THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS Faithfully TRANSLATED into ENGLISH Meter.

Whereunto is prefixed a discourse declaring not only the lawfullnes, but also
the necessity of the heavenly Ordinance of singing Scripture Psalms in the
Churches of God.

Coll. III. Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, in all wisdom,
teaching and exhorting one another in Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual Songs,
singing to the Lord with grace in your hearts.

James v. (...) any be afflicted, let him pray, and if any be merry let him
sing psalms.

Imprinted 1640

The Preface.
THe singing of Psalms, though it (...) nothing but holy harmony, and (...)
such is the subtilty of the enemy, (...) of our nature against the Lord, and
his (...) our hearts can find matter of discord in (...), and crotchets of
division in this (...). -for- There have been three question (...) stirri^g
concerning singing. First* (...) are to be sung in churches? whether (...)
scripture psalms, or the psalms (...) the gifts of godly men in every age of
the (...) Secondly, if scripture psalms, whet^^^ (...) own words, or in such
meter as english (...) wont to run in? Thirdly^ by whom are they ^o be sung?
whether by the whole churches togeth^r with their voices? or by one man singing
alo^e and the rest joyni^g in silence, and in the close sayi^g amen.

Touching the first, certainly the singing of David's psalms was an acceptable
worship of God, not only in his ow^e, but in succeeding ti^e^* as in Solomon's
time 2 Chronicles. 5.13. in (...) time 2 chronicles. 20.31. in Ez^^ (...) time Ez^a 3.10,
11. and the text is evi^^nt in Hezekiahs time they are commanded to sing praise
in the words of David and Asaph, 2 chronicles. 29, 30. which one place may serve to
resolve two of the questions (the first and the last) at once* for this
commandment was it cerimoniall or moral? some things in it i^deed were
cerimoniall, as their musical instruments etc but what cerimony was there in
singing praise with the wo^ds of David and Asaph? what if David was a typeof
Christ, was Asaph also? was every thing of David typical? are his words (which
are of moral, universal, and perpetual authority in all nations and ages)
are they typical? what type can be imagined in making use of his songs to
praise the Lord? If they were typical because the cerimony of musical
instruments was joined with them, then their prayers were alsotypicall, because
they had that ceremony of incense admixt with them: but we know that prayer
then was a moral duty, notwithstanding the incense; and so singing those
psalms notwithstanding their musical instruments. Beside, that which was
typical (as that they were sung wi^h musical instruments, by the twenty-foure
orders of Priests and Levites. 1 chronicles 25.9.) must have the moral and
spiritual accom^lishment in the new Testament, in all the Churches of the
Saints principally, who are made kings and priests Reu. 1.6. and are the first
fruits unto God. Reu. 1^ 4. as the Levites were Number. 3.45. with hearts and
lips, in stead of musical instruments, to praise the Lord; who are set forth
(as some iudiciously think) Reu. 4.4. by twenty four Elders, in the ripe age
of the Church, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. answering to the twenty four order^ of Priests
and Levites 1 chronicles. 25.9. Therefore not some select members, but the whole
Church is (...) to teach one another in all the special singing of David's
psalms, some being called by the^ the (...): psalms, some (...) Hymns some
(...): spiritual songs. ^oe that if the singing David's psalms be a moral
duty and therefore perpetual; then we under the new Testament are bound to
sing them as well as they under the old: and if we are expressly commanded to
sing Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, then either we must sing David's
psalms, or else may affirm they are not spiritual songs: which being penned
by an extraordi^a^y gift of the Spirit, for the sak^ especially of Gods
spirtuall Israel; not to be read and preached only (as other parts of holy
writ) but to be sung also, they are therefore most spiritual, and still to be
sung of all the Israel of God: and verily as their sin is exceeding great, who
will allow David's psalms (as other scriptures) to be read in churches (which
is one end) but not to be preached also, (which is another end foe their sin is
crying before God, who will allow them to be read and preached, but seek ^o
deprive the Lord of the glory of the third (...) of them, which is to sing them
in christian (...) obj. 1 If it be said that the Saints in the (...) Church did
compile spiritual songs (...) own inditing, and sing them before the (...) 1
Cor. 14, 15, 16.

Ans. We answer first, that those Saints co^piled these spiritual songs by the
extraordinary gifts of the spirit (common in those days) whereby they were
enabled to praise the Lord in strange tongues, wherein learned Para^s proves
those psalme^ were uttered, in his Comme^t on that place ^ers 14 which
extraordinary gifts, if they were still in the Churches, we should allow them
the like liberty now. Secondly, suppose those psalms were sung by an ordinary
gift (which we suppose cannot be ^victed) does it therefore follow that they
did no^, and that we ought not to sing David's psalms? must the ordinary gifts
of a private man quench the spirit still speaking to us by the extraordin^ry
gifts of his servant David? there is not the l^^st foot-step of example, or
precept, or color ^^^son for such a bold practice.

obj. 2. Ministers are allowed to pray conceived ^rayers, and why not to sing
conceived psalms? must we not sing in the spirit as well as pray in the
spirit?

Ans. First because every good minister has not a gift of spiritual poetry to
compose extemporary psalms as he has of prayer. Secondly. Suppose he had, yet
seeing psalms are to be sung by a ^oynt consent and harmony of all the Church
in heart and voice (as w^e shall prove) this cannot be done except he that
composeth a psalm, bring^th into the Church set forms of psalms of his o^ne
inve^tion; for which we find no warrant or president in any ordinary officers
of the Church ^h^oughout the sciptures. Thirdly. Because the book^ of psalms
is so complete a System of psalms, which the Holy Ghost himself in (...)
wisdo^e has made to suit all the conditions, necessityes, temptations,
affections, etc. of men in all ages; (as most of all our interpreters on the
psalms have fully and p^rticularly clear where fore by this the Lord seems
to stops men's mouths and minds ordinarily to compile or sing any other
psa^mes (under color that the ocasions and conditions of the Church are new)
etc. for the public use of the Church, seeing, let our condition be what it
will, the Lord himself has supplied us with far better; and therefore in
Hezekiahs time, though doubtless there were among them those which had
extraoridnary gifts to compile new songs on those new ocasions, as Isaiah and
Micah etc. yet we read that they are commanded to sing in the words of David
and Asaph, which were ordinarily to be used in the public worship of God: and
we doubt not but those that are wise will easily see; that those set forms of
psalms of Gods own appointment not of man's conceived gift or humane
imposition were sung in the Spirit by those holy Levites, as well as their
prayers were in the spirit which themselves conceived, the Lord not then
binding them therein to any set forms; and shall set forms of psalms
appointed of God not be sung in the spirit no^, which others did then?

Queston. But why may not one co^pose a psalm and sing it alone with a loud
voice and the r^st join with him in silence and in the end say Amen?

Ans. If such a practice was found in the Church of Cori^th, when any had a
psalm suggested by an extraordinary gift; yet in singing ordinary psalms the
whole Church is to join together in heart and voice to praise the Lord. -for-
First. David's psalms as has been showed, were sung in heart and voice
together by the twenty four orders of the musicians of the Temple, who typed
out the twenty four Elders all the members especially of christian Churches
R^^ 5.^. who are made Kings and Priests to God to praise him as they did: for
if there were any other o^der of singing Choristers beside the body of the
people to succeed those, the Lord would doubtless have given direction in the
gospel for their quallification, election, maintenance etc. as he did for the
musicians of the Temple, and as his faithfullnes has done for all other church
officers in the new Testament. Secondly. Others beside the Levites (the chief
Singers) in the ^ewish Church did also sing the Lords songs; else why are they
commanded frequently to sing: as in ps. 100, 1, 2, 3. ps 95, 1, 2, 3. ps. 102.
title. with verse 18. and Ex. 15.1. not only Moses but all Israel sang that
song, they spoke saying (as it is in the orig.) all as well as Moses, the women
also as well as the men. v. 20 21. and deuteronomy. 32. (whereto some think, John had
reference as well as to Ex. 15.1. when he brings in the protestant Churches
getting the victory over the Beast with harps in their hands and singing the
song of Moses. Reu, 15.3.) this song Moses is commanded not only to put it into
their hearts butinto their mouths also: deuteronomy. 31.19. which argues, they were
with their mouths to sing i. together as well as with their hearts.

Thirdly. Is^iah foretells in the days of the New Testament that Gods watchmen
and desolate lost souls, (signified by wast places) should with their voices
sing together, Isa. 52.8, 9. and Reu- 7.9, 10. the song of the Lamb was by many
together, and the Apostle expressly commands the singing of Psalms, Himnes,
etc. not to any select christians, but to the whole Church Ephesians. 5.19 coll.
3.16. Paul and Silas sang together in private Acts. 16.25. and must the
public hear only one man sing? to all these we may add the practice of the
primitive Churches; the testimony of anci^nt and holy Basil is in stead of many
Epist. 63 When one of us (says he) has begun a psalm, the rest of us set in
to sing with him, all of us with one heart and one voice; and this says he is
the common practice of the Churches in Egypt, Lybi^, Thebes, Palestina, Syria
and those that dwell on Euphrates, and generally every where, where singing of
psalms is of any account. To the some purpose also Eusebius gives witness,
E^cl^s. H^st. lib. 2. cap. 17. The objections made against this do most of
them plead against joining to sing i^ heart as well as in voice, as that by
this means others out of the Church will sing as also that we are not always
in a suitable est^te to the matter sung, and likewise that all cannot s^ng with
understanding; shall not therefore all that have understanding join in heart
and voice together? are not all the creatures in heaven, earth, seas: men,
beasts, fishes, fowls etc. commanded to praise the Lord, and yet none of these
but men, and godly men too, can do it with spiritual understanding?

As for the scruple that some take at the translation of the book of psalms
into mee^er, because David's psalms were sung in his own words without meeter:
we answer- First^ There are many verses together in several psalms of David
which run in rithmes (as those that know the hebrew and as Buxtorf shows
Thesau. pa. 62^.) which shows at least the lawfullnes of singing psalms in
english rithmes.

Secondly. The psalms are pen^ed in such verses as are suitable to the poetry
of the hebr^w Language, and not in the common style of such other books of the
old Testament as are not poetical; now no protestant doubts but that all the
books of the scripture should by Gods ordinance be extant in the mother tongue
of each nation, that they may be understood of all, hence the psalms are to be
translated into our english tongue; and if in our english tongue we are to
sing them, then as all our english songs (according to the course of our
english poetry) do run in meter, so ought David's p^almes to be translated into
meeter, that so we may sing the Lords songs, as in our eng^ish tongue so in
such verses as are familar to an english ear which are commonly metricall: and
as it can be no just offense to any good conscience to sing David's hebrew songs
in english words, so neither to sing his poetical verses in english poetical
meter: men might as well stumble at singing the hebrew psalms in our english
tunes (and not in the hebrew tunes) as at singing them in english meeter,
(which are our verses) and not in such verses as are generally used by Davi^
according to the poetry of the hebrew language: but the truth is, as the Lord
has hid from us the hebrew tunes, lest we should think our selves bound to
imitate them; so also the course and frame (for the most part) of their hebrew
poetry, that we might not think our s^lves bound to imitate that, but that
every n^tion without scruple mi^ht follow as the graver s^rt of tunes of their
own country songs, so the graver sort of verses of their own country poetry.

Neither let any think, that for the meetre sake we have taken liberty or
poetical license to depart from the true and proper sense of David's words in
the h^brew verses, noe; but it has been one part of our religious care and
faithful in^^avour, to keep close to the original text.

As for other objections taken from the difficulty of Amsworths tunes, and the
corruptions in our common psalm books, we hope they are answered in this new
edition of psalms which we here present to God and his Churches. For although
we have cause to bless God in many respects for the religious endeavors of
the translaters of the psalms into meetre usually annexed to our Bibles, yet
it is not unknown to the godly learned that they have rather presented a
paraphrase then ^he words of David translated according to the rule 2 chronicles.
29.30. and that their addition to the words, detr^ctions from the words are not
seldom and rare, but very frequent and many times needles, (which we suppose
would not be approved of if the psalms were so translated into prose) and that
their variations of the sense, and alterations of the sacred text too
frequently, may justly minister matter of offense to them that are able to
compare the translation with the text; of which failings, some judicious have
often complained, others have been grieved, whereupon it has bin generally
desired, that as we do inioye other, so (if it were the Lords will) we
might inioye this ordinance also in its native pu^ity: we have therefore done
our endeavor to make a plain and familiar translation of the psalms and
words of D^vid into english meter, and have not so much as presumed to
paraphrase to give the sense of his meaning in other words; we have therefore
attended heerin as our chief guide the original, sh^^^ing all additions,
except such as even the best tran^lators of them in prose supply, avoiding all
material detractions from words or sense. The word (...) which we translate
and as it is redundant sometime in the Hebrew, so sometime (though not very
often) it has been left out, and yet not then, if the sense were not fair
without it.

As for our translations, we have with our english Bibles (to which next to
the Original we have had respect) used the Idioms of our own tongue in stead
of Hebraismes, lest they might seem english barbarismes. Synonimaes we use
indifferently: as folk for people, and Lord for Jehovah, and sometime (though
seldom) God for Jehovah; for which (as for some other interpretations of
places cited in the new Testament) we have the scriptures authority ps. 14.
with 53. Heb. 1.^. with psalm 97. Where a phrase is doubtful we have
followed that which (in our own apprehensio^) is most genuine and edifying:

Sometime we have contracted, sometime dilated the same hebrew word, both for
the sense and the verse sake: which dilatation we conceive to be no
paraphrasticall addition no more then the contraction of a true and full
translation to be any unfaithful detraction or diminution: as when we dilate
who heals and say he it is who heals; so when we contract, those that
stand in awe of God and say Gods fearers.

Lastly. Because some hebrew words have a more full and emphaticall
signification then any one english word can or does sometime express, hence we
have done that sometime which faithful translators may do, viz. not only to
translate the word but the emphasis of it; as (...) mighty God, for God. (...)
humbly bless for bless; rise to stand, psalm 1. for stand truth and
faithfullnes for truth. Howbeit, for the verse sake we do not always thus, yet
we render the word truly though not fully; as when we sometime say rejoice for
shout for joy.

As for all other changes of numbers, tenses, and characters of speech, they
are such as ^ither the hebrew will, u^forcedly bear, or our english forceably
calls for, or they no way change the sense; and such are printed usually in an
other character.

If therefore the verses are not always so smooth and elegant as some may
desire or expect; let them consider that Go^s Altar needs not our pollishings:
Ex. 20. for we have respected rather a plain translation, then to smooth ou^
verses with the sweetness of any paraphrase, and so have attend^d Conscience
rather then Elegance, fidelity rather then poetry, in translating the hebrew
words into english language, and David's poetry into english meerre; that so
we may sing in Sion the Lords songs of pray^e according to his own will;
until he take us from hence, and wip^ away all our tears, and bid us enter
into our masters joy to sing eternal Halleluiahs.

THE PSALMS In Meter
PSALM I
O Blessed man, that in the advice
of wicked does not walk:
nor stand in sinners way, nor sit
in chair of scornful folk.

is his longing delight:
and in his law does m^ditate,
by day and eke by night.

planted by water-rivers:
that in his season yields his fruit,
and his leaf never withers.

the wicked are not so:
but they are like unto the chafe,
which wind drives to and fro.

rise to stand in the doom,
nor shall the sinners with the just,
in their assembly come.

acknowledges the way:
but the way of ungodly men,
shall utterly d^cay.
PSALM II
WHy rage the Heathen furiously*
muse vain things people do;

Princes consult also:
with one consent against the Lord,
and his anointed one.

their cords be from us thrown*

will mock them; then will he

and vex them suddenly.

upon my holy hill

counsel declare I will.
God spoke to me, thou art my Son:
this day I thee begot.

the Heathen for thy lot:
and of the earth thou shall possess
the utmost coasts abr^ad.

and crush with iron rod.

ye Judges of the earth (Hear.)

rej^yce in him with fear.

and ye fall in the way.
when his wrath quickly burns, oh blessed?
are all that on him stay.
Psalm 3 1 A psalm of David when he fled from the face of Absalom his Son.
O Lord, how many are my foes?
how many up against me stand?

in God for him at any hand.

and the-uplifter of my ^ead,

his holy hill me answered.

for I^hovah did me up bear:

ten thousand of them I Will not fear.

for all mine enemies thou have stroke
upon the cheek-bone: and the teeth
of the ungodly thou have broke.

belongs unto Jehovah;
thy blessing is, and let it be
upon thine own people. Selah.
Psalm 4 To the chief Mus cian on Neginoth, a psalm of David.
GOD of my justice, when I call
^nswer me: when distr^st
thou have inl^rg'd ^e, s^^w me grace,
and he^re thou my request.

to shame how long will you?
how long will ye love vanity,
and still deceit pursue?

set by his gracious saint:
the Lord will hear when I to him
do pour out my complaint.

consider seriously:
within your heart upon your bed;
and wholly silent be.

let sacrificed be,
and confidently put your trust
on Jehovah do ye.

will cause us good to see:
the light, Lord, of thy countenance
let on us lifted be.

more then the time wherein
their corn, and also their new wine,
have much increased bin.

and take my sleep will I:
For thou Lord make me dwell alone
in confident safety.
Psalm 5 1 To the chief Musi^ian upon Nehiloth, a ps^lme of David.
Hear thou my words and understand
my meditation, Jehovah.

of my cry: for to thee I pray.

my voice: to thee I will address

art not a God love wickedness
neither shall evil with thee dwell.

shall never stand: for thou hate
all them that work iniquities.

the speakers of lying-falshood,
the lord will make to be abhorred
the man deceitful, and of blood.

in multitude of thy mercy:
and will in fear of thee bow down,
in temple of thy sanctity.

because of mine observing spies,
O Jehovah do thou thy ways
make straight, and plain, before mine eyes

their inward part iniquities;
their throat an open sepulcher,
their tongue is bent to flatteries.

from their own plo^s let them fall far,
cast them out in their heaps of sins,
for they against thee Rebels are.

and shout for joy eternally,
and thou shall them protect: and they
that love thy name shall jo in thee.

a blessing on the rightous one:
and wilt him crown as with a shield,
with gracio^s acceptance.
Psalm 6 To the chief Mu^ician on Neginoth upon - Sheminith, a psalm of D^vi^.
LORD in thy wrath rebuke me not,
nor in thy hot wrath chasten me

Lord heal me, for my bones vexed be.

how long Lord will thou me fors^ke?

o save me for thy mercy sake.

and who ^h^ll praise thee in the grave?

swims, I with te^rs my couch wash have.

bec^us^ of all mine enemies.

all ye that work iniqui^ies:
for Iehov^h even no^ has heard
the voice of these (...) ^eepi^g t^ares.

Jehovah does receive my prayers.

and greatly troubled let them be:
yea let them be returned back,
and be ^shamed suddenly.
Psalm 7 Shiggajon of David which he sa^g to Jehovah upon the words of Cush
the Benjamite.
O LORD my God in thee
I do my trust repose,
save and deliver me from all
my persecuting foes.

my soul in pieces tear:
rending asunder, while there is
not one d^liverer.

if this thing done have I:
if so t^ere be within my hands
wrongful iniquity

the man with me at peace,
(yea I have him delivered
that was my foe causlesse:)

and take, and tread to clay
my life: and honor in the dust
there let him wholly lay

for the enemies fierceness:
be thou lift up, and wake to me,
judgment thou did express.

shall peoples assembly;
and for the same do thou return,
unto the place on high.

Jehovah judge thou me.
according to my righteousness^,
and mine integrity.

but do the just confirm,
for thou who art the righteous God*
do hearts and reins discern.

in heart he saved has.

yet daily kindles wrath.

his sword he sh^rp will whet:
his bow he bended has, and he
the some has ready set.

the instruments of death,
for them that hotly persecute,
his arro^s he sh^rpneth.

of vain iniquity:
a toylesome mischeife he conceived,
but shall bring forth a lie.

and delved deep the same:
But fallen he is into the ditch,
that he ^imselfe did frame.

shall on his head turn down^*
and his injurious violence
shall fall upon his crown*

for ^is just equi^y;
and I will si^g unto the name
of I^hovah most high.
Psalm 8 To the chief Musician upon Gittith. a psalm of David.
O LORD our God in all the earth
^ow's thy name wondrous great?
who have thy glorious majesty
above the heavens set.

thy strength thou did ordeine,
that thou might still the enemy,
and them that thee disdain.

the moo^e and st^rres consider:

that thou do him r^m^mber?
or what is the Son of man, that thus
him vis^ted thou have?

a little lower placed
and have with glory crowned him,
and comely majesty:

lordly authority.

all sheep and oxen, yea

and fishes of the sea;
and all that pass through paths of seas.

how wondrously-magnificent
is thy name through the world?
Psalm 9 To the chief Musician upon Muth-Labben a psalm of David
LORD I Will the praise, with all my heart;
thy wonders all proclaim.

most high, I Will sing thy name.

and perish at thy sight.

In throne sits judging right.

their names razed ever aye.

thou madst their towns decay;
their memory with them is lost.

^is throne to judgment he prepares.

he to the folk shall minister
judgment in uprightness.

a fort in times of stresse.

nor do thou, Lord forsake,

that dwells in Sion, make:
declare among the folk his works.

he them remembers: nor forgets
the crying of the meek.
(2)

from them that do me hate
mark mine afflictions that arise,
thou lift'st me from deaths-gate.

the Daughter of Sion,
thy praises all. and may rejoice
in thy salvation.

the pit that they had made:
their own foot taken is ith'net
which privily they laid.

Jehovah is made know^e:
the wicked's snared in's ow^e hand work.
deep meditation.

all ands that God forget.

poores hope ^e'r^ faild him yet.

judge to heathen in thy sight.

the nations Lord affright. Selah
Psalm 10
WHy standst thou Lord a far? why hyd'st
thy self in times of straight?

the poor afflicted wight:
snare them in their contrived plots.

the wicked boasts, and covetous
blesses, stirring Gods ire.

his counten^nces pride
will not seek after Go^: not Go^
so all his thoughts abide.

on high thy ju^gements be
above his fight: (...) pressing foes
puff at them all will he.

I move^ shall not be:
from aye to aye because I am
not in adversity

deceits, an^ fallacy:
under his tongue perverseness is,
also iniqui^y.

he sits, in secret dens
he slays the harmless: against the poo^e
slyly his eyes down bends.

in den, the poor to catch
he lurks, and trapping them in 's net
the afflicted poor does snatch.

humbly he bows with-all:
that so a multitude of poor
in his strong paws may fall.

he hides his face away,
so that he will not see this thing
unto eternal aye.
(2)

lift thou thine hand on hy,
let not the meek afflicted one
be out of memory.

contemn the almighty one?
he in his heart says, thou will not
make inquisition.

with thy hand to repay:
the poor leaves it to thee, thou art
of fatherless the stay.

and of the evil one.
search thou out his impiety,
until thou find none.

and to eternal aye:
out of his land the heathen folk
are perished away.

Jehovah, thou do hear:
thou firmly do prepare their heart,
thou makst attent thine ear.

that ad no more he may
sorrowful man out of the land
with terror to dismay.
Psalm 11 To the chief Musician a psalm of David.
I In the Lord do trust, how then
to my soul do ye say,
as does a little bird unto
your mountain fly away?

their arrows they prepare
on string; to shoot in dark at them
in heart that upright are.

utterly ruined be:
as for the man that righteous is,
what then perform can he?

the Lords throne in heaven:
^is eyes will view, and his eye li^s
will prove the Sons of men.

even him the Lord will prove;
his soul the wicked hates, and him
that violence does love.

ungodly men upon:
and burning tempest; of their cup
shall-be their portion.

all righteousness does love:
his countenane the upright one
beholding, does approve.
Psalm 12 To the chief Musician upon Shemin^th a psalm of David.
Help Lord: for godly men do cease:
faithful fail men among.

with flattring lips, and tongue
and with a double heart they speak.

shall cut them of, with every tongue
that speaks boasting word.

prevailing pow're shall get:
are not our lips our own for Lord
who over us is set?

that want, for poor oppressed,
I Will now arise, from such as puff,
will set him safe at rest.

as silver that is tryde
in e^rthen furnace, seven times
that h^th been purifyde.

preserve them every one,
For eve^more in safety from
this generation.

do walk presumptuously,
when as the vilest sons of men
exalted are on hye.
Psalm 13 To the chief Musician: a psalm of David.
O JEHOVAH, how long
will thou forget me aye?
how long will thou thy countenance
hide from me far away?

in my soul take, sorrow
in my heart daily? over me set
how long shall be my foe?

behold me answer make,
Ill^minate mine eyes, lest I
the sleep of death do take.

^revaild against him: and me
those ^ho do trouble, do rejoice,
when I shall moved ^ee*

have put in thy mercy;
my heart in thy salvation
shall joy exceedingly.

will sing, because that he,
for evil bountifully has
r^warded good to me.
Psalm 14 To the chief Musician a psalm of David.
THe fool in's heart says there is no God*
they are corrupt, have done
abominable-practises,
that does good there is non^.

on Sons of men: to see,
if any that does understand,
that seeks God there be.

ev'^ filthy are become:
and there is none (...) does good,
noe not s^ much as one.

have they no k^owledge all?
that eat my people: they eat bread,
and on God do not call.

affrighted sore they were,
for God in generation is
of such as righteous are*

that poor afflicted is,
to be ashamed and that because,
the Lord his refuge is.

his folks captivity
when God shall turn: Jacob shall joye
glad Israel shall be.
Psalm 15 A psalm of David.
JEHOVAH, who shall in thy tent
sojourne, and who is he
shall dwell within thy holy mount?

And works justice, and speaks truth

he does not slander, neither does
unto his neighbor wrong,
And against his neighbor that does not
take up reproachful lies.

contemned is in his eyes;
But he will highly honor them
that do Jehovah fear:
and changes not, though to his loss,
i^ tha^ he once do swe^re.

and bribe he does not take
against the harmless* he that does
these things shall ^ever shake.
Psalm 16 Michtam of David
O Mighty God, preserve thou me,
for on thee do I rest.

my soul thou have professed:
My goodness reaches not to thee.

the earth and to the excellent,
whom all my joye is on.

their sorrows multiplye:
their drink oblations of blood
offer up will not I.
Neither will I into my lips
the names of them take up.

of my part, and my cup:
Thou art maintainer of my lot.

in pleasant places: yea, fair is
the heritage for me.

who has me counseled:
yea in the nights my reins have me,
chastising nurtured.

as present before me:
because he is at my right hand
I shall not moved be.

and glad is my glory:
moreover also my flesh shall
in hope lodge securely.

within the grave to be,
nor will thou give thine holy one,
corruption for to see.

of joys abundant-store
before thy face, at thy right hand
are plea^ures evermore.
Psalm 17 A Prayer of David.
HArken, o Lord, unto the right,
attend unto my cry,
give ear unto my prayer, that goes
from lips that do not lie.

thine eyes the right let see.

by night, and tryest me.
yet nothing find'st, I have resolvd
my mouth shall not offend.

I spoylers paths attend.


for thou will hear, God, hear my speec^,
incline thine ear to me.

thy merveilous-mercyes,
show unto them that trust in thee,
from such as against them r^se.
(2)

In thy wings shade me hide.

in heart are on each side.

speak with their mouth proudly.

on earth their bowed down eye.

that greedy is to tear,
in secret places lurking as
he a young lion were.

make him bow down o Lord,
do thou my soul deliver from
the wicked one, thy sword,

from men that mortal are,
and of this passing-world, who have
within this life their share,
with thy hid treasure furthermore
whose belly thou fillest:
their sons are filled, and to their babes
of wealth they leave the rest.

shall very clearly see,
and waking with thine image, I
shall satisfied be.
Psalm 18 To the chief Musician, a psalm of David, the s^rvant of the Lord,
who spoke the words of this Song, in the day that the Lord delivered him from
the hands of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul* and he^ Said,
I Will dearly love thee, Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my rock, and my tower,
and my deliverer, my God,
I Will trust in him who is my power,
My shield, and my salvationes-horne,

I on the Lord will call, so shall
I be kept from mine enemy.

me feared the floods of ungodlie,

the snares of death prevented me.

and to my God cried: he did hear
from his temple my voice, my cry,
before him came, unto his ear.

roots moov'd, and were stird at his ire,

and from his mouth devouring-fire:
By it the coals inkindled were.

and he descended, and there was
under his feet a gloomy cloud.

yea he flew on the wings of wind.

his covert that him round confinde,
Dark waters, and thick clouds of skies.

his thickened clouds did pass away,
hayl-stones and coals of fire did pass.

within the heavens, the most high
likewise his angry-voyce did give,
hayl-stones, and coals of fire did fly.

and bruising he them scattered,
and lightnings he did multiply,
likewise he them discomfited.

and the foundationes of the world
appeared; at thy rebuke, at blast,
of the breath of thy nostrils Lord.
(2)

^e out of waters-great he drew.

them which me hated did rescue.
For they were mightyer then I.

of my cloudy calamity;
but for me was the Lord a stay.

he saved me, for he did delight

according as I did aright,
Acco^ding to the cle^n^esse of
my hands, he recompensed me.

nor from my God went wickedlie.

nor from me put I his decree.

my self from mine iniquity.

after my righteousness therefore:
according to the cleanness of
my hands that was his eyes before.

with upright thou deals uprightly.

with froward turn thy self awry.

but wilt the lofty looks suppress.

my God will lighten my darkness.

and by my God leapt over a wall.

that trust in him he is shield to all.

or who a rock, our God except?

and he does make my way perfect.

and on my high place maks me stand.

so well to war he learnes my hand.

thou furthermore have given (...):
and thy right hand has me up^eld,
thy meeknes made me great to be.

so that mine anckles did not slide

nor turned I till they were destroyed.

rise up: under my feet they fell.

with fortitude to the battle*
Thou have subdued under me,
those that did up against me ri^^.

that I might wast mine enemies.

to God, yet with no answer meet.

and cast them out as dirt in the str^^^.
(4)

have of the people me set free;
thou of the h^^then made me h^ad*
people I knew not shall serve me.

strangers shall yield themselves to m^e.

and from their closets frighted be.

let my healths God exa^ted ^ee.

and brings dow^e people under me.

and above those that against me went,
thou lift'st me up; and thou have freed
me from the man that is violent.

unto thee render thanksgiving,
o Lord* among the heathen folk;
and to thy name I Will prays^s (...).

to his King, and does show mercy
to his anointed, to David,
and to his see^ e^ernally.
Psalm 19 To the chief musician a psalm of David.
THe heavens do declare
the majesty of God:
also the firmament sh^ws fo^th
his ^and^-work abroad.

night has to night declared.

where their voice is not heard.

is gone forth, and unto
the utmost end of all the world,
their speeches reach also:
^ Ta bern^cle he
in them pitched for the Sun.

glad Giants-race ^o run.

his course and compassing;
to ends of it, and from the ^ea^
thereof is hid nothing.
(2)

the soul converting back:
Gods testimony faithful is,
makes wise who-wisdome-lack.

are right, and glad the heart:
the Lords commandment is pure,
light does to eyes impart.

and does indur^ for ever:
the judgments of the Lord a^e true,
and righteous altogether.

more to be prized are,
then honey, and the honeycomb,
sweeter they are by far.

admonished from hence:
and in the keeping of the same
is a full recompense.

from secret faults cleanse me.

(...) thy servant be:
Let them not bear the rule
in me, and then shall I
be perfect, and shall cleansed be
from much iniquity.

and the thoughts of my heart,
be pleasing with thee, Lord, my Rock
who my redeemer art.
Psalm 20 To the chief Musician, a psalm of D^vid.
JEHOVAH hear thee in the day
of sore calamity,
the name of the God ofIacob
defend thee mightily.

from Sion strengthen thee.

accepted let it be. Sela^.

all thy counsel fulfill.

with singing joy we will:
And we in the name of our God
our banners will erect:
when as all thy petitions
Jehovah shall effect.

save his anointed- Dear:
with saving strength of his right hand
from (...) heaven will hear.

and some in horses set:
but we the name of Jehovah
our God will not forget.

rise and stand steadfastly.

when as to him we cry.
Psalm 21 To the chief Musician a psalm of David.
JEHOVAH, in thy strength
the King shall joyful be;
and joy in thy salvation
how vehemently shall he?

have granted the desire:
and thou have not witholden back,
what his lips did require. Selah.

of goodness prevent him:
thou on his head of finest gold
have set a Diadem.

to him thou gav'st it free,
even length of days for evermore
unto eternity.

his glory has been great:
honor, and comely dignity
thou have upon him set.

to perpetuity:
Thou makst him with thy countenance
exceeding glad to be.

the King does trust, and he
through mercy of the highest one,
shall not removed be.

that are thine enemies:
thy right hand also shall find ou^
those that do thee despise.

them in times of thine ire:
the Lord will swallow them in's wrath
and them consume with fire.

that does proceed of them,
out of the earth: and their seed from
among the Sons of men.

intended against thee:
a wicked plot they have devised,
but shall not able be.

them set; and thou will place
thine arrows ready on thy string,
full right against their face.

exalted be on high:
and we will sing; yea praise with psalms*
thy mighty power will we.
Psalm 22 To the chief musician upon Aijeleth Sh^ba^ a psalm of David.
MY God, my God, wherefore have thou
forsaken me? and why,
art thou so far from helping me,
from the words of my cry?

but me thou do not hear;
and eke by night, and unto me
no quiet rest is there.

who constantly do dwell,
within the thankful praises of
thy people Israel.

assured confidence:
they trusted have, and thou to them
did give deliverance.

and were delivered:
in thee they put their confidence,
and were not confounded.

of men an opprobrie,
and also of the people am
despised contemp^uouslie.

a scoff at me do make:
they with the lip do make a mow,
the head in scorn they shake.

let him now rid him quite:
let him deliver him, because
in him he does delight.

the belly forth did take:
when I was on my mothers breasts,
to hope thou did me make.

committed been have I:
yea thou have been my mighty-God
from my mothers belly.
(2)

for tribulation
exceeding great is near at hand,
for helper there is none.

about have compassed:
the mighty-buls of Bashan have
me round environed.

so gaped me upon;
like as it were a ravening
and a roaring Lion.

and all my bones sundred:
my heart in midst of my bowels,
is like to wax melted.

and my tongue fast-cleaveth
unto my jaws, and thou have brought
me to the dust of death.

the assembly me beset
of the wicked; they pierced through
my hands, also my feet.

they looked, they did me view.

and lot for my coat threw.

to help me hasten thou.

the power of dogs rescue.

give me salvation free:
for thou from horns of Unicorns
answer have given me.

that Brethren are to me:
in midst of congregation
I will give praise to thee.
(3)

all Jacobs seed praise ye,
him glorify, and dread him all
ye Isreal's seed that be.

loathes not, nor does despise;
nor hides his face from him, but hears
when unto him he cries.

in the great assembly:
before them that him reverence
perform my vows will I.

Jehovah praise shall they
that do him seek: your heart shall live
unto perpetual aye.

and turn unto the Lord:
and thee all heathen-families
to worship shall accord.

the kingdom appertain:
and he among the nations
is ruler Sovereign.

all who to dust descend,
(though none can make alive his soul)
before his face shall bend.

him shall attend upon;
to God it shall accounted be
a generation.

by them declared shall be,
unto a people yet unborne,
that done this thing has he.
23 A Psalm of David.
THe Lord to me a shepherd is,
want therefore shall not I.

does cause me down to lie:
To waters calm me gently leads

he does in paths of righteousness:
for his names sake lead me.

I walk, none ill I Will fear:
because thou art with me, thy rod,
and staff my comfort are.

in presence of my foes:
thou d^st annoint my head with oil,
my cup it over-flowes.

all my days follow me:
and in the Lords house I shall dwell
so long as d^yes shall be.
Psalm 24 A psalm of david.
THe earth Iehovahs is,
and the fullness of it:
the ^^^itable world, and they
tha^ there upon do sit.

he has it firmly laid:
and it upon the water-floods
most sollidly has stayed.

who shall thereto ascend?
and i^ his pl^ce of hol^nes,
who is it that shall stand?

in heart; to vanity
who has not lifted up his soul,
nor sworn deceitfully.

a benediction,
and righteousness from the strong-God
of his salvation.

of them that seek thy face:
of them that do inquire for him:
of Jacob it is the race. Sela^.

and doors everlasting,
^e ye lift up: and there into
shall come the glorious-King.

Jehovah, puissant,
and valiant, Jehovah is
in battle valiant.

and door^ everlasting,
do ye lift-up: and there into
shall come the glorious-King*

lo, it i^ Jehovah
of w^rlike ^rmies, he the King
of glory is; Selah.
Psalm 25 A Psalm of David.
I Lift my soul to thee o Lord.
My God I trust in thee,
let me not be ashamed: nor let
my foes joy over me.

be filled with shamefulnes:
but they shall be ashamed all,
who without cause transgress.

thy paths make me discern.

in thy truth, and me learn,
For thou God of my saving health,
on thee I wait all day.

mind; for they are for aye.

neither my trespasses:
after thy mercy mind thou me
o Lord for thy goodness.

will sinners teach the way.

will teach the meek his way.

^ll of them truth also,
to them that keep his covenant,
and testimo^ies do.
(^)

freely do thou (...)
mine own perverse iniquity:
because that great is it.

the way that he shall choose.

as heirs the earth shall use.

that do him reverence:
and of his covenant he them
will give intelligence.

upon Jehovah set:
for it is he that will bring forth
my feet out of the net.

and on me mercy show:
because I solitary am
afflicted poor also.

from my distress me bring.

and pardon all my sin.

and cruelly me hate,

be shamed, who on thee wait.

me: for I trust in the^.

o God, do thou set fr^e.
26 A (...).
IVdge me, o Lord, for I have walked
in mine integrity:
and I have trusted in the Lord,
therefore slide shall not I.

my reins, and my heart ^ry.

and in thy truth walk I*

with men themselves that hide.

nor will with vile abide.

so I Will thine altar round:

and all thy praises sound.

Lord, dearly love do I,
the place and tabernacle of
thy glorious majesty.

with men of blood my life.

bribery is full rife.

walk in mine uprightness.

I will Jehovah bless.
27 A Psalm of David.
THe Lord my light, and my health is,
what shall make me dismayed?
The Lord is my lifes-strength, of whom
should I then be afraid?

and my foes in battle;
against me come, to eat my flesh,
themselves stumbled and fell.

my heart undaunted is:
if war against me should arise,
I am secure in this.

which I will still request:
that I may in the house of God,
all days of my life rest:
To see the beauty of the Lord,
and in his Temple seek.

hidden he will me keep:
He will me hide in secrecy
of his pavillion:
and will me highly lift upon
the rocks-munition.

lifted on high shall be,
above mine enemies, who do
about encompasse me.
Therefore in's tent I Will sacrifice,
of joye an offering,
into Jehovah, sing will I,
yea, I will praises sing.
(2)

me, o Jehovah, hear*
have mercy also upon me,
and unto me answer.
When thou did say, seek ye my face,
my heart said unto thee,
thy countenance, o Jehovah,
it shall be sought by me.

in wrath thy servant cast:
God of my health, leave, leave not me,
my helper been thou have.

though they do me forsake,
yet will Jehovah gathering
unto himself me take.

and be a guide to me
in righteous path, because of them
that mine observers be.

of my streight-enemies:
for witness false against me stand,
and breath out cruelties.
I should have fainted, had not I
believed for to see,
Iehovahs goodness in the land
of them that living be.

be stablished, and let
thine heart be strengthened, and thine hope
upon Jehovah set.
Psalm 28. A psalm of David.
JEHOVAH, unto thee I cry,
my Rock, be thou not deaf me fro:
lest thou be dumb from me and I
be like them down to pit that go.

for grace, when unto thee I cry:
when I lift up mine hands unto
thine Oracle of Sanctity.

with workers of unrighteousnes,
that with their neighbors peace do speak,
but in their hands is wickedness.

and like the evil of their deeds:
give them like to their handy-works,
and render unto them their meeds.

they did not wise-attention yield,
neither unto his handy work,
them he will wast, but not up-build.

the voice of my requests for grace.

my heart did trust, and helped I was:
Therefore my heart will gladness show,
and with my song I Will him confess*

their strength, and tower of safety is.

and bless thou thine inheritance,
and even unto eternity
do thou them feed and them advance.
This. After the common tunes.
Save Lord, thy people, and do thou
bless thine inheritance:
and unto all eternity
them feed and them advance.
Psalm 29 A psalm of David.
Unto the Lord do ye ascribe
(o Sons of the mighty)
unto the Lord do ye ascribe
glory and potency.

his names glorious renown,
in beauty of his holiness
unto the Lord bow down.

upon the w^ters is:
the God of glory thund^reth,
God on great waters is.

Gods voice is glorious,

Cedars of Lebanus.

the mountain Lebanon,
and like to a young Unicorn
the hill of Syrion.


the desert shake: the Lord does cause
the Cadesh-desart shake.

and makes the forest bare:
and in his temple every one
his glory does declare.

for ever sits as King.

his folk with peace blessing.
Psalm 30 A Psalm and Song, at the dedication of the house of David.
JEHOVAH, I will thee extol,
for thou have lift up me;
and over me thou have not made
my foes joyful to be.

and thou have made me whole.

thou have brought up my sou^e:
Thou made me live, I went not down

(ye his Saints) and give thanks when ye
his holiness record.

life in his love does stay:
weeping may lodge with us a night
but joye at break of day.

I shall be moved never.

my mountain stand fast ever:
Thou hidst thy face, I troubled was.

o Lord: also my humble suit
unto the Lord made I.

into the pit go down?
shall dust give glory unto thee?
shall it thy truth make known?

and on me mercy have:
Jehovah, o be thou to me
an helper me to save.

converted have my sadness:
my sackcloth thou unloosed have,
and girded me with gladness:

and may not silent be:
o Lord my God, I will give thanks
for evermore to thee.
Psalm 31 To the chief Musician, a psalm of David.
IN thee, o Lord, I put my trust,
let me be shamed never:
according to thy righteousness
o do thou me deliver.

let me deliverance have:
be thou my strong rock, for an house
of defense me to save.

and my fortress wilt be:
therefore for thy names sake do thou,
lead me and guide thou me.

which they have for me laid
so privily: because that thou
art to me a sure aid.

reposing do commit:
Jehovah God of verity,
thou have redeemed it.

to lying vanity:

and joy in thy mercy:
Because thou have considered
my afflicting distress;
thou have my soul acknowledged
in painful anguishes;

within the enemies hand:
thou made my feet within the place
of liberty to stand.
(2)

for in distress am I,
with grief mine eye consumed is,
my soul and my belly.

with sighs are consumed:
because of my sin, my strength fails,
and my bones are wasted.

chiefly my neighbors to;
a fear to friends: they that saw me
without, did fly me fro.

that is out of memory:
and like a vessel that is broke
even such a one am I.

the slandering did hear,
round about me on every side
there was exceeding fear:
While as that they did against me
counsel together take,
they craftily have purposed
my life away to make.

my confidence have put

within thy hand are shut:
From the hands of mine enemies
do thou deliver me,
and from the men who me against
my persecuters be.
(3)

upon thy servant make:
o give to me salvation
even for thy mercy sake.

for called on thee I have:
let wicked men be shamed, let them
be silent in the grave.

that against men upright
do speak such things as grievous are;
in pride, and in despite.

that fear thee have hidden:
which thou work'st for them that thee trust,
before the Sons of men.

shall hide them from man's pride:
in a pavillion, from the strife
of tongues, thou will them hide.

for he has showed me
his loving kindness wonderful
in a fenced-cittie.

from the sight of thine eyes:
yet thou hear^st the voice of my fuit,
when to thee were my cries.

because the Lord does guard
the faithful, but the proud doer
does plenteously reward.

and let your heart wax strong:
all whosoever hopefully
do for Jehovah long.
32 A psalm of David, Maschil,
O Blessed is the man who has
his trespass pardoned,
and he whose aberration
is wholly covered,

the Lord imputes not sin:
and he who such a spirit has
that guile is not therein.

began to wear away,
with age; by means of my roaring
continuing all the day.

heavily did endure:
into the drought of Summer time
turned is my moisture. Selah.

I have acknowledged,
and mine iniquity I have
not closely covered:
Against my self my sin, said I,
I will to God confess,
and thou did the iniquity
forgive of my trespass. Selah.

in finding time shall pray.
surely in floods of waters great,
come nigh him shall not they.

from trouble save me out:
thou with songs of deliverance
shall compass me about.

thee in the way will I
which thou shall go, I will to thee
give counsel with mine eye.

noe knowledge be not ye:
whose mouths are held with bridle-bit,
that come not near to thee.

their sorrows do abound:
but him that trusts in the Lord,
mercy shall compass round.

ye righteous ones rejoice;
and all that are upright (...) heart
shout ye with joyful voice.
psalm 33
Ye just in God rejoice,
pr^yse well th'upright does sure:

to him, on ten string 'd lute.

aloud play skilfully.

his works in verity.

and also equity:
the earth replenished is with
the Lords benignity.

the heavens had their frame,
and by the spirit of his mouth,
all the host of the same.

he gathers as an heap;
together as in storehouses
he lays up the deep.

because of Jehovah:
let all the dwellers of the world
before him stand in awe.

the word, and it was made:
he gave out the commandment,
and it was firmly stayed.

the nations counsel; he
devises of the people makes
of none effect to be.

abide for ever shall,
the (...) of his heart
to generations all.
(2)

whose God Jehovah is:
and people whom for heritage
chosen he has for his.

all Sons of men views well.

on all that on earth dwell.

alike he fashioneth:
and all their operations
he well considers.

there is no King saved*
nor is by multitude of strength
the strong delivered.

to be a savior:
nor shall he work deliverance
by greatness of his power.

lo, is Iehovahs eye:
upon them that do place their hope
on his benignity.

^^d their soul from death ^ree.

our help, and shield is he.

for in's pure name trust we.

like as we trust in thee.
Psalm 34 A psalm of David, when he changed his behavior before Abimelech,
who drove him away and he departed.
I Will bless God always, his praise shall
still in my mouth be had.

shall hear this and be glad.

let us together advance.

my fears deliverance.

nor shamed were their faces.

and freed from all distress.

the Angel of the Lord;
who do him fear; and to them does
deliverance afford.

that God is good: o blessed,
that man is ever whose hope does
for safety in him rest.

his holy ones who be.
because that such as do him fear
not any want shall see.

and suffer hungering:
but they that seek Jehovah, shall
not want any good thing.
(2)

come children hark to me.

and loves good days to see?

from speaking guile keep thou.

seek peace, and it follow.

the Lord does set his eye:
and likewise he does bow his ear
when unto him they cry.

them that do wickedly:
that he of them from off the earth
may cut the memory.

from their distresses all.

and contrite save he shall.

from all God sets him free.

of them shall broken be.

the wicked man upon:
and those that hate the just shall come
to desolation.

Jehovah does redeem:
nor any shall be desolate,
that put their trust in him.
35 A psalm of David.
PLead, lord, with them that with me plead:
fight against them that fight with me.

stand up my helper for to be.

against them that my pursuers be:
and do thou say unto my soul
I am salvation unto thee.

that seek my soul how they may spill:
let them be turned back and shamed
that in their thoughts devise mine ill.

be, and Gods Angel them driving.

and the Lords Angel them chasing.

they hidden have for me a net:
which they without a cause have dug
that they there in my soul may get.

and let his net that he does hide,
himself ensnare: let him into
the very same destruction slide.

in his s^lvation joyful be

o Lord, who is like unto thee?
Who from the stronger then himself
the poor afflicted set free:
the poor afflicted and needy,
from such as spoylers of him be.
(2)

what I knew not they charged on me.

whereby my soul might spoiled be,

with sackcloath, and I afflicted
my soul with fasting, and my prayer
into my bosom returned.

my near friend or mine own brother:
I heavily bowed down as one
that mourns for his own mother.

rejoiced, and they gathered
themselves together: yea abjects
themselves against me gathered;
And I was ignorant hereof;
and they unceasantly me tear,

at me their teeth they gnashing were.

my soul from their destructions,
o do thou set at liberty,
my only one from the Lions.

within the congregation great:
and I thy praises will set forth
where there be many people met.

let them not rejoice over me:
neither let them wink with the eye,
that are my haters causlesly.

but in their thoughts they do invent
deceitful matters against them
that in the land for peace are bent.

and said, ah, ah our eye it saw.

Lord, from me be not far away.

my God and my Lord, to my plea.

my God, lest over me joy should they.

aha, our souls desire have we:
we now have swallowed him up,
o let them never say of me.

jointly, who at my hurt are glad:
let them that against me magnify,
with shame and dishonor be clad.

that favor do my righteous ^ause:
yea, let them say continually,
extolled be the Lord with praise,
Who does in the prosperity
of his servants his pleasure stay

and of thy praise speak all the day.
Psalm 36. To the chief Musician a psalm of David, the servant of the Lord.
THe trespass of the wicked one
says in assured-wise:
within my heart, the fear of God
is not before his eyes.

his sin is found mean while

iniquity and guile:
He to be wise, to do good leaves.

he sets himself in way not good:
he has not ill hated.
(2)

to clouds thy faithfullnes.

mountains thy righteousness:
Thou savest m^n and beast, o Lord.

therefore i^ shadow of thy wings
men's sons their trust do place.

unto the full shall take:
and of the river of thy joys
to drink thou shall them make.

in thy light we will see light.

to right in heart thy right.

nor wicked hand move me.

and raised they cannot be,
37 A Psalm of David.
FRet not thy self because of those
that evil workers be,
nor envious be against the men
that work iniquity.

be cut down, suddenly:
and like unto the tender herb
they withering shall dye.

and be thou doing good,
so shall thou dwell within the land,
and sure thou shall have food.

also upon the Lord,
and the desyers of thy heart
to thee he will afford.

to him commit thy w^y.

thy judgment as noone day.

with patience do thou stay:
fret not thy self because of him
who prospers in his way,
Nor at the man, who brings to pass
the crafts he does devise.

thy self fret in no wife.

by cutting down to fall:
but those that wayt upon the Lord,
the land inherit shall.
(2)

the wicked shall not be:
yea, thou shall diligently mark
his place, and it not see.

shall of the earth possess:
also they shall themselves delight
in multitude of peace.

gnashing at him his teeth.

his day coming he sees.

and bent their bow have they,
to cast the poor and needy down,
to kill th'upright in way.

their bows shall broken be.
is
then wic^e^s treasury.

the Lord the just ^oth stay.

and their lot is for aye.

in any time of ill:
and when the days of famine come,
they then shall have their fill.

as lambs fat shall decay:
they shall consume: yea into smoke
they shall consume away.
(3)

but he does not repay:
but he that righteous is does show
mercy, and gives away.

the earth inherit shall,
and they that of him cursed are,
by cutting down shall fall.

they are by Jehovah
established: and also he
delights in his way.

be utterly down cast:
be^^use Jehovah with his hand
does underprop him fast.

yet have I never seen
the just man left, nor that his seed
for bread have beggars been.

and lends: his seed is blessed.

and ever dwell at rest.

his Saints forsakes not he;
kept ever are they: but cut off
the sinners seed shall be.

and therein ever dwell.

his tongue does judgment (...).

none of his steps slideth.

and him to slay seeks.

relinquish in his hand,
neither will he condemn him when
adjudged he does stand.
(4)

and he shall ^hee exalt
the earth to inheri^: when cut off
the wicked see thou shall.

in mighty power to be:
also himsefe spreading abroad
like to a green-bay-tree.

and lo, then was not he;
moreover I did seek for him,
but found he could not be.

and the upright attend:
because that unto such a man
peace is his latter end.

together perish shall:
the latter end shall be cut off
of the ungodly all,

does of Jehovah come:
he is their strength to them in times
that are most troublesome.

he shall deliver them
from wiced men, because that they
do put their trust in him.
Psalm 38 A psalm of David, to bring to remembrance.
LORD, in thy wrath rebuke me not:
nor in thy hot rage chasten me.

and in me thy shafts fastened be.
There is no soun^nes in my flesh,
because thine anger I am in:
nor is there any rest within
my bones, by reason of my sin.

ascended are above my head:
like as an heavy burden, they
to heavy upon me are laid.
and corrupt they be:
my foolishnes does make it so.

all the day long I mourning go.

and in my flesh is no soundnes.

because of my hearts restlessnes.

nor is my groaning hid from thee.

and mine eye sight is gone from me.
(2)

stand off: off stand my kinsmen eke.

that seek my hurt, they mischief speak,
And all day long imagine guile,

and as a dumb man I became
as if his mouth not open were.

and in whose mouth reproves none were.

o Lord my God, thou will me hea^^

when my foot (...), they va^^nt the more

am near, my grief's still me before.

I for my sins will sorry be.

who falsely hate me, multiply.

evil in stead of good to me,
because I follow what is good,
to me they adversaryes be.

my God o do not far depart

o Lord who my salvation art.
Psalm 39 To the chief musician, even to Ieduthun, a Psalm of David.
I Said, I will look to my ways,
lest I sin with my tongue:
I Will keep my mouth with bit, while I
the wicked am among.

my mouth I did refrain,
From speaking that thing which is good,
and stirred was my pain.

while I was musing long,
inkindled in me was the fire;
then spoke I with my tongue.

let me the measure learn;
that what a momentany thing
I am I may discern.

mine age as naught to thee:
surely each man at's best estate,
is wholly vanity. Selah.

sure stirred in vain they are:
he heaps up riches, and knows not
who shall the same gather.
(2)

my hope is upon thee.

the fools scorn make not me.

this done because thou have.

by thy hands blow I wast.

man for iniquity;
thou blast's his beauty like a moth:
sure each man 's vanity. Selah.

be not still at my tears:
for stranger, and pilgrim with thee,
I 'me, as all my fathers.

that I may strength recall:
before I do depart from hence,
and be noe more at all.
Psalm 40. To the chief musician, a psalm* of David.
WIth expectation for the Lord
I waited patiently,
and he inclined unto me.
also he heard my cry.

out of the miery clay:
and set my feet upon a rock,
he stablished my way.

of praise our God unto:
many shall see, and fear, upon
the Lord shall trust also.

makes his trust abide:
nor does the proud respect, nor such
to lies as turn aside.

have many a wonder wrought:
and likewise toward us thou have
^^^eived many a thought.
Their sum cannot be reck'ned up,
in order unto thee:
would I declare and speak of them,
beyond account they be.
(2)

would not; thou boar'st mine ear:
burnt offering, and sin offering
thou neither did requere.

roll it is writ of me.

thy laws in my beart be.

thy righteousness I show:
lo, I have not refraynd my lips,
Jehovah, thou do know.

within my heart alone:
I have declared thy faithfullnes
and thy salvation:
Thy mercy nor thy truth have I
from the great Church conceald.

from me o Lord withheld.
Let both thy kindness and thy truth
keep me my life throughout.

have compast me about:
My sins have caught me so that I
not able am to see:
more are they then hairs of my head,
therefore my heart fails me
(3)

to help me Lord make have.

who seek my soul to waste:
Let them be driven back, and shamed,
that wish me misery.

that say to me, fie fie.

that seek thee: let them say
who thy salvation love, the Lord
be magnifyde always.

the Lord yet thinks on me:
my help and my deliverer thou
my God, do not tarry.
Psalm 41 To the chief musician, a psalm of David.
BLessed is he that wisely does
unto the poor attend:
the Lord will him deliverance
in time of trouble send.

on earth he blessed shall be,
nor do thou him unto the will
give of his enemy.

the Lord will strengthen him:
thou also wilt make all his bed
within his sickness time.

merciful unto me;
heal thou my soul, because that I
have sinned against thee.

with evil me defame:
when will the time come he shall dye,
and perish shall his name?
me, he
speaks vanity: his heart
sin to it self heaps, when he goes
forth he does it impart.
(2)

together whisper still:
against me they imagine do
to me malicious ill.
Thus do they say some ill disease,
unto him cleaves sore:
and seeing now he lies down,
he shall rise up noe more.

on whom my trust I set,
his heel against me lifted up,
who of my bread did eat.

that I may them requite.

in me thou do delight:
For over me triumphs not my foe,

in mine integrity; and set'st
me thee before for aye.

from everlasting been,
also unto everlasting:
Amen, yea and Amen.
THE SECOND BOOK.
PSALM 42 To the chief musician, Maschil, for the Sons of Kor^h.
LIke as the Heart panting does bray
after the water brooks,
even in such wise o God, my soul,
after thee panting looks.

my soul it thirsts sore:
oh when shall I come and appear,
the face of God before.

by night also by day,
while all the day they unto me
where is thy God do say.

these things, then me upon
I do my soul out pour, for I
wit^ multitude had gone:
With them unto Gods house I went
with voice of joy and praise:
I with a multitud^ did go
that did keepe-holy-days.

stirred in me: thy hope place
in God, for yet him praise I shall
for the help of his face.
(2)

therefore thee mind I will
from Iordanes and He^monites land,
and from the little hill.

deep unto deep does call:
thy waves they are gone over me,
also thy billows all.

command will in the day:
a nd in the night his song with me,
to my life's God I Will pray.

why have thou forgot me?
why go I sad, by reason of
pressure of the enemy.

my foes reproach me do:
while all the day, where is thy God?
they do say me unto.

thy self down heavily;
and wherefore in me make thou
a stir tumultuously?
Hope thou in God, because I shall
with praise him yet advance:
who is my God, also he is
health of my countenance.
Psalm 43.
IVdge me, o God, and plead my cause
from nation mercylesse;
from the guilefull and man unjust,
o send thou me redre^se.

why cast's thou me thee fro:
why go I mourning for the sore
oppression of the foe?

let them lead, and bring me,
unto thy holy hill, and where
^hy tabernacles be.

to God my joys gladness:
upon the Harp o God my God
I will thy praise express.

thy self down heavily;
and wherefore in me make thou
a stir tumultuously?
Hope thou in God, because I shall
with praise him yet advance:
who is my God, also he is
health of my countenance.
Psalm 44 To the chief musician, for the sons of Korah.
WE with our ears have h^ard, o God,
our fathers have us told,
what works thou did in their days,
in former days of old.
How thy hand drove the heathen out,
and them thou planted have;
how thou the people did afflict,
and ^hou did them outcast.

the lands possession,
neither yet was it their own arm
wrought their salvation:
But thy right hand, thine arm also,
thy countenances light;
because that of thine own good will
thou did in them delight.

(...) do the same endure:
do thou for Jacob by command
deliverances procure.

push down our enemies:
through thy name will we tread them down
that up against us rise.

any affiance have,
upon my bow, neither is it
my sword that shall me save.

and put our foes to shame.

and for aye praise thy name. Selah.
(2)

thou make us also
to be ashamed; neither do thou
forth with our armies go.

thou make back recoyle:
likewise they which our haters be,
for themselves us do spoil.

to slaughter that belong:
also thou have us scattered
the heathen folk among.

whereby no wealth does rise:
neither do thou obtain increase
of riches by their price.

thou do us expose,
a scorn we are and mocking stock,
to them that us enclose.

a by word do us make:
also among the nations,
at us their heads they shake.

it is continually,
and of my countenance the shame
has over covered me.

and scoffingly despite:
by reason of the enemy,
and self revenging wight.
(3)

have not forgotten thee:
neither against thy covenant
have we dealt faithleslie.

our steps from thy way strayed;

and hid us in deaths shade.

to a strange God our hands:

hearts secrets understands.

counted as sheep to slay.

cast us not off for aye.

o wherefore do thou hide?
of our grief and oppression
forgetful do abide.

to earth cleaves our belly.

because of thy mercy.
Psalm 45 To the chief musician upon Shoshannim, forth sons of Korah,
Maschil a song of loves.
MY heart good matter boyleth forth,
my works touching the King
I speak: my tongue is as the pen
of Scribe swiftly writing.

grace in thy lips is shed:
because of this the Lord has thee
for evermore blessed.

gird thou upon thy thigh:
thy glorious-magnific^nce,
and comely majesty.

meeknes and righteousness:
and thy right hand shall lead thee forth
in works of dreadfulnes.

thine arrows piercing be:
whereby the people overcome,
shall fall down under thee.

the scepter of thy state

but wickedness do hate:
Because of this, God even thy God
he has anointed thee,
with oil of ^ladnes above them,
that thy companions be.
smell,
all of thy garments had:
out of the yvory pallac^s
whereby they made thee glad.

kings daughters present were,
the Queen is set at thy right hand
in fine gold of Ophir.
(2)

do thou incline thine ear:
do thou forget thine own people,
and house of thy father.

himself in thy beauty:
and bowing down worship thou him,
because thy Lord is he.

the daughter there of Tire:
the wealthy ones of the people
thy favor shall desire.

all glorious within:
and with imbroderies of gold,
her garments wrought have been.

in robes with needle wrought:
the virgins that do follow her
shall unto thee be brought.

also with rejoicing,
so shall they entrance have into
the Palace of the king.

that were thy fathers be:
whom thou may place in all the earth
in princely diginty.

through generations all:
therefore for ever and for aye
the people praise thee shall.
Psalm 46 To the chief musician, for the sons of-Korah, a song upon Alemoth.
GOD is our refuge, strength, and help
in troubles very near.

though the earth removed were.
Though mountains move to midst of seas

and troubled be, at whose swellings
alt^ough the mountains shake. Selah.

shall rejoice Gods city:
the holy place the tent wherein
abides the most high.

moved she shall not be:
God shall be unto her an help,
in the morning early.

the kingdoms moved were:
he did give forth his thundering voice
the earth did melt with fear.

the eternal Jehovah:
the God of Jacob is for us
a refuge high. Selah.

which Jehovah has wrought,
the fearful desolations,
which on the earth he brough^.

wars into peace he turns:
the spear he cuts, the bow he breaks,
in fire the chariots burns.

exalted be will I
among the heathen: through the earth
I 'le be exalted hye.

the eternal Jehovah:
the God of Jacob is for us
a refuge high. Selah.
Psalm 47. To the chief musician: a psalm for the Sons of Korah.
CLap hands all people, shout for joy,
to God with voice of singing mirth:

a great King over all the earth.

and nations under our feet lay.

his dear Jacobs glory. Selah.

Jehovah with the trumpets noise.

unto our King with singing voice.

sing ye psalms of instruction:

God (...) ^is holy throne upon.

Princes of peoples gathered be,
for shields of the earth to God belong:
he is exalted mightylie.
Psalm 48 To the chief musician, a song and psalm for the sons of Korah.
GReat is Jehovah, and he is
to be praised greatly
within the city of our God,
in his mountain holy.

the joy of the whole earth
mount Sion; the great Kings city
on the sides of the north.

to be a refuge high.

they past together by.

were troubled, fled for fear.

like her that child does bear.

in pie^es thou breakest:
even with a very blast of wind
coming out of the east.

the Lord of hoasts city,
in our Gods city, God will it
stablish eternally. Selah.
(2)

thy free benignity,
wirhin the very middle part
of thy temple holy,

so is thy praise unto
the ends of earth: thy right hand 's full
of righteousness ^lso.

and triumph let them make
who are the daughters of Judah,
even for thy ^udgements sake.

and go about he^ ye,
and do ye reckon up thereof
the towers that therein be.

her Palaces view well,
that to the generation
to come ye may it tell.

for ever and for aye:
likewise untothe very death
he guides us in our way.
Psalm 49 To the chief musician a psalm for the sons of Korah.
Hear this all people, all give ear
that dwell the world all over.

jointly both rich and poor.

of wisdom be speaking:
and my hearts meditation shall
be of understanding.

I will mine ear incline;
I will also upon the Harp
open my dark doctrine.

in days that evil be:
when that my heels iniquity
about shall compass me.
(2)

their stay to trust unto,
who in the plenty of their wealth
themselves do boast also:
of them that can
by any means redeem
his brother, nor give unto God
enough to ransom him.

and ever cease it.

and never see the pit.

the fool and brutish too
to perish, and their rich estate
to others leave they do.

to generations all
their dwelling places, and their lands
by their own names they call.

abides not a night:
become he is just like unto
the beasts that perish quite.

yet whatsoever they say,
their successors that follow them
do well approve. Selah.

death shall them feed upon;
and the upright over them in mom
shall have dominion.
And from the place where they do dwell,
the beauty which they have,
shall utterly consume away
in the devouring grave.
(3)

unto my soul will give,
even from the power of the grave,
for he will me receive. Selah.

in wealth is made to grow,
and when the glory of his house
abundantly does flow.

nothing when he does dye:
neither shall after him descend
ought of his dignity.

in time of his life blessed,
and men will praise thee, when as thou
much of thy self make.

they never shall see light.

like beasts that perish quite.
Psalm 50. A psalm of Asaph.
THe mighty God, the Lord has spoke,
and he the earth does call,
from the uprising of the Sun,
thereof unto the fall.

out of the mount Sion,
which is of beauty excellent
the full perfection.

fire shall waste in his sight;
and round about him shall be raised
a storm of vehement might.

calls heavens, and earth likewise,

with me by sacrifice.

show forth apparentlie:
because the mighty God himself
a righteous judge will be. Selah.
(2)

speak, I will testify
also to thee o Israel,
I even thy God am I.

will find no fault with thee,
or thy burnt offerings, which have been
at all times before me.

from house, or foldes of thine.

on thousand hills are mine.

all of them do I know:
and every wild beast of the field
it is with me also.

it unto thee declare:
for mine the habitable world,
and fullnes of it are.

the blood of goats will I?

thy vows to the most high.

do thou unto me cry,
and I will thee deliver, and
thou me shall glorify.
(3)

do thou the mention make
of my statu^e^, why in thy mouth
should'^^ thou my covenant take?

my words behind thee cast.

with him consented have;
And likewis^ with adulterers
thy part has been the same.

and guile thy tongue does frame,
Thou sit, thou do speak against
the man that is thy brother:
and thou do slander him that is
the son of thine own mother.

in silence I kept close:
that I was altogether like
thy self, thou did suppose*
I Will thee reprove, and in order
before thine eyes them set.

ye that do God forget:
^est I you tear, and there be no^
any deliverer.

praise unto me offer.
aright
his conversation,
to him will I give that he may
see Gods salvation.
Psalm 51. To the chief musician, a psalm^ of David, when Nathan the prophet
came unto him, after he had gone in unto Bathsh^b^.
HAve mercy upon me o God,
in thy loving kyndnes:
in multitude of thy mercyes
blot out my trespasses.

wash me most perfectly,
and also from this sin of mine
do thou me pu^ify.

my self do take notice,
and sin that I committed have
before me ever is.

this ill done thee before:
when thou speakst just thou art, and clear
when thou do judge therefore.

I did my shape receive:
^lso my mother that me bare
in sin did me conceive.

within the inward part:
and thou shall make me wisdom know
in secret of my heart.

I shall be cleansed so:
do thou me wash, and then I shall
be w^iter then the snow.

make me to hear the voice:
that so the bones which thou have broke
may cheerfully rejoice.

^ide thou away thy face:
also all mine iniquityes
do utterly deface.
(2)

also a spirit right

away out of ^hy sight;
Nor from me take thy holy spirit.

of thy salvation, and uphold
me with thy spirit free.

that work iniqui^ie:
and by this means shall sinners be
converted unto t^ee.

free from blood guiltines,
and so my tongue shall joyfully
sing of thy righteousness.

by thee be opened,
and by my mouth thy praises shall
be openly showed.

it would I freely bring:
neither do thou contentment take
in a whole burnt offering.

they are a broken sp^ite:
God, thou will not despis^ a h^ar^
that is broken, and contrit^*

do good to Sion hill:
the walls of thy Ierus^l^m
o do thou build up sti^l.

ple^se thee, with burnt offrin^,
and whole burnt offering; t^en ^^ey shall
calves to thine Altar bring.
Another of the same.
O GOD, have mercy upon me,
according to thy kindenes dear:
and as thy mercyes many be,
quite do thou my transgressions clear.

and from my sin me purify.

before me is my sin daily.

and done this evil in thy sight:
that when thou speakst thee justify
men may, and ^udging clear thee quite.

in sin my mother conceav'd me.

and made me wise in secrecy.

shall be; me wash, and then the snow

Joy and gladness, the bones which so
Thou broken have joy cheerly shall.

blot thou iniquityes out all
which are upon me any way.
(2)
at last
God: a right spirit in me new make.

thy holy spright nor from me take.

and stay me with thy spirit free.

and sinners shall be turned to thee.

o God, God of my health-saving,
which if thou shall vouchsafe, aloud
thy righteous^es my tongue shall sing.

and thy praise shall my mouth forth show

that I should it on thee bestow:
Thou joy'st not in burnt sacrifice.

broken; o God, thou wilt not despise,
a heart that is broken and contrite.

on Sion goodness bounteouslie:
Ierusalems walls that lie so low
do thou vouchsafe to edify.

the sacrifices with content
of righteousness, the offerings slain,
which unto thee we shall present,
Together with the offerings
such as in fire whole burned are:
and then they shall their bullocks bring,
offerings to be on thine altar.
Psalm 52 To the chief musician, Maschil* a psalm o* David: when Doeg the
Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of
Ahimilech.
O man of might, wherefore do thou
thus boast thy self in ill?
the goodness of the mighty God
endures ever still.

mischievous things devise:
it is like to a razor sharp,
working deceitful lies.

more to speak lies then right.

devouring words delight.

destroying the^ deface,
he shall take th^e away, and pluck
thee from thy dwelling place,
And also root thee out from off
the land of the living. Shelah.

and fear, at him laughing.
that made not God
his strength: but ^rusted in
his store of wealth, himself made strong
in his mischievous sin.
am I
like ^ green Olive Tree:
I trust for ever and for aye,
in Gods benignity.

because thou have done this:
and I Will wayt on thy name, for good*
before thy Saints that is.
Psalm 53. To the chief musician upon Mahalat^, Maschil. ^ psalm of Davi^.
THe foo^e in's heart says, there is no Go^*
they are corrupt, have done
abominable practices;
that does good there is none.

on sons of men, to see
if any that does understand,
that seeks God there be.

even filthy are become:
and there is none that does good,
noe not so much as one.

have they noe knowledge all?
who ea^e my people: they eat bread;
and on God do not call.
where noe fear was,
against thee in camp that lies
his bones God scattered; and them shamed
for God does them despise.

his folks captivity
when God shall turn: Jacob shall joye
glad Israel shall be.
Psalm 54 To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil, a psalm: of David, when
the Ziphims came and said to Saul, does not David hide himself with us?
PReserve me, by thy name, o God,
and by thy strength judge me.

words in my mouth that be.

and who oppress me sore,
pur^ue my soul; neither have they
set God themselves before. Selah.

that do my soul sustain.

them in thy truth restrain.

with voluntarines;
Lord, to thy name I will give praise,
because of thy goodness.

out of all miseryes:
and i^s desire mine eye has seen
upon mine enemies.
Psalm 55 To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil, a psalm of David.
O GOD, do thou give ear unto
my supplication:
and do not hide thy self away
from my petition.

and answer me return,
I in my meditation
do make a noise and mourn.

the wicked have oppressed,
for they injustice on me cast
and in wrath me detest.

deaths terrors fallen be.

horror has covered me.

wings of a dove will give;
that I might fly away and might
in quiet dwelling live.

and in the desert rest. Selah,

from violent tempest.
(2)

do t^ou their tongues di^i^e;
for strife and violence I within
the city have espied.

they do walk night and d^y:
mischief also and sorrow do
in midst of it stay.

decei^fullnes also,
and out of the broad streets thereof
guilefullnes does not go.

could I have borne; nor did
my foe against me lift himself
from him had I me hid.

my well esteemed peer,
which wast to me my special guide,
and mine acquaintance near.

in sweet society:
and we did walk into the house
of God in company.

go down quick into hell:
for wickedness among them is
in places where they dwell.
(2)

and me the Lord save shall.

pray, and aloud will call,

in peace my soul set free
from war that was against me, because
there many were with me.

that does of old abide; Selah.
because they have no change, therefore
Gods fear they lay aside.

he has put forth his hand:
he has also the covenant
which he had made prophan'^.

but war in's heart: his words
more then the oil were softened
but yet they were drawn swords.

and he sustain thee shall:
nor shall he suffer righteous one^
to be removed at all.

bring them who bloody be,
^uilefull shall not live half their days*
but I will trust in thee.
Psalm 56. To the chief musician upon Ionath Elem Rechokim, Michtam of David,
when the Philistims took him in Gath.
LORD, pity me, because
man would up swallow me:
and fighting all the day throughou^,
oppress me sore does he.

me swallow up daily;
^or they be many that do fight
against more, o most high.

what time I am afraid.

my confidence have stayed*
I will not be afraid
what flesh can do to me.

for ill against me be.

themselves they closely hyde;
they mark my steps when for my soul
waiting they do abide.

by their iniquity;
thou in thine anger down depresse
the folk, o God mighty.

put thou my weeping tears
into thy bottle; ^re they not
within thy registers.

when I cry unto thee:
this I do know assuredly,
because God is for me.

the Lords word I will praise.

what man against me can raise.

I Will render praise to thee.

delivering do^t free;
Deliver wilt not thou
my feet from down falling?
so that I may walk before God
ith light of the living.
Psalm ^7* To the chief musician Altaschith, Michtam of David, when he fled
from Saul in the cave.
O GOD, to me be merciful,
be merciful to me:
because my soul for shelter-safe
betakes it self to thee.
Yea in the shadow of thy wings,
my refuge I have placed,
until these sore calamities
shall quite be over past.

that does for me perform.

me from the spightfull scorn
Of him that would with greedy have,
swallow me utterly: Selah.
the Lord from heaven will send sorth
his grace and ve^ity.

with men on-fier-set:
men's sons whose teeth are spears, and shafts,
whose tongues as swords are whet.

above the heavens high:
up over all the earth also
lifted be thy glory.

my soul is bowed; a pit
they dig'd before me, but themselves
are fallen in midst of it. Selah*

p^epared is my heart,
sing will I, and sing praise with psalms,

Wake* salt^ry and Harp, I will
awake in the morning.

amongst nations to thee sing.

thy merciful bounty:
thy verity also does reach
unto the cloudy sky.

above the heavens high:
up over all the earth also
lifted be thy glory.
Psalm 58 To the chief musician, Altaschi^h, michtam of D^vid.
Do ye o congregation,
indeed speak righteousness?
and o ye (...) of earthly men,
do ye judge uprightnes?

injurious-wickednes;
and in the land you will weigh out
your hands violentnes.

the womb, they go astray
as soon as ever they are borne;
uttering lies are they.

they like deaf Aspe, her ear

his voice she will not hear.

break out, o God most strong,
do thou Jehovah, the gre^^ tee^h
break of the lions young*

that run continually:
and when he bends his shafts, let them
as cut asunder be.

each of them pass away;
like to a woman's untimely birth
see Sun that never they may.

take them away shall he,
as with a whirlwinde both living,
and in his jealousee.

the vengeance he does see:
his feet wash shall he in the blood
of them that wicked be.

for righteous there is fruit:
sure there is a God that in the earth
judgment does execute.
Psalm 59 To the chief musician Altaschith, Michtam of David: when Saul sent,
and they watched the house to kill him.
O GOD from them deliver me
that are mine enemies:
set thou me up on high from them
that ^p against me rise.

grievous-iniquity:
and be a savior unto me
from men that be bloody.

the strong causlesse combine
against me, not for my crime, Lord,
nor any sin of mine.

they run, and ready make
themselves, do thou behold, also
unto my help awake.

rise to visit therefore
all heathens; who sin wilfully,
to them show grace no more.

to dogs a noise do make;
and so about the city round
a compass they do take*

within their lips swords are:
for who is he (do these men say)
which ^s at all does hear.

and heathens all wilt mock.
And for his strength I Will wayt on thee
for God is my high Rock.
(2)

with good shall prevent me:
and my desire upon my foes
the Lord will let me see.

but scatter them abroad
by thy strong-power; and bring them down,
who art our shield o God.

and in their pride them take:
and for their cursing, and lying
which in their speech they make.

them be no more; that they
may know that God in Jacob rules,
to th'ends of the earth. Selah.

and like dogs a noise make;
and so about the city round
a compass let them take.

seeking what they may eat,
and if they be not satisfiyde,
then let them grudge thereat*

in the morning thy kindness:
for thou my tower and refuge art
in day of my distress.

sing psalms of praise will I:
for God is mine high tow^e, he is
the God of my mercy.
Psalm 60. To the chief musician upon Shushan Eduth Michtam of D^vid, to
teach. when he strove with Aram Naharaim, and with Aram Zobah when Ioab
returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of salt, twelve thousand.
O GOD, thou have rejected us,
and scattered us abroad:
thou have displeased been with us,
return to us o God.

thou it asunder brake:
do thou the breaches of it heal,
for it does moveing shake.

things that are hard, t^ou have
also the cup of trembleing
given to them to taste.

a B^nner to display
thou given have to be lift up
for thy truths sake. Selah.

delivered may be,
o do thou save with thy right hand,
and answer give to me.

rejoice therein will I,
Sh^c^em I will divide, and meet
of Succoth the valley.

Manass^h mine besides:
Ephraim the strength is of my head,
Judah my laws prescribes.

over Edom my shoo,
o Palestine, because of me
be thou triumphant too.

to th'citty fortifyde?
and who is he that will become
into Edom my guide?

cast us off heretofore?
and thou o God, who with our hoasts
would not go ou^ before?

for man's help is but vain:

our foes tread with disdain.
Psalm 61 To the chief musician upon Negi^^^. A psalm of D^vi^
HArken o God, unto my cry*
unto my prayr attend.

to thee from the earths end.
Do thou me lead unto the rock
that higher is then I.

strong Fort from the enemy.

for ever will abide,
within the covert of thy wings
I Will seek my self to hide. Selah^.

that I to thee have past:
their heritage that fear thy name
to me thou given have.

wilt make addition.
his years a^ generation,
and generation.

he shall abide for aye:
do thou mercy and truth prepare
that him preserve they may.

sing praise perpetually,
that I the vows which I have made
may pay continually.
Psalm 62 To the chief musician, to Ieduthun, a psalm of David.
TRuly my soul in silence waytes
the mighty God upon:
from him it is that there does come
all my salvation.

salvation; it is he
that my defense is, so that I
moved grea^ly shall not be.

against man; be slain ye shall,
all ye are as a tortring fence,
and like a bowing wall.

from his excellency:
lies they do love, with mou^h they bless*
but they curse inwardly. Selah.

the mighty God upon:
because from him there does ari^^
my expectation.

salvation; it is he
tha my defense is, so that I
^h^ll never moved be.

^lso is my glory:
and ^he rock of my fortitude,
my hope in God does ly.

do put your trust always,
before him pour ye out your hearts:
God is our hopefull-stay. Selah.

high men's sons are a lie:
in balance laid together are
lighter then vanity.

ye in oppression:
if so be riches do increase
set not your heart the^eon.

once and again this word
I have it heard that all power
belongs unto the Lord.

o Lord, does appertain:
for thou according to his wo^k
rendrest each man again.
Psalm 63 A psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.
O GOD, thou art my God, early
I will for thee inquire:
my soul thirsts for thee* my flesh
for thee has strong desire,
In land where as no water is
that thirsty is and dry.

thy strength and thy glory.

abundantly excel
e^'n life it self: wherefore my lips
forth shall thy praises tell.

whilst that alive am I:
and in thy name I will lift up
these hands of mine on hi^h.

shall sa^i^fied be:
my mouth also with joyful lips
shall praise give unto th^e*

of thee my bed upon,
and on thee in the night watches
have meditation.

he that to me help brings;
therefore will I sing joyfully
in shadow of thy wings.

does follow after thee:
also thy right h^nd it is that
which has upholden me.

to bring it to an end,
they shall into the lower parts
of the earth down descend.

they shall be made to fall:
and they be for a portion
unto the Foxes shall.

all that by him do swear
shall glory, but stopped shall be
their mouths that liars are.
Psalm 64 To the chief musician, a psalm of David.
O GOD, when I my prayer make,
my voice then do thou hear;
also do thou preserve my life
safe from the enemies fear.

the wicked hide thou me:
from the insurection of them
that work iniquitee.

like as it were a ^word;
and bend their ^owes to shoot their shafts
even a most bitter word:

the perfect man to hitt.
suddenly do they shoot at him,
and never fear a whitt.

encourage; how they may
lay snares in secret, thus they talk;
who shall them see? they say.

a search exact they keep:
both inward thought of every man
also the heart is deep.

be sudden their wound shall.

upon themeslves to fall,
All that see them shall flee away.

the works of God, for his doing
they shall consider well.

and trust in him he shall:
and they that uprigh^ are in heart
in him shall glory all.
Psalm 65 To the chief musician, a psalm and song of David.
O GOD, in Sion ^ile^^ly
praise wayteth upon thee:
and thankfully unto thee shall
the vow performed be.

the prayr that men do make,
even unto thee therefore all flesh
themselves they shall betake.

prevailed against me;
as for our tresp^sses they shall
be purgde away by thee.

thou thy free choice do mak^;
and that he may dwell in thy courts
him near to thee do take:
For with the good things of thy house
be satisfyde shall we;
and with the holy things likewise
that in thy temple be.

that dre^dfully are done,
(...) answer give to us, o God,
of our salvation:
Upon whom all the ends of the earth
do confidently stay,
and likewise they that are removed
far off upon the sea.


the noise of seas, noise of their wave^
also the peoples rage.
(2)

that dwell in parts far out;
out goings of the morning thou
and evening makst to shout.

it moisten plenteously,
thou with Gods stream, full of water
enrichest it greatly:
When thou have so prepared it,
thou do them corn prepare.

watrest that in it are;
The furrows of it thou setlest,
with showers that do fall
thou makst it soft, thou do thereof
the springing bless withal.

adorn as with a crown,
also the paths where thou do tread,
fatnes they do drop down.

are in the wilderness;
and girded are the little hills
about with joyfullnes.

corn over-covering
the valleys is; so that for joy
they shout, they also sing.
Psalm 66 To the chief musician a psalm or song.
O All ye lands, a joyful noise
unto God do ye raise.

make glorious his praise.

unto the Lord say ye:
through thy powers greatness thy foes shall
submit themselves to thee.

that dwell upon the earth,
and sing unto thee, they shall sing
unto thy name with mirth. Selah.

of God take ye notice,
he in his doing ^errible
toward men's children is.

convert, a way they had
on foot to pass the river through,
there we in him were glad.

his eyes the nations spy:
let not those that rebellious are
lift up themselves on high. Selah.
part)
his praises voice be heard.

nor suffers to be stird.

us tryde as silver's tryde.

on our loins streightnes tyd^.

through fire and water pass
did we, but us thou broughst into
a place that wealthy was^

my vows I Will pay to thee.

when trouble was on me.

that full of fatnes are,
with the incense of rams, I will
bullocks with goat^s prepare. Selah.
part)
of God that fearers are,
and what he has done for my soul
to you I will declare.

my tongue extolled was he.

the Lord will not hear me.

me heard assuredly;
unto the voice of my prayr he
list'ned-^ttentively.

neither my prayr has he,
nor yet his own benignity,
turned away from me.
Psalm 67 To the chief musician on Neginoth a psalm or Song.
GOD gracious be to us, and give
his blessing us unto,
let him upon us make to shine
his countenance also. Selah.

thy way the earth upon,
and also of thy saving health
in every nation.

let all people praise thee.

and let them joyful be:
For thou shall give judgment unto
the people righteously,
also the nations upon earth
thou shall them lead safely. Selah.

let all people praise thee.
Her fruitful increase by the earth
shall then forth yielded be:
God even our own God shall us bless.
I say bless us shall,
and of the earth the utmost coasts
they shall him reverence all.
Psalm 68 To the chief musician, a psalm or song of David.
LEt God arise, his enemies
let them dispersed be,
let them also that do him hate
away from his face flee.

do thou them drive away:
as wax at fire melts, in Gods sight
let wicked so decay.

o let them joyful be
before the Lord, also let them
rejoice exceedingly.

extol him that does ride
on skies, by his name IAH, before
his face joyful abide.

and of the widows case
God is a judge, and that within
his holy dwelling place.

(...) forth those that are bound
in chains, but the rebellious
dwell in a barren ground.
(2)

in presence of thy folk,
when through the desert wilderness
thou did marching walk. Selah.

from heavens the drops down fell:
Sinai it self moved before
the God of Israel.

di^st send a plent^ous rain,
whereby when as it weary was
thou it confirmed again.

therein; thou do prepare
o God of thy goodness, for them
that poor afflicted are.

that it have published.

at home spoil divided.

be like doves wings shall ye
with silver decked, and her feathers
like yellow gold that be.

it was white as Salmons snow.

like Bashan hill unto.

this is the very hill
in which God loves to dwell, the Lord
dwell in it ever will.
(3)

thousands of Angels be;
with them as in his holy place,
on Sinai mount is he.

captivity captive,
for men, yea, for rebels also
thou did gifts receive;
That the Lord God might dwell with them.

with benefits, blessed be the Lord
that is our salvations God. Selah.

that is our God most strong:
and unto Jehovah the Lord
issues from death belong.

the hairy scalp also
of hi^ that in his trespasses
on forward still does go.
(4)

ag^ine from Bashan hill:
my people from the depths of seas
bring back again I will.

blood of thine enemies;
imbrude the tongue of thy dogs may
be in the same likewise.

thy goings in progress;
even of my God my King within
place of his holiness.

in midst maids with Timbrel.

the spring of Israel.

with Iudahs Lords, and their
counsel, with Zebulons princes,
and Naphtalies lords were.

thy God has commanded;
strengthen o God, the thing which thou
for us have effected.
(4)

Kings shall bring gifts to thee.

of bulls that mighty be:
With peoples calves, with him that stoops
with pieces of silvar:
o scatter thou the people that
delight themselves in war.

and Ethiopias land
shall speedily unto the Lord
reach her out-streched hand.

unto the Lord sing praise. Selah.

that were of ancient days:
Lo, he his voice, a strong voice gives.

hi^ excellence over Israel is,
and his strength in the height.

the God of Israel, he
gives strength and power unto his folk,
o let God blessed be.
PSALM lxix. To the chief musician upon Shoshanni^, A psalm of David.
THe waters in unto my soul
are come, o God, me save.

w^ere I no standing have:
Into ^eep waters I am come,
where floods me overflow.

my throat is dried so;
Mine ey^s fail: Iwayt for my God.

without a c^use, then mine heads hairs
they more in number be:
Also mi^e enemies wrongfully
they are that would me sla^,
mighty they are; then I restored
what I ^ook not away.

my sin's not hid from thee.

let not be shamd for me:
O never suffer them, who do
for thee inquity make,
o God of Isr^ell, to be
confounded for my s^ke,
(2)

reproach have suffered:
confusion my countenance
has overcovered.

unto my bretherren;
and am an aliant unto
my mothers childerren.

up eaten: every one
who thee reproach, their reproaches
are fallen me upon

this was reproach to me.

yet must their proverb be.

against me speak they do;
unto the drinkers of strong drink,
I was a song also.

to thee Lord, mak^ my prayr:
me Lord, in thy salvations truth,
in thy great mercy hear.
(3)

and me from sinking keep:
let me be freed mine haters from,
and out of waters deep.

nor me let swallow up
the deep, also let not the pit
her mouth upon me shut.

is thy benignity:
turn unto me according to
greatness of thy mercy.

from thy servant away;
because that I in trouble am;
hear me without delay.

do thou it vindicate;
give me deliverance, because
of them that do me hate.

my shame, and my disgrace:
mine adversaryes every one
they are before thy face.
(4)

for some me to bemone
I sought, but none there was; and for
comforters, but found none.

unto me gall they gave;
and in me thirst they vinegar
for drink made me to have.

to them become a snare:
and that let be a trap, which should
have been for their welfare.

that they may never see:
with trembling also make their loins
to shake continually.

on them thine anger fell.

none in their tents let dwell.
him do persecute
on whom thy stroke is found:
also they talk unto the grief
of them whom thou do wound.

iniquity do add:
into thy righteousness for them
let entrance none be had.

o do thou them forth blot,
and amongst them that righteous are
be written let them not.
(5)

let thy health lift me by.

with thanks him magnify.
this also
shall be more pleasing far,
then any ox or bullock young,
that horned and hoofed are.

then shall be glad the meek;
also their heart shall ever live
that after God do seek.

despise whom he has bound.

that moves, his praises sound.

and Sion he will save:
that they may dwell therein, and may
it in possession have.

inherit shall the same:
also therein inhabit shall
they that do love his name.
Psalm 70 To the chief musician, a psalm to bring to remembrance.
O GOD, to rescue me,
Lord, to mine help, make have.

ashamed be, and abasht:
Turned back and shamd let them
that in my hurt delight.

their shame for to requite.

joy, and be glad in thee:
let such as love thy health say still,
magnifyde let God be.

I poor am and needy:
thou art mine aid, and my helper
o Lord; do not tarry.
Psalm 71
JEHOVAH, I for safety do
betake my self to thee:
o let me not at any time
put to confusion be.

let me deliverance have:
to me do thou incline thine ear,
also do thou me save.

I always may resort:
thou gav'st commandment me to save,
for thou my Rock and Fort.

my God, deliver me,
out of the hand of the unjust,
leavened with cruelty.

mine expectation:
and thou art he whom from my youth
my trust is set upon:

thou art he that tookst me
out of my mothers belly; still
my praise shall be of thee.
(2)

but thou my refuge strong.

and honor all day long.

o cast me not away,
and do not thou abandon me
when my strength does decay.

to me, against me spoke,
and they that for my soul lay-wayt,
counsel together take.

do ye him now pursue,
and apprehend him, for there is
not one him to rescue.

my God have to help me.

let them ashamed be:
Let t^em consumed be, let them
be also covered,
both with reproach and dishonor,
that for my hurt waited.
(3)
I with patience will wayt
on thee continuallee,
and I will add yet more and more
to all the praise of thee.

and thy salvation show
from day to day, for of the same
no number do I know.

go on a long will I:
I Will men^ion make of thy justice,
yea even of thine only.

thou have instructed me:
and hitherto I have declared
the wonders wrought by thee.

and hoary head, o God,
do not forsake me: till I have
thy power shown abroad,
Unto this generation,
and unto every one
that shall hereafter be to come,
thy strong dominion.
(4)

reach up on high also,
great are the things which thou have done;
Lord who is like thee unto?

afflictions great and sore,
sh^lt me revive, and me again
from depths of earth restore.

and comfort me always.

I will show forth thy praise,
O thou my God, I will sing forth
to thee mine Harp upon,
thy verity and faithfullnes,
o Isreal's Holy-one.

when I shall sing to thee:
my soul also, which freely thou
have brought to liberty.

thy justice all day long:
for they confounded are, and brought
to shame, that se^k my wrong.
Psalm 72 A psalm for Solomon.
O GOD, thy judgments give the King,
and thy justice to the Kings Son.

and to thy poor see judgment done,

unto ^he people bring forth peace:
the li^^le ^ills shall bring the same,
by execu^ing righteou^nes.

and children of the needy save;
and he in pieces shall break down
each one that them oppressed have.

endure through generations all.

as showers on earth distilling-fall.

and store of peace till no moon be.

from flood to lands end reign shall he.

do dwell, before him bow they must:
and they who are his enemies
they verily shall lick the dust.
(2)

of Tarshish, and the Isles, the Kings,
Shebahs, and Sebahs Kings also,
shall unto him give offerings.

and serve him every nation:

the poor, and helper that has none.

and the souls of the needy save.

by him shall free redemption have:
And precious in his sight shall be

and unto him shall every one
of purest gold of Shebah give:
Also each one their humble prayr
in his behalf shall make always:
and every one his blessedness
shall daily celebrate with praise.
(3)

ith land the mountains tops upon,
the fruit whereof shall moving shake
like to the trees of Lebanon:
And they that of the city be
like grass on earth shall flourish all.

as long as Sun continue shall:
So shall his name continued be,
and men in him themselves shall bless,
and all the nations of the world
shall him the blessed one profess.

the God, the God of Israel,
he works by himself alone
such things whereat men may marvel.

for ever, let the whole earth be
filled full with glory of the same,
Amen, also Amen say we.
This. After the common tunes.

also let the earth all
be filled with his glorious fame,
Amen, and so it shall.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Psalm 73 A psalm of Asaph.
TRuly to Israel God is good;
to men of a clean heart.

aside did well nigh start.

in peace to see the ill.

but firm their strength is still.

in toylesome misery,
nor are they stricken with like plague^
as other mortals be.

encomp^sse them about,
and like a garment; violence
does cover them throughout.
which they have
extended are their eyes:
greater prosperity they have
then their hearts can devise.

speak guile proudly they talk.

their tongue through the earth does walk.
(2)

have hi^^er turned in,
and waters out of a full cup
wrung out to them have been.

that God this thing should know,
and is there in the highest one
knowledge hereof also?

who have tranquillity:
within the world they do increas^
in rich ability.

cleansed my heart have I.

for plagued am I daily:
And every morning chastened.

thy childrens generation
lo then I should betray;

casting I did devise,
the matter too laborious
appeared in mine eyes.

of God I went, and then
I prudently did understand
the last end of these men.
(3)

these men thou placed have:
and into desolations
thou do them downward cast.

brought to destruction?
how are they utterly consumed
with sad confusion?

awaking does arise,
so thou o God, when thou awakst
their Image shall despise.

pricked were my reins by me:

like a beast before thee.
(4)

before thee I do stand:
thou have upheld me steadfastly
also by my right hand.

guidance unto me give:
up afterward also thou shall
to glory me receive.

who is it that I have?
and there is nothing upon earth
besides thee that I crave.

does fail me altogether:
but God the strength is of my heart,
and portion mine for ever.

utterly perish shall:
those who a whoring go from thee
thou have destroyed all.

near God for to repair:
in God the Lord I put my trust,
all thy works to declare.
Psalm 74 Maschil of Asaph.
O GOD, why have thou cast us off,
why does thy rage endure?
for ever smoking out against
the sheep of thy pasture?

of old by thee purchased:
the rod of thine inheritance
which thou redeemed have,
This mount Sion wherein thou dwelst.

unto the desolations
of perpetuity:
Thy foe within the Sanctuary
has done all lewd designs.

their Banners set for signs.

did lift up had renown:

her carved works they beat down.

they cast, the dwelling place
of thy name down unto the ground
profanely they did raze.

thus in their hearts they said:
Gods Synagogues throughout the land
all in the flames they laid.
(2)

a Prophet us among:
nor with us any to be found
that understands how long.

o mighty God, defame?
thine enemy for evermore
shall he blaspheme thy n^me?

the right hand of thy strength?
out of thy bosom o do thou
draw it forth to the length.

from ancient time my King,
in midst of the earth he is
salvation working.

devide the sea asunder:
the Dragons heads in pieces thou
did break the waters under.

thou into pieces brake:
to people that in deserts dwell
for meat thou did him make.

thou dri'dst up floods of might.

thou Sun prepar'st, and light.

have constituted fast:
the summer and the winter cold
the same thou formed have*
(3)

r^proachfully does blame,
o Lord, also the foolish folk
blasphemed have thy name.

thy turtles soul deliver:
the congregation of thy poor
forget not thou for ever.

because the dark places
of the earth with habitations
are full of furiousnes.

return away with shame:
o let the poor and needy one
give praise unto thy name.

have thou in memory
how day by day the foolish man
with scorn reproacheth thee.

the loud tumult of those
continually on high ascends
that rise thee to oppose.
Psalm 55 To the chief musician Altaschith, psalm or song of Asaph.
O GOD, to thee do we give thanks,
thanks give we unto thee:
and that thy name is near at hand;
thy wonders show to be.

uprightly judge I will.

I stay its pillars still,

deal not so foolishly:
also unto the wicked ones,
lift not the horn on hye.

with stiffned neck speak not,

promotion can be got.

another down does tread.

also the wine is red:
It Is full of mixture, and thereout
he poures: but on earth all
the wicked ones the dregs thereof
both strein, and drink them shall.

for evermore I will
sing praises unto him that is
the God of Jacob still.

also cut off will I:
but the horns of the righteous,
shall be exalted high.
Psalm 76 To the chief musician, on Neginoth, a psal^ or song of Asaph.
IN Judah God is known: his name
is great in Israel.

in Sion he does dwell,

the shield, sword, and battle. Selah.

the mounts of prey excel.

they slept their sleep profound:
and of the men of might there is
none that their hands have found.

as thy rebuke our past,
the chariot also, and the horse
in a dead sleep are cast.
(2)

and who is it before
thy presence that can stand, when as
that thou art angry sore?

judgment from heaven above:
the earth exceedingly did fear,
also it did not move.

to the execution
of judgment, to save all the meek
that are the earth upon. Selah.

shall turn the wrath of man:
and the remainder of the earth
also thou shall restrain.

that him surround all ye,
and bring ye presents unto him,
that feared ought to be.

asunder cut he shall:
unto the Kings on earth that be,
dreadful he is withal.
Psalm 77 To the chief musician, to Ieduthun, a psalm of Asaph.
TO GOD I cried with my voice:
yea with my voice I have
cried unto the mighty God;
and ear to me he gave.

my sore ran in the night,
and ceased not: also my soul
refused comfort quite.

disquieted was I:
I did complain, and my spirit
o'rewhelmd was heavily. Selah.

I cannot speak for fears.

of ancient times the years.
(2)

the song in night I had:
I commun'd with my heart, also
strict search my spirit mad^.

and pleased will he not be?

to perpetuitee?
His promise does it, fail for aye?

gracious to be? has he shut up
in wrath his dear mercyes? Selah.

it is mine infirmity:
the years of the right hand I will
think on of the most high.
(3)

the actions of the Lord:
thy wondrous works of ancient time
surely I will record.

and of thy doings talk.

o God, where thou do walk.
What god so great as our God is?

thou God have done; among the folk
thou do thy strength declare.

with thine own arm set free,
of Jacob also of Joseph
the childeren that be. Selah.
(4)

thee did the waters see:
they were afraid, the deeps also
could not but troubled be.

the skies a sound out sent:
also thine arrows on each side
abroad dispersed went.

the world illuminate
thy lightnings did, the earth also
trembl^d and shook hereat.

unkowne, are in the deep.

thou ledst thy folk like sheep.
Psalm 78 Maschil of Asaph.
GIve listening ear unto my law,
ye people that are mine,
unto the sayings of my mouth
do ye your ear incline.

I Will speak hid things of old:

our fathers have us told.

to th'after age sh^wing
the Lords praises: his strength, and works
of his wondrous doing.

and put in I sraell
a law, which he our fathers charged,
they should their children tell:

are to be borne might know;
that they might rise up and the same
unto their children show.

their confidence might set:
and Gods works and his commandment
might keep and not forget,

a stiff, st^ut race; a race
that set not right their hearts: nor firm
with God their spirit was.
(2)

that went out with their bow,
did turn their backs in the day when
they did to battle go.

in his law they denyde*

that he to them descryde.

within their fathers sight:
in Egipts land, within the field
of Zoan, by his might.

he caused them through to pass:
and he the waters made to stand
that as an heap it was.


in wilderness, as from great deep^
drink unto them he gave.

streams he did bring also,
and caused water to run down
like as the rivers do.
(3)

against him for to sin:
by their provoaking the most high
the wilderness within.

did tempt the God of might:
by asking earnestly for meat
for their souls appetite:

they s^yd can God be able
within the desert wilderness
to furnish us a table*

waters, and streams did flow:
for his folk can he flesh provide,
can he give bread also?

so kindled was a fire
against Jacob: and against Israel
there came up wrathful ire.

nor in his health did hope:

and doors of heaven set open:
(4)

and gave them the heavens wheat.

to th'full he sent them meat.

brought South-winde by his power.

like the seas sand did shower.

he caused it to fall,
even round about on every side
their dwelling places all.

abundantly also:
for that which was their own desire
he did on them bestow:

from their lustful desire:
but while their meat was in their mouths,

And slew their fat ones: and smote down
of Israel the choice men.

believe his wonders then.
(5)

the days of their life spend,
and hastily he brought their years
unto a fearful end.

they sought with their desire:
and they returned, early also
did after God enquire.

they called to memoree:
and that the mighty God most high,
was their Redeemer free.

and to him their tongues lyde.

nor did in's covenant bide.

their sin, and stroyd them not;
yea, often he turned his wrath aside,
nor raised all is anger hot.

and as it were a wind
that passes, and comes not again,
recalled unto minde^
(6)

and made him there to moan?

stint Isr'ells holy one.

keep in their remembrance:
wherein he from the enemy
gave them deliverance:

in Egypt he had shown:
and his most fearful prodigies
within the field of Zoan:

converted into blood:
and (that they could not drink thereof)
the waters of their flood.

he sent forth diverse flies:
and them amongst, which them destroyed,
he sent forth frogs likewise.

their labor to th'Locust.

their Sycamores with frost.

their cattle shut up fast:
likewise their herds of cattle to
the fiery thunder blast,

and indignation,
and sore distress: by sending forth
ill Angels them upon.
(7)

and their soul did not sav^
from death: also their life over
to Pestilence he gave,

all the first borne did smite:
those that within the tents of Ham
were chiefest of their might*

his own folk forth to go:
like to a flock ith wilderness
he guided them also.

so that they did not dread:
within the sea their enemies
he also covered.

them of his holy place:
unto this mountain which he did
by his right hand purchase.

their lot he did devide
by line: and Isr'ells tribes he made
in their tents to abide.
(8)

and grieved him bitterly:
also his testimonies they
kept not attentively:

and faithlesnesse did show:
they turned were aside even like
to a deceitful bow.

him with their places hye:
and with their graven Images,
moved him to jealousy.

Isr'ell with hatred great:

which men amongst he set,

into captivity:
also into the enemies hand
his beautiful glory.

wroth with his heritage.

none gave to marriage.

their widows did not weep.

awakned out of sleep:
Like a strong man that after wine

his foes behind: and so he gave
them an eternal blot.
(9)

nor Ephr'ims tribe approved.

moun^ Sion which he loved.

like unto places high:
like to the earth which he did found
to perpetuity.

election he did make,
and from the place of folding up
the sheep he did him take.

he did him then advance;
to feed Jacob his folk, also
Isr'ell his heritance.

integrity them fed:
and by the wise disrcetion
of his hands he them led.
Psalm 79 A psalm of Asaph.
O GOD* the heathen entered have
thine heritance, and defylde
thine holy temple: they on heaps
Jerusalem have pylde.

they given have for meat
to the fowls of heaven: flesh of thy Saints
for be^sts of earth to eat^.

about Ierusal^m
like unto waters: and there was
none for to bury them.

reproach become are we:
a scoffing and a scorn to them
that round about us be*

continue in thine ire,
for ever? shall thy jealousy
bu^ne like as does the fire?

which never did thee know,
upon the kingdoms that have not
called on thy name also.

his habitation
they also wondrously have brought
to desolation.
(2)

let thy mercies make have
us to prevent: because we are
near utterly laid waste.

for thy names glory make,
us free also, and purge away
our sin for thy names sake.

with heathen let be known
before our eyes, the vengeance of
thy servants blood out flowne.

come up, accordingly
as is thy mighty arm: save those
that are designed to dye,

into their bosom pay,
that their reproach, with which o Lord,
reproached thee h^ve they.

will give thee th^n^s (...)
(...) unto generations (...)*
we will show forth thy (...)
Psalm ^0 To ^he c^ief musici^n upon (...) F^du^h, a psalm of As^^h.
O Isr'ells ^hepheard, give thou ear;
that Joseph leadst about
like as a ^^ock: that dwelst between
the Cherubims, shine out.

Manasseh s ^ribe also,
do thou stir up thy strength, and come,
and to us safety show.

and cause thy countenance
to shine forth upon us; so we
shall have deliverance.

be wroth at thy folks prayrs?

to drink giv'st many tears.

thou do also expose:
and scornefully amongst themselves
laugh at us do our foes.

and cause thy countenance
to shine forth upon us, so we
shall have deliverance.
(2)

a Vine, thou did cast
the heathen people forth, also
this vine thou planted have.

a room where it might stand:
deep root thou did cause it to take
and it did fill the land.

like Cedars great extend.

she to the flood did send.

quite broken down to lie,
so that all those do pluck at her
that in the way pass by?

by wasting it annoy:
and wild beasts of the field do i^
devouringly destroy.
(3)

o God of hoasts, incline
to look from heaven, and behold,
and visit thou this vine.

with thy right hand set fast,
that branch likewise which for thy self
strongly confirmed thou have.

and utterly cut down,
perish they do, and that because
thy countenance does frown.

let thine hand present be:
upon the son of man whom thou
have made so strong for thee

from thee go back at all:
o do thou quick^n us, and we
upon thy name will call.

and cause thy countenance
to shine forth upon us, so we
shall have deliverance.
Psalm 81 To the chi^fe musician upon Gi^ti^h, a psalm of Asaph.
SIng unto God who is our strength,
and that with a loud voice:
unto him that is Jacobs God
make ye a joyful noise.

and bring the Timbrel hither:
the Harp which soundes so pleasantly
with Psaltery together.

with Trumpet sound on high:
in the appointed time and day
of our solemnity.

this thing a statute was;
and by the God of Jacob this
did for a judgment pass.

when as through Egypt land
he went: I there a language heard
I did not understand.

his shoulder did set free:
his hands also were from the pots
deli^ered by me.
(2)

in thunders secret way
I answred thee, I proved thee at
waters of Meribah. Selah.

testify unto ^hee:
o Israel, if that thou will
attention give to me.

in midst of thee at all:
nor unto any foreign god
thou bowing down shall fall.

from land of Egypt led:
thy mouth open wide, and thou by me^
with plenty shall be fed.

unto the voice I spoke:
and Israel would not in me*
quiet contentment take.

I did them send away,
in their own consultations
likewise then walked they.
(3)

obedient had bin:
and o that Israel he had
walked my ways within.

have pulled down their foes:
I should have turned my hand upon
such as did them oppose.

obedience should have faynd:
but unto perpetuity
their time should have remaind.

have nourisht them should he:
with honey of the rock I should
have satisfied thee.
Psalm 82 A psalm of Asaph.
THe mighty God does stand within
th'assemblie of the strong:
and he it is that righteously
does judge the gods among.

will judge unrighteouslie?
and will accept the countenance
of those that wicked be?

also the fatherless:
unto the needy justice do,
and that are in distress.

needy deliver ye;
and them redeem out of the hand
of such as wicked be.

in darkness they walk on:
all the foundations of the earth
quite out of course are gone.

of the highest ye are all.

one of the princes fall.

do thou thy self advance;
for thou shall have the nations
for thine inheritance.
Psalm 83 A psalm or song of Asaph,
O GOD, do not thou silence keep:
o do not thou refrain
thy self from speaking, and o God.
do not thou dumb remain.

do rage tumultuously:
and they that haters be of thee
have lift the head on hye.

they crafty counsel take;
also against thy hidden ones
they consultation make.

let us cut them down therefore,
that in remembrance Isr'elss name
may not be any more.

counsel with one consent,
and in confederation
against thee they are bent.

and of the Ishmaelites:
the people of the Haggarens
and of the Moabites.

and Amaleck conspire,
the Philistims, with them that be
inhabitants of Tire.

conjoined unto them:
and help they have administered
unto Lots childerren.
(2)

so to them be it done:
as unto Sisera and Iabin
at the Brook of Kison

were quite discomfited:
who also did become as dung
that on the earth is spread.

make thou their Nobles fall,
yea, as Zeba and Zalmunna
make thou their Princes all.

Gods houses let us take.

before the wind them make.

the flame sets hills on fire:

and fright them in thine ire.

of ignominious shame:
that so they may o Lord, be made
to seek after thy name.

and terriblie troubled:
yea, let them be put unto shame,
and be extinguished.

JEHOVAH is only,
art over all the earth throughout
advanc^d the most high.
Psalm 84 To the chief musician upon Gittith a psalm for the sons of Kor^h.
HOw amiable Lord of hoasts
thy tabernacles be?

yea it even faints in me.
Mine heart, my flesh also cries out
after the living God:

an house for her abo^d.
Also the swallow finds her nest
thine Altars near unto
where she her young lays: Lord of hoasts,
my King, my God also.

still they will give thee praise. Selah.

in whose heart ^re their ways.

do make it a fountain:
also the pooles that are therein
are filled full of rain:

in Sion all appear.

o Jacobs God, give ear. Selah.
(2)

of thine anointed see.

then elsewhere thousands be:
I rather had a doore-keeper
be in the house of my God:
then in the tents of wickedness
to settle mine abode.

he is a shield also:
Jehovah on his people grace
and glory will bestow:
No good thing will he hold from them
that do walk uprightlee.

that puts his trust in thee.
Psalm 85 To the chief musician, a psalm for the sons of Korah.
O LORD, thou have been to the land
gracious: Jacobs captivity
thou have returned with thy hand.
also the iniquity
of thy people have pardoned:
thou all their sin have covered. Selah.

from thy fierce indignation
thou have thy self turned away.

convert thou us; and do thou make
thine anger toward us to slake.

will thou thine indignation
draw out to generation?
and unto generation?

that thy folk may rejoice in thee.
(2)

thy saving health on us bestow.

for he will speak peace his folk unto,
and to his Saints: but let not them
to foolishnes return again.

unto all them that do him fear;
that in our land may dwell glory.
together,
prosperity and righteousness
embracing did each other kiss.

from heaven looks righteousn^s.

our land eke shall give her increase.

and in the way her steps shall place.
Another of the same
O LORD, thou favored have thy land:
Jacobs captivity.

thy folks iniquity:
Thou have close coverd all their sin.

thou have: from fiercenes of thine ire
thy self returned thou has^*

of our salvation:
and toward us cause t^ou to cease.
thi^e indignation

for evermore? what shall?
thine anger be by the^ drawne-out
to generations all?

thy folk rejoice shall so.

thy saving health bestow.
(2)

for to his people peace
he will speak; and to his Saints: lest they
return to foolishnes.

is his salvation:
that glory may within our land
have habitation.

justice and peace do kiss.

from heaven looking is.

and yield her fruit our land.

her steps in the way to stand.
Psalm 86 A prayer of David.
BOw down o Lord, thine ear,
and harken unto me:
because that I afflicted am,
also I am needy.

for gracious am I:
o thou my God, thy servant save,
that does on thee rely.

cry daily thee unto.

to thee mine lift I do.

to pardon prone withal:
and to them all in mercy rich
that do upon thee call.

give ear my prayer unto:
and of my supplications
attend the voice also.

to thee I will complain:
by reason that thou unto me
wilt answer give again.
(2)

none is there like to thee:
neither with thine are any works
that may compared be.

whom thou have made, the same
shall come and worship thee before:
and glorify thy Name.

the things that thou have done
are wonderful, thou art thy self
the mighty God alone.

o make thy way appear,
walk in thy truth I will; mine heart
unite thy name to fear.

o Lord my God, thee praise:
and I will glorify thy name,
for evermore always.

thy mercy does excel;
also thou have delivered
my soul from lowest hell.
(3)

of violent rose against me,
after my soul they sought: nor have
before them placed thee.

tender, and gracious;
longsuffring, and in mercy thou
and truth art plenteous.

and mercy on me have:
unto thy servant give thy strength:
thine handmaides son do save.

that mine haters may see,
and be ashamed; because Lord, thou
do help, and comfort me.
Psalm 87 A psalm or song for the sons of Korah.
AMong the holy hills
is his foundation.

loves the gates of Sion.

o Gods city, of thee. Selah.

to them that do know me;
Behold Philistia,
Tyrus city likewise,
with Ethiopia; that this man
by birth did thence arise.

of Sion that borne there
this and that man was, and the highest
himself shall stablish her.

even at that time when as,
the people he does number up,
that there this man borne was. Selah

as also there shall be,
those that on instruments do play:
all my springs are in thee.
Psalm 88 A song or psalm for the sons of Korah, to the chief musician upon
Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite.
LORD God of my salvation,
before thee day and night cryde I.

incline thine ear unto my cry.

and my life draws nigh to the grave.

I Am as a man that no strength have.

like slain which in the grave are shut;
by thee noe more remembered:
and by thy hand off are they cut.

in dakrnesses, within deep caves.

do me afflict with all thy waves. Selah^

thou have put far away me fro:
unto them loathsome thou madst me,
I am shut up nor forth can go.

mine eye with mourning pines away:
Jehovah, I call thee upon:
and stretch my hands to thee all day;
(2)

shall dead arise and thee confess? Selah.

in lost estate thy faithfullnes?

within the dark shall they be known?
and shall thy righteousness be seen
in the land of oblivion?

at morn, my prayer prevent shall thee.

why hidest thou thy face from me?

am ready, from my youthful years,
I am sore troubled doubtfully
while I do bear thy horrid fears.

thy terrors they do me dismay.

close me together all the day.

removed off aw^y from me,
and mine acquaintance thou have cast
into darksom obscurite^.
Psalm 89 Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite.
THe mercyes of Jehovah sing
for evermore will I:
I Will with my mouth thy truth make known
to all posterity.

for ever be up built;
establish in the very heavens
thy faithfullnes thou will.

I made a covenant:
and by an oath have sworn unto
David mine own servant.

establish-sure I will:
also to generations all
thy throne I Will build up still. Selah.

they shall with praise confess;
in the ass^mblie of the Saints*
also thy faithfullnes.

the Lord the heavens within?
among sons of mighty to the Lord
who is it that is like to him.
(2)

is to be had in fear:
and to be reverenc't of all those
that round about him are.

in power does abide?
thy faithfullnes does compass thee
also on every side.

thou do dominion bear:
when as the waves thereof arise,
by thee they stilled are.

in pieces Rahab quite:
thou have dispersed thine enemies
even by thine arm of might.

thine are they: thine they be;
the world, with fullnes of the same,
founded they were by thee.

thou did create the same:
Tabor together with Hermon,
rejoice shall in thy Name.
(3)

thy hand it is mighty,
and also thy right hand it is
exalted up on high.

are the prepared place:
mercy and truth preventing shall
go forth before thy face.

the joyful sound do know,
Lord, in thy countenances light
they up and down shall go:

rejoice exceedingly:
and in thy righteousness they shall
be lifted up on high.

the glory of their power:
our horn shall be exalted high,
also in thy favor.

a safe protection;
and he that is our Sovereign,
is Isr'ells Holy-one.
(4)

unto thy Saint, and said,
I upon one that mighty is
salvation have laid:
One from the folk chose, I set up.

have found: him I anointed with
mine oil of sanctity.

mine arm him strengthen shall.

exact on him at all:
Nor shall the Son of wickedness
afflict him any more.

and plague his haters sore.

and in my name shall be

^is hand upon the sea:
In The rivers also his right hand.

thou art m^ Father: and my God,
Rock of my health also.

my first begotten one:
higher then those that Princes are,
who dwell the earth upon.

to times which ever last:
also my covenant with him
it s^^ll stand very fast.
(5)

to perpetuitee:
his throne likewise it like unto
the days of heaven shall b^e.

and from my judgments swerve:

comm^ndes do not observe:

their bold transgression,
as also their iniquity
with sore stripes them upon.

I Will not tak^ utterly
away from him: nor will suffer
my faithfullnes to lie.

by me shall not be broke:
neither will I alter the thing
which by my lips is spoke.

if I to David lie:

to perpetuity:
And like the Sun before me his throne.

shall be established, like a true
witness in heaven: Selah.
(^)

in detestation:
exceedingly thou have been wroth
with thine anointed one.

of thy servant, his crown
thou have profaned unto the ground
by casting of it down.

his forts thou ruined have.

who by the way have past:
He Is a reproach to his neighbors.

thou have advanced their right hand:
and made all is foes to joy*

thou have turned backward qui^e:
and in the battle thou have not
made him to stand upright.

his glorious renown:
unto the very earth his throne
thou also have c^st down.

thou have diminished;
with very great confusion
thou have him covered. Selah.
(7)

thy self for evermore?
burn like unto consuming fire
shall thy displeasure sore?

how short a time have I;
wherefore have thou created all
men's sons to vanity?

and death shall never see?
from the strong power of the grave
shall he his soul set free?

o Lord, where are they now?
which in thy truth and faithfullnes
to David thou did vow.

unto remembrance call:
how I it bear in my bosom
from mighty people all.

have cast r^proach upon,
wherewith they have reproacht the steps
of thine anointed one.

to all eternitee:
Amen, so let it be, also
Amen, so it shall be.
THE FOVRTH BOOK
Psalm 90. A prayer of Moses the man of God.
O LORD, thou have been unto us
from generation,
to generation, a place
of fixed mansion.

ere earth and world by thee
were formed: thou art eternally
God to eternite^.

turn miserable men:
and then thou say ye sons of men
do ye return again.

are but within thy sight
as yesterday when it is past:
and as a watch by night.

they quite away are borne,
they like a sleep, and as the grass
that grows up in the morn.

it also up does grow;
it in the evening is cut down
it withers also.

consumed speedily:
and by thy sore displeasure we
are troubled suddenly.

before thee in thy fight:
our secret evils are within
thy countenances light.

our days all pass aw^y:
our years we have consumed quite,
even as a tale are they.
(2)

of our years which remain,
and if through strength they fourscore be,
their strength is grief and pain:
For it is cut off soon, and we fly

thine angers strength? according as
thy fear, thy wrath is so.

so we will on wisdom set.

let it repent thee yet?

betimes with thy mercee:
that so rejoice, and be right glad,
through all our days may we.
wherein
affliction we have had,
and years wherein we have seen ill,
now also make us glad.

do thou thy work declare:
also thy comely glory to
those that thy children are.

our handy works also
stablish on us; our handy work
establish it do thou.
Psalm 91.
HE that within the secret place
of the most high does dwell,
he under the Almightyes shade
shall lodge himself full well.

I to the Lord will say:
he is my God; and I in him
my confidence will stay.

he shall deliver thee,
also thee from the Pestilence
infectious s^all free.

under his wings shall be
thy trust: his truth shall be a shield
and buckler unto thee.

for terror by the night:
nor for the arrow that with speed
flies in the day light:

walk in the darkness fast:
nor for the sore destruction
that does at noone day wast.
(2)

and ten thousand also
at thy right hand, but it shall not
approach thee near unto:

attentively shall view:
also thou shall behold how that
the wicked have their due.

my safe protection,
even the most high, thou have him made
thine habitation.

there shall to thee b^fall,
neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling place at all.

command concerning thee:
in all thy ways where thou do walk
thy keeper for to be.

lest thou against a stone

on th'Adder, and Lion:
The Lion young and Dragon thou
shall tread under thy feet.

on me his love has set:
Because that he has known my Name,
I will him set on high.

and answer him will I:
I will be with him when he is
in troublesome distress,
and I to him will honor give,
when I shall him release.

I Will give to him his fill:
and also my salvation
decl^re to him I will.
Psalm 92. A ps^lme or song for the Sabbath day.
IT is a good thing to give thanks
Jehovah thee un^o:
unto thy Name praises to sing,
o thou most high also.

within the morning light*
also thy truth, and faithfullnes,
to show forth every night.

and Psaltery upon:
upon the solemn sounding Harp,
a meditation.

me caused to rejoice:
and in the workings of thy hands
I will triumph with voice.

thy thoughts are very deep.

this in his heart does keep.

even like the grass unto,
and all that work iniquity
when as they flourish do:
It Is that they then may be destroyed
to perpetuity.

for evermore most high.

thy foes they perish shall:
the workers of iniquity
they shall be scattred all.
(2)

thou shall exalt on high:
and ^ith fresh oil in mine old age
anointed be shall I.

upon mine enemies:
mine ear shall hear of wicked ones,
that up against me rise.

he that is righteous:
like to a Ceadar he shall grow
that is in Lebanus.

are planted steadfastly:
within the Courts of our God they
shall flourish pleasantly

continue forth to bring:
they shall be fat, yea likewise they
shall still be flourishing:

my refuge strong is he,
also that there is not in him
any iniquitee.
Psalm 93.
THe Lord reigns, clothed with majesty:
God clothed with strength, does gird
himself: the world so stablisht is,
that it cannot be stirred.


the floods lift up, Lord, floods lift up,
the floods lift up their noise.

more strong then waves of sea:

becomes thine house for aye.
Psalm 94
O LORD God, unto whom there do
revenges appertain:
o God, to whom vengeance belongs,
clearly shine forth again.

Judge of the earth throughout:
render a recompense unto
all those that are so stout.

that do walk wickedly?
how long shall those that wicked are
rejoice triumphingly?

and speak things that hard be?
and shall all such thus boast themselves
that work iniquitee?

and h^ri^^ge oppress.

and kill the fatherless.

nor Jacobs God it mind.

when will ye wisdom find?

who f^rmes the eye, not see?

man's teacher, knows not he?
(2)

that they are very vain.

and in thy law do train.

days of adversity:
until the pit be dug for
such as do wickedly.

his people cast away,
neither will he forsake his own
inheritance for aye.

it shall return again:
also all upright ones in heart
they shall pursue it then.

will up for me arise?
who will stand up for me against them
that work iniquityes?

had near in sil^nce dwel'd.

thy mercy me upheld.
(3)

of mine within my mind,
still from thy consolations
my soul delight does find.

have fellowship with thee:
which frames molestation
and that by a decree?

together they withstood
the soul of him that righteous is:
and condemn guiltless blood.

he is a refuge high:
also my God he is the rock
of my hopeful safety.

and in their wickedness
he shall them cut off: yea, the Lord
our God shall them suppress.
Psalm 95.
O Come, let us unto the Lord
shout loud with singing voice.
to the rock of our saving health
let us make a joyful noise.

approach with thanksgiving:
also let us triumphantly
with Psalms unto him sing.

King above all gods is.

and strength of hills are his

also he made the same:
and also the dry land is his
for it his hands did f^ame.

and bowing down adore:
he that our maker is, the Lord
o let us kneel before.

his pasture people are,
and of his hands the sheep: to da^
if ye his voice will hear,

o harden not your heart:
as in day of temptation,
within the vast desert.

and my works looked upon:

this generation:
And said, this people err in heart:
my ways they do not know.

into my rest should go.
Psalm 96.
SIng to the Lord a new song: sing
all the earth the Lord unto:

still his salvation show.

people his wonders spread.

above all gods in dread.

which heathens Gods do name:
but yet Jehovah he it is
that did the heavens frame.

abide before his face:
both fortitude and beauty are
within his holy place.
all
unto the Lord afford,
glory and mightynes also
give ye unto the Lord.

give ye the Lord unto;
offer ye an oblation,
enter his courts also.
(2)

do ye the Lord adore:
the universal earth likewise
in fear stand him before.

the world instablenes
shall be, unmoved also: he shall
judge fo^k in righteousness.
there at b^ glad,
and let the earth rejoice:
o let the sea, and ^^'s fullnes
with roaring make a noise.

and all things there about:
then all the (...) that be in the wood
they joyfully shall shout

he comes earths judge to be:
the world with justice, and the folk
judge with his truth shall he.
Psalm 97*
THe Lord does reign, the earth
o let heerat rejoice:
the many Isles with mirth
let them lift up their voice.

dark clouds there went,
right and judgment
his throne do found.

and burns his foes about.

by lightnings he sent out:
the earth it saw
and it trembled.

like wax away
At presence of the Lord:
at his presence who is
of all the earth the Lord.

the heavens high
they do forth show:
all folk also
see his glory.

do serve, on them remain
let dreadful shamefullnes:
and who in Idols vain
themselves do boast;
with worship bow
to him all you
Gods Angels host.

glad Iudahs daughters were,
this cause, o Lord, they had,
thy judgments did appear.

all earth set over:
all Gods before
in dignity.

the evil hate do ye;
to his Saints souls afford
protection does he:
he will for them
freedom command
out of the hand
of wicked men.

surely there is sown light:
and gladness for their share
that are in heart up^ight.

ye Just confess;
his holiness
while ye record.
Psalm 98. A Psalm
A New song sing unto the Lord,
for wonders he has done:
his right hand and his holy arm
him victory has won.

has made for to be known:
his righteousness in the heathens sight
he openly has shown.

and truth has mindful been:
the ends of all the earth they have
our Gods salvation seen.

make ye a joyful noise:
make ye also a cheerful sound,
sing praise, likewise rejoice.

also with a Psalms voice.

the Lord the King rejoice.

the world, and there who dwell.

rejoice together well

to judge the earth: rightly
with justice shall he judge the world,
and folk with equity.
Psalm 99.
JEHOVAH it is that reigns,
let people be in dread:
'midst Cherubs he remains,
the earth let itbe moved.

in Sion great,
in highness set
he is likewise
Above all the people.

so great and terrible:
for holy is the same.

does love justice:
thou do stablish
things that be right:
Judgment thou do, also
in Jacob righteousness.

set up in his highness,
and worship ye
his footstool at:
by reason that
holy is he.

among his Priests, likewise
Samuel all those among
that to his name send cries:
called they have
the Lord upon,
and be alone
them answer gave.

in the cloudy pillar: then
they kept his records, eke
his ord'nance he gave them.

our God did hear,
and di^st answer
to them impart,
Thou wast a ^od pard'ning
them, although thou vengeance
upon their works did bring.

and bow ye dow^e
at's holy hill:
for our God's still
the Holy-one.
Psalm 100. A Psalm of praise.
MAke ye a joyful sounding noise
unto Jehovah, all the earth.

before his presence come with mirth.

who has us formed it is he,
and not our selves: his own people
and sheep of his pasture are we.

into his Courts with thankf^llnes:
make ye confession unto him,
and his name reverently bless.

for evermore is his mercy:
and unto generations all
continue does his verity.
Another of the same.
MAke ye a joyful noise unto
Jehovah all the earth:

before him come with mirth.

not we our selves, but he
has made us: his people, and sheep
of his pasture are we.

wi^h praise, and thankfulness
into his Courts: confess to him,
and his Name do ye b^esse.

his bounteous-mercy
is everlasting: and his truth
is to eter^ity.
Psalm 101. A psalm of David.
MErcy and judgment I will sing,
Lo^d, I will sing to thee.

when will thou come to me?
I will in midst of my house walk
in my hearts perfect^^s:

matter of wi^kednes:
I hate their work that turn aside,
it shall not cleave m^e to.

none evil will I know.

his neighbor privily:
I cannot bear the proud in hearr,
nor him that looks high.

mine eyes shall be, that they
may dwell with me: he shall me serve
that walks in perfect way.

shall not in my house dwell:
before mine eyes he shall not be
settled, that lies does tell.

early destroy will I:
to cut off from Gods city all
that work iniquity.
Psalm 102 A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pours out
his complaint before the Lord.
LORD, hear my supplication,
and let my cry come thee unto:

thy face hide not away me fro:
Thine ear to me do thou incline,
in the day I cry, soon answer me:

and like an hearth my bones burnt be.

that I to eat my bread forget:

my bones unto my skin are set.

like Owl in desert so am I:

on house top solitarily.

against me they rage, against me they swear:

and mix my drink with weeping-teare.

and of thy vehement-disdaine:
for thou have high advanced me,
and thou have cast me down again.
(2)

and like the withered grass am I.

and thy Name to eternity.

thy tender-mercy on Sion:
for it is time to favor her,
yea the set time is now come on.

take ple^sure, and her dust pity.

and all Kings of the earth thy glory.

he in his glory shall appear.

and he will not despise their prayer.

for the succeeding-after-race:
that people also which shall be
created, they the Lord may praise.

from heaven's the Lord the earth does see:

to loose them that deaths children be.

his Name in Sion to record.

and Kingdoms for to serve the Lord.
(3)

and shortened my days has he.

my God do not away take me:
Thy years throughout all ages are.

for elder time: and heavens be
the work which thine own hands have ma^e.

they all as garments shall decay:
and as a we^ring v^stiment
thou shall the^ change, and changed are they.

they never shall consumed be.

and their seed stablisht before thee.
Psalm 10^. A psalm of David.
O Thou my soul, Jehovah bless,
and all things that in me
most inward are, in humblenes
his Holy-Name bless ye

o thou my soul: also
put not out of thy memory
all is bounties, thee unto.

all thine iniquityes:
he it is also who heals
all thine infirmityes.

redeems: who crowns thee
with his tender compassion
and kind benignitee.

does satisfy thy mouth:
so that like as the Eagles be
renewed is thy youth.

for all oppressed ones.

his acts to Isr'ells sons.
(2)

he is v^ry gracious:
and unto anger he is slow,
in mercy plenteous.

to perpetuity:
nor he his anger will retain
unto eternity.
likewise
to us he has not done:
nor has he our iniquityes
rewarded us upon.

in height the ear^h above:
so toward them that do him fear
confirmed is his love.

far in their distances:
he has removed away so far
from us our trespasses.

which he his sons does bear:
like pity does Jehovah show
to them that do him fear.

he minds that dust we be.

in field, so flourishes he.

and it away does go;
also the place whereas it was
noe longer shall it know.
(3)

shall be and ^ye has been
to them that fear him; and's justice
unto childrens children.

that do in mind up lay
the charge of his commandment
that it they may obey.

established his throne:
and over all his Royallty
does bear dominion.

in str^ngth, bless ye the Lord,
that do his word, that harken well
unto the voice of 's word.

o bless Jehovah st^ll:
and all ye ministers of his,
his pleasure that fulfill.

of his dominion,
bless ye Iehov^h o my Soul,
Jehovah bless alone.
Psalm 104.
THe Lord bless, o my Soul, o Lord
my God, exceedi^gly
great art thou: thou with honor art
clothed and with mai^s^y.

it were a garment cover:
who like unto a curtain do
the heavens stretch all over.

ith waters, and he makes
the clouds his Charrets, and his way
on wings of wind he takes.

who makes a fiery flame.

should be removed the same.

did cover the dry land:
above the places mountainous
the waters they did stand.

away then fled they fast:
they also at thy thunders voice
with speed away do have.

down by the valleys go,
the place which thou did found for them
until they come unto.

which they may not pass over:
so that they might noe more return
again the earth to cover.
(2)

which run among the hills.

wild asses drink their fills.

among the sprigs with mirth.

thy works fruit fill the earth.

herbs also for man's good:
that he may bring out of the earth
what may be for their food:

and oil their face to bright:
and bread which to the heart of man
may it supply with might.

Cedars of Lebanon:

Firres are her mansion.

rocks Conies do enclose.

the Sun his setting knows.
(3)

when wood beasts creep out all.

from God for food ^hey call.

they couch, when gone aside.

until the ev'ning-tide.

all of them thou have wrought
in wisdom: with thy plenteous store
the earth is fully fraught.

wherein things creeping be
beyond all number: beasts of small
and of great quantitee.

therein thou madst to play.

in their time give thou may.

thy hand thou op'nest wide,
and they with such things as are good
are fully satisfyde.

their breath thou take away,
then do they dye: also return
unto their dust do they.

thy spirit forth to go:
thou of the earth do make the ^ace
to be renewed also.
(4)

for evermore endure:
in his own works Jehovah shall
joyfully take pleasure.

upon the same does look,
the mountains he does touch, likewise
they thereupon do smoke.

concerning him shall be:
so that I in Jehovah will
rejoice exceedinglee.

and wicked be no more:
bless thou Jehovah, o my soul,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
Psalm 105.
O Praise the Lord, call on his Name.
among people show his facts.

talk of all is wondrous acts.

boast in his Holy-Name.

always seek ye the same.

has done remember you:
his wonders, and the judgments which
do from his mouth issu^.

sons of chose Jacob ye.

the earth his judgments be.

and his commanded word,
a thousand generations to
he does in mind record,


a law to Jacob: and Isr'ell
a Covenant aye to last.
(2)

by lot, heirs to be there.

and strangers in it they were;

unto another pass:
when from one Kingdom their goings
to other people was,

Kings checked he for their sake:

unto my Prophets make.

all staff of bread brake he.

sold for a slave to be.

in yr'n his soul did lie.

the Lords word did him try.

loosed him and let him go.

of all is wealth ruler too:


Isr'ell to Egypt: and Jacob
sojourned in the land of Ham.

them stronger then their foe,

to's servants craft to show.
(3)

and Aaron whom he chose.

they in Hams land disclose.

nor did they's word gainsay.

and he their fish did sl^y.

in chambers of their Kings.

in all their coasts he brings.

their land fires fl^me did make.

and their coast-tr^es he brake.

and Caterpillars, such
the number of them was as none
could reckon up how much,

fruit of their ground devour.

the chief of all their power.
(4)

he them from thence did bring:
and among all their tribes there was
not any one weak^ling.

for on them fell their dread.

to light the night he spread.

with heavens bread satisfy,

floods ran in places dry.

and's servant Abraham thought.

forth he his ^hosen brought.

the land on them bestow:
the labor of the people they
inherited also.

they might observe always:
also that they his laws might keep.
do ye I^hovah praise.
Psalm 106.
Praise ye the Lord, o to the Lord
give thanks, for good is he:
for his mercy continued is
to perpetuitee.

or all his praise display?

does righteousness always.

do thou remember me:
and me with that salvation
visit which is of thee:

in gladness of thy nation:
that with thine own inheritance
I might have exultation.

sinned erroniously:
we practiced have iniquity,
we have done wickedly.
(2)

thy wonders in Egypt,
nor was thy mercyes multitude
in their remembrance kept:
But at the sea at the red sea

Names sake he ^av'd them that he might
his mighty power make known.

and dried up it was:
so that as through the wilderness,
through depths he made them pass.

them hate, he set them fr^e:
and them redeemed from his hand
th^^ was their enemee.

of them there was left none.

his praises thereupon.
(3)

they for his counsel stay:

in the desert God tryde they.

leannes their soul into.

Aaron Gods Saint also.

and hid Abirams troup.

flame burnt the wicked up.

molt image worshipped they.

an ox that eats hay.

in Egypt did great acts:

by th'red sea dreadful facts.

Moses stood (whom he chose)
before him in the breach* to turn his wrath,
lest that he should waste those.
(4)

nor did believe his word:

they heard not of the Lord.

against them he lift his hands.

and scatter them in the lands.

ate offerings of the dead.

the plague amongst them spread.

and so the plague did stay.

to age and age for aye.
(5)

they angered him also:
so that with Moses for their sakes,
it very ill did go:

with his lips to speak rashly.

they stroyd not utterly:

and learned their works to do:

became a snare unto.

and daughters offered^

and of their daughters shed,
Whom unto Canans Idols they
offered in sacrifice:
the land with blood abundantly
polluted was likewise.

which they themselves had done:
and they did go a whoring with
inventions of their own:
(6)

was kindled of the Lord:
so that he the inheritance
which was his own abhorred.

their haters their lords were.

made them the yoke to bear.

provoakt him bitterly
with their coun^ell, and were brought low
for their iniquity.

when he did hear their plaint.

for them his Covenant:
And in hi^ many mercyes did

pitty'd of all that led them forth
into captivitee.

from heathens gathering raise
to give thanks to thy Holy-Name:
to triumph in thy praise.

from aye to aye blessed be:
and let all people say Amen.
o praise Jehovah ye.
THE FIFTH BOOK
Psalm 107.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord,
because that good is he:
because his loving kindenes lasts
to perpetuitee.

he freed from the enemies hands:

from South, and Northern lands.

they wandered: no town find,

their soul within them pinde.

when they were in distress:
who did them set at liberty
out of their anguishes.

he led them forth also:
that to a city which they might
inhabit they might go.

for his great goodness then:
and for his workings wonderful
unto the sons of men.

does thoroughly satisfy:
the hungry soul he also fills
with good abundantly.
(2)

the shade of death abide;
who are in sore affliction,
also in iron tide:

of God they did rebel;
also of him that is most high
contemned the counsel.

he did bring down their heart:
down did they fall, and none their was
could help to them impart.

when they were in distress:
who did them set at liberty
out of their anguishes.

also deaths shade from under:
as for the bands that they were in
he did them break asunder.

for his great goodness then:
and for his workings wonderful
unto the sons of men.

the gates that were of brass:
and he asunder cut each bar
that made of iron was.
(3)

fools do affliction bear.

to deaths gate they draw near.

when they were in distre^s*
who did them set at liberty
out of their anguishes.

healing to them he gave:
from out of their destructions
he did them also save.

for his great goodness then:
and for his workings wonderful
unto the sons of men.

let them of thanksgiving:
and while his works they do declare
let them for gladness sing.
(4)

their business there to do

in the deep his wonders too.

commands to arise:
which lifts up the waves thereof,

Down go they to the depths again,
their soul with ill does quail.

and all their wit does fail.

when they were in distress:
and thereupon he brings them
out of their anguishes.

the waves thereof are still.

to the hav'n which they did will.

for his great goodness then:
and for his workings wonderful
unto the sons of men.

him let them highly raise:
where Elders are assembled, there
him also let them praise.
(5)

to drought the springing well:

for their sin there that dwell.

and dry ground to a spring.

their town of habiting,

also to sow the field;
which may unto them fruitful things*
of much revenue yield.

they greatly are increast:
and for to be diminished
he suffers not their beast.

and they are brought down low,
by reason of their pressing-streights,
affliction and sorrow.
(6)

and causes them to stray
in the solitary wilderness,
wherein there is no way.

does make the poor to rise*
and like as if it were a flock
does make him families.

and he shall joyful be:
in silence stop her mouth also
shall all iniquitee.

these things attentive learn:
the loving-kindenes of the Lord
they clearly shall discern.
Psalm 108. A song or psalm of David.
O GOD, my heart's fixed, I Will sing; praise
sing even with my glory.

I will awake early.

the people praise among:
within the midst of nations
thee will I praise with song.

to the skies thy truth does mount.

let thy glory surmount:

be set at libertee:
with thy right hand salvation give,
and do thou answer me.
(2)
own holiness
spoken, r^joyce I shall:
of Shechem I Will division make;
and mete our Succoths vale.

and Ephraim also he
is of my head the strength: Judah
shall my lawgiver be.

over Edom my shoo:
I Will make a shout triumphantly
over Philistia too.

the city fortifyde?
who is it that into Edom
will be to me a guide?

who did us cast thee fro?
and likewise will thou o God,
forth with our armies go?

is man's salvation.

for he will our foes tread down.
Psalm 109. To the chief musician, a psalm of David.
GOD of my praise, hold not thy peace,
For mouth of the wicked,
and mouth of the deceitful are
against me opened:
Against me they speak with lying tongue.

with words of hate; and me against
without a cause they fought.

but I my prayer make.

and hate for my loves sake.

do thou make for to sit,
also at his right hand do thou
let Satan stand at it.

condemned be therein:
and let the prayr that he does make.
be turned into sin.

office another take.

and's wife a widow make.

beg they their bread also:
out of their places desolate
let them a seeking go
(2)

that does to him pertain:
and let the stranger spoil what he
did by his labor gain.

mercy to him express:
nor any one that favor may
his children fatherless.

cut off that from him came:
in the following generation
out blotted be his name.

fathers iniquitee:
and of his mother never let
the sin out blotted be.

continually put:
that from out of the earth he may
the memory of them cut.

compassion to impart,
but did pursue the needy poor:
to slay the broke in heart.
(3)

cursing unto him come:
as he did not in blessing joy,
so be it far him from.

clothed him: so let it go
like water to his bowels, and
like oil his bones into.

himself for to array:
and for a girdle, wherewith he
may gird himself always.

rewarded from the Lord:
also of them against my soul
that speak an evil word.
(4)

o do thou well for me:
because thy mercy it is good,
o do thou set me free.

my heart's wounded also.

Locust like to and fro.

it is fatnes does forsake.

at me, their heads they shake.

thy mercy save thou me:

Lord that i'ts done by thee.

when as that they arise
let them be shamed, thy servant
let him rejoice likewise.

with shame be clothed upon:
and themselves cloth as with a cloak
with their confusion.

give thanks exceedingly:
yea him among the multitude
with praise I Will glorify.

the poor and needy one:
from those that do condemn his soul
to give salvation.
Psalm 110. A psalm of David.
THe Lord did say unto my Lord,
sit thou at my right hand:
till I thine enemies make a stool
whereon thy f^et may stand.

send from out of Sion:
in midst of thine enemies
have thou dominion.

in holy beautyes be:
from mornings womb; thou have the de^
of thy youth unto thee.

thou art a Priest for aye:
after the order that I of
Melchizedeck did say.

wounding shall strike through Kings
in that same day wherein that he
his indignation brings.

and fill with bodies dead
great places, and over many lands
he shall strike through the head.

in the way he passes by:
because of this therefore he shall
lift up his head on hye.
Psalm 111.
Praise ye the Lord; with my whole heart
Jehovah praise will I:
in the private meetings of th'upright,
and public assembly.

that in them have pleasure.

aye does his justice dure.

his doings merveilous:
full of compassion is the Lord
as well as gracious.

that fearers of him be^:
he evermore his covenant
does keep in memoree:

unto his people show:
that he the heathens heritage
upon them might bestow.
(2)

the working of his hands:
yea very faithful also are
each one of his commands.

they stand in stablenes:
yea they are done in verity
also in uprightnes^

that covenant of his
for aye he has ordaind: holy
and reverend his Name is.

Iehovahs fear: all they
that do his will have prudence good.
his praise indures for aye.
Psalm 112.
Praise ye the Lord. blessed is the man
that does Jehovah fear,
that does in his commandments
his spirit greatly cheer.
very mighty upon earth
shall be that are his seed:
they also shall be blessed that
from the upright do proceed.

both wealth and much rich store:
his righteousness it also does
endure for evermore.

to upright ones arise:
both gracious, and pittyfull,
righteous he is likewise*
(2)

and ready is to lend:
and with descretion his affairs
he ca^ryes to an end.

for ever moved be:
the righteous man he shall be had
in lasting memoree.

he shall not be afraid:
his trust he putting in the Lord.
his heart is fi^mly stayed.

fear shall not him surprise,
until he see what he desires
upon his enemies.

his justice constantly
indureth: and his horn shall be
with honor lif^ed hye.

gnash with his teeth shall he
and melt away: and their desire
shall fail that wicked be^*
Psalm 113.
THe Lord praise ye, praise ye the Lord
his servants Gods Name praise.

from henceforth and always.

the Lords Name's to be praysd.

over heavens his glory raysd

who upon earth does dwell.

in heaven, in earth as well.

the poor lifts from the dung.

his peoples Peers among.

to keep house, and to be
a joyful mother of children:
wherefore the Lord praise ye.
Psalm 114.
WHen Isr'ell did depart
The Egyptians from among,
and Jacobs house from a people
that were of a strange tongue:

Isrell's dominion was.

was forced back to pass.

upwards like unto rams:
the little hills also they did
leap up like unto lambs.

thou Iordane, back to go?

like lambs ye hills also?

at Jacobs Gods presence:

springs he from flint sends thence.
Psalm 115
NOt to us, not unto us, Lord,
but glory to t^y Name afford:
for thy mercy, for thy truths sake.

where is their God now gone away?

He has done whatsoever he would.

the handy work of men they were.

eyes have they, but they do not see.

Noses have they, but do not smell.

feet have they but they do not go:
And through their throat they never spoke.

and all that trust in them are so.

he is their help, their shield as well.

He is their help, and he their shield.

their help also their shield is he.
(2)

he will bless us, he will bless Isr'ells house:
blessing he will Arons house afford.




the Lords: but the earth men's sons gives he.

Nor any that to silence bow.

and ever henceforth. praise the Lord.
Psalm 116.
I Love the Lord, because he does
my voice and prayer hear.

he bowed to me his ear.

about beset me round:
the pains of hell 'gate hold on me,
distress and grief I found.

I called, and did say,
deliver thou my soul, o Lord,
I do thee humbly pray.

is merciful also.

saved me when I was low.

unto thy quiet rest:
because the Lord to thee himself
has bounteously expressed.

mine eyes from tears, from fall
my feet. Before the Lord in the land
of living walk I shall.
(2)

afflicted much was I.

I did say hastily.

to me for's ben^fits all.

and on the Lords Name call.

I Will pay the Lord my vows.

the death is precious.

thine own servant am I:
I am the son of thy hand-maide,
my bands thou did untye.

offer to thee I will:
Iehovahs Name I earnestly
will call upon it still.

the vows were made by me,
now in the presence of all them
that his own people be.

even in the midst of thee
o thou city Jerusalem:
o praise Jehovah ye.
Psalm 117.
AL nations, praise the Lord; him praise
all people. For his mercies be
great toward us: also always
the Lords truth lasts. the Lord praise ye.
Another of the same.
AL nations, praise the Lord; all folk
praise him. For his mercee
is great to us; and the Lords truth
aye lasts. the Lord praise ye.
Psalm 118.
O Give ye th^nks unto the Lord,
because that good is he;
because his loving kindenes lasts
to perpetuitee.

let Israel now say.

mercy indures for aye.

Jehovah fearers be;
his loving kindenes that it lasts
to perpetuitee.

from out of streitnes great;
the Lord me answered, and me placed
in an enlarged seat.

what man can do to me.

that of me helpers be:
Therefore upon them that me hate
my wishes see shall I.

then on man to rely.
(2)

then trust in Princes put.

in Gods Name I Will off cut.

me compassed about:
but in Iehovahs Name I will
them utterly root out.

like as of thorns the flame:
but I will utterly destroy
them in Iehovahs Name.

the Lord yet helped me.

and saving health is he.

the voice of joye afford
and of salvation: strongly works
the right hand of the Lord.

exalted up on hye:
the right hand of Jehovah is
a working valiantly.
(3)

what things the Lord works.

but gave me not to death.

the gates of righteousness:
I will go into them, and will
Iehovahs praise confess.

the just shall enter in.

and have my safety bin.

head corner stone now lies.

it is wondrous in our eyes,
(4)

Jehovah he has made:
we will exceedingly rejoice,
and in it will be glad.

salvation now afford:
I humbly thee entreat, now send
prosperity, o Lord.

o let him blessed be:
out of Iehovahs house to you
a bles^ing wish do we.

light unto us affords:
the sacrifices bind unto
the altars horns with cords.

my God I Will set thee hye.

and aye lasts his mercy.
Psalm 119.
(...) (1) Aleph
ALL-blest are men upright of way:
walk in Iehovahs law who do.

with their whole heart him seek also.

but in his ways do walk indeed.

unto thy precepts to give h^^d.
so
my ways addressed were by thee.

then shall I not ashamed b^e.

with hearts uprightnes I Will thee praise.

I will observe thy statute-wayes.
(...) (2) Beth
By what may 'young man cleanse his way?
by heeding it as thy word guides.

thy laws let me not go besides.

that I might not against thee sin.

thine own statutes instruct me in.

declared with my lips have I.

joy more then in all rich plenty.

and have respect unto thy ways*

and not forget what thy word says.
(...) (3) Gimel

that I may live thy word to keep.

out of thy law the wonders deep.

do not thy precepts from me hide.

unto thy judgments time and tide.

which do from thy commandments swerve.

for I thy records do observe.

but on thy laws thy servant mused.

and for men of my counsel used.
(...) (4) Daleth

o quicken me after thy word.

thy statutes learning me afford.

so I Will muse on thy wondrous ways.

according to thy word me raise.

and thy law grant me graciously.

thy judgments before me laid have I.

o lord, on me shame do not cast.

when thou mine heart enlarged have.
(...) (5) He^

and I will keep it to the end.

yea with my whole heart it attend.

because therein delight I do.

and covetousnes not unto.

and in thy way make me to live.

who to thy fear himself does give.

because thy judgments good they be*

o in thy justice quicken me.
(...) (6) Vau.

thy saving health as thou have said.

for on thy word my hope is stayed.

because thy judgments I attend.

to everlasting without end.

because I do thy precepts seek.

I of thy testimonies speak.

also my self delight I will.

beloved: and mind thy statutes still.
(...) (7) Sajin.

on which to hope thou did me give.

because thy word does make me live.

yet have I not thy law declinde.

I did recall, and comfort find.

for lewd men that thy law forsake.

of thy statutes my songs do make.

o Lord: and I thy law observe.

I from thy precepts did not swerve.
(...) (8) He^h.

I said that I would keep thy word.

thy promised mercies me afford.

my feet into thy testaments.

to keep with heed thy commandments.

of thy law I am not mindeless.

for judgments of thy righteousness.

that fear thee, and thy laws do heed.

teach me the laws thou have decreed.
(...) (9) Teth.

after thy word, right-well have done.

for I believe thy precepts on.

but I thy word observed have now.

thy statutes teach me, oh do thou.

thy laws I Will keep with my hearts-might.

but in thy law I do delight.

that so thy statutes learn I should.

then thousands of silver and gold.
(...) (10) Iod.

thy hands me formed have, and made.

because hope in thy word I had.

and faithfully thou chastnedst me.

now let thy grace my comfort be.

for thy law as my joy I chu^e.

but I will in thy precepts muse.

and such as have thy records known.

that so I shame may suffer none.
(...) (11) Caph.
when as
my soul does faint for help from thee.

saying, when will thou comfort me?

yet do I not thy laws forgo.

on my pursuers judgment do?

which do not unto thy law suit.

they wrongfully me persecute.

but I thy laws did not forsake.

me in thy me^cie lively make.
(...) (12) Lamed.

o Lord, for ever to endure.

thou form'dst the earth, and it stands-sure.

for all are servants thee unto.

Then had I perished in my woe.

because by them thou quicknedst me.

I sought thy precepts studiou^lee.

but I thy testimonies mind.

but very large thy law I find.
(...) (13) Mem.

it is my study all the day.

by thy rule: for it is with me aye.

for thy records my study are.

because I kept thy laws with care.

that so I might thy word observe.

I did not from thy judgments swerve.

to my mouth more then honey they.

therefore I hate each lying way.
(...) (14) Nun.

and to my path the shining light.

that I will keep thy judgments right.

Lord quicken me after thy word.

and me thy judgments teach o Lord.

but I have not thy law forgot.

yet from thy laws I strayed not.

for aye: for my hearts joy they be.

thy st^tues to eternitee.
(...) (15) Samech.

vain thoughts: but love thy law do I.

I on thy word wait hopefully.

may keep my Gods commandments.

nor shame me for my confidence.

and in thy law still I Will delight.

do stray: for false is their deceit.

therefore thy records love I do.

I do thy judgments dread also.
(...) (16) Hajin.

I judgment do, and righteousness.

let not the proud ones me oppress.

as also for thy righteous word.

and thy lawes-learning me afford.

thy testimonies for to know.

for men thy law do overthrow.

above gold, yea the finest gold.

of all things, are all right, I hold.
(...) (17) Pe^

therefore my soul keeps them with care.

and makes them wise that simple are.

because I longed for the same.

as thou do them that love thy Name.

no wickedness bear rule in me.

and thy laws-keeper will I be.

and me to learn thy statutes cause.

because they do not keep thy laws.
(...) (18) T^ade.

thy judgments upright are also.

are right, yea, very faithful too.

mine enemies thy words forget.

therefore thy servant loves it.

yet thy commands forget not I.

also thy law is verity.

yet thy commands delights me give.

make thou me wise, and I shall live.
(...) (19) Koph.

Lord hear: thy statutes keep I will.

and I shall keep thy records still.

I for thy word do hopefull-wai^e.

in thy word for to meditate.

after thy judgments quicken me.

who from thy law afar off be.

and all thy precepts verity.

thou laid'st them for eternity.
(...) (20) ^esch.

for I thy law do not forget.

for thy words sake alive me set.

since they thy laws to find never strive.

after thy judgments me revive.

yet I not from thy records swerve.

for they thy word do not observe.

grant, of thy bounty live I may.

and all thy right judgments for aye.
(...) (21) Schin.

but of thy word my hearts in awe.

so I rejoice do in thy law.

but thy law dearly love do I.

the judgments of thine equity.

and such shall find no stumbling-stone.

and thy commandments I have done.

and them I love exceedinglee.

for all my ways before thee be.
(...) (22) Thau.

as thou have spoke, me prudent make.

deliver me for thy words sake.
thy praise:
when thou thy laws have learned me.

for all thy precepts justice be.

for thy commandments chose have I.

and my delights in thy law ly.

help me also thy judgments let.

for I thy laws do not forget
Psalm 120. A song of degrees.
Unto the Lord, in my distress
I cried, and he heard me.

o Lord, my soul set free.

or what on thee confer?

with coals of juniper.

a sojourner remain:
that I do dwell in tents, which do
to Kedar appertain.

that peace does much abhor,

they ready are for war.
Psalm 121. A song of degrees.
I To the hills lift up mine eyes,
from whence shall come mine aid.

which heaven and earth has made.

nor slumber; that thee keeps.

he slumbreth not, nor sleeps.

on thy right hand the shade.

shall thee by stroke invade.

thy soul he keeps always,

the Lord keeps now and aye.
Psalm 122. A song of degrees.
I Joyed in them, that to me said
to the Lords house go we.

our feet shall standing be.

like unto a city
together which compacted is
within it self closely.

unto Isr'ells witness;
that they unto Iehovahs Name
may render thankfullnes.

of David's house do sit.

see that ye pray for it:
Prosper they shall that do thee love.

o let there be, prosperity
within thy Palaces.

I Will now speak peace to thee.

seek thy felicitee.
Psalm 123. A song of degrees.
O Thou that sit in the heavens,
I lift mine eyes to thee.

hand of their masters be:
As maids eyes to her mistress hand,
so are our eyes unto
the Lord our God, until that he
shall mercy to us show.

merciful to us be:
because that filled with contempt
exceedingly are we.

our soul's filled very much:
also of those that great ones are,
even with contempt of such.
Psalm 124. A song of degrees* of David.
HAd not the Lord been on our side,
may Israel now say,

did rise against us they:

when their wrath on us burned.

the stream our soul over turned.

had passed on their way:

did not give us a prey.

out of the fowlers snare:
the s^are asunder broken is,
^^d we delivered are.

is in Iehovahs Name:
wh^ is the maker of the earth,
and of the heavens frame.
psalm 125. A song of degrees.
THey that do in Jehovah trust
shall as mount Sion be:
which cannot be remo'vd, but shall
remain perpetuallee.

Jerusalem do stay:
so does the Lord surround his folk,
from henceforth even for aye.

it shall not resting be:
lest just men should put forth their hand
unto iniquitee.

gladness to them impart:
as also unto them that are
upright within their heart.

the Lord shall make them go
with workers of iniquity:
but peace be Isr'ell to.
psalm 126. A song of degrees.
WHen as the Lord returned again
Sions captivitee:
at that time unto them that dream
compared might we be.

with singing then our tongue:
the Lord has done great things for them
said they, t'heathens among.

whereof we joyful be.

turn our captivitee.


bearing choice seed, shall sure with joye
bringing their sheaves return.
psalm 127. A song of degrees for Solomon.
IF God build not the house, vainly
who build it do take pain:
except the Lord the city keep,
the watchman wa^es in vain.

watch late, to feed upon
the bread of grief: so he gives sleep
to his beloved one.

sons are his heritage.

are sons of youthful age.

his quiver filled with those:
they shall not be ashamed, in the gate
when they speak with their foes.
Psalm 128. A song of degrees.
BLessed is every one
that does Jehovah fear:
that walks his ways along.
with cheer
thy hands labor:
blessed shall thou be,
it well with thee
shall be therefore.

shall be by thine house side:
the children that be thine
like olive plants abide
about thy board.

that man does rest,
that fears the Lord.

from Sion, and shall see
Ierusalems goodness
all thy life's days that be.

thy children then
with their children,
peace on Isr'ell.
Psalm 129. A song of degrees.
FRom my youth, now may Isr'ell say,
often have they me assaild:

ye^ against me naught prevaild.

their furrows long they drew:

he did asunder-hew.

and ^urned back together.

which ere it is ^rown, does wither:

the mower does not find:
not therewith he his bosom fills
that does the sheaves up bind.

Iehovahs blessing be
on you: you in Iehovahs Name
a blessing wish do we.
Psalm 130. A song of degrees.
LORD, from the depth I cryde to thee.
My voice Lord, do thou hear:
unto my supplications voice
let be a^tent thine ear.

should mark iniquitee.

that feared thou may be.

and I hope in his word.

more my soul for the Lord.

is with the Lord: with him

he Isr'ell will redeem.
Psalm 131. A song of degrees, of David.
MY heart's not haughty, Lord,
nor lofty are mine eyes:
in things too great, or high for me,
is not mine exercise.

composed, and made to rest*
like as a child that weaned is,
from (...) his mothers breast:
Im'e like a weaned child.

with expectation on the Lord,
from henceforth and for aye*
Psalm 132. A song of degrees.
REmember David, Lord,
and all is affliction:

to Jacobs mighty one.

my houses tent into:
upon the palate of my bed,
thither I will not go.

give sleep unto mine eyes:
nor will I give to mine eye-lidds
slmber in anywise,

I do find out a seat:
a fixed habitation,
for Jacobs God so great.

there did we of it hear:
even in the plain-fields of the wood*
we found it to be there.

we will at his footstool bow.

and th'Arke of thy strength now.

clothed with righteousness:
o let thy holy ones likewis^
shout forth for joyfullnes.
part*
a servant unto thee,
the face of thine anointed one
away quite turned be.

truth, nor will turn from it;
thy bodies fruit, of them I Will make
upon thy throne to sit.

and covenant, I teach them;
upon thy throne for evermore
shall sit their children then.

made choice of mount Sion:
he has desired it to be
his habitation.

to perpetuity:
here will I dwell, and that because
desired it have I.

abundantly I will:
the poor that be in her with bread
by me ^^all have their fill.

them also I will clad:
her holy ones likew^se they shall
with shouting loud be glad.

will make to bud forth there:
a candle I prepared have
for mine anointed dear.

with shame apparel them*
but flourishing upon himself
shall be his Diadem:
Psalm 133. A song of degrees, of David
HOw good and sweet o see,
i'ts for brethren to dwell
together in unitee:
that fell
the head upon,
that down did flow
the beard unto,
beard of Aron:
The skirts of his garment
that unto them went down;

Sions mountains upon,
for there to be
the Lords blessing,
life aye lasting
commands he.
Annother of the same.
HOw good it is, o see,
and how it pleases well,
together even in unitee
for brethren so to dwell:

from head, to the beard did go,
down Arons beard: downward that went
his garments skirts unto.

on Sions hill descend:
for there the Lord blessing does bid,
even life without an end.
Psalm 134. A song of degrees.
O All ye servants of the lord,
behold the Lord bless ye;
ye who within Iehovahs house
in the night time standing be.

in's place of holiness.

thee out of Sion bless.
Psalm 135.
THe Lord praise, praise ye the Lords Name*
the Lords servants o praise him ye.
the same
in the Courts of our Gods house who be.

for sweet its to his Name to sing.

and Isr'ell for his precious thing,

and over all gods, our Lord keeps.

in heaven, earth, seas, and in all deeps.

forth from the ends of the earth to rise;
he makes lightning for the rain:
the wind brings from his treasuries.
(2)

and that o^ man, of beasts also.

on Pharaoh, on all is servants too.


Og also one of ^ai^hans kings:
all kingdoms of the Cananites,

his people Isr'ells lot to fall.

o Lord, is thy memorial.

and of his servants he will repent.

and gold: men's hands did them invent.

eyes have they, but they do not see:

and in ^h^ir mouth no breathings be.

that trust in them so is each one.

the Lord bless, thou house of Aaron.

who fear the Lord, bless ye the Lord.

who dwells at Salem praise the Lord.
Psalm 136.
O Thank the Lord, for he is good:
for's mercy lasts for aye.

for's mercy is always.

for^s mercy lasts for aye.

for's mercy is always.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc^

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy etc.

for's mercy lasts for ay.

for's mercy is always.
Psalm 137.
THe rivers on of Babylon
there when we did sit down:
yea even then we mourned, when
we remembered Sion.

upon the willow tree.

led in captivitee,
Required of us a song, and thus
asked mirth: us waste who laid,
sing us among a Sions song,
unto us then they s^id.


loose her skill my right hand, if I
Jerusalem forget.

if mind thee do not I:
if chief joys over I prize not more
Jerusalem my joy.

unto the ground said they,
it raze, it raze, when as it was
Jerusalem her day.

daughter of Babylon,
who must be waste: that which thou have
rewarded us upon.

that takes up, that eke
thy little ones against the stones
does into pieces break.
Psalm 138. A psalm of David.
Withal my heart, I Will praise thee new:
before the gods I Will sing to thee.

and praise thy Name for thy mercee,
and thy truth: for thy word thou hye
over all thy Name do magnify.

with strength thou did my soul up-beare.

the word when of thy mouth they hear.

for great's Iehovahs glorious praise.

respect yet has he to the low:
but as for them that are lofty,
he them does at a distance know^

of trouble thou will quicken me,
Forth shall thou make thine hand to go
against their wrath that do me (...),
thy right hand shall me save also.

thy mercy Lord, for ever stands:
leave not the works of thine own hands.
Annother of the same.
Withal my heart, I Will thee confess:
thee praise the gods before.

toward it I Will adore:
Also I will confess thy Name,
for thy truth, and mercy:
because thou over all thy Name
thy word do magnify.

thou did me answer make:
thou strengthnedst me with strength, which I
within my soul did tak^.

all earths Kings shall thee praise.

they shall sing in his ways.

yet he respects the low:
but as for them that are lofty
he them far off does know.

thee quickening me I have:
thy hand thou will cast on my foe,
thy right hand shall me save.

thy mercy ever stands,
Lord, do not those forsake that be
the works of thine own hands.
Psalm 139. To the chief musician, a psalm of David.
O LORD, thou have me searched and known.
Thou know my sitting down,
and mine up-rising: my thought is
to thee afar off known.

and all my way^s know well^

Lord, thou can fully tell.

and layst on me thine hand.

for me to u^derstand

or where from thy face fly?

if down in hell I lie.

where u^most sea-co^sts be.

and thy right hand hold me.

me cover, if I say:
then shall the night about me be
like to the lightsome day.

but as the day shines night:
alike unto ^hee both these are,
the darkness and the light.

my reins: and covered me
within my mothers womb thou have.

Because that I am fashion^d
in fear^ull wondrous wise:
and that thy works are merveilous,
my soul right well descries.
(2)

when made I was closely:
and when within the earths lowest par^^
I was wrought curiously.

imperfected, did look,
and all the members that I have
were written in thy book,
What days they should be fashioned:
none of them yet were come.

o God? how great's their sum?
If I should count them, in number
more then the sands they be:
and at what time I do awake,
still I abide with thee.

those that be wicked slay:
ye that are bloody men, therefore
depart from me away.

speak wickedly likewise:
thy Name (...) do take up in vain
who are ^^ine enemies.

and am not I with those
offended grievously that do
up-rising thee oppose?

I count them as my foes.

try me, my thoughts disclose:

in me there be at all:
and me conduct within the way
that last for ever shall.
Palm 140 To the chief musician, a psalm of David,
LORD, free me from the evil man:
from violent man save me*

for war they gathred be.

a serpent like unto:
the poison of the Aspe it is
under their lips also. Selah.

from violent man me save:
my goings who to overthrow
in thought projected have.

cords also: they a net
have spread abroad by the way side:
grins for me they have set. Selah.

thou art a God to me:
Lord, hear the voice of my requests,
which are for grace to thee.
(2)

of my salvation:
my head by thee has covered been
the day of battle on.

Jehovah, do not grant,
their wicked purpose furher not,
lest they themselves do vaunt.

do round about enclose,
o let the molestation
of their lips cover those.

into the fire likewise
^et them be cast, into deep^ pits,
that they no more may rise.

men of an evil tongue:
evil shall hunt to overthrow.
the man of violent wrong.

I know God will maintain:

shall before thy face remain.
Psalm 141. A psalm of David.
O GOD, my Lord, on thee I call,
do thou make have to me:
and harken thou unto my voice*
when I cry unto thee.

as incense in thy sight:
and the up-lifting of my hands
as sacrifice at night.

a watch my mouth before:
as also of my lips with care
o do thou keep the door.

to do the wicked deed
with wicked workers* and let no^
me of their dainties feed.

let him reprove me eke,
it shall be such a precious oil,
my head it shall not break:
For yet my prayr's even in their woes.

on rocks, then shall they hear my words,
for they are sweet to taste.

does cut and cleave the wood,
even so our bones at the graves mouth
are scattered abroad.

directed are mine eyes:
my soul o leave not destitute,
on thee my hope relyes.

which they have laid for me;
and also from the grins of those
that work iniquitee.

o let the wicked fall:
until such time that I escape
may make from them withal.
Psalm 142. Maschil of David, a prayer when he was in the cave.
Unto Jehovah with my voice,
I did unto him cry:
unto Jehovah with my voice
my suit for grace made I.

my meditation:
before his face I did declare
the trouble me upon.

then thou did know my way:
In The way I walked, a snare for me
they privily did lay.

but no man would me know,
all refuge faild me: for my soul
none any care did show.

my hope thou art alone:
and in the land of living ones
thou art my portion.

attend unto my cry:
from my pursuers save thou me,
which stronger be then I.

from prison oh bring out:
when thou shall me reward, the just
shall compass me about.
Psalm 143. A psalm of David.
LORD, hear my prayr, give ear when I
do supplicate to thee:
in thy truth, in thy righteousness;
make answer unto me.

with him that serves thee;
for in thy sight no man that lives
can justified be.

my life to the ground has thrown:
and made me dwell in the dark like them
that dead are long agone.

perplexedly in me:
my heart also within me is
made desolate to be.

I medita on use
on all thy wo^^^: upon the work
of thy hands I do muse.

reach mine outstretched hands:
so after thee my soul does thirst
as do the thristy lands. Selah.
(2)

hide not thy face me fro:
lest I become like one of them
that down to pit do go.

for I do on thee stay,
wherein that I should walk cause me
^o understand the way:
For unto thee I lift my soul.

from all mine enemies; I do ^lye
to hide my self with thee.

oh teach thou me to do,
thy spirit is good: of uprightnes
lead me the land into^

even for thine own Names sake;
And for thy righteousness my soul
from out of trouble take.

cut off in thy mercy,
destroy them that afflict my soul:
for thy servant am I.
Psalm 144. A psalm of David.
O Let Jehovah blessed be
who is my rock of might,
who does instruct my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight.

and that does set me free:
my shield, my trust, which does subdue
my people under me.

knowledge of him do take?
what is the son of man, that thou
account of him do make?

pass like a shade away.

the mounts and smoke shall they.

thine arrows shoot, them ^out,

do thou redeem me out:
And rid me from the waters great:
from hand of strangers brood:

a right hand of falsehood.
(2)

upon the Psaltery,
and on ten stringed instrument
to thee sing praise will I.

safety victorious:
his servant David he does save
from sword pernicious.

whose mouth speaks vanity:
and their right hand a right hand is
of lying filsity:

in youth may be our sons;
our daughters palace like may be
pollisht as corner stones:

of every sort of meats;
our cattle bringing thousands forth,
ten thousands in our streets:

that breaking in none be
no^ going out: that so our streets
may from complaints be free.

whose state is such as this:
o blessed shall the people be,
whose God Jehovah is.
Psalm 145. David's psalm of praise.
MY God, o King, I Will thee extol:
and bless thy Name for aye.

and bless thee every day.

his greatness se^rch can none.

and thy great acts make known.

speak of thy majesty;
and of the operations
by thee done wondrously.

shall speak which dreadful are:
also concerning thy greatness,
it I will forth declare:

they largely shall express:
and they shall with a shouting voice
sing of thy righteousness.

full of compassion:
slow unto anger, and full of
commiseration.
part (2)
his works his mercies be.

and thy Saints shall bless thee,

and talk of thy power hye;

his kingdoms majesty.

and thy reign lasts always.

and all downe-bow'd ones raise.

thou do in season bring.

fill'st of each living thing.

and holy in's works all.

in truth that on him call.

of those that do him fear:
He will be safety unto them,
and when they cry he will hear.

tha^ lov^r^ of him be:
but whosoever wicked are
abolish them does he.

by speaking shall express:
also all flesh his holy Name
for evermore shall bless.
Psalm 146.
THe Lord praise: praise (my soul) the Lord,
So long as I do live
I Will praise the Lord; while that I am,
praise to my God I Will give.

who can no succor send.

his thoughts that day do end.

of Jacob for his aid:
whose expectation is upon
Jehovah his God stayed.

truth keeps for evermore:

gives to the hungry store,

the Lord ope's eyes of blind,
the Lord does ^aise the bowed down;
the Lord to the just is kind.

the orphan, and widow:
but he of them that wicked are
the way does overthrow.

thy God, o Sion, he
to generations all shall reign:
o praise Jehovah ye.
Psalm 147.
Praise ye the Lord, for it
is good praises to sing,
to our God for it is sweet,
praise is a comely thing.

the Lord up-reares,
outcasts gathers
of Isre'll them.

and up their wounds does bind.

he calls them all by kind.

and of great might,
yea infinite
his knowledge it is.

wicked to ground does fling.

on Harp, our Gods praise sing.

to ^arth gives raines:
who on mountains
makes grass to rise.

when as they cry feeds then.

nor in the legs of men.

his pleasure where
m^n do him fear,
and hope on's grace.

Sion thy God confess:

in thee thy sons does bless.

in borders thine:
with wheat so fine
he fills thee.

swiftly his word does pass.

his hoare frost ashes as.

like morsels to:
before his cold who
can stand steadfast?

makes wind blow, water flows.

and judgments Isr'ell shows.

no nation to,
judgments also
they have not known.
Hallelujah,
Psalm 148. Hallelujah.
FRom heaven o praise the Lord:
him praise the heights within.

all is Armies praise ye him.

Sun and Moon bright:
all Stars of light,
o give him praise.

over heavens ye waters clear.

for he spoke, made they were.

for ever and aye:
nor shall away
his made decree.
below:
ye dragons and each deep.

whirl winds his word which keep.

you hills all ye:
each fruitful tree,
all Cedars too*

things creeping, fowls that fly.

princ^s, earths judges hye:
do all the same.

old men and babes.

For his Name's hye only:
his glory over earth and heaven.

the praise of all is Saints, even
the sons who be
of Israel,
his near people,
the Lord praise ye.
Psalm 149.
PRaise ye the Lord: unto the Lord
do ye sing a new song:
and in the congregation
his praise the Saints among.

in him who him has made:
children of Sion in their King
o let them be full glad.
melodious flute
his Name give praise unto:
let them sing praises unto him
with Timbrell, Harp also.

does pleasure greatly take:
the meek he with salvation
even beautiful will make.

most gloriously rejoice:
and as they lie upon their beds
lift up their singing voice.

a two edged sword also:

punishment for to do:

also their peers to bind:

all is Saints this honor finde^
Hallelujah.
Psalm 150.
PRaise ye the Lord. praise God
in's place of holiness:
o praise him in the firmament
(...) his great mightines.

that be magnificent:
and praise ye him according to
his greatness excellent.

that gives a sound so hye:
and do ye praise him with the Harp,
and sounding Psalterye.

praise unto him give ye:
wi^h Organs, and string'd instruments
praised by you let him be.

unto him give ye praise:
upon the Cim^alls praise ye him
which hye their sound do raise.

the Lord does breath afford
the praises of the Lord set forth:
o do ye praise the Lord.
FINIS
An admonition to the Reader.
THe verses of these psalms may be red^ced to six kinds, the first whereof may
be (...) near forty common tunes; as they (...), out of our chief musicians,
by Tho. Ravenscroft.

The second kind may be sung in three tunes as Ps* ^5.50. and ^7. in our
english psalm books. The third. may be sung indifferently, as ps. the 51.100.
and ten commandments, in our english psalm books. which three tunes
afor^said, comprehend almost all this whole book of psalms (...) ^^ing tunes
most familiar to us.

The fourth. as ps. 148. of which there are but about five.

The fifth. as ps. 112. or the Pater noster, of which there are but two. viz.
85. and 138.

The sixth. as ps. 113. of which but one, viz. 115.

Faults escaped in printing.
Esc^^e^. Right Psalm^ 9. verse 9* oprest. oppressed. ^. 10. k^owes. know. Ps. 18.
^ 29 the. thee. ^. 31.3 part wanting. ^ p^rt. Ps. 19. ^. 13* let thou- kep^
b^ck kept back. o letpunc; Ps. 21. ^. 8. the Lord. thine hand. Ps. 143. ^. 6.
Ioue^ ^. moreover I.

The rest, which have escaped through oversight, you may amend, as you find
them obvious.


