A Quickening WORD FOR The hastening a Sluggish Soul to a seasonable Answer to
The Divine Call. Published by a poor Sinner that found it such to him.

Being the last SERMON Preached in the First Church of Boston Upon Isaiah 55.
6. By the Pastor there, on the 24th of the fifth Month, 1670.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. J 1670.

A Quickening Word FOR A Sluggish Soul.
ISAIAH 55. 6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while
he is near.
THe Doctrine that this Text offered to us, was this:

If in seeking the Lord we would not miss of success, we must not miss the
season thereof.

We must not seek him at our own pleasure or leisure, nor in our own loytering
pace, but if we would speed in seeking, we must seek with speed, and in the
time of his appointment, that time which he makes a season.

Reas. 1. We can never seek the Lord too soon, but we may too late.

Reas. 2. It is fit God should appoint the time of our seeking and finding,
because what he does for us he does freely, he gives as a Dole, and not pays
as a Debt, and we receiving all of grace as Beggars, may not choose. A rich man
indeed that has it by him, may eat when he has a mind; but the poor man must
eat when he can get it, and is glad to have his Alms at any time, the time that
his good Master chooses. And the Lord can best choose the fittest time, because
of his Infinite Wisdom, which is sufficient to silence the prattle and
exceptions of foolish man.

USE I. For Information.

1. We must therefore seek the Lord with desire, design, and hope of finding.

2. See we how cross we are to God, to set our season and convenience against
Gods season; when he is at work, we are apt to put off, Acts 24. 25. He thinks
another time may be better, but if you will not like of God's time, it is not
like that God should accept of yours.

3. See our need of divine Help to subdue our Understanding to his Wisdom, and
our Will to his good Pleasure.

USE II. For Direction, To give Aim to know our finding time.

Rule 1. All times are not alike, indifferent or indefinite, and left to us to
take what time we see good. but there is a limitation of time to Season or
Opportunity, which is as the Eye of the Needle: it is the Market, which is not
every day; the Market is indeed free, without price, but not without care: Isa.
55. 1, 2. Hearken diligently.

Rule 2. When God is near he may be found: and God is near (1) When grace is
stirring, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. Joh. 5. 3. and (2) When he sends his Messengers after
us to call us. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. then there is some compassion ready: and (3)
When he touches us with his Rod, we may lay hold of his hand, Isa. 27. 5. (4)
When he enforces, and gives an edge to the outward Call, Mat. 21. 34. and 11.
12. and 3. 10. (5) When God removes Impediments, Cant. 2. 10, 11, 12. (6) When
inward Calls second the outward, and the Spirit strives, Cant. 5. 4.

Rule 3. Before your space of Repentance is over, Revel. 2. 21. before the
forty days ended, Jonah 3. 4.

Rule 4. Before the time of God's repenting and patience is over, Jer. 15. 6.

Rule 5. Before God has put a (...) on your Salvation, (...).

Rule 6. There is no assurance of any time, but the present, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Psalm.
95. 7.

USE III. For Exhortation.

Leave not this work to some spare time, to a rainy day (when nothing else to
do) not to a sick bed, crazy Age, etc.

Motive 1. It is more easy to seek and find seasonably, speedily: (1) When
God is pleased in mercy to breathe by his Spirit, Romans 9. 16. Joh. 3. 8. (2)
The heart deceives when it delays, and pretends to morrow; to morrow never
comes, as is seen in Felix, Act. 24. (3) By delays the heart is more hard. (4)
The work to be done is more hard. (5) The more hard work to be done, the more
weeds the more debt. (6) We are afterward more unable to do it; the weakest
Beast should not have the heaviest burden: and Satan and Sin do more strongly
fortify themselves.

Mot. 2. If we neglect to seek in good time that we may find, an evil time
seeks and finds us, after death, at death, yea in this life a man may be taken
in an evil time when we are past seeking, or at least finding. You say, To
morrow is a new day; but to morrow may be no day to thee.

No day of seeking really, Luke 19. 42. Hos. 4. 17. when God faith to all
Means, all Prayers, all Movings of the Spirit, Let him alone.

No day of finding, Luke 14. 24.

Mot. 3. Delay increases sin and suffering: You must buy that precious Pearl
by the Inch of Candle, while Life and Season lasts; therefore you must not
stand chaffering and dodging till the Market be over, but dispatch and bid like
a Merchant, as one that has a mind to buy.

Mot. 4. You have certain ground in the Text and elsewhere to seek the Lord in
season, but you have no ground of delay; for this life, and what depends upon
it, is uncertain; nothing of this life is certain, but the going out of it. You
think you will seek the Lord when you are elder, free, recovered from such
sickness or business, when you are a little settled, and have something about
you, but Death may prevent all these, and strip you of all, and settle you in
your long home: So that you have but shallow ground to delay your leaving your
sins another time, for life may leave you first. You have certain promise if
you hearken to day, Psalm. 95. but as for to morrow, who has promised that?
None but the Devil, and thy own Heart, who are notorious deceivers: In all
other Affairs you are confined to Season, in Husbandry, Navigation, Provision
for Winter, etc.

Mot. 5. The last Motive is, That if you seek not the Lord in season, but delay
and put off, you sin very much against the Patience of God, the Dignity of God,
and the Love and Kindness of God.

First, You sin against the Dignity of God, and that is the Jewel he will not
part withal. That Soul that delays to seek him in season, offends against the
Honor of God two ways:

1. He prefers other things before God.

2. He prefers himself before God.

The former of these has been spoken to: Mat. 22. 4. there is the Farm, and
the Merchandise, and though both of them honest and lawful Imployes, yet they
become a snare unto the person that does delay; his Vocation becomes an
Avocation. Now weigh and consider what there can be in this world, that is
worthy to be preferred before Jesus Christ: Why do you not accept of the Lord?
This or that business stands in the way: And if lawful things become abominable
when they stand in the way, how much more unlawful? If his respect to his Wife
should not hinder, much less his respect to his Harlot may hinder him; if his
Trading, much more Cheating, Gaming, or Tippling.

Let thy own heart answer me, Is it not a great Indignity to the great God,
that thou should give the best of thy time, and the choice of thy strength
and spirits to the World, and the Devil the god thereof, and assign only the
feeble wishes of thy withered Age to the true Lord of Heaven and Earth? To give
the flower of your Wine to the Devil, and offer the Dregs to Christ? To give
thy full Dishes for Satan to feast on, and entertain the Lord with Fragments,
Scraps and Crumbs from the Devils Table? And yet thou say, God is thy
Father, and thy Lord: May not he say to thee, If I be a Father, where is my
honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear? Mal. 1. 6, 8. Had you any respect
for God, had you any awe of him, you durst not deal so with him; you durst not
offer the blind, the lame and the sick to your Governor, but ye make bold
with him that rules your Rulers, and bring your blind, and lame, and sickly
years to him; your Eyes blinded with dust and lust, your Strength lame in
trudging and drudging for Satan; your whole man faint and sickly with bearing
the heat of the day in his work; Do not fashion to your selves such an Idol of
easy and soft kindness in God, as to be put off with any thing: No, no, he
knows the honor that is due to his Name, and claims and expects it; The best
of the Oil, the best of the Wine, and of the Wheat, the first-fruit of them are
his, Numb. 18. 12. not any dregs of the Oil, any refuse of the Wheat, not any
pricked Wine will satisfy him. If ye count him not worthy of the first and
best, the worst and latter will not be counted worthy of him.

Furthermore, in delaying thou do unmannerly, set up thy self before the
Lord, who is as thou say, Thy Father, and thy Lord. Is it not fit that the
Child should wait on the Father, and the Servant on the Master? How rude art
thou to make him wait on thee, especially considering that thou have need of
him, and not he of thee? He is thy Physician, and calls for thee now, and will thou not take his time? Not only thy duty, but thy necessity should hasten
thee. Genes. 41. 14. When Joseph was in Prison, Then Pharaoh sent and called
Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon; the word in the Hebrew
is, They made him run: he staid not to take his leave of his friends, but he
runs. How many Messengers has the King of Heaven sent to you, and you have
delayed, Shall I? Shall I? yea, and when will that be? Some stir not, and
some do but creep. Joseph he waited till the word came, but now the Promise is
about to be fulfilled, it is time for him to run now. Thou art in the dungeon
and captivity of Sin and Satan, the King of Heaven he sends his Messengers to
invite thee, and thou come not; thou do not know what thou may lose, if
thou losest but a little time. John 11. 28. Martha calls Mary, and told her,
The Master is, come and calls for thee: ver. 29. As soon as she heard that,
she arose quickly, and came unto him. ver. 31. The Jews then which were with
her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary that she rose up
hastily, and went out, followed her, saying, She goes to the grave, to weep
there. V. 33. And when Jesus saw her weep, etc. Oh says Martha, The Master is
come, and calls for thee. How! is my dear Lord come? then neither my Tears
nor my Friends shall hinder me, but I Will go to him, for my Master calls. How
often have Christ's Servants told you that your Master calls; he calls you that
has Power over you, that has Grace for you, and will you reject that Love and
Kindness? When the World calls you, Here is a Prize, here is a Purchase, here
is a Bargain; how nimbly do men come then? So when the Flesh calls you, yet you
owe nothing to the Flesh: And does your Master call? all that you are and have,
you are debtors to him for it, and will ye not come when he calls? There is
another Instance in Mark 10. 46. Blind Bartimeus sat by the wayside begging,
and cried out, Lord Jesus thou Son of David, have mercy on me: and they charged
him that he should hold his peace; but he cried so much the more. Verse. 49.
Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called, and he arose and came to
Jesus. And Jesus stood still: What is the meaning of that? Christ would not go
further and further from this poor man: And they said, Be of good comfort,
arise, he calls thee; and he cast away his garments, and arose, and came to
him. If you could but understand your own Mercies, you would throw away all
Impediments to run after Jesus Christ, he stands still to receive you. Here are
Convictions, Exhortations, and Strivings of the Spirit of God with you, and all
to have you come to him. The Sufficiency of Christ swallows up all the wants
and defects of the poor Soul. Prove. 3. 27, 28. Withhold not good from them to
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Say not unto
thy Neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou have it
by thee. If you may not defer in giving, then how much less may you defer
when Christ offers you Grace and Mercy, an Alms in your starving state: Will
you say to Christ, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will receive it? what a
horrible pride is this for a Beggar to put it off, and say, Not now, but to
morrow: now thou have it by thee, but to morrow it may be far from thee.

Secondly, if thou do delay to seek the Lord in the season thereof, thou
sinnest against Divine Patience and Long-suffering; Cant. 5. 2. Open to me, my
Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and my
locks with the drops of the night. This Rain, and drops of the night, note
Suffering, and waiting late. Jesus Christ he suffered, that he might save thee,
and stays without doors long; can thou find in thy heart to keep him out
longer? will not all this move thee to open the door? Revel. 2. 21. I gave her
space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not: Behold, I will cast
her into a bed, and them that commit Adultery with her into great tribulation;
except they repent of their deeds: If she leaves not the Bed of Security, she
shall know the Bed of Anxiety. Has not God given this Land and People-space,
when he has been about to destroy it with Drought, and otherwise by Sea and by
Land, yet God has forborne, and not presently destroyed you: Wherefore? that
you might repent. Again, Gods hand has been lifted up on one or other of you
in a Storm at Sea; and why? that you might repent. Sometime he has visited you
with Sickness, and yet spared you; was it not that you should repent? If you do
not repent of your former delays and unkindnesses, God will lay you fast upon
a Bed of Destruction. Has not the Lord contended with other Nations, and you
in this Land have had a Truce? and this is, that you may treat with him on
terms of Amity: And now when God gives Truce to you, will you make War with
God? Romans 2. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath. The Lord does not only forbear to strike
thee, and pull back his hand, and there is long-suffering, forbearance a great
deal and a great while; but stretches forth his hand in rich goodness, and
shall all this riches be made little and light of by thee? It was given thee
for Consolation, and will thou use it to Desolation and Wrath? in stead of
goodness thou shall have severity, and in stead of long-suffering thou shall
have sudden destruction.

The third Branch of this Motive is; It is an high Offense against the highest
Love, when a Soul forbears to seek the Lord, when he offers himself to be
found. There Is none of you but will think you love the Lord, and it is pity he
should live that does not love Christ: if you delay and put off, certainly here
is little love in your Soul. Genes. 34. 18, 19. And their words pleased Hamor,
and Shechem Hamors son: And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because
he had delight in Jacobs daughter. Here is a Match propounded betwixt the Son
of God and thy Soul, if thou had a delight in the Son of God, thou would
not delay: it is evident you have no delight, because you do defer; if you
would have the Lord Jesus, you must deny your self, your own righteousness and
vanity: You cannot part with this and that evil; then you have no delight in
the Son of God: But you except against the terms; Gain and Bargains they must
be caught in the very time, in the very nick; you must not stand Shall I? Shall
I? till the Market is done. Ruth 3. 18. Then said she, Sit still my daughter,
until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest,
until he have finished the thing this day. Had thou any love and desire
kindled in thy Soul to Christ, thou would not be at rest; if thy Soul were
once engaged to Jesus Christ, all thy incomes would not give thee rest: A man
is in debt, and here is not Surety but Jesus Christ; As an Emperor said to a
Prodigal, He wondered what Pillow he slept on; it is a Pillow of the Devils
stopping. Oh think how dearly Jesus Christ has engaged you to love him. Revel.
3. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: What! Jesus Christ to stand without
knocking and calling, till the dews of the evening fall upon him. How ought
thou now to make haste? He knocks by Common Mercies, and Special Mercies, such
and such Successes, and such Prosperity, will not all this provoke thee to get
off from the Bed of Security, and to embrace him? How far did Jesus Christ
come to Redeem thee? he came from Heaven to Earth to Redeem thee: Thou art
undone, and thy Inheritance lost, and Christ thy Kinsman came to Redeem thee.
He opens not his Purse for Silver and Gold, but he opens all the Veins of his
heart to let out his heart-blood to Redeem thee, and thine Inheritance. Lo, I
come! Shall not Joseph be made to run when he comes from the Dungeon? Remember
those loud cries upon the Cross, and his thirsting upon the Cross; and he tells
thee of it: and what was this for, but to save thy poor Soul? the cry of Christ
that made the Earth to quake, and the Mountains to break, and will nothing move
and break thy heart and persuade thee? It may be Jesus stands at the door, and
in stead of opening the door, thou art driving him from the door; thou have
some churlish dog, some peevish Lust to drive him from the door; or thou have
some unclean Lust that makes thee to stink, thy profane language, thy
Atheistical thoughts, vain Conversation, are as so many stones thrown at him:
it may be when Christ is at the door, thou lie a-bed, and that with thy
unclean harlotry Lusts; thou have dealt so with him many a long day: but before
he goes he looks back, to see, if thou would relent a little, and return,
and therefore once more he calls thee: be not at rest this night till thou have
done something about this Match, and closing with Christ: Isai. 30. 18.
Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore
will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of
judgment: Blessed are all they that wait for him.

Quest. Oh Sir, how gladly would I embrace this Exhortation; But I fear my time
is past, and I have withstood my market; I am bid to seek while he may be
found; yea, but it may be he will now not be found, and then in vain is all my
seeking.

Ans. I Answer, 1. They that fear indeed the day of grace is over, give some
ground of hope that the day of grace is not over, if it be a quickening fear:
there is a fear that is contrary to hardness of heart, for one part of hardness
of heart is to be without either fear or care; now if thou fear lest the Sun
should be set upon thy Soul, Prove. 28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always;
but he that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief. Damning hardness is
contrary to fear. There is a sin unto death, and a sin that is not unto death:
Some sins do necessarily include death and damnation; if thou concludest that
the day of grace is over, thou concludest as hard as if thou had committed
the sin against the holy Ghost, and this a man cannot do, without he finally
harden his heart. Now this is a sin unto death; there is death in the
Understanding, in the Will and Affections: But now if thou halt a Soul-rowsing
fear, thy day is not past.

Again, if thy fear be an honest laborious fear: Psalm. 104. 21, 22, 23. Man
goes forth to his work; Art thou at it in the use of Means that thou may
find the Lord? then it is not Sunset yet, but it is working-time, because
thou art at work; the wild beasts are gone to their dens, that is, those
violent disorders that were in thy Soul, they are couched in their dens, that
now thou dare not walk and speak as thou did. If a man have his day of
grace over, he cannot cease to sin, but he will go on further and further, and
will take all advantages to keep himself in a course of sinning. Heb. 3. 10. I
was grieved with that generation, and said, They always err in their hearts.
A man that has his day of grace over, he is ever going out of the way, he
always erres in his heart, he has no heart any more to return.

Secondly, if the Lord Jesus continue to call and to strive by his Spirit, has
God let thee alone? does he say to all Means and Ordinances, Let that Soul
alone? or do thou find the Lord come and rowse thee? then surely the day is
not over: but when any Soul's day is over, then Christ leaves calling and
knocking at the door. If now that Soul that has resisted so long will yield,
surely the day is not over; if there be a correspondency and echo of thy Soul
to the outward and inward Call of Jesus Christ, that is, thou would fain do
what thou art bid, and fain come when thou art called, certainly thy day is not
over: Psalm. 27. 8. When thou saidest, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto the
Lord, Thy face will I seek: so long the day is not over. Prove. 1. 28. Then
shall they call upon me, but I will not axswer; they shall seek me early, but
they shall not find me: for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord; they chose rather a loose and slight life: They would none of
my counsel, they despised my reproof; as an Adulterer hates the light, that it
should not come where he is: this man is likely to have his day over. But on
whatever ground thou do suspect that thy day is over, thou have no warrant or
command to make sure thy Reprobation; God calls thee to make sure thy Election,
but he no way calls thee to make sure thy Reprobation. Eccles. 9. 4. To him
that is joined to all the living, there is hope: it is to give him a hope of
probability if he use the Means. This is a certain Rule, That if any one
Scripture hinders thee from seeking the face of God, that is not managed by the
Spirit of God, but by the spirit of Envy and Malice: Whatever it is that
awakens thee, and makes thee look about thee, that is good; but that which
quenches and damps all, that is of Satan. Oh receive this word of Exhortation,
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.

FINIS.

