Communion of Churches: OR, The Divine Management of Gospel-Churches by the
Ordinance of COUNCILS, Constituted in Order according to the SCRIPTVRES.

AS ALSO, The Way of bringing all Christian Parishes to be particular Reforming
Congregationall Churches: Humbly Proposed, As a Way which has so much Light
from the Scriptures of Truth, as that it may lawfully be Submitted unto by all;
and may, by the blessing of the Lord, be a Means of Uniting those two Holy and
Eminent PARTIES, The Presbyterians and the Congregationals.

AS ALSO To Prepare for the hoped-for Resurrection of the Churches; and to
Propose a way to bring all Christian Nations unto an Unity of the Faith and
Order of the Gospel.

Written by John Eliot, Teacher of Roxbury in N. E.

Psalm. 1.10 That ye may try the things that are excellent.

1 John 4 1. Try the Spirits.

Cambridge: Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1665

PREFACE.
ALthough a few Copies of this small Script are Printed; yet it is not
published, only committed privately to some Godly and Able hands, to be
Viewed, Corrected, Aw^rded, or Rejected* as it shall be found to hold weight in
the Sanctuary Balance, or not. And it is the humble Request of the Author*
That whatev^r Objections, Rectification, or Emendations may occur, they may
be conveyed unto him; who desires nothing may be accepted in the Churches, but
what is according to the Will and Mind of God, and tends to Holiness, Peace,
and Promotion of the holy Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

The procuring of half so many Copies Written and Corrected, would be more
difficult and chargeable, then the Printing of these few.

I beg the Prayers, as well as the Pains of the precious Servants of the Lord,
that I may never have the least finger in doing any thing that may be
d^rogatory to the Holiness and Honor of Jesus Christ and his Churches. And to
this I subscribe my self,

One of the least of the Laborers in our Lords Vineyard, JOHN ELIOT.

Communion of Churches: OR, The divine Management of Gospel-Churches BY THE
Ordinance of Councils.
CHAP. I. Prolegomena; or, Things premised.
I. THere be two holy Public Societies famous in the Gospel: 1. A Church of
Believers. 2. A Council of Churches.


A Church of Believers, is a company of visible Saints combined together, with
one heart, to hold Communion in all the instituted Gospel Worship, Ordinances
and Discipline, which Christ has (...), and given unto a particular Church.
Such a Company are frequently called A Church. See a few places: Act^ 2.47. and
11.26. and 14.23, 27. 1 Cor. 11.18, 20, 22, etc.

A Council, is a Society of particular Churches in Communion, by their
Representatives, for their well-being, and well-ordering all things among them,
by mutual Counsel, in Truth, Peace, and Holiness. Our Pattern is, that Great
Council, Acts 15. which consisted of two Churches, in an ordinary way expressly
agreed, to give and take counsel: and it is le^t as a Standard and Pattern, how
the great Ordinance of Counsel is to be used and managed for the well-being of
Churches, to the worlds end.

II. The Constitution of both these Buildings or Societies, are eminent and
observable in the Gospel.

The first of these, viz. A Church of Believers, is first instituted by Christ
himself, and afterward put in practice by the Apostles; Matthew. 16.18. Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church The Rock confessed is CHRIST:
Christ Confessed, is the Foundation of the Visible Church (...)
Peter confessing, is an hewn stone, squared to the foundation (...)
; a Believer made Ecclesiastically visible, fitted for Church-building and
fellowship.

A company of such Confessors, or a company of these confessing Believers,

1. Have power to join together into a Gospel Church State, as they did Acts
1.13, 14. Continued with one accord so Acts 2.46.

2. They have power to call Officers, by whom they become an Organick Body, and
fitted to administer and enjoy all instituted Worship: Acts 1.15, 23. Peter
stood up in the midst of the Disciples; And they appointed two. Acts 6.3.
Brethren, look you out men. Acts 14.23. By holding up hands made Elders.

3. By the Ministry of these Officers, the Church does a^tually enjoy such
Ordinances as are instituted by Christ, for their Edification;

Both Directive, in Word, Sacraments, Prayer, Singing of Psalms, and
Collections: Acts 2.42. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Col. 3.16. Teaching one
another in Psalms and Hymns, etc. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Every first day lay by it
self, etc. for (...) is the Neuter Gender, as well as Masculine, and is so to
be read, because they had two distinct Collections at that time The Collection
for Jerusalem was by it self, a public, not a private Collection. Corrective:
1 Cor. 5.4, 5. When gathered together, deliver to Satan.


III The administration of, and participation in all these Ordinances, (while
we are in this flesh, and state militant) are so full of variety of
difficulties and temptations, especially where Churches are numerous, that the
work cannot long be carried on (awhile it sometimes may, viz. wh^^e the
Churches are under the eye of an adversary, and when there be Elders eminent in
Piety, Humility and Ability) without stated help.

The help which the Lord has instituted, is Counsel.

When Antioch had trouble in some points of Doctrine, the Remedy which the holy
Ghost applied, was Counsel, given them by a formal Council, Acts 15.

When Corinth wanted help in a point of Discipline, the Apostle does help, by
ministering Counsel unto them, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. and he counsels the Church
to Excommunicate the man, the sinner.

Excommunication is a sharp Rod, made up of seven most severe and terrible
Twigs; or a strong Purgation, compounded of seven violent Ingredients; viz. 1.
He is cut off from visible Communion with Christ in the Church. 2. He is cut
off from familiar Communion with the Saints in Worship. 3. He is cast out of
the usual walk of the Spirit. 4. He is cast out of the House of God, as
unsavory Salt, or a loathsome thing that does offend. 5. He is thrust out of
the Paradise of God, from eating the Tree of Life, viz. Christ in the Sacrament
of the Supper, where the Spirit sits as in his Sealing-office. 6. He is cut
off from familiar Civil Communion with the Saints; he may not be invited to eat
with them. 7. He is delivered to Satan, and that by the Sentence of Christ,
through the hand of his Spouse the Church: and all this to be inflicted upon a
Brother.


Ah! who trembles not to minister such a Pill, to lay on such a Rod? And
therefore it had need to be managed and administered with all care, fear, and
clearness. And all this shows, and much more might be produced to show, what
need there is of Counsel; which, after thirty or forty years experience in the
way of Congregational Chur^hes, in fullness of liberty, we find more and more
need to insist upon, and that in such a fixed and ordered way, as that thereby
men may be tied to attend unto Counsel.

IV. A Council is constituted A^ts 15. where the wisdom of the holy Ghost has
given us a Pattern o^ the least* and of the greatest Councils, as our N. E.
Divines h^ve well observed. There cannot be a less Council then that was, for
there were but two Churches mentioned; and there cannot be a greater* and more
complete one, because there were the greatest Counselors, a most complete
Pattern, even the Apostles of Jesus Christ; teaching, That if there be but two
Churches, they may enjoy the Ordinance of mutual Counsel, though more
incompleatly. But if there be many Churches, then they are to be ordered
according to the Pattern of Combining Churches into complete Councils. Of which
in the next Chapter.

V. Christ, who has all power, Mat. 28.20. has derived all Ecclesiastical
Power first unto the Apostles, that they by Institution might distribute the
same unto several Offices in the Church. Hence,

As all Church Officers, especially Elders, and more especially Teaching
Elders, are ordinary Successors of the Apostles, in their several branches of
Church Power: So Councils of Churches are their eminent ordinary Successors, in
point of Counsel, and that in several respects.

First, Because in Councils there is most light, and nearest to infallibility:
and the more complete, the better; though the most complete Council may err,
because they have not a promise of infallible assistance.

Secondly, Because when the Apostles themselves had constituted Churches, they
did guide and counsel them how to use their power; as Paul did the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.4. the Apostle did not act the Censure himself: and so is
that of Paul to be interpreted, 1 Timothy 1.20. I have delivered to Satan; viz. as
I did the incestuous Corinthian, by giving such counsel to the Church, whereof
they were Members. In thus doing Councils succeed the Apostles.

VI. Inasmuch as Councils are Public Assemblies, and that not only
Ec^lesiastically public, but Civilly also, when they are h^ld with openness
and boldness. Hence, Civil Authority has influence, by Law and Command, to
give allowance unto such Assemblies; and so they have an Extrinsecall
Effi^iency in calling Councils: but the Intrinsecall and pr^per Efficients of a
Council, are the Churches, who elect and send Messen^^rs to that end.

VII. The Members constituent of a Council, are Church-Messengers.

The persons sent ought to be Elders, of both Orders, Teaching and Ruling, to
represent the whole Church; or ^n defect of Ruling Elders to represent the
people, Faithful Brethren eminent in holiness and wisdom, who are as Elders:
Acts 1^.2. Certain other of them Ver. 22. Chosen men chief men amon^ the
Brethren. Ver. 32. Being Prophets also themselves. And the reason hereof is,
Because, as the temptation of Learned men, is to affect a Prelacy over the
people: So the temptation of the Fraternity, is to affect a Morellian
Democracy. And therefore the wisdom of God has by institution balanced all
Ecclesiastical Councils with Members of both sorts, that may balance each
other, by Number at least, though not in Weight, yet enough to prevent any
prevalency of a temptation, either to subjugate the Churches under any
Prelatical Usurpation of the Learned; or to elevate and intoxicate the
Fraternity, to affect any inordinate power: which rather, and more effectually
tends to enervate and evacuate Government, then to preserve any Lawful and just
Liberty of the Brotherhood.

The end of the Churches sending these Messengers, is to manage the Ordinance
of Counsel in due order.

VIII. The Organick parts of a Council, whereby they are enabled to manage
their affairs in Prudence and Order, are Moderators, and Notaries: the choice
of whom is the first act they do, to complete themselves to be fit for action.

It may sometimes edify, to change Moderators every new Session, partly to
train up each other unto that special work of Christ, in the management of the
Affairs, and in caring for the public welfare of all the Churches; and also to
take trial of men's Gifts, Spirit and Abilities unto that high service; that so,
when there may be special need, they may know who is most fit to manage the
Council at such a time, for the glory of God, and for the most effectual
Edification, and public well being of the Churches.

Though Moderators may be often changed, it is not fit that the Notaries should
be so often changed.

IX. The Power of Ecclesiastical Councils is only Dogmatical, or Doctrinal:
Power of Censure is by the Lord fixed in the Church; and hence, when any appeal
unto a Council, it is for further and more clear light from the Scripture, and
for conviction thereby, but not for the Exercise of any Juridical Power.

CHAP. II. Of the Gospel-Measuring-R^^d by the Number Twelve.
I. SEeing particular Congregations in Gospel Order, are Churches; and these
Churches, for their well-being, need to hold and exercise Communion by
Coun^ils: and one Church (as Antioch) may need the greatest and highest Counsel.

Hence in such places where, through the riches of the Grace of Christ,
Churches are numerous, it will be necessary, that the management of these
Councils should be in Order, according to the Pattern of Complete Councils,
Acts 15. For multitude unordered, by how much the greater they are, the greater
is their cumber, and unaptness to operate in Order unto their end. Lesser
Bodies are more readily ordered, and have a greater aptitude to be active in
their Order unto their end. Ordo anima rerum.

II. Order is one of the Beauties of Heaven, and so it is of the Churches. Let
all things be done in Order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Jerusalem is a City compacted, Psalm.
122.3. and the more orderly Bodies are, the better are they compacted. Bodies
that are compacted, are so ordered by Number and Measure: The New Jerusalem is
the most glorious City that ever shall be on Earth; and we see that it shall be
compacted by Number and Measure, Rev. 21.12, to 18. and the Foundation Number
is Twelve, as appears ver. 14. The wall of the City had twelve Foundations.
And this Number Twelve is multiplied by Twelve, as appears ver. 16, 17. it is
square, Twelve every way, which amounts to One hundred forty and four.

III. The Twelve Tribes in the Old Testament, and the Twelve Apostles in the
New, do make that Number famous in the Churches, and fundamental in ordering
and compacting of Churches into Ecclesiastical Combinations of Councils.

The Twelve Tribes compacted in order, was the most beautiful, and
heart-ravishing Camp, that ever the worlds Eye did look upon, Numb. 24.2, 5, 6.
The Twelve Loaves (...) Shewbread, did represent the whole Visible Church
before God in the Temple. The Twelve Precious Stones in the Breast Plate of the
High Priest, show, That in such a Number Christ is pleased to order and
represent the whole Militant Church before his Father in Heaven. And according
to this Type, Rev. 7.4. the whole Visible Church is ordered, multiplied, and
sealed in this Number. And Rev. 21.12, 14. the Twelve Tribes are the Twelve
Gates, and the Twelve Apostles are the Twelve Foundations of the New Jerusalem.
That glorious visible Gospel Church, Ezekiel ^8. which is called Jehovah-Shamm^h,
is ordered by the Number Twelve, according to the Twelve Tribes of Israel, as
the Typical Land of Canaan was.

IV. In the perfect Pattern (for the Word is a perfect Rule) which the holy
Ghost has left us, Acts 15. as there is a ground work for the least of
Councils, in the Two Churches; so of complete Councils, in the Twelve Apostles.

For, though Herod had killed James with the sword, Acts 12.2. his Martyrdom
did not remove him out of the Foundation, but rather fix him in it: And the
Apostles were most of them killed for the Testimony of Jesus before John had
his Revelation, and yet we find them all written in the Foundation of the New
Jerusalem.

And therefore what should hinder, but that in the ordering of Complete
Councils, we should lay our foundation in the Number Twelve? and all the Orders
of Councils should be raised and compacted by that Number, even from the bottom
to the top.

V. And unto this Order and Number we may the rather be induced, because here
will be the Twenty four Elders, who do wait upon, and worship the holy Majesty
of God in all the Churches upon earth, as he has pleased to reveal himself,
Rev. 4. where the presence of God among the Churches is revealed: First, with
his glorious Angels next him, represented by the four living Creatures,
according to Ezekiel. 1. and 10. And secondly, with the Communion of Churches
about him, represented by the Twenty four Elders, who do represent all the
Churches on earth, in Communion: as will anon appear.

VI. (...) or when Twelve Churches are combined to ^^ld Communion together, the
least Number that one Church must (by Institution) send forth to that first
Council, must be one Teaching Elder, and one Ruling Elder; and then* this
Society of Churches is represented by twenty f^ur Elders strictly.

And when Twelve of these first Councils shall, with consent of the particular
Churches, elect and send forth one Teaching, and one Ruling Elder, the ablest
and fittest among them, to constitute a Provincial Council; that Council will
be strictly the Twenty four Elders, representing all the Churches in that
Province, concurring in the Election.

And when Twelve Provincial Councils shall, with like consent, send forth from
each of them one Teaching, and one Ruling Elder, the most holy and able among
them, to constitute a National Council, they will still be strictly the Twenty
four Elders, representing the whole Nation, in their Ecclesiastical state,
before the Lord.

And when Twelve National Councils shall send forth, in like manner, from each
of them, one Teaching, and one Ruling Elder, the most holy and fit among them,
to constitute an Ecumenical Council (or by what other less term it may be
thought meet to call it) they will still be strictly the Twenty four Elders,
representing before the Lord all the Churches in all those Nations, concurring
in the Election.

And why may not this ascent, and representation of all before the Lord, be
part of the meaning of that Text, Rev. 5.8, 9, 11, 12, 14?

VII. And this point is the more to be heeded, because Gods visible respect
unto, and acceptance of any people, is according to the good aspect and
condition of their Representatives. There may be much dross in a Parish, a
Province, a Nation, and in the world; yet if they have good Representatives
before the Lord, and if they carry the Lords matters well, in his sight, that
does obtain, through Christ, a favorable acceptance of, and dispensation
toward all that are so represented. And he has instituted Representatives of
the Church on earth: Aaron represented all Israel on his breast before the
Lord, Exodus 28.29. And a Council consisting of Messengers of Churches, the
glory of Christ, do represent the Churches who send and constitute that
Council, Acts 15. Oh! how happy were it for any people, to be in such visible
instituted Order on earth, as that they may be (through Christ) acceptably
represented before the Lord!

For God is so well pleased to see his people in Order, as that he will dwell
in that place, and call it by his own Name, Jehovah-Shammah; especially when
they are Civilly, as well as Ecclesiastically in good order represented before
Him.

VIII. Furthermore, this is to be considered, that though the Twenty four
Elders are so called, by the least Number that they can be, by this
Constitution; yet, according as the riches of Gods grace is more abundantly
poured out, they may be more in Number, though under this constituting
denomination. For, one Church may send forth two Teaching Elders, as Antioch
sent forth Paul and Barnabas, and Ruling Elders, or Brethren proportionably. So
likewise upon the same ground, when there be more Eminent Lights in any of the
Councils (as through grace it is like often to be) they may send more then one
to the Provincial, or National, or Ecumenical Councils: but still they are the
Twenty four Elders, because that is the Foundation Number.

IX. What if I should illustrate this Point by that of the Apostles? who are
often in Scripture called the Twelve Apostles, and yet there were more Apostles
then Twelve: for who doubts but that Paul, who was none of the Twelve, yet he
was an Apostle, and a chief Apostle, a great Foundation; and Barnabas was an
Apostle also, Acts 14.14. and 1 Cor. ^.9. But Twelve is the Foundation Number,
and therefore they are so denominated.

X. Again, though Twelve Churches be the lowest Number of the first
Combination, yet they may be more then Twelve, when the pourings out of Gods
grace shall be enlarged; yea, they may be any Number under Twenty four Churches.

If then Twenty three Churches should be in a Combination, their Messengers
sent to the first Council will be a great Number; but still they are the Twenty
four Elders before the Lord, by their fundamental Constitution.

So a like Number of Provincial Councils, and a like Number of National
Councils, though their Messengers are many, yet they are still the Twenty four
Elders, growing up, through grace, and increasing unto more Orders of Councils,
for the greater glory of Christ.

And when (through grace) there shall be Twenty four Churches, or first
Councils, or Provincial, or National Councils, then they must be compacted into
two Orders of those Councils, because Twelve is the Foundation Number, by which
they are multiplied, and compacted. And when this is done, they are reduced to
be Twenty four Elders strictly, the Foundation Number.

As in the Order of that Civil Government set up by Moses; the Orders of Ten,
and of Fifty, etc. are denominated b^ the least and constituting Number: though
those Orders may consist (when they are full of people and blessing) of many
more, even any number under Twenty and an hundred, etc. But when Ten are become
Twenty, and when Fifty are become an hundred, then they must be multiplied into
more Orders, because these Numbers are Foundation Numbers by which the Orders
of the Government are multiplied and compacted; and when that is transacted,
they are reduced unto their Foundation Numbers.

So it is here is the Ecclesiastical Orders of Government, the least Number of
a complete stated first Council, is Twelve Churches* whose least Number of
Messengers are Twenty (...), and by these Numbers they are denominated, though
they may be more Churches in a Combination, and more Messengers from some of
the Churches: and so it is in all the other Orders of Councils.

For a little further illustration of this point, I shall propose and answer
Six Questions, which may let in a little fur^her light into this Frame, and
remove some Objections.

Quest. 1. May a Church perform any Ecclesiastical Acts by Messengers, or
Representatives in their Name?

Answ. Yea* doubtless they may: they may Consult, and Agree to give Counsel, in
such cases as may be presented for that end, touching either Faith or (...), as
it appears Acts 15.

Quest 2. May a Church elect by Messengers or Representatives* when themselves
cannot be present where such Elective is performed?

Answ. An act of Election may be transacted by some of a ^ociety; yea by a few
in behalf of the rest, when they have their consent, and a calling so to act.
For instance,

If a lesser Number of a Church be necessarily absent from an ^ct of Election
performed in a lawful Assembly, they are all involved in the act of the major
part: This is without Controversy so. Here some only Elect, and all are
engaged.

Again, if the major part be necessarily absent, and send a lesser part, or a
few, with their express consent to do an act of ^^fection, it has the like
force and validity. The royal (...) which chose David to be their King, 1 Chronicles. 12. were far the lesser part of the People, but they were sent and
(...) and did perform it as affectually as if the whole People had been
present; and David was King, not only over the Representatives, who did
actually choose him, but over all the People, who did Elect him by their
Representatives.

If the parties sent to transact an Election, do act according to their heart
who sent them, they will not object, for had they been there present, they
would have done the same: but if the parties sent to Elect, do not Elect
according to their heart, they may justly question their act, and consider of
their Apology; but that does not nul^ifie the act in point of Order.

When Political Bodies, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, are multitudinous, and
remote from the place or action, either all cannot act, or if they do, it must
be by Representatives.

Quest. 3. May a Church Elect Elders or Messengers out of another Church* unto
a public and common service of Christ and of the Churches?

Answ. Yea, they may: For the great Collection of the Gentile Churches, which
Paul carried up to Jerusalem at his last going thither, was an act of many
Churches: And Paul, with those that went with him to present it, were chosen by
the Churches unto that service, 2 Cor. 8.1^. And there were many more Churches
Contributors, then there were Messengers sent to carry it. Acts 20.4. there
were but seven or eight in Paul's company, but all the Churches of Galatia,
Corinth, Asia, and Macedonia, were Contributors. Therefore many Churches chose
Messengers who were none of their own particular Churches, unto that public
and common service of Christ, and of the Churches.

Again, the ready subjection of all the Churches about Antioch, and other
places, Acts 16.4. unto the Decrees of the Council at Jerusalem, does probably
speak, That, as the trouble by those Questions, was a common case in all the
Churches; so they had some foreknowledge, con^urrence, and consent (after
consent sure enough they had) in the Mission of Paul and Barnabas (Teaching
Elders of Antioch, Acts 13.2.) unto Jerusalem, to the Apostles and Elders about
that matter.

Again* seeing the Rule of Communion of Churches does impose upon Elders a
degree of care of a^ the Churches, especially of those within their Ordered
Communion; it does also give unto all the Churches, a mutual interest in each
others Elders.

Hence, when they choose any of the Elders within the compass of their Order,
they choose those, who, in some respect, are their own, in whom they have an
Ecclesiastical interest, especially unto this public service of Counsel.

Quest. 4. May many Churches Elect a few of their Elders unto some public and
common service, wherein all the Churches so Electing are interessed?

Answ. Yea, they may: For all the Churches of Asia, Galatia, Macedonia, etc.
did Elect a few to accompany Paul in carrying their Contributions unto
Jerusalem: and it is expressly said, that from the Churches of Asia there were
but two sent, Acts 20.4. and we know there were at least seven Churches in
Asia, Rev. 1.4.

Quest. 5. When two, or a few Elders are chosen by many Churches unto some
public and common service of the Churches, do they represent all the Churches
who did Elect them unto that service?

Answ. Yea, they do so: For when many Churches (by Paul's ordering) sent a few
Messengers to Corinth, 2 Cor. 8.23. to fetch their Contribution, to be carried
(among the Contribution of many other Churches) unto Jerusalem, by the hands of
Paul, and a few others, chosen by the Churches unto that service, 2 Cor. 8.19.
these few Messengers did represent all the Churches who sent them: So as that
what the Church of Corinth should transact before them, is expressly said to be
before all the Churches, viz. who sent them, 2 Cor. 8.24.

Quest. 6. These Orders of Councils, First, Second, Third, or representing
fewer or more Churches, Are they a Divine Institution?

Answ. Touching the first Councils, consisting of immediate Messengers of
Churches sent for that end, it is out of question that these are a Divine
Institution, Acts 15.

The great difficulty is, touching the second and third Orders of Councils, and
so higher, unto the highest Ecumenical Council, whose Members are chosen
immediately by Councils, yet with the express consent of every particular
Church: not immediately by the Churches, but by their Representatives.

Touching these, in way of humble Proposal I affirm, That they are a Divine
Institution.

1. Because their Foundation, Formation, and Constitution, is deducible from
the Word of God, as appears by laying together the foregoing Questions, and
Answers thereunto, with what has been said before.

2. Because this multiplying of Order upon Order, seems to be typified in the
Ascents and Degrees in Ezekiels Temple; and by the multiplication of the Number
Twelve in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21, etc.

3. Because if there be not this multiplying of Council above Council (above, I
say, not in any Political Power, but in Order and Extent) then it does not yet
appear that there is any way or expedient, whereby there should be a General
and Equal Communion of all the Churches in a Nation, wherein every Church shall
be, by their own act and consent, interessed and concerned.

Much less can there be an Equal Communion of Churches, of several Nations.

For, if several Nations should need and desire to hold Communion of Councils,
who shall choose the Persons or Instruments, by whom this Communion shall be
held and acted?

If Princes choose them, it is not a regular Ecclesiastical Council. If Churches
choose and send them, shall some Churches only choose them, or all the Churches?
if some only; who? and why they, and not others? and how can their act
interest and oblige all?

If all the Churches must choose, then Immediately, or by Delegates:
Immediately, it is unfeizible, especially to act in knowledge and prudence; but
mediately by their Confidents and Representatives they may.

The same may be said of the Communion of all the Churches in a Nation or
Province, where Elections must be performed by Representatives. In which way, a
General and Equal Election is attainable; and without it, it does not yet
appear that it is attainable.

Now that several Nations ought to hold Communion, and also all the Churches in
a Nation, it does appear in these Scriptures: Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. Zeph. 3.9. 1
Cor. 11.16. and 14.32, 36. Of which see more in Synod at Boston.

This being commanded by God, and as yet no Way or Expedient appearing, whereby
it may be duly acted, we are at a great loss. Therefore the Lord opening this
way, which is so attainable, and not without Scripture Light, What if the
Churches should set upon the Trial of it, and see how the Lord may appear unto
his Servants therein? As for the Episcopal Way of Government, Alas! that is
most remote from this Ordinance of Communion of Churches.

CHAP. III. Of the Constitution of Four Orders of Councils.
I. WHen Twelve Churches, or any other Number under Twenty four, shall agree to
hold Communion in a Council for Mutual Help, and shall send forth Messengers at
least two from every Church, and they of both Orders of Elders, or in defect of
Ruling Elders, Brethren eminent in Piety and Wisdom, who are as Elders, to
manage the Ordinance of Counsel in the behalf, and for the benefit of all the
Churches herein combined.

These do constitute the first Order of a complete Council; the first Ascent of
the glorious Temple; the first Row in compacting the New Jerusalem. These are
the Twenty four Elders before the Lord, representing all the Congregations
which sent them. It is both needful and attainable, that these Councils should
meet once every Month.

II. When Twelve of the first Order of Councils, or any other Number under
Twenty four, shall, with the express consent of all their particular Churches,
agree to hold Communion in a Council for Mutual Help, and for the benefit of
all the Churches combined; and to that end, shall send forth from among
themselves, at least one principal and eminent Teaching Elder, and one Ruling
Elder, to manage the Ordinance of Counsel, in a Provincial Synod, in the
behalf, and for the benefit of all the Churches herein combined: These do
constitute the second Order of Councils. These are a Provincial Council; these
do represent very many Churches, and all the people in them, with their express
consent, and yet they are but Twenty four Elders, so denominated by their least
and constituting Number, though the Numbers represented be very great,
according to Rev. 5.8, 9, etc. These all are Church-Messengers* sent forth to
manage the Ordinance of Counsel, though immediately sent forth by the first
Councils, with the express consent of all the Churches combined. These are the
second Row of Churches compacted by the Number Twelve; the second Row of
Chambers in the Temple, of equal dimensions to the first, and built upon the
first, stand^ng upon the same bottom and foundation, the Twelve Apostles. It is
both needful and attainable, that these should meet quarterly.

III. When Twelve Provincial Councils, or any other number under Twenty four,
shall, with the explicit consent of the first Councils, and with the explicit
consent of the Churches, who are in this Combination, agree to hold Communion
in a Council for Mutual Help; and to that end, shall send forth from among
themselves at least one principal Teaching Elder, and one Ruling Elder, both
eminent in holiness, wisdom, and all fitting abilities, to manage the
Ordinance of Counsel in a National Synod, in the behalf, and for the benefit of
all the Provinces, first Councils, and particular Churches herein combined:
These do constitute a Third Order of Councils. These are a National Council;
these do represent a whole Nation of Churches and all the people of the Land;
and yet they are but Twenty four Elders, as Rev. 5.11, 13, 14. though all
Creatures concur, and are combined in the work; all are represented before
the Lord in Twenty four Elders. These are all of them Church-Messengers, sent
forth to manage the Ordinance of Counsel; but they are immediately sent forth
by the Provincial Councils.

IV. As the first Councils consist of the most choice persons in all the
Churches; so the Provincial Councils do consist of the most choice Instruments
in the respective Provinces; and the National Council does consist of the most
choice persons in all the Nation: who pass through so many Ecclesiastical
Elections, before they arrive unto this high and holy Service. They pass under
an opportunity of being called out from among all the Choice Jewels of the
Nation, who are in an Ecclesiastical Order and Capacity. It will be both
needful and attainable, that these should meet once in a Year.

V. When Twelve National Councils, or any Number under Twenty four, shall
agree, with the explicit consent of all the Churches, passing and arising
through all the Order^ of Councils, to hold Communion in Councils for Mutual
Help; and to that end shall send forth, at least one Teaching, and one Ruling
Elder, men eminent in Holiness and Abilities for so high a service, to
constitute an Ecumenical Council* and there to manage the Ordinance of
Counsel, in the behalf, and for the benefit of all the Churches and Councils
herein combined: These do constitute a Fourth Order of Councils. They are an
Ecumenical Council, and represent all the Churches in those Nations before the
Lord

VI. Twenty three Nations met in one Council, will be a great glory to Christ,
and by what has yet been in the world may be called Ecumenical. Yet when the
Kingdoms of this world, shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, I know not but there will be Councils above this. Nay, why may there
not be Twelve Ascents in combining all the World? Rev. 21.16, 17. But I leave
it to the Lord. At present this is the top, and uppermost Order of Councils,
and somewhat higher then we can yet well descry: but Faith in the Promise can
see all the world in the Gospel Order of Jesus Christ. And now the Lord Jesus
is triumphing in his Militant Glory upon earth, with his Twenty four Elders
about him, in Ecclesiastical visible Order. And now the whole M^litant Body,
fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working of the measure of every part from Christ,
makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.16.

VII. Furthermore consider, that though I have proposed but Three Orders of
Councils within the Nation; yet in populous Nations there may be a Jurisdiction
of Provinces, into chief Provinces and sub-Provinces. If a Nation be divided
into (at least) Twelve Ecclesiastical Provinces, and every one of these divided
into (at least) Twelve Sub-provinces, and every one of these into (at least)
Twelve Precincts of first Councils; then they will have Four Orders of Councils
within the Nation.

And three such Ascents will combine all the world into the hol^ Breastplate of
our great High Priest the Lord Jesus, in an Oecu^enical Council; or three
Ascents in one Nation, and four such Ascents in the Combination of all the
World, does in li^e manner make up the holy Breastplate of Christ: Which
Council may meet in Jerusalem, if the Lord will; and if that be so literal a
meaning of sundry Texts that way looking. And when that Council shall agree of
Universal days of Fasting or Feasting before the Lord* upon just occ^sion* Oh!
what glorious days will those be, when all the World shall appear together
before the Lord in such acts o^ Worship!

VIII And as an eminent Preparatory to these glorious days (when Christ shall
be King over all the earth, when there shall be one Lord, and his Name one,
Zech. 14.9. And when the Lord shall accomplish that Prophecy Eze. 34.23, 24.
And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my
servant David, he shall feed them* and he shall be their Shepherd; and I the
Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince among them: I the Lord
have spoken it. When Christ shall rule all the World, both in Civil and
Ecclesiastical affairs, by the Word of his mouth* managed by the hand of
Saints, even holy and religious Kings, Princes, and chief Rulers) Oh that the
Lo^d would put it into the heart of some of his Religious and Learned Servants
to take such pains about the holy Hebrew Language, as to fit it for this
Universal glorious use! Considering that above all Languages spoken by the lip
of man (by reason of its Trigra (...) Foundation, and other regular
Considerations, for the multiplications of all sorts of words) it is most
capable to be enlarged, and fitted to express all things and actions, all
motions and notions that our Humane Intellect is capable of (to speak no higher
of it) in this mortal life. Considering also, that it is the Invention of G^d
himself, and it is the purest Language on earth, not as yet defiled with the
scurrilous froth and some of carnal Wits in writings. Considering also, what is
promised to be in those days, that way looking, Zeph. 3.9. I will turn to the
people a pure Language: And when Egypt is converted, it is expressed by this*
that they shall speak the Language of Canaan, Isa. 19.1^. When all the World do
ob^isance to Christ disjunctim, then all Languages shall see my glory Isa.
66.18. but when they do it conjunctim, in what Language better then in it, in
which God first spoke unto man? How shall all flesh see the glory of the Lord
together, Isa. 40.5. unless there be an Universal Language? And what one fitter
then that, which it pleased our Lord Jesus to make use of* when he spoke from
heaven unto Paul at his first Conversion, Acts 26.13, 14. I saw a light from
heaven* and heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew Tongue,
Saul, Saul, etc.

CHAP. IV. The Order of Electing all these Councils; with Consideration of the
Time of their duration, and of the Times and Place of Meeting.
I. THe Election of the First Council is severally performed in every
particular Church combined in tha^ Society; wherein there seldom is any
variety of c^oi^e, and therefore no difficulty in the action: So that it may be
performed either by Lifting up of Hands, or by a Silent Vote, when their
Silence is the sign of their Concurrence.

If there be two Teaching Elders, the Church may send them both, if they see
good, as Antioch sent Paul and Barnabas, who were two Teaching Elders of that
Church, Acts 13.1. And according to the number of Teaching Elders whom they
send, the like number of Ruling E^ders, or principal Brethren they are to send,
and associate with them.

II. This act of the Churches Election must be diligently, religiously and
solemnly attended and performed, as being fundamentally and essentially
requisite, both for the Constitution of all Councils, and for the Obligation of
all Churches unto obedience.

This act of the Church has reference, not only to the Constitution of the
first Council, but also of all the rest. For seeing Churches are the Efficient
Causes of Councils, none are to be chosen to ^ Provincial* National, or
Ecumenical Synod, but such as were first chosen by some particular Church, to
constitute a first Council* and to carry on the Ordinance of Counsel according
to order.

Hence also it must be carefully and expressedly put into the Vote of this
first act of the Churches Election, That they are chosen to carry on the
Ordinance of Counsel in all the Orders of it, both in Provincial National, and
Ecumenical Councils, even unto the highest point: for though all that are thus
elected and sent by the Churches; are not to be el^cted and sent to Provincial,
National, and Ecumenical Councils, yet some of them are to be sent, and all of
them are in elect and send. And therefore when the Church does elect and send
them to this first Council, they are, by this act of the Church, empowered to
carry on the Ordinance of Counsel, through all the Orders thereof, even to the
top branch, either by electing others, or being ^lected themselves, unto those
services of Christ, and of the C^urches.

III. The Time of this Election, is to be upon the Sabbath immediately
preceding the stated time of the first Councils Monthly Meeting: and then are
they to be sent forth with the Prayers and Blessing of the Church.

IV. The Provincial Council does consist of the choycest Instruments in all the
first Councils, by whom they are chosen and sent with their Prayers and
Blessing: Every first Council electing the most holy, learned, and able Eld^rs,
both Teaching and Ruling, that they have, who are most fit to promote and
attain the ends they are sent for, viz. To carry on the Ordinance of Counsel in
a Provincial Synod, both by themselv^s, and by choosing such as may further
promote the same in a National Council, etc.

V. The Time of this Election, is to be in that Session of the first Councils,
which does immediately precede the stated Quarterly time of the Provincial
Councils Meeting.

VI. The Order and Manner of this Election may be this: The Moderator of that
Session may first put this to vote, whether they will send but one, or more
then one Teach^ng Elders; for by the good Providence and rich Grace of Christ,
there may be sundry able and eminent Lights in one first Council, and such, as
that it were a public injury and detriment to the Cause of Christ, if they be
not sent. This provided, That according to the Number of Teaching Elders, a
like Number of Ruling Elders be also sent with them.

The Manner of Election may be by Papers, if they see meet, which the Moderator
and Notary are to take, and number, and manifest who are chosen: and such as
are chosen, are by the Notary to be recorded.

VII. The National Council does consist of the most choice, holy, able, and
eminent Lights in all the Provincial Councils, by whom they are chosen, and
sent forth with their prayers and blessing.

Every Provincial Council choosing the most holy and able Elders, both Teaching
and Ruling that they have among them, to constitute a National Council, and to
carry on the Ordinance of Counsel, in that high and holy service of Christ, and
of all the Churches in the Nation; yea* and among other Nations if need be, and
when there is a calling thereunto.

VIII. The Time of this Election, is to be in that Session of the Provincial
Councils, which does immediately precede the stated time of the Annual Session
of the National Council.

The Order and Manner of their Election, may be in all respects according to
the forementioned Election in the Provincial Synod.

IX. An Ecumenical Council, is to consist of the most holy and eminent Lights
in all the National Councils, combined in this holy Ordinance of Mutual
Counsel; and may readily be ordered by this standard, when the Lord shall in
the riches of his grace, give opportunity to exercise the same.

Touching the Duration of these Councils.

X. Every one of these Councils does continue in being, until, according to
Order, a new Election be made; the new Election does antiquate the old.

Hence, as the Primitive Church had Apostles always in being, for their help;
So there be at least three Orders of Ecclesi^stical Councils, ever in being in
every populous Christian Nation, who must at the stated Times, and may at any
(...) meet, when the affairs of Christ, and of any of the Churches do need, and
duly call for the same.

And when Christian Nations shall be thus combined, there will be an
Ecumenical Council ever in being: yea, and when all the World shall be
combined, there will be a great Ecumenical Council ever in being* to order all
ecclesiastical a faires, in unity, holiness and peace, all the World over.

XI. A principal objection arises against this fixing and stating of Councils;
viz. That although pre-renas^ent Coun^ils are a divine remedy, when troubles
arise^ as it was at Antioch, who also then finished the Council* when the
present (...) was finished: but of fixed* stated, and permanent Coun^^ls we
have no example* nor does there appear any ground in S^ripture to bottom them
upon.

Ans. The Primitive Churches had a stated and permanent way of counsel
eminently, and more then our stated and permanent Councils can be, for they had
the Apostles and Evangelists constantly among them.

And though they had fixed Elders in every Church, yet they did need the
visitations, and frequently made use of the counsel of the Apostles and
Evangelists, who were the permanent Councils of the Primitive Churches

And though it has pleased the wisdom of our great Lawgiver, to give us but
one Example of an ordinary Council, and that he has done, to be our perpetual
guide in our ordinary way; yet there be many examples of the Churches need of,
and frequent use of the Apostles and Evangelists counsel, whom they had always
with them, or knew when and where to repair unto them for their help.

And we find by much and long experience, that our Reforming Churches do stand
in as much (if not more) need of constant and stated Councils, as the primitive
Churches did, or the constant presence of the Apostles and Evangelists, always
for their directive, and often for their corrective help.

We find by experience, that our Churches do oftener need the directive help
of Councils, then the corrective, and in both respects together we need them to
be always in being.

Many good works for the promotion of the Gospel and Kingdom of Jesus Christ do
stick long in the birth, and languish: yea, often miscarry and vanish for want of
the help of Councils.

Sundry Churches also, and remote places, ly long in the dark, without rood and
help, for want of the orderly care of settled Councils; Every bodies work i^
no-bodies. But when all Churches are in order, all know where their work lies.

Disorders likewise, and insuperable distempers, by long fretting and burning
in the bosom of sundry Churches, to the great dishonor of God, and scandal to
the Saints, for want of stated Councils: some or other refusing (in the time of
their temptations) to submit themselves unto the remedy, especially having that
advantage, that without their consent, a pro-renascent Council may not be
called; or i^ called by some only, they have the less opportunity of doing
good, and are in the more danger of doing hurt.

Nor can it be said that there is no example nor ground of stated and permanent
Councils in the holy Scriptures, seeing the Apostles and Evangelists were so,
and more, unto the Primitive Churches.

Hence also it was enough to give u^ one pattern of an ordinary Council, there
was no need for the continuation thereof, whilst the Apostles and Evangelists
did survive.

Object. But does not this strengthen the Argument for Bishops, and such like
Superintendents over the Churches? for so they a^gue.

Ans. Were there a like example in an ordinary way, set down in Scripture, for
this work to be done by any one Man not extraordinarily called, as there is for
a Council, then their Argument would have force with it; but such a pattern, or
precept for it, is not to be found. And the way of Councils, (which is clearly
instituted) is sufficient to attain the end, as we have found by gracious and
plenteous experience: though we are still defective, in that we have not our
Councils stated, and we do find great inconvenience by reason of that defect.

XII. These Councils, in the time of their duration, may multiply or cut short
their Sessions, as need may require, according as the business of the Churches,
and affairs of Christ may be more or less pressing and urgent.

XIII. There be two sorts of their Meetings, Stated. Occasional.
The stated Meetings of the first Councils are every Month: and what if it
should be on the first Third day of the week, in every month, through the year?

The stated meeting of the Provincial Councils, are once every quarter: and
what if two of them be the first Third day after the Sun touches the middle
point of the summer and winter Solstices? And the other two, the first Third
day after the Sun is in the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoctial? With this
consideration, that if the Sun touch any of these points upon the Third day of
the week, then that is the day of meeting; if on any other day, then the Third
day after.

The stated meeting of the National Council, is once a Year, and best in the
Spring: and what if it be the last Third day of the First Month called March?

XIV. The Law of the Constitution does call all these Councils to meet at the
stated times, without any other order or appointment.

XV. It is very requisite that some eminent man preach a public Lecture, on
the day of the meeting of every Council, to draw many Saints together, and to
raise a strong breath or Prayer, and to put the greater Solemnity upon so holy
a work.

XVI. Occasional Meetings may be multiplied either by intricacy of Cases,
Variety of Opinions, Troublesomeness of Persons, Danger of Churches, Gross
Scandals that cannot proceed to Censure, because of some obstruction, without
the help of Counsel.

Such Occasional Meetings, if foreseen, may be appointed by the Council before
they rise; if not foreseen, then they must be called by the Moderator then in
being, and the Notary, by Letters under either of their hands, where distance
of place requires it.

XVII. The place of Meeting for these Councils, and especially of the first
Councils is not to be limited, or tied to any one place, because there be
sundry Considerations about the place, whereof one may be prevalent at one
time, and another time another: Sometimes the age, and unfitness for Travel of
some eminently useful person; sometimes the common convenience for all:
Sometimes it may edify to meet in that Church where the chief Trouble may at
the present be, and yet this not always so, because the troubles of Antioch
were heard and settled at Jerusalem, where the best and ablest Counsel was to be
had, with the least trouble and inconveniency unto any.

CHAP. V. The general Work of all Ecclesiastical Councils.
THese Ecclesiastical Councils are to do for all the Churches in an ordinary
way, what the Apostles were to do in an extraordinary way. The care of all the
Churches does lie upon them, which appears both in the Manner of their
Constitution, and End of their Meeting.

Yea, they are to do for all the World, what lies in them, as the Apostles
were to do, Matthew. 28. Go, and teach all Nations, etc.

I. Hence, first, if there be any Heathen people that yet know not Christ, it
is a work well-becoming any of these Orders of Councils, and all of them in
their harmony, to seek out, and send forth (...) Laborers to such a work and
service of Christ, to carry the Gospel, and preach Jesus Christ unto them; to
gather and plant Churches amongst them. And it is the duty of particular
Churches unto whose Society such Instruments, chosen by the Councils, do
belong, by Fasting and Prayer, and Imposition of hands, to send them forth unto
that Work; as the Church of Antioch did unto Barnabas and Saul* when they were
extraordinarily called* and sent forth unto such a Work as w^ are now speaking
of, Acts 13.2, 3. And this will be one holy wa^ of improvement of Church
treasuries* raised by voluntary Contributions, to spread and propagate the
Gospel to all the World.

II. If there be any among the profession Nations that sit in darkness, and in
the region of the shadow of death, and (...) no light, (and too many such dark
Corners there be, in the Land of Zebulon and Naphthali, Mat. 4 15, 16.) who
have none to bring the glad Tidings of Light and Life unto them, at least, none
that do it: ^t well becomes the vigilance of these Councils to provide and
send (...) Instruments unto them, by whose Labors, the Light (through grace)
may arise, and shine among them. And it is the duty of the Churches to send
forth such persons with their prayers and blessing, as abovesaid.

III. If there be any Sister-Church that has no Breasts, (which, by death or
other means* oft-falleth out, where Churches are numerous) it is a special and
proper care of the Ecclesiastical Councils, to take a prudent* pious, and
speedy course for their supply: It being a matter that has a great tendency to
the well-being not only of that Church, but of the Councils also, into whose
Communion all Elders are received.

And unto this point of their care and duty it does belong, sometimes to remove
L^ghts from one Candlestick ^o another, where the gifts and labors of some
special Instr^ments may be most fruitful, to the glory of God, and the public
good of Religion, and all the Churches.

But this is to be done with all wisdom, tenderness* and evidence of Scripture
light, that it is the Wall of God, and for his Glory so to be: that so the
Church concerned may yield it as a^ act of obedience to Christ, for whose sake
they should be willing to pluck out their right eyes and give them unto Christ,
in obedience as unto the Apostles, so unto Councils their ordinary Successors.

IV. As the care of all the Churches lies on the Ecclesiastical Councils, so
especially the care of those Churches which are in Combination together, and
those Communion they do act and toward whom their first trust and care is to
be exercised, for their well-being on earth* and for the furtherance of their
eternal being in the Kingdom of heaven, and in all for the glory of Christ and
in particular to take care that there be general directions for Public
Worship, and all ^ther Ec^lesiastic^l Ad^inistrations and Conversation; and for
Catechism, and Pla^^orm both of Doctrine and Discipline.

V. If any Error or Heresy arise ^r be by any evil Instruments openly or
secretly buz^ed and infused or any way vented and diffused* to hazard ^he
inf^^^ing and poi^oning any of the people. It is a special care of these
Councils to take up the matter, to clear up the light of the case by the Word
of God, and in due order to settle the Cause and suppress the Error by
counselling the Church to whom the person belongs to a due exercise of
Discipline if need be.

VI. If any Controversy* or doubtful Disputat^on arise in any of the Churches,
about any point of Religion either in Faith or Order; because all difference of
Opinion is apt to breed alienation of affection and give entrance to Satan, and
grief to the Spirit of Love and Peace: It concerns the Councils* withal care
and prudence, in due order to settle and silence such a Controversy.

VII. If any Strife or Division arise among any, either persons, or parties, or
Churches, or Towns, or Magistrates; because all strife is of Satan* and
dangerous* and the higher the worse: Therefore it ought to be the care of all
the Councils, speedily to reconcile (in an Ecclesiastical way is to their
spirits and affections) all such strife with all care refusing to interpose* or
meddle with the Civil cause, if any be, leaving that to be decided in Civil
Order* according to the Ordinance of God

VIII. If there arise any difficul^y in any of the Churches about Election of
Off^cers, A^ministration of Censures, Admission of Members, Education of Youth,
or in such like cases* (and when do all these vigorously proceed without
difficulty?) It is the duty and care of these Councils* by the evidence of the
light of the Word of God so to advise and counsel these Churches, as that they
may proceed to act in due unity good order, and in the power and peace of the
Gospel.

IX. Because the pious and prudent management of the public stock of Prayers
and Praises, is a point that greatly does concern the Church Militant: and
because all the great Motions in the world are steered and managed by Divine
Providence* according to the Prayers of the Churches, and of the Saints; Hence
it is a great service of Christ, and of the Churches, for all the Councils to
order and present matter of Prayers and Thanksgiving, and also to order and
guide the times and seasons of public Fastings and Thanksgivings. The
management of the great Wheel of public Prayers, as to the presenting of
matter, and ordering of seasons, lies within the care and guidance of the
Counc^ls, by whose pious prudence, all the Churches will be led on in an united
Spirit of Prayer, both for matter and seasons, but abandoning the Antichristian
stinted Forms and Times.

X. If Colonies, or New Towns are to be erected in Wildernesses, or any
unhabited places in the world; and people appear ready in their minds to
undertake such a Design: It is a singular point of wisdom and love, to manage
such a design religiously, so as that God may go with them, and dwell in the
midst of them. And therefore it is necessary that they have the Ministry of
Gods Word, and some other godly persons with them, who may carry on Church-work
among them. And this care belongs to the Councils, to order guide, and
provide for them.

XI When Parishional Congregations are to be called up unto R^formation; and
when Officers are to be Ordained among them, where none were before; and when,
by addition of Churches unto the Communion, Councils are to be multiplied:
These (and such like) are blessed Births, and very well-pleasing to Christ; and
Oh how well it becomes these Ecclesiastical Councils to Midwife forth such
Births as these?

XII. When a whole Church* or the major part thereof, do remove their
dwellings, and transplant themselves into some other pl^ce; great care is to be
had, that Christ may go with them that go, and that Christ may tarry, and not
depart from them that tarry: The care of the holy and loving management of such
a design, does much concern, and well become the holy care of the
Ecclesiastical Councils.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the particular works of all the Orders of Councils: and
first of the First Order.
WHen a Council of the First Order is met at the stated time, and in the Place
agreed on, and have completed themselves by choosing Moderator and Notaries,
and have commended their work, their Churches, and all the Government, Civil
and Ecclesiastical, etc. unto God in Prayer; then

I. The Moderator, with the Co-attestation of his Associate Ruling Elder, does
first declare the present state of the Church where they do minister, and who
have sent them, to act Communion of Councils with the sister-Churches here
represented, in this Council.

The present state of the Church he does declare, in these five Points, in
answering to these five Questions: 1. Whether they walk together in Truth and
Love? truthing it in love, Ephesians. 4.15. 2. Whether Peace rules in their hearts,
and braves it among them? (...), Col. 3.15. 3. Whether they walk in holiness of
Life, Evangelically unblameable? Luke 1.6. 4. Whether the Lambs of the Flock be
diligently fed, and trained up for Christ, in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord? Joh. 21.15. (...), My little Lambs. The care of the Lambs, is one third
part of the charge over the Flock of God. 5. Whether the Lord's Day be
reverently, religiously and strictly observed by all? Rev. 1.10. Isai 58.13.


The Affirmative of these Questions, (in Gospel Measure, and Endeavor, though
not without infirmities) declared by him, and co-attested by his Associate
Ruling Elder, is to be accepted, with all thankfulness unto God, for the
present good estate in Christ, of that Church; and the Notary is to record the
same to the praise of Christ Jesus.

II. The Moderator is to call upon all the Elders in order, to declare, with
the co-attestation of their Associate Ruling Elders, the state of all the
Churches, touching the same five Questions. All whose Reports are distinctly to
be recorded, as the present good estate, in Christ, of all those Churches, to
stand as a monumen^ of Gods mercy to future ages* and to be presented upon
record unto the Provincial and National Coun^ils.

III. If all the Churches walk in an Evangelical measure of Truth, Peace and
Holiness, and have no cause that labors among them, for want of Help and
Counsel; then the Moderator is to declare to the praise of God, that the work
of this present Session, as touching their own Churches, is finished.

IV. But if there be any difference* or strife, or any difficult case in any of
the Church^s, there opened by the Elders: The matter is first to be put, and
resolved into a Question or Questions, according as the state of the case does
require: and those Questions recorded, as matter for the Council to give advice
in, unto that Church from whence they came. Also it must be provided* that the
party, or parties concerned in the case or case^ be p^^sent both at the stating
of the Questions, and discussion thereof* and at the Application thereof unto
the particul^r case; and that he or they have competent liberty to Dis^uss,
Argue Answer or what ever is requisite* to find out and clear up the truth.
The Answer to the Questions, and the Application the^eof (so far as may stand
with due reverence to the Church and glory of Christ) are to be recorded.

V. If there be any case which the Elders see cause not to produce themselves,
or do refuse, then any Brother concerned may yea thoug^ it reflect upon the
Eld^rs themselves. Or in case of Maladministration: or if any already
censured appeal for further Light and Conviction: or if any deserving Censure,
do appeal from the Church for cle^ver conviction, and the Chur^^ sees cause to
defer proceeding unto Censure* (as sometimes it may be) upon his appe^l: Or
whatsoever ^he case or trouble be; only all such prop^sals by any of the
Fraternity, must be with due reverence, humility, and in the fear of God.

VI. If any other person or persons whatever, have any Question or Case in
matters of Religion, to propose unto the Council^ they in the next place may
(...) liberty in a reverent and orderly manner, to propose the same, and it is
to be Considered and Answered Also any other matter concerning the public good
of the C^urch^s and promotion of Religion, may be discussed and ordered, as
Fastings, Feastings* Propagation of the Gospel and the like.

VII. If business so multiply, (...) at one day suffices not to finish the
work, the Council have liberty to appoint other times so often as they need,
within the month: and if they finish not in that month, it must be left on
record how the case stands, and so to be presented to the Council that shall
be chosen for the next month, which ordinarily, in this order, will be the
same persons, or (at least) most of them.

VIII. If any Case prove too hard for them to resolve, or if they be
considerably divided in judgment, then the Case is to be transmitted to the
next Provincial Council, and recorded so to be, with the Reasons o^
transmitting the same.

IX. If they agree in Counsel about any case or point of Religion, in Faith or
Order: and if any person or persons, or Church concerned therein, do not accept
of their counsel and judgment; he, or they, have liberty to appeal to the next
Provincial Council; provided, that if the Council advise the Church to proceed
to Censure, they are to follow that counsel, notwithstanding his appeal, and
not to suffer sin to ly upon their brother; for if it were in the (...) power
to stop the clear process of a Gospel-medicine to his soul in gross scandals,
some would never come under the Soul-medicine of Christ Jesus, or not so soon
as were meet* but he may appeal higher f^r all actions of the Churches and
Councils, are liable to a (...), until it come unto the highest. And his
Appeal, with the Reasons and manner thereof, are to be recorded.

X. Every first Council, in the Sessions immediately foregoing (...) quarterly
time of the Provincial Councils meeting, must choose from among themselves, at
least one Tea^hing Elder and one Ruling Elder to be sent unto the Provincial
Synod, as Members of the same, there to represent the first Councils (who chose
and sent them) and all the Churches with them combined: and to carry on the
Ordinance of Counsel among them, according to due Order.

XI. Unto these thus chosen for the Provincial Council, are to be delivered in
writing, first, a Note of the present state of all the Churches combined with
them. Secondly, a Note of such Cases as are transmitted to the Provincial
Council, if any such be. And thirdly, a Note of such Appeals as are made unto
them, if any such be: all these, being first read, are then delivered unto
them. And thus they are sent with their Prayers and Ble^sing.

XII. When all these Elders do return to their own Chur^hes, they are (so far
as in prudence is meet) to relate the particular state of all the Churches, the
acts of the Council, the persons chosen for the Provincial Council, the cases
transmitted, and Appeals; or so much as may give them a general view of the
public state of the Churches and Affairs of Christ, as matter of continual
Prayers, Praises and Obedience in all the Churches.

The Particular works of the Provincial Council, the second Order of Councils.
THe Provincial Council being met at the stated time, and in the place agreed
on, Moderators and Notaries chosen, the work blessed, as in the Council of the
first Order; then

1. The Moderator, with the co-attestation of his Associate Ruling Elder,
declares the present state of the first Council that sent them; as also the
present state of all the Churches combined in that Council, which he delivers
in writing, and may be now read in this Council. Then he delivers in writing
such Cases as are transmitted to them, and such Appeals as are made unto them,
if any such be; these being also read in the Council, are kept in order by the
Notaries

2. The Notaries are to record the present state of that Council, and the
general good estate of all the Churches, rehirring unto the Records thereof now
presented.

3. The Moderator is to call upon all the Elders, in order, with their
Associates, delegated from all the first Councils, who are all to do as the
Moderator did, declaring the state of the Councils, and of the Churches,
delivering their Writings to the Notaries, which are all read, and recorded.

4. The Notaries are to produce, when called for, all the Papers which present
any Business or Work unto the Council, either by Transmission, or by Appeals:
which are orderly to be discussed. Care being taken, that all persons concerned
be present, and have free and competent liberty to argue* answer, object,
dispute, or what else may be requisite for finding out of the Truth.

5. If there be no Cases transmitted, nor Appeals from any first Councils, then
the business of the Lord, touching all their Churches, is (with glory and
praise to Christ) so soon finished as mentioned.

6. If any person or persons whatsoever, have any Questions or Cases concerning
Religion, and Ecclesiastical affairs of Christ now they have liberty, in due
reverence and order, to propose the same to be discussed and answered. And if
work multiply, the Council may either tarry together, or multiply their
Sessions, so often as they see cause, in their Quarter. And what Cases they have
unfinished, they are to leave them upon Record for the next Council.

7. If there be any case too difficult for them, or that they be consideratly
divided in judgment in, then that Case is to transmitted to the National
Council. The Notary is to Record it, with the Reasons thereof.

8. If any counsel or ju^gement agreed on by this Council be not accepted or
acquiesced in, by the party or parties concerned he or they may Appeal unto the
National Council, for further light; and the Notaries are to record it, and the
Reasons thereof. Provided, that if this Council advise the Church to p^oceed to
Censure, they may so do, if they see cause, notwithstanding his Appeal

9. Those Provincial Councils which do immediately forego the state^ time of
the National Coun^^ls meeting are each of them to choose, at least, one
Teaching, and one Rul^ng Elder, according to the manner aforesaid, who are to
be Representatives of these Provincial Councils, and of all the first Counc^ls,
and Churches with them combined* in the National (...); who are chosen to carry
on the Ordinance of Counsel in that Order.

10. The Notaries are publicly in the presence of every C^uncil, to deliver,
in writing unto them who are chosen for the National Council, 1. The present
state of all the first Councils, and of all the Churches combined with them, 2.
All the Causes that are transmitted by them unto the National Council. 3. The
Appeals, if any such be All these, being first read are delivered to them: and
so they are sent with their prayers and blessing.

11. If these Councils foresee any future Sessions this quarter, they may now
agree upon the same: if any Fasts or Feasts are to be kept by all their
Churches, they may now agree upon it, and propose the Causes thereof.

12. When these Elders do next meet in their first Councils, they must
prudently and faithfully report the good state of all the rest of the first
Coun^ils in the Province, and of all the Churches combined with them, and all
other weighty affairs frating to be communi^^^^^, that so they may relate them
to their Churches, that (...) things may be matter of joy, praise thanksgiving,
(...)* and obedience in all the Churches.

The particular Works of the National and h^ghest Ecclesiastical Council within
the Nat^on.
THe National Council being met at the stated time, and pla^e agreed on^
completed and blessed; then

1. The Moderator, with the co^attestation of the Ruling Elder his Associate,
is to declare unto them the present good estate of that Provincial Council
which sent them, as also the state of all the first Councils, and particu^ar
Churches with them combined. Also he declares such cases as are transmitted by
them unto this Council; and such Appeals as are made unto them, as part of the
present business of this Council. All these things to be delivered in writing
distinctly, unto the Notaries, who read them all, and then record the present
good estate of that Province, and all the Councils and Churches therein
combined; as also the matters that are from them dilated unto the present
Council.

2. The Moderator calls all the rest of the Provincial Representatives in
order, who are to make the like declaration as the Moderator has done, with
the co-attestation of their Associate Ruling Elders. All their Papers are to be
delivered to the Notaries, who are to read, and then record them distinctly,
with the present Ecclesiastical state of all the Provinces in the Nation, whose
Representatives do there appear, and make declaration thereof before the
National Council.

3. The Notaries are orderly to propose all the matters presented by the
Provincial Councils, when the Moderator requires the same. Care being had,
that the persons concerned be present, and have free and competent liberty to
argue, answer, object in due, reverent, and modest manner, and to do what may
be necessary for the finding out of the truth.

4. If there be no Cases transmitted to them, nor Appeals, the affairs of all
the Churches in the Nation are presently issued, with glory and praise to the
Lord Jesus, the King of Peace.

5. If any other person or persons within the Nation, or of any other Nation,
have any Cases or Questions about Religion, they may now have liberty of
proposing the same, to receive an answer.

6. If any Cases of difficulty be such, as that they cannot obtain an issue,
and resolution satisfactory, then the Case must be recorded, and stay until by
further consideration and discussion, God shall please to reveal further light
therein, because there is no Higher Council to appeal unto for light, within
the Nation. And in such cases, so the Apostles did walk, and teach the Churches
to walk, Phil 3.15, 16. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded:
and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. Nevertheless, whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule let us mind the same things.

But if the matter be of due weight and worth, then either by Transmission or
Appeal, it may ascend unto an Ecumenical Council.

7. If any person or persons, whose opinion or practice receives a judgment,
with counsel and advice in reference to the person or persons concerned, and he
or they rest not therein, as to Peace and Order; then if he or they (be they
many or few) be not already under Church Censure; the Church to which they
belong, are to proceed (according to the determination of this Council in the
case) unto their Censure, as the Church of Corinth did upon the advice of Paul,
1 Cor. 5.4, 5. for the healing of their souls, and bringing of them unto
repentance, and good order. Which being effected, the end of all this acting,
both in Conviction and Correction, is attended. And thus, within the compass of
one year, the whole Order of Ecclesiastical Discipline has its course, and
that in a most difficult case.

8. But yet if he or they rest not, such are high disturbers, and must be
suppressed by civil Power.

And in civil Order, he that does not submit unto and rest in (as to peace and
order) the sentence of the Supreme Power, is guilty of a Capital Offense, and
ought to be put to death, by the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.10, 11, 12, 13. and the
reason is; because Order is better then any of our lives. It is a greater good
to preserve Order, then to preserve the lives of the wilful and obstinate
violaters thereof. And the loss of Order and Peace in Ecclesiastical
Government, in the way of the Churches, is of greater consequence, then the
loss of their lives Zec. 13.3, 6.

9. All things that are to be commended or committed to Civil Authority, either
from the Churches, or in behalf of the Churches, and Religion^ are to be
resolved, and acted by the National Council. Where great care is to be had, to
keep a clear distinction, betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, and not to
meddle, or in the least, intrude or entrench upon Civil Authority. The
usurpation of Antichrist upon the Civil Authority, must ever keep the
Ecclesiastical Councils in a v^gilant fear of that aspiring pride: a worm too
apt to breed and grow in the breasts of learned, and eminently gifted men, if
there be not a vigilant spirit of mortification, and humble subjection unto
Order.

10 It will be necessary that an appointed Committee of this National Council
be always (some or other of them) resid^nt near unto the Supreme Civil
Authority; that they may speedily have notice of all occurrences, that may have
respect unto, or concern the Ecclesiastical affairs of the Churches: and may
receive Commands from Authority, about Fastings or Feastings, according to the
well or ill being of the affairs of the Nation, or the Churches, either at
home or abroad; and may call together the whole Council, if there be any cause
that it should be so, etc.

11. Such public Fasts and Feasts as concern all the Churches in the Nation to
solemnize, which are not first commanded by civil Authority, why may they not
be appointed and agreed on by the National Council? such public sins as are to
be bewailed; such mercies as are to be implored for our Churches, or for the
Nation, or for foreign Churches and Nations; such motions and designs of
spreading and propagating religion as are in hand, etc. These are to be
presented to all the Churches as matter of Prayer, both ordinary and
extraordinary.

12. When these Members of the National Council return unto the Provincia^
Councils, whose delegates they (immediately) are, they are to report unto them
the state and affairs of all the Churches in the Nation, and in foreign
Nations also And they are to report them to all the first Councils* and they
unto all the Chur^hes, as matters of pr^i^e, and prayer to God, and of
encouragement to obedience unto government.

And that this communication of Ecclesiastical affairs may be the more readily
expedited:

1. All the first Councils, or some one of every Council, may meet that day
seven night after the Provincial Counc^ls meeting to hear the affairs of all
the Province. And some of the Provincial Council may be there, to declare the
a^faires of all the Churches in the Province

2. So likewise the Provincial Counc^ls (o^ some of every Provincial C^un^^l)
may meet that day seven night aft^r the Session of the National Council, to
hear the affairs of the whole Nation, and some of the National Council may be
there to give information of all things ^itting to be com^unic^ted. But
experience will put men upon the best w^y of Order in these things.

The particular duties of the Oecumeni^al Council I pass in silence; I leave
them to their consideration* whos^ (...) portion it shall be* to see those
glorious times, when such Councils shall be called.

Notwithstanding these public Orders of Councils, it is l^wful for any person^
or parties, or Church* to t^ke any private Counsel, that he or they will or can
obtain, according to G^d (...) have occasion.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the way to bring every Christian Parishional
Congregation to be an explicit R^forming Congregational Church.
I. EVery Parishional Congregation, who solemnly renouncing all their sins and
evils, both personal and Ecclesiastical, shall willingly (by what ways, means,
or ^otives soever thereunto induced) submit themselves and their children to
the Government of Christ, in Gospel Order; and particularly to be guided in the
common concernments of Religion, by the holy advice of the forenamed Orders of
Councils; and do (by their pious and prudent counsel and concurrence) orderly
elect all Officers, both Elders and Deac^ns, among themselves, and promise for
themselves and their households, to walk in the Christian exercise of all Gods
Ordinances, according to Rule, in the Faith and Order of the Gospel: That
Parish, or so many of them as shall herein concur, is to be owned a
particular Reforming Congregational Church; and is to be received into the
Communion of the Churches in this Order of Government. They delivering this a^t
of theirs in writing, unto that first Counc^l with whom they associate, there
to be recorded.

II. It may, by the good blessing of God, gre^tly pro^ote Rel^g^^n, and the
Reformation of particular Chur^hes, if such of the godly Gentry of the Land,
who are not in Civil Authority would please to do that honor to Christ, to
subject themselves to his servi^e in accepting of the Offices of Ruling Elders
and Deacons, in the Churches of Jesus Christ. It would much strengthen the
hands of Church government, and be no small honor to themselves* and they will
hereby render themselves (...) in the Kingd^me of Heaven.

III By the Ordi^an^e o^ Ca^e^h^zing prudently exercis^d, both publ^ckly in the
Church, and in private houses all the Church are to be train^d up unto a
competency of knowledge in Jesus Christ.

IV. Special^ are is to be h^d in the tra^n^ng up of Youth in the good
knowl^dge of God* made manifest to the Church by their public account, answer,
or (...); and unto an expl^^ite acknowledgement of Christ with submi^sion and
engagement of themselves unto the Church, wherein they give up themselves and
their children unto God, to be ruled by Religion, in the Faith and Order of the
Gospel. Which done, their Children are to be baptized.

V. Upon the due evidence of some hopeful real work and change of heart by
Faith and Repentance, duly manifested to the Church* whereby the persons
concerned may be in Charity conceived able to examine themselves, and to
discern the Lords body in the Sacrament, and spiritually to judge of a
spiritual cause, such ought, by the Church, to be received unto Communion in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and such M^les unto Voting in the Church;
because ordinarily, such as are able to discern Christ in the Sacrament, are
also able spiritual^y to discern of a spiritual cause, and thereby capable to
Vote, in such cases wherein the Fraternity is called to Voting in the Church.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the Maintenance of these Councils.
I. THough it be meet that all their necessary Charges be born for them; for
who goes on a warfare at his own charge? yet it is in no wise meet that any
Profits or Revenues should be annexed unto any of the Councils, from the lowest
unto the highest. Worldly Profit, Power and Splendour are beneath the spirit and
aim of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Only the Notaries Place, being a service of
much l^bour, pains and diligence, it is me^t that some consideration be had for
some convenient re^ompence for their labor.

II. If any godly minded Christian, out of a love unto, and zeal for the honor
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, should desire to give, and annex Maintenance
unto any of these forenamed Councils, more then conveniently to bear their
Charges (as Noble Constantine did for the worldly splendour of the Bishops) it
ought not to be permitted, but religiously opposed: for it will certainly prove
an Inlet of great Corruption* Ambition, Avarice, and Strife unworthy and unfit
persons will endeavor to Br^be themselves into Places* more for the Wages,
then for the Work.

III. The honor of the Service, and the glory of Christ that is upon the
Messengers of the Chur^hes, these are inseparable from the Work and are as suc^
as flesh and blood (we being in the flesh, and state militant) will be able to
weather, and keep from running aground upon.

But Revenue and Profit are separable from the Work, and must be religiously
and earnestly kept off: It being a Worm that will surely corrupt this blessed
Work, and glorious Service of Jesus Christ

IV. A small Revenue will maintain the government of Churches by Councils, even
in a great Nation, in comparison of the vast revenues which the Antichristian
Hierarchy have fatted and enriched themselves withal: which also has
advantaged them to arrogate unto themselves, and usurp civil Authority. And by
these carnal A^ditta^ents unto the Church, Religion has been corrupted, most
men have been damned, and few saved. Therefore the Church ought now, in our
reformation and resurrection, to despise the World, and not to suffer great
revenues to be annexed unto this part of the kingdom of Christ especially.

V. The religious meetings of Councils, must be patterns of all meetings of all
men, throughout the Nation: for they are many shining Lights met together, and
all men will mark what they do, and one In^h of excess in them who are the
Center, will be an Ell in the people.

Hence they must strive to be patterns to all men.

1. In Gravity: not full of Mirth, Laughter and Jesting.

2. In Sobriety: no excess in drinking wine and strong drink.

3. In Moderation of diet, Ornaments, or any Po^p.

4. In Sedul^y, and Diligence: it is the Lords work, and Cursed be he that does
the work of the Lord negl^gently.

5. In all Holiness of Discourse and behavior.

6. In Patience and Meekness of Spirit, in all matters.

7. In Care for the public Cause of Christ, and welfare of all the Churches,
the chief ca^e of all which does firstly and chiefly ly upon the Modera^ors.

VI. Great care is to be had of the first Councils that there may be some grave
and exempla^ Elders in every one of them, because according to our custom,
there may be sundry that are young, raw, and weak, and need to be trained up
unto the gravity, prudence, and holiness of the affairs of Christ his
Ecclesiastical kingdom.

Care is also to be had, that Gra^e S^ler* and Prudent Ruling Elders may be
sent* such as may be an awe unto green and young Scholars* where need may be.

Care is also to be had, that they stay no long^r then necessary business, and
just employment holds them, that there may be no temptations like
company-keeping in vanity, and smoking away their precious time.

VII. Their entertainment may be 8 d. Ordinary at noon, and 6 d. at night,
provided they be necessita^ed to tarry all night, otherwise their charges are
but their dinner and horse-^eat.

For the defraying of which charge, the Deacons of that Church where they meet,
may be authorized so to order the matter with the Deacons of all the Churches
in that combination, as that the ch^rge shall be by them defrayed, and not put
to the account of any of the Elders. And by the same hands some recompense may
be given to the Notaries, for their labor and service.

For the supply of which charge, the voluntary Contributions of every Church
will be such a treasury, as will never know want, so long as Religion, and love
to Christ remain and rule among them.

VIII. The Provincial Councils will be more choice and grave assemblies, and
their treatment must be with more respect and reverence: but their expenses
with the like moderation and sobriety It is to be supposed that these dwell
more remote are fuller of work, and must tarry longer.

If the State entertain these, and allow them 10 li. a Se^sion for their four
stated Sessions in a year; and 5 li. for the Notaries, it will not be a great
charge.

And if the National Council have 100 li. per annum for their Attendance and
Notaries.

One thousand pound per annum will suffice for a great Nation where they may be
in twenty Ecclesiastical Provinces.

And this charge will be less then the the revenu^s of some one Bishopric. The
design of Antichrist was to pamper the flesh; the design of Christ is to
mortify it, and to honor Grace.

FINIS.

