A DIRECTION FOR A PUBLIC PROFESSION in the CHURCH ASSEMBLY, after private
Examination by the ELDERS.
Which Direction is taken out of the Scripture, and Points unto that Faith and
Covenant contained in the Scripture.

Being the same for Substance which was propounded to, and agreed upon by the
Church of Salem at their beginning, the sixth of the sixth Month, 1629.

In the Preface to the Declaration of the Faith owned and professed by the
Congregationall Churches in England.

The Genuine use of a Confession of Faith is, that under the same Form of Words
they express the substance of the same common Salvation or unity of their
Faith. Accordingly it is to be looked upon as a fit means, whereby to express
that their Common Faith and Salvation, and not to be made use of as an
imposition upon any.

WE Beseech you Brethren to know them that labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and admonish you and to esteem them very highly in love for their
work sake and be at peace among your selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.

Obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it (...)
and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you, Heb. 13.17.

Who is that wise and faithful steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over
his household, to give them their portion of (...) in due season, Luke 12.42.

One Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.^.

The Common Faith, Tit. 1.4.

The common Salvation, Jude Ver. 3.

Christ Jesus the high priest of our Profession, Heb. 3.1.

The profession of our Faith. Heb 10.22.

One shall say I am the Lords, Isai. 44.5.

Hold fast the form of sound words. 2 Timothy 1.13.

The (...) Knowledge, and of the truth, Rom 2.20.

The form of Doctrine delivered unto you, Romans 6.17.

THE CONFESSION OF FAITH.
I do believe with my heart and confess with my mouth.

Concerning God.
THat there is but one only true God in three persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, each of them God, and all of them one and the some Infinite,
Eternal God, most Wise, Holy, Just, Merciful and Blessed for ever.

Concerning the Works of God.
THat this God is the Maker, Preserver, and Governor of all things according
to the counsel of his own Will, and that God made man in his own Image, in
Knowledge, Holiness and Righteousness.

Concerning the fall of Man.
THat Adam by transgressing the Command of God, fall from God and brought
himself and his posterity into a state of Sin and death, under the Wrath and
Curse of God, which I do believe to be my own condition by nature as well as
any other.

Concerning Jesus Christ.
THat God sent his Son into the World, who for our sakes became man, that he
might redeem and save us by his Obedience unto death, and that he arose from
the dead, ascended unto Heaven and sits at the right hand of God, from
whence he shall come to judge the World.

Concerning the Holy Ghost.
THat God the holy Ghost has fully revealed the Doctrine of Christ and will of
God in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, which are the Word of God
the perfect perpetual and only Rule of our Faith and Obedience.

Concerning the Benefits we have by Christ.
THat the same Spirit by Working Faith in Gods Elect, applies unto them Christ
with all his Benefits of Justification, and Sanctification, unto Salvation, in
the use of those Ordinances which God has appointed in his written words which
therefore ought to be observed by us until the coming of Christ.

Concerning the Church of Christ.
THat all true Believers being united unto Christ as the Head, make up one
Mystical Church which is the Body of Christ, the members whereof having
fellowship with the Father Son and Holy Ghost by Faith, and one with (...)
love, do receive here upon (...) forgiveness of (...) with the life of grace,
and at the Resurrection of the Body, they shall receive everlasting life. Amen.

THE COVENANT.
I do heart^^^ take and avouch this one God who is made known to us in the
Scripture by the Name of God the Father, and God the Son even Jesus Christ and
God the Holy Ghost to be my God, according to the tenor of the Covenant of
Grace; wherein he has promised to be a God to the Faithful and their seed
after them in their Generations, and takes them to be his People and therefore
unfeignedly repenting of all my sins, I do give up myself wholly unto this God
to believe in love, serve and Obey him sincerely and faithfully according to
his written word, against all the temptations of the Devil, the World, and my
own flesh and this unto the death.

I do also consent to be a Member of this particular Church, promising to
continue steadfastly in fellowship with it, in the public Worship of God, to
submit to the Order Discipline and Government of Christ in it, and to the
Ministerial teaching guidance and oversight of the Elders of it, and to the
brotherly watch of Fellow Members: and all this according to Gods Word, and by
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ enabling me thereunto, AMEN.

Questions to be Answered at the Baptizing of Children, or the substance to be
expressed by the Parents.
Quest. Do you present and give up this child, or these children, unto God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, (...) in the F^^th, and Engaged in the Covenant
of God professed by this Church?

Quest. Do you sollemnly Promise in the (...) of God, that by the (...), you
will (...) your Covenant duty toward (...), so as to bring them upon the
Nurture and (...) of the Lord, teaching and commanding them to keep the way of
God, that they may be able ((...) grace of Christ) to make a personal
profession of their Faith and to own the Covenant of God themselves in due time.

FINIS.

