THE LIFE and DEATH OF That Reverend Man of GOD, Mr. RICHARD MATHER, TEACHER of
the CHURCH IN Dorchester IN NEW ENGLAND.

Psalm. 112. 6. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Heb.
13.7. Remember them who have spoken to you the Word of God. Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. Ministri vita censura and cynosura.

CAMBRIDGE:

Printed by S. G. and M. ^. 1670.

TO THE CHURCH AND INHABITANTS OF DORC^ESTER in N.E. Grace unto you from God by
Jesus Christ.
Beloved in the Lord Jesus,
You have here presented to your view, and for your imitation in the Lord, the
Life of him that was to many of you a Spiritual ( as to me a Natural) Father:
Inasmuch as the greatest part of his time in the Ministry he was a Labourer in
the Lords Harvest amongst you; Also with you did he finish his course. There is
therefore special reason why what is here done should be directed to your
selves.

The Composer of this ensuing Relation is not willing that his Name should be
published. But it is done by one who has had the viewing of my Fathers
Manuscripts; from whence, as well as from personal and intimate Acquaintance of
many years continuance, and other ways, he has been truly furnished with the
knowledge of what is here reported. And indeed the greatest part of the Story
is known unto sundry amongst your selves.

What remains then, Brethren and Beloved in the Lord, but that we should be
mindful of what is by the Lord required, when the Scripture says, Remember
them that have taught ( and not only them that do (...)) the Word of God,
whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. What that
Doctrine of Faith is which your blessed Teacher did from the Lord instruct you
in, I need not say; only Remember it. Remember his Farewell Exhortation, which
is now in many of your Houses, and Oh that it were in all your Hearts. And as
for his Conversation, your selves know that God made him Exemplarily Faithful,
Zealous, Patient, Humble, Holy: Follow him as he followed Christ. So likewise
pray that he may do who is

Yours in the Lord always, Increase Mather
BostonN.E. September 6. 167^.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Richard Mather.
THe Writing and Reading of the Lives of Wortky Ones, has been by some
accounted amongst the most profitable works of men under the Sun. The Labors
of some Learned amongst the Gentiles this way have not been altogether without
benefit, witness what is done by Pluterch, Laertius, Philostratus, Eunapius,
Pliny, etc. albeit they are to be read with judgment. But especially the
faithful Description of the Lives of those who have been Eminent Teachers in
the Church, has been to the great advantage of afterAges. Many have reaped
benefit by reading Dorotheus his Collection of the Lives of the Prophets,
Apostles, and Seventy Disciples of Christ: And (not to speak of the Labors of
Gennadius, Epiphanius, Isidore, and Prochorus of old) among later Writers,
Shopfius his Academia Christi, and Tossanus concerning the Lives of the
Fathers, and Melchior Adam concerning the Lives of all our Modern Divines, as
far as he could by any means come to the knowledge thereof. The pains which
Mr. Clark has taken in publishing the Lives of many of our English Worthies,
has been profitable to not a few: And great pity it is that more should not be
done that way. If the Lives of Brightman, Parker, Ames, Barroughs, Hooker, etc.
were published to the World, it might be of general advantage. Nor is it to be
doubted but that there have been many famous in their Generations, whose
Memories are buried in the dust, for want of some one to undertake and office,
whereby their Names might have been perpetuated to Posterity.

Vixtre fortes ante (...)
(...) Sed ^athy mabiles
Vre^^tur ignetiq, lex^d
(...) Carent quia vats Sacro.
But it must needs be in it self a thing (...) to God, that his grace toward
and in his Servers, and the wonders of his Providence about them, should be
kept in remembrance. Therefore some have written their own Lives. So did (not
to mention Josephus, Bellarmius, Cardan) amongst our Worthies, Junius,
Collinus, Buchanan; and of our own Nation, Bale, Burton, Hall, Bealy, etc. And
the like did this Reverend Man who is to be the Subject of the ensuing
Discourse essay to do; and proceeded therein to the 39th year of his Age, but
finished not what he had purposed. It remains therefore that some other
should do it, which we shall in following words of truck and plainess endeavor
to do.

THere is in the Parish of Winnick in the Country of Lancaster, a small Country
Town or Village called Lowton: In which Village Richard Mather was born Anno
1596. His Parents Thomas and Margarite Mather were of Ancient Families in
Lowton aforesaid, but by reason of some unhappy Mortgages they were reduced
unto a low condition as to the World. Nevertheless, God so disposed their
hearts, that they were willing to Educate this their Son in good Learning:
Concerning which he (after that the Lord was pleased to bestow not only
Learning but Grace upon him) has sometimes expressed himself, saying, By what
principles and motives my Parents were chiefly induced to keep me at School, I
have not to say, nor do I certainly know. But this I must needs say, that this
was the singular good Providence of God toward me, (who has the hearts of all
men in his hand) thus to incline the hearts: of my Parents; for in this thing
the Lord of Heaven showed me such favor, as had not been showed to many my
Predecessors, and Contemporaries in that place.

Now his Parents being strongly bent in spirit to have their Son a Scholar,
they sent him to Winwick School, which was about four miles distant from his
Fathers house. In the Winter season they boarded him at Winwick; but such was
his desire after knowledge, that in the Summer he traveled every day thither.
Whilst he was thus at School he met with no small discouragement, for that the
Schoolmaster under whom he was, although he had an excellent faculty for
teaching in GrammarLearning, and many were trained up by him, so as to be sent
unto Oxford and Cambridge, for Instruction in higher Studies; yet was he very
severe and partial in his discipline. Junius was almost quite discouraged from
his Studies, when being a School boy his Master would beat him eight times in a
day whether in fault or in no fault: The like Magisterial harshness caused him
of whom we write, earnestly desire that his Father would take him from School,
and dispose of him to some other Calling. Himself afterward, when he had waded
through these Difficulties, would say, God intended better for me, then I would
have chosen for my self; and therefore my Father, though in other things
indulgent enough, yet in this would never condescend to my request, but by
putting me in hope that by his speaking to the Master, things would be amended,
would still overrule me to go on in my Studies; and good it was for me to be
overruled by him, and his discretion, rather then to be left to my own
affection and desire. But Oh that all Schoolmasters would learn Wisdom,
Moderation and Equity toward their Scholars, and seek rather to Win the hearts
of Children by righteous, loving, and courteous usage, then to alunate their
minds by partiality and undue severity, which had been my after undoing, had
not the good Providence of God, and the Wisdom and Authority of my Father
prevented. But thus was that of the Poet made good:

Multa tulit fecitq, Puer sudavit and alsit
Quicupit optatam cursu contingere metam.
After that he had spent sundry years in this School, some Popish Merchants
coming out of Wales to Warrington, which is two miles from Winwick, were
inquisitive whether there were not any pregnant Wits in that School whom they
might procure for Apprentices. Presently Richard Mather was mentioned to them
as a pregnant Youth: Whereupon application was made accordingly to his Father,
who was inclineable to accept of this Motion, because now his Estate was so
decayed, that he almost despaired of bringing up this his Son as he had
intended. But here the Finger of Divine Providence was observable; for when his
Father was ready thus to part with his Son, and the Child to go, the Lord
raised up the heart of his Master, to be importunate with his Father still to
keep him at School, professing that it was great pity that a Wit so prone to
Learning should be taken from it, (as indeed it was) or that he should be
undone by Popish Education. The Persuasions of the Master so far prevailed,
as that his Scholar was still continued under him, until the fifteenth year of
his Age.

It was a mercy to him, that whilst he was yet in his Minority, he enjoyed the
public Ministry of one Mr. Palin, then Preacher at Leagh; of whom he would
say, that the remembrance of that man was Comfortable and Honorable in his
thoughts, even in his old Age, though his knowledge of him was in his
Childhood: He then observed such a plain, powerful, and piercing efficacy in
Mr. Palins Ministry, as was not to be seen in the common sort of Preachers in
those days, by means whereof some Illumination, though not a
through-Conversion, was wrought in him.

Having been thus long kept at School, he was called to leave his Fathers
Family. The occasion whereof was this. At a place called Toxteth Park near
Liverpool, there dwelt a wise and Religious People, who being desirous of the
good of themselves and their Posterity, intended to erect a School amongst
them, for the Education of their Children. It came into their minds to send
unto the Schoolmaster of Winwick, to enquire whether he had any of his Scholars
whom he would recommend unto them for such a Service: who having received their
desires, forthwith communicated the same to this his Scholar, and to his
Father, to see if the Motion would stand with their acceptance. He was desirous
rather to have gone to the University, but his Father closed with the Offer;
whence it was in fine mutually embraced, so that he removed from his Fathers
house to Toxteth ( Anno1611.) there to teach School. Nor is it any
disparagement to his Worth that he was once a Schoolmaster; for very eminent
Divines have been so, as of our own Nation Mr. Hieron, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Vines,
not to mention others, but rather an Eminency; the like seldom known, that one
should be found fit to be a Schoolmaster at fifteen years of Age: Yet the Lord
helped him in those his young years to carry it with such Wisdom and Love and
Gravity amongst his Scholars as was to admination, so as that he was by them
both loved and feared, beyond what is usual, even where there are aged Masters.

His being thus employed was more ways then one advantageous to him: for by
this means he became a more acurate Grammarian then Divines usually are. Being
also diligent in his Studies whilst he continued in this way of Employment, he
became a Proficient in other Arts, as in Logic, Rhetoric, yea and in
Theology. Moreover, it afterward appeared to be of God, that he was Called to
such a Work in such a place, for there the effectual Conversion of his Soul
unto the Lord, was wrought in his tender years, even before his going to Oxford;
whence he was preserved from those Corruptions which undid many of his
Contemporaries, through the Temptation which in the University they met with.
The means of his Conversion was partly by seeing a strange difference between
himself and sundry in that godly Family, where Divine Providence had cast his
Lot in Toxteth, viz. the Family of Mr. Edward Aspinwall, who was a Learned and
Religious Gentleman. Now he observed that the way and walking of that holy man,
was such as himself had not as yet been accustomed unto, which caused sad fears
to arise in his Soul, lest happily he might not be in the way which leads unto
Eternal Salvation. Also Mr. Harrison, then ^ famous Minister at Hyton,
Preaching upon Jo^.3.3. concern^^g the necessity of Regeneration, and at the
same time reading a Book of Mr. Perkins his, showing how far a Reprobate may
go, God blessed these three things not only to Conviction, but to Conversion.
This was Anno 1614. The pangs of the New Birth were exceeding terrible to him,
inasmuch as many times when they were at Meals in the Family where he
sojourned, he would absent himself to retire under hedges and other secret
places, there to lament his misery before God. But after some time, the Lord
revived his broken heart, by sending the holy Spirit in the Ministry of the
Word to apply the Precious Promises of the Gospel to his Soul.

Being thus become a New Creature, he was the more eminently a Blessing in the
Family, and in the Calling which the Lord had disposed of him in: And such
notice was taken of him, as that even from places remote Children were sent
unto him for Instruction and Education; and many were, by the Lords blessing
upon his Endeavors, fitted for, and sent unto the University. Some years
having been past over in this way of Employ, he resolved ( (...)) to spend some
time in one of the Universities, as apprehending that there, by converse with
Learned men, and other Advantages not elsewhere to be had, he might gain more
then by his private Studies in the Country. Accordingly he went to Oxford, and
continued for some time there in Brazen-Nose College. Being there, he was
variously affected: for it was a joy to him to find many there who had been
his quondam Scholars. It was also a joy to him that he had such leisure to
follow his Studies, and by Disputations, Lectures, Books, Conferences with
Learned men, etc. mavelous Advantages to obtain a Treasure of Knowledge. But
his heart being before this touched with the fear of God, the great Superstition
and Profaneness which he was forced there to behold, was no small grief unto him.

Soon after his coming to Oxford, he came into Acquaintance with the Learned
Doctor Worall, who was helpful to him in directing him as to the course of his
private Studies. Among^t other things, ^e advised to read the Works of Peter
Ramus; which counsel he followed, and saw no cause to repent of his so doing.
But before he had spent so much time in Oxford as he could have wished that he
might have done; the People in Toxteth, whose Children had been taught by him,
sent to him, desiring that he would return unto them to instruct not so much
their Children as themselves, and that not in mere Hamane Literature, but in
the things of God. This Call, after due Consideration, for weighty Reasons he
accepted of. Being then returned to Toxteth, he Preached his first Sermon
November 30. 1618. There was a very great Concourse of people to hear him, and
his Labors were highly accepted of by the judicious: Such was the vastness of
his Memory, as that the things which he had prepared and intended to deliver at
once, contained no less then six long Sermons. The people having had some taste
of his Gifts, were the more importunate in their desires that he might continue
amongst them. And because that could not be without Episcapal Ordination, they
urged him to accept thereof: Not having at that time so thoroughly looked into
that part of Ceremonious Conformity as after wards, he yielded unto the Motion;
and accordingly was Ordained (with many others on the same day) by Doctor
Morton then Bishop of Chester after the Mode of those Times. The Ordination
being over, the Bishop singled our Mr. Mather from amongst the rest, saying, I
have Something to say to you betwixt you and me alone. Mr. Mather was then
afraid lest some Informations might have been given in to the Bishop against
him because of his Puritanism, thereby to prejudice him; but it happened to be
otherwise: for when the Bishop had him alone, I have (faith he) an earnest
Request unto you, and you must not deny me; It is that you would pray for me:
for I know (said he) the Prayers of men that fear God will avail much, and you
I believe are such an one. Nevertheless, after that the Lord gave him to see
the evil of the sin of Conformity in the whole latitude of it, (for as to the
substance of Conformity, even from his first entrance upon the Ministry he saw
the evil thereof, and was by Divine Grace kept from being stained there with)
his Conforming (although it was at the desires of his people) ^o accept of this
Ordination from the Prelate, was no small grief of heart to him. Many years
after, one of his Sons taking notice of a torn Parchment in his Fathers Study,
enquired what it is; unto whom his Father replied, That he received that when
he was Ordained by the Bishop: And (said he) I tore it, because I took no
pleasure in keeping a monument of my sin and folly in submitting to that
Superstition, the very remembrance whereof is grevious to me.

Being as has been related, settled in the Ministry at Toxteth, he resolved to
change his single condition: And accordingly he became a Sui^or to Mrs.
Katharine Hoult, Daugher to Edmund Hoult Esquire of Bury in Lancashire. She had
(and that deservedly) the repure of a very godly and prudent Maid. The Motion
for several years met with Obstructions, by reason of her Fathers not being
affected toward Non-conformable puritans: But at last he gave his Consent that
Mr. Mather should marry his Daughter; the Match therefore was Consummated
September. 29. 1624, God made her to become a rich Blessing to him, continuing
them together for the space of above 30 years. By her God gave him six Sons;
four whereos ( viz. Samuel, Timothy, Nathaniel and Josephwere born in England,
and two ( viz. Eleazar and Increase) in New England. After his Marriage he
removed his Habitation three miles from Toxteth, to Much-Woolton, having there
purchased an House of his own; yet he was wont constantly Summer and Winter to
Preach the Word at Toxteth upon the Lords-dayes. During his abode there, he was
abundant in Labors in the Gospel: For every Lord's Day he Preached twice at
Toxteth, and once in a Fortnight on the Third day of the Week he kept a Lecture
at the Town of Prescot. Also, faithful and powerful Preaching being then rare
in those parts, he did frequently Preach upon the Holy days(as they are
called) being often thereunto desired by godly Christians of other Parishes in
that Country: And this he did, not as thinking that there was any Holiness in
those times (or in any other day besides the Lord's Day) beyond what belongs to
every day; but because then there would be an opportunity of great Assemblies,
and it is good casting the Net where there is much Fish: for which cause it
might be that the Apostles Preached mostly in Populous Towns and Cities, and
also (which suiteth with what we are speaking) on the Jewish Sabbaths after
their abrogation as to any Religious tie upon Conscience for their observation.
Yea and besides all this, he often Preached at Funerals. It is true that
Cartwright, Sherwood, Hildershem, and many other Renowned Non-Conformists, have
scrupled Preaching Funeral Sermons; Also in some Reformed Churches that
practice is wholly omitted, yea and Decrees of Councils have sometimes been
against it; but that has been chiefly upon account of that Custom of Praising
the dead upon such occasions, and that many times untruly: Which Custom (as
many Learned men have observed) is Ethnicall, having its rise from the Funeral
Orations of the Heathen. Publicola made an excellent Oration in Praise of
Brutus, which the People were so taken with, that it became a Custom that
Famous men dying should be so praised, and when (as Plutarch says in the life
of Camillus the Women amongst the Romans parted with their Golden Ornaments for
the Public Good, the Senate decreed, That it should be lawful to make Funeral
Orations for them also. Hinc mortuos lanaandi mos (...) quem nos body
servamus. Pol. Verg. de R^r. Invent. lib.3. cap.10. Nor indeed was this Rite
practiced in the Church before the Apostasy began. Fide Magd. Cont.4. Cap.6.
wherefore this faithful Servant of the Lord avoided that practice, his speech
at Funerals being taken up not with Praising the Dead, but with instructing the
Living concerning Death, the Resurrection, the Judgment to come, and the like
seasonable Truths. Thus did he Preach the Word, being instant in season and out
of season, reproving, rebuking, exhorting, with all long suffering and
doctrine. In his public Ministry in England he went over 2 Samuel, Chap. 24
Psalm 4. and Psalm 16. Proverbs, Chap.1. Isaiah, Chap.1. and Chap.6. Luke, 22
and 23 Chapters. Romans, Chap.8. 2 Epist. to Timothy; 2 Epist. of John; and the
Epistle of Jude.

After that he had thus painfully and faithfully spent fifteen years in the
Work of the Ministry, He that holds the Stars in his right hand, had more work
for him to do elsewhere; and therefore (...) of Satan and wrath of men must be
suffered to break (...) until this choice Instrument had his mouth stopped in
unrighteousness. The Lecturewhich he kept at Prefect caused him to be much
taken notice of, and so was the more unto the Adversaries of the Truth an
object of Envy. Magnam famam and magnam quietem codem tempore nemo potest
acquirere. Quint. Wherefore Complaints being made against him for
Nonconformity to the Ceremonies, he was by the Prelates Suspended. This was in
August, Anno 1633. Under this Suspension he continued until November
following: But then, by means of the Intercession of some Gentlemen in
Lancashire, and by the influence of Simon Byby (a near Alliance of the Bishops)
he was restored again to his Public Ministry. After his Restoration he more
fully searched into, and also in his Ministry handled the Points of
Church Discipline. And God gave him in those days not only to fee, but also
to Instruct others in the Substance of the Congregationall-Way, which came to
pass by his much reading of the holy Scriptures, and his being very conversant
in the Writings of Cartwright, Parker, Baynes, and Ames. But this restored
Liberty continued not long; for Anno 1634. Bishop Neal(he who was sometimes by
King James pleasantly admonished of his Preaching Popery, because by his
carriage he taught the people to pray for a blessing upon his dead Predecessor)
being now become Archbishop of York, sent his Visitors into Lancashire; of whom
Doctor Cousins (whose Cozening Devotions Mr. Pryx has made notorious to the
world) was one: These Visitors being come into the Country (...) kept their
Courts at Wigan; where, amongst many other unrighteous proceedings, having Mr.
Mather convened before them, they passed a Sentence of Suspension against him,
merely for his Nonconformity to the Inventions of men in the Worship of God.
It was mavelous to see how God was with him, causing a Spirit of Courage and
of Glory to rest upon him, and filling him with wisdom when he stood before
those Judges, who were not willing that he should (...) for himself, or declare
the Reasons which convinced his (...) of the unlawfulness of that Conformity
which they (...) Concerning the Lords presence with him at that (...) self does
in a Manuscript left in his Study thus express (...). In the passag^^ of that
day, I have this to bless the Name of God for, that the terror of their
threatening words, of their Pursevants, and of the rest of their Pomp, did not
so terrify my mind, but that I could stand before them without being daunted
in the least measure, but answered for my self such words of truth and
soberness as the Lord put into my moxth, not being afraid of their faces at
all: which supporting and comforting presence of the Lord I count not much less
mercy, then if I had been altogether preserved out of their hands.

Being thus silenced from Public Preaching the Word, means was again used by
Mr. Mathers friends to obtain his Liberty; but all in vain. The Visitor asked
how long he had been a Minister? Answer was made. That he had been in the
Ministry fifteen years. And (said he) how often has he worn the Surpless?
Answer was returned, That he had never worn it. What (said the Visitor,
swearing as he spoke it) preach Fifteen years and never wear a Surpless? It had
been better for him that he had gotten Seven Bastards. This was a Visitors
judgment. (...).

Wherefore the (...) being thus, he betook himself to a private life: and no
(...) being left, of enjoying Liberty again in his Native Land; (...) also
(Sapions Divinat) the approaching Calamities of England, he meditated a
Removal into New England. The principal Arguments whereby he was Convinced
that he had a Divine Call to engage in so great and hazardous a Design he drew
up together, and put them into form. which because they are of weight, and
because Postertity may there by see what were the swaying Motives which
prevailed with the first-fathers of N.E. to venture upon that unparalleled
undertaking, even to Transport themselves, their Wives and Little ones, over
the rude Waves of the vast Ocean, into a Land which was not sown; We shall
therefore here insert them.

(...) tending to prove the Removing from (...) to New, or to some such like
place, (...) only lawful, but also necessary for them that are not otherwise
tied, but free.

ARGUMENT 1.
Propos. To remove from a corrupt Church to a purer, is necessary for them that
are not otherwise tied, but free: as appears,

1. If a purer Church be a better gift then a corrupter Church, the aforesaid
Removing mentioned in the Proposition, is necessary.

The reason of the Consequence is, Because we are commanded to choose the best
gifts, 1 Cor.12.31.

But a purer Church is a better gift then a Church more corrupt. Ergo.

2. If we should not unnecessarily endanger our selves to be corrupted, then
the Removing mentioned in the Proposition, is necessary.

The Reason of the Consequence is, Because by staying voluntarily in places
corrupt, we do endanger our selves to be corrupted, 1 Cor.5.6. Eccles.9.18.

But that is forbidden by the sixth Commandment. Ergo.

3. If we ought not to behold evil voluntarily, then the Remo^^ng mentioned in
the Proposition, is necessary.

The Reason of the Consequence is, Because by staying voluntarily in corrupt
places, when we are free to remove, we do behold evil voluntarily.

But that we ought not, Psalm.119.37. Ergo.

Assumption. But to remove from England to N.E. or some such like place, is to
remove from a corrupter Church to a purer. Ergo.

ARGUMENT II.
Propos. To remove from a place where (...) and the Professors of it are
persecuted, unto a place of more quietness and safety, is necessary for them
that are free.

This appears by these Arguments; viz.

1. That which has a Divine Commandment for it, is necessary.

But so it is here, Matthew.10.23.

2. That which has the imitable and commended Example of Christ, and other
faithful Servants of God for it, is necessary, Mat.11.29. 1 Pet.2.21. 1 john.2.6. Phil.3.17.

But to remove from Persecution has the imitable Example of Christ,
Matthew.2.14. and 12.15. Luke4.10. joh.8.59. and 10.39. And of other faithful
Servants of God, viz. of Elias, 1 Kings 19.3. Moses, Exodus.2.15. Paul, Acts
9.25. Ergo.

3. If not removing from Perfecution when a man is not otherwise tied, but
free, be a Tempting of God, an exposing of ones self to unnecessary danger, and
so against the sixth Commandment; Then the removing mentioned in the
Proposition of this second Argument, is necessary.

But the former is true. Ergo.

4. If not removing from Persecution when a man is free, be a wrong to the
Church, then the Proposition is true.

The Reason of the Consequence is, Because we ought not to wrong, but to seek
the benefit and salvation of the Church and Elect of God, as far as is in us, 1
Cor.10.33. 27 ^ 2.10.

But not removing as aforesaid is a wrong to the Church, because it depriveth
the Church of the benefit of such a man's life and pains, as might if he had
peace and liberty, be profitable to the Church; whereas a voluntary staying in
places of Persecution, etc does hinder profit and benefit which the Church
might receive by such a man.

5. Because a man's frailty is oft-times more then he knows of (...) of trial
will utter it self, as appears by the (...) in the Palatinate. This infirmity
of man's (...) Ridley to counsel thos^ that were not taken (...) the Realm; and
Mr. Bradford on the same ground gives the same counsel to Erkinald Rawlins and
his Wife. Acts and Mon. Vol.3. Page.518. and Page.319.

Assumpt. But to remove from Old England to New, is to remove from a place
where the Truth and Professors of it are persecuted, to a place of more
quietness. Ergo.

ARGUMENT III.
Propos. To remove from a place where we cannot enjoy all the Ordinances of
God, needful to the well being of Churches and particular Christians in regard
of their Spiritual estate, unto a place where we may, is necessary for them
that are free.

1. Because we are commanded to seek all Spiritual blessings, with all the
means of the same, Matthew.6.33. Josh.6.27. Col.3.1.

2. Because the Spouse of Christ will not rest seeking her Beloved, till she
find him in the fullest means, Cant. 1.7. and 3.1,2,3.

3. Because there is none of the Ordinances of God, but they are needful and
profitable for the preservation and growth of Churches and Christians in grace.
To think any of them not needful, or not profitable, were to disparage the
Wisdom of him that appointed them.

4. Because if it be necessary to remove for the enjoying of some of Gods
Ordinances, it is necessary to remove for the enjoying of all, and in the want
of any one:

The Reason of the Consequence is, Because it cannot be showed from Scripture,
at what Ordinance a man is set at liberty from seeking any further by removing.
And another Reason is, Because as some are not of (...) to the being and
estate of a true Church, or (...), no more are any: And as some are necessary
(...) ^ell-being of a true Church and a true Christian, even (...) are all.

Assumpt. But that the Removal is necessary for the enjoyment of some of Gods
Ordinances, as for Preaching of the Word, will not be denied. Ergo.

ARGUMENT IV.
Pro^^^ To remove from a Church where the Discipline of Christ is wanting, to a
Church where it may be enjoyed, is necessary to them that are free.

1. If Discipline be an Ordinance of Christ, then the Removing mentioned in the
fourth Argument, is necessary.

The Reason of the Consequence is, Because the voluntary wanting any Ordinance
of Christ is sinful.

Besides the third Argument showed, Th^^ Removal for the enjoying of all Gods
Ordinances, is necessary to them that are free.

But Discipline is an Ordinance of Christ, Matthew.16.19. and 18.17. Ergo.

2. If Discipline be a part of Christ's Kingdom, and a necessary and effectual
means for preserving the Church, and the other Ordinances from corruption; then
the removing mentioned in the Proposition is necessary.

The Reason of the Consequence is, Because the voluntary wanting any part of
Christ's Kingdom, any necessary and effectual means to preserve the Church from
Corruption, is sinful, Luke 19.14,27. Psalm.2.3. Second Petition in the Lords
Prayer.

But Discipline is a part of Christ's Kingdom, a necessary and effectual means,
etc. Isa.9.6. 1 Cor.15. 24. Ergo

3. If removing from a Family where is no Government of good order for
suppressing of sin and wickedness, to another where is, be necessary for one
that is free; then the removi^^ (...) in the Proposition of this fourth
Argument (...).

The (...) of the Consequence is, Because there is one and the same Reason for
both.

But removing from such a Family is necessary for one that is free, Because a
voluntary staying in places of danger is a Tempting of God. Ergo.

Assumpt. But to remove from Old England to New, is to remove from a Church
where the Discipline of Christ is wanting, to a Church where it m^^^e
enjoyed.Ergo.

ARGUMENT. V
Propos. To remove from a place where the Ministers of God are unjustly
inhibited from the execution of their Punctions, to a place where they may more
freely execute the same, is necessary to them that are not otherwise tied, but
free.

1. God has sometimes commanded a removing in such a case as this, Mic.2.6,
10. Acts22.18.

2. The godly have practiced a removal in such a case, 2 Chronicles.11.14.16.
Acts13.46.

3. The Ministers gifts and talents should not be idle, but be employed for the
Churches profit, I Cor.12.7. 1 Pet.4.10.

4. The sin of inhibiting the Lords Ministers, is a forerunner of some sudden
and grievous Judgment, Isa. 30.10,13. when it is for no cause, or for trifles,
Isa.29.31.

Assumpt. But to remove from Old England to New, is to remove from a place
where the Ministers of God are unjustly inhibited, to a place where they may
more freely execute their Functions. Ergo.

ARGUMENT VI
Propos. To remove from a place where are fearful signs of Desolation, to a
place where one may have wellgrounded hope of preservation, and of Gods
protection, is necessary to them that are free.

1. Because it is the property of a wise man to foresee the plague, and to hide
himself, Prove. 22.3.

2. Because God has commanded to remove in such case, Mic.2.10. So Lot was
commanded to go out of Sodom, before the destruction thereof, Gen.19.

3. Because there are commended Examples of them that have done this; as of
Noah retiring into the Ark, Lot leaving Sodom, The godly leaving Jerusalem, a
little before the last destruction thereof by the Romans, and going forth to
Pella. See Brinsleyin True Watch, Part 3. page.76.118. Cartwright on Prove. 22.
3. and Junius on Revel.12.14.

4. Because Nature teaches to seek ones own preservation.

5. Because the sixth Commandment teaches the same, and makes voluntary
staying in places of danger to be a degree of Self-murder.

Assumpt. But to remove from Old England to New, is to remove from a place
where are signs of fearful Desolation, to a place where one may have well
grounded hope of Gods protection.

This Assumption is made good by the proof of two things: First, That in Old
England there are many signs of fearful Desolation. Now signs of Desolation are
such as these, and whether they be found in England, let it be considered.

1. Abundance of sin and sinners, Hos.4.1,2. Jer.5.9.

2. Impunity of sin and sinners.

3. General Security, 1(...)2,3. Matthew.24.38. Luke 17.28,(...)1.12.

4. The taking away of Gods dear and faithful Servants, Isa.57.1

5. Not profiting by former Judgments, Amos 4. 6, 7, etc.

6. Warnings by the Lords Ministers, Amos 3.7. Isai. 44.26.

7. Examples of Gods wrathful Judgments on others no worser sinners, Jer.7.12.
Rom.11. Mr. Brinsley shows at large, That the same sins which brought the
Captivity of 70 years on Judah, do as much abound in England as ever they did
in Judah, and that therefore we may certainly expect desolation for our sins,
unless course were taken speedily by general Repentance and Reformation to
pacific the Lords wrath. In 3d Part of True Watch, throughout the whole Book,
and more especially in page.493. and 503, etc.

The other thing to make good the Assumption, is, That in New England one may
have well-grounded hope of Gods protection, and for that there are these
Reasons:

1. The Promise of God to preserve Churches and Christians which purely observe
his Word and Ordinances, faithfully execute Justice and Judgment, etc. For
which, see these places; Isa.4.5,6. 2 Cor.15.2. Revel.3.8.9,10. Isa. 52.17. and
54.17.

2. The Example of Gods protecting and preserving such in former time, as 2 Chronicles. 17.3,4,9,10. As long as Israel kept and walked in Gods ways, no Enemy
was able to prevail against them, etc.

3. No instance can be given to the contrary, when God ever suffered any people
to perish that did purely observe his Ordinances, and execute Justice and
Judgment, until by their defection and sin they had forfeited their
happiness, and made themselves naked, and caused their Shield to depart from
them. Ergo,etc.

An Argument (...) Ministers only.
T o remove from such a place where the Pastors of the Congregation cannot
exercise the Lords Discipline by Ruling and Governing their own Flocks by
Censuring those that ought to be Censured, etc. to a place where they may do
it, is necessary for them that are free.

1. Because they are commanded to fulfill their Ministry and to perform all the
parts of their Pastoral Office, Coloss. 4.17. 2 Timothy 4.5. And this of
Administering the Keys of Discipline is one, Matthew. 16.19.

2. Because Christ has no where dispensed with them in any part thereof.

3. Because God has reproved them that have failed to do this, Rev.2.20.

4. Because Parents and Masters are bound to remove if they were in such
Commonwealths, where they might not be suffered to Rule and Govern their own
Children and Servants. The Reason whereof is, Because they are bound to
preserve their Children and Servants from being overthrown, if it be in their
power; but where such restraint is, they are in danger to be overthrown.

Now the Consequence of the Reason is, That then Ministers being free, are
bound to remove, if they be in such place where they may not govern their own
Flocks.

The Reason of which Consequence is, Because of Parents and Masters over their
Children and Servants, and of Pastors over their Congregations, there is par
Ratio, That if one be bound in case aforesaid to remove, the other are bound in
the like case to remove also.

These Arguments were thus presented to the Consideration of some godly
Ministers, and other Christians in Lancashire, at several Meetings for that
end. Nothing was satisfactorily said to take off the strength of the Reasons:
But many were thereby persuaded that his Call (...) New England was clear, yea
even his own people at Toxteth, who did so dearly love his Person, and highly
prize his Ministry, yet thought he was now Called of God to leave them. And
hereunto he was the more inclined, by some Letters of Mr. Cottons and Mr.
Hockers who were lately arrived in New England, and wrote (as then there was
cause) very encouragingly unto godly people to come after them. Mr. Hocker in
one of his Letters had this Expression; In a word (faith he) If I may speak my
own thoughts fully and truly, though there are very many places where (...) may
receive and expect more Earthly commodities, yet I do believe there is no place
this day upon the face of the Earth, where (...) gracious heart and a judicious
head may receive more spiritual good to himself, and do more temporal and
spiritual good to others.

Being then fully satisfied concerning the clearness of his Call for
New England, after many Prayers, and extraordinary seekings unto God, he
engaged upon the Transportation of himself and Family thither. His parting with
his People and other Friends in Lancashire, was like P^^'s taking his leave of
Ephesus, with much sorrow, many tears being shed by those who expected to see
his face no more in this world. This Journey was begun in April 1635. When he
traveled to Bristol in order to taking Ship there. In this Journey he was
forced (as sometime Brentius was) to change his outward Habit that he might
travel incognite, because Pursevants were designed to Apprehend him; but by
this means he escaped them. From Bristol he set Sail for New England May23.635.
The Lord, after manifold Trials of Faith and Patience, naught him in safety to
the desired Haven. It is seldom known, that a man designed in Gods Eternal
Counsel to special Service for his Name, does not at one time or other
experience Fminent Deliverances of Providance: So it was with (...) of the Lord
not once not twice. Sundry emi(...) from deadly Dangers did the Lord vouchsase
(...) Childhood, which he would speak of in his old Age: But the most
remarkable and memorable of all other, was that which happened to him on the
mighty Waters, where he that sits upon the Floods, and stilleth the raging of
the Sea when the Waves thereof roar, and whom the Winds obev, showed himself
wonderful in goodness: for when the Vessel was upon the Coasts of New England,
there (...) a fearful Storm (Which the Americans are wont to call an H^^acano)
by means whereof they were in no small danger; And had not the Lord strangely
turned the Wind in an instant, they had all perished upon the Rocks which were
just before, and within sight of them in the Ship. The Relation of this
observable Providence we shall here set down in Mr. Mathers own words, left
written by himself in his Journall from Lancashire to New England. Thus he
writes concerning it.

August 15. 1635. The Lord had not at done with us, nor had be let us see all
his Power and Goodness which be would have us take the knowledge of And
therefore about break of day, be sent a most terrible Storm of Rain and
Easterly Wind, whereby we were in as much danger as I think ever people were.
when we came to Land, we sound many mighty Trees rent in thoes in the midst of
the Bole, and others turned up by the Roots, by the fierceness thereof. we lost
in that Morning three Anchors and Cables, one having never been in the water
before; two were broken by the violence of the Storm, and the third out by the
Seamen in extremity of (...), to save the Ship and their and our Lives. And
when our Cables and Anchors were all lost, we had no outward means of
Deliverance but by hoysing Sail, if so be we might get to Sea, from amongst the
Islands and Rocks where we had Anchored: But the Lord let us ^ee that our sails
could not save us neither, no more then the Cables and Anchors; for by the
force of the Wind and Storm the Sails were rent asunder, and split in pieces as
if they had been but rotten Rags, so that of diverse of them there was scarce
lost as much as an band-breadth, that was not rent in pieces, or blown away
into the Sea: So that at that time all hope that we should be saved, in regard
of any outward appearance, was utterly taken away; and the rather, because we
seemed to drive with full force of wind directly upon a mighty Rock standing
out in sight above water, so that me did but continually wait when we should
bear and feel the doleful crashing of the Ship upon the Rock. In this extremity
and appearance of Death, as distress and distraction would suffer us, we cried
to the Lord, and he was pleased to have compassion upon us: for by his
overruling Providence, and his own immediate good hand, he guided the Ship
past the Rock, assuaged the violence of the Sea and of the Wind. It was a day
much to be remembered, because on that day the Lord granted us as wonderful a
deliverance, as I think over any people had felt. The Seamen confessed they
never knew the like. The Lord so imprint the memory of it (...) hearts, that we
may be the better for it, and be careful to please him, and to walk uprightly
before him as long as we live. And I hope we shall not forget the passages of
that morning until our dying day. In all this gri^vous Storm my fear was the
less, when I consedered the clearness of my Calling from God this way. And in
some measure (the Lords holy Name be blessed for it) be gave us hearts
contented and willing that he should do with us and ours what be pleased, and
what might be most for the glory of the Name, and in that we rested our selves.
But when news was brought us into the Gun-room that the danger was past, Oh how
our hearts did then relent, and melt within us! we burst out into tears of joy
amongst our selves in love unto our gracious God, and admiration of his
kindness, in granting to his poor Servants such an Extraordinary and Miraculous
Deliverance. His b holy Name be blessed for ever!

Thus far is Mr. Mathers Relation of this signal Providence, as left written
with his own hand. And this is the more to be taken notice of, because the
lives of several Choice Instruments of Gods Glory, were then saved: For not
only Mr. Mather himself, but two of his Sons, who are now faithful Ministers
of God, were in that Vessel; and so likewise was that Worthy Minister of Christ
Mr. Jonathan Mitchell, late Faithful and Famous pastor of the Church of
Cambridge in New England, he being then a Child of Eleven years of Age. Also
this Deliverance is the more remarkable, in that several Vessels were cast away
in that Storm. A Ship called the Angel Gabriel, which set out from Bristol with
the Vessel wherein Mr. Mather was, being then at Anchor at Pem^quid, was broke
in pieces; and the very same strange and sudden turn of Wind which saved the
Vessel wherein Mr. Mather was, ruined the other which came from England at the
same time. Also there was then a Ship, going between Piscataqua and the Bay,
which was ca^t away in this Storm, and all the people t^erein lost, except two
that were spared to report the News. And amongst others in that Vessel which
then perished, there was a precious Minister of the Gospel, viz. Mr. Avery, who
with his Wife and five Children all perished. This Minister (though it be a
Digr^ssion, yet the Story being so worthy of remembrance, let it here be
recorded) every moment expecting that the next Wave would be a Wave of Death,
lifted up his eyes to Heaven, saying, Lord, I cannot challenge a Promise of the
preservation of my life, but according to thy Covenant I challenge Heaven:
Which he had no sooner spoken, but a Wave immediately came and swept him away,
and so wasted him to Heaven indeed. And by the way let it further be noted,
That this which has been mentioned is the only Vessel which miscarried with
Passengers from Old England to New; so signally did the Lord in his Providence
own the Plantation of New England.

But (to digress no further) this Storm being allayed, the Lord brought them
safe to an Anchor before Boston, August 17. 1635 Mr. Mather abode with his
Family for some Months in Boston; and both he and his gracious Cons^ort joined
to the Church there.

Being thus by a mighty hand and an outstretched Arm brought into New England,
Motions from sundry Towns were soon presented to him, desiring that he would
employ the Talent which the Lord had enriched him with, for the work of the
Ministry amongst them. At the same time he was de^^red at Plymouth, Dorchester,
and R^xbury. Being in a great ^^rait in his own mind which of these
I^vit^tions to accept of, Considering that in difficult cases Counsel is an
Ordinance of God, (...) he is wont to discover his will, he therefore referred
(...) to the Advice of some judicious Friends; amongst (...) Mr. Cotton and Mr.
Hooker were chief, who met to (...) this weighty Affair; And their Advice was,
that he (...) of the Motion form Dorchester. Which being (...) accepted of by
him, he did (by the help of Child) set (...) great Work of Gathering a Church;
the Church who was first planted in that place being removed with the Reverend
Mr. Warham to Conecticut. There was an Essay toward Gathering a Church April
1. 1636. but by reason that the Messengers of Neighbour-Churches were not
satisfied, concerning some that were intended Members of that foundation, the
Work was deferred until August23 when a Church was Constituted in Dorchester
according to the order of the Gospel, by Confession and Profesion of Faith; and
Mr. Mather was chosen Teacherof that Church.

Being thus again settled in the Lord Work, he therein continued unto his dying
day; the Lord making him an Eminent Blessing not only to Dorchester, but to
all the Churches and plantations round about, for the space of near upon Four
and thirey years.

It is a true Observation which many from Luther have taken up, viz. That three
things make an able Divine.

1. (...) Study. Such an one must give himself to Reading and Meditation.

2. Ora^io; Prayer. A Man of God must be a man of prayer, even ever and anon
upon his knees before God: And be^e Orasse est bear Studnisse. Bradford the
Martyr and Cartwright the Consellor, studied kneeling.

3. Tentatio Temptation. As when Christ was to enter upon his public Ministry
he was grievously tempted,so it is wont to be with his Servants, and so it was
with this good man. The Lord having great Service for him to do, he must
undergo great Temptations, that he might be the better fitted for that where
unto he was called.

Wherefore before, and for some years after his accepting Office Relation in
Dorchester, he was in much Spiritual distress by reason of uncertainties
concerning his own Eternal estate. He did (as in wisdom he was bound to) keep
these troubles secret from men, only he revealed the distress of his Soul to
that great Divine Mr. Norton, then Teacher to the Church in (...) unto whom
(under Christ) God gave the tongue of the Learned to speak a word in season,
whereby his Soul was Comforted; the Lord giving him to see that he was (...) to
Heaven in the same way that David, Asaph, Heman (...) had gone before him.

During the time of his Pilgrimage in New England he under went not so many
Changes, as before that he had done; (...) he never removed his Habitation out
of Dorchester, alb^it (...) had once serious thoughts that way, by reason that
his (...) people in Toxteth, after that the Hierarchy was deposed in England
sent to him, desiring his return to them: But Dorchester was in no wise willing
to forgo their interest in him, therefore he left them not. Nevertheless, he
die in New England, (as in a Wilderness might be expected) experience many
trials of his Faith and Patience. That which of out(...) Afflictions did most
agrieve him, was the Death of his dear Wife, who had been for so many years the
greatest outward Comfort and Blessing which he did enjoy: Which Affliction was
the more grievous, in that the bring a Woman of singular Prudence for the
Management of Affairs, had taken off from her Husband all Secular Cares, so
that he wholly devoted himself to his Study, and to Sacred Employments. After
he had continued in the state of Widowhood a year and half, he again changed
his Condition, and was Married to the pious widow of that deservedly Famous Man
of God Mr. John Cotton; and her did God make a Blessing and a Comfort to him
during the remainder of his days.

Old Age now being come upon him, he was sensible of the infirmities thereof,
being in his latter years something thies Hearing: Also (as it was with great
Zanchy) the sight in one of his Eyes failed, seven years before his Death. Yet
God gave him Health of Body and Vigor of Spirit in a wonderful measure, so as
that in fifty years together, he was not by sickness detained so much as one
Lord's Day from public Labors. Which continued Health (as to Natural causes)
proceeded partly form his strong Constitution of Body, and partly from his
accustoming himself to a plain and wholesome Diet. Bona Dieta est potior qxov^
Hippocrate. He never made use of any physician, nor was he ever in all his life
sick of any acute Disease. Only the two last years of his Life he was sorely
afficted with that Disease which some have called Flagellum (...), viz. The
Stone, which at last brought him to an end of all his Labors and Sorrows.

Concerning the Time and Manner of his Sickness and Death, thus it was. There
being some Differences in Boston, Counsel from Neighbour-Churches was by some
desired, to direct them in the lord what should be done: Accordingly the
Churches sent their Messengers; and Dorchester Church, amongst others, sent Mr.
Mather their aged Teacher, who Assembled in Boston, April 13. 1669. He was,
because of his Age, Gravity, Grace and Wisdom wherewith the Lord had endowed
and adorned him, chosen the Moderator in that Reverend Assembly. For diverse
days after his being thus in Consultation, he enjoyed his Health as formerly,
or rather better then for some time of late. But as Luther when Assembled in a
Synod was surprised with a violent Fit of the Stone, whence he was forced to
return home, his Friends having little hopes of his life; so it was with this
holy man. For April 16. 1669. he was in the night, being then in his sons house
in Boston, taken exceeding ill through a total stoppage of his Urine. The next
morning he therefore returned home to Dorchester. Great was the favor of God
toward him, that he should be found about such a blessed work as then he was
engaged in, for the Lord found him sincerely and earnestly endeavoring to be a
peacemaker. His being thus taken when at a Synod, brings to mind that of the
German Phoenix;

Viximus in Synodis, and jam mori^^ur in ill is.

Now as usually Providence so orders, that they who have been speaking all
their lives long, shall not say much when they come to die: Blessed Hooker in
his last Sickness, when Friends would have had him answered to some Enquiries
which might have made for their Edification after he was gone, he referred them
wholly to the things which he had taught them in his health, because then he
had enough to do to grapple with his own bodily weakness, etc. Neither did this
good man speak much in his last Sickness either to Friends or to his Children.
Only his Son who is now Teacher of a Church in Boston, coming to visit his
Father, and perceiving the Symptoms of Death to be upon him, said unto him,
Sir, if there be any special thing which you would recommend unto me to do, in
case the Lord should spare me upon the Earth, after you are in Heaven, I would
entreat you to express it. At the which, his Father making a little pause, and
lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, replied, A special thing which I
would commend to you, is, Care concerning the Rising Generation in this
Country, that they be brought under the Government of Christ in his Church; and
that when grown up and qualified, they have Baptism for their Children. I must
confess I have been defective as to practice, yet I have publicly declared my
judgment, and manifested my desires to practice that which I think ought to be
attended; but the Dissenting of some in our Church discouraged me. I have
thought that persons might have Right to Baptism, and yet not to the Lords
Supper; and I see no cause to alter my judgment as to that particular. And I
still think that persons qualified according to the Fifth Proposition of the
late Synod-Book, have Right to Baptism for their Children.

His bodily Pains continued upon him until April 22. when in the Morning his
Son aforementioned, coming to visit him, asked his Father if he knew him; to
whom he Replied that he did, but was not able to speak any more to him:
Whereupon his Son saying, Now you will speedily be in the joy of your Lord; His
Father lifted up his hands, but could not speak. Not long after his Son again
spoke to him, saying, You will quickly see Jesus Christ, and that will make
amonds for all your pains and sorrows: At which words his Father again lifted
up his hands; but after that he took notice of no person or thing, but
continuing speechless until about 10 h. P. M. he quietly breathed forth his
last. Thus did that Light that had been shining in the Church above Fifty
years, Expire.

As some of the Lords precious ones have had a real apprehension and prae
sense of their approaching Dissolution imprinted on their Spirits; so it is
noted of Ambrose and of Gorgonia of old: and of Gesner, Melancthon, and ^anford
among Modern Divines: Thus it was with this holy man some time before his
departure. The last Text which be taught from, and insisted long thereon, was
that 2 Timothy 4.6,7,8. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand; I have fought a good sight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge will give me at that day; and
not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. And the
portion of Scripture which before that he had insisted upon, was Job 14. 14.
All the days of my appointed time, will I wait till my change come. The Lord
found his blessed Servant so doing. Also the last private Conference-Meeting
which he was at in Dorchester, he had prepared to speak from those words, 2
Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens: But bodily pains prevented him from speaking what was in his heart
to have expressed; the Lord intending that he should no more speak of, but see
that place which he had so much and so often thought on, and long prayed and
longed to enjoy.

He was, especially in his last Sickness, a Pattern of Patience. For although
extremity of pain, without any acute Disease, was that which brought him to his
Grave, yet he did never so much as once cry out from first to last; and it was
very rare to hear him so much as groan (but never grumble) under his dolorous
Griefs. In this Sickness, whereof he died, he was much delighted in reading
Doctor Goodwins Discourse about Patience, in which Book he read till the very
day of his Death. Once in his Sickness, his Son saying to him, that inasmuch as
several small Stones were come from him in his Urine, now possible he might
have some ease; his Father answered with an affecting earnestness of
expression, As for that matter, the Will of the Lord be done. Such was his
grace and patience. And at the same time his Son saying to him, God has showed
his great faithfulness unto you, having upheld you now for the space of more
then Fifty years in his Service, and employed you therein without ceasing,
which can be said of very few men upon the face of the whole Earth. His Father
replied You say true; I must acknowledge the mercy of God has been great
toward me all my days: but I must also acknowledge, that I have had many
failings, and the thought of them abaseth me, and works patience in me. When
any one asked him how he did; his usual Answer was, Far from well, yet far
better then my iniquities deserve. Thus did he (like old Austin who died
reading the Penitential Psalms) keep up a spirit of Repentance to the last.

As he was a man faithful and fearing God above many, so the Lord showed great
faithfulness unto him, both in making him serviceable unto the last, yea and
continuing the vigor of his Spirit, and power of his Ministry. Few men, though
young, are known to Preach with such vigor as he did (...) ten days before
his death. Also the Lord was faithful and gracious to him, in respect of his
Children. It was a special token of Divine favor unto some of the Ancients,
that their Sons after them succeeded in the Ministry; so was it with the
Fathers of Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, Basil, Hilary, etc. And the Lord
cheered the heart of this his Servant in his old Age, by giving him to see most
of his Sons employed in the Ministry many years before their precious Father's
decease. He left four Sons in that Work; one of whom, viz. Mr. Eleazar Mather,
late Pastor of the Church at Northampton in New England, went to his rest about
three Months after his Father, with him to sound forth the praises of God
amongst the Spirits of just men made perfect. The other three are yet
surviving, viz. Mr. Samuel Mather, Teacher of a Church in Dublin; Mr. Nathaniel
Mather, late Minister of Barnstable in Devon, and since in Rotterdam in
Holland; and Increase Mather of Boston in New England.

Concerning his Judgment. Touching matters of Fait^ and Doctrine, his large
Catechi^m which contains the Sum of the Body of Divinity, does sufficiently
manifest his Orthodoxness to the World. Indeed he was a strenuous opposer of
the Errors of the Times. Touching Worship and Disc^pline, he was for the true
Congregational-Way, in opposition to both the Extremes of Brownism on the one
hand, and Presbyterianism on the other hand. As for Brownism, he was of the
same apprehension with Mr. Dod and Mr. Cotton, That God is not wont to make
choice of men infamous for gro^s Vices^ (as that Brown and Barrow were) to be
the Discoverers of momentous Truths. And to manifest that he was far from the
Error of that Way, he has left a judicious Manuscript, proving that although
Power, i.e. Privilege and Liberty does belong to the Fraternity, yet that Rule
is proper to the Presbytery of the Church. As for Presbyterianism, his Printed
Books in Answer to Mr. Herle and Mr. Rutherford, show how far he was distant
from that Persuasion. Also some years before his Death, he prepared for the
Press an Elaborate Discourse, Enti^uled, A Plea for the Churches of
New England; divided into Two Parts: The former being an Answer to Mr.
Rathbands Narration of Church-Courses in New England; The other containing
Positive Grounds from Scripture and Reason, for the Justification of the Way of
the Churches in New England. Not many weeks before his death a Friend
acquainting him, that some reported that he had decl^red himself to be a
Presbyterian; He replied, You tell me a strange thing: I ha^^ written Books in
Defense of the Congregationall-Way, as differing from the Presbyterian, and
does any one say I declared my self for that Persuasion? It is nothing so. At
the same time I^ being said to him, that he had the principal hand in the
Platform of Discipline, and had he not changed his judgment from that? His
Answer was, No, not in any one particular that I know of.

His way of preaching was plain, aiming to shoot his Arrows not over his
peoples heads, but into their Hearts and Consciences. Whence he studiously
avoided obscure phrases, Exotic words, or an unnecessary citation of Latin
Sentences, which some men addict themselves to the use of. Mr. Dod was wont to
say, That so much Latin was so much flesh in a Sermon: So did this humble man
look upon the affectation of such things in a Popular Auditory to savor of
Carnal wisdom. The Lord gave him an excellent faculty in making abstruse
things plain, that in handling the deepest Mysteries he would accommodate
himself to Vulgar Capacities, that even the meanest might learn something. He
knew how to express (...) He would often use that Saying, Artis est celare
Artem. And much approved that of Austin; If (said he) I preach Learnedly, then
only the Learned and not the Unlearned can understand and profit by me; but if
I preach plainly, then Learned and Unlearned both can understand, so I may
profit all. He was Mighty in the Scriptures: Whence Mr. Hooker would say of
him, My Brother Mather is a mighty man. Also his usual way of Delivery was
very Powerful, Awakening, and Zealous; especially in his younger years, there
being few men of so great strength of body as he, which together with his
natural fervor of Spirit, being sanctified, made his Ministry the more
powerful. And the Lord went forth with his Labors to the Conversion of many,
both in England and in New England, Yet though his way of Preaching was plain
and zealous, it was moreover Substantial and very Judicious, Even in his
beginning times, Mr. Gillebrand (a famous Minister in Lancashire; and the more
famous, for that though he did exceedingly Stammer in his ordinary discourse,
he would pray and preach as fluently as any man) once having heard him Preach,
asked what his Name might be? And answer being made that his Name was Mather;
Nay (said Mr. Gillebrand) call him Matter, for believe it this man has
Substance in him. Yea, such was his Solidity of Judgment, that some who were
his Opposites, yet did therefore greatly respect and honor him. Doctor Parr
(then Bishop in the Isle of Man) having heard Mr. Mather was Silenced, lamented
it, saying, If Mather be Silenced I am sorry for it, for he was a solid man,
and the Church of God has then a great loss.

Because he was esteemed eminently Judicious, therefore amongst the Reverend
Elders in New England, he was much improved in Managing the Controversies then
under Debate about Church Government. The Discourse about the ChurchCovenant,
and the Answer to the XXXII. Questions, both written Anno 1639. although they
pass under the Name of the Elders of New England, Mr. Mather was the sole
Author of, as Mr. Cotton in his Answer to Baily, page.70. and Answer to
Williams, page.63. and Mr. Nathaniel Mather in his Epistle to the XXI. Questions
concerning Church Members and their Children, have truly related. And when
there was a Synod called to Convene at Cambridge, Anno 1647. that Reverend
Assembly desired three Elders to draw up A Model of Church Government against
the next Session, viz. Mr. Cotton, Mr. Mather, and Mr. Partrich. The Printed
Platform of Discipline is for the substance of it the same with that which was
Composed by Mr. Mather. It might be said of him, as was said of that blessed
Martyr, that he was sparing in his Diet, sparing in his Speech, most sparing of
all of his Time. He was very diligent both as to duties of general and
particular Calling, which are indeed the two Pillars upon which Religion
stands. As to his general Calling; He was much in Prayer, especially in his
Study, where he oft-times spent whole days with God in suing for a Blessing
upon himself and Children, and upon the people to whom he was related, and upon
the whole Country where he lived. The Requests which upon such occasions he put
up to God in Jesus Christ, and also how his heart was moved to believe that God
heard him, he left (many of them) in writing amongst his private Papers, I
suppose that so himself might have recourse unto those Experiences in a time of
darkness and Temptation; also that his Sons after him might see by their
Fathers Example, what it is to walk before God. Now what a loss is it to the
world when such a Righteous man is taken away! Well might Philo and Jerome weep
bitterly, when they heard of the death of any such men, because it portended
evil to the places where they had lived, and served God. As he was much in
Prayer, so he was very frequent in Hearing the Word. It was his manner to
attend several Lectures in Neighbour-Congregations, until his Disease made him
unable to ride; yea and usually even to his old Age (as did Mr. Hildersham) he
took Notes from those whom he heard, professing that he found profit in it.

As to his particular Calling, he was even from his youth a hard Student. Yea
his mind was so intent upon his Work and Studies, that the very morning before
he died, he importuned those Friends that watched with him to help him into his
Study: They urging that he was not able to go so far, he desired them to help
him and try; which they did: but ere he was come to the door of his
Lodging-room, I see (faith he) I am not able, yet I have not been in my Study
several days, and is it not a lamentable thing that I should lose so much
time? After his entrance upon the Ministry, he was not only in England (as
has been said) but in New England abundant in Labors: for except when he had
an Assistant with him (which was seldom) he Preached twice every Lord's Day;
and a Lecture once a fortnight, besides many occasional Sermons both in
Public and in Private. Also he was much exercised in answering many practical
Cases of Conscience, and in Polemical, especially Disciplinary Discourses. In
his Public Ministry in Dorchester he went over The Book of Genesis to Chap.
38. Psalm 16. The whole Book of the Prophet Zechariah, Matthews Gospel, to
Chap. 15. 1 Epist. to These. Chap. 5. And the whole Second Epistle of Peter;
his Notes whereon he reviewed, and Transcribed for the Press, not many years
before his decease.

Notwithstanding those rare Gifts and Graces where (...) Lord had adorned him,
he was exceeding low and little in his own eyes. Some have thought that his
greatest errous was, that he did not (...) his Officer, as he sight and
sometimes should have done. If a man must erie, it is good erring on that hand.
Honable enough, and good enough, was the frequent Saying of a great Divine. And
another observes, That every man has just as much and no more true worth in
him, as he has Humility. Austire being asked which was the most excellent
grace, answered, Humility; and which was the next, answered, Humility, and
which was the third, replied again, Humility. That indeed is Comprehensively
All. being of great price in the sight of God: And if so, Mr. Mather was a man
of much Real Worth.

It has been the manner of some, in writing Lives to insert the Wilis of those
whose Lives and Death they have described. The last Will and Testament of him,
whose Life and Death has thus been related, breathing forth a most humble,
holy, and gracious Spirit, we shall here subjoyn the Preface and Conclusion of
it. It was written with his own hand October. 16. 1661. And begins as
follows.

I Richard Mather, considering the certainty of death, and the uncertainty of
the time thereof, and withal knowing it to be the will of God that a man
should set his House in order before he depart this life, Do make this my last
Will and Testament in mazner following. First of all, I acknowledge the rich
and wonderful Grace and Mercy of Almighty God, whose hands have made me and
fashioned me, and who took me out of my Mothers Womb: that having made me a
Man, who might have made me a Beast or other Creature; He has also by his good
Providence preserved the being and comfort of my life all the days of my
Pilgrimage until now, even for the space of these Sixty five years: During all
which time, he has not suffered me to wam either food or raiment, or the
service of any creature, which has been requisite for my comfortable
subsisting in this World; which I acknowledge to be the bounteous gift of Him
who is Lord of all Creatures, and the High Possessor of Heaven and Earth. Next
of all, and more especially I am bound to give Thanks and Praise to Him whilst
I have any being, that I being a Child of Wrath by Nature as well as others,
and being born in a place of much Profaneness and Popery, he has of his
abundant grace vouchsafed to draw me out of that woeful estate of Sin and
Ignorance wherein I lay, and to make himself and his Christ known unto me by
the Gospel, of which grace I was most unworthy; and in his great patience and
mercy to bear with my manifold and great offenses; both before and since the
time of his gracious Calling of me, though for my unworthy walking in many
particulars, I might justly have been for ever rejected of him. Yea and such
has been his rich grace, that he has vouchsafed to put me an unworthy
creature into the Ministry of the Gospel of his Son, that I should not only
know and profess the same (which is unspeakable mercy) but be also a Preacher
of it unto others. In which Employment if any thing has been done which has
been pleasing unto him, or any way beneficial to any Child of his, it has
not been I that have done the same, but the grace of God which was with me. For
I must needs acknowledge to the praise of his Patience and Grace, That in my
poor Ministration for the space of these Forty two years and upwards, I have
been much defective in Wisdom and Watchfulness over the peoples Souls, in
Purity, in Faithfulness, in Uprightness, Ne^ness, Humility and Zeal: And
because of these, and many other my defects and offenses against the Lord, I
stand in much need this day of mercy and forgiveness through his Christ, and
have no cause to look for any acceptance either in this or in another World,
for any Righteousness of my own, either as touching my Ministry or otherwise,
but it disclaiming all though: of that kind, my only must and hope is to be
accepted of him, and (when this life shall end) to be saved in his Heavenly
Kingdom merely by his Free Grace, and the Obedience and precious Posistion and
Intercession of his dear Son. And concerning Death, as I do believe it is
appointed for all men (...) to die; so, because I see a great deal of
unprofitableness in my own life, and because God has also let me see such
vanity and emptiness even in the best of those Comforts which this life can
afford, that I think I may t^^ucly say, That I have seen an end of all
perfection: Therefore if it were the will of God, I should be glad to be
removed hence, where the best that is to be had does he yield so little
satisfaction to my Soul, and to be brought into his presence in glory, that
there I might find (fore there I know it is to be had) that satisfying and
All-s^^fficient contentment in him, which under the Sun is not it to be
enjoyed. In the mean time I desire to day the Lords leisure. But thou, O Lord,
how long! Now concerning my Outward Estate, since the Earth is the Lords as and
the fullness thereof, the habitable World, and all that is (...) therein; to him
therefore belongs the praise of (...) the I possess in this kind: And for the
portion (...) for which he has given unto me, it is my mind (...) if so it
please his Highness, that after my desire same may be disposed of as follows,
etc. Having thus gracio^^^y expressed himself, he proceeds to the (...)
Temporal Estate; which being of private Concer^ment, we shall not here trouble
the World therewith. But after the disposal of that, he conc^udeth with a most
^olemn Charge to his Children; with the rehear^^ll where^f we shall finish. It
is in words following.

C^^cerning my Son Timothy, with ^ll the rest of my Belo^ed Sons, as I hope God
has already made them partakers, at least sundry of them, of his saving grace
in Christ, for which I and they have cause to be endlesly thankful; so I think
it not a^^iss, for the further a^ce of their spirit^^l good, to lay upon them
this serious and solmn charge of a Dying Father* That none of them pres^me
after my decease to walk in any way of sin and wickedness in one kind or
another, or in a careless neglect of God, and the things of God, and of then
own Sal^^tion by Christ: for if they shall so do (which God ^orbid) Then and in
such case I hereby testify unto them, That their Father which begat them, and
their Mother which bare them, with all the Prayers which they have made, and
Tears which they have shed for them, their Example, their Admonitions and
Exhortations which they have administered to them, together with this ^y last
Will and Solemn Charge; All these will rise up against them as so many
Testimonies for their Condemnation at the last day. But I have better hopes of
them; And do hereby declare unto them, That if they shall seriously repent of
their sins, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and by his grace walk in all the ways
of God, and as becomes the Gospel of Christ; a^ this will be to the Honor and
glory of Him that made them, so it will reduced to their own unspeakable
comfort and benefit in this and in enether World: and their Father that now
speaks (...) them, with their dear Mother new with God, shall exceedingly
rejoice in the day of Christ, when we shall receive our Children unto those
Everlasting Habitations; and shall see not our selves alone, but those also
that have proceeded and came forth out of our own bewels, to have their part and
portion in that Eternal Glory. In desire and hope that it may be so, I (...)
all to the Lord of Heaven's Blessing: And let the Blessing of God to Jesus
Christ, be poured out and remain upon them all for ever owe. Amen.

FINIS.

