Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT Held at BOSTON the 21 st.
of February, 1675. And Printed by their Order, Edward Rawson, Secr't.
Majors Liberty to Pursue the Enemy.
WHereas the Law tit. Military, Sect. 11. enjoins that no Major of any Regiment
shall March with his Regiment out of the County wherein he has Command, Majors
of Counties at liberty to pursue the Enemy
nor cause any part thereof so to do without Order from the General Court,
Council or Major General, except it be in pursuit of the Enemy upon a Rout;

This Court does Order; That during these Wars, and till this Court take
further Order, it shall be in the liberty of the Major of each County or any
Inferior Commission Officer who has command of any Company or Party of men to
go out of their own proper County for Engaging, Pursuing or Destroying the
Enemy; so as they act not contrary to particular Order from Superior Officers
or Authority.

Troopers Exempted from Impresse.
WHereas by a late Order, the Troopers were made liable to be Impressed by Foot
Soldiers, at such time as it was supposed there would be little use of them
against the Indians, Troopers exempted from impress
who are found by experience to be very serviceable and necessary, and have
been employed in a full proportion to the Foot;

It is hereby Ordered that that part of the Order concerning Troopers be
Repealed.

Volunteers to be under the Martial Laws.
WHereas there are Complaints, that such Persons who list themselves Volunteers
in the Countries Service, do esteem themselves from under that command which is
necessary for the security of the Country; volunteers under the Martial Law.


It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That all such Persons so listing
themselves shall be subject to all such Martial Laws as are or may be provided
for the well ordering of the Forces of this Jurisdiction.

Guards and Garrisons.
WHereas there is observed a great neglect of the Execution of the Law lately
made, tit. Guards and Garrison Soldiers:

It is Ordered by this Court; That the said Law be carefully (by the Committee
of Militia, Addition to the Law tit. Guards and Garrisons
who are hereby Empowered in that respect, or chief Officer in each Town) put in
Execution, and in particular, that daily care be taken, that a considerable
part of the Soldiers by turns, in the several parts of the Respective Towns,
be improved in Scouting and Warding to prevent the Sculking and Lurking of the
Enemy about the said Towns, and to give timely notice of approaching Danger:
And also that the Brush in Highways and other places (judged necessary) be
cut up; Brush to be cut up and cleared
And that such Persons, Youths, etc. as are not in the Roll of the Traind Bands
(except such as are in public place exempted by Law) be under Obligation to
attend Command for that service, on penalty of five shillings per day for
neglect.

No Guns to be discharged at breaking up the Watch on penalty of 10 shill.
And it is further Ordered; That the breaking up of the Watch be not till the
rising of the Sun, at what time the Scouts are to set forth; and that no Gun
shall be then fired on penalty of ten shillings for each offense, these fines
to be levied by the Clerk of the Band by Warrant from the Committee of Militia
or chief Officer, who if they shall be convicted of neglect of their duty
concerning any of the Premises, they or he shall be fined ten pounds to the
Public Treasury.

UPon Consideration of many Sculking Indians about our Plantations, doing much
mischief and damage; And that a probable way of their Surprizal is by Scouting
in small Parties; for Encouragement thereof;

This Court does Order; That every Person or Persons, that shall surprise,
slay, three pounds per head allowed to all taking Indians Prisoners slaying them
or bring in Prisoner any such Indian on the south side of Pascataqua River, he
or they shall be allowed three Pounds per head, or the Prisoners so taken,
making it appear to the Committee of Militia of that Town to which they are
brought.

FINIS.

