Several Laws and Orders made at the GENERAL COURT, Holden at Boston the 15th.
of May 1672. And Printed by their Order. Edward Rawson Secr.
JURIES VERDICT
T His Court being desirous to prevent all Dissatisfaction and Inconveniences
that may arise in the Trial of Civil Cases in Inferior Courts, sometimes
happening by reason of Disagreement between the Bench and Jury formerly allowed
by Law;

Do Order and Enact; That henceforth in all County Courts, after that the Bench
have used all reasonable endeavors for clearing the case to the Jury, Juryes
Verdict to be Read and not refused.
by declaring the Law, and comparing the matter of Fact and Damage proved
therewith, the Verdict of the Jury finally given, shall be accepted, and
Judgment accordingly Entered: And in like manner shall the proceeding be in the
Court of Assistants, unless upon apparent corruption or error in the Jury
giving in their Verdict contrary to Law or Evidence, the party cast shall in
open Court Attaint the Jury, and give sufficient Bond and Sureties within
twelve hours after the Verdict is accepted, to prosecute the said Jury at the
next Court of Assistants, in an Action of Attaint, Plaintiff and Defendants
liberty to Attaint the jury in Case.
in which Case Execution shall be respited, and the Clerk of that Court shall
Summon a Jury of twenty four Able and Discreet men chosen as the Law Directs,
to attend the service of the Court where the said Action of Attaint shall be
tried in the first place, and if on trial of the case, there shall be found
manifest Error or Mistake, the party Complaining shall be Repayed his full
damage from the other party to the Original Suit and if by the said Jury of
twenty four, there be found Bribery, Conspiracy, or other Corruption, in the
Jury attainted, they shall be punished by Fine or Imprisonment, Juryes
attainted how Tried.
proportionable to the degree of (...) Offense; And if otherwise, the twenty
four Jurors shall acquit the former Jurors accused, they shall be allowed
double Costs from the Party accusing, and their Verdict and the Judgment of
the former (...) stand good, and execution shall be Issued forth accordingly;
And that Clause in the Law, allowing the Magistrates not to Concur with, or
refuse the Verdict of the Jury is hereby Repealed.

SURETIES.
F Or Explanation of, and Addition to the Law tit. Sureties and goods Attached,
where it is provided that Sureties as well as Principalls shall be Responsible
for one month to pay the Debt, unless he or they Surrender the Principal into
the hands of the Marshall or Deputy, but no way provided in the said Law how
the Suretyes may be compelled thereunto;

It is therefore Ordered, Where Bonds are forfeited the Case to proceed.
and hereby Declared, That in such Case the Party and Sureties being called and
the Bond declared forfeited upon nonappearance, the Case shall proceed to
hearing, and Judgment at the same Court, as in case of the Defendants
nonappearance upon Attachment of Goods: Execution to Issue out agianst Suretyes
And if the Case be found for the Plaintiff, that Judgment be granted against
him and his Suretyes, and Execution be Issued out accordingly, and to be in
force against the Sureties as well as the Principal, for one month after
Judgment given, as the said Law Intends.

No strong Liquor to Workmen.
W Hereas there have been sundry and frequent complaints preferred to this
Court, of Oppression by Excessive wages of Workmen and Laborers, which not
withstanding the endeavors of this Court to redress; such oppressions continue
and further increase, by a dangerous Imposition of such persons on those they
work and labor for, by demanding an allowance of Liquors or wine every day
over and above their wages, without which it is found by too sad experience
many refuse to work; Now forasmuch as such a practice of drinking liquors and
wine, tends much to the rooting young persons in an evil practice, Law
prohibiting Wine or strong Liquors to work men.
and by degrees to trayn them up to an habit of excess;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and by the Authority thereof, and be it
hereby Enacted; That if any person or persons after the publication hereof,
shall give wine or strong liquors to any workmen or boys that work with them,
except in cases of necessity, shall pay twenty shillings for every such Offense.

MILITARY.
T His Court taking into their serious Consideration the weight and necessity
that lies in them, to see that all Soldiers, (especially at such a season as
this) should be fitted with Arms, and well skilled to use them; And because
the welfare of each Military Troop and foot Company, both in their being
provided with, and knowledge of their use of Arms, lies very much in the
Clerk of each Companyes careful and faithful observation and execution of his
Office, in the seasonable and due levying of such Fines as are by Law due for
defects, the neglect whereof too sad experience shows, has done very great
hurt in many Companyes, for preventing such Inconveniences for the Future;

This Court does Order, Soldiers fines to be gathered by the Clerk of Troops
or Foot. Companies with in a month or to be leavied on themselves
That what Fines shall be due according to Law from any Soldier for defect, in
either Arms or Traynings, which the Clerk or Clerks of the said Troop or
Company shall not leavie and gather into his hands, within one Month after the
Training day on which the said defect is made, it shall be in the power of the
Captain or chief Officer of that Troop or Foot Company to send the Marshal or
Constable with an Execution, and leavie the said Fines upon the Estate of any
such Clerk or Clerks so defective, unless the said Clerk can make it appear to
the Captain, that he or they have been hindered either by sickness or the
absence of the person delinquent being out of Town.

And it is further Ordered; That the Clerk or Clerks of every Military Troop or
Company shall once in six Months surender a particular account to the Captain
or chief Officer, of all such fines as are leavied by the said Clerk, that the
same may be disposed of for the good of the Company according to Law.

T His Court considering our own state as to Fortification, how that our Forts
and Artillery belonging to the Country, both in this Town of Boston,
Charlstown, Salem and Marble head do need much to repair them, that they may be
fit for service if God should call thereunto;

Do therefore Order; Further allowance to Boston Charlstown, Salem and Marble
head for Fortification
That each of the Towns above mentioned shall be allowed what they are Rated to
the Country-Rate for this next year, for, and toward the finishing and
repairing the several Forts there, and that each of their Rates be committed
into the hands of the Committee of Militia in each of the aforesaid Towns, by
them speedily to be improved for the use abovesaid.

W Hereas diverse Soldiers, who by Law are commanded to attend Military
Exercise upon Training days in the Towns where they live, not having any
visible Estate whereon the Clerk of of the Company unto which they do belong
can leavie the fine due by Law, when they are delinquent either in Arms or
Trainings, do often neglect the duty in both keeping Arms and Trainings, and do
thereupon carry it boldly and provoakingly to the Clerk and other officers; For
prevention whereof:

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That it shall be in the
power of the Commission Officers of each Company, or such of them as are
present at the next Training day after such offense is committed, Soldiers
neglect of Arms and training with their Contempt of Officers how punished
to punish such person offending as abovesaid, who has not satisfied the Clerk
according to Law, by any Military punishment according to the aggravation of
the Crime, by either Riding the Wooden Horse, or by Bilboes,, or lying Neck and
Heels, or acknowledgement at the Head of the Company, or any punishment
according to Military Discipline, at the Discretion of the Commission Officer
or Officers present.

And in case any such Delinquent shall absent himself from Training two days
together, that then it shall be in the power of the chief Officers, and they
are hereby enjoined by Warrant directed to the Constable of that Town, to
convent such Offender before him, and to proceed with him as in this Order is
provided, and all Constables are hereby Ordered to attend their duty herein.

Book-Debts.
W Hereas by the Law made May 1669. respecting Book-debts; It is Declared, that
all Book-Debts shall be cleared within three years, as is therein expressed,
after which time no Book-Debt shall be pleadable in any Court: Upon a general
complaint, that the said Law will prove to the real detriment of very many of
our I nhabitants, and the utter undoing of some if a greater number of year
(...) not allowed to shut up Accounts;

It is therefore Ordered, Three years further added relating to Book-debts
and is hereby Declared; That there shall be three years more added for the
advantage of Debtors and Creditors to issue their Accounts, that all grounds of
complaint in this kind may be removed.

BURGLARY.
W Hereas in the Law tit. Burglary, it is expressed if any person shall commit
Burglary by breaking open any Dwelling House;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Addition to the Law
tit. Burglary
as an Addition to that Law; That if any person shall break up any Warehouse,
Shop, Mill, Malt house, Barn or Out-house, or any Vessel on any Shore, or in
any Cove, Creek, or upon the Water, such person so offending, shall be punished
as the Law provides in case of breaking up Dwelling-houses.

HIDES.
W Hereas the Law tit. Leather in the latter end of the first Sect. does
restrain all persons except Tanners to Bargain for, Hides to be purchased by any
or buy any Hides of Bull, Steer, Ox Cow, etc. being inconvenient in regard
they are many times given in Barter for Shoos, etc.

The said Clause in that Law, by the Authority of this Court is hereby Repealed.

W Hereas the Laws already made to prevent the Transportation of the Hides of
the growth of this Colony, do not reach the End, for want of a full and due
Execution;

This Court does therefore Authorize and appoint the Freemen of every Seaport
Town within this Jurisdiction, to Chose a meet and sufficient person from
amongst themselves yearly, to whom all persons shall repair who intend the
transporting of any Raw or Ruff Hides, and shall make proof whence such Hides
so to be transported came, and that they are not of the growth of, nor killed
in this Colony, and shall take a note from the person so Authorized of the
number of Hides that he intends to transport, paying one penny to the abovesaid
person for every such Hide.

And it is hereby Ordered, Hides of the Countries growth not to be transported
out of the Jurisdiction on penalty etc.
That no person shall ship or transport any Hides whatsoever out of this
Jurisdiction, without license from the person so Authorized, upon penalty of
loosing of such Hides so shipped: nor shall any Master, Purser or any other
person belonging to any Ship or Vessel within this Colony, receive on Board any
Raw or Ruff Hides without a Note or Ticket from the person so appointed first
appearing, upon the penalty of paying ten shillings for every Hide so shipped.
And such person Authorized as abovesaid, shall have power by himself or whom he
shall appoint, to make search in any Ship or Cask, wherein they suspect any
Hides to be Laden contrary to this Order, and shall make seizure thereof, and
the penalties and forfeitures abovementioned shall be the one third to the
seizer, one third to the Country, and one third to the Town from whence such
Hides are shipped:

And it is further Ordered, that the persons chosen as abovesaid, shall be
sworn to a faithful discharge of their duty herein.

INDIANS PORK.
W Hereas the Indians that border upon the English Towns within this
Jurisdiction, do frequently sell Pork to the English, and there is ground to
suspect that some of the Indians do steal and sell the English men's Swine, For
prevention whereof;

This Court does Order and Enact, That all English men do henceforth mark their
Swine with some Ear mark, or if they neglect the same, it shall be reckoned as
the loss of their propriety in them.

And it is further Ordered; That no Indian within this Jurisdiction shall mark
any Swine upon the Ears, and that all Indians who bring Pork unto the English
to sell, Order to prevent Indians stealing Englishmens Swine
are required to bring with them the Swines Ears whole, otherwise, or if the
ears be marked, it is in the liberty of any person to seize upon such Pork
tendered to sell, and the same to be forfeited, the one half to the Seizer, the
other half to the poor of the place where it is seized, to be distributed by
the Select-men to them:

And it is further Ordered; That this Law be forthwith Printed, Published and
Declared to all the Indians within this Jurisdiction in the Indian Language,
that they may attend the same; And this Law to take place and commence eight
Months after publication hereof.

SCOLDES.
W Hereas there is no express punishment (by any Law hitherto established)
affixed to the evil practice of sundry persons by Exorbitancy of the Tongue, in
Railing and Scolding;

It is therefore Ordered; That all such persons convicted before any Court or
Magistrate, Punishment for Railing or Scolding
that has proper cognizance of the case, shall be Gagged, or set in a Ducking
stool, and dipped over Head and Ears three times in some convenient place of
fresh or salt water, as the Court or Magistrate shall Judge meet.

Whether S shipping Goods upon B to be delivered to R beyond the Sea, the said
R paying freight, and the said B upon his arrival at the Port tendering the said
Goods to R, Resolution of a Question as to Freight
and the said R refusing to meddle with the said Goods and to pay freight,
whether the said B can recover his freight for the said Goods of the said S,
the said Good being left in a safe hand by good advice by the said B, or
whether the said B ought not to have satisfied himself for his freight out of
the said Goods without molesting the said S? The Court resolves this Question,
that S is not liable to pay freight unto B, but B to satisfy himself for the
freight out of the Goods.

Whether all Reviews are to be Entered and Prosecuted in that Court where the
Action was at first commenced? Where reviews are to be tried.
The Court resolves the Question on the Affirmative.

Whether upon an Action of Review, the Costs of former Courts where the Action
has been tried, shall be granted for whom Judgment is given? The Court
Resolves this on the Negative.

Whether the Law tit. Possessions intend the confirmation of Land to the
Possessor, Possession according to Law (...) title, etc.
where the Grant of the said Land was to another person, and the Possessor
nothing to show for the Allienation thereof but his Possession according to
that Law? The Court resolves this on the Affirmative.

FINIS.

