A DISCOURSE Concerning the Subject of Baptism Wherein the present
Controversies, that are agitated in the NEW ENGLISH CHURCHES are from Scripture
and Reason modestly enquired into

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Ezekiel 43. 11. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the
Form of the house and the Fashion thereof, and all the goings out thereof, and
the Comings in thereof, and all the Forms thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and all the Forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof; and write it in
their sight, that they may keep the whole Form thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and do them.

2 Cor. 13. 8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

Ephesians. 4. 15. Speaking the Truth in Love.

Si Ecclesia debet ur quam reflorescere necesse est ut a Puerorum Institutione
exordium fiat Luther. Liberi fidelium baptizantur ut participes sint, and
haeredes divinorum beneficiorum Ecclesiae promissorum, usque aetate provecti
Parentum Religionem and pretatem Profiteantur P. Ramus. in Coment. de Relig. l.
4. c. 6. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Samuel Green 1675.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader
ABout four years since I was drawn (by what Arguments is there expressed (to
the Composure of a Script, which is entitled, The first Principles of
New England, Concerning the Subject of Baptism, and Communion of Churches;
wherein I promised [by Divine permission and Assistance] to give an Account of
the Reasons which caused me to Concur with the late Synod Book, as to the
Extent of the Subject of Baptism, God has now given me to Accomplish those
purposes, whereof the ensuing discourse is the product. Also I thought it not
unseasonable to add something briefly on the other Question, concerning that
promiscuous baptizing, which is by some pleaded for, that so I might bear
witness to that which is indeed an Interest of Holiness, as well as to a Cause
of Divine Grace. I have desired and [according to the measure of grace
received] endeavored to follow the Argument in hand, avoiding what I could
prolix and verbose Excursions to things of another Concern, and such bitter
invectives against Dissenters, ^as Polemical writings are many times full of.
The Judicious Reader will remember that this was written (...), in America;
where I could not by any means come by the sight of some Books more fully
discovering the practice of Antiquity respecting the controverted Question. Yet
such as I had, I have spared no pains in evolving. Also what ever Books have
been here published on this Subject, and the Manuscripts likewise [which are
many] that any amongst our selves have written thereon; with sundry writings
that have come to my hands out of Europe, all treating on this Argument; I have
perused and considered, apud Conscientiam meam; and here give an account of my
present persuasion together with the Reasons thereof. Now in as much as this
Discourse is concerning the present truth; even in part the Truth of the
present Age we live in, but especially the Truth of the place, where Providence
has cast my present habitation, I would fain hope that by this undertaking, I
have in part served, or endeavored to serve my Generation according to the
will of God. I most willingly submit the whole to the Censure of Judicious and
Impartial uninterested persons, trusting in Christ for pardon of all
weaknesses, or ^^ hat ever is, mine herein, and that what is Truth, and so from
his holy Spirit, shall be owned and blessed for the promoving of the honor of
his Name, the establishing of his Servants: the Advancement of the Interest of
his holy Truth amongst us. The Lord help us to truth it in Love, and grant that
there may be peace and Truth in our days.

Boston. N. E. ^. of 2 M. 1675.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction to the ensuing Discourse.
The first Question Propounded, viz. Whether Persons Qualified according to the
fifth Proposition of the late Synod, have right to Baptism? The (...) of the
Proposition expressed, the Question rightly statd. That the the Synod does not
affi^me, that unqualified persons, o^ that Grand children as such have right to
Baptism. The affirmative part of the Question Concluded.

THat the blessed Sacraments of the New Testament, which are in their own
Nature Signs and Seals of the greatest Union have been an occasion of much
Dispu^e in the world, is known to all men. Yea such is our darkness who know but
in part, as that these uniting Mysteries of the Gospel, have accidentally sent
a fire not only between the Church and the world, [which we need not to wonder
at) but even amongst Christians themselves, and tha^ ^too of a more Pure and
Reforme^ profession. To say nothing what happened soon after Apostles and
Apostolical men fell asleep in the Lord; the last Century has sadly evidenced
the truth hereof in those controversies about the Eucharist; which have been
agitated not only between Pro^^stan^^ and Papists, but also Lutherans and
(...), as they are called formerly, indeed the dispute has been (...), upon
other Accounts; But in this last Age the great Question is about right to
Sacraments, or the Subjects unto whom they are regularly applied* Concerning a
right to partake at the Lord Table, there has not been so great a Controversy
in these New-(...), as there has been touching right to Baptism, it being
upon (...), (...) (too many) unquestionable grounds, (...) concluded, that none
may claim right to that Ordinance of the Supper, except they do manifest their
ability to discern the Lords body, and to examine themselves. But as to
Baptism there are some who are for an extreme strictness, even so as to deny a
baptismal Interest to belong to any Children (and consequently all such Parents
if unbaptized might not claim right to that holy Institution) whose Parents are
not Immediately admittable to the Lords Table. Others (...) for an universal
latitude as to the Subject of Baptism, even so as to comprehend all that are
nomine tenus Christians. Now inasmuch as the farther clearing of these
Questions may tend unto peace, and Edification of the Churches; and that
thereby Service will be done for Christ, and for his holy Truth, yea, and for
not only present, but succeeding Generations in this Country, we shall
therefore (by the help of Christ) inquire into them, and avoiding all harsh
reflections upon any man's person or notion, endeavor to keep close to
Scripture and Reason in the following Disquisition. As for the first of these
Enquiries, it has indeed been already in a way of order decided by a Synod
which was assembled in Boston in New England, Anno 1662.

But when Providence first brought forth the Issue of that debate many did
Conscientiously dissent from these Conclusions. And although of later years,
that Cause has exceedingly gained ground, yet there are some that still
withhold their Assent, whereby practice according to those determinations is
impeded in many Churches. The first Question then is, Whether the
Qualifications expressed in the fifth Proposition of the late Synod Book do
give right unto Baptism. In many Polemical discourses a great part of the
Contest has risen from the not understanding, or not rightly stating of the
Question, that so there may be no mistake about that matter, Let it be
remembered that the words of the Proposition are these, viz. Church members who
were admitted in minority, understanding the doctrine of faith and publicly
professing their Assent thereto, not scandalous in Life, and solemnly owning
the Covenant before the Church wherein they give up themselves, and their
Children to the Lord, and subject themselves to the Government of Christ in his
Church, their Children are to be baptized. So that the Question now is not
whether the Children of ignorant or profane persons, or of Heretics may be
baptized, or of such as do in a light manner own the Covenant, and so do no
more, but visibly take the Lords Name in vain; or of such o^ do refuse to
subject themselves to Church Discipline, I say the Question is not whether such
persons have right to Baptism, no such thing being affirmed by the Synod. Nor
is the Question whether Grandchildren as such have right to Baptism by virtue
of the faith and Covenant of their godly proparents, although the Immediate
Parent should be a forsaker of the Covenant and God of his Father. This very
mistake has been the Reason why many have drank in prejudice against the Synod
Book, Because they have apprehended, that there in the Baptism of the Children
of godless Parents has been pleaded for, only by virtue of the Grandfathers
Religion, although the next Parent should be no Christian. But that is a most
Injurious stating of the Question, for the Synod Book does in no wise ground
Baptism on the qualification of the Grandfather, but on the qualification of
the Immediate Parent. Let the Question then be understood concerning any
Parents whatsoever, whether that being qualified according as (...) in the
mentioned Proposition expressed, they, and consequeutly their Children have not
right to Baptism. Now considering the terms of the Proposition, I Conceive
that the Affirmative part of the Question is true, And although the Reasons
produced and urged by the Synod do evince the truth of this Assertion, yet as
some farther Explication thereof, and Addition thereto, (althoug^ I am neither
worthy nor able to add ought unto what is already by those Wotrhies performed)
we shall (as in Gods holy fear) now propound some Arguments to be weighed in
the Balance of the Sanctuary.

CHAP. II.
THe first Argument propounded, viz. because the persons in Question ought to
be acknowledged members of the visible Church, Proved (1.) From the Definition
of the visible Church, which is adhered to by Co^gregationals of the Savoy
meeting, and by Dr. Owen. (2.) From Mat. 16. 18. (3.) Else we unchurch all men
but our selves. (4.) In that it is a most dreadful thing to be wholly excluded
out of the visible Church, evinced by sundry Scriptures, which are occasionally
opened. (5.) If they be not of the Church, then they are of the world only, and
so belonging to Satan (6.) Because the persons in Question are not amongst
those whom the Scripture styles (...) or them without. (7.) Because they are
true worshippers.

The first Argument may be taken from that regular membership, or standing in
the visible Church which does belong to these persons. Thus we Reason. They
that according to the Scripture are and ought to be continued in the visible
Church, have right to Baptism for themselves and their Children. But this is
true concerning the persons in Question; Ergo, etc.

The Proposition is the great Convincing Argument whereby Antipaedo-Baptists
have been confuted. It is abundantly proved by those that handle see Mr.
Baxter of Infant Baptism, Chap. 4. see also the Answer of N. E. Elders to 21
Quest. Q^. 1.
that Controversy about Infant Baptism, yea, some Anabaptists confess it to be
a truth, that such persons have right to Baptism, and it is cleared in the
Synods first Proposition, which was unanimously consented to, yet let it be
granted that it is not a mere standing or membership in the visible Church, but
a regular standing therein that entituleth to Baptism, that is (in a word)
when a man is according to Scripture Rule become a member of the visible
Church, and there is no Rule in the word to cast him out of the Church, such a
person is a proper adequate Subject of Baptism. The only doubt and difficulty
will be about the Assumption. As in most Arguments (that is the part which
needs to be strengthened) Now that is manifest, 1. From the definition of the
visible Church. That so it may appear, that to administer Baptism according to
this Proposition is no deviation from Congregational Principles, we shall not
go to any other for a definition of the visible Church but to Congregational
men. Now they in their (...). 26. Ph^^. 2.
declaration of Faith at the Savoy meeting 1658. thus speak. The whole body of
men say they, throughout the world professing the Faith of the Gospel, and
obedience unto God by Christ according unto it, not destroying their own
profession by any Errors, and evening the Foundation or unholiness of
Conversation, are, and may be called the visible Church of Christ. Now compare
this definition with the persons described in the Proposition, and we shall
find, that all the particulars therein expressed, do agree unto them. Also
Doctor Owen [who was a great part of that Assembly at the Savoy] does give the
like description of the Catholic visible Church in his Book of (...).
Schism, where he thus writes. The universality of men professing the
doctrine of the Gospel, and obedience to God in Christ, according to it
throughout the world is that which is commonly called the Catholic Church All
Professors of the Gospel throughout the world, called to the knowledge of
Christ by the word do make up and constitute his visible Kingdom by their
professed subjection to him, (...).
The universal Church is a Collection of all that are duly called Christians.
I do not think, that particular Congregations do stand unto it in that Relation
of a Species to a genus, in which the whole nature of it should be comprised,
which would deprive every one of membership in this universal Church which is
not joined actually to some particular Church, then which nothing can be more
devoyd of Truth. Page (...)
As to the description of this Church, I shall a^^uiess, in that lately given
by a learned man, Ecclesia universalis est communio seu societa^ omnium
coetnum, I had rather he had said, omnium fidem Christianam profitentium five
illi ad Ecclesias aliquas particulares pertineant, five non pertineant. And
page 134, 135, 136. He shows what things are necessary to constitute a member
of the visible Catholic Church, and at last, page 137. Concludes saying, we
are at length arrived to this Issue, the belief and profession of all the
necessary saving Truths of the Gospel without the manifestation of an internal
principle of mind in consistent with the belief of them, or adding of other
things in profession which are inconsistent to the Truths so professed, is the
bond of this unity of the visible professing Church of Christ. Also he shows
that not only Modern but Ancient Divines have esteemed this the Catholic
Church, so Justin Martyr, Iren^^ Terta^lian, etc And many passages to the same
purpose are to be seen in a late discourse concerning Evangelical love and
Church peace, written by the same learned hand, wherein this description of the
Church Catholic visible, is more fully opened. And it is in the same Treatise,
with great evidence of Reason manifested, that Baptism is grounded upon
membership in this Church, it would be too tedious to transcribe all that is
there said about this matter, But the Reader that has the Book may if he
please consult page 47, 52, 53, 54, 74, 75.

2. This is evident from that famous Text, Math 16* 18. which intimates that
those that profess Faith in Christ and do not destroy that Profession by any
Heresy in Judgment, or Sandal in Conversation, are to be esteemed as belonging
to the visible Church. But the persons in Question do this. They (...)
publicly and solemnly before God, Angels and men profess their (...) to the
doctrine of Faith, and their Consent to the Covenant, and are not scandalous in
Life. Ergo

3. Either such persons as these are to be owned as belonging to the visible
Church, or else we shall exclude all persons except those of our way out of the
Church visible* If we say, that none belong to the visible Church but such as
do first make a Relation of the work of grace (a practice holy and good and far
be it from me to reflect thereon, as if it* were Superstitious or needless.
Albeit I Confess the rigid Imposition of this, or that Mode, or Formality In
this matter not determined in the Scripture, is not to be excused) and so join
themselves to particular Churches, this would be at once to unchurch all men
but our selves. But to appropriate membership in the Catholic Church to our
selves alone is such rigid, Censorious, arrogant, self-assuming, as better
becomes Papists then men of modest and Congregational Principles.

4. To be wholly excluded the visible Church is a most dreadful thing, and
therefore to affirm it concerning all those persons, whom the Proposition
refers unto it that which (for my part) I dare not do. Judicious Interpreters
conceive (and that not without Reason) that, that Book of the Living which some
in Scripture are said to have their Names blotted out of, is meant concerning
the Pachymer^s in Peraoh in Dionys, Are^pag.
Church Book. To have a name to be amongst the number of the Lords faithful
Servants is a great favor, so to be deprived of such a name is a heavy
Judgment and usual Curse that does fall upon, and follow Hypocrites, after
they are in their graves, It is mentioned as no small mercy, Psalm. 87. 6. The
Lord shall count when he writes up the People that this and that man was born
there. And on the other hand, it is a terrible threatening which we have Ezekiel.
13. 9. They shall not be in the Assembly of my people, neither shall they be
written in the writing of the house of Israel. And this may give light unto
those words of Moses, Exodus 32:32. And if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy
Book which thou have written. That is, (says Mr. Caryl on Job. Chapter 24. V. 20.
an excellent Interpreter) out of the Book which thou have commanded to be
written as a record of the People of Israel. God said to Moses that if he would
let him alone, and not by his Prayers withstand the destruction of the Children
of Israel, he would of make him a great Nation. Nay, (says Moses) rather then
that Gods Name should suffer by the ruin of his people, I am content not only
to be without the honor of being the head of a greater Nation then this, but
that my Name should not be recorded as a Leader of this Nation. Yea, moreover
that my Name should not at all be mentioned amongst the Lords People, I am
content to be without the honor of being recorded so much as a member of Gods
Church in this world. Thus also Paul could wish himself an Anathema from Christ
for his Brethren his kinsmens sake, etc. Romans 9. 3. b. c. he was willing to be
in the Condition, which excommunicate persons are visibly in. Though he had
been so great a Planter and Propagator of Churches, he was willing upon
Condition the Jews might be saved, to have his Name blotted out of the Church
Records. That Imprecation, Psalm. 69. 28. Let them be blotted out of the Book of
the Living, is a Prophetical Imprecation (many of those direful Imprecations
which the Old Testament is full of, are rather Prophesies then Prayers)
concerning the unchurching of the Jews, because of their abuses offered unto
Christ, of whom David was a Type. Now then, if it be so fearful a judgment to
be excluded out of the visible Church, we had need be careful how we shut out
our Children and poor Posterity from being of the house of Israel. It has been
an Ancient received maxim, (however abused by Papists and Prelates) extra
Eeclesiam nulla salus do jus (...) verum sen sum vide apud Jacob. Cappel. in
Annot. 1 Pet. 3. 21. and Altingi; problem. Theol. loc. 13. Prob. 9. Hinc and
illud Hieronymi, Non habet deum Patrem qui non habet Eeclesiam matrem.
that there is no Salvation out of the Church, therefore to affirm this
concerning all those of whom our present Controversy speaks, is at once to
shut them all out of Heaven. And this is Implicitly done, when we deny them
all title to Baptism, uncircumcised persons, ( h. e. not all such as were so
actually, but they that had no right to Circumcision) are said to go down into
the nether parts of the Earth, Ezekiel. 28. 10. and 31. 18.

5. The persons in Question are either belonging to the visible Church, or of
the world only. The Scripture speaks of those two terms, Church, and the
world, as opposite and Contradistinct, therefore often the gentile Heathen
Nations which in the days of the old Testament belonged not to the visible
Church, are called the world in Contradistinction to the Jews, who were once
the only Church and people of God upon Earth, which [(...) we may observe]
gives the true Interpretation of those by the Arminians much abused
Scriptures, which speak of Christ's dying for the world. But to say, that the
persons in Question, and their Children are of the world only, is in Effect to
say, that they are visibly the Devils, and none of the Lords Children, or that
they are only the visible members of Satan's, and not of Christ's Kingdom, for
Satan is the Prince and God of this world, John 14. 32. 2 Cor. 4. 4.

6 Either the p^^sons in Question, and their Children are within the Pale of
the visible Church, or else they are amongst those, whom the Scripture does
style (...) those that are without, 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13. Col 4 5. The visible
Church is compared to an house, It is Gods house and Christ's house. The Temple
in respect of both the Courts of it was [as Divines conceive] a Type hereof,
thence the Courts of the Temple were not covered but open, thereby signifying
the visibility of the Church. Now as, for Heathens, Idolaters, etc. they are
out of this house, they have no standing in the Courts of the Lord. They do not
stand within thy ga^e, O Jerusalem. But shall we say thus concerning all those
described in the Proposition? This is to say, that they are dogs, Math. 15* 26,
27. Rev. 32* 15. And indeed to deny unto them title to Baptism is practically
and Consequentially to affirm no less, as will appear to him that well
considers and compares these Scriptures, Rev. 22. 15. 1 Cor. 7:14. with
Isai. 52. 1. Math 7 6.

7. They that are true worshippers do belong to the visible Church, A false
Church is a Company of false worshippers; and vide Owen de Tacol. and mornei
Treat of Church Cu. 1. page 10.
a true Church is a Company of true worshippers. But we cannot say of the
persons in Question that they are false worshippers, for they worship the true
God only, and that in no other ways or means, then what himself has
instituted, therefore surely they belong to the visible Church, and
consequently have right to Baptism.

CHAP. III.
A Second Argument is produced, viz. because the persons in question are
visible Believers, which is demonstrated, 1. In that they are not Infidels, 2
dly. Else there is no hope of Salvation either of them or theirs. 3. They are
partakers of those gifts of the Spirit which are peculiar to Christians. 4. The
Scripture calls persons so q^al (...) in the Proposition expressed, believe^
(...) which is showed in sundry particulars. 5. (...) persons in Question are
Justly styled Disciples or Christians, and therefore are believers, and
baptizable.

Having endeavored to clear the first Argument, we proceed unto a second and
that shall be, because the persons in Question are visible believers, The
Argument stands thus, visible believers have right to Baptism for themselves
and theirs. But the persons in Question are visible believers. Ergo.

The Proposition (at least so far as it concerns persons Adult] is yielded on
all hands. Yea, even those that do mistake, and so pervert this principle, yet
acknowledge that where there is faith, there ought to be Baptism. But that
Faith which gives right to Baptism [ in foro Ecclesie.] as to us is not
invisible faith. But the visibility of faith is that which we must proceed upon
as to the Administration of this Ordinance. It is said that Simon Magus
believed and was baptized, Acts 8. 13. he was not baptized upon the account of
an invisible and saying faith whereof he was destitute, but because he was a
visible believer. And the like may be said concerning many thousands, that were
baptized by John Baptis and the Apostles: We proceed then to the Assumption,
which is thus demonstrated. The persons in Question are either visible
believer, or Infidels, The Scripture acknowledges no medium between these two,
but men are either believers or Infidels, the Greek word (...) used throughout
the New Testament, for unbeliever and for^ Infidel is the same, That word which
in some places is translated unbeliever, is elsewhere rendered Infidel. I
Confess that some men who pretend to be of the Christian belief, have not right
to Baptism, because they are Infidels in practice, and those are the worst, of
Infidels, 1 Timothy 5. 8. But when a man is not an Infidel neither as to his
Profession nor as to his practice, the Scripture calls him a Believer, or
non-Infidel. Now can any say concerning the persons in Question that they are
Infidels, or that they are in the same condition with the unbelieving Jews, or
Turks, or other Heathens. How harsh, yea, how horrid is that affirmation which
asserteth all the Children in Question to be in the same state with the
Children of Turks, Tartars, or Cannabals, yet if they be not visible believers,
or if they have not right to Baptism they are in the same Condition with Jews
and Turks, and such like Heathenish Infidels, In a word to deny them right to
Baptism (the Gospel Circumcision) is to make them to be not Israelites, but
Egyptians, Josh. 5. 9. The Hebrew Doctors Buxtorf Lexi^. T^almud. p. 407.
say of those two Rites of Circumcision and Baptism that whosoever shall
neglect either of them is not to be accounted a Proselite.

2. If the persons in Question be all out of the number of visible believers,
then there is no rational ground of charitable hope concerning the Salvation of
any of them or theirs. As for unbelievers the word is plain, that they shall
have their portion in that Lake which burns with fire, Rev. 21. 8. Mark, 16.
16. Nor is it any rigid, Principle in them who affirm that no charity binds us
to believe that Vide Twisse contra Corvin. p. 30. etc. lege etiam Cameronis.
Disput. cum courcellio.
the Children of Infidels are saved, we find in Scripture that God gave express
Command, not only that Aault persons amongst the Heathen Nations but that their
little ones also should be destroyed, see Numb. 31. 17. Deuteronomy. 20. 16, 17. and
13. 12. 13. Josh. 7. 15, 16. And they are pronounced happy that should dash the
little ones of Babylon against the stones, Psalm. 137. 9. Which manifests that
such little ones are not saved. But who dare conclude thus concerning all the
Children in Question, or concerning this or that particular amongst them?

3. They partake in the special gifts of the Holy Ghost, I mean such spiritual
gifts as are peculiar unto Christians, therefore are they believers, and have
right to Baptism, Acts 10. 45. and 11. 15. Assent unto the Mystery of the
Gospel is a great gift of the Holy Ghost, even more then flesh and blood can
attain unto, Math. 16. 17. And does not the Apostle declare that they that do
in a serious manner profess that Jesus in the Lord have in some sort received
the Holy Ghost, and he opposes such unto Gentiles, or unbelievers, 1 Cor. 12.
2, 3. In a word, the persons in Question are illuminated with the knowledge of
Christ, which Illumination is a great gift of the Holy Spirit, and one
Character of a visible believer, Heb. 10. 32. the believing Hebrews are called
illuminated ones. Drufius his note on the place is that these illuminati were
indeed Baptizati, therefore (...) is used for Baptism; and (...) for baptize,
and we know that Vide Heb. 6. 4. ^um version Syria^* and Scorsi Not* in
rheophen. Homil. 21. ^. ^. 8. V^is de Anahaptismo These. 9.
the Ancient Church is wont to express Baptism by the term of illumination.

4. The Scripture calls persons so qualified as is in the Proposition
expressed, believers. For 1. They are in the Scripture said to have Faith, or
to be believers, who do make an open Profession of the Christian Religion
before the world, not everting the reality of that Profession by any practice
inconsistent therewith, Acts 5. 14. 1 Cor, 7. 12, 13, 14, 15. But thus it is
with the persons in Question.

2. They that do give up themselves to the Lord, and to his people, are in
Scripture phrase believers. Thus the believing Macedonians are described 2 Cor.
8. 5. they gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us by the will of God. Now
this description of a believer does belong to the persons in Question; for it
is expressly affirmed in the Proposition that they must give up themselves and
their Children to the Lord, and subject themselves to the Government of Christ
in his Church.

5. It is yet further evident that the persons we speak of are visible
believers, because they are Disciples. Disciples and believers are the same, If
we search the Scriptures we shall find that believers and disciples are
Synoni^^ous, Acts 4. 32. with 6. 2. and 13 48, 52. and 15. 9, 10. and 19. 1, 2.
They that belong to Christ are disciples, as is clear beyond dispute by
comparing Math. 10. 42. with Mark. 10. 41. Now the Children in Question belong
to Christ, all of them visibly, and some of them really and savingly, therefore
are they disciples, and therefore believers unto whom Baptism does of right
appertain. Besides they that do subject themselves to Christ's discipline cannot
with any color of reason be excluded from discipleship, but this is in the
Proposition affirmed of those in Controversy Yet again they that are justly
styled Christians are disciples, Acts 11. 26. Now thus are the persons in
Question. Indeed if these Children are not to be nominated Christians, if they
be such, as that if we speak in the Scripture dialect, we may not lawfully
style them Christians, then are they not meet to be baptized; but on the other
hand, if they be (and ought by us to be accounted) Christians, then the
withholding Baptism from multitudes of such persons, is unjustifyable, and
will one day appear to be sinful.

CHAP. IV.
THe third Argument produced that those Qualifications which old give right to
Circumcision do give right to Baptism, this Proposition is evident, (1.)
Because Baptism succeeds Circumcision, as it is proved from Col. 2. 11. 12.
and from the great Analogy and resemblance that is between Circumcision and
Baptism. [1.] Circumcised persons were solemnly Consecrated unto God which is
cleared from Exodus 4. 25. that Text is vindicated from the Sense commonly put
upon it, so in Baptism. [2.] Circumcision did intimate that our Nature is
Corrupt, so Baptism. [3.] Circumcision did seal Regeneration proved from
Scripture, so Baptism.

2. The Proposition proved by comparing the Qualifications entitling to
Circumcision with those that give right to Baptism.

1. An Everlasting Engagement or Covenant to become the Lords Servants was
required in order to Circumcision, showed by many Scriptures, so concerning
Baptism.

2. In Adult persons Historical Faith was required before Circumcision, so
concerning Baptism.

3. A profession of the Name of the true God, and of the only true Religion, so
concerning Baptism. That phrase of baptizing into the Name of another
explained, Baptism the mark of Christianity, they are deceived that think that
Circumcision did seal only temporal promises, or that mere natural descent from
Abraham gave right thereunto, The Assumption, viz. that the persons in Question
have those Qualifications that did give right to Circumcision evinced. [1,] In
that they are in Covenant with God, proved by five Reasons. [2.] They have an
Historical Faith.

3. They make an open profession of the true Religion and that for ought any
thing does appear to the Contrary in sincerity. A great Objection against this
Argument Considered and Answered.

We come now to a third Argument for the demonstration of the Truth before us,
which is thus disposed.

Those Huic Argumen to non omnes Anabaptistae resistout whitaker.
Qualifications which did give right to Circumcision, do give right to
Baptism. But the persons in question even Parents and Children have those
Qualifications which did give right to Circumcision, Ergo

The Proposition is evident, (1.) because Baptism v. Calvin Instit, I. 4. chapter
16.
comes in the room of Circumcision^. Either Baptism does so, or something
else is instituted to succeed Circumcision, or else we must say there is no
Ordinance at all given to Believers instead thereof, But neither of these
latter may be affirmed, therefore is the former true. Besides that Scripture,
Col. 2. 11, 12. does clearly intimate, that Baptism does succeed Circumcision,
the place has See Forbes de Justif. p. 125. 126, Dr. Winter of Infant Bapt. p.
120. Dr. Homes p. 27. Mr. sydenham p. 118. Mr. Cobbet p. 196. Mr Oeree p. 30.
Mr Cotton p. 127 Mr. Cragg p. 264. Mr. Marshal p 27, 28. vossius de paedo
Baptismo. These. 11. Mr: Vaughams dispute with Mr. Tombs p. 5.
been abundantly vindicated by others notwithstanding the glosses of
Antipaedo-Baptists put upon it, therefore we shall not insist here, only thus
much shall be said, it is evident that the Apostle in that Context is laboring
to deliver the Christian Colossians from those lmpositions and (...) which were
put upon them, by some false and Jewish Teachers, who had reduced them under
legal bondage, and in special to the Observation of Circumcision. The Argument
which be uses to undeceive them, is that they had Compleatness in Christ; for
they had in him circumcision, which is (...) made without hands, or inward
Circumcision. True might they say. But so had Abraham and the Fathers after
him, yet they had an outward Ordinance applied to them also; so have you too
says the Apostle, for you are buried with him in Baptism, wherein [also] you
are risen with him. So that in your Baptism you have a greater privilege
belonging to you, even an Ordinance that does hold forth unto you not only
mortification (buried with him in Baptism) as Circumcision did, but also
vivification, you are risen with him so that in Christ you are Complete
partaking of the Substance of Circumcision and more too, and therefore why
should you observe Circumcision still? This is the Apostles scope, and his
Reasoning is strong and Irrefragable. However no man can deny but that the
Apostle dissuading from the practice of Circumcision tells them of their
Baptism, and why should he do so, if this do not come in the room of that? And
does v Blakes birth. privilege. p. 10.
not the Apostle Peter allude unto Circumcision, when he expresses the
external Baptism, by the putting away of the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
But the truth of this is farther manifested from the great Analogy and
Agreement, which is (without any straining of Notions) to be observed between
these two Ordinacces, E. G. (1.) In that Circumcised persons were solemnly
dedicated and consecrated to God, so as to become his devoted Servants, yea,
they were espoused to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: Hence a Circumcised
person was called by the Name of (...) ^hathan i. e. an espoused one, quia
Circumcisionis die, (...) desponsatur, because when he is Circumcised, he is
solemnly espoused to the true God. This I take to be the Intendment and
Interpretation of that difficult place, Exodus 4. 25. our version (which many
Expositors follow) carries it as if those words of Zippora^ were spoken to her
husband Moses, whom she out of Enmity against that sacred rite of Circumcision
called a bloody husband. But I conceive that our translation does not (...) hit
upon the true sense of them.

1. Because (...) Hebrews never call an husband by the name of Chatham, after
the seven days of Espousal are over, therefore Zipporah having been married
some years could not now call her husband by that Name.

2. Zipporahs Father Iethro being a Midianite descended from Adraham, and a
godly man also, he must needs keep up Circumcision, in his Family, so that his
Daughter could not be offended at that, yea, Ancient H^tories acquaint us that
the Arabians [ Zipporah was an Arabess] did never wholly omit that rite. Not
only Herodotus, but ^osephus affirms that the Ishm^elites were Circumcised in
his time, so all men know that the Turks who pretend a descent from Abraham are
at this day.

3. It is not probable that Zipporah would have dared to revile her husband,
when she saw the Lord in the room ready to kill him.

4. The Angel went away, when, (...) Sept.
or because she said Cathan dami^n, ver. 26. Now it is not likely that the
Angel would desist from his attempt of staying Moses, because of his wives
invectives against her husband, but when she did solemnly pronounce the Child
to be a Circumcised one, this might well be since the neglect of that Ordinance
was the cause of this threatened death.

5. Not only the Hebrews, but the Arabians (of whom it was said Zipporah was)
are wont to call a Vide Schindler. Pentag lot. and R. Kimchi in Radi^e. (...)
newly Circumcised person by the Name of Chathan. This^ Interpretation is
followed by Ouk^los, Elias in Tishbi, Abenezra, and other Jewish Expositors;
And by Drusins Mede, Obr. Cartwright, etc. Hence is that Job. 1. 12. we are
born [not of blood] but of God, etc. b. c. v. Ludov. Cappel. in lo^.
our being Circumcised and reckoned amongst the Children of God, is not enough
except we partake of a Divine and spiritual Regeneration. This may be the
Reason why Circumcised persons are styled the Children of God. The Hebrews were
wont to call those that were peculiarly devoted to this or that, the Children
of that which they were devoted unto. Hence are those phrases of the Son of
perdition, Child of death, Children of the Bridegroom, etc. Beza in Mat. 8. 12.
The Sum is, in Circumcision there is a solemn Consecration of the Soul to the
true God. Therefore is that phrase, Jer. 4. 4. Circumcise your selves. i. e.
give your selves as every true penetent does to the Lord, so that Circumcision
notes Consecration to the Lord. Hence a man's hired Servants were not
Circumcised, but only his Children, or his bought Servants, the Reason was
because he had not an absolute Power over those, as he had over these, to
dedicate them to the use and Service of the true God. But thus it is in
Baptism, the baptizate is given, Consecrated, and espoused to Christ, yea, a
Christian is one who is gr. (...) Leigh. (...)
offered, i. e. dedicated to the Lord, Rom 12 2. From the abuse of this Truth
has sprung that Superstition of baptizing Alters, Bells, Churches so called,
thereby to signify their Consecration and dedication to the Service of the
Lord. Now as by the Straw and Stubble we may gather what kind of grain was in
the Field, so even those Superstitions show that Consecration to the Service of
Christ is the thing signified by Baptism.

2. Circum^^sion did intimate that our nature is corrupt and defiled, (...). ^.
^. Therefore the Jews called the sin of (...) (...) (...) or (...) from Deuteronomy.
10. 16. (...) to that Question when an Infant may be (...) of the would to
come? The Answer given is, (...) after he is Circumcised; Circumcision being
admitted as a sign of the taking away by grace the evil nature in man. And in
Answer hereunto v. Ain^ worth ^^ Genesis 17. 4.
this Corruption of nature is by the Apostle called (...), uncircumcision, Col.
2. 13. but the like may be affirmed coecerning Baptism, Ephesians. 5. 26. Tit. 3. 5.
Heb. 10. 22.

3. Circumcision did seal and signify Conversion and Regeneration, Romans 2. 28,
29. Hence when in the days of the Jewish Church any of the Heathen Nations
being Proselyted and joined to the Church were thereupon Circumcised and
baptized, they called them new born. In which respect Christ may well upbraid
Nicodemus for his not understanding what was spoken to him concerning the new
birth, Joh. 3. 10. Art thou a Master in Israel and know not these things, q.
d. Art thou a Rabbi and yet understandest not the true meaning of these
Phrases, and of the rites that are Customary in your Church? And hence also is
that Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I will Circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy Seed, etc.
which does manifest that Circumcision was a Seal of Regeneration, and in other
places the Scripture speaks of the Circumcision of the heart, because the
outward Circumcision made with hands, was a sign of the inward Circumcision
made without any hands, but that of the Spirit, so does the Apostle plainly
teach us that Circumcision signified the putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh, Col, 2 12. Now the very same thing is signified in Baptism, even a
mortifying of the old man, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. therefore is it called the Laver
of Regeneration, Tit. 3 5 effectum significati praedicatur de signo ut cum
Baptismus di^itur Regenerare. Ames. And our Savior teaches that a man must be
born of water and of the Spirit, Job. 3. 7. h. e. (...).
of the Spirit, as the principal Author of this new birth, and of water, or
Baptism, whereby the Regenerating work of the Spirit is as by a sacred Symbol
adambrated and sealed. Other Concurrences there are, which make good this
Assertion, that Baptism answers to, and comes in the room of Circumcision.
But designing brevity we let them pass, these instanced in being sufficient to
evince the thing, they are produced for.

2. The truth of the Proposition will be very evident, if we consider how
persons were to be qualifyed that had right to Circumcision, and what are the
grounds of right to Baptism comparing them together.

1. An Everlasting Engagement or Covenant to become the Lords Servant was
required in order to entituling to that ^rite of Circumcision. This no man can
easily doubt of, that is but acquainted with the first Institution of
Circumcision, of which the 17 Chapter of Genesis gives us the account at
large. Therefore Circumcsiion is called the Covenant, because it was a sign of
token of the Covenant ver. 10. 11. And the neglecters of Circumcision, are
therefore said to be breakers of the Covenant, ver. 14. The Jewish Doctors are
some of them of the opinion that when Elias complained of the Children of
Isreal's forsaking the Covenant, 1 King. 19. 14. that he there taxes them with
the neglect of that Ordinance of Circumcision, However that were, this is
certain, that the omission of Circumcision was a renouncing of the Covenant.
From this ground it was that Children had ^ight to Circumcision. viz. Because
of their Covenant Interest. The Children of Israelites were by virtue of the
Covenant born the Lords Servants, Levit. 25. 41, 42. which explaineth David's
meaning, Psalm. 116. 16. where he says, O Lord truly I am thy Servant, and the
Son of thy Hanamaid q. d The Child of a Servant is a Servant, It is so as to
those Servants over whom a man has a more absolute power, their Children are
also born his Servants, so says David, I am born the Lords Servant, because my
Mother was in Covenant with him. Consider the place with Ezekiel 16. 20. hence I
say was their right to Circumcision. The Jewish Masters Buxtor flexie. Tha^
(...). p. 14 and S^hind^ penteg. p 297. Hortin. These phil. p. 1^. (...)
tell us that by three things did Israel enter into Covenant BEM^^AH by
Circumcision, BITEBILAH Baptism, BECORBAN and Sacrifice, and so say they) did
Erbnick^inall Ages. In a time when Sacrifice could not be offered, as after the
destruction of the Temple they entered into Covenant by Circumcision and
Baptism. Learned men have observed, that though Baptism was not an
Evangelical Sacrament till John's time, yet it was used long before amongst the
Jews, when they did Solemnize the Admission of any Proselyte into their Church
and Covenant. Yea, and the Infants of Proseites were baptized as well as their
Parents, as the Jewish Records do abundantly testify. v. Bab. Cherub. fol. 11
Light (...), Hor* Hebr. p. 40. Cradock Harmon. p. 29. 30.

Hence Saints ship being the same with feacrate (...) was requisite in order to
Circumcision. Therefore the (...), that is to say the lews are termed Saints,
Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Psalm. 50 ^ and 148. 14. And if we follow lewish phrases, an
uncircumcised, and unholy, unclean person are the same, yea, in Scripture
phrase, we find them Identical, Isai. 52. 1. Henceforth there shall come no
more unto thee the uncircumcised, and the unclean, which yields a mavelous
light to that invincible Argument for Paedo-Baptisme taken from the Apostles
words, 1 Cor. 7. 14. else were your Children unclean, but now are they [(...)]
Saints. If an Hebrew (such an one as Paul who wrote those words) should read
that Expression, he could not but Conclude that the Apostle does there affirm,
that the Children of Christians have the same Saintship or faederal holiness
which the Children of the Jews formerly had, and a right unto that, which is
the Gospel Circumcision, Consider the place in Ezra 9. 2. and 10. 3. which does
afford a most clear and satisfactory explication of the Apostles meaning in the
Scripture but now cited. Now as Covenant Interest gave right to Circumcision,
so it does to Baptism. We find therefore that the Apostle calls upon the
Converting Jews to submit to Baptism, because the promise i. e. the Covenant
(for promise and Covenant are frequent Synonimas in Scripture, Romans 9. 4. Ephesians.
2. 12. as in the Synod Book is truly observed) Mr. Co^to^ of Infant Baptis.
page 32.
is belonging to them, Acts 2. 38, 39. Hence it is that a disciple is the
proper Snbject of Baptism, A disciple and a Covenanter are the same. There is
a Covenant between Master and Scholar. A disciple is one that stands engaged to
become the Lords Scholar; There are that ground Baptism not upon Covenant
Interest, but upon performance of the Conditions required in the Covenant. But
I wish that this may be deeply Considered of, for this very mistake seems to
be one of the greatest Causes of dissent from the synods Proposition, whose
defense and demonstration we have undertaken, we must therefore distinguish
between Confoederation and (...), promi^ing and performing. If only performers
have right to Baptism, then no Reprobate or unregenerate person may be
baptized; For they perform not the Conditions of Repentance and Faith. It
remains then that the Covenant or promise (where such a non performance as
does render the promise to be no promise is not evident) is that which
entitleth to Baptism, if any shall (as most do) fall short of that which their
Baptismal vow Ingageth them unto, at their peril shall it be* Nevertheless, God
in the Gospel of grace does declare unto (...), that he will be their God in
Case they will be his people. Now if any persons will promise to be his
Servants, and do not by any other either Profession or practice contradict that
Promise, it is his will that the Every belonging to his Servants, or the Seal
of Baptism should be Conferred on them. To promise Service and Fidelity in
war is enough to get listed, but the faithful performance of Service is of
necessity to be rewarded. In like sort an Engagement to become a new Creature,
and to walk as it becomes a Servant of Jesus Christ, [provided as before
expressed] gives Title to Baptism. But performance of that Engagement is
necessary in order to obtaining the good sealed therein, Romans 2. 25.

2. In Adult persons Historical Faith was required in order to Circumcision,
yea, true saving Faith was requisite, in order to partaking of the spiritual
benefit and Efficacy of that Sacred Institution. Abraham had Faith before he
was Circumcised, And Circumcision is expressly called a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. The Jews themselves had of ^old the
knowledge of this Truth. For some of their Rabbis teach Maimon Treat of Kings
Chapter 10. S. 7. ^
that none have right to Circumcision but Abraham's Seed, and none are Abraham's
Seed but such as observe his Law, which though now quite perverted by them, is
in it self a true Principle. But the same also is to be affirmed concerning
Baptism. Therefore when ^ohn baptized, be taught the People that they should
believe on him that should come after him, that is on Jesus Christ, Acts. 19. 4.

3. Adult persons might not be Circumcised, except they did openly before the
world make a Credible or uncontradicted profession of the Name of the true God,
and of the only true Religion, (...) such a Profession as is not attended with
any either opinion or practice Contradictory unto, and Inconsistent with
sincerity. It was not enough for them to believe the Truth inwardly, but they
must also make profession of it outwardly. Yea, we find in the Jewish Records,
that they were of old very careful about this matter, not admitting of
Proselytes unto Circumcision, except upon good Experience they found that they
did for sincere Ends embrace the true Religion, which [themselves say] was the
Reason that so few Proselytes were admitted in the days of David and Solomon,
lest happily the Time-serving Ethnicks of those days might out of Carnal fear or
worldly Advantage take upon them the Profession of the then only true Religion.
Now the same thing is true concerning Baptism. As those that were Circumcised,
must be Professors [let it be remembered that we speak of persons Adult] of the
Name of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or the God of Israel, [so styled
because the Covenant was made and renewed with them] so they that are baptized
must be Professors of the Name of Christ, or of the only true God in Jesus
Christ. As the old Testament style usually calls God the God of Israel, or
the God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, which is his memorial to all Generations.
So in the New Testament style he is, the God of Jesus Christ, because the New
Testament is made with Jesus Christ, and with believers in and through him,
hence then Baptism being a Seal of the New Testament, the partakers of it must
profess the Name and Religion of Christ, and thence are said to be baptized
into his Name, (...)
1 Cor. 1. 13. were you baptized in [or into] the Name of Paul. The Apostle
would say, that we are baptized into the Name of Christ alone, h. e. baptized
persons are Engaged to profess no other Religion, or to own no other Lord of
their Faith and of their Souls but only Jesus Christ. Thus Acts 8. 16. they
were baptized (...) into the Name of the Lord Jesus, h. e. by the Rite of
Baptism they were solemnly admitted into the Profession of the Christian
Faith. Thus it is said, 1 Cor. 10. 2. They were baptized (...), into Moses, h.
e. into the Profession of Moses, i. e. the Law [for the Law it called Moses in
the Scripture] or Doctrine taught by Moses, as Expositors Basil de Spiri^u
Sanct. Chapter 14.
Ancient and Gataker Misc. chapter page 28.
modern have Interpreted that place. So Acts 19 8. they were baptized into
John's Baptism, i. e. into the Profession of his doctrine, which was sealed by
his Baptism; In like sort, baptizing into the Name of Christ, Implies that
the person baptized is for ever Engaged to profess the Name and Religion of
Christ. We read of some in the New Testament that did believe on Christ, that
did not make an open Profession thereof, John. 12. 42. These were not baptized
[which by the way is a clear evidence ^that is not a mere ^Historical but a
Justifying Faith which does entitle to Baptism) for men by receiving that
Ordinance, did before the world avouch Christ to be their Lord, and own
themselves to be his disciples and Servants, John 4. 1. Baptism is the mark,
Character, and Cognizance of a Christian, hence John speaks of those that
have the Name of the Lamb (although some Copies express not that phrase, yet
others have it) and of his Father in their Foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. who are set
in opposition to those that receive the mark of the Beast in their Foreheads,
Chap. 13. ver. 16. Now by those that thus bear the Name of Christ and of God in
their Foreheads, we are (as that great Interpreter Mede.
of the Apocalypse who is (...) has learnedly explained it) to understand those
who break not their Faith, whereby they have bound themselves in Baptism to
Christ (the Lamb) as their Lord and General, and to his Father. The Sacrament
of Baptism whereby we solemnly profess allegiance to God and Christ, and by
which we take upon us his Name, is the Seal of the Lord, and so is called by
the Ancients, Austin, In John Sract. 6.
calls it, the Royal marks and the mark of the Redeemer. Tertullian (...) Idol.
c. 19:
calls it the mark of Christ, To Exhort. ad Bap.
Ba^t, so the Scho^^ast. See more in Mede on Rev. 14. 1. By all this discourse
then, it appears that See Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. p. 39. 40.
they are greatly ly deceived who think that Circumcision was only a carnal
thing, sealing no more then carnal or temporal Promises. The Jews themselves,
although they understood but little of those mysteries which themselves
observed Comparatively to what is revealed in the Gospel, yet they ever thought
that holy and Heavenly mysteries were signified by Circumcision. As appears by
their words in the Book called Zohar cited by Ainswrrth on Genesis 17. 11. and
many other Testimonies that might easily be produced, and they that adhere to
that Not on that the Sacraments of the old Testament did not seal (for the
Substance) the same spiritual mysteries, which are sealed in the Sacraments of
the New Testament do comply, (...)
not only with the Anabaptists but with Papists against the (...) of Orthodox
and Protestant Writers, yea, their notion is evidently and fully against the
scope and Reasonings of the holy Apostle in the 1^. Chap. of his (...) Epistle
to the Corinthians.

Moreover, it is from what has been declared, manifest that they are no less
mistaken, who think that the difference between Circumcision and Baptism lies
in this. That Regeneration is requisite to Baptism, but that mere natural
descent from Abraham gave right to Circumcision* Regeneration was as much
requited in order to Circumcision, as it is in order to Baptism, but that the
thing which did entitle to Circumcision, was the being visibly the spiritual
Seed of Abraham, and not a mere natural descent from him, is evident.

1. In that there were in the days of the old Testament, some descended from
Abraham who had no right to Circumcision, E. G. Edomites, Ishmaelites. etc.
Jer. 9. 26. Psalm. 120. 5.

2. In that some were Circumcised, who were not of the natural Seed of Abraham,
viz. his spiritual Seed, so. Proselytes to the Faith of Abraham. Though a man
were a Jew by birth he had no right to Circumcision, except he were of the
Jewish (that is of Abraham's) Religion; and he that was of the Jewish Religion,
although he were not a Jew by birth, yet had right to that Ordinance. In a
word, Abraham's Children are such as are so, either externally or internally.
Amongst external Children are such as do profess the Faith and Religion of
Abraham, Thus did the Jews and Proselytes of old, and so do all that are truly
called Christians now. Those that are the spiritual Children of Abraham upon an
internal Account are such as are truly Regenerate, Genesis 21. 12. Isaac was both
these, therefore is he called the Child of the Promise, v. (...) Annot. in lo^.
h. e. born by virtue of the Promise which Ishmael was not, only by natural
Generation. Hence Penitent Za^heus is called a Son of Abraham, Luke 19. 9. The
latter of these have right to Baptism in Soropoli, in the sight of Heaven, the
former have so in soro Soli, as to men; yea, and in some sense in foro Dei
likewise, h. e. God commands that such should have the Seal of the Covenant
applied to them, withal Engaging that if they will be as good as their word,
that then all the blessings propounded in the Covenant, shall be theirs, so
then it remains still a Truth; that as to any substantial difference, the
same qualifications were required under the old Testament to fit for
Circumcision which are now required under the new Testament to entitle to
Baptism, Hence Christians are called the Circumcision in a spiritual Sense,
Phil. 3. 3. and the Jews are said to be baptized, 1 Cor. 10. 2, which shows
that those two Ordinances do as to their Essentials agree.

We come at last to the Assumption of the Argument thus far propounded, viz.
That the persons in Question have those Qualifications which did give right to
Circumcision. E. G.

1. They are in Covenant with God, which is proved first in that they were once
in Covenant with him (as all that are for Paedo Baptism will readily
acknowledge) and they are not chargeable with the guilt of any sin, either of
Commission or of Omission, for the which the Lord does discovenant his people;
Indeed if the Children whose Interest we plead, were born of Idolatrous or
Heretical Parents, or of Parents degenerated into Infidells, or Incorrigibly
Scandalous in their lives and conversations; these are evilis for which God
does disowne and discovenant men, and therefore so might we likewise, Exodus 32.
7. Ezekiel 23. 4, Revel. 11. 2. Tit. 3. 10, Romans 11. 21. with Zech. 11. 10 Psalm.
50. 16. of which more under the second Question, but no such thing can be said
of these concerning whom we dispute. He that does affirm ( affirmanty Incumbit
probated) that these Children have been guilty of such evil, as that the God of
all patience and grace does now reject and disown them as not belonging to him,
must bring forth his strong Reasons to prove what he says and show wherein.

2. Though the persons in Question had never been taken in to Covenant in their
Infancies, yet being qualified as the Proposition expresses, they must
therefore needs be under the bond of the external Covenant, should a Jew, Turk,
or Indian, do such things, as the Proposition requires, he would then be
visibly in Covenant with the Lord. How much more then are these persons so?

3. They that may become guilty of breaking Covenant are in Covenant, Romans 4.
15. But so may the persons in Question, should any of them (which mercy forbid)
forsake the God of their Fathers, and degenerate into Heathenisme or
Antichristianisme, the Lord will judge them after the manner of those that
break Covenant with him, Ezekiel. 16. 38. Isai. 24. 5.

4. Either these persons and their Children are in Covenant with the Lord, or
else there is no Salvation for any of them or theirs. If there were, there
would be Salvation without a Covenant, but it is a sure Principle that there is
no Salvation out of the Covenant of grace. If therefore the Children whose
Cause we plead, are not Interessed in the Covenant of grace there is no visible
hope of their Salvation. They that are strangers to the Covenant of Promise are
without God and without Christ in the world, and so without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12.

5. Their serious desire of Baptism does evidence their non renanciation of
the Covenant. Many of those Apostate Jews, who of old did forsake the Covenant,
Dan. 11. 30. did also renounce Circumcision, yea, they did in a vile manner
uncircumcise themselves, as is by credible History reported, 1 Maccab. 1. 16.
which gives light to that Scripture, 1 Cor. 7. 18. profane v. Epiph^nlib de.
Men's. and pond Cells l. 7. c. 25. Goodwin jewish Antiq. 16. c. 1.
Esau is thought to be the first Author and practiser of that wicked Invention.

2. The persons in Question have an Historical Faith, for the Proposition
expressly requires that they must understand and assent to the Doctrine of
Faith. Now this is a special (though not an only or the main) Qualification
entituling persons Adult to Baptism, Act 8. 36, 37.

3. They make an open, credible, or uncontradicted profession of the Name of
the true God, and of the true Religion before the world, for it is also
inserted in the Proposition, that they must publicly profess their assent to
the Doctrine of Faith, and solemnly own the Covenant before the Church, giving
themselves and theirs up to the Lord, and subjecting themselves to the
Government of Christ. These things mentioned were the main grounds of
Circumcision, and are the Qualifications requisite in order to Baptism; and
therefore being found in the persons concerning whom the Question is, can any
man forbid water that these should not be baptized? But before we pass off from
this Argument it seems necessary to remove a ponderous Objection, for it may
be said, if those Qualifications which entitled to Circumcision do give right
to Baptism, will it not then follow, That as in the Jewish Church persons
though never so profane, and wicked in their Conversations yet had their
Children Circumcised So in Christian Churches Parents no better qualified then
such Jews were, may claim right to Baptism for their Children? I Answer, this
will not follow from the Argument insisted on. [1.] because if the Rule had
been duly observed, all profane Impenitent persons had been cut off from the
Church of Israel by the Censure of Excommunication. It would be besides the
Question here to enter upon a large discussion of that Controversy, whether
there were not Censures appointed in the Jewish Church upon the account of
moral transgressions. That persons were suspended from partaking in holy things
by Reason of Ceremonial uncleanness is not doubted, But whether it were so in
the Church of Israel on the account of moral uncleanness has been a Question
amongst some, Mr. Aarous Rod Blossoming. Lib. 1.
Gelaspy has learnedly and elaborately proved that the Affirmative is true.
The Jewish Masters tell us of four Baxtorf. lex. T^lmad: p. 1 304 1305.
and twenty Causes of Excommunication, and many of them are for transgressions
of the moral Law, especially they say, that L^em^odem libro. p: 195.
an Heretical or Epicurean Israelite was excommunicated withont delay yea, the
most Ancient and famous of the Jewish writers In libro de victimas offerentibas.
Philo, Antiq. Judaic. l. 19. c. 7.
Josephus, etc. informous, that in the Church of Israel of old there were
Ecclesiastical Censures upon the account of moral uncleanness, and the
Scripture does in many places, not obscurely intimate as much unto us. This
seems evident from Separabitur a caetu, i. e. excommunicabitur sit Osiander*
Junias, M^lvenda,
Ezra 10. 8. and A^e (...) perillad (...), intelli^it d^o excommunication is
genera Grotins in loc.
Neh. 13. 25. And in the New Testament we find that the Jews did excommunicate
such as were Heretical in Judgment as well as the Scandalous in Life, John 9.
22. and 12. 42. and 16. 2. also great Interpreters Conceive that, that
Scripture Isai. 66. 5, does respect Excommunication upon the account of
Religion, so de Arcauo sermon. C. 47.
Arias Montanus de Republiea Habreor. c. 7.
Bertramus Cent. 1. l. 1 c 8
the Centuriators etc. yea, this is the Sentence of Erasmus, Brentius,
Tossanus, Diodati, Cartwright, Gerhard, and others cited by Book 1. c. 6.
Gelaspi. Now amongst the Jews if a man were excommunicate, his Children were
cast out of the Church too. He that is justly accounted the most learned man
that has been in the world, as to Iudaical learning in that Book of his, the
Composure where of was the fruit of (...)
thirty year study, informs us, that amongst the Israelites the difference
between him that was guilty of death, and him that was guilty of Cutting off,
i. e. Church Censure was (...)
that, in the former himself only was Cut off, but not his Children, but as for
the latter, not himself only but his Children were Cut off. And another learned
Author Goodwin (...) and Aaron l. 5. Chapter 2.
in Jewish Antiquities, tells us that the children of excommunicate persons
were not Circumcised.

2. If persons now be as well qualified as of old in the Church of Israel, they
required Proselytes to be before they admitted them to Circumcision, they have
right to Baptism, for they absolutely refused to receive a Scandalous or
Heretical person. Nay, (as before was hinted) Buxtorfeodem Libro p. 408.
they strictly enquired whether he that desired to be Circumcised, had not
Mercenary ends and motives, which prevailed with him, and if so it appeared,
they would not accept of such a Proselyte. Now these things considered, it does
not at all follow, that because many profane and Heretical persons had their
children Circumcised, that therefore such now should have Baptism, either for
themselves or their children.

CHAP. V.
THe fourth Argument prosecuted, because the Children in Question are under
Church discipline. proved, [1.] Because that Baptism which they received in
Infancy ingaigeth them to a Subjection to the orders of Christ's Seoul. [2.] In
all Ages and almost in all Churches, such Chilpren have been under
Ecclestastical discipline, so in the primitive times, proved from the Testimony
of Clemens Paul's fellow labourer, so in after Ages the Cate^^umeni, so in the
Bohemian Churches. And all Protestant Churches, yea, in those of the
Separation. [3.] Discipline and Church Government is the Cause of God and of
new England. [4.] God has owned and blessed the application of Church
discipline to sundry of those Children. (5.) The so great neglect of discipline
has been (and if not reformed will be) destructive to the rising Generation in
New England. (6.) Those Children are of those whom the Scripture styleth (...)
or those within. (7.) The do by an act of their own subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in his Church. (8.) They are part of that (...) whom
Elder^are to feed. 9. They are of Christ's Family.

Enough has been said to clear the third Argument, we come then unto a fourth,
which is this, They that are under the discipline and Government of Christ in
his Church, have right to Baptism, But the Children in Question are so, Ergo.

Concorning the Proposition many words are not needful, even Anti-Paedo^
Baptists themselves do acknowledge that disciples have right to Baptism,
according to Math. 28. 19. But they that are under the discipulus a disciplina
qua^i discipulin^^. V. Mr Philip Goodwin Evan^el. Condun. p. 9.
discipline and Government of Christ in his Church are disciples, therefore
they have right to Baptism, and Consequently may transmit that right to their
Children; The Consequence I know will be denied by those that Scruple all
Infant Baptism, but it is readily embraced by those for whom this discourse is
principally intended. To proceed to the Assumption, viz. That the Children in
Question are, (and ought to be carried toward accordingly by the particular
Churches, where they are, and have been baptized) under the Government and
discipline of Christ in his Church. Inasmuch as this is a Truth of no small
Importance and Concernment to the Interest of Christ's Kingdom, and wherein the
welfare of the rising Generation in New England is not a little involved, we
shall therefore propound [as briefly as may be] some Arguments for it, which
seem to carry a Convincing Evidence of light along with them.

1. Baptized persons are under the discipline and Government of Christ, for
Baptism does engage the receiver of it unto an observance of all that Christ
does Command, and therefore unto a Subjection (...) that discipline which is by
him appointed, Math. 28. 19, 20. when a person is baptized he is solemnly
admitted into Christ's School, can one be admitted into Christ's School, and yet
not Subject to the Orders and discipline of that School? who ever subjecteth
himself to Baptism, does by that very act Subject (...) to that discipline
which does belong to the School of Christ. Again, Baptism is the Livery which
of right appertains to Christ's hou^hold Servants, surely, if a man accept of
that Livery he does thereby submit himself to the Laws and Government of
Christ, which is exercised in Christ's Family here on Earth. Therefore the
persons in Question being baptized, may not plead exemption from discipline. To
desire the Privileges of Christ's School and yet to expect freedom from the rod
of it (in Case of due desert) is unreasonable.

2. That discipline and Government which Christ has appointed in his Church
has been exercised toward Children [according to their Capacity] even in all
Ages of the world, so it was when the Church was domestical, Genesis 4. 16. and
21. 10. and after the Church became National, Gal. 5. 3. This (I take it) is
questioned by none, or very few. Now in as much as to be under the wing of
Christ's Government in his Church, is a very high Privilege, he that shall
affirm that although the Children of the Jews were invested with this
Privilege, yet that the Children of Christians are divested thereof, had need
to have strong Reasons to prove this Assertion, and must show us the Repeal
from Scripture, or we cannot believe him. Besides, if due enquiry be made into
the Catholic practice of the N. T. Church, it will be found that such persons
as we are speaking of, have ever been looked upon, as within the verge of the
Churches power and discipline. Clemens (...) in his divine Epistle to the
Church of (...) Conter etiam Tertul. contra Marcion. l. 4.
Corinthians, bids them look well to this. Let (says he) your Children be made
partakers of that discipline which is in Christ. This Testimony is the more to
be valued, for that this Clemens is thought to be the very same person that we
read of in the Scriptures, as one of Paul's see Medes works in Folio p. 1013.
and Buxtons Notes on that Epistle of Clement.
Fellow Laborers, Phil 4. 3. And that Epistle of his does wholly Savor of a
Primitive and Apostolical Spirit, and thence was most highly valued by the
Ancients, being honorably mentioned by l. 3. c. 3.
Irenoeus, In Catal. Script. Eccles.
Hiero^, H^stor. Eccl. c. 12.
Eusebiu, l. 3. c 18.
Necophorus etc. And in after times baptized ones (one Question is of such)
were kept under a strict discipline, which also was the Reason why some
deferred their Baptism, yea, detained their Children from Baptism a long
time, so it was with Austin Confess l. 1. c 11
as himself Confesses. Moreover, they that have any acquaintance with the
Customs of the Church in the Ages following the Apostles, know that in those
times there were three sorts of persons, under the Churches Inspection.

1. Such as were only instructed in the mysteries of Christian Religion, these
the Greeks called Catechument: the Latins v. Tertuil. de (...) and adv. (...)
c. 4. and (...) ^. 3. Ep. 17.
Audientes, and when they desired Baptism they were termed compe^entes, (...)
those did receive (...), before admission to full Communion.

2. Such as were moreover baptized; but not admitted to higher Privileges,
these were styled baptizati, Inutati, (...). Now these were subject to Church
Censures, Albaspin. in (...). de p^nit. c. 7. lege (...) p 420.
Censura si p^^^arent post Baptismum coerceban^ur. And yet they were not
admitted to the Lords Supper, Nay, the teachers or those days were Cautelous
of so much as preaching v. Cyril. Alexcontra Julian. l. 7 Chrysort ^iu 1 Cor
15. 29. Dyonis. (...). de Hierarch. Initio
concerning the Lords Supper, (which I Confess was unjustifiable (...) and
Superstition) if any of these that were only Catechument, (...), or baptizati
were present, as is evident beyond all Contradiction from Innumerable
Testimonies, out of the Ancients (Fathers as they are called) easily producible.

3. (...), perfecti, or Confirmed ones, i. e. such as were admitted to all
Church Privileges. So then, the Christian Church of old did discipline such
Children as our Question is about, although not presently admitted to the Lords
Table. Furthermore, since the Anti Christian Apostasy, the Reformed Church has
ever owned this Truth. As for those pure Churches, which Ratio ordin. (...).
Bohem. p 71.
for a long time flourished in Bohemia, Commenius testifyeth concerning them,
that ( disciplinoe subjacent omnes a seen ad ^^fantem) even Children as well as
others were under discipline. Thus also it was in that gathered Church which
was in London in the days of Edward the sixth, as their famous Pastor Forma
Eccles. (...). (...): (...) p 1041, etc 107, etc.
Johannes Alasco has declared. And in one word, in Reformed Churches
generally, yea, even in those of the Separation witness Mr. Robinson, in his
Appendix to Mr. Perkins Cateehisme, and the Churches in Plymouth Colony (though
some of them are not of the way of separation, but our Congregational Brethren)
at this day extend discipline toward their Children, (as the matter does
require) and dismiss them also, (when by removal put upon it) to other
Churches, although they were never in full Communion with any Church. Now it is
a saying of above thousand years old, and has much of Truth in it, (...)
That, that which the universal Church holds, and has in all Ages been
practiced is (...) esteemed as Apostolical. But this extending of discipline
toward the Children of the Church which we plead for has been the Catholic
practice of the Churches of Christ in all places and in all Ages, which is a
great Argument to prove that it has the stamp of lus Divinum upon it. Although
in Antipaedo-Baptistical Congregations [and some few other] there has been no
Church care about Children, yet some few inconsiderable exceptions are not
enough to invalidate a general Rule, or to prove that the Church in general
has not walked according to this Rule. And albeit some now with us are apt to
Conceive that only Parents, and not their Children are given up to the Elders
and Brethren of the Church, yet the affirmative of this Question was so clear
in former times amongst us, as that Children in their Catechism were taught
thus to believe. Mr. Cotton in his Milk for babes has again and again
expressed this. See him also in his Book of the holiness of Church members,
page 57. and of Infant Baptism, page 163. And Answer to Williams, page 44. 78.
3. Discipline is our great Interest, which we are engaged to assert and plead
for. This is the Cause of God in New England in a special manner. We are the
Children of the good old Non-Conformists, now what was it that they did suffer
so much for, but that so they and their Children also might be brought under
that discipline, and Government which Christ has appointed in his Church? and
therefore were they by their Adversaries the Prelates reproached, with the Name
of Disciplinarians, should we now desert that Cause, it would be a sad
degeneracy. There are many godly Souls in New England, that the great motive
which prevailed with them to come into this wilderness, was that so they might
leave their Children under the Government of Christ in his Church. But if the
Church has nothing to do with such, these Confessors have suffered many things
in vain. Have we for our poor Childrens sake in special, left a dear and
pleasant Land, and ventured our Lives upon the great waters, and encountered
with the difficulties and miseries of a wilderness, and does it at last come to
this, that they have no more Advantage as to any Church care about them, then
the Indians and Infidels amongst whom we live? O this is sad! when Pharaoh
would suffer the Children of Israel themselves to serve the Lord in the
wilderness, but their little ones must not go with them, we know what Spirit
acted him. We may avert that they who will not suffer the Children of Christ's
people to come under his Government, are not in that matter acted by his Spirit.

4. God has owned and blessed the application of Church discipline, toward
the Children in Question, for much, yea, for saving good. Instances are not
rare amongst us, that when some of these Children have been left to scandalous
miscarriages, and thereupon in the Name of Christ Censured, the Lord has
blessed those Censures, even to the Conversion of their Souls, the flesh has
thereby been destroyed, and the Spirit saved; this proves that the practice we
argue for is no ^umane Invention, but a a^vize Institution. Does not the
Apostle prove, see Mr. Cotton of Baptism. p. 173.
that his Calling was divine, because God owned it and succeeded it with a
blessing, 1 Cor. 9. 1, 2. with Chap. 4. 15, 16? And is not Peter's call to the
work of the Ministry amongst the Jews evinced from the very same Argument, Gal.
2. 7 8, 9. Was not Gods blessing of Aarons Rod an effectual demonstration of
the divine approbation of his Ministry? The like may be said in this Case,
concerning the Rod of discipline. Its true, that the Lord may, [and many times
doth] own an Ordinance of his own, though attended with many humane mixtures
and Superstitions; but that which is merely an Invention humane in divine
worship, God has cursed it, and he will never bless it, should Churches go
about to Censure the Children of unbelieving Indians, the Lord Jesus would
never own such proceedings, but he has, and does, and will own them, as to
those that are the Children of the Church.

5. The neglect of discipline toward the Children in Question, has been the
woeful Cause of much evil amongst us. There are many sad Complaints against the
rising Generation, and too much Cause for them, but how much sadder would it be
if they who make such Complaints should be any way chargeable with the guilt of
these miscarriages, by with holding from this (...), that which is by the Lords
appointment the means (...) and recovery out of evil: This very neglect has
brought a wound upon these Churches which (except the Lord be exceeding
merciful) is now become immedicable, and Incurable, Hine prima (...), children
have been let alone so long and are become so numerous, and many of them such
(...) as that (though once it might have been done with much ease) it is now
[in some places at least] become a difficulty, [ and almost an Impossibility]
how to bring them under the yoke of Christ. But what Answer they will give to
the Lord in that day, at whose door this evil shall lie, I know not, but
sometimes have inward tremblings to think, I would not for all this world, that
the guilt of the miscarriage of so many Souls should lie upon me. It was
disputed in Oxford, whether the chief Magistrate be in any Case a Subject of
Church Censure. The Respondent pleaded, that though all other Christians might
[in Case] be the Subject of that Ordinance, yet he by Reason of the dignity of
his person must be ex^mpted, whom the opponent urged with this Argument
salutare animoeremedium, etc. That which is a means appointed by Christ for the
salvation of the Soul may not be with held from the chief Magistrate, But
Church Censure is so, Ergo.

Thus I would say here, that which is a means appointed by Christ, for the
Salvation of the Souls of our Children, and to prevent their Eternal ruin. Let
us not say that it belongs not to them, but so is Church Censure, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
It is an Ordinance, yea, a Privilege, which in its own nature is not only
panal but medecinal. Therefore they are injurious to the Souls of the Children
concerning whom our present dispute is, that will not suffer them to have the
benefit of so great and healing an Ordinance.

6. They that are of those whom the Scripture Styles (...) Those within, are
under Church discipline, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to judge them that are
without? do not ye judge them that are within? which plainly shows that
discipline does or should run parallel with the visible Church. Who ever an
Apostle has power to Censure, is a Subject of Church discipline, But it was
true con^rning every member of the visible Church that an Apostle had power to
Censure them. And surely there ought to be a difference acknowledged between
Children and Strangers, Mat. 17. 25, 26. Nor are they worthy to be accounted
members of Christ's Kingdom, who are not willing to Subject themselves to the
Laws and Government therein appointed; But it was before proved that the
persons in question, are members of the visible Church.

7. They that by a personal Act of their own, do subject themselves to the
Discipline and Government of Christ, are u^ questionably under that Government.
But this is true concerning the persons described in the Controverted
Proposition. Against this Argument, I see not; what can with any Colour^^
Reason be pretended, unless it should be said, that the Scripture forbids
persons, no better qualifed, then is by the Propsition required, to snbject
themselves to Discipline, which assertion is great deal sooner affirmed then
proved.

8. The Synods Argument, taken from the Relation which such Children stand in
toward the Elde^ of the Church, seems very demonstrative. All the flock are
under the seeding (which implies Rule and Government) of the Elders thereof,
Act. 20. 28, But Children are part of the flock, it is a strange flock which
has no Lambs in it, every particular Church being under the inspection of
ordinary Elders, is a flock of God, 1 pet. 5. 2. But if only such as are in
full Communion are subject to Church discipline then the flocks, i. e. Churches
[ Cant. 1. 7.] of Christ, consist only of sheep but not of Lambs.

9. They that are of Christ's Family are the Subjects of Christ's discipline, but
the Children of Believers as well as themselves are of Christ's Family. Gods
Children are of Christ's Family, but the Children of Believers are Gods
Children, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. thy Sons and thy Daughters whom thou have born unto
me, my Children says the Lord. In a word, the Church is married unto Christ^;
Hence the Children of the Church, are the Children of Christ, the Churches
husband; therefore these whose Interest we are pleading, being Church Children,
they are Christ's Children, and therefore the Subjects of his discipline, yea,
and the Scripture says expressly concerning converted Gentiles, that their
Children are brought into the Church (which is the Family of Christ) in the
Arms of their Parents, Isai. 49 22. I have the rather insisted on this
Argument, because if this matter referring to discipline were but duly
attended, the other Question about Baptism would be brought unto such a
narrow, as that there would be little the occasion for this dispute. It is true
and a worthy observation of Mr. Cottons, Let (says he) Grounds and Ends of
Infant Baptism, p 106, 134, 161, 163.
the primitive practice be restored to its purity, and then there will be no
more fear of pestering Churches with a Carnal Generation of members baptized in
their Infancy, then of admitting a Carnal Company of Hypocrites, confessing
their Faith and Repentance, in the face of the Congregation, either the Lord in
the faithfulness of his Covenant, will sanctify the hearts of the baptized
Infants to prepare them for his Table, or else he will discover their Hypocrisy
and profaneness in the presence of his Church before men and Angels, and so
prevent the pollution of the Lords Table, and Corruption of the discipline of
the Church by their partaking therein. And in another place the same great
Author has Holiness of Church members p. 51.
this passage. Many Children are born in the Church to whom the Pastor is by
his Office a Pastor, whose Conversion he is bound to intend and attend.

CHAP. VI.
THe fifth Argument touched, viz. because those Arguments which prove (...)
Baptism in the General, do for the most part prove it according to that
Latitude which is by the Con^roverted Proposition asserted. And the Objections
against this Extent of Baptism do many of them strike at PaedoBaptisme evinced
by many Instances.

Thus for the fourth Argument. In the fifth place, it is a Consideration not to
be slighted, that the usual Arguments whereby Paedo-Baptisme in the general is
proved, may ^truly be applied to those concerning whom our present dispute is.
Also the Objections against this extent of Baptism are such, as
Antipaedo-Baptists are wont to make use of to serve their turn. And that this
may not seem to be words only, without proof, let there Instance be given to
Confirm what has been said. Now the Arguments commonly produced to prove
Infant Baptism are those which have been insisted on, They that are of Gods
Church; that are in-covenanted; Believers; disciples; Children of Abraham;
Children of the Kingdom; that are Christ's; holy Persons; the heritage of the
Lord; (...) of Salvation; Subjects of the Special Blssings of Christ etc. are
to be Baptized. But all this is true concerning some Children, Ergo, some
children are to be Baptized. Yea, and all those Arguments which demonstrate the
just Divinum of Paedo^aptisme in general, may be applied to those concerning
whom the question speaks. On the other hand, the ordinary Objections against
all Infant Baptism are such as these, viz. that thereby we shall come to have
a Carnal Generation of Church members, and that Church membership is not
propagated by Generation under the new Testament, as it was under the old, that
Infants do not hold forth Faith and Repentance, and are not fit to partake at
the Lords Table, that there is neither Precept nor Example in Scripture to
warrant such Baptism, that it upholds the state of Anti Christ, sets the
Seal to a blank, etc. Such Reasons as these now mentioned, Anabaptists make use
of, to serve their turns? as in their printed Pamphlets may be seen, and what
have the Brethren of the Antisynodalian persuasion, more to say then these
things? Also some that are great sticklers against the Synod Book, raze
Foundation-Pillar-Principles in the doctrine of PaedoBaptisme, for they reject
the distinction of Baptismes being a Seal of Initiation, and the Lords Supper
of Confirmation. They own not an holiness of Consecration or dedication to the
Lord, as the ground of Baptism; but maintain, that all Holiness is either
Imputed, or else qualitative, viz. in respect of an holy frame of heart in
Regeneration, which is the Anabaptists very distinction, see Mr. Hooker of the
Covenant p. 43. Mr. Cobbet. p. 18. Mr. Cotton. P. 111. They say that sincere
Saints only, and not any hypocrite is under the Covenant of grace, which
Assertion I thought that none but Anabaptists and Antinomians had maintained
it, till now I see some others, in that principle jumping with them. Yea, many
of the Antisynodalian brethren deny that Children are members of the Church,
pretending that it cannot stand with the purity of the Church to own such a
member there in. But Mr. Cotton In his Epistle prefixed to my Fathers
Catethisme. See also his Book of Infant Baptism, p. 101. 103.
says, that all but Antipaedo Baptists do acknowledge Children to be members
of Christ's Kingdom and Church. And Dr. Goodwin In his Epistle to Mr. Cottons
grounds and ends of Infant Baptism
has spoken worthily in saying that Infants are purissinapars Ecclesia the
purest part of the Church. The study of this Controversy, has made me willing
to peruse what ever tracts (whether printed or in Manuscripts) I could any way
come by the sight of, do professedly handle that Question concerning Paedo
Baptism. And I must needs say, that I have not yet met with any discourse
where in the Baptism of Infants is with more succinctness and full Conviction
Asserted and proved, then it is in the Synod Book, which doubtless is partly
come to pass, by Reason that, that learned and worthy Divine Mr. Mitchel late
famous Pastor of the Church in Cambridge, had a special hand in the Composure
thereof, who was ('it is well known by what means) above others versed in that
Controversy. Nor is it wholly to be buried in silence, that professed Antipaedo
Baptists are much displeased at the Synod Book. I have by me a M. SS. written
in England by an Antipaedo Baptist there, in Confutation of the Synod Book. How
the men of that opinion amongst us stand affected, needs not to be said, this
Argument will be of no moment with some, but it is of weighty Consideration
with me, and I know not, but that it may be so with some others, into whose
hands this Discourse shall come; and I have therefore mentioned it.

CHAP. VII.
THe last Argument mentioned, viz. That John Baptist and the Apostles did
practice Baptism in as great a Latitude, as is now pleaded for.

There is yet another Argument, viz. That John Baptist and the Apostles did
Baptize persons that had no higher qualifications, then are in the Controverted
Proposition expressed. As for John, the Scripture assures us that Jerusalem
and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan were baptized of him,
Math. 3. 5, 6. Mark. 1 5. Now it seems much against Reason to Imagine, that
those numerous multitudes of (by him) baptized ones, had all of them higher
qualifications then those required in the Proposition, (especially Considering
that John himself does intimate that many of them were but chaffy Professors)
which if they had not, it must needs follow that persons so qualifyed had right
to that Ordinance. For certainly, John would not apply Baptism unto unmeet
Subjects, and whereas it is alleged by some, that John told his hearers that
they must bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, that only proves that
Repentance is necessary, in order to obtaining the spiritual good held forth in
Baptism, and not that John Baptized none but true penitents. Nor is that
scruple of any weight, which has by others been objected, who Question whether
the Baptism of John and that instituted by Christ were the same. For besides
that the Affirmative is abundantly and irrefragably proved by our Divines
against the Papists and some of the Ancients (Fathers so called) this objection
falls to the ground, in that it is evident, that the Apostles were for as great
a Latitude respective to the Subject of Baptism as John was, for it is said,
that they baptized more then John, John. 4 1. Consider the place, with John. 6.
60, 61, 64, 66. How can we think that those many thousands of Jews whom the
Apostles baptized before our Saviors Ascension, were so qualified as some with
us would now have it to be? It is Confessed that in after Ages as the mystery
of iniquity began to work, and men would be stricter and wiser then the Rule,
there was in the Church a great Rigidity as to the Administration of Baptism,
the Catechumeni were sometimes long deferred, and detained from this Ordinance,
and held as Competentes it may be many years together. But did the Baptist or
the Apostles ever carry it so? Surely no. Yea, men did v. Euseh. i. 4. de vita
Constant. Theod. Lib. 1. Hist. Eccles c. 35 Nazianz. (...) 40. de Bapt.
Superstititiously omit Baptism, some because they would be baptized in the
River, where Christ was baptized. Valentinian the Emperor dyed as he was going
to be baptized in the River Jordan, others because they thought that if they
sinned after Baptism, their sins could not be forgiven, etc. So that too much
Rigidity as well as too much Laxeness in this point does Incurr the Censure of
Superstition and Anti Christianisme. And yet it is not to be forgotten, that in
former Ages of the Church there has ever been a greater Latitude as to the
Subject of Baptism, then as to the Subjects of the other Seal of the Lords
Supper. Thus it is at this day, in the Protestant Churches throughont
Christendom, [so called] yes, and has been so ever since the Reformation, as
who so does Consult the Confessions and Forms of Discipline published by many
of the Reformed Churches will easily perceive. Also toward the Primitive
times, there were some admitted to hearing and to Baptism, [as was partly
intimated before, and may more fully be cleared anon] who were kept from the
Lords Table. They that were v. Mo^ice of Right to the Lords Supper. p: 115. ex
Albaspin. (...) Gregor. Theumaturgi. Epist. Canon quam citat Medas in 1 ^ Cor.
11. 22. p. 420.
called sta^tes were admitted to some but not to all Church Privileges. There
were in the Church of old Initian and Confirmate. The former of these were
admitted to Baptism and unto Discipline, but not to the Lords Supper. The
latter Sort only were received to full Communion in all Church Privileges.

CHAP. VIII.
THe Author formerly Concurred with those that are for a greater strictness, as
to the Subject of Baptism then it by the synod asserted. This change of
Apprehension Justified. Many Learned and worthy men have seen cause to change
their Conceptions about greater matters then this. The first Objection removed.
By this extent of Baptism, the Blood of Christ is not profaned.

Enough [I Suppose] has been said for the evincing of the Affirmative Part of
the Question propounded. Nevertheless, it must needs be owned, that there are
weighty Objections, which seem to propend toward the Negative in this
Controversy. And in that respect I am far from Censuring those that do not
concur with my present persuasion in this matter, yea, I do Confess that I was
my self twelve years ago dissenting from that, which now upon much study and
enquiry after the mind of Christ, I see, and cannot but profess to be the
Truth. Nor do I think it a disparagement to me (who am a man full of Ignorances
and Infirmities) openly to declare that the Lord has graciously given me to
see further into His Truth, then once I did. All men acknowledge that when
Bellarmine wrote his Book of Recognitions, It was the greatest Testimony of
Ingenuity that ever was given by him. And there have been many Learned men, who
(...) me in light more then the Moon does the least (...), who have in far
greater matters then this is, ^ern Cause upon second thoughts to alter their
Apprehensions. Is not Austin famous for his humility manifested in his Book of
Retractations? And vide Bucer ^ Retractationem decaena inter scripta ejus
Anglicana. p. 642. and alter m^ Retractationem. p. 647.
Bu^er for changing his Judgment in that Controversy about Consubstan^^a^ion.
Yea, Leather, v pezetij Mellif. Histor. and Melch. Ad. m in vita Lutheri
notwithstanding all that he had said and written for that (...). yet saw cause
before his death to be of another mind, albeit he was slow to publish it [but
left it to Melancthons wisdome] lest his Doctrine in other matters of a higher
Concern, should be called into Question. And great Zvinglius was once a little
inclined to Antipaedo-Baptisme, yet the Lord in mercy gave him not only to see
the evil of that error, but also to do special Service for the Church, in
vindicating the Truth against the Anabaptists of that Age. It is a great honor
to Mr. Robinsons name, that he was by means of Doctor Ames writings, brought
off from his Rigraity of Separation in that point of refusing to hear in Church
Assemblies in England, and that he left written [ propria manu] in his study,
Convincing Reasons, to manifest the lawfulness of that practice, which
sometimes himself had publicly declared against. And it is both a wise and a
witty Return which Doctor Owen makes to Mr. Cawdry, who charge the Doctor
with some Inconstancy of Judgment, for that he saw Cause after his writing for
the Presbyterian to appear on the behalf of the Congregational way. see his
review of Schism. p. 45.
He that can glory that in fourteen years be has not Altered or improved his
Conceptions of some things of no greater Importance then that mentioned, shall
not have me for his Rival. So I say, that person who though his Course of life
lead unto Constant study and enquiry after Truth, yet shall not in the space of
twelve years change his Apprehension in any matter, though of as great a
Concern [and a greater too] as this now under debate, has more Reason to be
ashamed [if not of his pertinacy yet] of his non-proficiency in knowledge, then
to boast of his non-Apostacy. I shall proceed then to mention those Objections
[with some others] which once were prevalent with me to Cause a dissent from
the Proposition thus far asserted and proved, and also the Answers which to me
seem satisfactory.

1. It is objected we shall become guilty of profaning the blood of Christ, if
we apply Baptism to unmeet Subjects.

Answer. Some indeed Conceive that the water in Baptism, does signify the
blood of Christ, as wine in the Lords Supper does, and hence are afraid to
Administer Baptism to any, except such as holding forth Faith and Repentance,
are Subjects ^t for the Lords Supper. But there are Learned and very worthy
Divines who Conceive that they are mistaken, who think that the water in
Baptism does (as wine in the Lords Supper does) by Divine Institution
represent the Blood of Christ. see Mr. Medes Discourse on Tit. 3. 5.
It is very true, that the Blood of Christ is that which makes Baptism and
all other Ordinances effectual, but that is not the (...) or Countertype, which
the water in this Sacrament figureth. Therefore the Ancients are silent
concerning the Blood of Christ ^n their explications of this Mystery, and some
Lutherans complain of the Calvinists as being the Authors of this Notion. Nor
may we assign significations to Sacramental Types without Scripture warrant.
But the Scripture every where mentions another thing to be signified by this
water, sc. not the Blood, but the Spirit of Christ, or Regeneration. Yea, those
two are distinguished, when both the Sacraments of the New Testament, are
Conjunctly and mysteriously mentioned in the Scripture, Ezekiel. 47. 1. John. 19.
34. with 1 John 5. 8.

2. Though it be most true, that in Baptism we have Communion with Christ in
respect of his Death and Resurrection, yet it will not follow, that the Blood
of Christ is profaned by baptizing the persons in Question, because they are
so Qualifyed as that we are bound in Charity to hope that they are Interested
in the Redemption of Christ.

CHAP. IX.
THe second Objection, viz. that if the person in Question have right to
Baptism, they must also be Admitted to the Lords Table, as none of old were
Circumcised, but they were moreover Admitted to the Passover. That persons may
have right to Baptism, and yet not to the Lords Supper; proved from Scripture
and Reason.

Baptism is a Seal of Initiation, Regeneration, insition into Christ, and not
of growth in grace, which the Lords Supper does Seal. Persons may be capable of
receiving Baptism that are incapable of partaking at the Lords Table, some
amongst the Jews admitted to Circumcision that were not admitted to the
Passover or full Communion in all Church Privileges.

It is further objected by some, that if such persons have right to Baptism,
then also to the Lords Supper, as those that had right to Circumcision were
admitted to the Passover. But it may be Answered that it does in no wise
follow, that if these persons have right to Baptism, that then they have right
to the Lords Supper. For no Paedo-Baptist will affirm, that the same
Qualifications are required for Baptism which are required for Admittance to
the Lords Table; The Scripture makes a plain difference here, for Disciples
see the Answer to the Apologetical Preface. p. 43. and (...) Baptism. p. ^^,
63. and Baxter, p. 115.
as such have right to Baptism, John 4. 1, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Hence all, and
every disciple has so: when as they are not simple disciples, but self
examining disciples, that have right to partake of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.
28. Covenant Interest alone gives right to Baptism, but not to the Lords
Supper. Hence persons may have Immediate right to Baptism both for themselves
and theirs, and yet not of that other Ordinance, as (according to the opinion
of some) is proved by the Instance of a Believer not actually joined to a
particular Church, hence also it comes to pass, that, that may prevent the
Administration of the Lords Supper in Churches, which is not a sufficient Cause
to hinder the Administration of baptism, E. G. in Case of Schism, we see the
Administration of one of these Ordinances is suspended but not of the other.

Furthermore, Baptism is a Sacrament of Initiation, or Insition into Christ,
as those Scripture Expressions of being baptized into Christ, baptized into one
body, etc. do evince, Gal. 3. 27. Romans 6. 3. 1 Cor 12. 13.

Hence we read of twelve gates in New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 12. which Judicious
Interpreters take to be an Allusion as to the Sea Mr. Por^er of (...) number,
66^. P. 100, 114, 133, 14^, 147.
twelve gates which were in literal Jerusalem, so to the twelve Congregations
which are supposed to have been in Christian Jerusalem, (I mean the Christians
which lived in Jerusalem before the Romans destroyed it) wherein baptism was
administered, and thereby persons admitted, ( i. e. Sacramentally) into the
Heavenly Jerusalem, i. e. the Catholic Church. It is a Seal not of growth in
grace, but of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. I Confess this Notion has been
misunderstood and abused by many, but that does not make it to be an untruth.
It was a perverting of this Principle, when those Ancient Superstitions were
introduced of giving milk and honey to those that were newly baptized, ad
Infantandum as Tertu^ian speaks to signify the Spiritual Infancy and
Regeneration of those that were baptized, and of applying salt, etc to them,
because those Customs were of old used toward new born Infants, Isai. 7. 14,
15. Ezekiel. 16. 4. Also from the abuse of this Principle, it has come to pass
that in many Synagogues or meeting houses ( Cata^brestically styled Churches)
the Font stands at the door of the house, because Baptism is a Seal of
Entrance into the Church. Yea, the Gentiles did Instiate by Sacred washings:
and from them the Papists have learned to asperse holy water (as they call it)
on those that are entering into the Church. Thus we hear him in the famous
Heathen Poet speaking.

Tu genitor cape sacra manu patriosque penates
Me bello e tanto digressum and cade recenti
Attractare uefas, donec me flumine viro,
Abluero. AEneid. 2.
and AEneid. 6.
Idem ter socios pur a circumtulit unda
Spa^gens rore lev^et ramo felicis oliva.
Now all these washings, which the Gentiles used in their Sacra, Justin Mar^vr
says that by a Diabolical (...) ( Diabolus est dei sinia) they derived from
the Scriptures and Customs which were originally of divine Institution. But as
for the Lords Supper, it is a Sacrament not of Initiation but of Confirmation,
or growth in grace. There is then in this respect a great difference to be
observed in these two Sacraments. Hence it is that baptism is but once to be
administered, and the Lords Supper often, because a man is but once Regenerate,
whereas he is alwa^es growing up in Christ. Now to Argue that is persons have
right to a Sacrament of Initiation, that then they have so to the Sacrament of
Confirmation is no cogent Reasoning. Mr. Mede (...)
has truly observed, (though he stretch that Principle to another purpose)
that the Eucharist is a Sacrament of a different nature from baptism, this is
the Rite only of our new birth, wherein God accepts us to be his Servants, but
the Lords Supper is the Sacrament whereby we exercise the Functions of this new
life, worshipping and glorifying God through Jesus Christ, offering up
spiritual Sacrifice and service to him. Furthermore, we have seen by Experience
that Infants of seven (nay of three) years old have clearly evidenced that
Faith and other graces were wrought in their hearts, so godly Josias, Timothy
and others mentioned in the Scriptures had grace wrought in their hearts before
they were come to Adult Age. Have not Children been Martyrs for the Truth, that
Child which suffered Martyrdom Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. I. p. 116.
with Romanus was but seven years old, were not some of the Martyred Children
Ibid p. 57, 58.
of Felicitas, who suffered under the fourth Persecution then in minority? I
omit here the old story of the Pueri Ephesmi which Ancient Records speak of but
I would not wholly pretermit the true affecting stories which to this purpose
have of late been published Mr. Janeways Token for Children.
by a faithful Minister of Christ, who has to the great Comfort and benefit
both of Parents and Children cleared that matter to the world by exemplifying
in thirteen Children, who were effectually wrought upon in their minority, or
in-Adult Age. Now Certainly, these Children had right to baptism. Mr. T^mb^
himself (for he Confesses (...)
that such Children as John Baptist was, might be baptized) would hardly deny
it, but they had not Immediate right to partake at the Lords Table, since by
Reason of Age (or Nonage rather) they were not Subjects capable thereof. To
Conclude, Mr. Hookers (...)
words seem to have much evidence of Truth and Reason with them. Baptism
(says he) is the Entrance into Christ's Family, there is more to be looked at
to make a person capable of the Supper of the Lord, he must be able to Exmine
himself, and must not only have grace but growth in grace To the same purpose
see Mr. Steven Marshals learned and Judicious Sermon of Infant Baptism, page
51. As for that which is added to Confirm the Objection thus far Answered,
viz. that in the Jewish Church none were Circumcised but they were Immediately
admitted to the Passover, It is sooner affirmed then proved. 1. The Jewish v.
Hottinger. The saur Philol. I. 1. c. 1. p. 17, 18. and Dru^de Tribus Sect.
Judaeor p. 101.
Masters tell us of three sorts of Advenae or Proselytes, Gerei Toschab,
Proselyti Inquliini, who did observe those Commandments which were called the
seven Precepts of Noah, these indeed were not Circumcised.

2. Gerei Tzedek, Proselyti Justi^ia. Alias Gerei Gerurim, Proselyti (...) who
out of pure respect to Religion and the Name of God became Proselytes. Now
these were admitted to Circumcision, Baptism, Sacrifices, Passover, and all
Privileges belonging to members, in the Church of Israel.

3. Shechirim, Mercena^ius Proselytus est Circumcisus qaldem, fed men
Baptizatus, sic enim explicant Rabbini (...) Kabbi Levi (...) lib. Chin. (...)
Rabbin^rum.
Mercenarij, such a Proselyte was (as some say) Circumcised, but not recived to
further Privileges. However, we know from Scripture, that that uncleanness
would debarr from coming to the Passover, which yet did not unfit for the other
Ordinance of Circumcision. As also that Circumcision was according to divine
Institution observed by many who never were acquainted with the Ordinance of
the Passover. Thus have we the second Objection Answered. Nevertheless it may
not be amiss for the Reader to bear in mind that Anabaptists are wont to make
use of this very Argument, sufficiently Confuted in the writings of the
Orthodox^, who have maintained the Truth against the opposers of See Blackwood
against Infant Boptisme* p: 9. Answered by Mr. Blake, p. 44
Infant Baptism.

CHAP. X.
THe third Objection, viz. That membership in a particular Church gathered
according to Gospel Rules gives right to Baptism. The particular Church by
some taken in a very strict Sense, viz. for those unto whom Christ has
Committed the power of the keys, more largely for that part of Christ's visible
Kingdom, which does reside in such a particular place. The persons in Question
members of the particular Church, not in the former, but in the latter Sense.
That the visible and particular Churches are not one and the same, proved. That
membership in the particular Church is not the formal Reason of Baptism,
proved from Scripture and Reason.

We proceed to Consider a third Objection, viz. that membership in a particular
Church constituted according to Gospel Rules is that which does give right to
Baptism, which since it cannot be affirmed concerning the Children in
Controversy, therefore it may seem that they have no Title to Baptism.

Unto this may be Answered.

1. A particular Church is by some taken in a very strict Sense, viz. for a
Company of professing Covenanting Believers entrusted by Christ with the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 16. 18, 19. Thus by Church is meant a Society
consisting of Elders and Brethren which are a Body Politic, or Spiritual
Corporation, unto whom Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction does entirely belong. Yea,
the particular Church is sometimes in the Scripture taken in this strict Sense,
Acts 15. 22, 23. The Elders and Brethren are there said to be not only the
Church, but the whole Church. See more to this purpose in that excellently
Judicious Epistle which Dr. Goodwin, and Mr. Nigh have prefixed to Mr. Cottons
Treatise of the Keys, page 3. Now in this Sense not only Children but also
women are exempted from being members Constituent of the particular Church. h.
e. They have nothing to do with the power of the Keys. See that Preface
mentioned in the page Cited, and the Reply of the dissenting Brethren at
Westminster, page 30. and Dr. Owens Catechism, page 89. 103. Doubtless some
such Notion as this must be aimed at by Learned Mr. Norton, when he asserts
that women are members of the Church, but not members Constituent. For thus he
writes in his acute and accurate discourse In M: Ss. since the writing of
this* that Script of Mr. Nortons is printed. See my first Principles of New
England. page 20, 21.
about Church membership, the membership of a male Child Confaederating
mediately, i. e. In the public, person of the Mother excels the membership
of the Mother Confederating Immediately in her own person, because the Mother,
though she be a Church member, yet is not capable of being a member Constituent
of the Church, for only Brethren Constitute a Church, in that they alone be
capable of being the Subject of the power of the Keys, 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2.
12. So as that should the Brethren dye, the Sisters surviving could not
continue a Church, but would Immediately cease to be Church members, etc. Thus
Mr. Norton. Nevertheless, we must not therefore exclude either Women or
Children from being the Subjects of Church discipline, we know that in Civil
Corporations those that belong to such a City are under the Jurisdiction of the
Aldermen, and Common Council, who yet are not themselves either the one or the
other. In a College, all that have their Names written in the College Book,
are Subject to the Statutes and Government of that College, although no
members Constituent of the Corporation, even so all that have their Names
written in the Church Book, h. e. all that are members of the visible Church,
are ( i. e. ought to be) subject to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, and submit
themselves to his Government exercised by those Spiritual Corporations which
Christ has endowed with a Charter, albeit they are not members Constituent
thereof, or those to whom the power of the Keys does belong. Neither let it be
objected here, that we must not fashion the Church according to the world.
True, but if men in the world do in some things order matters as Christ has
appointed in his Church, we need not marvel at it; for Christ being the wisdom
of God has ordered matters in his Church according to the Rules of Infinite
wisdom, he has also by the same Spirit of wisdom taught men to order Civil
Constitutions aright. If therefore in some things, the wisdom of our Ancestors
in ordering of their Civil Governments, does imitate that of Christ's in framing
his Church, we may from the one Illustrate the other. See more in the above
praised Preface, p. 7. 9.

2. A particular Church is sometimes taken more largely, so. for that special
part of Christ's visible Church, which has its subsisting in this or that
particular place. Hence the Apostle says to the Corinthians, you are the body
of Christ and members in particular, Epist. 1. 12, 27. so then, they were not
only belonging to the body or Church of Christ in general, but members of that
particular part of Christ's mystical body, which was then in Corinth. In this
sense, it must not be denied, but that the Children in Question are members of
the particular Church, h. e. they are parts ( membrum est part Integri says
the Logician) of that part of Christ's visible Church which does reside in this
or that particular place, as formerly has been demonstrated. As for those who
think there is no difference between the instituted or particular Church
strictly taken, and the Church visible, so as that a man cannot be a member or
one of these, but he must be so of the other too, their notion is easily
everted. For that may possibly dismember a man as to a particular Church which
will not do so as to the visible Church. Diotrephes did Cast Brethren out of
the Church. 3 John 10. He did not cast godly Souls wholly out of the visible
Church (for that was not in his power); But out of some particular Church. See
Engl. Annot
Be-like it was out of that particular Church at Corinth, where a Spirit of
division and Faction prevailing, might well occasion such disorders and abuses
of Church Censures. Men may be cast out of the particular Church ( clave
erran^e) and yet not out of the Catholic Church, either visible or invisible.
Again, no one can be a member of the particular Church without the Consent of
other men, but a man may belong to the visible Church; whether men will or no.
A man may make profession of the Name of Christ, and his Conversation may be as
becomes the Gospel, whether men will or no. Now such a Profession and practice
will Constitute a member of the visible Church, but a farther act of
Confoederation is necessary to Constitute him a member of an Instituted Church.
Yet more, suppose a particular Church to be dissipated and dissolved by
persecution, so as that all the members are cut off, only one or two, these
escaped ones, of what Church are they members? Not of the particular, for that
has now no being, therefore they are members only of the Church general
visible, as when a Corporation in a Kingdom is destroyed, yet a member of it
escaping remains a member of the Kingdom, though not of that Corporation,
which is dissolved, so it is here.

3. They will undertake a difficult province, who shall maintain that
Membership in a particular Gospel Church, is the formal reason of Baptism. All
and only they that have an interest in Abraham's Covenant have right to
Baptism; now certainly, some that are not stated Members in any particular
Church, yet are within Abraham's Covenant. There are who do observe that in the
Scripture there is some difference between those terms of Brethren and
Disciples. vide Belgic Annotations
Act. 21. 4, 7. Brethren being used for those that were incorporated in some
particular Church, but Disciples are the same with Christians though not joined
in particular Churches. Now Disciples as such and not Brethren only have right
to Baptism. And truly it is hard to affirm, that a godly person must be denied
Baptism for his Child merely because he is not joined to a particular Church,
though it may be the reason of his not joining is only the weakness of his
tender Conscience which scrupleth his own fitness for the Lords Supper; and so
for actual Membership in the particular Church, and yet in the mean time would
gladly have himself and his Consecrated to Christ, yea and rejoice to be under
the Government and Laws of his Kingdom exercised in particular Churches.
Besides, the Institution of Baptism was precedanous to the Institution of
particular Gospel Churches. Those whom John Baptized were none of them Members
of a Gospel Church; nor will it suffice to say, that they were Members of the
Jewish Church, and that therefore John Baptized them; If Baptism belonged to
them as Members of the Jewish Church, then John would have Baptized all such
Members, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia which we know he did not, Luke
7. 30. Baptism is a Seal not of the Old but of the New Testament, and
therefore Membership in the Old Testament Church could not give right
thereunto. Again Cornelius was Baptized by Peter before he was joined to any
particular Church, and yet he was no See Dr. Twisse Letters to Mr. Meed p 1020.
Proselite to the Jewish Church, for he was uncircumcised, Act. 11. 3. Also the
Eunuch was Baptized before he was a Churchmember, as to a particular Church,
and although he might be a Jewish Proselite that could not inright him to
Baptism, because Baptism was no Ordinance of that Church, and being baptized
he was bound to relinquish the Jewish Religion and Church and to joy^ himself
to the Christian Church. When Philip went to Samaria, we find not that there
was any Church there planted at that time, yet he baptized them that believed,
Act. 8. The Jailer was not a member of an Instituted Chapter nor those in his house
when baptized, Act. 16. 31. The three thousand Converts were first baptized,
Acts 2. 41. then added to them, i. e. the Church, v. 47. There is little said
to enarvate this Argument only it is alleged that the Administrators were
extraordinary, but to that there is a ready, and it should seem a rational
Answer, viz. That extraordinary Officers would not apply Baptism to unlawful
or undue Subjects. Certainly, the Apostles would not administer Baptism to
unmeet Subjects, (therefore they never baptized unbelieving Jews or Heathens,
etc,) yet so it must be, if membership in a particular Church be a necessary
Qualification to render one baptizable. For many thousands that were destitute
of this Qualification, did the Apostles baptize, yea, it seems a matter
deeply to be Considered of, that we do not read in the Scripture of any one
person ever baptized after he was joined to a particular Church, but of many
that were so before such joining. Nor do we read of any one person admitted to
the Lords Table (since the first Administration and Institution of that Sacred
Ordinance) before his joining to some particular Church, but of many after
that, which seems strongly to intimate that membership in a particular Church
is a necessary requisite as to admission to the Lords Supper, but not so as to
Baptism. Besides Paul was baptized before he was joined to any particular
Church, Act. 9. and that by Ananias who is thought to be only an Ordinary
Teacher, some conceive that he was one of the Elders at Damascus, others think
he was one of the 70 disciples. But it cannot be proved that he was an
extraordinary Officer. Let us further argne a little, when Children of other
Churches are baptized by the Officer of this Church, into what Church are they
baptized? Not into that particular Church, where the Seal is Administered to
them, for they are no members there, nor into that particular Church from
whence they are brought, for the Officer of one Church, has not power to
baptize a Child into another Church then his own, therefore it remains that
they are baptized into the Church Universal.

Finally; If membership in the particular (strictly taken) or Instituted Church
be necessarily required before Baptism, it will then follow, that an
Instituted Church may (and in some Cases ought to) Consist of none but
unbaptized persons. Suppose a Company of Indians should be Converted to the
Faith of Christ; according to this notion, they must first of all be formed
into an Instituted Church and then baptized, so here is an Instituted Church,
and not one baptized member in all the Church. A thing never known in
Apostolical days. See P. B. defense of lawfulness of baptizing Infants against
I. S. page 23, 30, 31. and in the same discourse, Chap. 4. per totum. The sum
of the Answer is, That membership in a particular Church is not the formalis
Ratio of Baptism. And if it were so, it may ( sensu sano) truly be affirmed of
the persons in Question, that they are members of particular Churches.

CHAP. XI.
THe fourth objection that such large Administration of Baptism will Corrupt
Churches, Answered. The Synod provideth against the evil, Discipline the way to
keep Churches pure, undue straining of the Subject of Baptism, will end in
Church Corruption. The fifth objection Answered. That it is the visibility of a
Justifying Faith that gives right to Baptism, the persons in Question to be
accounted Believers. It follows not that therefore they are Immediately
admittable to the Lords Supper.

It is in the fourth place objected, that the Administration of Baptism,
according to the pleaded for Latitude is inconsistent with the purity of
particular Churches? Answer. It is such a pleasant thing to hear men plead for
the purity of Churches, as that, though they should miss it, in their
Apprehensions, we may well bear with them, yea, the Lord the Searcher of all
hearts, when he sees a (...) aim at holiness in his Servants does many (...)
not only overlook their mistakes, but also reward their Sincerity, and
therefore as for those with whom this objection is a real Scruple, we ought to
carry it toward them with all manner of Love and Christian moderation.
Nevertheless, Let the Considerate Reader mind the Answer, which is,

1. That they whose notion is, that the particular Church is a Spiritual
Corporation entrusted with the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
whereof women and Children are only members Inclusively, and not properly
Constituent, or whose notion is that membership in the particular Church, is
not the formal Reason of Baptism, are not at all concerned in this Objection.

2. The Synod does sufficiently provide for the purity of Churches, inasmuch as
they exclude the persons in Question from the Lords Table, and that Privilege
of vering in Church affairs, till they be further Qualifyed: Now it is not
Baptism which will Corrupt particular Churches, but the admission of persons
unduely qual^fyed to the management of the affairs of Christ's Kingdom, and to
the Supper of the Lord, which is an Ordinance peculiarly belonging to those in,
(and never regularly Administered to any out of) particular Churches. And as for
a faithful Care concerning Admissions to the Lords Table. I know no men that
have been more regularly strict and exact about that matter, then those that
have been strenuous Assertors of Baptism according to the Synodical Latitude.

3. It is a zealous and diligent Attendance to discipline according to the
Rules of Christ and not Curtailing the Covenant that will keep Churches pure.
There are two ways practiced by men in order to keeping Churches pure, the one
is humane, the other is divine. The humane way is to straiten the grace of the
Lords Covenant, that is the way of the Anabaptist. The divine way is faithfully
to attend discipline. Now it will be found in the Issue, that the divine way
only is that which will attain the End, experience does testify that Churches
have been pure or impure, according as discipline has flourished or been
evanid amongst them. Look abroad the world upon the Corrupted Collapsed
Churches that are in many places, and we shall see that they have little more
then a Carcass of discipline amongst them, without the life and power of it,
which is the true and great Reason of their Corruption.

4. It is to be feared that the denial of such Baptism as is disputed for,
will in time Introduce Corruption and Impurity into Churches. For hereby
persons out of the exceeding great desire; which they have that their Children
might be baptized, (and who can blame them for that?) are put upon a Temptation
to venture upon the Lords Table before such time as they are so well qualified
for it as were meet yea and Churches also are hereby put upon a Temptation to
be lax in their Admissions to the Lords Table, that so they may be quiet from
the continual clamours of those that do account themselves not a little
wronged, when Baptism is withheld from their Children. These things may serve
to Answer that Objection, but there is another wherein there seems to be a real
knot. For in the fifth place it may be alleged, that the persons in Question,
either have to the Judgment of Charity a Justifying Faith or not. If not they
(and consequently their Children) are not baptizable. If yea, then they are
forthwith admittable to the Lords Snpper. Answer.

1. I do readily acknowledge, that as it is only a Justifying Faith which
gives right to Baptism Coram Deo, so it is the profession or visibility of
this Faith that gives right thereunto Coram Ecclesia. Some have maintained
that a Dogmatical Historical Faith, or a Faith of Assent to the Truth of the
Gospel does entitle to Baptism. But the common Lege Gataker contra wardum and
Baxter of confirmation, p. 32, 33, 113, 114. and Davenant in Col 1. 18. and
Thorndike of the Church p. 31. 32.
Protestant Doctrine against the Papists speaks otherwise. Though a man
should believe all that the holy Scriptures say concerning God and Christ, yet
if he does not Consent with (...), that this God shall be his God, and this
Christ his Savior, he has not right to Baptism in the sight of God, or if he
does not profess such a Consent (which is Employed in the Proposition before us
when it is said concerning the persons in Question that they gave up themselves
to the Lord.) he cannot justly claim Baptism. In most Churches in the World
men own the Creed (called the Apostles) before Baptism, now therein they say I
believe [In] God, and not only I believe God, so, with a Faith of assent only
in the understanding, (...) to believe in God implies a consext of the will
choosing this God for my God and considering that in Baptism there is a
profession of Repentance for past transgressions, and an engagement to walk in
newness of life for time to come, Mark. 1, 4. 2 Pet. 1. 9. And that it comes
in the room of Circumcision, which was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith,
Romans 4. 11. and that thereby remission of Sins is sealed, Act. 2. 38. which
Remission is not promised to any Faith but justifying, Also that Baptism is
said to save, 1 pet. 3. 21. and they that are Baptized are said to be in
Christ, Gal. 3. 27. and to have Communion with Christ. in respect of his Death
and Resurrection, Romans 6. 4, 5. Col. 2. 12. I say from these and many the like
considerations I am fully persuaded that is not a mere Hystorical but
Sacramenta non conferunt^^ (...) ^is qui vel fidem habent vel faltem eam
preseterunt, (...) nullis certis argument is compertum esse possit, earn esse
ementitam. These Salmur vol. 3. p. 39.
Justifying Faith which gives right to Baptism.

2. The persons in question are such as in the Judgment of Rational Charity
have such a Faith: if a man does seriously profess that he does accept of Jesus
Christ as his only Lord and Savior, except he be a person that has some way
forfeited his credit, Charity requires us to believe him, 1 Cor. 13. 7. indeed
they that have by an ill carriage forfeited the credit of their profession, we
must stay for further fruits before we are bound to judge that they speak the
truth, but if it be a credible person that speaks, the Law of Nature, and of
Christ, and the Apostolical practice in receiving such teaches us to believe
and hope well concerning such serious Professors. The question is not whether
the persons under dispute are undoubtedly true Believers; No doubt bnt that
many of them are not so, but whether they possibly [and probably] may be true
Believers. Now no man can in reason judge otherwise but that many of them are
so, yea there is not any one particular person of them, concerning whom we can
say, that he is not so; yea it is certain of every man of them that he is a
true Believer, if what he says concerning himself be true; Now if a man be so
qualified as that it is probable that he is amongst the number of Believers, yea
certain that he is so, if he do not make a false and Hypocritical Profession of
his embracing Christ, Charity that hops the best requires us till something
contrary do appear, to hope that such a person may be a true Christian. In
brief, true Faith does consist in the Resignation of a man's self up to the
Lord, now the persons in question profess that they do thus, and we ought to
hope that they are sincere in that Profession because nothing contrary does
appear, but several things there are which call for a Charitable Judgment, E.
G. The seriousness and solemnity of the Profession in-offensiveness of
conversation, a willing subjection to the Holy Government of Christ appointed
in his Church, etc.

3. It will not follow that therefore these persons are Immediately to be
admitted to the Lords Table, or to the Privileges of full Communion, for more
full and satisfactory Evidences of Regeneration and of Christian proficiency
are requisite in order to Admission to the Lords Supper, then ^in order to
Baptism. There seems to be much evidence of Reason and Scripture light in
that which a Mr. Gelaspi in libro supra citato
learned Writer speaks when he has these Words, This Argument ( viz. from
the Admission of persons so, or so, qualified to Baptism) does not fully reach
Admission to the Lords Table, where some further and more exact proof must he
had of ones fitness and qualification for the Communion of Saints, even those
of age when they are Baptized are but Incipientes when they come to the Lords
Table they are Proficientes. There is more required in Proficients then, in
Novie^s and Beginners, as there is more required to fit one for strong Meat
then for Milk. Moreover, if all that are in a state of Justification are
immediately to be admitted to the Lords Table, then either we must deny that
Infants are in a state of Salvation, or we must run into that which was of old
a gross Error in the Church, and is at this day a custom in those degenerate
Titular Christians, who are known by the name of Thom a Jesu L. 7. C. 5.
copbti, Zab. de Relig. Ethiop.
Abissives, G^ido de H^res.
Armanians, v. Purchase. Pilgr. L. 1. C. 13.
Maronites, etc. who distribute the Eucharist to Children presently after their
Baptism. But let out Brethren if they can, instance in any one pure Church
throughout the World, in any age of it, that have been as large in the
Administration of the Lords Supper, as they have been respecting the Subject of
Baptism, excepting some few of late. I know that in Corrupted, Collapsed
Churches, it has been so (as but now was intimated) but not in pure Churches
walking according to the primitive pattern. Verbo A Believer and his House ( i.
e. his posterity) is straightway to be admitted to Baptism, Act. 16. 31, 33.
but we cannot say, that every Believer is straightway (...) dum (...) geriter)
or immediately to be admitted to the Lords Table. To conclude, thus I argue, If
we find in the Scripture, that Disciples, yea, Believers that had in the
judgment of Charity a justifying Faith and were thereupon Baptized, yet were
not admitted to the Lords Table for several years after their Baptism, then it
is lawful to admit to Baptism, though not presently to the Lords Supper; but
(not to mention others) we read of twelve Disciples or Believers at Ephesus,
who were not admitted to the Lords Supper of sundry years after their Baptism
therefore it follows not, that if the persons in question be as to the
judgment of Charity (yea in sincerity) Believers that then they must needs be
without any further delay admitted to the Lords Table, and to all other
Privileges, or to full Communion, Act. 19. 1, 2, 3, 7. And it is abundantly
clear that in the Primitive times, many were admitted to Baptism who were not
admitted to the Lords Supper; Nay, who had not so much as once heard of the
Lords Supper, v. Albasp. in Text de pan. Hence the Ancients do generally and
frequently say, that a Baptized person is not a perfect Christian till such
time as he be unctus or confirmatus, their meaning is, that he may be Baptized,
and yet not in full Communion as to all Church Privileges, See Mr. Hanmer of
Confirm. P. 15, 16. but this Objection was partly answered before, Chap. 7. and
9.

CHAP. XII.
THe sixth Objection, viz. that the persons in Question never had any other but
an Infant membership, which cannot continue in Adult age, Answered. Persons
thus Qualified are members, though in Infancy, they had not been so, InInfant
membership may continue. Proved; because that part or Interest which a man had
in the Lord, when an Infant may continue all his days, such Children when
Adult may be Cast off. They are the Lords Subjects and bond Servants. This
objection Contradicts the great design of Infant Baptism, and Crosses the
Covenant of grace, Children regenerated in Infancy retain their membership, God
has received them into his Church and never put them out, therefore they are
members (...). The Jews retained their membership, when Adult, this notion of
non-Continuance is uncomfortable doctrine for Godly parents and Children. The
Principles which it is founded upon, are weak, there is not a Specifical
difference between the membership of Infants, and of persons Adult, a real and
not a mere Imputed holiness is to be affirmed of some Infants, Children of the
faithful heirs. A new sort of membership will Infer Rebaptization, Concluding
distinctions to be minded throughout this whole discourse.

There is one Objection more to be subjected to Examination, which because
there are that lay the weight of their whole Cause upon it, we shall (by the
help of Christ) endeavor a full Answer to it. It is then objected that the
persons in Question are no members of the visible Church, because they never
had any membership, but what they received in Infancy, which membership neither
does nor can continue, when persons are adult, and consequently they have no
right to Baptism?

Answ. 1. In case the persons concerning whom the Question is had never been
admitted into the Church in their Infancies, yet being qualified as in the
Proposition is expressed, they would become Members of the visible Church.
Should an Indian or any other Infidel make a solemn Profession that he does
believe acaccording to the Christian Faith, and this Profession not be
contradicted by his life, and withal desire Baptism; yea, and submit himself
to the Government of Christ in his Church, and Promise to be the Lords Servant;
for ought we know such an one may be of the Invisible, but we are therefore
sure that he is of the visible Church. Now all this is found in those Children
whose interest we are pleading for.

2. Whereas its said that a Membership received in Infancy cannot continue but
is always invalid and extinct, when the Infant comes to be Adult, that
assertion cannot be truth, as the following Arguments do manifest.

Argument; 1. If the part or interest which some Infants have in the Lord does
continue, when they are Adult, then their membership received in Infancy does
not always cease and vanish when they are adult, for to be a Church member and
to have a part in the Lord are terms equivolent, Josh. 22. 24, 25, 27. Read Dr.
Owens Expes. Upon Heb 4. 9. p. 256, 297.
The Church and the People of God are the same thing variously expressed, 2 Chronicles. 23. 16. our English word Church is vide Fulleri Miscil. Sacr. l. 2. c. 9.
thought to come from (...) which is as much as to say the Lords People, To be
of the number of Gods People and to be a Church member are one and the same; To
be continued a Member of the Church is to be continued amongst the number of
the Lords People, or to remain one of them that do belong to the only true God,
but the part or interest which some Infants have in the Lord does continue when
Adult: That Interest which Timothy and his Mother and Grandmother had in the
Lord whilst they were Infants did continue when they were Adult, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
and 3. 15. So the interest which David while an Infant had in God continued
when he was Adult, therefore he said, Psalm. 22. 10. I was cast upon thee from
the Womb, thou act my God from my Mothers Belly. Lord (said David I have been
committed to thy care and keeping ever since I came into the World, and
therefore thou will not cast me off now; by virtue of thy Covenant, I have had
an Interest in thee ever since I was born, and therefore thou will be my God
and Savior still. Now if his part which he had in the Lord being an Infant
were vanished and nullified; how could he plead that as an Argument with the
Lord, and strengthen his Faith thereon for Mercy? how could he say, not only
thou wast my God as soon as I was born, but thou art my God from my Mothers
belly, if his Relation to God were not continued.

Argument 2. If Children that were received into the Church in their minority
may after they be come Adult be cast off, then they continue Members when
Adult. For certain it is, that no man can lose that which he has not, he
cannot be cut off from the Relation which he is a stranger to, or be cast out
of such as house if he be not within, or cashiered of such a company, if he be
not one belonging thereunto; but they that were received into the visible
Church when Infants may after they become Adult be cast off, albeit they have
no new membership additional to that of their Infant Estate, else why did David
say to Solomon, if thou forsake the Lord he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. What was it that Solomon was in danger of being cast off from?
surely it was in part that visible Relation, which then being in his minority
he stood in before the Lord, or his Church-memembership: And when was he in
danger of being thus cast off? even after his Adult age, therefore
Church Membership or visible Relation to God though received in Infancy, does
sometimes continue in Adult age, and vanishes not with Infancy, did not the
Lord himself Denounce and Execute a Dreadful Sentence of Excommunication upon
Apostate Israel, Jerem. 3. 8. Now what new Church membership were they deprived
of beyond what did in their Infancies appertain to them? yea, and who is able
to prove that in the day of their being Cast off by the Lord, they had any
better (or near so good) membership or standing in the visible Church, then
these have whose Interest we Assert? Moreover, the Author of this Objection
acknowledges, that members received in Infancy, when they come to be Adult (in
Case they break the Covenant) may and ought to be disowned by the Church, now I
would know, what is this disowning? either it is an humane device, or it is
part of that Discipline which Christ has appointed in his Church, If it be a
humane device, away with it. Let us have nothing in the Church, but what, the
Lord Jesus has Instituted. Especially, let not those who are ready to accuse
others with designs of Introducing humane Inventions into the Church, because
they would practice that, which upon much study and Enquiry after the mind of
Christ, they believe is according to his will, set up an Ordinance which the
word speaks not of. If it be a part of that Discipline which Christ has
appointed, then it must be applied to none but Church members, since the End
and designs of discipline is as that great Divine Ames Medul. L. C. 37. Th. 1.
well expresses it, Ad tollenda Scandala ex Ecclesia Dei, to remove Scandals
out of the Church of ^God, therefore persons that do no way belong to the
Church of God are not Subjects capable thereof.

Argument 3. The Synods Reason taken from the Relation of Subjects and
bond-Servants, stands unshaken and Irrefragable, not withstanding any thing
that hitherto has been said, to Invalidate it; they that are born the Subjects
of such a Prince, do remain his Subjects, when they grow up to Adult Age, and
shall the Children of Christians who are born and baptized the Subjects of
Christ the King of Kings, Ezekiel. 37. 24, 25. cease to be his Subjects when once
they are grown to years of discretion? Is not this doctrine highly
Antichristian, yea, very Injurious to the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, which
does at once deprive Jesus Christ of the greatest part of his Adult Subjects,
which he has in the world? one that is born the Servant of such a Master, does
continue his Servant, after that he is become Adult. Now the Child of a
Believer is born the Servant of God, therefore did David say, O Lord truly I am
thy Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son of thy handmaide, Psalm. 116. 16. 'though
he were now come to years of discretion, yet he proves that he was the Lords
Servant still, because he was the Son of a believing Mother, he does not only
say, I was thy Servant, but I am so, because born of one that was so, But if
this doctrine which we dispute against be Truth, one might have said to him,
you are mistaken David, your Argument proves no such thing as you bring it
for, it only proves that you were Gods Servant when an Infant, but now where
you are a man your Relation to him Cease for all that, but David in Spirit
said this, and therefore we know his Argument was good.

Argument 4. That Assertion which does Contradict the great design of, and
special thing which is signifyed^ in and by the Baptism of Infants is unsound,
but so does this Assertion concerning the non Continuance of Childrens Relation
to God when they become Adult, for what is the great Design of Infant
Baptism, but that thereby the Children of the faithful might be for ever
engaged to the true God in Christ? Is not this one thing thereby signified,
that now this Child is become the Lords, not for fourteen or twenty years, but
as long as he shall live, when as this notion of non-Continuance of membership
holds forth the contrary, viz. that when Infants are become Adult, the
Engagement that was between God and them is expired and null.

Argument 5. That Assertion which runs cross to the Covenant of grace is not to
be admitted; but so does this* For in the Covenant God promises to be a God
not only to the Parent, but also to the Child and that Everlastingly, Gen, 17.
13. Psalm 48. Last. when as this Assertion brings in a new Covenant, wherein the
Lord does not promise to continue to be the Child's God, as he does to be the
Fathers God. We say of the Anabaptists, that sure their Tenent cannot be sound,
because they make a Covenant which God never made, even a Covenant which takes
in the Parent but leaves out the Child; the like may we say of this Assertion,
which teaches that God does Covenant to be the Parents God for ever, except he
violate the Covenant by choosing another God, but that he covenants to be the
Childs God, only twenty years or till he become Adult, and then though the
Child never did choose any other but his Fathers God, yet his time is out, he
is set at liberty from his Service to the true God, and what has be to do with
the Lord God of Israel, Joshua 22. 24: Is not this to make that Covenant
temporary which the Lord has called Everlasting, Genesis 17. 13, Isai. 24. 50 1 Chronicles. 17. 22. In a word, Abraham's Govenant is but one, embracing Father and
Child with both Arms, when as this notion makes two Covenants, (Specifically
different the one from the other) of the Covenant of grace, one that is with
the Parent, which lasts for ever, another with the Child which is of force, it
may be twice or thrice ^seven years, and then the Lease is out. For my part I
neither can, nor dare believe this to be true, especially considering that the
Lord does expressly promise in his gracious Covenant to be a God even from the
womb to Gray hairs, Isai. 46. 3, 4.

Argument 6. Children that are Regenerated in their Minority do retain their
membership in Gods Church, but some such Children there are, Job. 31. 18. Luke
1. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 15. therefore it folloveth undenyably that a membership
received in Infancy may Continue in Adult Age.

Argument 7. They whom the Lord has received into his Church do there Coutinue
till God put them out, but God has received Infants into his Church, Ezekiel. 16.
20. Math. 19. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 14. And he does cast none out of his Church but for
Heresy or Scandal, therefore such as were born members of the visible Church,
when they come to be Adult, not being chargeable with any Scandal or Heresy,
they continue members of the visible Church still.

Argument 8. The Jews did retain their membership received in Infancy after
they were Adult, Christ o^vneth the Jews still retaining the substance of the
true worship of God to be a Church, John 1. 11. and 4. 22. They are said to be
the Children of the Kingdom, Math. 8. 12, The Vineyard of the Lord, Math. 21.
41, 43. Now I would ask any one that makes this Objection; whether he does, or
can think in his Conscience, that if the Jews had been qualified as is in the
Proposition expressed, that then God would have rejected them, and their
Children from being his people, I do not think that any sober men will say, or
can think so, and if not, why should we reject and disown believing Gentile
Parents and their Children, considering that, that Kingdom which did belong to
the Jews is now given to the Gentiles, Math. 21. 43 and 28. 19. and that the
Scripture does expressly declare that called inchurched Gentiles do not lose
their visible Relation to God as long as they continue in the faithful
Profession of the Truth of the Gospel, for the rejecting whereof, the Jews were
deprived of their visible Church Estate, Romans 11. 20, 22. surely had we more of
the Spirit, Grace, and Patience of the Lord, in our hearts, it would be
otherwise with us; we are (says Mr. Cotton in his Judicious Treatise of Infant
Baptism)* See Mr. Cotton of Infant Baptism p. 56, 65.
shallow and narrow our selves, and so we measure the Grace of God and the
Covenant thereof according to our own scanning.

Argument 9. That Assertion which is a most uncomfortable saddening Doctrine to
the Godly, both Parents and Children is to be rejected, as not being from the
Spirit of truth. God speaks comfortably to his People, Isai. 40. 1. and would
not have their hearts saddened, Ezekiel. 13. 22. and the spirit of truth is the
Comforter, Job. 16. 7. But it is another Spirit which is the Author of all
Doctrines which are indeed dark and uncomfortable to those that fear the Lord,
and so is this Assertion.

1. Its uncomfortable to Godly Parents, How great a comfort is it to a godly
man, to think; though I dye and leave^ the World and my poor Children are left
behind me, yet God will be with and bless them when I am gone, Genesis 25. 11.
and 48. 21. Prove. 20. 7. I leave them interested in God for ever. As a precious
man when dying, called his Children about him and said, Children, I have
nothing to leave you, but a God, and a gracious Covenant, and that's enough for
you. So on the other hand, how (...) and dismal is it, for a man to think, my
Children when once they are grown up to years of discretion have no interest in
God, no^ in the Covenant of his Grace, were this Doctrine true it would be
enough to break the heart of a godly man, who prizeth the Lords Covenant above
a thousand Worlds: But blessed be God that it is false.

2. Its uncomfortable to the Children of Godly Parents how many of the Elect of
God have found this a sweet consideration to them, that they could say, the God
of my Father, and truly I am the Son of thy Handmaid, Remember that I was
thine, before ever Satan had any thing to do with me, yea before I was born
into the World, Deuteronomy. 29. 14, 15. and though by manifold breaches of Covenant I
have deserved that thou should cast me off, yet remember thy Covenant, and
that I am thine still. I appeal to the sanctified Experience of Godly Children,
if they have not found the Doctrine of a continued interest in the Covenant of
Grace to be full of glorious consolation.

Argument 10. The Principles upon which this notion (of an impossibility of the
continuance of a Membership received, in Infancy) is built, falls to the
Ground, and therefore the superstructure built thereon cannot stand. There is
little of Scripture alleged for this conception, but the grounds of it are
principally two.

1. That there is a specifical difference between the Membership of an Infant
and of one that is Adult; this notion cannot hold water: Do but ask any Logical
Tyro, of what sort the distribution is, when Church Members (or any other
Members) are distinguished into Infants and Adult; he will answer you, that it
is a distribution of the Subject from its Adjuncts, and therefore it cannot be
a distribution of the Genus into its Species. Besides things that do
Specifically differ can never be the same: as a Man and Bruit can never be the
same; Take a young Bruit and keep it an hundred years, he will never be a Man,
but keep a young Child so long, and he will become an aged Man, the reason is
because there is a Specifical difference between a Man and a Brute, but not
between an old Man and a Child; So he that is now an Infant-member will
hereafter be an Adult-Member, which could not be if these did Specifically
differ. Again, things that are of the same nature do not Specifically differ
for we do not in this Dispute take Species in the notion that Individual are
Species but for the same with Genus) but so is the Membership of an Infant, and
of a person Adult, Root and Branch are of the same nature, as common experience
proves, James 1. 12. But the membership of the Child is as the Branches and
the Parent is the Root; witness Romans 11. 16. Therefore they are of surely the
same nature, Ergo, not specifically different: Is it usual for men that hold
an Error to cut the throat of their own Principles; so does (as it seems to
me) the Author of this Notion, when he professes that the Holiness and
membership of Parent and Child are of the same nature, yea, one and the very
same; How can that be, if they specifically differ, Furthermore, those things
which have the same essential causes, even the same matter and form, do not
specifically differ, but this is true concerning the membership of an Infant
and of an Adult person, there are the same essential causes of both, for
Saintship is the matter, and Confederation the form, both of the one and the
other; But whereas for the countenancing of this conceit it is said, that
there is something required as an essential condition ( viz. works and fruits)
of the Parents in order to membership which is not required of the child,
therefore they do specifically differ; this is as if one should say, there is
something required of an Officer in a Church, which is not required of other
members, therefore there is a specifical difference between the membership of
an Officer and of a common member. The other Principle upon which this notion
of non-continuance of membership is founded, is that the holiness of Infants is
only imputed, and therefore it cease, when they being capable to act for
themselves are incapable of Advantage by mere Parental Imputed Holiness?

Answer, Should it be affirmed that the inherent Sanctification of the parent
is imputed to the Child that were a dangerous Assertion, and were in effect to
make the Parent the Child's Christ, but if the meaning of the Objection be, only
that the Parents profession and act of confederation, is so imputed to his
Child as that he is there by reputed a Professor and Confederator, this is
true but it touches not the Question; For Confutation then, we affirm, that
the Holiness of Infants is real. Foederal Holiness is real, but the Holiness of
Infants is foederal, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Deuteronomy. 29. 13. Besides, it is a mavelous
mistake to think that persons Adult, or that Infants are said to be holy, only
upon account of Inherent or qualitati^^ Holiness, for the Scripture
acknowledges foederai Holiness. Thus the body of the Israelitish Nation was
Holy. As to, Inherent Holiness or saving Sanctification, the greatest part of
them were strangers to it, but they were all foederally Holy, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and
14. 2. and 26. 18, 19. Ezra. 9. 2. Dan. 8. 24. and 12. 7. therefore also the
Covenant is called the Holy Covenant, Dan. 11. 28, 30. Luke 2. 23. Because they
that are within the Covenant are an Holy People, See Mr. Hooker of the
Covenant, page 41. See ^rake p. 7^.
The Scripture speaks of an Holiness which is transmitted from Father to
Child, Romans 11. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 14. which cannot be said of Inherent Holiness.
Again, if the Child have a Membership of his own really distinct from the
Parents Membership, this notion of a mere imputed Holiness, vanishes, Bat so
it is, as appears because the Membership of the Child may continue when the
Membership of the Parent is utterly ceased, namely after the Parent is dead;
the weight of this Argument has so pressed the beloved Brother who lays the
stress of his cause upon this Notion or Imputation, as that he has seriously
made a Question of it, Whether Men do not remain Members of the visible Church
after they are Dead? But can any man in good earnest think, that an Hypocrite
when he is dead and gone to his own place is still a member of Gods Church? yet
his Infant Child is so, therefore the membership of the Child does exist after
from the membership of the Parent is extinct, therefore it is really distinct
from the Parents membership, therefore the Child has a real, and not only an
Imputed holiness appertaining to him. It might also have been said here, that
there is a Relative Holiness which is perpetual, viz. in respect of
Consecration and dedication to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 1, 22. Psalm. 106. 16. there
is an holiness of Propriety. So was the Temple holy, yea, thus were the
Children of Israel (and in a more peculiar manner the Levites) an holy People,
Ezra. 8. 28. This holiness is to be affirmed of all that belong to the visible
Church. Hence Christians are said to be the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Therefore it is there said, you are not your own, 9. d. as the Temple was the
Lords Propriety, so are you; God has a peculiar Interest in you, and Lordship
over you, as he had in the Temple after its dedication, more then in any house
upon the Earth, and thus are the Children of Believers Holy, because God has a
special Interest and propriety in them, beyond what he has in any other
Children in the world, they do of right forever belong unto God, they are named
after the God of Israel, The Name of the true God, Father, Son, and Spirit is
put upon them, and being thus Consecrated to be the Lords Servants, they are
holy. And for this Reason is the Lord styled, the Holy one of Israel, Psalm. 71.
22. Because he was the separated Object whom his People Israel did choose and
single out as the Object of their fear, when all the world about them served
Idols.

Argument 11. The Children of the faithful being in Covenant are Christ's and
Abraham's Seed, and therefore Heirs, Gal. 3, last, Romans 4. 1. 3. Now it is
strange that Children should have a right to the Inheritance whilst in their
Nonage, Gal. 4. 1. But no right when Adult, although they continue faithful
Children still.

Argument 12, This notion will enforce Rebaptization For the Covenant which the
Child was in when an Infant, is (it seems) become a mere nullity, so that now
being Adult he must not Renew his Covenant, See Mr Cobbet ubi supra p. 31. 139
but enter into a new and other kind of Covenant which he was never in before,
Now it is necessary that when a man does enter into Covenant he should be
Initiated by Baptism. There was lately a Sect in the world who upon this very
ground, although they did acknowledge Baptism of Infants as lawful, yet did
rebaptize themselves when Adult, See Baxter of Infant Baptism, page 343. Thus
have we seen the Truth proved, and all Objections against the pleaded for
extent of the Covenant of grace falling like Dagon sometimes before the Ark of
the Covenant. Before we pass over to the second Question as a Conclusion to
this, let it once for all, be said and remembered, that in many passages in this
Discourse, we have respect to the received distinction of Jus in re and ad rem,
or of Right and Possession. A person may have right to those Privileges, which
yet he may for the present be justly detained from the actual enjoyment of.
Again, we must distinguish Right and present Administration. It is Faith or
Interest in the Covenant of grace which gives right to Baptism; yet before a
man can have Baptism regularly administered to him, there must be some Steward
of God to dispense this mystery; and the person that has Faith (we speak of
the Adult) must become professedly subject to the Gospel, and to the orders of
Christ's School, If respect be had to these distinctions, some notions will
appear, to be very Consentaneous amongst themselves, which otherwise may seem
to have a Repugnancy in them.

CHAP. XIII.
THe second Question propounded, viz. whether all that profess Christianity
have right to Baptism, the Negative asserted and proved, many that outwardly
profess Christianity, are not visibly in Covenant with the Lord, nor have a
visible Interest in the thing sealed in Baptism. Nor submit themselves to
Christ's Government in his Church, but are de jure excommunicate, and worse then
Infidels, and therefore not to be baptized. In Primitive and Apostolical Times,
practice as well as Profession was looked after. It is a dishonor to the Name
of Christ, that every body should be counted a Servant in his Family. Holy
things must not be given to Dogs.

The things which have been spoken may suffice for the clearing of the first
Question, we proceed now (as in the Lords holy fear) to Consider of the second.
Question, viz. Whether all that profess Christianity have right to Baptism?
The Answer whereunto is Negative. In most places in Christendom (as it is
called) there is much more need to Insist on the demonstrative, evincing of the
Negative to this Question then on the Affirmative of the former. But amongst us
that which we have already Asserted and proved, is the Controversy of the Time
and place, where in the Lord has Cast our Lot to be, and Consequently the
present Truth, in which respect we have been the more large in discussing that,
but shall be brief in this which follows. Nevertheless, perceiving that some
do already plead for Baptism, upon the mere Account of a Practically
Contradicted, and everted Profession of Christianity, and not knowing but that
in process of Time (for one extreme begets another, and it may be feared that
our Rigidity or over strictness as to the Subject of Baptism will Issue in
promiscuous Laxness) such large and loose Principles (they being suitable to
that Corrupt nature which is in men) may prevail generally; upon these and the
like Considerations, we shall here mention some Arguments which enforce a
Negative Conclusion to the Question, but now propounded.

Argument 1. They that are not visibly or externally in Covenant with the Lord,
have no right to Baptism, for Baptism being (as all men excepting
Antipedo-Baptists do concurrently acknowledge) a Seal of the Covenant, they
that have nothing to do with the Covenant, have no just title to plead for
Baptism the Sea I thereof; But this is true concerning many who Call
themselves Christians. E. G. Idolaters and such like, are not to be esteemed
^he Lords Covenant People, Exodus 22. 7. Ezekiel. 23. 4. Hos. 1. 8. and 2. 2. upon
this ground, Farel vide call, vint Epist, 147, 149.
and Calvin, as also our amous Second part of second reply p. 142.
Carewright, and other Renowned Nonconformist, have maintained that the
Children of papists (both the Paren^s, being such) ought not to be baptized.
Baptism being the Every which belongs to Christians, manifest Anti-Christians
of those that are the Devils Servants (as Idolaters are) cannot went it, but by
usurpation, wherefore the Apostle says, there can he no Communion between
Christ and Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 15. Then surely the mark of Christ must not be set
upon Belials i. e. Idolaters. See Dr. Lights foots Sermon on Luke 1. 17. p. 40.
for often in the Scripture Belial is as much as to say an Idol, and by the
Children of Belivl, Idolaters are meant. So again, they ^that go on
incorrigibly in a Course of Profaneness are not to be reputed as in Covenant
with the Lord, for the proof of which that Script are is plain and full, Psalm
50. 16, 17. Alas, there are many that pretend to be Christians, when as they
are visibly and notoriously Covenant-breakers, they make no Conscience of
keeping Covenant with men, and therefore we may be sure, they will not keep
Covenant with God, but are unfit to Covenant either for themselves or for their
Children. Now they that have nothing to do to take Gods Covenant into their
mouths have nothing to do with Baptism the Seal of the Covenant.

Argument 2. They that in the Judgment of rational Charity have not a visible
Interest in the thing sealed in Baptism, vide whitaker prefect de sacr^ L. 2.
de neced. Bapt.
have go right to the Seal. God has joined, the exhibiting sign and the thing
exhibited together, therefore men must have a Care that they do not knowingly
put them asunder, I say not that we must know that there is the thing sealed,
wherever we do apply the Seal, but I say that we may not apply the Seal, when
we know there is not the thing sealed, for so to act, were in baptizing to
Contradict the nature and blessed Ends of Baptism. But there are many who
profess Christianity, that yet in the Judgment of rational Charity have not a
visible Interest in the thing sealed in Baptism. For Baptism is unto the
party baptized a Sign and Seal of his Union with Christ, Romans 6. 5. Gal. 3.
27. of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. John 3. 6. of Remission of sins, Mark 1. 4. of
his being Engaged to walk in newness of Life, Romans 6. 3, 4. when as the plain
contrary unto all these particulars is sadly visible and apparent concerning
the greatest Number of those that profess Christianity in the world. Ergo they
have not right to Baptism.

Argument 3. They that will not submit themselves to the discipline and
Government of Christ, there is no Reason that they should be baptized, we
(says that famous John a Lasco) suffer no Stranger to offer his Infant to
Baptism in our Churches, who does not willingly submit himself to the
Discipline of our Church. To admit men into Christ's Family, that will not be
subject to the Laws and Government thereof, or to the Privileges of Christ's
School, that will not be subject to the orders therein, is against Reason. But
many that profess Christianity, yet reject Church discipline. Ergo.

Argument 4. They that are either Formally or ipsojure excommunicated Consule
Theses Theol, Salmur.
have no right to Baptism. It cannot be denied but that some great Divines
have written for the Baptism of the Children of Excommunicates, but then they
are wont to put in this Caution, viz. that there must be some other person to
undertake for the Child's Education in the true Religion, so did Beza ^eza
Epist. 9. 10.
express his Judgment when the Ministers of Neocomun refused to baptize such
Children. Let this one Argument instead of many be Considered, viz. that they
that are not members of the visible Church have not right to Baptism, for it
was before proved and is indeed a granted Principle with those that defend the
Truth against Antipaedo-Baptists, that a Regular standing in the visible Church
is that which does entitle to Baptism, But justly Excommunicate ones are not
of the visible Church: Hence such are said in Scripture to be cast forth, and
to be cast cut, viz. out of Gods House or Church in this World, Job. 15. 6.
Gal. 4. 30. and to be cut off, Gal. 5. 12. Genesis 17. 14. Surely a Member that is
cut off from the Body is not Still belonging thereunto. And to be put away from
amongst those that are of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 2, 13. One that is for breaking
the Marriage Covenant put away does not remain under Conjugal Relation. No more
does one that is Excommunicate remain a Member of the visible Church, Yea, such
are said to be Delivered in the Name of Christ up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. i. e.
Gelaspy libro supra citato 297.
they are Authoritatively o^clarea to be no longer of the visible Church, but
of the World and so under Satan's Regiment, who is the God of this World, 2 Cor.
4. 4. the same person cannot possibly at the same time, be as to his visible
state, both of Christ's and of Satan's Kingdom, Mat. 6. 24. 2 Cor. 6. 15. But
Excommunicates are as to their visible state of Satan's Kingdom, Ergo their
Children may not be baptized, They that write concerning things of that nature,
say, that when the Devil does enter into an explicit league with any one that
pretends to be a Christian, he causes them to renounce their Baptism. I
remember a tremendous Instance to that purpose of one about fourteen years
ago, in Sherborn in Dorset, who being imprisoned upon the Account of
familiarity with Satan, confessed to others (and to my self also) that the
Devil made her to renounce her Baptism, and so made a formal Covenant with
her, giving her a new name, etc. But certainly, it will not please Christ, that
we should Baptize those into his Name, who are visibly and manifestly the
servants of Satan: we know of old, they were wont professedly (and their
conversations might not contradict that Profession) to renounce Satan, etc. or
they were not Baptized, shall we then Baptize such as remain the known Snbjects
of his Kingdom? And this Argument holds, not only concerning such as have a
just censure formally passed upon them by the Church, but also with reference
to them that are ipso jure Excommunicate i. e. that are so visolius legis sine
sententia judicis, yea (which is more) they that are de jure Excommunicate,
have no right to Baptism, now this is true concerning all Heretical or
Profane persons, yea and obstinate persisters in lesser evils, then Heresy or
Scandal, whom we may suppose to have a present standing in the visible Church,
they ought not to be tolerated there, but the Rule is express for their being
forth with rejected, except they repent, Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12. 2 Toes.
3 6. Tit. 3. 10. or if such be not already in the Church they may not be
admitted, and therefore not Baptized, whereby Admission into the Church is
Solemnized, it cannot be a duty to solemnize the Admission of a person into the
Church (which is done in Baptism) and yet at the same time a duty to reject
him from Church Fellowship (which is a duty concerning such persons as were but
now mentioned) (...) such have not right to Baptism. But as for many that
profess Christianity, they are Excommunicates either formally or de jure Ergo.

Argument 5. They that are not Christians have not right to Baptism, because
Baptism is the mark of Christianity as has been shewed^ we may not by
baptism go about to Christianize those who we know are nor Christians, for
that would be to take the Lords Name in vain. Now some profess Christianity
concerning whom it is evident, that they are not Christians, Rev 2. 9. their
practice is such as does quite (...)
nullify their profession. Tit. 1. ult. Mr. Baxter Argreth well and strongly,
when he says, (...)
we must not Baptize him for a Christian who we are sure is none, if a Man
should affirm that he did believe in Christ, and yet should presently profess
that he will not obey him, every man will conclude that, that profession is no
profession. Now if an Affirmation contradicted by words ought not to be taken
for a Profession, much less an Affirmation more certainly contradicted by the
tenor of the life: In a word, Infidels may not be baptized, therefore they
that are worse then Infidels may not. Now so are some that call themselves
Christians, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

Argument 6. In the Primitive and Apostolical times men were not baptized upon
the bare account of Profession, except there were a practice that did in some
sort correspond with that Profession; Hence in those times in order to the
Application of Baptism, they required not only a Profession of the Christian
Faith, but (as was partly hinted but now) an Abrenu^^tation of Satan in the
Greek church they used this Form.
Flesh and the World. Some conceive that the Apostle, when he speaks of the
Answer of a good Conscience 1 Pet. 3. 21. (...)
alludeth to that Custom in the Primitive times, when the Administrator did
ask the baptized, Credis? do thou believe? And he answered again Credo, I do
believe; Abrenuntias? do thou renounce Sin, Saran and the World? the party
to be Baptized answered again, Abrenuntie, I do renounce them Spendes? do
thou Covenant? Answer, Spendea, I do Covenant. Also we know, that John Baptisi,
when he Baptized, required not only a profession of Repentance, but a
Conversation suitable there unto, even fruits meet for Repentance, Matthew. 3. 8.
Some have thought that John refused none who desired to partake of his
Baptism, but judicious Interpreters are not wanting, who conceive that he
repelled the Pharisees from his baptism, albeit they desired it. Thus the (...)
Centuriators, (...)
Pa^e^s, (...)
Gelaspy, [^] Mr Baxter. And of our N. E. Divines (...)
Mr. Cotton, (...)
Mr. Hooker, (...)
Mr. Norton. And it is not very Consonant to Reason for us to imagine that John
would call them a Generation of Vipers, and baptize them in the same breath
Consider Mat 3. 7. with Luke 7. 30.

Argument 7. It rendeth greatly to the dishonor of the name of Christ, that
every one should be owned of, and entered into his Family David would not
endure a profane person in his Family. Psalm. 101. 7 And can we think that it
will pleas Christ that such should by Baptism be entered into his Family, his
Church that is? Great men would account themselves dishonored, if the Livery
appertaining to their Servants, should be worn by every vise person, and will
not the great God our Savior Jesus Christ, think me like, when Baptism the
Livery of his Servants is worn by the unholy and profane? In a word,
promiscuous Baptism does make the Church (...)
no household, but an Inn rather, to receive whosoever comes, whereby the
name of the Lord is profaned.

Argument 8. Christ has for (...) to dogs, Mat 7 6. (...) 20. Phil. 3. 2. 2
Pet. 2. 22. Rvel. 22. 15, This I confess is a Common Argument. Beza contra
Erast. Vide etiam Bezae Annot. in 1 Cor 7 4.
makes use of it for this end, and so did De side and operibus.
Austin of old, and Chrysostom De Comonnctione Cordis l. 1
before him, and Tertullian before him; De Baptism. c. 18.
and there is weight in it. If it should be said, that the reasons which have
been aleadged concern Adult persons being unbaptized, when as the controversy
is touching the baptism of Infants born of Parents already baptized; The
Answer is, that the Arguments do reach this also. For if we prove that neither
Parent has a Title to Baptism, nothing more needs to be said to prove that
the Child has no Title thereunto. For nibildat quod non habet, it is against
all Reason to Imagine, that a man should be able to entitle another unto that
Privilege which himself has no Title to, nor Interest in. The Derivative
right cannot be greater then the Primitive. I know Austin blames him, that
when he excommunicated Classicanus, did cast his Children out of the Church
with him, and concerning Children born before Excommunication, the thing is
disputable amongst learned men, albeit it was before noted, that the Jews of
old in Excommunicating the Parent, did also cut off the Child from being of the
Congregation of Israel, and from having any right to Church Privileges. And
evident it is, that such Children as are born of such Parents as either never
had, or cease to have any visible right to Baptism, can not rationally claim
right thereunto.

CHAP. XIV.
HUmane Testimony no demonstration in this Case, Promiscuous Administration of
Baptism is Popish and Antichristian. Sundry Protestant writers have testified
against it. The Conclusion.

As for humane Testimony in this Case, as it is true, that it does Conclude
nothing in matters of this nature, where we must to the Law, and to the
(divine) Testimony, and if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no true Light in them, so we shall not greatly insist thereon. The
Truth is, that Protestants generally have been extremely lox and large, in
their Principles and practices as to the Subject of Baptism, which I will also
confess, has in part come to pass, by reason that the Church has been in
Babylon, and has not yet fully shaken off the dust thereof, Let not the
Anabaptist Triumph withont a Cause in this Concession. It was before
acknowledged, that overmuch Rigidity as to the Subject of Baptism is
Anti-Christianisme. For that Error prevailed when Antichrist first began to
rise. Let it now likewise be owned as a Truth, that when the Antichristian
Apostasy was come to its height, an Error on the other hand prevailed, even a
Catholic promiscuous baptizing of all Sorts, nay a compelling of men to
receive Baptism against their wills. Bellarmine De sacrem Bapt.
and others of the Popish Faction, have taught that Baptism does sanctify the
unclean, and therefore that it is not profaned, though it be Administered to
unclean persons. Histories tell us what wild work the men of that Religion have
made of it, when they have pretended to Christianize the poor miserable Indians
in some places of America, It is reported that in the Kingdom of Mexico Surius
incron^ ad Ann. 1558.
sundry of their Preachers did in a few years time baptize each one of them
above one hundred thousand. It is to be found amongst the Records of Charles
the fifth, that See Purchase Pilgrim. p 115.
an old Priest had baptized seven hundred thousand and another three hundred
thousand, and certain others very great multitudes, and yet their own writers
Oviedo, Benzo, etc. do confess that scarce one of them willingly became a
Christian, and that they remembered not any thing of the Christian Religion,
only that they had been baptized, we know what was done in England after that
Cambden Brittan Beda ad Paulinum.
Austin the Monk arrived there, and how it was usual in those Popish times
either by force or by Speeds Chron. Book. 7. Chapter 36.
fraud to bring men to Baptism, before their hearts were indeed persuaded to
embrace the Gospel.

So then, in Arguing against such promiscuous baptizings as the present
discourse is treating of, we dispute against nothing but that which is
Anti-Apostolical and Antichristian. No^ have there been altogether wanting
those (though it is to be wished that their number had been greater) who have
already undertaken this Cause. I might mention here vide Synops. Purior (...)
p. 4^. These 46
Polyander, (...), Waleus, Taysius, also Sparhemius gives (...)
three Reasons to prove that Profane men cannot lawfully be baptized. Mr.
Baxter has written a large and learned Treatise, the whole design whereof is
to prove that the notoriously ungodly have no right to Baptism, and to Answer
the Objections and pleas which some have Insisted on, others I omit, only it
may not be amiss, here to recite some remarkable passages out of learned Mr.
Gelaspies Aarons Rod, blossoming. Thus he writes, page 544, 545 It were a
profanation of the Sacrament of Baptism to baptize a Catechamen or Jew, or a
Pagan professing a Resolution to turn Christian, he being manifestly under the
power of abominable reigning sins, and being still a profane and wicked liver,
although he were able to give a sound and Orthodox Confession of Faith, Austin
Lib. (...) and operib^s, Chap. 18. tells us that the Church did not admit
scandalous persons to baptism. And except they repent, (says he) from their
dead works, they are not suffered to come to Baptism, diverse Arguments he
brings in that book for this thing; As 1. That Peter says, Acts 2. 38. Repent
and be baptized. 2. That the Apostle Heb. 6. 1 Injoyneth Repentance from dead
works, with Baptism, 3. That John preached the Baptism of Repentance. 4. That
Fornicators, Adulterers, Thiers, etc. shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
therefore such as are known to live in these sins without Repentance ought not
to be baptized. 5. He argues from 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, etc. Now I offer this
Query, shall an abominable wicked Li^e, Murder, Adultery, Swearing, Cursing,
Lying, or the like, keep back a man from so much as entering into the visible
Church, by the door of baptism, and shall not the like abominations keep back
a man from Fellowship with Saints at the Lords Table? See also page 555. where
he thus speaks. Erastus argues from the Admission of a Generation of Vipers
to baptism to prove the lawfulness of admitting a Generation of Vipers to the
Lords Supper. But I argue (...) wise, such persons as desire to be received
into the Church by baptism, if they be profane and scandalous persons, ought
not to be baptized, but refused baptism: therefore profane and Scandalous
persons ought much less to be admitted to the Lords Supper. Likewise in page
515. he has this passage, which methinks (...) to be written in Letters of
Gold. I believe (says he) no (...) Minister would adventure to baptize one who
has manifest and Infallible Signs of unregeneration. Sure we cannot be
Answerable to God, if we should minister Baptism to a man whose works and
words do manifestly declare him to be an unregenerate unconverted person. And
if we may not Initiate such an one, how shall we bring him to the Lords Table?
Thus far Mr. Gelaspy.

To Conclude, it would be an happy thing, if in all Controversies of this
nature, we could be of the same mind, and of the same Judgment; for so does
the Scripture require, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Philz. 2. But that is rather to be wished
for, and endeavored after, then to be hoped, till that great and blessed day
come, wherein there shall be one Lord and his Name one in all the Earth, one
Sheepfold, and one Shepherd. When we are come unto a perfect may, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, we shall come unto that
perfect unity of the Faith, which (...) this world we attain not to, yet if the
Lord help us, with a Spirit of wisdom and moderation, (although Truth must no^
on any Terms be parted with, as Luther Ruat caelum (...) mica v^rit it is pere it
Luther in (...)
said, let Heaven and Earth perish rather then the least Truth should be lost)
we shall not Censure one another or be of different off nations, because of
different Apprehensions in the Questions Controverted. And we had need, to be
the more careful over our own hearts about this matter; for that, there are not
waning solemn Instances, both in the present and former Ages of woeful
Paroxysmes, occasioned amongst good men by this very Question touching the
Subject of Baptism. To mention only that which happened in the Church whereof
Renowned Farel was the Pastor. lege inter Calvini (...) ^pit 147, 148, 149:
One that was a member therein did Apostatize to the Papists, after which the
grand mother being of the true Church desired Baptism for her Grandchild.
Farel considering that both the next Parents were Idolaters, and the Child
still under their Education, refused (as well he might) to baptize the Child,
but his (...) baptizeth it, whereupon there happned an uncomfortable difference
between them two, (and in the Church who yet were (...) of them godly and
learned me^, both of them studious of Reformation, both of them Sufferes
together for bearing (...) to the Truth of the Gospel. So those famous (...)
and (...) differed in judgment about the Subject of Baptism. These things
should make us (...) moderate in our notions, which also they that have a
righteous Cause are wont to be as zealous for the Truth. I shall finish with
the Words of that famous African Synod fourteen hundred years ago, being come
to the Conclusion, of the Controversy then under debate, concerning the
Subject and time of Baptism they yet say, Inter Cyprian opera p. (mihi) 148.
Nominem Iudicamus si diversum in bacre senserit, we Censure no man, albeit as
to this Question, he be not altogether of our Judgment.

INIS.
Errata
Page 1. l. 22. There should have been a full point after called. p. 15. l.
penult. l. Sanhedrin. p. 17. 26. r. Bitbilah. l. 37. r. faederalt p. 18. l. 13.
r. with Ezra. p. 44. l. 10. r: Gere. l. 14. r. (...) Gerurim. p. 49. l. 8. r.
enery art. p. 54. l. 24. r. Abissines. l. 36. r. geritur. p. 55. l. 14. r.
Tertull de pe^itent p. 59. l. 16. for where r. when. p. 64. l. 18. for or r.
of. p. 65. l. 35. r. between right. The Author not being able personally to
attend the perusal of these Sheets, as they were printed off, there are other
Errors, especially respecting punctations and Latin or Greek quotations, which
the Intelligent Reader will perceive and heartily Interpret.


