THE GENERAL LAWS And LIBERTIES Of the MASSACHUSETTS COLONY: Revised and
Reprinted, By Order of the General Court Holden at Boston. May 15 th. 1672
Edward Rawson Sec^^.

Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God and
they that resist receive to themselves Damnation. Romans 13. 2. CAMBRIDGE Printed
by Samuel Green, for John Usher of Boston. 1672.

THE GENERAL LAWS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS COLONY, REVISED AND PUBLISHED, BY ORDER
OF THE GENERAL COURT in October 1658.
FOrasmuch as the free fruition of such Liberties, Immunities, Privileges, The
civil privileges of the Inbitants of this Colony.
as Humanity, Civillity and Christianity call for, as due to every Man in his
Place and proportion, without Impeachment and Infringement, has ever been, and
ever will be, the Tranquillity and Stability of Churches and Commonwealth, and
the denial or deprival thereof, the disturbance, if not ruin of both.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That no man's
life shall be taken away, no man's Honor or good Name shall be stained, no man's
person shall be arrested, restrained, banished, dismembered, nor any ways
punished; no man shall be deprived of his wife or children, no man's goods or
estate shall be taken away from him, nor any ways indamaged, under color of
Law, or countenance of Authority, unless it be by virtue or equity of some
express Law of the Country warranting the same, established by a General Court,
and sufficiently published; or in case of the defect of a Law, in any
particular case, by the word of God. And in Capital Cases, or in Cases
concerning dismembring, or banishment, according to that word, to be judged by
the General Court. [1641:]

Ability. Age.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Age of discretion.
That the age for passing away Lands, or such kind of Hereditaments, or for
giving of Votes, Verdicts or Sentences in any civil Courts or causes, shall be
one and twenty years, Liberty to dispose Estate.
but in choosing Guardians, fourteen years. And all persons of the age of one
and twenty years, as aforesaid, and of understanding and memory, whether
excommunicate, condemned, or other, shall have full power and liberty, to make
their Wills and Testaments, and other lawful Alienations of their Lands and
Estates. [1641. 47.]

Age for plaintiffs and Defendants.
IT is Ordered by this court and the Authority hereof, Age for plaintiff and
Defendant.
that the age for Plaintiffs and Defendants in civil Cases, before any
Magistrate, Commissioner or Court of Judicature, shall be twenty one years of
age, and for all persons under that age, their Parents, Masters, and Guardians
as they shall see meet shall plead and defend their right and interest, as the
matter may require; and in all Criminal cases, every person younger as well as
elder, shall be liable to answer in their own persons, for such misdemeanors
as they shall be accused of, and may also inform and present any misdemeanour
to any Magistrate, Grand-jury-man, or Court, any Law, Custom or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding. [1668.]

Actions.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Actions when tryable.
That all Actions of Debt, Accounts, Slander, and Actions of the Case
concerning Debts and Accounts, shall henceforth be tried, where the Plaintiff
pleases, so it be in the Jurisdiction of that Court, where the Plaintiff or
defendant dwells, unless by consent, under both their hands it does appear,
they would have the case tried in any other Court. All other Actions shall be
tried, within that Jurisdiction where the cause of the Action does arise.

2. Whereas sundry Inconveniences do arise, by reason that Plaintiffs in Civil
Cases do delay to Enter their Actions, to the great expense of much Precious
time, and damage to the Public:

This Court does therefore Order, Rule for entry of Actions.
That henceforth no Action shall be Entered after the first day of the Court is
ended. And in case any Plaintiff shall delay his Entry longer then the first
Forenoon of the Courts sitting, every such person or persons shall pay double
Entry money. And all persons, whether Parties or Witnesses, are enjoined to
attend their respective Concerns in every Court of Justice, as well the first
Forenoon of the Court, as afterward; and shall present the whole plea and
Evidence before the Case be committed to the Jury, and no after-Plea or
evidence shall be admitted to any person, Any Law, Usage or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding. And for that end, all marshalls and Constables are
enjoined to make their Returns of Attachments by them served, sometime the
first Forenoon of the Court that is to take cognizance of the Case concerned
therein. Provided, That the double Entry-money be paid by him that so neglects
his Entry, and not put the Defendant to unnecessary charge through his default.
[1665.]

3. In all Actions of Trespass, Actions of trespass under forty shillings.
where Damage shall be pretended, above Forty shillings, and yet on the hearing
thereof, it shall appear to the Count to come under that value, in all such
Cases, the Plaintiff shall lose his Action, and pay the Defendant cost.

4. Every Person impleading another, Fees for Entry of Actions.
in any Court of Assistants or County Court, shall pay the sum of ten
shillings, before his Case be Entered; and for every Action of above forty
shillings value, tryable before the Commissioners of Boston, ten shillings; and
for all Actions under forty shillings, tryable before the said Commissioners.
A. 52. P. 7.
one Magistrate, or the tree Commissioners, for ending small Causes, ten
Groats, unless the Court see cause to admit any to Sue in for ma pauperis.
[1642. 52.]*

5. And where the Debt or Damage recovered, Addition (...) of Actions.
shall amount to Ten pounds, in every such case to pay fire shillings more; and
where it shall amount to Twenty pounds or upward, there to pay ten shillings
more then the first ten shillings; which said additions, together with the
charge of the Entry of the Action, shall be put to the judgment and execution,
to be leavied by the Marshall, and accounted to the respective Treasurers to
whom it appertains. [1647.]

6. Whereas the Country is put to great Charge, by this Courts attending Suits
Commenced or Renewed by Petition or Review.

It is Ordered that in all such cases; Actions brought to the General Court to
be be^^ the charge of the Court.
if it appear to the Court, that the Plaintiff had no just cause of any such
proceeding, the said Plaintiff shall hear the whole charges of the Court, both
for time and expenses, which they shall judge to be expended by his occasion;
and may further impose a fine upon him, as the merit of the cause shall
require; but if they find the defendant in fault, they shall impose the just
charges upon such defendant.

7. And in all Actions brought to any Court, Plaintiff liberty* to with draw
his Action.
the Plaintiff shall have liberty to withdraw his Action or to be nonsuited,
before the Jury have given in their verdict; in which case, he shall always
pay full costs and charges to the defendant, and may afterward reniew his Suit
at another Court. [1641.]

8. And it is Ordered, L 1. p. 16.49
that no man many Suit or Action against another, shall falsely pretend great
Damages or Debts, to vex his Adversary; and in all cases where it appears to
the Cour^, Vexations, Suits to pay treble damage and (...) fined 40. shill.
that the Plaintiff has willingly and wittingly done wrong to the Defendants
in commencing and prosecuting any Action, Suit, Complaint or Indictment, in his
own name, or in the name of others, he shall pay treble damages to the party
grieved, and be fined Forty shillings to the common Treasury. [1641. 46.]

APPEAL.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof: Liberty to appeal
That it shall be in the liberty of every man cast, condemned or Sentenced in
any Inferior Court, to make his Appeal to the Court of Assistants: as also to
appeal from the sentence of one Magistrate, or other persons deputed to hear
and determine small causes, before Execution.
unto the shire Court of each Jurisdiction, where the cause was determined.
Provided they tender their Appeal, and put in security before the Judges of the
Court, to prosecute it to effect, and also to satisfy all damages, before
execution granted; which shall not be till twelve hours after Judgment, In
criminal cases to be bound to the good behavior.
except by special order of the Court. And if the cause be of a criminal
nature; then also to put in security for the good behavior and appearance at
the same time: and if the point of appeal, be in matter of Law, then to be
determined by the Bench, if in matter of fact by the Bench and Jury. And if in
the Court of Assistants, Appeals to the General Court*
two of five, three of seven, or such a proportion of the Magistrates then
present, shall actually dissent from the sentence of the Court in any Capital
offense, it shall then be in the liberty of the party sentenced, to appeal to
the next General Court.

2. It is further Ordered; That all Appeals with the Security as aforesaid,
shall be recorded at the charge of the party Appealing, L. 2. p. 1.
and certified unto the Court, to which they are made. And the party Appealing,
Appealant to give his reasons six days before.
shall briefly in writing (without reflecting on Court or Parties, by provoking
Language) under his own or his Atturnies hand, give in to the Clerk of the
Court from which he did Appeal, the Grounds and Reasons of his Appeal, six
days before the beginning of the Court, A. 51. p. 1.
to which he did Appeal; to which Court the said Clerk shall return the said
writing, Not prosecuting an Appeal, forfeit forty shill.
and give copies thereof to the Defendant if he desire the same. And whosoever
shall Appeal from the Sentence of any Court, and not prosecute the same to
effect, according to Law, shall besides his Bond to the party, forfeit to the
Country, the sum of Forty shillings for every such neglect.

3. And for a more clear and equal hearing and determining all cases of Appeal;
A. 43. p. 19.
It is Ordered, That no person that has sat as Judge, or voted in any
inferior Court, No Judge Appealed from, may judge the action of Appeal.
in that case he is Appealed from, shall have any vote in the Superior Court
Appealed to, but the case shall be determined by such as are no ways engaged
in the same, by Judging or Voting formerly: Provided there be more Magistrates
Appealed to, then those that sat in the Court Appealed from. A. 54. p. 2.
And in all cases of Appeal, the Court Appealed to shall Judge the case, Error
may be rectified, with reversing the former judgment.
according to former Evidence, and no other, rectifying what is amiss therein;
and where the matter of fact is found to agree with the former Court, and the
Judgment according to Law, not to revoke the Sentence or Judgment, but to
abate or increase damages, as shall be judged right; any use or custom to the
contrary notwithstanding. [1642.47.49.50.53.54.]

ON a motion of the Deputies of Dover and Portsmouth, in behalf of most of the
Freemen there; Appeal from the Associate Court in Dover and Portsmouth tryable.
That whereas they have power in their Associate Courts to try any Case under
Twenty pounds, and finding no Law where they may Appeal, but to the Court of
Assistants, the Actions being many times very small, and is great charge to
come to Boston for every small Case; it is their desire, that the Court would
grant them an Order, that any person cast or condemned, may Appeal to the
County Court held in Dover or Portsmouth, and that some persons may have
Magistratical Power in that County as formerly:

The Court judges it meet to grant their request; And it is Ordered that
henceforth it shall be in the liberty of Plaintiff and Defendant, in all Cases
tryable, before the Court of Associates in Portsmouth and Dover, to Appeal to
their next County Court in Dover or Portsmouth, as in other cases, any custom
or usage to the contrary notwithstanding. [1670.]

Appearance. Nonappearance.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Immunity from
punishment in case of inevitable obstruction.
That no man shall be punished for not appearing at or before any Civil
Assembly, Court, Council, Magistrate or Officer, nor for the omission of any
Office or Service; if he shall be necessarily hindered, by any apparent Act or
Providence of God, which he could neither foresee nor avoid; Provided that this
Law shall not prejudice any person of his just cost and damage in civil action.
[1641.]

APPAREL.
ALthough several Declarations and Orders have been made by this Court, A. 51.
p 5.
against excess in Apparel, both of Men and Women, which have not taken that
effect as were to be desired, but on the contrary; we cannot but to our grief
take notice, that intolerable excess and bravery has crept in upon us, Excess
in Apparel prohibited.
and especially amongst people of mean condition, to the dishonor of God, the
scandal of our profession, the consumption of Estates, and altogether
unsuitable to our poverty: and although we acknowledge it to be a matter of
much difficulty, in regard of the blindness of mens-minds, and the stubborness
of their wills, to set down exact Rules to confine all sorts of persons; yet we
cannot but account it our duty, to commend unto all sorts of persons; the sober
and moderate use of those blessings, which beyond expectation, the Lord has
been Pleased to afford unto us in this wilderness, and also to declare our
utter detestation and dislike, that men or women of mean condition, should take
upon them the garb of Gentlemen, by wearing Gold or Silver lace, or Buttons, or
Points at their knees, or to walk in great Boots; or Women of the same rank to
wear Silk or Tiffiny hoods, or Scarfes, which though allowable to persons of
greater Estates, or more liberal education, yet we cannot but judge it
intolerable in persons of such like condition:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; that no
person within this Jurisdiction, nor any of their relations depending upon
them, whose visible estates real and personal, shall not exceed the true and
indifferent value of two hundred pounds; shall wear any Gold or Silver lace, or
Gold and silver Buttons, or any bone lace above two shillings per yard, or silk
hoods, or scarfs, upon the penalty of ten shillings for every such offense, and
every such delinquent to be presented by the Grand Jury, And forasmuch as
distinct and particular rules in this case suitable to the estate or quality of
each person cannot easily be given: It is further Ordered by the Authority
aforesaid, that the Select Men of every Town, or the Major part of them, are
hereby enabled and required from time to time, to have regard, and take notice
of Apparel of any of the Inhabitants of their several Towns respectively, and
whosoever they shall judge to exceed their ranks and abilities, in the
costliness or fashion of their Apparel in any respect, especially in the
wearing of Ribbonds or great Boots, (Leather being so scarce a commodity in
this Country) Lace, Points, etc. Silk Hoods, or Scarfes, the Select men
aforesaid shall have power to assess such persons so offending in any of the
particulars above mentioned in the Country Rates, at two hundred pounds
estates, according to that proportion that such men use to pay to whom such
Apparel is suitable and allowed, Provided this Law shall not extend to the
restraint of any Magistrate or Public Officer of this Jurisdiction, their
Wives and Children, who are left to their discretion in wearing of Apparel, or
and settled Military Officer, or Soldier in the time of Military service, or
any other whose education and employment have been above the ordinary degree,
or whose estate have been considerable, though now decayed. [1651.]

As an Addition to the Laws about Apparel.
WHereas excess in Apparel amongst us, unbecoming a Wilderness-condition, and
the profession of the Gospel, whereby the Rising Generation are in danger to be
Corrupted and Effeminated; which practices are witnessed against by the Laws of
God, and sundry Civil and Christian Nations:

It is therefore Ordered and Enacted by this Court, Addition to the Law for
Apparel
and the Authority thereof, That all persons within this Jurisdiction, whether
the Children, or Servants that are under government in Families, that shall
wear any Apparel exceeding the quality and condition of their Persons or
Estate, or that is apparently contrary to the ends of Apparel; and either of
these to be so judged by the Grand Jury and County Court of that Shire where
such complaint or presentment is made: All such persons being Convicted, shall
for the first offense be Admonished; for the second offense pay a fine of
twenty shillings; for the third offense, forty shillings, and so following, as
the offenses are multiplied, to pay forty shillings a time to the Treasury of
that County. Also if any Tailor shall make or fashion any Garment for such
Children or Servants under government as aforesaid, contrary to the mind and
order of their Parents or Governors; every such Tailor shall for the first
offense be Admonished; and for the second offense, forfeit double the value of
such Apparel or Garment as he shall fashion or make, contrary to the mind and
order of their Parents or Governors; half to the Owner, and half to the
Country. And all Grand Jury men are hereby enjoined to Present all those whom
they do judge breakers of this Order. [1662]

ARRESTS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That no man's person
shall be Arrested or Imprisoned for any Debt of Fine, None to be kept in prison
for debt that have not to satisfy.
if the Law can find any competent means of satisfaction, otherwise from his
estate, (except in special Contracts, as in the Law of Payments) And if not,
his person may be Arrested and Imprisoned, where he shall be kept at his own
charge, not the Plaintiffs, till satisfaction be made, unless the Court that
had cognizance of the cause, or some superior Court shall otherwise determine;
provided nevertheless, that no man's person shall be kept in prison for debt,
but when there is an appearance of some estate which he will not produce, to
which end, any Court or Commissioners Authorized by the General Court may
Administer an Oath to the party, or any other suspected to be privy in
concealing his estate, but shall satisfy by service if the Creditor require
it; but shall not be sold to any but of the English Nation. [1641. 47.]

It is Ordered, That when any persons are Committed to Prison in any Civil
Action, The Keepers discharge of Prisoners in Case.
the Keepers of the Prison shall not stand charged with their supply of
Victuals, or other Necessaries. And in case the Prisoner has no Estate, and
will be deposed before any Magistrate, that he is not worth five pounds, the
Plaintiff shall provide for his relief, or otherwise the Keeper shall not stand
charged with him: and all such charges the Plaintiff shall have power to levy
with the Execution, before the party be delivered from Prison.

COmplaint being made to this Court, of abuse offered to Justice, through
liberty granted, by the Keepers of the Prisons, to such persons as stand
Committed for payment of fines, and on Execution granted in Civil Cases:

This Court do Order; That no person or persons Committed as abovesaid, Keepers
of (...).
shall be permitted by the Keeper of the Prison, to go at liberty without the
precincts of the Prison, but by the License of the Court that Committed him, or
of the Creditor for whom Execution is granted; on penalty of paying the fine
imposed, and satisfaction of the Execution in any Civil Case. [1662]

IT is Ordered, Keepers liberty to take (...).
that the Keeper of the Prison for the time being, shall henceforth have the
same liberty that the Marshall has in all Civil Cases; to take sufficient
Bail after Commitment, as the Marshall might before Commitment. [1662.]

Attachments. Summons.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; L. 2. p. 12.
That it shall be the liberty of every Plaintiff, to take ou^ (...) Summons or
Attachments against any Defendant; Plaintiffs liberty to take summons or
Attachments.
Provided no ^^^^ment shall be granted in any Civil Action, to any Forreigner,
against a settled Inhabitant in this Jurisdiction, Foreign Plaintiffs to put
(...) security.
before he has given sufficient security or caution, to prosecute his Action,
and to answer the Defendant such costs, as the Court shall award him.

1. And it is further Ordered that in all Attachments of Goods and Chattels, or
of Lands and Hereditaments, legal notice shall be given to the party, or left
in writing at his house or place of usual abode, otherwise the suit shall not
proceed; Execution re^pited.
notwithstanding, if he be out of this Jurisdiction, the cause shall then
proceed to trial, but Judgment shall not be entered before the next Court, and
if the Defendant do not then appear, Judgment shall be entered, but Execution
shall not be granted before the Plaintiff has given security to be responsal
to the Defendant, if he shall reverse the Judgment within one year, or such
further time as the Court shall limit.

2. And it is hereby Declared, L. 1. p. 4^.
that no Summons, Pleading, Judgment, or any kind of proceeding in Courts or
course of justice, shall be abated, arrested or reversed upon any kind of
circumstantial errors or mistakes, Circumstantial errors.
if the person and cause be rightly understood and intended by the Court. And
in all Cases where the first Summons are not served six days inclusively
before the Court, summons to be served six day^^ before the (...)
and the Case briefly specified in the Warrant, where appearance is to be made
by the party Summoned, it shall be at his liberty whether he will appear or
not, except all cases that are to be handled in Court suddenly, called on
extraordinary occasion.

3. And whereas Suits at Law, A. 51. p. 1. In (...) to take out process.
many times such as do prosecute the same in their own name, in procuring the
process; intend and do declare in the name, and on the behalf of others, viz.
as Executors, Administrators, Assigns, Atturnies, Guardians, Agents or the
like, which is not only improper, but tends also to uncertainty; for
prevention whereof:

It is Ordered, That henceforth the Original process, whether Summons or
Attachments shall express in whose name the Plaintiff sueth, whether in his own
name, or as Executor of the last Will and Testament of such a man, or
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of such a man, or Assign, Attorney,
Guardian or Agent of such a man, or the like, or otherwise, if exception be
taken before the parties join issue, it shall be good, and the plaintiff shall
be liable to pay cost. [1641. 44. 47. 51.]

Marshalls may serve Attachments.
WHereas it has been commonly practiced, that Attachments have been directed
to the Marshall to be ^ervea in any Town under the Jurisdiction of that Court
whereof the Marshall is Officer, notwithstanding the Law does Order, that all
Attachments shall be directed to the Constable in such Towns where no Marshall
dwells:

It is hereby Ordered and Declared, Marshalls may serve Attachments.
That the said Custom shall be accounted legal, and shall not abate the
Proceeding or Trial of any Cause. Provided no more Costs be charged on the
Defendant, then by Law are due to Constables for serving Attachments. [1662]

BAKERS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That henceforth every Baker
shall have a distinct mark for his Bread, and keep the true Assizes, as
hereafter is expressed, viz. when Wheat is ordinarily sold for money at these
several Rates hereafter mentioned, the penny white loaf by averdupois weight,
when Wheat is by the bushel -- at 3 s. 0 d. the white 11 ounces 1 qr. wheat 17
ounces 1 qr. household 23 ounc. 0. at 3 s. 6 d. the white 10 ounces 1 qr. wheat
15 ounces 1 qr. household 20 ounc. 2. Weight of Bread
at 4 s. 0 d. the white 09 ounces 1 qr. wheat 14 ounces 0 qr. household 18 ounc.
2. at 4 s. 6 d. the white 08 ounces 1 qr. wheat 11 ounces 3 qr. household 16
ounc. 2. at 5 s. 0 d. the white 07 ounces 3 qr. wheat 11 ounces 2 qr. household
15 ounc. 2. at 5 s. 0 d. the white 07 ounces 0 qr. wheat 10 ounces 2 qr.
household 14 ounc. 0. at 6 s. 0 d. the white 06 ounces 2 qr. wheat 10 ounces 0
qr. household 13 ounc. 0. at 6 s. 6 d. the white 06 ounces 0 qr. wheat 09 ounces
2 qr. household 12 ounc. 2.
And so proportionably, under the penalty of forfeiting all such Bread as shall
not be of the several Assizes aforementioned, to the use of the poor of the
Town where the offense is committed, and otherwise as is hereafter expressed,
Clerk of the Market
and for the better execution of this present Order; there shall be in every
Market Town, and all other Towns needful one or two able persons annually
chosen by each Town, who shall be sworn at the next County Court, or by the
next Magistrate, unto the faithful discharge of his or their Office: who are
hereby Authorized to enter into all houses, Their power.
either with a Constable or without, where they shall suspect or be informed of
any Bread baked for sale, and also to weigh the said Bread as often as they see
cause, and seize all such as they find defective. As also to weigh all Butter
made up for sale, and brought unto, or being in the Town or Market to be sold
by weight, which it found light after notice once given, shall be forfeited in
like manner. The like penalty shall be for not marking all Bread made for sale:
A. 52. p. 8.
And the said Officer shall have one third part of all forfeitures for his
pains, the rest to the poor as aforesaid. [1646.]

2. Whereas it appears to this Court, that there is much deceit used by some
Bakers and others, who when the Clerk of the Market comes to weigh their
Bread* pretend they have none, but for their own use, and yet afterward put
their Bread to sale, which upon trial has been found too light; for prevention
of such abuses for time to come:

It is Ordered, that all persons within this Jurisdiction, who shall usually
sell Bread within doors or without, To prevent deceit in Bakers.
shall at all times hereafter, have all their Bread that they either put to
sale or spend in their families, made of the due Assizes, marked and yielded to
trial of the said Clerk as is directed in the Order aforesaid, under the
penalty therein expressed. [1652.]

BALLAST.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That no Ballast shall
be taken from any Town shore, Ballast not to be taken without leave.
by any person whatsoever, without allowance under the hands of the Select men,
upon the penalty of six pence, for every shovel full so taken, unless such
stones as they had laid there before. nor ^ast into the Channel.
It is also Ordered, That no Ship nor other Vessel, shall cast out any Ballast
in the Channel or other place inconvenient in any Harbor within this
Jurisdiction, upon the penalty of ten pounds. [1646.]

BARRATRY.
IT is Ordered and Decreed, and by this Court Declared; Barratry.
That if any man be proved and judged a common Barrater, vexing others with
unjust, frequent and endless suits, it shall be in the power of the Court, both
to reject his Cause, and to punish him for his Barratry. [1641.]

BENEVOLENCE.
IT is Ordered, That this Court hereafter will grant no Benevolence, except in
foreign occasions, and when there is Money in the Treasury sufficient, and our
debts first satisfied. [1641.]

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Gifts and Legacies to
be faithfully disposed (...)
that all Gifts and Legacies given and bequeathed to the College, Schools of
Learning or any other Public use; shall be truly and faithfully disposed of
according to the true and declared intent of the Donors. And all and every
Person or Persons betrusted to receive or improve any such Gifts o^ Legacies,
shall be liable from time to time to give account of their disposal and
management thereof to the County Court of that Shire where they dwell, and
where such Estate shall lie, who are hereby empowered to require the same where
need shall be, and to appoint Feoffes of trust, to settle and manage the same
according to the will of the Donors.

BILLS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Bills Assigned good debt to the
Assignee.
That any debt, or debts due upon bill or other specialty assigned to another,
shall be as good a debt and estate to the Assignee, as it was to the Assigner,
at the time of its assignation: And that it shall be lawful for the said
Assignee, to sue for, and recover the said debt due upon bill, and so assigned,
as fully as the original Creditor might have done; Provided the said
Assignement be made upon the backside of the bill or specialty. [1647.]

BOND-SLAVERY.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That there shall never
be any Bondslavery, No Bond-slavery
Villenage or Captivity amongst us, unless it be lawful Captives taken in just
Wars, as willingly sell themselves or are sold to us, and such shall have the
liberties and Christian usage which the Law of God established in Israel
concerning such persons does morally require, Provided this exempts none from
servitude, who shall be judged thereto by Authority. [1641.]

Bounds of Towns and Persons.
FOrasmuch as the Bounds of Towns, and of the Lands of particular persons, are
carefully to be maintained, and not without great danger to be removed by any,
which notwithstanding by deficiency and decay of marks, may at unawares be
done, whereby great jealousies of persons, trouble in Towns, and encumbrances
in Courts do often arise, which by due care and means might be prevented:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Town Bounds
to be laid out once in one year.
that every Town shall set out their Bounds, within twelve months after their
Bounds are granted: and that when their Bounds are once set out, once in three
years, three or more persons of a Town, To be surveyed within 3 year.
appointed by the Select men, shall appoint with the adjacent Towns, to go the
Bounds betwixt their said Towns and renew their marks; which marks shall be a
great heap of stones, or a Trench of six foot long and two foot broad, the most
ancient Town to give notice of the time and place of meeting for this
perambulation; which time shall be in the first or second month, upon pain of
five pounds for every Town that shall neglect the same; Provided that the three
men appointed for perambulation shall go in their several quarters, by order of
the Select men, and at the charge of the several Towns.

2. And it is further Ordered, Particular persons bounds to be surveyed once a
year.
that if any particular proprietor of Lands lying in common with others, shall
refuse to go the Bounds betwixt his I and and other men's once a Year in the
first or second month, being requested thereunto upon one weeks warning, he
shall forfeit for every day so neglecting, the shillings, half to the party
moving thereto, the other half to the Town. [1651.]

BREWERS.
TO the end no other but good and wholesome Beer be Brewed at any time in this
Jurisdiction, to be sold for the supply of Ship or other Vessels at Sea; and
that no oppression or wrong be done to any in this Mystery:

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof: That no person
whatsoever, shall henceforth undertake the calling or work of Brewing Beer for
sale, but only such as are known to have sufficient skill and knowledge in the
Art of Mystery of a Brewer. Brewers to (...) satisfaction (...) bad Beer.
And it is further Ordered, that if any undertaker for victualling of Ships or
other Vessels, or Master or owner of any such Vessel, or any other person,
shall make it appear, that any Beer bought of any person within this
Jurisdiction, does prove unfit, unwholesome and useless for their supply, either
through the insufficiency of the Malt, or Brewing, or unwholesome Cask; the
person wronged thereby shall be, and is hereby enabled, to recover equal and
sufficient damage, by Action against the person that put that Beer to Sale.

Breach of the Peace.
FOr the better preserving of Peace, and every man's Liberty and Safety in this
Jurisdiction, Breach of (...).
and to the end that all Fighting and Quarrelling and Disturbance may be
avoided:

It is by this Court Ordered, and by the Authority thereof Enacted, that no
person shall beat, hurt or strike any other person, upon penalty of paying to
the party stricken, by fine to the County where the Offense is committed, or
both, such sum or sums as the County Court, Magistrate, Commissioner or
Associate, that take cognizance thereof shall determine: and because in this
case several circumstances may alter the degree of the offense, as who do
smite, who is smitten, with what Instrument, the danger of the wound, more or
less, time, place and provocation, and other the like, it is left to the
discretion of the Judges aforesaid, upon hearing and consideration, to impose
such penalty or penalties, as in their discretion shall seem just, equal and
proportionable to the merit of the offense.

Judgment for Title of House or Land.
IT is Declared and Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Judgment
for Title of House or Land.
That where a Judgment is given in any Court for any person of House or Land,
upon the trial of the Title thereof; if the person against whom the Judgment
is given, does either forcibly keep possession thereof still after execution
served, or enter upon it again, and so retain possession by force, he shall be
counted a high offender against the Law, and breaker of the public peace;
therefore speedily to redress such a criminal offense, every Magistrate is
empowered, and by his place has power to give warrant and command to the
Marshall, Officers and other men whom he thinks meet to be employed in the
business (the Marshall also requiring aid, greater or lesser, as need requires)
and suppress the force, and give possession to the owner, and to imprison such
as do appear to be Delinquents, and their aiders and abettors, to be forth
coming at the next Court that did give the Judgment in the case, there to make
their Answer: and whom the Court does find guilty, to set such fine or other
punishment upon them as the merit of their several cases does require.

BRIDGES.
THis Court considering that Bridges in Country Highways are for the benefit
of the Country in general, and that it may be unequal to lay the charge thereof
on particular Towns:

Does Order, Bridges to be made and repaired by the County.
that from time to time, upon information or complaint to each County Court, of
the necessity or defect of any Bridge or Bridges as aforesaid; the Court shall
appoint a Committee to view and determine the same, and the charges shall be
proportioned by the Magistrates in each County Court, to be levied upon the
Several Towns in each County according to the direction of the Law for Country
Rates.

2. The Court considering the great danger that Persons, L. 2. p. 3.
Horses, Teams, are exposed to, by reason of defective Bridges, and Country
Highways in this Jurisdiction:

Does Order and Declare, That if any person at any time, lose his life, in
passing any such Bridge or Highway, after due warning given unto any of the
Select men of the Town in which such defect is, in writing under the hand of
two witnesses, o^ upon presentment to the Shire Court, of such defective Ways
or Bridges, that then the County or Town which ought to secure Ways or
Bridges, Penalty for damage received by the insufficiency of Bridges.
shall pay a fine of one hundred pounds to the Parents, Husband, Wife or
Children, or next of Kin to the party deceased. And if any person lose a Limb,
break a Bone, or receive any other bruise or breach in any part of his Body,
through such defect as aforesaid; the County or Town, through whose neglect
such hurt is done, shall pay to the party so hurt, double damages, the like
satisfaction shall be made for any Team, Cart or Cartage, Horse, other Beast or
Loading, proportionable to the damage sustained as aforesaid.

3. And for the prevention of danger, A. 58.
which may come by the insufficiency of Bridges and Passages which lie upon
Town Highways, the care whereof does belong either to the Town or particular
Persons to repair, who many times cannot procure Workmen to do the same:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court, Power to press workmen to repair
Bridges.
That upon the complaint of any such Town or Person, to any one Magistrate, he
shall hereby be empowered to issue out Warrants to the Constable, to impress
such Workmen in their Town-ship, as shall be needful to secure and repair the
same, who shall be paid for their work, either by the Town or Persons, to whom
such Bridges or Passages do belong. [1648. 51. 59.]

Burglary and Theft.
FOrasmuch as many Persons of late years, Robbing in house, highways penalty.
have been and are apt to be injurious to the Goods and Lives of others,
notwithstanding all care and means to prevent and punish the same:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That if any
Person shall commit Burglary, by breaking up any dwelling house, or rob any
person in the field or highways, such person so offending, shall for the
first offense, be branded on the forehead with the letter (B) and if he shall
offend in the same kind the second time, he shall be branded as before, and
also be severely whipped; and if he shall fall into the like offense the third
time, he shall be put to death, as being incorrigible.

And if any person shall commit such Burglary, On the Lords day.
or rob in the fields or houses on the Lords day, besides the former punishment
of Branding, he shall for the first offense have one of his (...) cut off; and
for the second offense in the same kind, he shall lose his other ear in the
same manner; and for the third offense he shall be put to death. [1642. 47.]

2. For the prevention of Pilfering and Theft: Rob Orchard of Garden of steal
goods.
It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That if any person be
taken or known to rob any Orchard or Garden; that shall hur^^or steal away any
Grafts or fruit Trees, Fruits, Linen, Woollen or any other goods left out in
Orchards, pay treble damages
Gardens, Back-sides, or in any other place in house or fields, or shall steal
any wood or other goods from the waterside, from men's doors or yards; or be
whip^^
he shall forfeit treble damage to the owners thereof.

And if they be children, or servants, that shall trespass herein, if their
parents or masters will not pay the penalty before expressed, they shall be
openly whipped.

And forasmuch as many times it so falls out that small thefts and other
offenses of a criminal nature are committed both by English and Indians in
towns remote from any prison or other sit place to which such malefactors (...)
committed until the next Court.

It is therefore ordered that any magistrate, One Magistrate may determine such
cases.
upon Complaint made to him may hear, and upon due proof determine, any such
small offenses of the aforesaid nature according to the Laws here established,
and give warrant to the Constable of that Town where the offender lives to levy
the same; Provided the damage or fine exceed not forty shillings; Provided also
it shall be lawful for either party to Appeal to the next Court to be holden
in that Jurisdiction, giving sufficient caution to prosecute the same to
effect, at the said Court. And every Magistrate shall make a return yearly to
the County Court where he lives, Magistrate and Constables to returns to the
County Court.
of what cases he has so ended. And also the Constables of all such fines as
they have received.

And where the offender has nothing to satisfy, such Magistrate may punish by
stocks or whipping, as the cause shall deserve, not exceeding ten stripes;
Servants and Workmen.
It is also Ordered, that all Servants and Workmen imbezling the goods of their
Masters or such as set them on work, shall make restitution, and be liable to
all Laws and penalties as other men. [1646.]

3. It is further Ordered by this Court; A. 52. p. 10.
That what person soever shall steal from any person, any Coin, Goods or
Chattels, to the value of ten shillings or upward, shall be whipped, or pay such
a sum or sums of money as the Court or Magistrate, Stealing above ten shillings.
that has proper cognizance thereof shall adjudge to be sufficient to satisfy
all costs and charges of the Court and Country in prosecuting and trying the
said offender, Constable to make search (...) goods stolen.
to the use of the common Treasury; and for smaller thefts, it is left to the
discretion of the Judge or Judges that shall have cognizance of the crime, to
appoint smaller mulcts or punishments, or only legal Admonitions as they shall
find cause.

And further it is declared and Ordered, That when any Goods are stolen from
any person, the Constable of the Town, by warrant from Authority* shall search
for the same, in any suspected places or houses, and upon search or otherwise,
Concealing of theft and receiving satisfaction privately.
if he shall find the same or any part thereof, or any ground of suspicion
appearing to the Officer, he shall bring the Delinquent or suspected party to a
Magistrate to be proceeded with according to the Law. And if any person having
goods stolen from him, shall privately receive his said stolen goods (except
the fact be private, penalty.
or committed by some member of his own family) and so smother the theft, and
shall not legally prosecute the Offender, he shall forfeit to the common
Treasury the Goods or Chattels so received or the true value thereof. [1652.]

CAPITAL LAWS.
IF any man after Legal Conviction shall HAVE or WORSHIP any other God but the
LORD GOD, ^^latry
he shall be put to death, Exodus 22. 20. Deuteronomy 13. 6, 10. Deuteronomy 17. 2, 6.

2. If any Man or Woman be a WITCH, Withch-craft.
that is, Has or Consulteth with a familiar Spirit they shall be put to death,
Exodus 22. 18. Levit. 20. 27. Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11.

3. If any Person within this Jurisdiction, Blasphemy.
whether Christian or Pagan, shall wittingly and willingly presume to BLASPHEME
the holy name of God, FATHER, SON, or HOLY GHOST, with direct, express,
presumptuous, or high-handed Blasphemy, either by wilful or obstinate denying
the true God, or his Creation, or Government of the World, or shall curse God
in like manner, or reproach the holy Religion of God, as if it were but a
politic devise; to keep ignorant men in awe; or shall utter any other kind of
Blasphemy of the like nature and degree, they shall be put to death, Levit. 24.
15, 16,

4. If any person shall commit any wilful MURDER upon premeditate malice,
Murder.
hatred or cruelty, not in a man's necessary and just defense, nor by mere
casualty against his will, he shall be put to death, Exodus 21. 12, 13. Numb.
35. 31.

5. If any person slays another suddenly, in his ANGER or CRUELTY of passion,
he shall be put to death, Levit. 24. 17. Numb. 35. 20, 21.

6. If any person shall slay another through guile, Poisoning.
either by POISONING or other such Devilish practice, he shall be put to death,
Exodus 21. 14.

7. If any Man or Woman shall LIE with any BEAST or Bruit Creature, Bestiality.
by carnal Copulation, they shall surely be put to death, and the Beast shall
be slain and buried, and not eaten, Levit. 20. 15, 16.

8. If any Man LIES with MANKIND as he lies with a Woman, (...)
both of them have committed Abomination, they both shall surely be put to
death, unless the one party were forced, or be under fourteen years of age, in
which case he shall be severely punished, Levit. 20. 13.

9. If any Person COMMIT ADULTERY with a Married or Espoused Wife, Adultery.
the Adulterer and the Adulteress shall surely be put to death, Levit. 20. 19.
and 18. 20. Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 27.

10. If any man STEALS A MAN or Mankind, Man-^^^^ing.
he shall surely be put to death, Exodus 21. 16.

11. If any Man rise up by FALSE-WITNESSE wittingly, False witness.
and of purpose to take away a man's Life, he shall be put to death, Deuteronomy. 1^.
16. and 13. 16.

12. If any Man CONSPIRE and ATTEMPT any INVASION, Conspiracy.
INSURRECTION or public REBELLION against our Commonwealth: Rebellion.
or shall endeavor to surprise any Town or Towns, Fort or Forts therein; or
shall Treacherously and perfideously attempt the Alteration and Subversion of
our frame of Polity or Government fundamentally, he shall be put to death,
Numb. 16. 2 Samuel 3. 2 Samuel 18. 2 Samuel 20.

13. If any Child or Children above sixteen years old, Children curse or smite
Parents.
and of sufficient understanding, shall CURSE or SMITE their natural FATHER or
MOTHER, he or they shall be put to death, unless it can be sufficiently
testified, that the Parents have been very unchristianly negligent in the
education of such Children, or so provoked them by extreme and cruel
Correction, that they have been forced thereunto to preserve themselves from
Death or Maiming, Exodus 21. 17. Levit. 20. 9. Exodus 21. 15.

18. If a Man have a STUBBORN or REBELLIOUS SON of sufficient years of
understanding ( viz.) sixteen years of age, Rebellion^ Son.
which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and
that when they had chastened him, will not hearken unto them, then shall his
Father and Mother, being his natural Parents lay hold on him, and bring him to
the Magistrates assembled in Court, and testify unto them, that their Son is
stubborn and rebellious, and will not obey their voice and chastisement, but
lives in sundry and notorious Crimes: such a son shall be put to death, Deuteronomy.
22. 20, 21.

15. If any Man shall RAVISH any maid, Rape.
or single Woman, committing Carnal Copulation with her by force, against her
own will; that is above the age of ten years, he shall be punished either with
death or with some other grievous punishment according to circumstances, as the
Judges or General Court shall determine, [1649.]

16. Forasmuch as Carnal Copulation with a Woman Child, under the age of ten
years, Rape of a child.
is a more heinous sin then with one of more years, as being more inhumane and
unnatural in it self, and more perrilous to the life and well-being of the
Child:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that
whosoever he be shall commit or have Carnal Copulation with any such Child
under ten years old, and be legally convicted thereof, he shall be put to
death. [1669.]

17. If any person shall be Indicted for any CAPITAL CRIME, Nonappearance in a
Capital Crime.
(who is not then in durance) and shall refuse to render his person to some
Magistrate within one month after three Proclamations publicly made in the
Town where he usually abides, there being a month between Proclamation and
Proclamation: his Lands and Goods shall be seized to the use of the Common
Treasury, till he make his lawful appearance. And such withdrawing of himself,
shall stand in stead of one witness to prove his Crime, unless he can make it
appear to the Court that he was necessarily hindered. [1646.]

Cask and Cooper. Gager. Packer.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That all Cask used for
any Liquor, Cask their Assize and quality.
Fish, Beef, Pork, or other Commodities to be put to Sale, shall be of London
Assize, and of sound and well seasoned Timber; Gagers Fee.
And that sit persons shall be appointed from time to time, in all places
needful, to Gage all such Vessels or Cask, and such as shall be found of due
Assize, Coopers mark.
shall be marked with the Gagers mark, who shall have for his pains four pence
per Tun. And every Cooper shall have a distinct Brand-mark on his own Cask,
upon the penalty of forfeiture of twenty shillings. A. 51. p. 2.
And whosoever shall put to Sale any new Cask, being defective, either in
Workmanship, Timber or Assizes as aforesaid, upon due proof made before any one
Magistrate, Defective Cask forfeit.
he shall forfeit such Cask to the Informer, and be fined to the use of the
Country ten shillings per Tun, and so proportionably for greater or lesser
Cask. And because there may be no neglect in the choice of a Gager or Packer;
It is Ordered, that every Town within this Jurisdiction, Choice of Gager and
Packer.
wherein any Cask are made, shall yearly make choice of a sit man for that
employment, who being presented by the Constable within one Month after the
choice made, before any one Magistrate, shall there take his Oath belonging to
his place, which if he shall refuse, Packer must pack no good (...) Cask of
full Assize.
he shall pay the sum of forty shillings, and another shall be chosen in his
room. Also the Town or Constable shall either of them suffer the like penalty
for their neglect of this Order. And every Gager or Packer, shall see that all
Cask he packs, Beef, Pork, Mackerel, Fish or other Goods is committed to his
Care, be of true and full Assize, and that he packs the same in no other Cask
whatsoever, on penalty of ten shillings for every Cask by him packed, that is
or shall be defective in that respect, one half to the Informer and the other
half to the Country.

2. And for the preventing deceit of any person in the packing of Fish, To
prevent deceit in packing Beef and Pork etc
Beef and Pork to be put to Sale in this and other Jurisdictions:

It is Ordered, That in every Town where any such Goods are packed up for Sale,
the Gager or Packer of that Town, or of the Town wherein it is put to Sale or
Shipped, shall see that it be well and orderly performed, that is to say,
Packers fees 4. 5. per ^un.
Beef and Pork, the whole, half or quarter; and so proportionably, that the
best be not left out: And so Fish, that they be packed all of one kind, and
that all Cask so packed be full and sound, and well seasoned, setting his Seal
on all Cask so packed, and he shall recover of the owners for so packing and
^ealing, four shillings per Tun; but if the Gager do only view them, and find
them good and sufficient, he shall set his Seal upon them* and have one
shilling per Tun for so doing, and if such goods so packed, Cask not marked
forfeit.
shall be put to sale without the Gagers mark, he shall forfeit the said Goods
that so puts them to sale; the one half to the Informer, the other half to the
Country. [1641. 47. 51. 52.]

To Regulate Coopers-Staves.
WHereas the Law tit. Pipe-staves, provides only for Pipe-staves for tight
Cask, and that Hogshead-staves and Barrel staves both of white and red Oak, as
well as for Pipe-staves, are frequently transported, and traffiqued in
payments, both to the Country Treasury, and otherwise;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That all Hogs-head
staves shall be in length three foot two inches, or upwards, not exceeding
three foot four inches; Coopers staves to be well (...).
and all Barrel staves shall be in length thirty one inches, all well and even
hewed or dressed sufficiently for use, as for Pipe-staves is expressed, whether
of white or red Oak. And all Headings for Pipe-staves of any sort to be in
length twenty eight inches; and for Hogsheads and Barrels, suitable to the Cask
to be made thereof; and that it be inserted in the Oath appointed for Viewers
of Pipe-staves, Any thing in the aforesaid Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Cattle Cornfieldsd. Fences.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Owner make good his
Fence
That in all Cornfields, which are enclosed in Common, every party interested
therein, shall from time to time make good his part of the fence, No Cattle to
be put in till Corn be out.
and shall not put in any Cattle, so long as any Corn shall be upon any part of
it, upon pain to answer all the damage that shall come thereby. [1647.]

2. Whereas it is found by experience, Occupiers of Land may Order common Fields
that there has been much trouble and difference in several Towns, about the
Fencing, Planting, sowing, Feeding and Ordering of Common fields;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That where
the Occupiers of the Land, or the greatest part thereof, cannot agree about the
fencing or improvement of such their said fields, that then the Select men in
the several Towns shall order the same, or in case where no such are, Liberty
to Fence in several
then the major part of the Freemen (with what convenient speed they may) shall
determine any such difference as may arise upon any information given them by
the said Occupiers, excepting such Occupiers Land shall be sufficiently fenced
by it self, which any Occupier of Land may lawfully do. [1643. 47.]

3. Whereas this Court has long since provided, that all men shall Fence their
Corn, Meadow, ground and such like, against great Cattle, to the end the
increase of Cattle especially of Cows and their breed should not be hindered;
there being then but few Horses in the Country, which since are much increased,
many whereof run in a sort wild, doing much damage in Corn and other things,
notwithstanding fence made up according to the true intend of the Order in that
case established, many whereof are unknown, most so untruly that they can by no
means be caught or got into custody, whereby their owners might answer damages,
and if sometimes with much difficulty and charge they be, they (...) in danger
of perishing before the owner appears or can be found out, all which to Prevent;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That every Town and
Peculiar in this Jurisdiction, Every Town to have a distinct mark for Cattle.
shall henceforth give some distinct Brand-mark, appointed by this Court (a
Copy of which marks, each Clerk or the Writs in every Town shall keep a Record)
upon the Horn, or Left Buttock, or Shoulder of all their Cattle which feed in
open Common without constant Keepers, whereby it may be known to what Town they
do belong. Cattle not marked trespassing pay double damage.
And if any Trespass not so marked, they shall pay double Damages: nor shall
any person knowing, or after due notice given of any Beast of his to be unruly
in respect of Fences, suffer such Beast to go common, Unruly Cattle to go in
Fetters.
or against Corn-field, or other impropriate enclosed grounds fenced as
aforesaid, without such Shackles or Fetters as may restrain and prevent
Trespass therein by them from time to time. And if any Horse or other Beast
Trespass in any Corn of other enclosure, being Fenced in such sort as secures
against Cows, Oxen and such like orderly Cattle; Harms to be viewed by
sufficient men.
the Party or Parties Trespassed shall procure two sufficient Inhabitants of
that Town, of good repute and credit, to view and adjudge the harms, which the
Owner of the Beast shall satisfy when known upon reasonable demand, Notice to
be given to the owner of the Beast.
whether the Beast were impounded or not: But if the Owner be known, and near
residing, as in the same Town or the like, he shall forthwith have notice of
the Trespass and Damage charged upon him, that if he approve not thereof, he
may nominate one such man, who with one other chosen by the party damnified, as
aforesaid, shall review and adjudge the harms; Provided they agree of damage
within one day after due notice given, and that no after harms intervene to
hinder it, which being forthwith discharged, together with the charge of the
notice, former view and determination of damage, L. 2. P. 3.
the first Judgment to be void, or else to stand good in Law; Provided
notwithstanding, the party Trespassed shall not be barred of his Action, albeit
the harms be not viewed and judged according to the direction aforesaid.

And if any Cattle be found damage feizant, the party damnified may impound or
keep them in his own private Close or Yard, till he may give notice to the
owner, and if they cannot agree, the Owner may Replevie them, or the other
party may return them to the owner, and take his remedy according to Law; L. 2.
P. 8.
yet in case of involuntary Trespasses, where such Trespasser shall pay, or
Legally tender full recompense for all the damage done by him before any suit
commenced, the Plaintiff shall recover no cost of his suit.

And in all Trespasses or damages done to any man, In voluntary Trespass pay no
cost.
if it can be proved to be done by the mere default of him to whom the damage
is done, it shall be judged no Trespass, L. 1. P. 51.
no^ any damage given for it. [1646]

4. For all harms done by Goats, Goats pay double damage
there shall be double damage allowed, and when any Goats are taken in Corn or
Gardens, the owner of such Corn or Garden, may keep and use the said Goats till
full satisfaction be made by the owners. [1646.]

5. Forasmuch as Complaints have been made of a very evil Practice of some
disordered Persons in the Country, who use to take other men's (...), sometimes
upon the Commons, and sometimes out of their own (...) and Enclosures, and ride
them at their pleasure without any leave or privity of the Owners;

It is therefore Ordered and Enacted by the Authority of this Court; Riding or
working other men's Horse or Cattle without leave
That whosoever shall take any other man's Horse, Mare, (...), or drawing beast,
either out of his enclosure, or upon any Common or elsewhere, (expect such be
taken damage feizant and disposed of according to Law) without leave of the
Owner, and shall ride or use the same, he shall pay to the party wronged treble
damages, Penalty treble damage or whip
or if the Complainant shall desire it, then to pay only ten shillings, and
such as have not to make satisfaction, shall be punished by whipping,
imprisonment or otherwise, as by Law shall be (...), and any one Magistrate or
County Court may hear and determine the same. [1647.]

6. For the better preserving of Corn from damage, by all kind of Cattle, and
that all Fences of Cornfieldsd, A. 53. P. 20.
may from time to time be sufficiently upheld and maintained;

It is Ordered by this Court, That the Select men of all Towns, shall make
wholesome Orders, Select men to order the repair of Fences.
for the repairing of all Fences both general and particular, within their
several townships, excepting Fences belonging to Farms of one hundred Acres or
above, and have power to impose (...) upon all Delinquents, (...) twenty
shillings for one offense; and if any Select men shall neglect to make Orders
as aforesaid, they shall forfeit five Pounds to the use of the Town, and so for
every Months default from time to time; To (...) viewers of common (...)
and the said Select men of every Town shall appoint, from year to year, two or
more (if need require) of the Inhabitants thereof, To give (...) of defect to
the Owner^
to view the Common fences, of all their Cornfieldsd, to the end, to take due
notice of the real defects and insufficiency thereof, who shall forthwith
acquaint the owners thereof with the same; and if the said Owners do not within
six days time or otherwise as the Select men shall appoint, Owners to repair
within (...) days.
sufficiently repair their said defective fences: then the said two or more
Inhabitants appointed as aforesaid, shall forthwith repair or review them, and
shall have double recompense for all their labor, care, cost and trouble, Else
the (...) to (...) them (...) have double (...).
to be paid by the Owners of the said insufficient Fence or Fences, and shall
have warrant from the said Select men, directed to the Constable to levy the
same, either upon the Corn or other estate of the Delinquent: Provided the
defect of the Fence or Fences be sufficiently proved by two or three witnesses.
[1647.]

7. Where Lands lie in Common unfenced, if one man shall improve his Land, by
fencing in several, and another shall not, he who shall so improve, shall
secure his Land against other men's Cattle, and shall not compel such as join
upon him to make any Fence with him, except he shall also improve in several as
the other does. ^^^tition Fence between neighbors, born by does.
And where one man shall improve before his neighbor, and so make the whole
Fence, if after his said neighbor shall improve also, he shall then satisfy
for half the others Fence against him, according to the present value, and
shall maintain the same; and if the first man shall after lay open his said
field, then the said neighbor shall enjoy his said half Fence so purchased to
his own use, and shall also have liberty to buy the other half Fence, paying
according to present valuation, to be set by two men chosen, by either party
one: the like Order shall be where any man shall improve Land against any
TownCommon. House Lots Fences.
Provided this Order shall not extend to House Lots not exceeding ten Acres;
but if such one shall improve, his neighbor shall be compellable to make and
maintain one half of the Fence between them, whether he improve or not.
Insufficient fence no damage except by Swine and Calves.
Provided also, no man shall be liable to satisfy for damage done in any
ground not sufficiently fenced, except it shall be for damage done by Swine, or
Calves under a year old, or unruly Cattle which will not be restrained by
ordinary Fences, or where any man shall put his Cattle, or otherwise
voluntarily Trespass upon his neighbors ground: and if the party damnified
find the Cattle damage feizant, he may impound or otherwise dispose of them.
[1642]

FENCE.
WHereas the Laws published concerning Fences and Cattle, being in the second
Edition, transported from their first order and method, much difficulty does
many times arise concerning the true meaning thereof, whereby great damages do
^ccrew to many of the Inhabitants, and consequently, to the Country: For
prevention whereof;

This Court does Order and Enact, Fence to secure Corn Fields.
That where any Cattle shall Trespass on any propriety, not appearing to be
sufficiently Fenced, against Swine sufficiently yoaked and ringed, or Cowes and
such Cattle as will be restrained by a sufficient Fence, in the judgment of
the viewers of the Fences, as Page 11. Sect. 6. in all such cases the Owners of
the Fence, or of the Land, shall bear all such damages, as to them thereby
sustained, any thing in the said Order, or any other Law, Custom or Usage to
the contrary notwithstanding. [1662]

Causes Small Causes.
FOR easing the Charge and Encumbrance of Court by small Causes; The Magistrate
may end causes under 40.^.
It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That any Magistrate in the
Town where he dwells, may hear and determine by his discretion (not by Jury)
according to the Laws here established, all causes arising in that County,
wherein the Debt, Trespass or Damage, does not exceed Forty shillings, who may
send for parties and witnesses by Summons or Attachment directed to the
Marshall or Constable, who shall faithfully execute the same.

And it is further Ordered, Three Commissioners in Towns to end small^^ ^uses.
that in such Towns where no Magistrate dwells, the Court of Assistants or
County Court, may from time to time upon request of the said Towns, signified
under the hand of the Constable, appoint three of the Freemen as Commissioners
in such cases, any two whereof, shall have like power to hear and determine all
such causes wherein either party is an Inhabitant of that Town, who have hereby
power to send for Parties and Witnesses, by Summons or Attachment directed to
the Constable, as also to Administer Oaths to Witnesses, and to give time to
the Defendant to Answer if they see cause; and if the Party Summoned refuse to
give in his Bond or Appearance; or sentenced, refuse to give satisfaction,
where no goods appear in the same Town where the Party dwells, they may charge
the Constable with the party, to carry him before a Magistrate or Shire Court
(if then sitting) to be further proceeded with according to Law, L. 1. p. 46.
but the said Commissioners may not commit to Prison in any case. And where the
Parties live in several Towns, the Defendant shall be liable to be sued in
either Town at the liberty of the Plaintiff.

2. And forasmuch as the Magistrates are under an Oath of God, for dispensing
equal justice according to Law;

It is Ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that all Associates for County
Courts, when and where there shall be any, Associates and commissioners to be
sworn.
and all such Commissioners Authorized as aforesaid, shall be sworn before each
County Court or some Magistrate in that County, unto the faithful discharge of
the trust and power committed to them.

And it is further Ordered, That in all small Causes as aforesaid, where only
one Magistrate dwells in the Town, and the Cause concerns himself, as also in
such Towns where no Magistrate is, and the Cause concerns any of the three
Commissioners, Select men to try Causes.
that in such cases the Select men of the Town, shall have power to hear and
determine the same, and also to grant execution for the levying and gathering
up such damages for the use of the person damnified, as one Magistrate of thr^^
Commissioners may do. And no Debt or Action proper to the Cognizance of one
Magistrate or the three Commissioners as aforesaid, L. 1. p. 4.
shall be received into any County Court, County Court to reject all Actions
under 40.^
but by Appeal from such Magistrate or Commissioners, except in cases of
Defamation and Battery. [1647. 49.]

3. Whereas by reason of the concourse of people, A. 51. p. 6.
and increase of trade in the Town of Boston, Suits at Law are grown more
frequent, whereby the County Courts are much prolonged, and forasmuch as many
crimes are also committed in the said Town, by strangers and others, which
often escape unpunished; For the prevention whereof,

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Commissioners of Boston.
that there be seven Freemen resident in Boston, annually chosen by the Freemen
of the said Town, and presented to the Court of Assistants, Chosen.
who hereby have power to Authorize the said seven Freemen to be Commissioners
of the said Town, to act in things committed to their trust, as is hereafter
expressed; Sworn.
who shall from time to time be sworn before the said Court, or the Governor,
Deputy Governor or any two Magistrates. And this Court does hereby give and
grant Commission and Authority unto the said seven men, or any five of them,
or any three of them with one Magistrate, to hear and determine all Civil
Actions which shall be brought before them, Power in (...) Cases to ten pounds.
not exceeding the sum of Ten pounds, arising within the neck of Land on which
the Town is Situate, as also on Noddles Island, or betwixt any persons where
both parties shall be Inhabitants or Residents within the said Neck or Noddles
Island aforesaid, or where either party shall be an Inhabitant or Resident
aforesaid; Provided they keep a Book of Records for the entry of all Causes,
Evidences, Testimonies, Sentences and Judgments as the Law provides in like
Cases; which said Commissioners are Authorized annually, to appoint a Clerk of
their Court and to demand and receive of every Plaintiff in all Cases or
Actions not exceeding Forty shillings, the sum of three shillings four pence;
and for all other Actions, the sum of ten shillings; and for all other things
the accustomed fees; and the said Commissioners shall from time to time publish
their Court days, as the three Commissioners in Towns are bound to.

And for the discovery, prevention and punishment of Misdemeanors in the Town
of Boston; To Criminal Cases.


Power and Authority is hereby given and granted to the said Commissioners, and
every of them, by Warrant under their or his hand, to convent before them, or
any of them, all such persons as shall be complained of for such offenses, or
otherwise brought to their cognizance, and to hear and determine the same,
according to the Laws here established as any Magistrate may do, Provided the
fines imposed by them, do not exceed forty shillings for one offense.

And that the said Commissioners may the better and more diligently endeavor
the suppressing of sin and misdemeanors, and the breath of the peace in the
said Town; Officers required to assist the Commissioners
Their Commission shall be from time to time, under the hand of the Secretary
of the General Court. And also all Marshalls, Constables and other Inhabitants
respectively, are required to be aiding and assisting our Commissioners
aforesaid in this behalf.

And that no person may be discouraged or damnified by this Commission; It
shall be lawful for any person to Appeal from the Sentence of all or any of
them to the Court of Assistants. [1651.]

4. And because the Commissioners in the several Towns have Power of
judicature, A. 4. P. 2.
the exercise whereof is of great concernment, both to Towns and Country;

It is therefore Ordered, None to be Commissioner but such as are approved.
that henceforth there shall be none admitted to be a Commissioner for any Town
in this Jurisdiction, but such whose conversation is inoffensive, and whose
fidelity to the Country is sufficiently known and approved of by the County
Court of that Shire. [1654.]

Charges Public.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, None to be employed in
public service at their own charge
That no Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistant, Associate, Grand or Petty Jury
man at any Court, nor any Deputy for the General Court, nor any Commissioners
for Military Discipline at the time of their public meetings, shall at any
time bear his own charges, but their necessary expenses shall be defrayed,
either by the Town, or the Shire on whose service they are, or by the Country
in general. [1631. 41.]

2. The Court considering the necessity of an equal Contribution to all common
charges is Towns;

Does Order, Every Inhabitant to pay to all charges in Church and Commonwealth
That every Inhabitant shall Contribute to all Charges both in Church and
Commonwealth, whereof he does or may receive benefit: And every such
Inhabitant who shall not Contribute proportionably to his ability to all common
Charges, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, shall be compelled thereunto, by
Assessment and Distress, to be levied by the Constable or other Officer of the
Town; and the Lands and Estates of all men (wherein they dwell) shall be Rated
for all Town charges, Lands and Estates to pay^ where they lie.
both Civil and Ecclesiastical (as aforesaid) where the Lands and Estates shall
lie, and their persons where they dwell.

3. For a most equal and ready way of raising meant for defraying the public
charges, and for Preventing such inconveniences as have fallen out upon for
(...) Assessments;

It is ^^lered and Enacted by the Authority of this Court; Country Rate
That the Treasurer for the time being, shall from year to year in the fifth
Month, without expecting any other Order, Treasurers warrant to the Constable.
send his warrants to the Constable and Select Men of every Town within this
Jurisdiction, requiring the Constable to call together the Inhabitants of the
Town, who being so assembled, shall choose some one of their Freemen to be a
Commissioner for the Town, who together with the Select men, Persons (...) to
be valued in the sixth month.
for their prudential affairs, shall some time in the sixth Month then next
ensueing, make a List of all the Male persons in the same Town from sixteen
years old and upwards, and a true estimation of all personal and real estates,
being or reputed to be the estate of all and every the persons in the same
Town, or otherwise under their custody or managing according to just valuation,
and to what persons the same do belong, whether in their own Town or elsewhere,
so near as they can by all lawful means which they may use, viz. of Houses,
Lands of all sorts, as well broken up as other (except such as does or shall
lie common for free seed of Cattle, to the use of the Inhabitants in general,
whether belonging to Towns or particular Persons, but not to be kept or hearded
upon to the damage of the Proprietors,) Mills, Ships and all small Vessels
Merchantable, Goods, Cranes, Wharfs, and all sorts of Cattle, and all other
known Estate whatsoever, either at Sea or on Shore; all which Persons and
Estates are by the said Commissioners and Select men to be assessed and rated
as here follows, Persons at 1. 5^ 8 d. per head
viz. every Person aforesaid (except Magistrates and Elders of Churches) one
shilling and eight pence by the head, Estates at one Penny per pound
and all Estates, both real and personal, at one penny for every twenty
shillings, according to the Rates of Cattle hereafter mentioned. The Estates of
all Merchants, A. 51. p. 1.
Shopkeepers and Factors, shall be Assessed by the Rule of common estimation,
Merchants rated by will and doom
according to the Will and Doom of the Assessors, having regard to their stock
and Estate, be it presented to view or not* A. 57. p. 23.
in whose hands soever it be; and if any such Merchants find themselves over
valued, if they can make it appear to the Assessors, they are to be eased by
them, Rate of house 3* lands.
if not, by the next County Court; And Houses and Land, of all sorts (except as
aforesaid) shall be rated at an equal and indifferent value, according to their
worth in the Towns and Places where they lie. Also every Bull and Cow of four
years old and upward at three pounds, Rate of (...).
Heifers and steers between three and four years old at fifty shillings, and
between two and three years old at forty shillings* and between one and two at
twenty shillings, and every Ox of four years old and upward at five pounds,
every Horse and Mare of three years old and upward five pounds, between two and
three at three pounds, of one year old and upwards at thirty shillings; every
Ewe sheep above one year old at ten shillings, every Goat above a year old at
eight shillings, every Weather sheep above one year old at ten shillings; every
Swine above one year old at twenty shillings; Every Ass above one year old at
forty shillings: And all Cattle of all sorts under a year old, are hereby
exempted; as also all Hay and Corn in the Husbandmans hand, because all Meadow,
arable Ground and Cattle are Rateable as aforesaid.

And for all such persons as by the advantage of their Arts and Trades are more
enabled to help bear the public charge then common laborers and Workmen,
Artificers and Handicrafts Rated.
as Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Victuallers, Smiths, Carpenters, Tailors,
Shoomakers, Joyners, Barbers, Millers and Masons, with all other manual persons
and Artists, such are to be rated for returns and gains, Impotent persons
exempted.
proportionable unto other men for the produce of their Estates* Provided that
in the Rate by the Poll, such persons as are (...) by sickness, lameness or
other infirmity shall be exempted. And (...) such Servants and Children as take
not wages, their Parents and Masters shall pay for them, but such as take wages
shall pay for themselves.

And it is further Ordered, Commissioners meet at the shire Town.
That the Commissioners for the several Towns, in every Shire, shall yearly
upon the first fourth day of the week in the seventh Month, assemble at their
Shire Town, and bring with them fairly written the just number of Males listed
as aforesaid, and the Assessments of Estates made in their several Towns,
according to the Rules and Directions in this present Order expressed; and the
said Commissioners being so assembled, To perfect the Assessments.
shall duly and carefully examine all the said Lifts and Assessments of the
several Towns in that Shire, and shall correct and perfect the same, according
to the true intent of this Order, as they or the major part of them shall
determine, and the same so perfected, they shall speedily transmit to the
Treasurer under their hands, or the hands of the major part of them; and
thereupon the Treasurer shall give warrants to the Constables to collect and
levy the same; so as the whole Assessment, both for Persons and Estates, may be
paid in unto the Treasurer before the twentieth day of the ninth Month yearly:
And every one shall pay their Rate to the Constable in the same Town where it
shall be Assessed, Constables to Collect in the ninth month.
(nor shall any Land or Estate be Rated in any other Town but where the same
shall lie, or was improved to the Owners, reputed Owners, or other Proprietors
use or behoof, if it be within this Jurisdiction) And if the Treasurer cannot
dispose of it there, the Constable shall send it to such place in Boston, or
elsewhere, as the Treasurer shall appoint, at the charge of the Country, to be
allowed the Constable upon his account with the Treasurer, and for all
Peculiars, viz. such places as are not yet laid within the bounds of any Town,
the same Lands with the Persons and Estates thereupon, Peculiars to be Assessed
at the next Town.
shall be Assessed by the Rates of the Town next unto it, the measure or
estimation shall be by the distance of the meeting houses.

And if any of the said Commissioners, or of the Select men, shall wittingly
fail or neglect to perform the trust committed to them by this Order, in not
making, Commissioners or select men's tailings
correcting, perfecting or transmitting any of the said Lifts or Assessments
according to the intent of this Order;

Every such Offender shall be fined forty shillings for every such offense, or
so much as the Country shall be damnified thereby, Forfeit 40.^.
so it exceed not forty shillings for one offense, provided such offense be
complained of and prosecuted within six months.

And it is further Ordered, that upon all Distresses (...) be taken for any of
the Rates and Assessments aforesaid, the Officer shall distrein Goods or Cattle
if they may be had, and if no Goods, then Lands or Houses, if neither Goods nor
Lands can be had within the Town where such Distress is to be taken, then to
Attach the body of such persons to be carried to Prison, there to be kept till
the next Court of that Shire, except they put in security for their appearance
there, or that payment be made in the mean time.

And it is Ordered, that the prizes of oll sorts of Corn, to be received upon
any Rate by virtue of this Order, shall be such as this Court shall let from
year to year, and in want thereof at price (...), to be judged by the
Commissioners of Ess^^, Middlesex and Suffolk. (...)

And it is further Ordered, that no Estate of Land in England, shall be Rated
in any public Assessment; Land in England Rate free
And it is hereby Declared, that by public Assessment and Rates, is intended
only such as are Assessed by Order of the General Court for the Countries
occasion and no other, [1646. (...) 57.]

4. It is Ordered, A. 56. P. 1^
that every Constable within this Jurisdiction, shall on the penalty of fire
pounds; clear up all their Accounts with the Treasurer, for the Rates of their
several Towns, Constables to clear their Accounts with the Treasurer by the
first of May.
by the first of May yearly, and they and every of them are empowered to press,
boats or carts, for the better and more speedy sending in their Rates,
according to the time appointed.

And if any Constable shall not have Collected the Rates and Assessments, L. 1.
P. 46.
committed to his charge by the Treasurer, during the time of his Office, that
he shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his Office have power to Levy by
distress, Constable after the expiration of his Office has power to Collect
Rates.
all such Rates and Levies; and if he bring them not in to the Treasurer
acording to his warrant, the Treasurer shall distreyn such Constables goods for
the same.

And if the Treasurer shall not so distreyn the Constable, Treasurer may
distr^in the Constable or any other Inhabitant.
he shall be answerable to the Country for the same: And if the Constable be
not able to make payment, it shall be lawful for the Treasurer to distreyn for
all arrearages of rates and leavyes, any man or men of that Town where the
Constables are unable, and that man or men upon petition to the General Court,
shall have Order to Collect the same again equally of the Town, with his just
damages for the same. [1640. 56.]

RATING STRANGERS.
THis Court understanding that several Gentlemen Merchants strangers* in the
beginning of every ye^r, frequently coming into these parts* and bringing
great store of English and other goods of all sorts to great value* and usually
making up their markets to their great advantage before the Sixth Month, when
the Rates, or Order fo^^he Collecting of them by Law is to issue out, (not
without a considerable disadvantage to the Merchants and Shopkeepers,
Residents and Inhabitants of this Colony, who have born the heat of the day,
and are fain to be at all the charge for supporting of the Government) and the
said Merchants stranger taking the chief of the benefit of the Trade, and make
their escapes without any payment to support the Government of this place,
under, and by which they reap so great advantage to themselves: Order for
Assessments on Strangers,
It is therefore Ordered, that it shall be henceforth lawful for the Select
men of each Town, where such Strangers are, or shall be^, to assess all such
Strangers, according to the Cargo's they shall bring into this Country: Or in
case of their refusal, to give a true Account of their Estate to the
Select-men; then the said Select-men shall, and hereby are empowered to make
their Assessment on all such Strangers in any Month of the Year, yearly, in
proportion to a single Rate by will and doom, as the Inhabitants of this
Country are used to be rated; and for non-payment, by the Constables to Levy
their said Assessments, as in other cases, by Warrant from the said Select-men.
[1665.]

FOR the preventing of differences arising between the Treasurer of the Country
and the Constables of the Towns, For (...) between Treasurer and Constables.
in Collecting and receiving the Country* Rate, and of great damage thereby
happening to the Country;

It is Ordered by this Court, that where any pay is tendered, the price whereof
is not determined by this Court, the place of Apprisement shall be where the
payment is tendered to the Treasurer, or his Order by men indifferently chosen,
as the Law directs. [1667.]

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that henceforth the
Ministers of Gods Word, regularly Ordained over any Church of Christ, Ministers
of Gods word Rate free.
Orderly gathered and Constituted; shall be freed from all Rates for the
Country, County and Church, and for the Town also, except where by special
Contract with the Town they have consented thereunto: Provided this freedom
shall extend only to such estate as i^ their own proper estates, and under
their own Custody and improvement. [1671.]

Children and Youth.
FOrasmuch as the good Education of Children is of Singular behoose and benefit
to any Commonwealth, and whereas many Parents and Masters are too indulgent
and negligent of their duty in that kind;

It is Ordered, Select men's care that all children may be taught to Read.
that the Select men of every Town, in the several Precincts and quarters where
they dwell, shall have a vigilant eye over their brethren and neighbors, to
see, First that none of them shall suffer so much Barbarism in any of their
families, as not to endeavor to teach, by themselves or others, their Children
and Apprentices, so much learning, as may enable them perfectly to read the
English tongue, and knowledge of the Capital Laws: upon penalty of twenty
shillings for each neglect therein.

Also that all Masters of families, do once a week (at the least) Catechize
their children and servants in the Grounds and Principles of Religion, and if
any be unable to do so much; And Catechized
that then at the least they procure such children and apprentices, to learn
some short Orthodox Catechism without book, that they may be able to answer
unto the questions that shall be propounded to them out of such Catechism, by
their Parents or masters, or any of the Select men when they shall call them to
a trial, of what they have learned in that kind.

And farther that all Parents and Masters do breed and bring up their chilren
and apprentices in some honest lawful Calling, Labor or employment, Children
to be brought up in some calling.
either in husbandry or some other trade, profitable for themselves and the
Commonwealth, if they will not or cannot train them up in learning, to fit
them for higher employments.

And if any of the Select men; after admonition by them given to such masters
of families, shall find them still negligent of their duty in the particulars
before menti oned, Unruly children placed out by Select men.
whereby Children and servants become rude, stubborn, and unruly: the said
Select men with the help of two Magistrates, or the next County Court for that
Shire, shall take such children or apprentices from them, and place them with
some Masters for years, (boys till they come to twenty one, and girls
eighteen years of age complete) which will more strictly look unto, and force
them to submit unto Government, according to the rules of this Order, if by
f^ir means and former instructions they will not be drawn unto it. [1642.]

2. Forasmuch as it appears by too much experience, that diverse Children and
Servants, A. 54. P. 6.
do behave themselves disobediently and disorderly toward their Parents,
Masters and Governors; to the disturbance of families, and discouragement of
such Parents and Governors;

It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, Disobedient Children and
Servants punished by one Magistrate
That it shall be in the Power of any one Magistrate, by warrant directed to
the Constable of that Town where such offender dwells, upon complaint, to call
before him any such offender, and upon conviction of such misdemeanors, to
sentence him to endure such Corporal punishment, by whipping or otherwise, as
in his judgment the Merit of the fact shall deserve, not exceeding ten stripes
for one offense, or bind the offender to make his appearance at the next County
Court;

And further it is also Ordered, Or by the Commissioners.
that the Commissioners of Boston, and the three Commissioners of each Town
where no Magistrate dwells, shall have the like Power; Provided that the person
or persons so sentenced, shall have liberty to make their Appeal to the next
County Court, in any such cases.

3. Upon Information of diverse loose, vain and corrupt persons, both such as
come from Foreign parts, A. 51. P. 4.
as also some others here inhabiting or residing, which insinuate themselves
into the fellowship of the young people of this Country, drawing them both by
night and by day, from their callings, studyes and honest occupations, and
lodging places, to the dishonor of God, and grief of their Parents, Masters,
Tutors, Guardians and Overseers etc:

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That whosoever shall
any ways cause or suffer any Young people or persons whatsoever, Persons under
government not to be entertained in common houses.
whether Children, servants, apprentices, Scholars belonging to the College,
or any Latin school, to spend any of their time or estate, by night or by day,
in his or their Company, Ship or other vessel, Shop or house, whether
Ordinary, Tavern, victualing house, Cellar or other place where they have to
do, and shall not from time to time, discharge and hasten all such Youths to
their several employments and places of abode, or lodging aforesaid, if their
being in any such place be known to them, or any other servant or help in the
family, or supplying the place of a servant at Sea or on land: that then such
person, householder,, shopkeeper, ship-master, ordinary-keeper, taverner,
victualer, or other; shall forfeit the sum of forty shillings upon legal
conviction before any Magistrate, On penalty of forty shillings.
or the Commissioners Authorized to end small causes, one half to the
informer, the other half to the Country; and all Constables in their several
Limits are Required to Act herein as is provided in reference to the Law
concerning Inkeepers.

4. Whereas sundry Gentlemen of quality, and others, often times send over their
Children into this Country to some friends here, hopeing (at least) thereby to
prevent their Extravagant and viotous courses; who notwithstanding (by means
of some unadvised or ill affected persons, which give them credit, in
expectation their friends either in favor to them, or prevention of blemish to
themselves, will discharge their debts) they are no less lavish and profuse
here, to the great grief of their friends, dishonor of God, reproach of the
Country;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court, Debts made by persons under age not
recoverable.
That if any person after publication hereof, shall any way give credit to any
such Youth, or other person under one and twenty years of age, without order
from their friends here or else where under their hands in writing, they shall
loose their debt what ever it be; And further, if such Youth or person incur
any penalty by such means, and have not wherewith to pay, such person or
persons as are occasions thereof, shall pay it, as the delinquents in the like
case should do. [1647.]

5. If any person shall wilfully and unreasonably deny any Child, timely or
convenient marriage, Parents denying marriage etc;
or shall exercise any unnatural severity toward them; such children shall
have liberty to complain to Authority for redress in such cases. [1641.]

6. No Orphan, dureing their minority, which was not committed to tuition or
service by their Parents in their life time, Orphans not be disposed on without
a Court
shall afterward be absolutely disposed of by any, withont the consent of some
Court, wherein two Assistants (at least) shall be present, except in case of
marriage, in which the approbation of the major part of the Select men of that
Town, or any one of the next Assistants shall be sufficient, and the minority
of women in case of marriage, shall be sixteen years. [1646.]

Chirurgions, Midwives, Physicians.
FORasmuch as the Law of God allows no man to impair the Life, L. 2. P. 3.
or Limbs of any Person, but in a judicial way;

It is therefore Ordered, That to person or persons whatsoever, employed at any
time about the bodies of men, women or children, for preservation of life or
health; as Chirurgions, Midwives, Physicians or others, presume to exercise,
or put forth any act contrary (...) the known approved Rules of Art, No force
or violence to be used in any case with: out consent etc.
in each Mystery and occupation, nor exercise any force, violence or cruelty
upon, or toward the body of any, whether young or old, (no not in the most
difficult and desperate cases) without the advice and consent of such as are
skillfull in the same Art, (if such may be had) or at least of some of the
wisest and gravest then present, and consent of the patient or patients if they
be mentis compotes, much less contrary to such advice and consent; upon such
severe punishment as the nature of the fact may deserve, which Law
nevertheless, is not intended to discourage any from all lawful use of their
skill, but rather to encourage and direct them in the right use thereof, and
inhibit and restreine the presumptuous arrogance of such as through presidence
of their own skill, or any other sinister respects, dare boldly attempt to
exercise any violence upon or toward the bodies of young or old, one or
other, to the prejudice or hazard of the life or limbo of man, woman or child.
[1649]

Clerk of the Writts.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; L. 2. P. 13.
That (notwithstanding every Magistrate has power to grant Warrants, Summons
and Attachments) in every Town within this Jurisdiction, there shall henceforth
be a Clerk of the Writts, nominated by each Town, and allowed by each Shire
Court; to grant Summons and Attachments in all Civil Actions; Clerks fees.
at the liberty of the Plaintiff, and Summons for Witnesses; and the said
Clerks are allowed to grant Replevins, and to take Bond with sufficient
security of the party to prosecute the Suite, whose Fees shall be, for every
Warrant two pence, Warrants directed to the Constable.
a Replevin or Attachment three pence, and for a Bond four pence. And all
Attachments are to be directed to the Constables, in such Towns where there i^
no Marshal dwelling. [1641]

It is Ordered, That henceforth the Clerk of the Writts shall demand of such
as receive Attachments of them, Clerk of the Writts to Respond the Marshalls
fees of 3d Attachment.
three pence a piece more then formerly, in behalf of the Marshal General,
which shall be in liew of that three pence on Attachments, by a former Law he
was to receive of the Constable or County Marshal, and that the Constables
shall have but twelve pence upon an Attachment as formerly. [1660]

COLLEGE.
WHereas through the good hand of God upon us, there is a College founded in
Cambridge in the County of Middlesex, called Harvard College; for the
encouragement whereof, this Court has given the Sum of four hundred pounds,
and also the Revenue of the Perry bewixt Charlestown and Boston; and that the
well Ordering and mann^ging of the said College is of great concernment:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That the
Governor, and Deputy Governor for the time being, and all the Magistrates of
this Jurisdiction, Commissioners and Feoffees of the College.
together with the teaching Elders of the six next adjoining Towns, viz:
Cambridge, Watertowne, Charles-towne, Boston, Roxbury and Dorchester, and the
President of the said College for the time being, To make Orders
shall* from time to time have full Power and Authority to make and establish
all such Orders, Statutes and Constitutions, as they shall see necessary for
the Instituting, Guiding and furthering of the said College; and several
members thereof, from time to time, in Piety, Morallity and Learning, Dispose
of (...) and Revenues.
and also to dispose, order and manage to the use and behoof of the said
College and members thereof, all Gifts, Legacies, Bequeaths, Revenues, Lands
and Donations, as either have been, are, or shall be Conferred, Bestowed, or
any ways shall fall, or come to the said College. And whereas it may come to
pass, that many of the said Magistrates and said Elders may be absent, or
otherwise employed about other weighty Affairs, when the said Colledge^ may
need their present Help and Counsel; It is therefore Ordered, that the greater
number of Magistrates and Elders, which shall be present with the President,
shall have the Power of the whole; Provided that if any Constitution, Order or
Orders by them made, shall be found hurtful unto the said College, or the
members thereof, or to the Weal-publick, then upon Appeal of the Party or
Parties grieved, unto the company of Overseers first mentioned, they shall
Repeal the said Order or Orders (if they shall see cause) at their next
meeting, or stand accountable thereof to the next General Court. [1636. 40. 42.]

2. Whereas we cannot but acknowledge the great goodness of God toward his
People in this Wilderness, A. 54. P. 2.
in raising up Schools of Learning, and especially the College, from whence
there has sprung many Instruments, both in Church and Commonwealth, both to
this and other places: And whereas at present the work of the College has
been several ways obstructed, and seems yet also at present, for want of
comfortable maintenance, for the encouragement of a President: This Court
taking the same into their serious consideration, and finding that though many
Propositions have been made for a voluntary Contribution, yet nothing has
hitherto been ^btained from several persons and Towns, although some have
done very liberally and freely, and fearing least we should show our selves
ungrateful to God, or unfaithful to posterity, if so good a Seminary of
Knowledge and Virtue should fall to the ground through any neglect of ours;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That (besides
the Profit of the Ferry formerly granted to the College, which shall be
continued) there shall be yearly Levied by Addition to the Country Rate one
hundred pounds, One hundred pounds given by the Court to the President and
Fellows.
to be paid by the Treasurer of the Country to the College Treasurer, for the
b^hoofe and maintenanc of the President and Fellows, to be distributed between
the President and Fellows according to the determination of the Overseers of
the College, and this to continue, dureing the pleasure of the Country.

And it is hereby Ordered, That no man shall stand engaged to pay his voluntary
Contribution, that he has underwritten, by virtue of this Courts
propositions, and that such persons as have already done voluntarily, shall be
considered for the same in the Country Rate, such a proportion as this addition
of one hundred pounds does add to the Rate, to be allowed by the Constable to
each person, and by the Treasurer to (...) Constable. [1659]

CONDEMNED.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That no man Condemned to dye, shall be put to
Death within four days next after his condemnation, None to be executed within
4 days after Condemnation.
unles the Court see special cause to the contrary, or in case of Marshal Law:
nor shall the Body of any man so put to death, be unburied twelve hours,
unless it be in case of Anotomie. [1641]

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That the Secretary for
the time being, Signing of Warrants for execution.
shall from time to time, Sign all Warrants for the execution of persons
sentenced to Death, either in the General Court or Court of Assistants: and
that the Secretary or Clerk of every Court shall sign Warrants for executions
in all other judgments of Courts Civil or Criminal; any Custom or usage to
the contrary notwithstanding. [1668]

CONSTABLES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That the Constable shall
Whip, Constable to whip
or Punish any to be punished by Order of Authority (where there is not another
Officer appointed to do it) in their own Towns, unless they can get another to
do it; A. 55. P. 26.
Also every Constable is Empowered and hereby Enjoined, To Collect town Rates.
faithfully to Collect such Rates and Assessments as shall from time to time be
committed unto them, by the Select men of the several Towns, provided it be by
Warrant under their hand.

2. It is further Ordered: That any and every Person tendered to any Constable
of this Jurisdiction, To convey Offenders.
by any Constable or other Officer, of our own, or belonging to any For^aine
Jurisdiction in this Country, or by Warrant from any such Authority; shall be
presently received and conveyed forthwith from Constable to Constable, till
they be brought to the place to which they are sent, Hues and cries to be
pursued.
or before some Magistrate of this Jurisdiction, who shall dispose of them as
the justice of the cause shall require.

And all Hues and cries shall be duly received and diligently pursued to full
effect; To be put forth by the Constable
And where no Magistrate is near, every Constable shall have full power to
make, sign, and put forth, pursuites or Hues and cries, after Murderers,
Offenders to be Apprehended.
Manslayers, Peace-breakers, Thieves, Robbers, Burglarers, and other Capital
offenders; as also to Apprehend without warrant, such as are overtaken with
Drink, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Lying, Vagrant persons, Night-walkers;
Provided they be taken in the manner, either by the sight of the Constable, or
by present information from others.

As also to make search for all such persons, either on the Sabbath day or
other, when there shall be occasion, in all houses Licensed to sell either Beer
or Wine, or in any other suspected or disordered places, and those to Apprehend
and keep in safe custody; till opportuinity serve to bring them before one of
the next Magistrates, to further examination; Provided when any Constable is
employed by any of the Magistrates, for Apprehending of any person, he shall
not do it without Warrant in writing;

And if any person shall refuse to assist any Constable, All to assist the
Constable on penalty of 10. (...).
in the execution of his Office, in any of the things before mentioned, being by
him required thereto, they shall pay for neglect thereof ten shillings, to the
use of the Country, to be levied by Warrant from any Magistrate, before whom
any such offender shall be brought, and if it appear by good testimony,
wilful neglect forty shillings.
that any shall wilfully, obstinately, or contemptuously refuse or neglect to
assist any Constable as is before expressed, he shall pay to the use of the
Country forty shillings.

And that no man may plead ignorance for such neglect or refusal;

It is Ordered, Constable Staff.
that every Constable shall have a Black staff, of five foot long, Tipped at
the upper end about five inches with brass, as a Badge of his Office, which he
shall take with him when he goes to discharge any part of his Office; which
staff shall be provided at the charge of the Town, and if any Magistrate, Not
raising Hue and cries in Capital cases for^^.
Constable, or any other upon urgent occasion, shall refuse to do their best
endeavor, in raising and prosecuting Hues and cries, by foot, and if need be
by horse, after such as have committed Capital Crimes, they shall forfeit for
every such offense to the use aforesaid forty shillings. [1646.]

For the Regulating and settling the charge of prosecution of Hues and cries,
It is Ordered, that what shall Arise by occasion of escape from the Countries
prison, or flight from Authority to avoid the same, shall be paid by the
Treasurer of the Country^ and such as Arise by flying fom any of our County
prisons, or to escape any of them, shall be defrayed by the Treasurer of that
County where the occasion did arise. Charge of Hues and cries.
And such persons (...) procure Hues and cries upon their own particular
occasions shall bear all the charge arising therefrom; provided due accounts be
made by such as demand pay. [1660.]

Conveyance, Deeds and Writings.
FOR the prevention of Clandestine and uncertain Sales and Titles; A. 52. P.
15.


It is Ordered and Declared by this Court, That henceforth no^ Sale or
Alienation of Houses and Lands, within this Jurisdiction, shall be holden good
in Law, except the same be done by Deed in writing, under hand and Seal, No
sale of Land vallid without Deed etcs
and Delivered, and Possession given upon part in the name of the whole, by the
Seller or his Attorney, so Authorized under hand and Seal; unless the said Deed
be acknowledged and Recorded according to Law. [1652.]

2. Whereas the unskilfullnes of some, A. 51. P. 2.
that make Deeds and Conveyances of Houses and Land, the word Heir is
oftentimes Omitted, when as an Estate of Inheritance is intended to be passed
by the Parties; whereupon Questions and Suites at Law are apt to arise: For the
prevention whereof for time to come; This Court Orders;

That all Deeds and Conveyances of Houses and Lands in this Jurisdiction,
wherein an Estate of Inheritance is to be Passed, it shall be expressed in
these words, or to the like effect; viz. To Have and to Hold, the aid House or
Lands respectively, to the Party or Grantee, his Heirs and Assigns for ever;
How Deeds and Conveyances are to be made.
or if it be an Estate entayled, then to Have and to Hold etc: to the Party or
Grantee, and to the Heirs of his body Lawfully begotten, or to the Heirs Male
of his body Lawfully begotten, between him and such an one his wife, or to Have
and to Hold to the Grantee for term of life, or for so many years; Provided
this Law shall not include former Deeds and Conveyances, but leave them in the
same condition, as they were or shall be in before this Law takes effect, which
shall be at the last of October one thousand, six hundred, and fifty one,
Provided also that this Law shall not extend to Houses or Lands given by Will
or Testament, or to any Land granted, or to be granted by the Inhabitants of a
Town. [1651.]

3. It is Ordered, L. 1. P. 16.
That no Conveyance, Deed or Promise whatsoever, shall be of Validity, if it be
obtained by illegal Violence, Imprisonment, Threatening, Debts obtained by force
invallid
or any kind of Forcible compulsion, called Dures. [1641.]

And all Covenous or Fraudulent Alienations or Conveyances of Lands, Tenements,
or any Hereditaments, shall be of no force or validity, to Defeat any man from
his due Debts or Legacies, Fraudulent Deeds invallid.
or from any just Title, claim or possession, of that which is so Fraudulently
conveyed.

4. And for the avoiding all Fraudulent Conveyances, and that every man may
know what Estate or Interest, other men may have in any Houses, Lands or other
Hereditament, they are to deal in;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That after the end of October,
Sales to be acknowledged and Recorded
one Thousand, six hundred and forty, no Mortgage, Bargain, Sale, or Grant
made, of any Houses, Lands, Rents or other Hereditaments, where the Granter
remains in Possession, shall be of any Force against other persons, except the
Granter and his Heirs, unless the same be acknowledged before some Magistrate,
and Recorded, as is hereafter expressed: And that no such Bargain, Sale or
Grant already made in way of Mortgage, where the Granter remains in possession,
shall be of Force against other, but the Granter or his heirs, except the same
shall be entered as is hereafter expressed within one Month after the date
before mentioned, if the party be within this Jurisdiction, or elsewere, within
three Months after he shall return; Party refusing to acknowledge his Deed to
be imprisoned.
And if any such Granter being required by the Grantee his Heirs or Assigns,
to make an Acknowledgment of any Grants, Sale, Bargain or Mortgage by him made,
shall refuse so to do, it shall be in the Power of any Magistrate to send for
the party so refusing, and commit him to prison without Bail or Mainprise,
until he shall acknowledge the same, and the Grantee is to enter his Caution
with the Recorder of the County Court, Grantee to enter his Caution.
and this shall save his Interest in the mean time; And if it be Doubtful
whether it be the Deed and Grant of the party, he shall be bound with Sureties
to the next Court of Assistants, and the Caution shall remain good as
aforesaid.

And for the Recording of all such Grants, Sales, Mortgages;

It is Ordered, that the Clerk of every Shire Court shall Enter all such
Grants, Clerk of the Court to enter Deeds.
Sales, Bargains, Mortgages of Houses, Lands, Rents and Hereditaments as
aforesaid, together with the names of the Granter and Grantee, Thing and Estate
granted, together with the Date thereof. [1641, 42.]

COUNCIL.
THIS Court considering how the weighty Affairs of this Jurisdiction, whether
they Concern this peculiarly, or have Reference to the rest of our Confederated
Colonies, may be duly and speedily Transacted, in the Vacancy of the General
Court, for the satisfaction of the Commissioners, in respect of the weighty and
sudden occasions which may be then in hand;

Does hereby Express and Declare, Council how to (...) together.
that the General Court ought to be called by the Governor, when the
importancy of the business does require it, and that time and opportunity will
safely admit the same; and that all other necessary matters are to be Ordered
and dispatched by the Major part of the Council of the Commonwealth: And
therefore to that end, Letters signifiing briefly the business, and the time and
place of meeting for Consultation ought to be sent unto the Assistants.

Also it is hereby Declared, that Seven of the said Assistants meeting, the
Governor or Deputy Governor being one, How many may Act.
is a sufficient Assembly to Act, by Impressing of Soldiers or otherwise as
need shall be, and in case of extreme and urgent necessity, when endeavors are
reasonably used to call together the Assistants, and the business will not admit
delay, then the Acts of so many as do Assemble, are to be accounted and are
accounted Vallid and sufficient: Also it is intended, that the General words
before mentioned, contain in them Power to Impress and send forth Soldiers,
Their power.
and all manner of Victuals, Vessels at Sea, Carriages and all other
necessaries, and to send Warrants to the Treasurer to pay for the same. [1645]

COUNSEL. ADVICE.
IT is Ordered by this Court; L. 2. P. 4.
That it shall not be Lawful for any person to ask Counsel or Advice of any
Magistrate, or Commissioner in Towns, in any Case wherein afterward he shall
or may be Plaintiff, before such Magistrate or Commissioner, None to ask
Counsel of Magistrate or Commis. in civil act.
under penalty of being disinabled to prosecute any such Action, (that he has
so propounded or taken advice as aforesaid,) at the next Court where the case
shall come to Trial, being pleaded by way of Bar, either by the Defendant or
any on his behalf; in which Case the Plaintiff shall pay full Costs to the
Defendant, and if the Defendant ask Counsel or Advice as aforesaid, he shall
forfeit ten shillings for every such offense to the Plaintiff.

COURTS.
IT is hereby Declared, That the General Court consisting of Magistrates and
Deputies, L 2.. P. 10, 13.
is the chief Civil Power of this Commonwealth; which only has Power to
Raise Money and Taxes upon the whole Country, and dispose of Lands, viz. to
Give the Confirm Proprieties, appertaining to and immediately derived from the
Country; General Court the Chief power.
and may Act in all affairs of this Commonwealth according to such Power,
both in matters of Counsel, making of Laws, and matters of Judicature, by
Impeaching and Sentencing any person or persons according to Law, and by
receiving and hearing any Complaints orderly presented against any person or
Court;

And it is Agreed, that this Court will not proceed to Judgment in any Cause,
Civil or Criminal, before the Deputyes have taken this Oath following. [1634,
42, 44.]

I Do Swear by the most great and dreadful Name of the Everl^ving God, that
in all Cases wherein I am to deliver my Vote or Sentence, L. 2. P. 24.
against any Criminal Offense, or between Parties in any Civil case; I will
deal uprightly and justly, Deputys Oath,
according to my judgment and conscience; And I will according to my skill and
ability, Assist in all other Public affairs of this Court, Faithfully and
Truly, according to the Duty of my place, when I shall be present to attend
the service.

2. Forasmuch as after long Experience, L. 1. P. 10.
diverse inconveniences are found in the manner of proceeding in this Court,
Magistrates and Deputys to (...) apart
by Magistrates and Deputies sitting together: It is therefore Ordered by this
Court and Authority thereof; That henceforth the Magistrates sit apart, and
Act all business belonging* to this Court, by themselves; by drawing up Bills
and Orders, as they shall see good in their wisdom, which having agreed upon,
they may present to the Deputies to be considered, and accordingly to give
their Consent or Dissent: The Deputies in like manner sitting by themselves,
and consulting about such Orders and Laws, as they in their discretion and
experience shall find meet for the Common good; which agreed on by them, they
may present to the Magistrates, who having considered thereof, may manifest
their Consent or Dissent thereto;

And no Law, L. 1. P. 3^.
Order or Sentence shall pass, or be accounted an Act of this Court, without
consent of the greater part of the Magistrates on the one party, and the
greater number of Deputies on the other party; But all Orders and Conclusions
that have passed by Approbation of Magistrates and Deputyes as aforesaid, No
Act to pass without consent of the major part of both.
shall be accounted Acts of this Court, and accordingly be Engrossed, which on
the last of day every Session shall be deliberately Read over before the whole
Court; Provided that if the Magistrates and Deputies shall happen to differ in
any case of Judicature, A. 52. P. 11
either Civil or Criminal, such Case shall be determined by the Major Vote of
the whole Court met together.

3. FOR the Electing of the Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants and General
Officers, upon the day appointed by our Patent, to hold our yearly Election,
being the last Wednesday of every Easter Term; Day of Election to be attended
without Summons.


It is Solemnly and Unanimously Decreed and Established; That henceforth, the
Freemen of this Jurisdiction, shall either in Person or by Proxy, without any
Summons Attend and Consummate the Elections on the day aforesaid yearly; at
which time also they shall send their Deputyes with full Power to consult of
and determine such matters, Deputies also to be sent.
as concern the Welfare of this Commonwealth; From which General Court, no
Magistrate or Deputy shall depart or be discharged, without the consent of the
Major part both of Magistrates and Deputies, None to depart without leave.
during the first four days of the first Session, under the penalty of one
hundred pounds, nor afterward under such penalty as the Court shall impose,
Provided that the Deputies of Dover, and of such other Towns as are not by Law
bound to send Depuies, are at liberty of attending any after Sessions. [1643,
53.]

4. It is hereby Ordered and declared, that the Governor and Deputy Governor,
L. 1. P. 24.
jointly agreeing, or any three Assistants consenting, have power out of Court
to Reprieve a condemned Malefactor, Governor and Deputy Governor three
Assistant power to (...) one condemned.
till the next Court of Assistants, or General Court; and that the General
Court only has Power to Pardon a condemned Melefactor.

Also it is declared, that the General Court has Authority to send forth into
Fo^^aine parts, General Court may send forth any person.
any member of this Commonwealth, of whatsoever quality, conditon, office or
relation, about any public Message or Negotiation, Provided the Party so sent
be acquainted with the Affairs he goes about, and be willing to undertake the
Service. [1641]

5. It is Ordered by this Court, L. 1. P. 36, 24.
that the Governor, Deputy Governor, or greater part of the Assistants, may
upon urgent occasion call a General Court at any time; Power to call a General
Court Not to be dissolved but by consent
But no General Court shall be dissolved or adjourned, without the consent of
the Major part thereof.

6. It is Ordered and declared, that the Governor shall have a casting Vote,
Governor and President casting vote.
wheresoever there shall be an ^qui-vote, in the Courts of Assistants or
General Court, and the President, or Moderator in all Courts of Civil
Assemblies. [1641]

The Court being sensible of the great necessity of maintaing the Authority of
Courts and Magistrates;

Does Order, That whosoever shall openly or willingly defame any Court of
justice, L. 1. P. 36.
or the Sentences and Proceedings of the same, or any of the Magistrates, or
other Judges of any such Court, in respect of any act or sentence therein
passed, Reproach Courts or Magistrates
and be convicted thereof; shall be punished for the same, penalty.
by whipping, fine, imprisonment, disfranchisment, or banishment, as the
quality or measure of the offense shall deserve.

And if any Magistrate or other member of any Court, shall use any reproachful
or unbeseeming speeches or behavior, toward any Magistrate, Judge, Offenses
of the members of the Court in Court how censured.
or member of that Court, in the face of the Court; he shall be sharply
reproved by the Governor or President of the said Court, and if the quality of
the offense be such as shall deserve a further Censure* or if the person so
reproved shall reply again without leave; the Court may proceed to punish any
such offender, by fine or imprisonment, or may bind him over to the next
superior Court. And if in a General Court* any miscariage shall be amongst the
Magistrates, when they are by themselves, it shall be examined and sentenced
amongst themselves, if amongst the Deputyes when they are by themselves, it
shall be examined and sentenced when they are by themselves, if it be when the
whole Court is together, it shall be judged by the whole Court. [1637, 41.]

7. For the better Administration of Justice, and easing of the Country of
unnecessary charges and travail;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, L. 1. P. 14.
That there be two Courts of Assistants yearly kept at Boston, Two Courts of
Assistants.
by the Governor, or Deputy Governor and the rest of the Magistrates, on the
first Tuesday of the first month, and on the first Tuesday of the seventh
month, to hear and determine all, their power.
and only actions of Appeal from inferior Courts, all Causes of divorce, all
Capital and Criminal Causes, extending to Life, Member or Banishment. And that
Justice be not deferred, nor the Country needlessly charged; L. 3. P. 5.
It shall be Lawful for the Governor, or in his absence the Deputy Governor
(as they shall judge necessary) to call a Court of Assistants for the Trial of
any Malefactor in Capital Causes. Governor may (...) a Court of Assistants.


Also there shall be County Courts held in the several Countyes, by the
Magistrates living in the respective Counties, or any other Magistrates that
can attend the same, or by such Magistrates as the General Court shall appoint
from time to time; L. 1. P. 14, 15.
together with such persons of worth, where there shall be need, as shall from
time to time be appointed by the General Court (at the nomination of the
Freemen of the County) to be joined in Commission with the Magistrates, County
Courts
so that they may be Five in all, who keep them
Three whereof may keep a Court, provided there be one Magistrate; Every of
which Courts shall have full power to hear and determine all Causes, How many
judges
Civil and Criminal, not extending to Life, Member or Banishment, (which with
Causes of divorce, are reserved to the Court of Assistants) and to make and
constitute Clerks and other needful Officers, their Power.
and to Summon Juryes of Inquest, and Trials out of the Towns of the County;
Provided no Jurors shall be warned from Salem to Ipswich, not from Ipswich to
Salem, and the times and places for holding the County Courts shall be as
follows.

SUFFOLK.
Boston the last tuesday of the second Month. The last tuesday of the fifth
Month. Time and place of the County Courts.
The last tuesday of the eighth Month. And the last tuesday of the eleventh
Month.
NORFOLK.
Salisbury the second tuesday of the second Month. Hampton the second tuesday
of the eighth Month.
ESSEX.
Salem the last tuesday of the fourth Month. And the last tuesday of the ninth
Month. Ipswich the last tuesday of the first Month. And the last tuesday of the
seventh Month.
PASCATAQUA.
Dover. the last tuesday of the fourth Month. Portsmouth the last tuesday of
the fourth Month.
MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown the third tuesday of the fourth Month. And the third tuesday of the
tenth Month. Cambridge the first tuesday of the second Month. And the first
tuesday of the eighth Month.
YORKSHIRE.
York the first tuesday of the fifth Month.
HAMPSHIRE.
North-Hampton the last tuesday of the first Month. Springfield the last
tuesday of the seventh Month.
A Judgment acknowledged before any two Magistrates and the Secretary or Clerk
of any Court, L. 2. P. 7.
shall be good in Law, Judgment acknowledged before two Magistrates.
and the Clerks Fee for Recording the same shall be twelve pence, and if the
Secretary or Clerk be a Magistrate, he with one Magistrate may do it.

8. For the more speedy dispatch of all Causes which shall concern Strangers,
L. 1. P. 15.
who cannot without prejudice stay to attend the ordinary Courts of Justice;

It is Ordered, that the Governor or Deputy Governor, with any two
Magistrates, Special Courts for Strangers
or when the Governor, Deputy Governor cannot attend it, that any three
Magistrates shall have power upon the request of such Stranger, to call a
special Court to hear and determine all Causes civil and criminal (triable in
any County Court according to the manner of proceeding in County Courts) which
shall arise between such Strangers, Records of special Courts to be transmitted
to the Court of Assistants.
or wherein any such Stranger shall be party. And all Records of such
proceedings, shall be transmitted to the Records of the Court of Assistants, to
be entered as trials in other Courts (which shall be at the charge of the party
cast or condemned in the case. [1639.]

It is further Ordered that it shall be lawful for any Stranger, L. 2. P. 15.
upon legal Summons, Strangers liberty to so at any Court.
to enter any Action in any Court of this Jurisdiction, against any person not
residing or Inhabitant amongst us.

9. For preventing all occasions of partial or undue proceedings, L. 1. P. 36.
in Courts of Justice and avoiding of jealousies;

It is Ordered, that in every civil Cause, between Party and Party, where there
is between any Judge of the Court, and any of the parties, the Relation of
Father and Son, Judges related to (...) not to give Sentence.
either by Nature or Marriage, Brother and Brother, Uncle and Nephew, Landlord
and Tenent in matters of considerable value: Such Judge, though he may have
liberty to give reasonable Advice in the case, yet shall have no power to Vote
or give Sentence therein; neither shall sit as a Judge, when he shall so plead
or give Advice therein. [1635.]

10. It is Ordered by this Court; L. 1. P. 16.
that every person, that is to Answer for any criminal Cause, (...) to be
Judged the next Court.
whether in Prison or under Bail; his Cause shall be heard and determined at
the next Court that has proper cognizance thereof, if it may be done without
prejudice of Justice. [1641.]

11. Forasmuch as the proceedings of this Court are often hindered by
introducing particular cases of a private nature; A 54. P. 2.


It is therefore Ordered, In difficult cases Courts may consult with (...)
General Court
that no Court shall transfer the Cases comeing before them, and proper to
their cognizance, whether civil or criminal, but if there be difficulty in any
case the Court shall state the Question, leaving out the parties Names, and may
present the same to the General Court, where it may be resolved; and according
to the said resolution of the General Court, the Inferior Court that presented
the Question, shall at their next meeting proceed to Judgment or Sentence.
[1654.]

12. Every Court within this Jurisdiction where two Magistrates are present, L.
2. P. 4.
may admit any Church Members, County Courts may admit Freemen
that are sit to be Freemen, giving them the Oath, and the Clerk of each Court
shall certify their Names to the Secretary at the next General Court. [1641.]

It is Ordered that the Secretary at the request of all such as are admitted to
the freedom of this Colony or any in their behalf, Freemens names to be
Recorded
give a true copy out of this Courts Records of their Names by them to be
delivered to the Clerks or Recorders of those Courts in the several Counties to
which they do belong, with a copy of the Oath of Freemen as it is now stated,
that they may there take their Oaths, etc. [1666.]

Courts Ajournments.
WHereas through the extremity of the seasons in this Country, or other
accidents that often happen, that Courts of Justice are sometimes put by to the
great prejudice of Justice;

This Court does therefore Order, that henceforth it shall be in the power of
any one or more of the Magistrates, being present at the time and place where
the Court is to be kept, to Adjourne the said Court to some more convenient
time, Courts Ajournments.
as though the whole Court had been met; and all Jurymen, Witnesses and
Parties summoned to attend the Court, either in Civil or Criminal Cases,
according to their respective Summons, Obligations, Attachments or other
Process are hereby bound to such Ajournments, and all proceedings to remain in
force as though the ordinary course of time had been attended. [1661.]

CRUELTY.
IT is Ordered by this Court, cruelty*
That no man shall exercise any Tyranny or Cruelty toward any Bruit Creatures,
which are usually kept for the use of Man. [1641.]

Death Untimely.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Untimely death to be
inquired by a Jury.
that whenever any Person shall come to any sudden, untimely or unnatural
death; some Assistant or the Constable of the Town, (...) forthwith Summon a
Jury of twelve discreet Men to inquire of the cause and manner of their Death,
who shall present a true verdict thereof to some near Assistant, or the next
County Court upon their Oath. [1641.]

DEBTS by BOOK.
ON complaint, and consideration of sundry Inconveniences both to Creditors and
Debtors, through want of seasonable examination and ballancing of
Book-accompts;

It is Ordered, and by this Court Enacted, that all such Book-debts as are now
standing out, or that hereafter shall be made, and that shall not within three
years after publication hereof, Book debts to be Balance within 3 years.
or within three years after such debt as hereafter shall be made, be accounted
for or balanced with the Original Debtor or his Attorney, Agent, Assign^^ or
other lawful Successor or Substitute, and on Account or Balance thereof,
assured by Specialty given for it, or witnessed by subscribing the Debtor or
other Accomptants Name to the Creditors Book, or Subscription of the Witnesses
to such Account, shall not be pleadable in any Court; unless such Book-debt
shall within the time before limited, be prosecuted or proved in such Court as
has proper cognizance thereof, by Evidence competent and approved by the said
Court: And the Evidence there Recorded, and the Record thereof, shall secure
the Creditor, his Executors and Assigns, unless the Debtor or his Assigns
shall disprove the same, within one year after such proof made, or recovery of
the said Debt, if such Debtor, his or her Agent, Attorney, Assign, Substitute,
Executor, Administrator or other lawful successor, be or shall be within this
Jurisdiction, or elsewhere, and have due notice from the Creditor thereof.

Deputies for the General Court.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority hereof, Deputies chosen by paper.
that henceforth it shall be lawful for the Freemen of every Town, to choose (by
Papers) Deputies for the General Court; who have liberty to meet together, to
confer and prepare such public business, as by them shall be thought fit to be
considered of at the next General Court, Their power
who also shall have the full power of all the Freemen deputed to them, for the
making and establishing of Laws, granting Lands, and to deal in all other
affairs of the Commonwealth, wherein the Freemen have to do, the matter of
Election of Magistrates and other Officers only excepted: wherein every
Freeman is to give in his Vote; Provided that no Town shall send more then two
Deputies, and no Town that has not to the number of twenty Freemen shall send
more then one Deputy; Number of Deputies to be sent from particular Towns.
and such Plantations as have not ten Freemen shall send none, but such Freemen
may Vote with the next Town, in the choice of their Deputies, till this Court
take further Order. And all Towns that have not more then thirty Freemen, A. 53.
shall be at liberty of sending or not sending Deputies to the General Court.
[1636. 38. 53.]

2. And the Free men of any shire or town, have liberty to choose such Deputies
for the General Court, Liberty to choose Deputies dwelling any where in this
Jurisdiction
either in their own shire Town, or else where as they judge fittest, so be it
they be Freemen, and Inhabiting this Jurisdiction.

And when the Deputies for the several Towns are met together at any General
Court, Deputies may order their own house
it shall be lawful for them or the major part of them, to hear and determine
any difference that may arise about the Election of any of their Members, and
to order what may concern the well ordering of their body.

And because we cannot foresee what variety and weight of occasions may fall
into future consideration, and what Counsels we may stand in need of;

It is Ordered that the Deputies of the General Court, shall not at any time be
stated and continued but from Court to Court, No Deputies to hold longer then
one year.
or at most but for a year, that the Country may have an annual liberty, to do
in that case what is most behoofful for the welfare thereof. [1641. 34. 35.]

And it is further Ordered, A. 54. p. 3.
that no man although a Freeman shall be accepted as a Deputy in the General
Court, Deputies to be Orthodox
that is unsound in Judgment, concerning the main points of Christian
Religion, as they have been held forth and acknowledged by the generality of
the Protestant Orthodox Writers; or that is scandalous in his conversation, or
that is unfaithful to this Government.

And it is further Ordered, that it shall not be lawful for any Freeman to make
choice of any such person as aforesaid, that is known to himself to be under
such offense or offenses specified, upon pain or penalty of five pounds, and
the Cases of such persons to be tried by the whole General Court. [1654.]

And henceforth the Constables of each Town, shall return the name of the
person or persons chosen by the Freemen to be Deputies for the General Court,
Constable to return who are chosen Deputies and for (...) time.
and the time for which they are chosen, whether for the first Session or for
the whole year. And every Constable that shall fail in his duty herein shall
forfeit the sum of twenty shillings, to be paid to the common Treasury; and all
persons so chosen as aforesaid, accepting thereof, which shall be absent from
the house, during the time of their sitting, without just grounds so judged by
the house, shall pay twenty shillings a day for every such defect, and the
several returns of each Constable, shall be kept on file by the Clerk of the
Deputies until the Court be ended. [1654.]

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that no person who is
an usual and common Attorney in any Inferior Court* Common Attorney no Deputy
shall be admitted to sit as a Deputy in this Court.

DISTRESS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that no man's Corn or
Hay that is in the field, or upon the Cart, nor his Garden stuff, nor any
thing subject (...) present decay, Distress upon Corn or ^ay etc
shall be taken in Distress, unless he that takes it does presently bestow it
where it may not be imbezled, nor suffer spoil or decay, or give security to
satisfy the worth thereof, if it comes to any harm. [1641.]

DOWRIES.
FOrasmuch as no provision has been made for any certain maintenance of Wives
after the decease of their Husbands;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Wives to enjoy the
third of the it Husbands Lands, etc.
that every Married Woman, (living with her Husband in this Jurisdiction, or
other where absent from him with his consent, or though his mere default, or
inevitable providence, or in case of Divorce, where she is the innocent party)
that shall not before Marriage be estated by way of jointure, in some Houses,
Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments for term of life, shall immediately
after the death of her Husband, have Right and Interest by way of Dowry, in and
to one third part of all such Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as
her Husband was seized of to his own use, either in possession, Reversion or
Remainder, in any Estate of Inheritance, (or Frank-tenement not then
determined) at any time during the Marriage, to have and enjoy for the term of
her natural life, according to the Estate of such Husband, free and freely
discharged of, and from all Titles, Debts, Rents, Charges, Judgments,
Executions and other Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made or suffered by her
Husband, during the said Marriage between them, or by any other person claiming
by, from or under him, or otherwise, then by some Act or Consent of such Wife
signified by writing under her hard, L. 2. p. 5.
and acknowledged before some Magistrate o^ others, Authorized thereunto, which
shall bar her from any Right or Interest in such Estate. And if the Heir of the
Husband or other person Interested, shall not within one Month after lawful
demand made, Widows third part to be set out.
assign and set out to such Widow her just third part with convenience, or to
her satisfaction, according to the intent of this Law, then upon a Writ of
Dowry, in the Court of that Shire where the said Houses, Lands, Tenements or
other Hereditaments shall lie, or in the Court of Assistants, if the same lie
in several Shires; her third part or Dowry shall be assigned her, to be set out
in several, by Mets and Bounds, by such persons as the same Court shall appoint
for that purpose, with all costs and damages sustained; Provided always this
Law shall not extend to any Houses, Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments
sold or conveyed away by any Husband Bona^^de, for valuable consideration
before the last of November one thousand six hundred and forty seven. Provided
also that every such widow so endowed as aforesaid, shall not commit or suffer
any strip or waste, Not to suffer strip or waste.
but shall maintain all such Houses, Fences and Enclosures as shall be assigned
to her for her Dowry, and shall leave the same in good and sufficient
reparation in all respects. [1641.]

DROVERS:
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That if any man shall
have occasion to lead, or drive Cattle from place to place that is far off, so
that they be weary, or hungry, or fall sick or lame, it shall be lawful to
rest and refresh them for a competent time in any open place that is not Corn,
Meadow or enclosed for some particular use. [1641.]

ECCESIASTICAL.
ALL the People of God within this Jurisdiction, who are not in a Churchway,
Liberty to gather Churches
and be Orthodox in judgment, and not Scandalous in life, Shall have full
liberty to gather themselves into a Church Estate, provided they do it in a
Christian way, with the observation of the Rules of Christ revealed in his Word.

Provided also, that the General Court does not, nor will hereafter approve of
any such companies of men, with approbation of Magistrate, and Elders
as shall join in any pretended way of Church Fellowship, unless they shall
acquaint three o^ more Magistrates dwelling next, and the Elders of the
Neighbor Churches where they intend to join and have their approbation therein.

2. It is further Ordered, that no person being a Member of any Church which
shall be gathered without the approbation of the Magistrates and the said
Churches, shall be admitted to the freedom of this Common wealth.

3. Every Church has free liberty to exercise all the Ordinances of God,
according to the Rule of the Scripture.

4. Every Church has free liberty of Election and Ordination of all her
Officers from time to time, (...) chus-Church Officers.
provided they be able, pious and Orthodox.

5. Every Church has also free liberty of Admission, Recommendation, Members
Dismission and expulsion, or Disposal of their Officers and Members upon due
Cause,, with free Exercise of the Discipline and Censures of Christ, according
to the Rules of the Word.

6. No Injunction shall be put upon any Church, No Humane Institutions
Church officer or Member in point of Doctrine, Worship or Discipline, whether
for Substance or Circumstance besides the Institution of the Lord.

7. Every Church of Christ, has freedom to Celebrate days of Fasting and
Prayer and of Thanksgiving, according to the Word of God.

8. The Elders of Churches and other Brethren and Messengers, Elders meeting.
have liberty to meet Monthly, Quarterly or otherwise, in convenient Numbers
and Places for Conference and Consultation, about Christian and Church
Questions and Occasions, provided that nothing be concluded and imposed by way
of Authority from one or more Churches upon another, but only by way of
Brotherly Conference and Consultation.

9. All Churches also have liberty to deal with any of their Members in a
Church way, that are in the hands of Justice, so it be not to retard and hinder
the course thereof.

10. Every Church has liberty to deal with any Magistrate, Deputy of Court or
other Officer whatsoever, that is a Member of theirs, in a Church way, in case
of apparent and just offense given in their places, so it be done with due
observance and respect. Churches liberty to deal with their members.
But no Church Censure shall degrade or depose any man from any Civil Dignity,
Office or Authority he shall have in the Commonwealth.

11. The Civil Authority here established, has power and liberty to see the
Peace, Ordinances and Rules of Christ be observed in every Church, according to
his Word as also to deal with any Churchmember in a way of Civil Justice,
notwithstanding any Church Relation, Office or Interest.

12. Private meetings for Edification in Religion, Private meetings
amongst Christians of all sorts, shall be allowed, so it be done without just
offense, for number, time, place and other circumstances. [1641.]

13. The Treasurer of the Country, shall defray the charges of the Elders of
our Churches when they are employed by special Order of the General Court. L.
2. p. 7.
[1642.]

Whereas it is the duty of the Christian Magistrate to take care the People be
fed with wholesome and sound Doctrine, and in this hour of temptation wherein
the Enemy designeth to sow corrupt seed. A. 58.
Every company cannot be thought able or fit, to judge of the Gospel
qualifications required in the public dispensers of the Word, and all
Societies of Christians are bound to attend Order and Communion of Churches,
Constant preachers to be without offense.
considering also the rich blessing of God, flowing from the good agreement of
the Civil and Church Estate, and the horrible mischiefs and confusions that
follow on the contrary;

It is therefore Ordered, that henceforth no person shall publicly and
constantly Preach to any company of People, whether in Church Society or not,
or be Ordained to the Office of a Teaching Elder, where any two Organick
Churches, Council of State, or General Court shall declare their
dissatisfaction thereat, either in reference to Doctrine or Practice, the said
Offense being declared to the said company of People, Church or Person, until
the Offense be orderly removed; and in case of Ordination of any Teaching
Elder, timely notice thereof shall be given unto three or four of the
neighboring Organick Churches, for their approbation. [1658]

14. Forasmuch as the open contempt of Gods Word, and Messengers thereof, is
the desolating sin of Civil State and Churches;

It is Ordered, that if any Christian (so called) within this Jurisdiction,
shall contemptuously behave himself, toward the Word Preached, or the
Messengers thereof, Open opposers of the word.
called to dispense the same in any Congregation, when he does faithfully
execute his service and Office therein, according to the Will and Word of God;
either by interrupting him in his Preaching, or by charging him falsely with
any Error, which he has not taught in the open face of the Church, or like a
son of Korah, cast upon his true Doctrine, or himself any Reproach to the
dishonor of the Lord Jesus who has sent him, and to the disparagement of his
holy Ordinance, and making Gods ways contemptible and ridiculous: that every
such person or persons (whatsoever censure the Church may pass) shall for the
first Scandal be convented and reproved openly by the Magistrate at some
Lecture, and bound to their good behavior.

And if a second time they break forth into the like contemptuous carriages,
they shall either pay five pounds to the public Treasury, or stand two hours
openly upon a Block or Stool, four foot high, on a Lecture day, with a paper
fixed on his breast, written in Capital Letters, AN OPEN AND OBSTINATE
CONTEMNER OF GODS HOLY ORDINANCES, that others may hear and be ashamed of
breaking out into the like wickedness. [1346.]

And every Christian as aforesaid, that shall go about to, destroy or disturb
the Order and Peace of the Churches established in this Jurisdiction, L. 2. p.
5.
by open renouncing their Church estate, or their Ministry, or other Ordinances
dispensed in them, either upon pretense that the Churches, were not planted by
any new Apostle, Disturbers of order and place of Churches penalty.
or that Ordinances are for carnal Christians, or for Babes in Christ, and not
for spiritual or illuminated persons, or upon any other such like groundless
conceit; every such person who shall be found culpable herein, after due means
of conviction, shall forfeit to the public Treasury, forty shillings for every
month, so long as he shall continue in that his obstinacy. [1646.]

15. Wherever the Ministry of the Word is Established, according to the Order
of the Gospel throughout this Jurisdiction;

Every person shall duly resort and attend thereunto respectively on the Lords
days, Absence (...) Meeting
and upon such public Fast days, and days of Thanksgiving, as are to be
generally observed by appointment of Authority. And if any person within this
Jurisdiction shall without just and necessary cause, withdraw himself from the
public Ministry of the Word, after due means of conviction used, he shall
forfeit for his absence from every such public meeting five shillings. And all
such offenses may be heard and determined from time to time, by any one or more
Magistrates. [1646.]

16. To the end there may be convenient Habitations for the Ministers of the
Word;

It is Ordered, that the Inhabitants of every Town, shall take care* to provide
the same, Ministers houses how to be provided for
either by hiring some convenient House, for the use of the present Minister,
or by compounding with him, allowing him a competent and reasonable sum to
provide for himself, so long as he shall continue with them, or by building or
purchasing an house for the Minister and his successors in the Ministry, as the
major part of the said Inhabitants shall agree. And the particular sums
assessed upon each person by a just Rate, shall be collected and levied as
other Town Rates.

17. That there may be a settled and encouraging maintenance of Ministers in
all ^owns and Congregations within this Jurisdiction. A. 54. p. 6


It is Ordered, that the County Court in every Shire, shall upon information
given them of any defect, of any Congregation or Town within the Shire,
Provision for Ministers m^^^tenance.
order and appoint what maintenance shall be allowed to the Minister of the
place, and shall issue out warrants ^o the Select men to assess the
Inhabitants, which the Constable of the said Town shall collect and levy as
other Town Rates. And it is hereby Declared to be our intention that an
honorable allowance be made to the Minister, respecting the ability of the
place, and if any Town shall find themselves burdened by the Assessments of
the County Court, they may complain to the Court, which will at all times be
ready to give just release to all men. [1654.]

IT being the great duty of this Court, to provide that all Places and People
within our Gates be supplied of an able and faithful Minister of Gods Holy
Word;

Be it therefore Ordered and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof,
That the County Courts in their respective precincts, do diligently and
carefully attend the execution of such Orders of this Court, as concerns the
maintenance of the Ministry, and the purging of their Towns and Peculiars from
such Ministry and public preachers as shall be found vicious in their lives,
Provision for an able Ministry.
or perniciously Hetrodox in their Doctrine; and for all places destitute of an
able and faithful Ministry, that they use their best endeavor for the
procuring and settling of such faithful Laborers in Gods Vineyard, and that
the charges of their procuring, and settling, be levied on the Inhabitants, as
the Law for maintenance of Ministers directs; and that for the future there may
be no neglect hereof: the Presidents of each County Court, shall du^ly from
time to time give it in charge to the Grand-juries of their respective Courts,
to present all abuses and neglects of this kind, and that with all care and
diligence the same he redressed, that so the Name of the Lord our God being
known in our dwellings, and exalted in our gates, he may still delight in us,
to continue his favorable presence with us, and our unparaleld enjoyments both
temporal and spiritual, which through the rich mercy of God in Christ hitherto
we have enjoyed, and not be provoked through our profane slightings and
despising thereof, to bereave us and our posterities of such choice Mercies.
[1660.]

WHereas the Christian Magistrate is bound by the Word of God to preserve the
Peace, Order or Liberty of the Churches of Christ, and by all due means to
promote Religion in Doctrine and Discipline, according to the Word of God; and
whereas by our Law, tit. Ecclesiastical, Sect. 4.

It is Ordered and Declared, Choice of Church Officers.
that every Church has free liberty of Calling, Election and Ordination of all
her Officers, from time to time, provided they be able, pious, and Orthodox:
For the better explanation of the said Law, and as an addition thereunto, this
Court does Order and Declare, and be it hereby Ordered and Enacted, that by the
Church, is to be meant, such as are in full Communion only; and that the
teaching Officer or Officers of such Church or Churches, we do intend shall be
the Minister or Ministers to all the People in that Town where such Church or
Churches are planted; and that no Inhabitant in any Town shall challenge a
right unto, or act in the Calling or Election of such Officer or Minister,
until he be in full communion, upon the penalty of being accounted a disturber
of peace and order, and to be punished by the Court of that Shire* either by
Admonition, Security for the good Behavior, Fine, or Imprisonment, according
to the quality and degree of the offense.

ELECTIONS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that for the yearly
choosing of Assistants, Election by Indian Corn and Beans.
the Freemen shall use Indian Corn and Beans, the Indian Corn to manifest
Election, the Beans contrary; and if any Freeman shall put in more then one
Indian Corn or Bean, for the choice or refusal of any public Officer, None but
Freemen to put in votes.
he shall forfeit for every such offense, ten pounds, and that any man that is
not free, or has not liberty of voting; putting in any vote, shall forfeit the
like sum of ten pounds. [1643.]

2. For the preventing many inconveniences, that otherwise may arise upon the
yearly day of Election, and that the work of that day may be the more orderly,
easily and speedily issued;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Elect by ^yozes sent,
sealed up.
that the Freemen of this Jurisdiction, which shall not personally appear at
Boston, to give in their votes on the day of Election, shall and may in their
several Towns, from time to time give in their votes for Elections, before
their Deputy and the Constable, who shall take them and Seal them up in
distinct papers, and send them to the Court of Elections, all the Assistants to
be chosen by Indian Corn and Beans, as abovesaid.

The Governor, Elect of Govern* etc. by papers.
Deputy Governor, Major General, Treasurer, Secretary, and Commissioners of
the United Colonies, by wrighting the names of the persons Elected, in papers
open, or once foulded, not twisted nor rolled up, that they may be the sooner
perused. And such small villages as send no Deputies, the Constable thereof,
with two or three of the chief Freemen shall receive the votes of the rest of
the Freemen, and deliver them together with their own sealed up, to the Deputy
of the next Town, who shall carefully convey the same unto the said Court of
Election. [1647.]

3. Forasmuch as the choice of Assistants or Magistrates yearly, L. 2. p. 10*
is of great concernment, and with all care and circumspection to be attended;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the Constables of
every Town within this Jurisdtction, shall call together all their Freemen some
day in the second week of the first Month yearly to give in their votes in
distinct papers for such persons (being Freemen and resident within this
Jurisdiction, A. 52. p. 15.
as well the Magistrates in present being as others) whom they desire to have
chosen for Magistrates or Assistants at the next Court of Election, Nomination
of Magistrates in Towns.
not exceeding the number of (...), and no Freeman shall put in above one vote
for one person, under the penalty of ten pounds for every offense.

And the said Freemen (so met together) or the major part of them, shall then
and there appoint one to carry their votes sealed up unto their Shire Towns, A.
58.
upon the last fourth day of the week in the first Month following, at twelve
of the clock from time to time, which persons for each Town so assembled, shall
appoint one of themseves as a Commissioner of each Shire, Votes to be sent to
the Shire Town.
to carry them to Boston the second third day of the second Month, there to be
opened and perused in the presence of one or two Magistrates (if they be in
Town) if otherwise, by those persons that brought them at the Court House in
Boston, or such other place as the Commissioner of Suffolk shall appoint; and
those eighteen that have most Votes, shall be the men (and they only) which
shall be nominated at the Court of Election for Magistrates or Assistants as
aforesaid, and the said Commissioner of each Shire, Commissioner of the Shire
to return the names of the persons nominated to the Constables
shall forthwith signify to the Constable of the several Towns within their
County, in wrighting under their hands, the names of those eighteen persons
aforesaid, all which the Constable in each Town shall timely signify to their
Freemen. And as any have more Votes then other, Old Magistrates to be first put
to Election.
so shall they be nominated for Election, except such of the eighteen who were
Magistrates the year before, who shall have precedence of all others in
nomination on the day of Election. And if any person be trusted in this Order,
shall fail in the discharge of their (...), shall forfeit ten pounds. [1649.]

4. It is Declared by this Court, to be the constant liberty of the Freemen of
this Jurisdiction, to choose yearly at the Court of Election out of the Freemen,
all the General Officers of this Jurisdiction, and if they please to discharge
them at the Court of Election, by way of Vote, they may do it without showing
cause; but if at any other General Court, we hold it due Justice that the
reason thereof be all^adged and proved. Freemen to ch^se all general Officers
By General Officers we mean our Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants,
Treasurer, Major General, Admiral at Sea, Commissioners for the United
Colonies, Secretary of the General Court, and such others as are, or hereafter
may be of like General nature. [1641.]

WHereas it is found by experience, that there are many who are Inhabitants of
this Jurisdiction, who are Enemies to all Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical,
who will not yield Obedience to Authority, but make it much of their Religion
to be in opposition thereto, and refuse to bear Arms under others, who
notwithstanding combine together in some Towns, and make Parties suitable to
their designs, in Election of such persons according to their ends;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that all
persons, Persons exempt from voting in Elections
Quakers or others, which refuse to attend upon the public Worship of God here
Established; that all such persons whether Freemen or others, acting as
aforesaid, shall, and hereby are made incapable of Voting in all civil
Assemblies during their obstinate persisting in such wicked ways and courses,
and until certificate be given of their Reformation.

And it is further Ordered, that all those Fines and Mulcts of any such
Delinquents as aforesaid, which are not gathered nor paid to the several
Treasurers of the Counties, as also what Fines shall be laid on them for the
future, shall be delivered by the Order of the County-Treasurers respectively
to the Select men of the several Towns whereunto they belong, to be by them
improved for the poor of the Town.

ESCHEATS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that where he Heir or
owner of Houses, Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels can be found, they shall
be seized to the public Treasury, till such Heirs or Owners shall make due
claim thereto, unto whom they shall be restored upon just and reasonable
terms. [1646.]

FARMS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that all farms which
are within the bounds (...) any Town, shall henceforth be of the same Town, in
which they lie, (...) Meadford. [1641.]

Faires and Mark^^*
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, that there shall henceforth be a
Market kept and Boston in the County of Suffolk, Boston.
upon the fifth day of the week from time to time.

And at Salem in the County of Essex, upon the fourth day of the week from time
to time. Salem.


And at Lyn on the third day of the week from time to time. Lyn.


And at Charlstown in the County of Middlesex upon the sixth day of the week
from time to time. Charlstown.


It is also Ordered and hereby Granted to Boston aforesaid, to have two Fairs
in a year; on the first third day of the third Month, and on the first third
day of the eighth Month, from year to year to continue for two or three days
together.

Also to Salem aforesaid, to have two Fairs in a year, on the last fourth day
of the third Month, L. 2. p. 7.
and the last fourth day of the seventh Month from year to year.

Also to Watertown, in the County of Middlesex, two Fairs in a year, on the
first sixth day of the fourth Month, Watertown.
and the first sixth day of the seventh Month.

Also to Dorchester, in the County of Suffolk, two Fairs in a year, on the
fourth third day of the first Month, and the last fourth day of the eighth
Month, from year to year. [1633, 34, 36, 38, 48.]

FERRIES.
FOR settling all common Ferries in a right course, both for the Passengers and
Owners;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Men may pass Ferries in
their own Boats
That whosoever has a Ferry granted upon any passage, shall have the^ sole
liberty for transporting Passengers, from the place where such Ferry is
granted, to any other Ferry place, where Ferry Poats use to land; and any Ferry
Boat that shall land Passengers at any other Ferry, may not take Passengers
from thence, L. 2. p. 7.
if the Ferry Boat of that place be ready; provided this Order shall not
prejudice the liberty of any that do use to pass in their own or neighbors
Cannoos or Boats to their ordinary labor or business. But no Ferry man shall
carry over the water any Passengers in a Cannoo, but in case of necessity,
Ferry men not to carry in cannoos:
and upon his own desire, under the paid of forfeiture of the Cannoo or the
value thereof to the Treasury.

And at Weymouth Ferry, every single person shall pay for his Passage two pence.

And all Ferry men are allowed to take double pay at all common Ferries after
day light is done, and those that make not present pay, being required, shall
give their names in wrighting, or a pawn to the Ferry men, or else he may
complain of any such to a Magistrate for satisfaction.

And it is Ordered, that all Magistrates, and such as are, or from time to time
shall be chosen Deputies of the General Court, Magistrates and Duputies so pass
free
with their necessary attendance, viz. a Man and a Hor^e at all times, during
the time of their being Magistrates or Deputies (but not their Families) shall
be Passage-free over all Ferries, that pay no Rent to the Country.

2. And for the preventing of danger in the Passing at Common Ferries;

It is Ordered, That no person shall press or enter into a Ferry Boat contrary
to the Will of the Ferry man, None to enter the Ferry boat without leave of the
Ferry men Magistrates, Deputies or Elders
or of the most of the Passengers first entered upon pain of ten shillings for
every such attempt.

And that every Ferry man that shall permit or allow any person to come into
his Boat, against the will of any of the Magistrates or Deputies, or any of the
Elders shipped in such boat, or the greater part of the Passengers in the said
Boat, shall forfeit for every person so admitted or received, against such
their will so declared, the sum of twenty shillings.

And it shall be in the power of any of the Ferry men, to keep out, or put out
of his Boat, any person that shall press, enter into, or stay in any such Ferry
Boat, contrary to this Order.

And it is further Ordered, Men pass us they (...) except public persons.
that all persons shall be received into such Ferry Boats according to their
comeing first or last, only a^l public persons, or such as go upon public or
urgent occasions, as Physicians, C^^rurgeons and Midwives, and such other as
are called to Women's Labors, such shall be transported with the
first.[1641,44,46,47.]

FINES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, L. 1. p. 38.
that every Offender fined for the breach of any Penal Law, shall forthwith pay
his or their Fine or Penalty, or give security speedily to do it, or be
imprisoned, Fines to be paid presently
or kept to work till it be paid, unless the Court or judge that imposed the
Fine, L. 2. p. 7.
, see cause to respite the same; And in all Courts, where any Fine or Fines or
other Sums of Money shall be assessed or received; Clerk to return all Fines to
the treasurer in fourteen days
And also when any Magistrate or Commissioner, shall assess any Fines, or
receive any Sum, for the use of the Country, by virtue of any special Order,
the Secretary or Clerk of each Court, and every such Magistrate and
Commissioner, shall within fourteen days, L. 1. p. 22.
send a Transcript or Note of the said Fines and other dues to the Treasurer of
the Country or Country to whom it does belong, who shall forth with give
warrant to the Marshal to collect and levy the same: And if no goods can be
found to satisfy such Fine or other dues, Marshal to Attach the body where
Goods are not, etc.
the Marshall shall Attach the Body of such persons, and imprison them till
satisfaction be main; Provided that any Court of Assistants or County Court,
may dischange any such person from imprisonment, if they be unable to make
satisfaction. [1638, 4^]

Firing and Burning.
IT is Ordered I by this Court and Authority thereof, Firing of ground when
lawful, when forbidden
that whosoever shall kindle any Fires in the Woods, or Grounds lying in
Common, or enclosed, so as the same shall run into Corn grounds or Enclosures
before the tenth day of the first Month, or after the last of the second Month,
or on the last day of the Week, or on the Lords day, shall pay all damages, and
half so much for a Fine, or if not able to pay, then to be Corporally punished,
by warrant from one Magistrate, or the next County Court, as the offense shall
deserve, not exceeding twenty stripes for one offense. Provided that any man
may kindle fire in his own ground so as no danger come thereby, either to the
Country or to any particular person; and whosoever shall wittingly and
willingly burn or destroy any Frame, Timber, Hewed, Sawen or Riven Heaps of
Wood, Charcoal, Corn, Hay, Straw, Hemp or Flax, he shall pay double damages.

2. Whereas some dwelling Houses, A. ^^. p. 1^.
and other Houses within this Jurisdiction, have been set on Fire, and the
means or occasion thereof not discovered, though some persons have been
vehemently suspected to have been Instrumental therein: The Court taking into
consideration the danger of such a wicked practice, especially in Towns where
the Houses are near adjoining, and there being no Law yet provided for the
punishment of so heinous a crime;

Does therefore hereby Order, and be it Enacted by the Authority of this Court;
that any person or persons whatsoever, of the age of sixteen years and upward,
that shall after the publication hereof, wittingly and willingly set on fire
any Darn, Stable; Mill, ^ut House, Stock of Wood, Corn or Hay, or any other
thing of like nature, shall upon due conviction by testimony or confession, pay
double damages to the party damnified, and be severely whipped.

And if any person of the age aforesaid; Burning Houses.
shall after the publication hereof, wittingly, and willingly, and
felloniously, set on fire any Dwelling House, Meeting House, Store House, or
shall in like manner, set on fire any out-House, Barn, Stable, Leanto, Stack of
Hay, Corn or Wood, or any thing of like nature, whereby any Dwelling House,
Meeting House or Store House, comes to be burnt, the party or parties
vehemently suspected thereof, shall be apprehended by Warrant from one or more
of the Magistrates, and committed to Prison, there to remain without Bail,
till the next Court of Assistants, Capital.
who upon legal conviction by due proof, or confession of the Crime, shall
adjudge such person or persons to be put to death, and to forfeit ^o much of
his Lands, Goods or Chattels, as shall make full satisfaction, to the party or
parties damnified. [1612.]

Fish^. Fishermen.
WHereas it has been a custom for foreign Fishermen to make use of such
Harbors and Grounds in this Country, as have not been Inhabited by English
men; and to take Timber and Word at their pleasure for all their occasions, yet
in these parts which are now possessed, and the Lands disposed in proprieties,
unto several Towns and Persons, by the Kings Grant, under the great Seal of
England;

It is Declared; Repealed. page 5. 1661.
That it is not Lawful for any Person, either Fisherman or other, either
Forreigner or of this Country, to enter upon the Lands so appropriate to any
Town or Person, or to take Wood or Timber in any such place, without the
License of such Town or Proprietor, and if any person shall Trespass herein,
the Town or Proprietor so injured, may take their remedy by action at Law, or
may preserve their goods or other interest, by opposing Lawful force against
such unjust violence; Provided that it shall be lawful for such Fishermen as
shall be employed by any Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, in the several
seasons of the year, to make use of any of our Harbors, and such Lands as are
near adjoining for the drying of their Fish or other needful occasions, as also
to have such Timber and Fire wood, as they shall have necessary use of for
their Fishing-seasons where it may be spared, so as they make due satisfaction
for the same to such Town or Proprietor. [1646.]

2. Whereas much Damage herb arisen to Merchants trading hence, by bad making
of Fish, and the credit of our Trade therein has much suffered;

It is therefore Ordered, A. 52. p. 9, 10.
That at every fishing place within this Jurisdiction, some discreet and honest
person be appointed by the County Court, unto which such Fishing place does
belong, and those persons so nominated and appointed, are by this Court
empowered to give Oath unto such persons as shall be chosen by the deliverers
and receivers of any Fish, who have liberty hereby, either of them, to choose
one or more sufficient knowing men in such cases, Sworn viewed of Fish at all
Fishing places
to view what Fish is delivered and received; which viewers shall be sworn as
aforesaid, and what they approve of as Merchantable, the receiver shall accept,
and what is Refuse Fish shall be cast by, and the said viewers for their labor
and pains aforesaid, shall be allowed one penny per Quintal for so much
Merchantable Fish as he or they shall view, to be paid one half by the
deliverer, and the other half by the receiver.

And for further direction to the viewers in trial of Fish;

It is hereby Ordered, That all Sun burnt, salt burnt and Dry Fish, that has
been first pickled, shall be judged un-Merchantable.

FOr the Explanation of an Order bearing date, Fishermens liberry to cut flakes
regulated
1646. and the Repealing of the same, 1667. For giving a liberty to Fishermen,
according to a Reservation in the Patent, to cut down Wood for Flakes or Stage
and other uses about their Fishing employ, that it is intended only in that
Order to give liberty to such as are Strangers, and come only to make Fishing
Voyages, and not to Fishermen that are Inhabitants, who are not to trespass
upon any person in their propriety, but are liable to make satisfaction with
damages as in any other Action of Trespass, no way restraining Fishermen in
Common Lands, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that no man shall
henceforth kill any Cod fish, Hake, Hadduck or Polluck, to be dried for sale in
the Month of December or January, because of their spawning time, nor any
Mackrell to Barrel up in the Month of May or June, No Fish to be^ ki^^d when
they go to Spawn.
under penalty of paying five shillings for each Quintal of Fish, and Five
shillings for each barrel of Mackrell; nor shall any Fisherman cast the Garbage
of the Fish the catch over board at or near the Ledges or Grounds where they
take the Fish; nor shall any of the Boats crew refuse or neglect to obey the
Order of the Master of the Vessel to which they belong, for the times and
seasons of Fishing; nor shall they take or drink any more Strong Liquors then
the Master thinks meet to permit them: the breach of these three last being
under the penalty of Twenty shillings, for the first Offense; for the second
forty shillings; for the third three Months Imprisonment, one third part of the
aforesaid Fines to the Informer proving the same. [1668]

THis Court being informed, that the taking of Mackrel at unseasonable times do
greatly diminish their increase, and will in the issue tend to the spoil of the
Trade thereof;

Do Order and Enact, That henceforth no Mackrell shall be caught, except for
spending whilst fresh, To prevent damage by unseasonable killing of Mackrel.
before the first of ^uiy annually, on penalty of the loss of the same; the one
half to the Informer, and the other half to the use of the Country. And any
Magistrate or County Court is empowered to act herein to all intents and
purposes, for the execution of this Law.

WHereas by the blessing of God, the Trade of Fishing has been advantageous to
this Country, which is like to be much impaired by the use of Turtooda's Salt,
which leaves spots upon the Fish, by reason of Shells and Trash in it: For
prevention thereof;

This Court does Order, To prevent damage by salting Fish with Turtoodas salt.
and be it hereby Enacted, That all such Fish that is salted with Turtooda's
Salt, and thereby spotted as abovesaid, shall not be accounted for Merchantable
Fish: and all sworn Cullers of Fish are hereby required to have special regard
to the fulfilling of this Order, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

FORGERY.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That if any person
shall forge any Deed or Conveyance, Testament, Bond, Bill, Release,
Acquittance, Letter of Attorney, or any Writeing, to pervert Equity and
Justice; he shall stand in the Pillory, three several Lecture days, and render
double damages to the party wronged, and also be disabled to give any Evidence
or Verdict to any Court or Magistrate. [1646.]

FORNICATION.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That if any man Commit
Fornication with any single Woman, they shall be punished, either by enjoining
Marriage, or Fine, or Corporal punishment, or all, or any of these, as the
Judges of the Court that has Cognizance of the Cause shall appoint. [1642.]

THere being a seeming contradiction between the Laws tit. Fornication, and
tit. Punishment;

This Court does Declare, That the former referring to a particular Crime, a
shameful Sin, much increasing amongst us, to the great dishonor of God, and
our profession of his Holy Name, the punishment of that Sin shall be as is
prescribed in the said Law, any thing that may seem to restrain or limit the
same, contained in the other Law, tit. Punishment, notwithstanding, And in case
any person legally convicted of that or any other shameful and vicious Crime,
be a Freeman; it shall be in the liberty and power of the Court that has the
proper cognizance thereof, besides any other Penalty or Punishment, to add
Disfranchisement thereto. [1665.]

WHereas there is a Law provided by this Court for punishing of Fornicators,
but nothing as yet for the easing of Towns, where Bastards are born, in regard
of the poverty of the Parent or Parents of such Children sometimes appearing,
nor any Rule held forth touching the reputed Father of a Bastard for legal
conviction;

It is therefore Ordered, and by this Court Declared, that where any man is
legally convicted to be the Father of a Bastard-childe, he shall be at the care
and charge to maintain and bring up the same, by such Assistance of the Mother
as nature requires, and as the Court from time to time (according to
circumstances) shall see meet to Order: and in case the Father of a Bastard, by
confession or other manifest proof, upon trial of the case, do not appear to
the Courts satisfaction, then the Man charged by the Woman to be the Father,
she holding constant in it, (especially being put upon the real discovery of
the truth of it in the time of her Travail) shall be the reputed Eather, and
accordingly be liable to the charge of maintenance as aforesaid (though not to
other punishment) notwithstanding his denial, The reputed Father of a Bastard
to maintain it.
unless the circumstances of the Case and Pleas be such, on the behalf of the
Man charged, as that the Court that has the cognizance thereof shall see
reason to acquit him, and otherwise dispose of the Child and Education
thereof; Provided always, in case there be no person accused in the time of
her Travail, it shall not be available to abate the conviction of a reputed
Father; any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Freemen. Non-Freemen.
TO the end the Body of the Freemen may be preserved of honest and good men; L.
2. p. 8.


It is Ordered, None but Church Members to be Freemen.
That henceforth no man shall be admitted to the Freedom of this
Commonwealth, but such as are Members of some of the Churches within the
limits of this Jurisdiction;

And whereas many Members of Churches to exempt themselves from public
service, will not come in to be made Freemen;

It is Ordered, that no Members of Churches within this Jurisdiction, shall be
exempt from any public service they shall be chosen to by the Inhabitants of
the several Towns, as Constables, Jurors, Select men, Surveighors of the
Highways; and if any such person shall refuse to serve in, or take upon him
any such Office, being legally chosen thereunto, he shall pay for every such
refusal, such fine as the Town shall impose, not exceeding twenty shillings for
one offense. [1647.]

THis Court having considered of the proposals presented to this Court by
several of the Inhabitants of the County of Middlesex; Repealed.


Do Declare and Order, That no Man whosoever, shall be admitted to the Freedom
of this Body Politic, but such as are Members of some Church of Christ and in
full Communion, which they declare to be the true intent of the ancient Law;
page the eighth of the second Book, Anno. 1631. [1660.]

IN Answer to that part of his Majesty's Letter of June 2^. 1662. concerning
admission of Freemen;

This Court does Declare, Admission of Freemen.
That the Law prohibiting all persons, except Members of Churches, and that
also for allowance of them in any County Court, are hereby Repealed.

And do also Order and Enact, That from henceforth all English men, presenting
a Certificate under the hands of the Ministers or Minister of the place where
they dwell, that they are Orthodox in Religion, and not vicious in their lives,
and also a Certificate under the hands of the Select Men of the place, or of
the major part of them, that they are Free holders, and are for their own
proper estate (without heads of persons) rat^able to the Country in a single
Country Rate, after the usual manner of valuation in the place where they live,
to the full value of ten shillings, or that they are in full Communion with
some Church among us; It shall be in the liberty of all and every such person
or persons, being twenty four years of age, House-holders and settled
Inhabitants in this Jurisdiction, from time to time to present themselves and
their desires to this Court for their admittance to the Freedom of this
Commonwealth, and shall be allowed the privileges to have such their desire
propounded, and put to vote in the General Court, for acceptance to the
Freedom of the body politic, by the s^fterage of the major part, according to
the Rules of our Patent. [1664.]

FOrasmuch as several persons who from time to time are to be made Freemen live
remote, and are not able without great Trouble and charge to appear before this
Court, to take their respective Oaths;

It is therefore Ordered, County Court to (...) Oath of Freedom
that henceforth it shall be in the power of any County Court to Administer the
Oath of Freedom to any persons approved of by the General Court, who shall
desire the same, Any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. [1664.]

Galloping in Boston streets.
WHereas it appears, that notwithstanding such wholesome Orders as have been
hitherunto made by the Select men of Boston, provided for the restraint of all
persons from violent Riding in the streets of the said Town: yet nevertheless,
many sake the liberty and boldness to Gallop frequently therein, to the great
endangering the Bodies and Limbs of many Persons especially Children, who are
ordinarily abroad in the streets, and not of age of discretion suddenly to
escape such danger. This Court having seriously considered the Premises, being
careful to prevent a practice that is like to be of such dangerous consequence;

Do Order, That no person whatsoever, Penalty for Gallop (...) in Boston streets
shall after the publication hereof, Gallop any Horse within any the streets of
the said Town, upon penalty of forfeiting three shillings and four pence for
every such offense, upon conviction before any one Magistrate or Commissioner
of Boston, to be paid to the Treasury of the County of Suffolk, unless it
appear on extreme necessity.

Gaming and Dancing.
UPon complaint of the disorders, by the use of the Games of Shuffle-board and
Bowling, in and about Houses of Common-entertainment, whereby much precious
time is spent unprofitably, and much waste of Wine and Beer occasioned; L. 2.
p. 8.


It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, No Gaming in Ordinaries
That no person shall henceforth use the said Games of Shuffle board, or
Bowling, or any other Play or Game, in or about any such House.

Nor in any other House used as common for such purpose, upon pain for every
keeper of such House to forfeit for every such offense twenty shillings, and
every person playing at the said Game, etc. in or about any such House, shall
forfeit for every such offense five shillings.

Nor shall any person at any time Play or Game for any Money or Money worth, No
Gaming for money.
upon penalty of forfeiting treble the value thereof, one half to the party
informing and the other half to the Treasury; nor shall any person be an
Abettor to any kind of Gaming on the like penalty.

Nor shall there be any Dancing in Ordinaries upon any occasion, No Dancing in
Ordinaries.
on the penalty of five shillings for every per on that shall offend; and any
Magistrate may hear and determine any offense against this Law. [^646,47,51.]

For preventing disorders arising in several places within this Jurisdiction,
by reason of some still observing such Festivals, A. ^^. p. ^.
as were Superstitiously kept in other Countries, to the great dishonor of God
and offense of others;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that
whosoever shall be found observing any such day as Christmas or the like,
Penalty for keeping Christmas.
either by forbearing labor, feasting, or any other way upon any such account
as aforesaid, every such person so offending, shall pay for every such offense
five shillings as a fine to the County.

And whereas not only at such times but several other times also, it is a
custom too frequent in many places, to expend time in unlawful Games, as Cards
Dice, etc.

It is therefore further Ordered, penalty for playing at Cards and Dice.
and by this Court Declared, That after publication hereof, whosoever shall be
found in any place within this Jurisdiction, playing either at Cards or at
Dice, contrary to this Order, shall pay as a fine to the County the sum of five
shillings for every such offense.

WHereas the great sin of Coming increases within this Jurisdiction, to the
great dishonor of God, corrupting of Youth, and expendof much precious-time
and estate: for the preventing of which, and as an addition to the Law, tit.
Gaming, etc.

This Court does Declare, Penalty for Gaming.
and be it Ordered by the Authority thereof, That what person or persons
soever, shall bring into this Jurisdiction any playing Cards or Dice, or with
whomsoever such Cards or Dice be found in his or their Custody, he or they
shall pay as a fine the sum of five pounds, the one half to the Treasurer, the
other half to the Informer: But in case any such Cards or Dice shall come into
the custody of any person without his knowledge or consent, he shall carry them
to the next Magistrate or Commissioner within two days after his knowledge of
them, to dispose of them as the said Magistrate or Commissioner shall see
cause, any such person shall be free from the penalty.

And if any person that has played or gamed, and shall give Information
thereof, he shall be freed from the penalty of the Law to pay treble damage,
but shall have no further benifit of the Law by his information.

And also any such persons Testimony shall be good in Law, for one Testimony,
against any that shall break this Law.

And it is also Declared, that it is and shall be in the liberty of the Court
or Judges that shall determine any such case, to punish the transgressor or
transgressors of the Law, by imposing the fine, or otherwise by corporal
punishment as they shall judge best; any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. [1670.]

Heresy Error
ALthough no Humane power be Lord over the Faith and Consciences of men, yet
because such as bring in damnable Heresies, tending to the subversion of the
Christian Faith, and destruction of the Souls of men, ought duly to be
restrained from such notorious impieties;

It is therefore Ordered and Declared by the Court; That if any Christian
within this Jurisdiction, shall go about to subvert and destroy the Christian
Faith and Religion, by broaching and maintaining any damnable Heresies: As
denying the immortality of the Soul, or resurrection of the Body, or any sin to
be repented of in the regenerate, or any evil done by the outward man to be
accounted sin, or denying that Christ gave himself a Ransom for our sins,
Errors.
or shall affirm that we are not justined by his death and righteousness, but
by the perfections of our own works, or shall deny the Morallity of the fourth
Commandment, L. 1. p. ^.
or shall openly condemn or oppose the Baptizing of Infants, Anabaptists.
or shall purposely depart the Congregation at the administration of that
Ordinance, or shall deny the Ordinance of Magistracy, or their lawful
Authority, to make War, or to punish the outward breaches of the first Table,
Obstinate to be banished.
or shall endeavor to seduce others to any of the Errors or Heresies
abovementioned; every such person continuing obstinate therein, after due means
of conviction, shall be sentenced to Banishment. [1646. 44.]

2. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, being written by the
Prophets, Apostles, and Holy men of God, A. 37. p. 7 8.
inspired by the Holy Ghost, containing in them the infallible and whole Will
of God, which he purposed to make known to Mankind, both for his own Worship
and Service, and also for the Instruction, Obedience, Faith and Salvation of
Man, which yet by Heretics in former ages, and now of late, have been opugned
and denied so to be, which tends to the overthrow of all true Religion, and
Salvation, for the prevention of so heinous a crime;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That what person or
persons soever, professing the Christian Religion, above the age of sixteen
years, that shall within this Jurisdiction, wittingly and willingly, at any
time after the publication of this Order, deny either by Word or Writeing, any
of the Books of the Old Testament, As Genesis, Exodus, Levitious, Numbers,
Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Samuel, Kings, Kings, Chronicles,
Chronicles, Ez^a, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, ^^oel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jona^, Micah, Nahum, Habbakuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi.
Or New, as Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Romans, Corrinthians, Corrinthians,
Galath^ans, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Thessalonians,
Timothy, Timothy, Titus, Philemon, Hebrews, lames, Peter, Peter, John, John,
John, lude, and Revelation. To be the written and infallible Word of God.

Or if any person as aforesaid, Denying the Scrip^^re to be the word of God
belonging to this Jurisdiction, shall commit the said crime upon the Sea, not
being or belonging to the Jurisdiction of any other Common wealth, shall be
forthwith apprehended by the next Officer or Officers, whether Marshal or
Constable or their Deputy, who shall have power so to do by warrant from any
one of the Magistrates, and shall be committed to the Prison at Boston, without
Bale or Mainprize, there to be safely kept till the next County Court, where
upon sufficient Testimony brought against the said Delinquent, he shall be
adjudged for his offense after legal conviction, to pay such a fine as the
Court which shall have cognizance of the crime shall judge meet, not exceeding
the sum of fifty pounds, Penalty;
or shall be openly and severely whipped by the executioner, whether Constable or
any other appointed, not exceeding forty strokes, unless he shall publicly
recant before his Sentence (which if he do) he shall not pay above the fine of
ten pounds to the Treasurer for the use of the Commonwealth, or be whipped in
case he pay not the fine.

And it is further Ordered and Enacted, That if the said Offender after his
Recantation, Sentence or Execution, shall the second time publish, and
Obstinately, and Pertinaciously maintain the said wicked Opinion, he shall be
Banished or put to Death as the Court shall Judge. [1651.]

3. It is Ordered, A. 54. p. 7.
that all and every of the Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, that have any of
the Books in their Custody, that go under the names of John Re^ves, Muggletons
books to be delivered in to some Magistrate
and Lodowick Muggleton (who pretends themselves to be the two last Witnesses,
and Prophets of Jesus Christ) which are full of Blasphemies, and shall not
bring or send in all such Books in their Custody to the next Magistrate, shall
forfeit the sum of ten pounds for every such Book found in his hand, the one
half to the Informer, the other half to the Country.

And as many of the said Books, to be burnt.
as are, or shall be in Custody, shall be burnt in the Market place at Boston.
on the next Lecture day, by the Common Executioner.

4. Whereas there is a cursed Sect of Heretics lately risen up in the World,
A. 56. p. 13.
which are commonly called Quakers, who take upon them to be immediately sent
of God, and infallibly assisted by the Spirit, to speak and write Blasphemous
Opinions d^spising Government, and the Order of God in Church and Common
wealth, Quakers
speaking evil of Dignities, reproaching and reviling Magistrates and
Ministers, seeking to turn the People from the Faith, and gain Proselites to
their pernicious waves. The Court considering the premises, and to prevent the
like mischief, as by their means is wrought in our Native Land;

Does hereby Order, and by the Authority of this Court be it Ordered and
Enacted; That no Master or Commander of any Ship Ba^que, Pinnace, Not to be
brought into this Jurisdiction by (...) ^a^ter of ship on penalty of 100 pounds
Ketch, or other Vessel, shall henceforth bring into any Harbor, Creek or Cove
within this Jurisdiction, any known Quaker or Quakers, or any other Blasphemous
Heretics as aforesaid, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of one hundred
pounds, to be forthwith paid to the Treasurer of the Country, except it
appears that such Master wanted true notice or information that they were
such, and in that ca^e he may clear himself by his Oath, when sufficient proof
to the contrary is wanting.

And for default of payment of the said fine of one hundred pounds, or good
security for the same, such Master shall be committed to prison, by warrant
from any Magistrate, there to continue till the said fine be satisfied to the
Treasurer as aforesaid.

And the Master or Commander of any such Ship or Vessel that shall bring them,
Masters that bring in Quakers must carry them back.
being legally convicted, shall give in sufficient security to the Governor or
any one or more of the Magistrates, to carry them back to the place whence he
brought them, and on his refusal so to do, the Governor or the said Magistrate
or Magistrates shall commit such Master or Commander to prison, there to
continue till he shall give in sufficient security to the content of the
Governor or said Magistrates.

And if any person or persons within this Jurisdiction, shall henceforth
entertain and conceal any such Quaker or Quakers, A. 57. p. 26.
or other Blasphemous Heretics knowing them to be such) every such person
shall forfeit to the Country forty shillings for every hours entertainment and
concealment of any Quaker or Quakers, etc. as aforesaid, and shall be committed
to prison as aforesaid, till the fines be fully satisfied and paid.

5. And every person or persons, A. 5^.
that shall encourage or defend any of their pernicious ways, by speaking,
writeing or meeting on the Lords day, Incouragers of Quakers their penalty.
or at any other time, shall after due means of conviction incur the penalty
insueing, viz. every person so meeting, shall pay to the use of the Country,
for every time ten shillings, and every one speaking in such meeting, shall
forfeit five pounds.

6. If any person shall knowingly import into any Harbor of this Jurisdiction,
Dispersing Quakers Books
any Quakers Books or Writeings, concerning their damnable Opinions, he shall
forfeit for every such Book o^ Writeing five pounds, and whosoever shall
disperse or conceal any such Book or Writeing, and it be found with him or her,
or in his or her House; and shall not immediately deliver the same to the next
Magistrate, penalty 5 pounds
shall forfeit and pay five pounds for dispersing or concealing every such Book
or Writing.

7. And every person or persons whatsoever, Reviling of Magistrates or
Ministers.
that shall revile the Office or person of Magistrates or Ministers, as is
usual with the Quakers, such person or persons shall be severely whipped, or pay
the sum of five pounds.

8. And every person that shall publish and maintain any Hetrodox or erroneous
Doctrine, A. 53. p. 19^ Publishers or Errors
shall be liable to be Questioned and Censured by the County Court where he
lives, according to the merit of his Offense.

9. Whereas there is a pernicious Sect, A. 58.
commonly called Quakers, lately arisen, who by Word and Writeing, have
published and maintained many dangerous and horrid Tenants, and do take upon
them to change and alter the received laudable customs of our Nation, in
giving civil respect to equals, or reverence to Superiors whose Actions tend
to undermine the Authority of Civil Govornment as also to destroy the Order of
the Churches, by denying all established forms of Worship, and by withdrawing
from the Orderly Church Assemblies, allowed and approved by all Orthodox
Professors of the* Truth; and instead thereof, and opposition thereunto,
frequenting private meetings of their own, insinuating themselves into the
minds of the simpler, or such as are less affected to the Order and Government
of the Church and Commonwealth, whereby diverse of our inhabitants have been
infected and seduced, notwithstanding all former Laws made, (upon experience of
their arrogant bold obtrusions, to disseminate their Principles amongst us)
prohibiting their comeing into this Jurisdiction, they have not been deterred
from their impetuous Attempts to undermine our peace and hasten our ruin;

For prevention thereof, Quakers to be Apprehended.
This Court does Order and Enact, that every person or persons of the cursed
Sect of the Quakers, who is not an Inhabitant of, but found within this
Jurisdiction, shall be Apprehended (without Warrant, where no Magistrate is at
hand) by any Constable Commissioner or Select Man, and conveyed from Constable
to Constable until they come before the next Magistrate, who shall commit the
said person or persons to close Prison, Imprisons.
there to remain without Bail until the next Court of Assistants where they
shall have a legal trial by a special Jury, and being convicted to be of the
Sect of the Quakers, shall be sentenced to Banishment upon pain of Death.

And that every Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction, Banished on pain of death.
being convicted to be of the aforesaid Sect, either by taking up, publishing
and defending the horrid Opinions of the Quakers, Qualification of Quakers
or by stirring up Mutiny, Sedition or Rebellion against the Government, or by
taking up their absurd and destructive practices, viz. denying civil respect
and reverence to Equals and Superiors, withdrawing from our Church Assemblies,
and instead thereof frequenting private meetings of their own, in opposition to
Church Order, or by adhering to, or approving of any known Quakers that are
opposite to the Orthodox received Opinions and Practices of the Godly, and
endeavoring to disaffect others to Civil Government and Church Order; and
condemning the practice and proceedings of this Court against the Quakers,
manifesting thereby compliance with those, whose design is to overthrow the
Order established in Church and Commonwealth: Every such person upon
examination, and legal conviction before the Court of Assistants in manner as
aforesaid, shall be committed to close prison for one Month, and then unless
they choose voluntarily to depart the Jurisdiction, shall give Bond for their
good Abbearance and appearance at the next Court of Assistants, where
continuing obstinate, and refusing to retract and reform the aforesaid Opinions
and Practices, shall be sentenced to Banishment upon pain of Death: And in case
of the aforesaid voluntary departure, not to remain, Quakers voluntarily*
depart, may not return without license
or again to return into this Jurisdiction, without the allowance of the major
part of the Council first had and published, on penalty of being Banished upon
pain of Death, and any one Magistrate, upon information given him of any such
person, shall cause them to be apprehended, and if upon examination of the
case, One Magistrate may commit to prison.
he shall according to his best discretion find just ground for such
complaint, he shall commit such person to prison, until he comes to his trial
as is above expressed. [1646.]

THis Court being desirous to try all means, with as much Lenity as may consist
with our safety, to prevent the Intrusions of the Quakers, who besides their
Absurd and Blasphemous Doctrines, do like Rogues and Vagabonds come in upon us,
and have not been restrained by the Laws already provided;

Have Ordered, that every such Vagabond Quaker, found within any part of this
Jurisdiction, Order against Quakers and Vagabond Rogues.
shall be Apprehended by any person or persons, or by the Constable of the Town
wherein he or she is taken, and by the Constable or in his absence, by any
other person or persons conveyed before the next Magistrate of that Shire
wherein they are taken, or Commissioner invested with Magistratical power: And
being by the said Magistrate or Magistrates, Commissioner or Commissioners
adjudged to be a wandering Quaker, viz. one that has not any dwelling, or
orderly allowance as an Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction, and not giving civil
respect by the usual gestures thereof, or by any other way or means manifesting
himself to be a Quaker, shall by Warrant under the hand of the said Magistrate
or Magistrates, Commissioner or Commissioners, directed to the Constable of the
Town wherein he or she is taken, or in absence of the Constable, to any other
meet person, be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and tied to a Carts
tail, and whipped through the Town, and from thence immediately conveyed to the
Constable of the next Town toward the borders of our Jurisdiction, as their
Warrant shall direct; and so from Constable to Constable till they be conveyed
through any the outwardmost Towns of our Jurisdiction.

And if such Vagabond Quaker shall return again, then to be in like manner
Apprehended, and conveyed as often as they shall be found within the Limits of
our Jurisdiction; Provided every such wandering Quaker, having been thrice
convicted and sent away as abovesaid, and returning again into this
Jurisdiction, shall be Apprehended, and Committed by any Magistrate of
Commissioner as abovesaid unto the House of Correction within that County
wherein he or she is found, until the next Court of that County; where if the
Court judge not meet to release them, they shall be B^inded with the Letter R.
on their left shoulder; and be severely Whipped, and sent away in manner as
before.

And if after this, he or she shall return again; then to be proceeded against
as Incorrigible Rogues and Enemies to the Common Peace, and shall immediately
be apprehenended, and Committed to the Common Goal of the Country, and at the
next Court of Assistants shall be brought to their trya^, and proceeded against
according to the Law made Anno. 1658. page 36. for their punishment on pain of
death.

And for such Quakers as shall arise from amongst our selves, they shall be
proceeded against as the former Law of Anno. 1658. page 36. does provide, until
they have been convicted by a Court of Assistants; and being so convicted, he
or she shall then be Banished this Jurisdiction; and if after that they shall
be found in any part of this Jurisdiction, then he or she so Sentenced to
Banishment, shall be proceeded against as those that are Strangers and Vagabond
Quakers, in manner as is above expressed.

And it is further Ordered, That whatsoever charge shall arise about
Apprehending, Whipping, Conveying, or otherwise about the Quakers, to be laid
out by the Constables of such Towns where it is expended, and to be repaid by
the Treasurer out of the next Country Levy.

And further, that the Constables of the several Towns are hereby empowered from
time to time, as necessity shall require, to Impress Cart, Oxen, and other
Assistants for the Execution of this Order. [1661.]

THis Court heretofore, for some Reasons inducing, did judge meet to suspend
the execution of the Laws against Quakers, as such, so far as they respect
Corporal punishment or Death, during the Courts pleasure. Now forasmuch as new
complaints are made to this Court of such persons abounding, especially in the
Eastern parts, endeavoring to draw away others to that wicked Opinion;

It is therefore Ordered, that the last Law tit. Vagabond Quakers, Order
against Vagabond Quakers May 16^^ in force.
May 1661. be henceforth in force in all respects; Provided that their Whipping
be but through three Towns: and the Magistrate or Commissioners signing such
Warrant, shall appoint both the Towns, and number of Stripes in each Town to be
given. [1662.]

HIDES and SKINS.
WHereas some persons more seekin their own private advantage then the good of
the Public, do Transport Raw Hides and Pelts;

It is Ordered that henceforth no person shall deliver aboard any Ship or other
Vessel, Raw Hides not to be transported.
directly or indirectly, any Raw Hide, Skin, Pelt or Leather unwrought, with
intent to have the same transported out of this Jurisdiction, upon pain to
forfeit the same or the value thereof.

And that no Master of any Ship or Vessel shall receive any Raw Hides, Skins,
Pelts or Leather unwrought, directly or indirectly aboard his Ship or Vessel to
be so transported upon the like penalty.

Provided that any Person, Stranger or other, may transport any Hides or Skins
brought hither from beyond the Seas by way of Merchandise, or the Skins of
Bever, Moos, Beat and Otter. [1646.]

2. Upon Information of the neglect of many persons, L. 2. p. 8.
in not saving such Hides or Skins, as either by casualty or Slaughter come to^
hand, whereby damage redounds to the Country;

It is Ordered, that every Hide or Skin shall carefully be dried, before it
corrupt, Hides and skins to be preserved.
and that such Hides or Skins shall be sent where they may be Tanned or
Dressed, and whosoever shall neglect to do as aforesaid, shall forfeit for
every such Hide five shillings, and for ever Skin of Calves or small Cattle
twelve pence. [1640, 46.]

HIGHWAYS.
TO the end there may be convenient Highways for Travelers.

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That all Country Highwayes shall
be such as may be most easy and safe for Travelers, to which purpose the
Court of that County where such Highways is to be made and laid out, shall
upon complaint appoint two or three men of each next Town, whose Inhabitants
have most occasion thereof, upon view to lay out such Highways according to
Order, given them by that Court, and make return of what they do therein to the
next Court, Provided always it occasion not the pulling down of any Man's
House, or laying open any Garden or Orchard, and in Common Grounds, or where
the Soil is wet, myrie or very rocky, shall lay out such Highways the wider,
viz. six, eight, ten or more Rods.

Provided, Satisfaction to be given proprietor.
that if any Man be thereby damaged in his improved Ground, the Town shall make
him reasonable satisfaction, by estimation of those that laid out the same: and
if such persons deputed cannot agree, it shall be referred unto the County
Court of the Shire, who shall have power to hear and determine the Case; And if
any person find himself justly grieved with any act or thing, done by the
persons deputed aforesaid, he may Appeal to the County Court aforesaid, but if
he be found to complain without cause, he shall surely pay all charges of the
parties, and Court, during that Action, and also be fined to the Country as the
Court shall adjudge. [1639.]

2. It is Ordered and Declared by this Court, Private ways in Towns.
That the Select Townsmen of every Town, have power to lay out (by themselves
or others) particular and private ways concerning their own Town, Private
ways in Town;
only so as no damage be done to any man without due recompense to be given by
the judgment of the said Select men, and one or two chosen by the said Select
men, and one or two chosen by the party, and if any person shall find himself
justly grieved, he may Appeal to the next County Court of that Shire, who shall
do justice therein as in other Cases. [1642.]

3. Upon information that diverse Highways are much annoyed and encumbered by
Gates and Rails erected upon them; Encumbrance in High ways to be removed.


It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That upon any information or
complaint made to any County Court, or to any Magistrate of any such Gates or
Rails erected, or to be erected upon any Common Highway, the said Court or
Magistrate shall appoint a Committee of diserect and indifferent men to view
such encumbrance, and to Order the reformation thereof.

And if the parties whom it shall concern, shall not submit to such Orders,
they shall require them to appear at the next Court of that Shire, and also
shall certify the encumbrance found, and Order by them made under their hands
unto the said Court, or appear in person to prosecute the cause, where it shall
be heard and determined for case and convenience of Travelers, with due
respect to the Proprietors cost and damage, but no person shall stand charged
with the repair of common High ways through his own Ground. [1647.]

HORSES, MARES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; L. 2. p. 11.
Commander of any Ship or Barque, shall receive on board his Ship or Vessel,
any Horse, Gelding or Mare, but such as shall be entered into a Book, with the
color, particular marks and age, (as near as may be known) and person of whom
such Horse was last bought, Horses to be transported, to be entered in a Book.
and proof by Witness or Oath that he was the true owner thereof, to be kept by
the Clerks of the Writs in all their Towns, who are hereby Authorized to view
all such as shall be shipped; and for every Horse so entered, there shall be
paid to the said Officers, by the Owner or Merchant of such Horse, six pence a
piece.

And every Commander or Master of any Vessel, who shall take on board any other
Horse or Mare, except such as he shall receive a Note under the hand of the
said Clerk, and be entered as aforesaid, Penalty
shall for every such offense forfeit the Sum of forty shillings to the
Informer and forty shillings to the Treasury. [1649.]

It is Ordered, No Horses to be sold to Indians.
that no person shall under any pretense sell or any way dispose any Horse,
Mare or Colt, to any Indian, upon the penalty of one hundred pounds. [1655.]

WHereas the Breed of Horses in the Country is utterly spoiled, whereby that
useful Creature will become a burden, which otherwise might be benificial, and
the occasion thereof is conceived to be through the smalness and badness of
Stone Horses and Colts that run in Commons and Woods;

For prevention whereof, Order for the best improvement of stone Horses
This Court does Order and Enact, and be it Ordered and Enacted by the
Authority hereof, That no Stone Horse above two years old shall be suffered to
go in Commons and Woods at liberty, unless he be of comely proportion and
sufficient stature, not less then fourteen Hands high, reckoning four Inches to
a Handful, and such a Horse to be viewed and allowed by the major part of the
Select men of the Town where the owner lives.

And if any person or persons turn any Stone Horse upon the Commons, or at
liberty, or in the Woods, being not viewed and allowed as before, he or they
shall forfeit twenty shillings a Month for every Stone Horse running at
liberty, after he is a two years old; which penalty is to be taken by Warrant
of the Select Men, and employed to the Towns use, and if the Select Men of any
Town do neglect their duty in taking their fines, and viewing such as are
brought in, according to this Law, they shall forfeit twenty shillings to the
County Treasury; and this Law to be in force the first of October next. [1668.]

Idle Persons.
WHereas in the Law tit. House of Correction, Idle persons are particularly
named as such, as the Law intends should be committed to that House for
Correction and Reformation: This Court taking notice, upon good information and
sad complaints, that there are some persons in this Jurisdiction, that have
Families to provide for, who greatly neglect their Callings, or mispend what
they earn, whereby their Families are in much want, and are thereby exposed to
suffer, and to need relief from others;

This Court for remedy of these great and unsufferable evils; do Declare, that
by Idle persons (mentioned in the recited Law) such neglectors of their
Families, are comprehended amonst the rest, and that in a special manner.
[1668.]

IT is Ordered, Constable to take notice of Idle persons.
that no person, House-holder or other, shall spend his time Idely or
unprofitably, under pain of such punishment, as the County Court shall think
meet to inflict.

And the Constables of every Town are required to use special care to take
notice of Offenders in this kind, especially of common Coasters, unprofitable
Fowlers, and Tobacco takers, and present the same to the next Magistrate, who
is hereby empowered to hear and determine the cause, or transfer it to the next
Court. [1633.]

JESUITS.
THis Court taking into consideration the great Wars, Combustions and Divisions
which are this day in Europe and that the same are observed to be raised and
fomented, chiefly by the secret underminings, and solicitations of those of the
Jesuitical Order, Men brought up and Devoted to the Religion and Court of Room,
which has occasioned diverse States to expel them their Territories, for
prevention whereof among our selves;

It is Ordered and Enacted by Authority of this Court, Forbidden to enter out
Jurisdiction.
That no Jesuit or Spiritual or Ecclesiastical person (as they are termed)
Ordained by the Authority of the Pope or See of Room, shall henceforth at any
time repair to, or come within this Jurisdiction: And if any person shall give
just cause of suspicion, that he is one of such Society or Order, he shall be
brought before some of the Magistrates, and if he cannot free himself of such
suspicion, he shall be committed to Prison, or bound over to the next Court of
Assistants, to be tried and proceeded wid^, To be Banished.
by Banishment or otherwise as the Court shall see cause.

And if any person so Banished, be taken the second time within this
Jurisdiction, upon lawful trial and conviction, he shall be put to Death.
Provided this Law shall not extend to any such Jesuit, Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical person, as shall be cast upon our Shores by Shipwreck or other
Accident, so as he continue no longer then till he may have opportunity of
Passage for his departure; nor to any such as shall come in company with any
Messenger hither upon public occasions, or Merchant, or Master of any Ship
belonging to any place, not in enmity with the State of England, or our selves,
so as they depart again with the same Messenger, Master or Merchant, and behave
themselves inoffensively during their abode here. [1647.]

IMPOSTS.
FOR the support of the Government and Maintenance of Fortification, for the
protecting and safe guarding our Harbors for our selves and others that come
to Trade with us;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, A. 53. p. 19.
That every Person, Merchant, Seaman or other, that bring (...) or
Strong Water into any of our Harbors, in any Ships or Vessels whatsoever
(except they come directly from England as their first Port) before they Land
any of the said Wines or Strong Water, Wines to be entered before landed.
more or less, shall first make entry of as many Butts, Pipes or other Vessels,
as they or any of them shall put on shore, by a Note under their Hands
delivered to the Officer that is to receive the Customs at his House, upon
pain of forfeiture and confiscation of all such Wines and Strong Water as are
Landed, before such entry made, wheresoever found, the one half to the Country,
the other half to the Officer, and the Merchant or owner of such Wines of any
kind, or Strong waters, as soon as he Lands them, shall deliver and pay unto
the said Officer what is due for Custom of them according to this Order,
Custom to be paid upon the Landing.
in Wine or Strong-water, according to the proportion of the goodness of the
parcel that is brought in, as the Officer and Owner can agree, to the
contentment and satisfaction of the said Officer, but if they cannot agree,
Customers Deputy.
the Treasurer for the time being shall Determine the price thereof.

And it is further Ordered, that the chief Officer or Customer shall have under
him a Deputy or Deputies, who shall be as searches or waiters in several
places, to take up such Wines or Strong Water by order of the said chief
Officer, and to take notice of what is Landed in any place of this
Jurisdiction, that the Country be not defrauded, who shall have due recompense,
as the chief Officer shall agree with them, and all Wines shall pay Custom
according to the Rates following:

Every Butte or Pipe of Fyall Wines, Rates of the Custom of wine.
or any other Wines of the Western Islands, five shillings.

Every Pipe of Madera wine six shillings eight pence.

Every Butte or Pipe of Sherry, Sack, Malaga, or Canary Wines, ten shillings.

Muscadels, Malmsies and other Wines from the Straits, ten shillings.

Bastards, Tents and Alligants, ten shillings.

And proportionable for greater or lesser Vessels of each kind.

Every Hogshead of French Wines two shillings six pence.

And every Hogshead of Strong Water, ten shillings, and proportionably for
greater or lesser quantities.

2. And for the better reco^ering any such Customs of Wines and Strong waters,
Customers power and duty.
or Forfeitures, for not entering according to this Order;

It is Ordered, that the said Officer or his Deputy, has hereby power, and is
required to go into all Houses or Cellars, where he knows or suspecteth any
Wine or Strong Water to be, and shall seize all such Wines and Strong Water
as are not entered according to this order; and also seize and take possession
of so much Wines and Strong Water as shall make payment for what Custom is
due, according to entries made, and is refused or neglected to be paid in due
manner according to this Order.

And all Constables and other Officers are hereby required to assist and aid
the Officer in the discharge of his duty, Constables to (...) the Officer
and helping to break open such Houses or Cellars of the Owners of such Wines
or Strong Water, us shall refuse to open their doors or deliver their Keys in
a peaceable manner.

And any Smith, Carter, Owner of Boat, Constables and others to assist the
Customer
Porter or other, that shall be required by the Officer to help and assist in
taking, loading and transporting such Wines for the use of the Country, and
shall refuse or neglect such service for due hire, shall forfeit to the Common
Treasury, ten shillings for such default, on penalty of ten shillings
to be levied by the Constable, by Warrant from any one Magistrate.

And all Debts due unto the Country for Custom of Wines or Strong Water,
where Wines or Strong Water are not to be found, they shall be recoverable in
a way of Action, according to the course of Law in other Cases.

3. And it is further Orderd, L. 2. p. 9.
That besides the Customs of Wines or Strong Water aforesaid, all Merchants
or Masters of Strangers Ships, which shall arive with Merchandise, in any of
our Harbors of Boston or Charlstown, and shall make sale thereof, or of the
greater part of the same, shall pay by way of Custom or Imposition, Sixpence
per Tun to be paid by every ship.
after the Rate of six pence per Tun for every Ship, to be paid out of the said
Merchandise; And the Master of every such Ship, shall also pay ten shillings
toward the maintenance of our Fortifications, for the defense of our said
Harbors; Provided no English-ship, or other Ship or Vessel, Fraught in
England, by any English man arriving in our said Harbors, nor any Vessel of
our Confederates, or any other parts where our Ships are free of Customs,
Imposts and Taxes, shall pay the said Custom of six pence per Tun to the
Officer appointed, but only toward the maintenance of the said Fortifications
ten shillings for every Ship above the burden of two Hundred Tuns, For a ship
of 200 Ton (...), For lesser ships, (...) pence.
and six shillings eight pence for all other Vessels and Ships under that
burden. [1645.]

Impost on Wine and Strong Liquors:
WHereas the General Court has formerly for good and weighty Reasons, laid an
Impost upon Wines and Strong Water Imported;

It is thought expedient by this Court, Import on Wine strong Liquor.
for good causes and considerations, to set a Rate upon all Cider, Mum, Ale and
Beer, sold in public Houses licensed to sell such things, that is to say,
Impost on Ale and Beer 2. 5. 6. (...) per Hogshead
two shillings six pence per Hogshead upon all Cider, Ale and Beer, and five
shillings per Hogshead upon all Mum, and so in proportion thereto, to each of
them in greater or lesser quantities.

And this Court does further Order that these Rates or Sums above said, Mum 5.
^. per. Hogshead
be paid to the Treasurer of the Country or to his Assigns in Money, by every
person Licensed to keep an Inn, Ordinary, or House of public entertainment,
within this Jurisdiction whatsoever.

And to that end, every person so Licensed, and selling, are Ordered and
Required to keep a true and just account of what he or they shall sell from
time to time; and that at the end of every Month or Week, being thereto
required, after the publication hereof, they shall present the said, account to
the Treasurer abovesaid, upon Oath if required, or to his Assign, and pay all
the Money due hereby; and in case any of the persons Licensed as abovesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to do what is above Ordered, upon conviction before any
two Magistrates or Court of that County where the offense is committed, shall
pay treble damage to the Country or forfeit his or their License, at the
discretion of that Authority that shall take Cognizance thereof. [1668.]

FOr the better Explanation and effectual Execution of the Law, tit. Impost;

It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, Wines and
Strong Liquors imported to be entered with the Officer.
That all Wines and Strong Water Imported into this Jurisdiction, according to
that Law, be entered with the Officer in particulars, both for quantity and
quality, before any of it be Landed, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of all
that is Landed before it be entered.

It is Ordered that the Impost required by Law be paid to the Officer in Money,
or the best of the specie at Money price.

Impost upon all Goods and Provisions.
THis Court taking notice of sundry Complaints of much Inequality in the
present way of raising Moneys to defray Public Charges;

Do therefore Order, and by the Authority of this Court, be it Ordered and
Enacted:

I. That all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Provisions of all sorts (excepting
Fish, Sheeps-Wool, Cotton-wool, Salt, and such other things as by former Laws
are exempted, or otherwise provided for) which from any foreign part, or other
Jurisdiction, shall be imported into any of our Harbors, Ports, Shores or
elsewhere within this Jurisdiction, shall be Rated in a just proportion with
Estates Rateable in the Country, viz. for every twenty shillings value, shall
be paid one penny in Money.

II. All Goods, Wares and Merchandises as aforesaid, shall be here valued as
follows; that is, Every Hundred pounds at the Port or place from whence it
came, to be accounted here at one Hundred and twenty pounds, which penny per
twenty Shillings, shall be paid by the Agent, Factor, Owner or other person by
whom they are brought, or to whom they are sent or Consigned; and so according
to the same proportion for all greater or lesser quantities whatsoever.

III. To which end, all Goods and Provisions as aforesaid Imported, shall by
the Master, Purser, Boatswain, or Skipper of each Ship or other Vessel in which
they are brought, before breaking Bulk, or Landing any of the said Goods, be
certified unto the Country Treasurer or Collector by him empowered in the
several Port Towns, or other places where they are brought, on penalty of
forfeiture of twenty shillings per Tun, according to the burden of the Ship or
Vessel wherein they are brought from time to time.

IV. And all and every such Collector, shall carefully and truly enter all
such Goods, with their several Marks, Casks, Packs, Far^els, Trusses, Chests,
Truncks, Cases, and all other things however called or distinguished, with the
Names of the persons to whom such Goods or other Things are sent and Consigned,
or (...) Owners thereof, so far as may by any lawful means be discovered.

V. And all persons to whom such Goods or other things aforesaid; are Consigned
or sent, or are the Owners thereof, shall from time to time; before such Goods
are Landed, signify the true and just value thereof, by showing the true and
perfect Invoyce thereof, unto the aforesaid Collectors for each Port; who are
hereby required to Enter the gross Sum thereof in a Book for that purpose, what
the said Goods or other things amount unto, and shall forthwith demand and
receive the several Rates of Assessments aforementioned, or certify the
Treasurer, or such other Collector or Receiver as is concerned therein.

VI. And in case of denial or delay of payment, the Collector Authorized as
aforesaid, shall levy the same by distress upon the said Goods, at the Rate or
price set in the Invoyce, out of which he shall have two shillings per pound
for his time and labor therein: And for the more full effecting hereof, the
said Collector is empowered to require aid (if need be) as any Constable may in
the like service, and no man may refuse to assist* upon the same penalty the
Law in that case express.

VII. If any Invoyce or Bill of Parcels shall be falsified, concealed, of not
produced, of any Goods or other things imported as aforesaid, it shall be
lawful for the Treasurer or Collector, with the Select Men of each Town therein
concerned, to Rate all such Goods, or the Owner, or other Agent for the same,
by Will and Doom, according to their best discretion; Provided it be not less
then four pounds per Tun, as the same stands Entered in the Bill of Lading, in
the Boatswain or other Officers Book.

VIII. It is further Ordered, in reference to all sorts of Cattle that are
brought into this Jurisdiction, to be sold, killed or transported, that the
Venders shall give a just and true account of all such Cattle so brought, to
some one of the aforesaid Officers empowered to act herein, both in respect of
number and kind, and the same shall be entered in a Book; and the Owners of all
such Cattle, or the person with whom they are trusted, before they are set to
sale, killed or put on Board any Vessel for transport, shall pay for every Head
as is expressed in the Law tit. Charges Public, upon penalty of forfeiture of
any such Beast, or the true value thereof, in whose hand soever found; the one
half to the public Treasury, the other half to the Informer.

IX. For all other sorts of Goods, Hides, Skins, Beaver, Peltry, Butter,
Cheese, or other Merchandise or Provisions brought into this Jurisdiction by
Land, the Owner, Factor, Agent, or other person entrusted, shall before any
sale made, or before any putting on Board any Vessel for transport, or other
disposal of the said goods, make a just and true Entry thereof, as is before
provided concerning Goods imported by Sea, and to be Rated one penny in every
twenty shillings, the same to be paid in Money to the said Officer, under the
penalty of forfeiture as aforesaid; the one third part to the Country
Treasurer, one third part to the Informer, and one third part to the Collector.

X. The Country Treasurer for the time being, is hereby empowered and required
duly to execute, or cause to be duly and fully executed this present Order in
each particular part thereof; who is also empowered and Authorized to depute
and empower all such Officers under him, as he shall judge necessary for the
accomplishment thereof, who upon Warrant so them directed under his Hand and
Seal, shall attend the same: And the said Officer or Officers shall be
accountable to the said Treasurer, when he shall call them thereunto.

XI. It is also Ordered, That such Goods or other things as upon importation
shall by this Order be paid for, shall not again for that year be Rated, whilst
they remain in the hands of them that so paid for them.

XII. In case the Treasurer or any Officer under him, shall find any great
difficult or doubtful case in the execution of this Order, they shall repair to
the Governor and Council, or so many of them as can conveniently assemble,
provided the number be not less then five, who are hereby empowered to give such
Order and Directions for removing Obstructions, as the major part of them shall
judge expedient, for the effectual prosecution of this Order.

And the Order Respecting Customs, made October 1668. is hereby Repealed.

And it is Ordered further, That this present Law be in force forthwith, upon
the ending of this present Sessions, and forthwith published in Boston and
Charlstown.

It is Ordered by this Court, that this shall be the Seal of the Treasurers
Office.

T.M.


ALthough there are several Orders made by this Court, concerning the receiving
of the Rates of Goods Imported, yet it is found by experience, that it falls
short of attaining the full end intended: For prevention of the defrauding of
the Officer who is appointed to Collect the same;

It is hereby Ordered, ^aw to prevent the defrauding of the Officer for Customs
as an Addition to what the Law has provided in this case, that all Masters of
Ships or other Vessels, comeing into our Ports with any Goods Rateable
according to Law, shall keep in their Custody all such Goods, till they receive
an Order from the Collector to deliver the same, or in defect thereof to pay
unto the said Officer the full value of the Rate appointed by Law. [1670.]

Whether the revenue arising by Rate or Custom of Goods Imported, Three
Questions resolved.
as also Powder paid by Shipping belonging to Strangers and brought into the
River of Pascataqua, is to be returned to the Public Treasury of this Country?
This Question is Resolved by the whole Court on the Affirmative.

Whether the Money already Collected in Pascataqua River, viz. by Customs or
Rate on Goods Imported, etc. and for Powder paid by shipping, that is, what
has been received from Strangers, and such as are not Inhabitants of the said
River, is to be returned to the public Treasury of this Country; this Question
also was resolved on the Affirmative by the Court.

Whether the Revenue arising by the Rate or Custom laid on Goods Imported,
belonging to the Inhabitants of Pascataqua River, which is brought into the
said River, is to be paid into the Country Treasurer; This Question is Resolved
in the Negative by the whole Court. [1671.]

IMPRESSES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; L. 1. p. 9.
That in all public works of this Commonwealth, one Magistrate and the
overseer of the work, shall have power to send their Warrants to the Constables
of the next Towns, Laborers pressed for any public work
to send so many Laborers and Artificers as the warrant shall direct, which
the Constable and two other or more of the Freemen, which he shall choose, shall
forthwith execute for which service, such Magistrate and Overseer aforesaid,
shall have power to give such Wages as they shall judge the Work to deserve;
Provided that for any ordinary work, no man shall be compelled to work from
home above one week together.

2. It is also Ordered, That no man shall be compelled, to any Public work or
service, unless the press be grounded upon some act of the General Court, and
have reasonable allowance for the same, nor shall any man be compelled in
Person to any Office, Work, Wars, or other public service, that is
necessarily and sufficiently exempted, by any natural or personal impediment,
as by want of years, greatness of years, defect of mind, failing of senses,
Persons free for defect
or impotency of Limbs:

Nor shall any man be compelled to go out of this Jurisdiction upon any
offensive Wars, which this Common wealth, or any of our Friends or
Confederates, as shall voluntarily undertake, but only upon such vindictive and
defensive Wars in our own behalf or the behalf of our Friends and Confederates
as shall be enterprized by the Council and consent of a General Court, Cattle
and other goods (...) in the Country service to be made good
or by Authority derived from the fame.

Nor shall any man's Cattle or Goods of what kind soever, be Pressed, or taken
for any Public use or service, unless it be by Warrant, grounded upon some Act
of the General Court; Nor without such reasonable Prizes and Hire, as the
ordinary Rates of the Country do afford, and if his Cattle or Goods shall
perish or suffer damage in such service, the Owner shall be sufficiently
recompensed. [1641.]

IMPRISONMENT.
IT is Ordered and by this Court Declared, That no Man's Person shall be
Restrained or Imprisoned by any Authority whatsoever, before the Law has
Sentenced him thereto, Who Baylab^^^
if he can put in sufficient Security, Bail or Mainprize, for his appearance
and good Behavior in the mean time, unless it be in Crimes Capital, and
Contempt in open Court, and in such Cases where such express Act of Court does
allow it. [1641.]

INDIANS.
FOR settling the Indians Title to Lands in this Jurisdiction; A. 52. p. 16.


It is Declared and Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That what
Lands any of the Indians in this Jurisdiction have possessed and improved, by
subduing the same, they have just right unto, Indians Title to Land.
according to that in Genesis 1. 28. and chap. 9. 1. and Psalm. 115. 16.

And for the further encouragement of the hopeful work amongst them, for the
Civilizing, and helping them forward to Christianity; If any of the Indians
shall be brought to Civility, and shall come among the English to Inhabit, in
any of their Plantations, and shall there live Civilly and Orderly;

That such Indians shall have Allotments amongst the English, Civil Indians to
have Land granted them.
according to the Custom of the English in like case.

Further it is Ordered, that if upon good experience, there shall be a
competent number of the Indians brought on to Civility, so as to be capable of
a Township, upon their request to the General Court, they shall have grant of
Lands undisposed of, for a Plantation as the English have.

And further it is Ordered by this Court, that if any Plantation or Person of
the English, Indians not to be dispossessed
shall offer injuriously to put any of the Indians from their Planting grounds,
or Fishing-places, upon their complaint and proof thereof, they shall have
relief in any of the Courts of Justice amongst the English, as the English have.

And further it is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, and be it
hereby Enacted, That all the Tract of Land within this Jurisdiction, whether
already granted to any English Plantations or Persons, or to be granted by this
Court (not being under the qualification of Right to the Indians) is, and shall
be accounted the just Right of such English as already have, or hereafter shall
have Grant of Lands from this Court, and the Authority thereof; from that of
Genesis 1. 28. and the Invitation of the Indians.

2. And it is Ordered, L. 1. p. 23.
That no Person whatsoever, shall henceforth buy Land of any Indian without
License first had and obtained of the General Court, None to buy Land of Indians
and if any offend herein, such Land so bought shall be forfeited to the
Country.

Nor shall any person, sell, give or Barter, directly or indirectly, any Gun or
Guns, no arms or ammunition to be ^^^ded with the dians.
Powder, Bullets, Shot, Lead to any Indian whatsoever, or to any person
Inhabiting out of this Jurisdiction: Nor shall any amend or repair any Gun
belonging to any Indian, nor shall sell any Armor or Weapons, upon penalty of
ten pounds for every Gun, Armor or Weapons so sold, given or Bartered, five
pounds for every pound of Powder, forty shillings for every pound of Shot or
Lead, and proportionably for any greater or lesser quantity. [1633. 37.]

FOR Explanation of the Law, tit. Indians;

This Court does Declare the Prohibition there expressed, Referring to the
purchase of Indian Land without License from this Court, is to be understood,
as well Graunts for term of years as for ever, and that under the same
penalty, as in the said Law is expressed. [1667.]

3. Whereas the French and Dutch and other foreign Nations do ordinarily Trade
Guns, L. 2. p. 15.
Powder, Shot, etc. with Indians, to our great prejudice and strengthening and
animating the Indians against us; And the aforesaid French, Dutch etc. do
prohibit all Trade with the Indians within their respective jurisdictions,
under penalty of confiscation, etc.

It is therefore Ordered; Foreigners prohibited Trade without Indians
That it shall not be lawful for any Frenchman, Dutchman, or any person of any
other Foreign Nation whatsoever, or any English dwelling amongst them, or
under them, or any of them, to Trade with any Indian or Indians within the
Limits of our Jurisdiction, directly or indirectly by themselves or others,
under penalty of Confiscation of all such Goods and Vessels as shall be found
so Trading, or the due value thereof, upon just proof of any Goods or Vessels,
so Trading or Traded.

And it shall be lawful for any person or persons, Inhabiting within this
Jurisdiction, to make seizure of any such Goods or Vessels Trading with the
Indians; one half whereof shall be for the proper use and benifit of the party
seizing, and the other half to the Country.

4. And because the Trade of Furrs with the Indians in this Jurisdiction, A 57.
p. 22*
does properly belong to this commonwealth, and not unto particular persons;

It is therefore Ordered, That henceforth no Person or Persons, directly or
indirectly, Name to Trade furre with Indians without Itcense under penalty of
100 (...).
shall Trade with the Indians for any sort of Peltry, excepting only such as
are Authorized by this Court, or by such Committee as this Court shall appoint
from time to time, under the penalty of one Hundred pounds fine for every
offense, ten pound whereof shall be to the Informer, the rest to the Country.

5. Whereas several Orders for the preventing of Drunkenness amongst the
Indians have been made, A. 52. p. 23^.
yet notwithstanding there is little or no reformation: For the prevention
thereof, and the frequent effects thereof, Murder and other outrages amongst
them:

This Court does Order, that no person of what quality or condition soever,
Stong Liquors prohibited to be sold or given to Indians on penylty of 40. 5.
per pint
shall henceforth Sell, Truck, Barter, or give any strong-Liquors to any
Indian, directly or indirectly, whether known by the name of Rum,
Strong Water, Wines, strong-Beer, Brandy, Cider, Perry, or any other strong.
Liquors, going under any other name whatsoever; under the penalty of forty
shillings for one pint, and so proportionably for greater or lesser quantities
to Sold, Bartered or Given, directly or indirectly, as abovesaid.

And for the better execution of this Order;

All Trucking Houses erected (not allowed by this Court) shall be forthwith
demolished.

And for the better effecting of this Order;

It is Declared that one third part of the penalty, shall be granted to the
Informer.

It is also Ordered, that special care shall be had by the Grand jury, of every
Shire Court, to inquire and present to the Court what they find, to discover
matter tending to such practice, against the true intent of this Law:

And all other Orders giving liberty to sell strong Liquors to the Indians, are
hereby Repealed; and all licenses formerly granted, are hereby disabled and
called in; Provided always, that it is not intended that this Law shall extend
to restrain any person from any charitable act, Except in case of sickness, etc.
in relieving any Indian ( bond fide) in case of sudden extremity, by sickness
or fainting, which calls for such help, not exceeding one dram, nor when any
Physician shall prescribe in way of Physic any of the particulars
beforementioned; so as upon sight of his direction in writeing, there be
allowance had under the hand of one Magistrate, or where no Magistrates in the
Town residing, being under the hands of the Town Commissioners or two of them.
[1657.]

6. This Court considering the necessity of restraining the Indians from
whatsoever may be a means to disturb our peace and quiet; A. 56. P. 18.


Does Order, That henceforth no person or persons Inhabiting within this
Jurisdiction, No Boats to be sold to Indians
shall directly or indirectly any ways give, sell, barter or otherwise dispose
of any Boat, Skiffe, or any greater Vessel unto any Indian or Indians
whatsoever, under the penalty of fifty pounds, to be paid to the Country
Treasurer, for every such Vessel so sold or disposed as aforesaid. [1656.]

7. It is Ordered by this Court, L. 1. p. 23.
That in all places within this Jurisdiction, Damage done in Indians in their
Corn to be satisfied.
the English shall keep their Cattle from destroying the Indians Corn, in any
ground where they have right to plant, and if any of their Corn be destroyed
for want of Fencing or Hearding; the Town shall make satisfaction, and shall
have power among themselves, to lay the charge where the occasion of the damage
did arise; Provided that the Indians shall make proof, that the Cattle of such
a Town, Farm or Person did the damage.

And for encouragement of the Indians, toward the Fencing in of their
Cornfieldsd;

Such Towns, Help Ind^^ ^^nce their Ground.
Farms, or Persons, whose Cattle may annoy them that way, shall Direct, Assist
and help them, in felling of Trees, riving and sharpning Rails, and holing of
Posts; allowing one English man to three or more Indians; And shall also draw
the fencing into place for them, and allow one man a day or two, toward the
setting up the same, and either lend or sell them Tools to finish it; Provided,
that such Indians to whom the Country, or any Town, have given, or shall give
Ground to plant upon, or shall purchase ground of the English, shall Fence such
their Corn Fields or Ground, at their own charge as the English do or should do:

And if any Indian refuse to fence their Corn Ground (being tendered help as
aforesaid) in the presence and hearing of sufficient witnesses, they shall keep
off all Cattle, or lose their damages.

And it is also Ordered, Indians to pay for hurt done to Cattle
that if any harm be done at any time by the Indians unto the English, in their
Cattle; the Governor or Deputy Governor with two of the Assistants, or any
three Magistrates, or any County Court, may order satisfaction according to Law
and Justice. [1640. 48.]

8. Whereas one end in planting these parts was to propagate the true Religion
unto the Indians, and that diverse of them are become subject to the English,
and have engaged themselves to be willing and ready to understand the Law of
God;

It is therefore Ordered, Laws to be published to the Indians
That such necessary and wholesome Laws which are in force, and may be made from
time to time, to reduce them to civility of life, shall be once a year (if the
times be safe) made known to them, by such fit persons as the General Court
shall appoint.

9. For the better Ordering and Governing the Indians subject to us, A. 18.
especially those of Natick and Punquepaog;

It is Ordered that whomsoever the Court shall appoint, do take care that all
such Indians do live according to our Laws, as far as they are capable, and to
that end shall be Authorized to constitute and appoint Indian commissioners in
their several Plantations, to hear and determine all such matters that do arise
amongst themselves as one Magistrate may do amongst the English, with Officers
to execute all Commands and Warrants, as Marshal and Constables.

And further they jointly shall have the power of a Country Court, Courts to be
kept among the Indians.
to hear and determine all causes arising among them, the English Magistrate
appointing the time and place of the Court, and consenting to the determination
or judgment, and all other matters beyond their cognizance shall be issued and
determined by the Court of Assistants.

10. And it is Ordered, that no Indian shall at any time Powaw or perform
outward worship to their false Gods, Powaws forbidden.
or to the Devil, in any part of our Jurisdiction, whether they be such as
shall dwell here or shall come hither; and if any shall transgress this Law,
the Powawer shall pay five pounds, Town to (...) Indians from profaning the
Sabbath
the procurer five pounds, and every other countenancing by his presence or
otherwise (being of age, of discretion) twenty shillings, and every Town shall
have power to restrain all Indians that shall come into their Towns from
profaning the Lords day. [1633, 37, 40, 41, 42, 46, 48, 56, 57, 58.]

WHereas the sin of Drunkenness amongst the Indians does much increase, order
to prevent Drunacuness in Indians
notwithstanding the Laws provided against that crying sin;

This Court does therefore Order, that any person or persons, that shall see,
know or find any Indian with any strong Liquors, Wine or strong Drink, that
such Indians have any way gotten without Order as the Law directs, shall have
power to seize the same, Th^^ strong liquor etc. to be seized by any person
and to deliver the said strong-Drink to the Constables of the Town or Place
where such Indians are found, with their persons to be conveyed before some
Magistrate or Commissioner, who have power to deal in such cases; and such
Indians as are found Drunk, being apprehended, and will not confess how or
where they had the said Wine, Liquors, or strong Drink, shall be secured or
imprisoned until they make a just acknowledgement where they had their Drink
aforesaid, or committed to the House of Correction, and there labor to
discharge the charge of their provision.

And if any such Indian do accuse any person for selling or delivering strong
Drink unto them, Their accusation against persons to be evidence unless the
party clear himself on (...), etc.
such Indian accusation shall be accounted valid against any such person
accused; except such persons shall clear then selves by taking their Oath to
the contrary, any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is also further Ordered, that whatsoever Indian shall hereafter be
taken Drunk, If Drunk to pay ten shillings or be whipped with ten stripes, etc.
shall pay the sum of ten shillings or else be whipped, by laying on ten stripes,
according to the direction of the Judge, whether Magistrate or Commissioner who
shall have cognizance of the case: And in all Towns where no Magistrate or
Commissioners are, such Cases shall be judged by the Select men or major part
of them. [16^6.]

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Trade with Indians for
peltry and Ammunition regulated.
That henceforth every person that is or shall be allowed by the Treasurer of
the Country to Trade Peltry or Skins with the Indians, shall have liberty to
sell unto any Indian or Indians, not in Hostility with us, or any of the
English in New England, Powder, Shot, Lead, (...) ( i. e.) Hand Guns, Rapier or
Sword blades; Provided he or they pay unto the country Treasurer every half
year in money, suspense a pound for every pound of (...), suspense for every
ten pounds of Shot or Lead, Every allowed Trader paying to the Country
Treasurer several sums appointed, etc.
three shillings for every Gun, three Shillings for every dozen of Rapier or
Sword blades, and so proportionably for any quantity that he or they shall sell
to any Indian or Indians; and every such person allowed to Trade as aforesaid,
shall upon Oath deliver to the Treasurer a true and just account of the
particulars of the abovementioned Commodities, by him or them sold unto any
Indian or Indians.

And it is further Ordered, that any person allowed as before, that shall be
convicted before any two Magistrates or County Court, of selling or bartering
any of the forementioned Commodities unto any Indian, whereof he or they have
not give a true and just account, and made due payment unto the Treasurer as is
above expressed; every such person or persons shall forfeit to the public
Treasury, five pounds sterling for every pound of Powder, five pounds for every
ten pounds of Shot or Lead, ten pounds for every Gun great or small, and ten
pounds for every dozen of Rapier or Sword blades, and so proportionably for any
quantity of the aforesaid Commodities sold or battled by him or them to any
Indian or Indians: and all persons except such as are allowed, are hereby
prohibited from selling any of the forementioned Commodities unto any Indian or
Indians, upon the penalty expressed in the Law, tit. Indians, Sect. 2. And this
Order to continue in force during the Courts pleasure; any Law or Order to the
contrary notwithstanding. [1668.]

INDITEMENTS.
IT is Ordered by this Court; A. 52. p. 18.
That no person shall be Indicted, Presented, Informed against, or Complained of
to any Court or Magistrate within this Jurisdiction, for the breach of any
penal Law, or any other misdemeanour, Complaints and presentiments to be made
within a year.
the forfeiture whereof belongs to the Country, unless the said Indictment or
complaint, be made and exhibited within one year after the offense be
committed; and if any such Indictment, Presentment, Information or Complaint be
not made within the time limited, then the same shall be void and of none
effect:

Provided always, this Law shall not extend to any Capital Offenses, (...) any
Crimes that may concern loss of Member or Banishment, or to any Treasonable
Plots or Conspiracies against the Commonwealth, nor to any Felonies above ten
shillings, not shall it hinder any person grieved, or that has any wrong done
to him or his Wife, Children, or Servants, or Estate, real or personal, but
that every such person shall have such remedies as formerly he might or ought
to have. [1652]

In keepers, Ordinaries. Tippling, Drunkenness.
FOrasmuch as there is a necessary use of Houses of Common Entertainment in
every commonwealth, and of such as Retail Wine, Beer and Victuals, yet because
there are so many (...), both by persons entertaining and by persons
entertained;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; None to keep
Ordinaries without License
That no person or persons shall at any time, under any pretense or color
whatsoever, undertake to be a Common Victualler, Keeper of a Cooks-shop, or
House for Common Entertainment, Taverner, or public Seller of Wine, Ale, Beer,
or Strong Water by Retail, (nor shall any sell wine privately in his House, or
out of doors, by a less quantity then Quarter Cask) without approbation of the
Selected Townsmen, and License of the County Court where they dwell, A. 58.
upon pain of forfeiture of five pounds for every such offense, or Imprisonment
at the pleasure of the Court.

Provided, it shall be lawful for any whole sale Merchant of Wines, ^^erby to
sell Wine and Strong Water by retail
or the present Stillers of Strong waters, being Masters of Families, or such
as receive the same from foreign parts in Cases, etc. or makers of Cider to
sell by Retail; Provided the quantity of Wine and Cider, be not less then three
Gallons at a time to one person, nor Strong Water less then a quart; and that
it be only to Masters of Families of good and honest report, or persons going
to Sea; and they suffer not any person to drink the same in their Houses,
Cellars or Yards.

And every person so Licensed for Common Entertainment, Ordinaries to (...)
Sign^s
shall have some inoffensive Sign, obvious for direction of Strangers, and such
as have no such Sign after three Months so Licensed, shall lose their License,
and others be allowed in their stead.

2. And every person Licensed to keep an Ordinary, L. 2. p. 13.
shall always be provided of Strong Wholesome Beer, A. 51. p. 4.
of four Bushels of Malt (at the least) to a Hogshead, A. 53. p. 19.
which he shall not sell at above two pence the Ale quart, To be always
provided with strong Beer and* per quart
upon penalty of forty shillings for the first offense, and for the second
offense to lose his License.

And it is permitted to any that will, to sell Beer out of doors, at one penny
the Ale quart or under.

WHereas the Law tit. In-keepers, Sect. 2. has provided, that every person
Licenced to keep an Ordinary, shall always be provided of strong wholesome
Beer, of four Bushels of Malt at the least to a Hogshead, which was Intended,
and is hereby Declared to be of good Barley Malt, not so be sold for above two
pence the Ale quart, on penalty as in the said Law is expressed,
notwithstanding which, many keepers of Inns and Ordinaries as regardless of the
said Law, or of the debasing of the produce of the Country, take liberty to
make and sell Drink bre^ed of, or mixed with Melasses, course Sugar, or other
Materials, to the damage, just offense and prejudice of sundry persons;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Four Bushels
of Barley Malt in a Hogshead
that no person Licensed as aforesaid, shall after publication hereof, sell or
any ways utter any Beer, Ale or Drink instead thereof, by Retail, that is not
made altogether of good Barley Malt, without any mixture of Melasses, course
Sugar or other Materials instead of Malt, on penalty of five pounds for every
such offense, one half to the Informer, the other half to the Country where
such offense shall be committed; besides the penalties in the former recited
Law expresses, on Complaint to any Magistrate, County Court or Commissioner for
Boston, unless the party complained of, shall legally prove his or her
Innocence therein, in which case, it shall be in the liberty of the Authority
as aforesaid, to accept the Oath of such person if tendered to him or them, if
they see cause: And the Authority aforesaid, are hereby empowered to hear and
determine such Complaints; any Law, Custom or Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding. [1667.]

3. And no Licensed person as aforesaid, A. 1. p. 30.
shall suffer any to be Drunk, or to Drink Excessively, viz. above half a pint
of Wine for one person at a time, Not to permit any to be Drunk etc.
or to continue Tippling above the space of half an hour, or at unseasonable
times, or after nine of the Clock at night, in, or about any of their Houses,
on penalty of five shillings for every such offense.

And if any person Licensed to sell Wine or Beer as aforesaid, L. 2. p. 6.
shall (...) in his House any person that shall be found Drunken, Not to
conceal Drunkards
and shall not forth with procure a Constable to carry such Drunken person
before some Magistrate or Commissioner, and in the interim, the said Vintner or
Drawer of Beer, shall make stay of such persons till the Constable shall come,
under the penalty of five pounds, for every default.

4. And every person found Drunken, A. 1. p. 30.
viz. so as he be thereby bereaved or disabled in the use of his understanding,
appearing in his speech or gesture, in any of the said Houses or elsewhere,
shall forfeit ten shillings and for excessive Drinking three shillings four
pence, and for continu^ing above half an hour Tippling two shillings six pence,
and for Tippling at unseasonable times, Drunkenness, Tippling the penalty
or after nine of the Clock at night five shillings for every Offense in those
particulars, being lawfully convict thereof, and for want of payment, they
shall be imprisoned till they pay, or be let in the Stocks one hour or more (in
some open place) as the Weather will permit not exceeding three hours.

5. And if any person be found Drunken, L. 2. p. 6.
by night or by day, or shall in his Drunkenness offer any abuse to the
Constable or others; Drunkards abusing the Constable to be committed
either by striking or reviling him or them, or using any endeavors by himself
or others to make an escape, it shall be in the power of the Constable to
commit such person or persons to safe keeping or imprisonment, or take Bond for
his appearance, as he shall see cause; and the Keepers of each Prison, upon
Warrant from any Magistrate, or Commissioner, or Select men, shall receive all
such as shall be so committed, and take but twelve pence for his see in such
cases.

And the Constable shall inform the next Magistrate thereof, but if no
Magistrate be in Town, (...) Selectmen
he shall convent such person or persons before one or more of the
Commissioners for ending small causes, and where no Commissioners are, before
any one or more of the Select men of the Town, who have power given them to do
as any one Magistrate may do in like case; Provided nevertheless, if any such
Delinquent shall confess his fault, and pay his fine and other charges, the
Constable shall receive it and dismiss the offender, and every person hereby
Authorized to receive the fines aforesaid, shall forthwith make return to the
Treasurer of the County where such offense is committed, of what he has done
and received in such cases.

6. It shall be lawful notwithstanding, L. 1. p. 30.
for all Licensed persons to entertain Land-travellers or Seafaring men in the
night season, when they come on shore or from their journey for their necessary
refreshment, Travelers entertained for a night
or when they prepare for their voyage or journey the next day early, so there
be no disorder among them, and also Strangers, Lodgers or other persons in an
orderly way, may continue in such Houses of Common Entertainment during meal
times, or upon lawful business what time their occasion shall require.

7. Nor shall any Merchant, Wine (...) Coopers (...) to permit (...) to be Drunk
Cooper, Owner or Keeper of Wines, or other persons that have them in there
custody, suffer any person to drink to Excess or Drunkenness in any of their
Wine-sellers, Ships or other Vessels, or places where Wines do lie on pain to
forfeit for each person so doing, ten shillings.

Nor shall any person licensed to sell Strong waters, A 54. p. 21
or any private Housekeeper permit any person or persons to fit Drinking or
Tippling Strong Water, Private Housekeepers not (...) permit (...) their Houses
Wine or Strong Beer in their Houses. And if any such Seller of Strong waters
or private Housekeeper, shall be legally convicted before any County Court, any
one Magistrate or Commissioners Court, such persons shall for the first offense
be fined twenty shillings, First offense to (...)
and if the party so convicted be not able to pay his fine, he shall be set in
the Stocks, where he shall continue one whole hour, and if any such Seller of
Strong waters shall be convicted as aforesaid of a second Offense of the same
nature, he shall forfeit his License, Second offense 5, (...)
and shall also pay twenty shillings as a fine to the Country, and if any
private Housekeeper, shall be convicted as aforesaid of a second Offense
against this Law, he shall pay a fine of five pounds, and for a third offense,
third offense good behavior.
such person of person being so convicted, shall be bound to their good
Behavior in twenty pound Bond, with two sufficient Sureties, or be committed
of Prison.

8. And if any person offend in Drunkenness, L. 1. p. 30.
excessive or long Drinking the second time, they shall pay double fines.

And if they fall into the same offense the third time, Drunk the second time
double fine
they shall pay treble the fines; and if the parties be not able to pay the
fines, then he that is found Drunk shall be punished by whipping, to the number
of ten stripes; and he that offends in excessive or long Drinking, third treble
shall be put into the Stocks for three hours, when the weather may not hazard
his life or limbs.

And if they offend the fourth time, fourth time imprisonment
they shall be imprisoned until they put in two sufficient sureties for their
good Behavior.

9. And it is further Ordered, That if any person that keeps or hereafter
shall keep a common house of Entertainment, Inkeepers contict of a third offense
shall be lawfully convicted the third time, for any offense against this Law;
he shall (for the space of three years next ensueing the said conviction) be
disabled to keep any such house of Entertainment, forfeit their License
or sell Beer, or the like, unless the Court aforesaid, shall see cause to
continue him.

10. It is further Ordered, that every In-keeper or Victualler, shall provide
for the entertainment of Strangers Horses, Provision for Horses
viz. one or more Enclosures for Summer; Hay and Provender for Winter, with
convenient Stable-room and Attendants, under the penalty of two shillings six
pence for every days default, and double damage to the party thereby wronged,
except it be by inevitable accident.

11. And it is further Ordered by the Authority aforesaid; That no Taverner,
Vintners to pay 50. s. per Butt
Seller of Wine by Retail Licensed as aforesaid, shall take above nine pound
profit by the Butte or Pipe of Wine, (and proportionably for all other Vessels)
toward his waste in drawing and otherwise, out of which allowance, every such
Taverner or Vintner, shall pay fifty shillings by the Butte or Pipe, and
proportionably for all other Vessels to the Country; for which they shall
account with the Treasurer or his Deputy every six Months and discharge the
same, all which they may do by selling six pence a quart in Retail which they
shall no time exceed) more then it cost by the Butt: Besides the benefit of
their Art and Mystery which they know how to make use of.

And every Taverner or Vintner shall give a true account and notice unto the
Treasurer or his Deputy, To give notice to the Treasures what Wine they buy
of every Vessel of Wine he buys from time to time within three days, upon
pain of forfeiting the same or the value thereof, the one half to the Country,
the other half to the Treasurer and Informer.

And it is Ordered, that the said Impost, shall from time to time be paid in
Wines at Merchantable price, A. 58.
or other equivalent Merchantable good pay, to the content of the Treasurer,
and that the Treasurer shall take special care in collecting the same; who is
hereby empowered to substitute such Deputies under him as he shall see meet in
the several Towns for his help and furtherance herein; for all which pains and
care, Treasurer to have (...) of this impost
he shall be allowed two shillings in the pound of all such Imposts as he shall
bring into his Annual account with the Country.

Provided always, that if any Vintner, Taverner or Retailer of Wines, shall
give an account to the Treasurer of any part of any Wine entered as abovesaid,
that he has sold away again by wholesale, being no less in quantity then a
Quarter Cask to one person at one time, and shall truly certify the person
who had it, Sellers of strong water to give notice to the Marshal within 3 days
and the time when; such person or persons shall be abated off their Impost, in
proportion to what they have sold.

And all such as Retail Strong Water, shall in like manner pay two pence upon
every quart to the use of the Country, who shall also give notice to the
Marshal General of every Case and Bottle, or other quantity they buy within
three days, upon pain of forfeiture as before.

12. And it is Ordered; L. 2. p. 31.
That in all places where Week day Lectures are kept, all Taverners,
Victuallers and Ordinaries, that are within one mile of the Meeting House to
which they belong, Ordinary keeper to clear their rouses in meeting time
shall from time to time clear their Houses of all persons able to go to
Meeting, during the time of the exercise, (except upon extraordinary cause, for
the necessary refreshing of Strangers unexpectedly repairing to them) upon pain
of five shillings for every such offense, over and besides the penalties
incurred by this Law for any other disorder.

13. It is also Ordered, That all offenses against this Law, One Magists to
hear and determine all (...) against this Law
may be heard and determined by any one Magistrate, who shall hereby have power
by warrant to send for, and examine parties and witnesses concerning any of
these offenses: and upon due conviction either by view of the said Magistrate,
or Affirmation of the Constable, and one sufficient witness with circumstances
concurring, or two witnesses, or confession of the party, to leavy the said
several fines, Delinquents Testimony
by warrant to the Constable for that end.

And if any person shall voluntarily confess his offense against this Law in
any the particulars thereof, his Oath shall be taken in evidence and stand good
against any other offending at the same time.

14. It is further Ordered by the Authority aforesaid, Constable to search in
Ordination
That all Constables may, and shall from time to time, duly make search
throughout the limits of their Towns upon Lords days and Lecture days in
times of exercise, and also at all other times so often as they shall see cause,
for all Offenses and Offenders against this Law, in any the particulars thereof.

And if upon due Information of Complaint, Constab. neglect
of any of their Inhabitants or other credible persons, whither Taverner,
Victualler, Tabler or other, they shall refuse or neglect to make search as
aforesaid, or shall not to their power perform all other things belonging to
their place and office of Constable, then upon complaint and due proof before
any one Magistrate, within three Months of such refusal or neglect, they shall
be fined for every such offense ten shillings, Fined (...)
to be leavied by the Marshal as in other cases by Warrant from such Magistrate
before whom they are Convicted or Warrant from the Treasurer upon notice from
such Magistrate.

15. And because it is difficult to Order and keep the Houses for public
Entertainment in conformity to the wholesome Laws established, A. 57. p. 2^.
as is necessary for preventing Drunkenness, excessive Drinking, vain Expenses
of money, Time, and the abuse of the good Creatures of God;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Ordinaries to
^^niew their License yearly
That no person or persons hereafter shall be Licensed to keep a House of
Common entertainment for any longer then one year at one time, and that such as
keep Houses of public entertainment, (the present Vintners during their
contract excepted) shall and hereby are enjoined once every year, to repair to
the several County Courts for reniewing their several Licenses (for which they
shall pay me shillings six pence to the Clerk of the Court) or else they shall
forfeit five pounds as unlicensed Ale housekeepers. [1645,46,47,48,51,53,57,58.]

UPon complaint of the great abuses that are daily committed by the Retailers
of Strong matters, Rhom, etc. both by the Stiliers thereof, and such as heart it
from ferraigne parts;

This Court do therefore Order, None to still or Retail Liquors without License
that henceforth no person or persons shall practice the Craft of Stilling
Strong water, nor shall fell or Retail any, by less quantities then a Quarter
Cask, and the same to be delivered not a several times or in several parcels,
but at one time, without Covin or Fraud, excepting only such as shall be
allowed Annually by the Country Courts respectively, on penalty of five pounds
forfeiture for every time that any person or persons shall be legally convicted
thereof; any Law, Usage or Custom, or former Licenses to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, this law shall not prohibit such Merchants as have Strong
(...) from foreign parts in Cases, from selling the same by the whole Case,
either to such as are going to Sea, or to Masters of Families of good report.
[1661.]

THis Court being sensible of the great increase of profaneness among us,
especially among the younger sort, taking their opportunity of meeting together
in places of public Entertainment, to corrupt one another by their (...) and
w^nton carriage, rudely singing and making a noise, to the disturbance of the
Family and other Guests if any be in the House;

This Court do therefore Order and hereby Enact, Penalty for rude singing in
Taverns
That no person or persons whatsoever, do presume either in Word or Deed to
carry it uncivilly, or wantonly, singing rudely, or making a noise to the
disturbance of the Family, or any other Guests in any place of Public
Entertainment, on penalty of paying five shillings for every offense against
this Law, being therefore legally Convicted before any Court, Magistrate or
Commissioner:

And where sundry persons are in the same company, where any such rude and
uncivil carriages are acted, and the particular person or persons unknown,
every of the said persons shall be liable to the like penalty, unless they can
attest their innocence, and do freely give in their testimony against the
nocent.

And if any person allowed to keep a house of public Entertainment-shall
suffer such carriages by any person or persons, and not legally prosecute the
same before Authority, on legal conviction thereof, before the County Court of
whom they had their License, they shall be debarred of any further renewal
thereof. [1664.]

As an Addition to the Law, tit. In-keepers;

it is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That where any person
or persons whatsoever, shall presume to keep an (...) of public Entertainment,
Ordinary, Cooks shop, or shall by Retail sell Wine, Strong Beer, Liquors or
Cider, without License first had and orderly obtained; or having had License,
and not renewed as the Law requires, or being discharged for any misdemeanour
committed, or suffered to be done in their Houses, or in or about the same: It
shall be lawful for any Court or Magistrate, on complaint made to them of such
Misdemeanour, to end for such person or persons before them, and being legally
convicted of any the abovesaid offenses, besides the penalty, to require Bond,
with sufficient Sureties for the good Abbearance of such person or persons, and
in special for their observance of the said Law: And in case of Refusal to give
such Bond with Sureties as is required; the Court or Magistrate that has
cognizance of such Complaint, shall commit such person or persons convicted as
abovesaid to Prison, until the next Court of the County. [1665.]

WHereas this Court has made several Laws and Orders for the prevention of the
sin of Drunkenness, and mispending precious Time and Estate; and yet
notwithstanding great complaint is made of several persons spending their Time
and Estate by Drinking and Tippling in Taverns and Alehouses, to the great
dishonor of God, and prejudice of their Families; For the prevention whereof,

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, For prevention or
Drunkenness
That the select men of each Town shall be, and are hereby required and
empowered to take special care and notice of all and every person and persons
transgressing as abovesaid, and thereupon to require him or them to forbear the
frequenting of such Houses or Taverns: and if any person shall after such
warning given him, be found in any such House of Entertainment, and he legally
convicted thereof, before any one Magistrate or Commissioner, he shall forfeit
five shillings, to be paid to the Treasurer of that Town for every such
Offense, or sit in Stocks as the Judges shall see meet.

And it is further Ordered, That the Select men shall also give notice to the
keepers of such Public Houses, that they suffer no such noted person in any of
their Houses, upon the penalty of twenty shillings for every such defect, to be
paid to the Treasurer as aforesaid. [1670.]

Judgments and Executions.
WHereas there is a great abuse in selling of Judgments and Precautions, A. 50.
and so altering the property of them before they be satisfied, or Goods
seized, whereby great inconvenience may arise, as experience has proved;

This Court does therefore Order, That after the end of this Session,
Judgments and Executions not to be sold
no person shall sell, Alienate or Assign any Judgment or Execution
whatsoever, and if any shall presume to Act contrary to this Order, his Sale,
Assignment or Alienation shall be void in Law; and in case the party die after
the Judgment before he has taken out an Execution, or before satisfaction be
received, his Executor or his Administrator shall take out or reniew the
Execution, as the party deceased might have done.

JURORS. JURIES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; L. 2. p. 5.
that the Secretary or Clerk of every Court, Clerk to grant warra it for Jurors
shall in convenient time before the sitting of the Court, send Warrants to the
Constables of the several Towns of the Jurisdiction of that Court, for Jurymen
proportionable to the Inhabitants of each Town: And the Constable upon the
receipt of such Warrant, Chosen by the Freemen
shall give timely notice to the Freemen of their respective Towns, to choose so
many able, discreet men as the Warrant shall require, which men so chosen,
Constables to return the warrant
he shall warn to attend the Court whereto they are appointed, and shall make
return of the Warrant unto the Clerk aforesaid.

The like Order shall be observed in the choice and summoning juries to attend
special Courts: A. 51. p. 5. L. 2. p. 8.


At which Courts every Jury-man shall be allowed four shillings per diem for
their charges, Juries at special Courts allowed (...) as per (...).
and to be paid by him upon whole motion the Court was granted.

And all Juries serving at the Court of Assistants at Boston, L. 1. p. 32.
shall be Summoned respectively out of the Counties of Suffolk and Middlesex:
And all Jurors so chosen, Jury to find accord. to Eviden.
shall be ^mpannelled and sworn truly, to try between party and party, and
shall find the matter of fact with the damages and costs, Bends to determine
matter of equity
according to their evidence, and the Judges shall declare the Sentence, or
direct the Jury to find according to Law; and if there be matter of apparent
equity, as the forfeiture of an Obligation, breach of Covenant without damage,
or the like, the Bench shall determine such matters of equity.

And no trial shall pass upon any man for life or Banishment in any inferior
Court, but by a special Jury Summoned for that purpose.

2. It is also Ordered, Grand Juries
that there shall be Grand juries Summoned in like manner every year unto the
several Courts in each Jurisdiction, to present all misdemeanors they shall
know or hear, L. 1. p. 47.
to be committed by any person within the Jurisdiction, and to do any other
service of the Common wealth, they shall be required by the said Court.

Provided no Juror, nor any person whatsoever shall be bound to inform, present
or reveal any private Crime or Offense, Jurors not bound to reveal secrets
wherein there is no peril or danger to this Colony, or any Member thereof,
when any necessary tie of Conscience binds him to secrefie, unless it be in
Testimonies lawfully required. A. 55. p. 19.


And every Grand juror shall be allowed three shillings per diem for his
charges, Jurors (...)
out of the fees and other profits arising in each Court where they do service,
or by the County if those in-comes fall short.

3. In all cases wherein the Law is obscure, so as the Jury cannot be satisfied
therein, A. 57. p. 25.
whether it be Grand or Petty Jury, they have liberty to present a special
Verdict, viz. If the Law be so in such a point we find for the Plaintiff,
Juries liberty to give a special Verdict
but if the Law be otherwise we find for the Desendant, in which case the
determination does properly belong to the Court.

And all Jurors shall have liberty in matter of Fact, if they cannot find the
main issue, yet to find and present in their Verdict so much as they can.

4. And if the Court and Jury shall so differ at any time about their Verdict,
that either of them cannot proceed with peace of Conscience, Court and Jury not
agreed, case comes to the General Court
the case shall be issued and determined at the next Court of Assistants, in
manner following, ( i. e.) the Attachment with the Security for appearance at
the County Court, A. 56. p. 14.
shall be continued to the Court of Assistants: and if the Plaintiff shall see
cause further to prosecute his Action, he shall give summons to the Defendant
as the Law provideth, and shall also take out of the Records of the County
Court the Records of the said case with the Evidences presented by both
parties, and bring the same to the Court of Assistants, where after the case is
presented, as it was at the County Court, both parties shall have liberty to
make any new Pleas or Evidence before the Bench and Jury: and in case the
Plaintiff shall not further prosecute his Action in manner as is hereby
provided, the Defendant shall then have Judgment granted him for his costs, at
the next Court of that Country.

5. It is further Ordered, That whenever any Jury or Jurors are not clear in
their Judgments or Conscience, L. 1. p. 31.
concerning any case wherein they are to give their Verdict, Juries liberty to
take advice in open Court
they shall have liberty in open Court (but not otherwise) to advise with any
man they shall think fit to resolve or direct them, before they give in their
Verdict.

And no Juror shall be compelled to serve above one ordinary Court in a year,
Jurers to serve but a year except
except Grand jurors, who shall hold two Courts together at the least, and such
as shall be summoned to serve in cases of l^e and death, or Banishment.
[1634,41,42,49,50,51,53,56,57.]

6. Whereas in Suits and Actions brought into Courts between party and party,
sometimes the Plaintiff and sometimes the Defendant, and sometimes neither of
them do attend to answer when they are called to Prosecute or Answer, which
has been (...) connired at by the Magistrates, and much time lost in sending
to seek them out, or wait their comeing in, whereby the Country charges
increased, and the Magistrates, furors, Witnesses and others abused, contrary
to the Laudable, Reasonable Practice and Customs of all Courts in our Native
Country, and other Countries known unto us;

It is therefore hereby Ordered and Enacted, That if any Plaintiff, He or She
have entered any Action to be tried in any Court, or which comes orderly into
any Court, by Replevin, Appeal, or by the disagreement between the Magistrates
and Jury in an Inferior Court, and do not by him or her self, Plaintiff and
Defendants penalty for not answer their call.
or by their Attomies make their appearance and prosecute their Action
immediately after they have been three times called in the Court by Name, after
the first forenoon of the Court; that then they shall be Nonsuited; and if
Plaintiff or Defendant appear upon such call, they shall have their costs
granted by the Court against him or her that does not appear; Plaintiffs
liberty to make new entry in case
and if afterward both parties do agree to try their case at the same Court,
they shall be allowed so to do, the Plaintiff paying half so much for a new
Entry as he did before.

And if any person presented by the Grand Jury for any offense, Delinq. penalty
for not answering what called
or Summoned by a Magistrate to answer any crime, do not upon Summons appear at
the time appointed, upon the third call as aforesaid, He or She shall be
proceeded against for contempt, except He or She be restrained or prevented by
the Hand of God.

Lands, free Lands.
IT is also Ordered, and by this Court Declared, That all our Lands and
Heritages shall be free from all Fines and Licenses, upon Alienations, and from
all Hariots, Wardships, Liveries, Primersezins, year, day and waste, Escheats
and forfeitures upon the Death of Parents or Ancestors, natural, unnatural,
casual or judicial and that for ever. [1641.]

LEATHER.
THis Court considering the several Deceits and Abuses which in other places
have been, and are commonly practiced by the Tanners, Curriers, and workers of
Leather, as also the abuses and inconveniences which accrue to the several
Members of this Commonwealth, by Leather not sufficiently Tanned and Wrought,
which is occasioned by the negligence and unskilfulness of those several
Tradesmen, which before, in and after, it is in the hand of the Tanner may be
much bettered or impaired; for prevention whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Butchers, Corritis may
not Tan
That no person using or occupying the Feat and Mystery of a Butcher, Currier
or Shoemaker by himself or any other, shall use or exercise the Feat or Mystery
of a Tarner, on pain of the forfeiture of six shillings eight pence for every
Hide or Skin by him or them so Tanned, whilst he or they shall use or occupy
any of the Mysteries aforesaid.

Nor shall any Tanner during his using the said Trade of Tanning, use or occupy
the Feat or Mystery of either Butcher, Currier, or Shoemaker, by himself or any
other, upon pain of the like forfeiture.

Nor shall any Butcher by himself or any other person, Casting of hides forfelt
12 d.
Gash or Cut any hide of Ox, Bull, Steer, or Cow, in fleaing thereof, or
otherwise, whereby the same shall be impaired or hurt, on pain of forfeiting
twelve pence for any such Gash, or Cut in any Hide or Skin.

Nor shall any person or persons henceforth, Only Tanners may but few hides
Bargain, Buy, make any Contract, or bespeak any tough Hide or Ox, Bull, Steer
or Cow, in the Hair, but only such persons as have and do use and exercise the
Art of Tanning.

2. Nor shall any person or persons, Leather not to be over (...) or
insufficiently Tanned
using or which shall use the Mystery or faculty of Tanning at any time or
times hereafter, offer to put to sale any kind of Leather, which shall be
insufficiently or not thoroughly Tanned, or which has been over limed, or burnt
in the limes, or which shall not have been after the Tanning thereof, well and
thoroughly dried, upon pain of forfeiting that whole Hide, half Hide, or other
piece of Leather, Penalty.
wherein one sixteenth part shall be sound by the Searcher or Sealer of Leather
(lawfully appointed) to be either over limed or insufficiently Tanned, or not
thoroughly dried as aforesaid.

Nor shall any person using the Mystery of Tanning as aforesaid, set any of
their Fats in Tan-hills, or other places where the Woozes or Leather put to
Tanne in the same, shall or may take any unkind heats, nor shall put any
Leather into any hot or warm Woozes whatsoever, on pain of twenty pounds for
every such offense.

3. Nor shall any person or persons, Curriers duty
using or occupying the Mystery or faculty of Currying, Curry any kind of
Leather, except it be well and thoroughly Tanned; nor shall Curry any Hide being
not thoroughly dried after his wet season, in which wet season, he shall not use
any stale, urine, or any other deceitful or subtle mixture, thing, way or
means, to corrupt or hurt the same; nor shall Curry any Leather meet for outer
sole Leather with any other then good hard Tallow, nor with any less of that
then the Leather will receive; nor shall Curry any kind of Leather meet for
upper Leather and inward Soles, but with good and sufficient stuff, being
fresh, and not salt, and thoroughly liquored, till it will receive no more; nor
shall (...) or scald any Hide or Leather in the Currying, but shall work the
same sufficiently in all points and respects, on pain of forfeiture for every
such offense, or act done contrary to the true meaning of this Order, Penalty.
the full value of every such Hide marred by his evil Workmanship or Handling,
which shall be judged by two or more sufficient and honest skilful persons,
Curriers or others on their Oath given to them for that end, by any Magistrate.

4. And every Town where need is or shall be, Searchers of Leather to be sworn
shall choose one or two persons of the most honest and skilful within their
several Town-ships, and present them unto the Country Court, or one Magistrate,
who shall appoint and swear the said persons, by their discretion, to make
search and view within the precincts of their limits, in any House, Shop or
Warehouse, where they conceive such Leather may be, whether wrought into Shoos,
Boots, or otherwise, as often as they shall think meet and need shall (...) who
shall have a Mark or Seal prepared by each Town for that purpose; and the said
Searchers, or one of them shall keep the same, and therewith shall Seal such
Leather as they shall find sufficient in all respects and no other. And if the
said Searchers, or any of them, shall find any Leather sold or offered to be
sold, brought or offered to be Searched of Sealed, which shall be Tarned, To
seize all defective Leather.
Wrought, Converted or Used contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
Order:

It shall be lawful for the said Searchers or any of them to seize all such
Leather and to retain the same in their (...) and if the owner shall not submit
to the Judgment of the Officer or Officers, the said Officer to sezing the
same, shall within three days, call to him four or six men, honest and skilful
in such were to view the (...) the presence of the party (or without him having
notice thereof) who shall certify upon their Oaths unto the next County Court
of that Shire, of unto one of the Magistrates the defect of the said Leather.

The like power shall the said Searchers have, Searching Leather made into
Shoos and Boots.
to search all Leather wrought into shoos or Boots, as also to seize all such
as they find to be made of insufficient Leather, or not well and sufficiently
wrought up:

And if any Searcher of Sealer of Leather, Searchers default
shall refuse with convenient speed, to seal any Leather sufficiently Tanned,
Wrought and Used according to the true meaning of this Order, Penalty
or shall Seal that which shall be insufficient, then every such Searcher and
Sealer of Leather, shall forfeit for every such offense, the full value of so
much as shall be insufficiently Tanned.

And the Fees for Searching and Sealing of Leather, shall be one penny a Hide
for any parcel less then fire, and for all other parcels, after the rate of six
pence a Dickar, which the Tanner shall pay upon the Sealing of the said Leather
from time to time.

5. Lastly, It is Ordered by the Authority aforesaid, That the several fines
and forfeitures in this Order mentioned, shall be equally divided into three
parts and distributed, as, viz. one third part to the common Treasury of the
Shire wherein the offense is committed, another third part to the common
Treasury of the Town ship where the offender inhabiteth, and the other third
part to the Seizer or Seizers of such Leather, Shoos, or Boots as is
insufficiently Tanned, Curried, or Wrought from time to time. [1642, 51.]

Liberties Common.
IT is Ordered, Liberty at public Assemblies
by this Court Decreed and Declared; That every man whether Inhabitant or
Forreigner, free or not free, shall have liberty to come to any public Court,
Council or Town meeting, and either by speech or writing, to move any lawful,
seasonable or material Question, or to present any necessary Motion, Complaint,
Petition, Fill or Information, whereof that Meeting has proper cognizance, so
it be done in convenient time, due Order and respective Manner. [1641.]

2. Every Inhabitant who is an House holder, Fishing and Fowling
shall have free Fishing and Fowling in any great Ponds, Bays, Coves and
Rivers, so far as the ^ea Ebbes and Flows within the precincts of the Town
where they dwell, unless the Freemen of the same Town or the General Court have
otherwise appropriated them:

Provided, that no Town shall appropriate to any particular person or persons,
any great Pond, containing more then ten Acts of Land, and that no man shall
come upon another propriety without their leave, otherwise then as hereafter
expressed.

The which clearly to determine;

It is Declared, That in all Creeks, Coves and other places about and upon Salt
water, where the Sea Ebbs and Flows, the Proprietor, or the Land adjoining,
shall have Propriety to the Low Water mark, where the Sea does not Ebb above a
hundred Rods, and not more wheresoever it Ebbs further,

Provided that such Proprietor, shall not by this liberty have power to stop or
hinder the passage of Boats or other Vessels, in or through any Sea, Creeks or
Coves, to other men's Houses of Lands.

And for great Ponds lying in Common, Liberty to pass (...) and row!
though within the Bounds of some Town, it shall be free for any man to fish
and foul there, and may pass and repass on foot through any man's propriety for
that end, so they trespass not upon any man's Corn or Meadow. [1641, 47.]

3. Every man of, or within this Jurisdiction, Liberty to remove out of the
Jurisdiction
shall have free liberty (notwithstanding any Civil Power) to remove both
himself and his Family, at their pleasure out of the same, Provided there be no
legal impediment to the contrary. [1641.]

LYING.
WHereas Truth in Words, as well as in Actions is required of all men,
especially of Christians, who are the professed Servants of the God of Truth;
And whereas all Lying is contrary to Truth, and some sort of Lies are not only
sinful (as all Lies are) but also pernicious to the public Weal, and injurious
to particular persons;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, Age of discretion
14 years
That every person of the age, of discretion (which is accounted fourteen
years,) who shall wittingly and willingly make, or publish any Lie, which may
be pernicious to the Public Weal, or tending to the damage or injury of any
particular person, or with intent to deceive and abuse the People with false
News and Reports, and the same duly proved in any Court, or before any one
Magistrate (who has hereby power granted to hear and determine all offenses
against this Law) such person shall be fined for the first offense ten
shillings, first offense to, (...) or stock.
(...) if the party be unable to pay the same, then to be set in the Stocks, so
long as the said Court or Magistrate shall appoint in some open place, not
exceeding two hours.

For the second offense in that kind, second offense (...)
whereof any shall be legally convicted, shall pay the sum of twenty shillings
or be whipped upon the naked Body, not exceeding ten stripes.

And for the third offense forty shillings, Third Offense
or if the party be unable to pay, then to be whipped with more stripes, not
exceeding fifteen.

And if yet any shall offend in like kind, (...) offense
and be legally convicted thereof, such person Male or Female, shall be fined
ten shillings a time more then formerly, or if the party so offending be unable
to pay, then to be whipped with five or six more stripes then formerly, not
exceeding forty at any time.

The aforesaid fines shall be leavied, or stripes inflicted either by the
Marshal of that Jurisdiction, or Constable of the Town where the offense is
committed, according as the Court or Magistrate shall direct.

And such fines so leavied shall be paid to the Treasury of the Shire where the
cause is tried.

And if any person shall find himself grieved with the Sentence of any such
Magistrate out of Court, Liberty to Appeal
he may Appeal to the next Court of the same Shire, giving sufficient security
to prosecute his Appeal, and abide the Order of the Court, If causeless doubly
fined
and if the said Court shall judge his Appeal causeless, he shall be double
fined, and pay the charges of the Court during his Action, or corrected by
whipping as aforesaid, not exceeding forty stripes, and pay the costs of the
Court, and party complaining or informing, and of the Witnesses in the case.

And for all such as being under age of discretion, that shall offend in Lying
contrary to this Order, Under age to be corrected by Parents
their Parents or Masters shall give them due correction, and that in the
presence of some Officer, if any Magistrate shall so appoint; Provided always,
that no person shall be barred of his just action of slander, or otherwise, by
any proceeding upon this Order. [1645.]

MANSLAUGHTER.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; A man may kill in his
own defense
That if any person in the just and necessary defense of his life, or the life
of any other, shall kill any person attempting to Rob or Murder in the Field
or Highway, or to break into any dwelling house, if he conceive he cannot with
safety of his own person otherwise take the Felon or Assailant, or bring him to
Trial, he shall be holden blameless. [1647.]

MARITIME AFFAIRS.
WHereas through the Blessing of God upon this Jurisdiction, the Navigation and
Maritime Affairs thereof, is grown to be a considerable Interest, the well
management whereof, is of great concernment to the public Weal; For the better
Ordering the same for the future, and that there may be known Laws and Rules
for all sorts of persons employed therein, according to their several stations
and capacities, and that there may be one Rule for the guidance of all Courts
in their Proceedings, in distributive justice;

This Court does Order, and be it Ordered by the Authority thereof;

SECT. I.
That whereas there is many times differences between Owners of Ships, Minor
part owners to be (...) by the major part
Ketches, Barques and other Vessels, in setting forth their several parts,
whereby damage does accrue to the particular concernment of Owners, and if not
prevented, may be a great obstruction of Trade, where there are several Owners
concerned, as Owners in Ship, Ketch, Barque or other Vessel whatsoever, used
for Traffic, Commerce, Fishing, Logge, Board, Wood or Stone, Carriage upon
Salt or Fresh Water, all such Owners of lesser part, shall be concluded for the
setting forth of his part, by the major part of the whole concerned, such
Owners so concluded, having notice given them of the meeting for such
conclusion, if they be nigh hand; and in case of any Owner refusing, or by
reason of neglect or absence, or not able to provide for the setting forth his
part, the Master of such Ship or Vessel may take up upon the Bottom, for the
setting forth of the said part, the which being defrayed, the remainder of the
income of such part to be paid by the Master to the said Owner.

SECT. II.
And in case of Fraightment, Owners refusing to (...) public (...) etc.
where any Owner shall refuse to assent to the letting out of Ship or Vessel,
where he is interested, such dissenter shall manifest it by some public act of
protest, before the signing of charter party, except the Master or the rest of
the Owners, or both, conceal from him or them their actings, then his or their
protest after charter party signed by themselves or agents, shall be taken for
legal dissent, yet not to hinder the proceed of the Ship or Vessel, but that
those so sending her forth shall be liable to respond his part upon ensurance
according to the Custom of Merchants, which ensurance is to be defalked out of
that part of hire, due for such owners which dissented.

SECT. III.
Whereas Masters of Ships or other Vessels, have their Owners live part in one
Country and part in another, whereby they have in themselves not only
opportunity; and some made use thereof in their own persons, to represent the
major part of the Owners in the place where be comes;

It is therefore Ordered, Masters to have but single votes.
that such Master shall not be taken to have Vote in the ordering of such
Vessel further then his own interest, except he make it appear to the rest of
the Owners, where he is, that he is Authorized under the hands of such Owners
absent, and then he is to have Votes according to the proportion of parts he so
stands for, and the majority of parts are to carry it as before; nevertheless
it is to be understood, that any Owner has power to make sale of his part,
either to the rest of the Owners, or others, as may be most to his own
advantage, and if any Master shall presume to act contrary hereunto, what
damage shall be sustained by the rest of the Owners, the Master shall be liable
to make good, it being duly proved against him.

SECT. IV.
All Masters taking charge, as Masters of Ships or other Vessels, and not being
sufficient to discharge his place, or that through negligence, or otherwise,
Penalty of Masters and Mariners non-attendance on board.
shall imbezel the Owners or Imployers Stock, or time, or that shall suffer his
men to neglect their due attendance on board, both by day and night, especially
when or whilst Merchants Goods are on board, and that Himself or Mate be not
on board every night, to see good Orders kept, upon defect therein, such Master
shall be liable to pay the damage that shall accrue by such neglect, it being
duly proved against him.

SECT. V.
For the Masters better securing their men to them, and to prevent all Coven,
Masters to make particular agreement with Seamen
they shall make clear agreements with their Mariners, and Officers for their
wages, and those agreements enter into a Book, and take the several men's hands
thereto, a copy whereof the Master as a Portlige Bill shall leave with their
Owners if required of them, before their setting sail upon the Voyage, and all
such agreements, the Master shall make good to the Seamen, and such Ship or
Vessel as they sail in, shall be liable for to make good the same.

SECT. VI.
All Masters of greater or lesser Vessels, Masters to make due provisions etc.
shall make due and meet provisions of Victuals and Drink for their Seamen, or
Passengers, according to the laudable custom of our English Nation, as the
Custom and Capacity of the places they sail from will admit, upon penalty of
paying damages sustained for neglect thereof.

SECT. VII.
That no Master shall Ship any Seaman or Mariner that is shipped before by
another Master to Imployer upon a Voyage, No Masters to entertain Seamen not
discharged.
nor shall any S^a-man ship himself to any other man, until he be discharged
from him that shipped him first, Nor seamen to enter themselves till cleared etc.
upon penalty of him that entertains him to pay one months pay, that such
Seaman agrees for, as also of such Seaman shipping himself to pay one months
pay that he agrees for; the half thereof to be paid to the use of the poor of
the Town or place where the offense is committed, the other half to the
complainer or informer.

SECT. VIII.
No Master of Ship or Vessel shall sail into any Haven or Port, Masters
prohibited from sailing into any Port but what bound to.
except necessitated thereunto by Wind or Weather, or for want of provision, or
for security from Pirates, but such Port as by charter party, or his Bill of
Lading he is bound unto, until he has delivered his Goods according to his
engagement; and in case any Master shall take in goods for more Ports and
Places then one, he shall declare himself so to do, to those that Freight upon
him, and in case he shall voluntarily go to any other Port or Harbor then he
is obliged to as above, if damage to the Merchants goods happen thereby, such
Master shall make good the same, it being duly proved against him.

SECT. IX.
Any Master hired out or employed by his Owners upon any Voyage, Masters may
alter their voyages in case,
receiving advice from his imployers, that alteration of the Voyage when they
are abroad, may be much for their security and advantage, by going to some
other port, Seaman Contract to stand good.
the Master seeing meet to close with that advice, the Mariners shall not
hinder his proceed, unless where any of the Seamen shall have made a
particular contract with the Master to the Contrary, Provided that they be not
carried to stay out above one year, (...) be carried to any place where they
may be liable to be pressed into a service they are not willing unto.

SECT. X.
Masters shall see that their Officers and Mariners be duly paid their Wages
according to agreement made with them, Masters to pay wages according to
agreement.
upon the finishing of their Voyage, without delay or trouble, upon penalty of
paying damages for neglect, and all costs that the Seamen shall be at for
recovering the same.

SECT. XI.
Whereas many times Masters take in Merchants Goods on board their Ships or
Vessels upon ^raight, when yet they are not merely fitted with suitable
Tackling and Seamen for the security of such Ships or Vessels, and Goods;

It is Ordered, Masters, Ships at Seamen to bear loss of goods demnified by
their neglect or want of Ground back.
That in case any Master of Ship or Vessel, after he has Laden upon his Ship
or Vessel any Merchants Goods to be transported, shall for want of sufficient
ground tackle (if to be had) or because of want of sufficient men being on
board, come a shore to the damage of such Merchants or Fraighters in their
Goods, the Ship shall be liable to make good such damages; and in case the
defect appear to be in the Master and Men both, or either, the Owners shall
recover such damage from them.

SECT. XII.
Where any Ship-Master has Mored his Ship or Vessel, none other shall come so
neat to him first Mored as to do him damage, Damage upon (...) when (...) fall
foul
or receive damage by him, upon the penalty of him so comeing, to make good all
the damage, and to be farther punished if wilfulness or perverseness in the
action be proved against him.

SECT. XIII.
In case any Master of Ship or Vessel under sail, Master (...), etc.
shall run on board any other Ship or Vessel at an Anchor, and damnifie him,
the party of fending shall pay the damage; and such Ship or Vessel as he sails
in shall be liable to arrest for the making good the damage, the damage to be
judged by indifferent men, appointed by the Judges thereof, unless the parties
agree among themselves.

SECT. XIV.
In case of loss of Goods by reason of throwing some over board to ease the
Vessel to save the rest, the Goods thrown over board, shall not be done without
the Master and major part of the companies consent, Goods thrown (...) and
Officers (...) made (...) Av^rage
or at least of the Officers with the Master, which Goods shall be brought into
an Avarage, and the whole loss to be born by Ship, and Goods, and Wages in
proportion that are saved; The like course shall be for cutting of Masts, and
loss thereof, or Boats, Cables or Anchors, as also of Riggin and sails, for
the safety of the whole, the Merchants Goods are to bear a part of the loss.

SECT. XV.
In case a Ship or Vessel, at setting forth proves deficient, and gives over
the Voyage, Damage by an insufficient bottom
the Charges the Merchant has sustained in Shipping and Landing his Goods,
shall be born by the Master and Owners of such Vessel, that presumes to take
Goods into an insufficient Bottom.

SECT. XVI.
Any Ship or Vessel at Sea, receiving damage by the Masters or Mariners
negligence, yet brings the Merchants Goods home, and delivers them
according to Bills Lading, Damage at sea
he shall receive his freight, but if (...) Goods be damnified, the Master of
Mariners shall make good the damage.

SECT. XVII.
If any Ship or Vessel in storm, Damage by ships breaking loose
shall break loose and fall upon another, and do her damage for want of ground
tackle, the Ship breaking loose shall make good the damage; but if it appear
the Master, or Mariners, or both, are negligent of freshing their Hease, or
clearing their Cables they shall pay the damage for such neglect.

SECT. XVIII.
All Mariners being shipped upon a Voyage, Mariners absent without leave
and in pay, they shall duly attend the service of the Masters Ship or Vessel
for the Voyage, and not absent themselves day or night without leave from the
Master, upon forfeit for every offense five shillings.

SECT. XIX.
No Officers or Mariners shall be disorderly or unruly, to occasion
disturbance in the Ship or other Vessel he is shipped upon, Officers or
mariners unruliness.
to hinder or damnifie the Voyage, to be proved by the Master or other
Mariners, or both, upon penalty of paying the damage if able, and in case of
inability to pay, to suffer Corporal punishment, as the nature of the offense
may appear to the Judges, and in case Master or Mariners shall conceal the
offenses of such, and refuse to give in evidences therein, they shall be
amerced or imprisoned, as the Judges shall see meet.

SECT. XX.
If any shall undertake the charge of Pilot, Boat swain, Gunner, or any other
Office, Ignorant Pilots or Officers.
in Ship or other Vessel, and not be able to discharge the duty of the place,
such shall lose their Wages in part or in whole, and be further punished for
their presumption, as the Judges shall see meet.

SECT. XXI.
All Mariners shall keep true Watch at Sea or in Harbor, Watch to be kept
as the Master shall appoint, upon pain of forfeit of twelve pence for every
default, to be defalked out of their wages.

SECT. XXII.
Any Mariner that has entered upon a Voyage, and shall depart and leave the
Voyage, Mariner (...) the Voyage
shall forfeit all his wages, one half to the poor, the other half to the
Master and Owners, and be further punished by Imprisonment or otherwise as the
case may be circumstanced, to be judges by the Magistrate or Magistrates they
are complained to, except such Seaman shall show just cause for his so leaving
the Voyage, and shall procure an Order therefore from Authority.

SECT. XXIII.
If any Mariner shall have received any considerable part of his wages,
Runaway Mariners
and shall run away from the Ship or Vessel he belongs to, and decline the
service of the Master in the prosecution of the Voyage, he shall be pursued as
disobedient Runaway servant, and proceeded with as such a one.

SECT. XXIV.
If any Mariner shall entertain any Person or Persons on Board the Ship or
Vessel he sails in, Mariners entertaining without Masters leave
without the Masters leave, or Masters or Mariners, shall do it at
unseasonable times, he or they shall forfeit twenty shillings, one half to the
Poor, the other half to the Owners.

SECT. XXV.
No Seaman, or Seamen, or Officer shall commit any outrage upon the Master of
any Ship or Vessel, that rate upon the Master
but those so offending shall be severely punished, by fine or other Corporal
punishment, as the fact shall appear to be circumstanced to the Judges that
shall hear it, and as they shall judge meet; If any Officers or Mariners shall
combine against the Master, whereby the Voyage shall be diverted or hindered, or
that damage thereby shall occrue to the Ship and Goods, they shall be punished
with loss of Wages, or otherwise as mutiniers, as the case may require.

SECT. XXVI.
In case any Ship or Vessel be in distress at Sea, by Tempest or other
accident, ships in distress not to be left
the Mariners shall do their utmost endeavor to oss^st the Master in saving
Ship and Goods, and not desert him without apparent hazard appear, that by
their staying they may lose their lives.

SECT. XXVII.
And in case of suffering Shipwreck, Mariners to do their utmost in Shipwreck
to save the Goods
the Mariners are without dispute upon their getting on shore, to do their
utmost endeavors to save the Ship or Vessel, Tackle and Apparel, as also the
Merchants Goods as much as may; out of which they shall have a meet
compensation for their hazard and pains; and any upon conviction of negligence
herein shall be punished.

Marriages and Married Persons.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; L. 2. p. 17.
That no man shall strike his Wife, nor any Woman her Husband, on penalty of
such fine not exceeding ten pounds for one offense, or such Corporal punishment
as the County Court shall determine.

2. For prevention of all wonderful Marriages;

It is Ordered, That henceforth no person shall be joined in Marriage, Three
times (...)
before the intention of the parties proceeding therein, has been three times
published, (...) 14 days
at some time of public Lecture or Town-meeting, in both the Towns where the
parties or either of them do ordinarily (...) or be set up in Writeing upon
some post of their. Meeting house door in public view, there to stand so as it
may easily be read, by the space of fourteen days. [1639.]

3. And whereas God has committed the care and power into the ^^^ds of Parents
for the disposing their Children in Marriage, so that it is against Rule to
seek to draw away the affections of young Maidens, under pretense of purpose of
Marriage, before their Parents have given way and allowance in that respect;
And whereas it is a common practice in di^ers places, for young men irregularly
and disorderly to watch all (...) for their evil purposes, to ins^nuate into
the affections of young Maidens, by comeing to them in places and seos^s
unknown to their Parents for such ends, whereby much evil has gro^n amongst
us, to the dishonor of God, and damage of parties; For pr^^^tion whereof for
time to come;

It is further ordered, (...) of (...) to be made in any m^^d without consent
of parents
That whatsoever person from henceforth, shall endeavor directly or
indirectly, to draw away the Affection of any Maid in this Jurisdiction, under
pretense of Marriage, before he has obtained liberty and allowance from her
Parents or Governors (or in absence of such) of the nearest Magistrate, he
shall forfeit for the first offense (...) pounds, for the second toward the
party ten pounds, Penalty (...)
and be bound to for bare any further attempt and proceedings in that unlawful
design, without or against the allowance aforesaid; And for the third offense
upon information or complaint by such Parents or Governors to any Magistrate,
giving Bond to prosecute the party, he shall be committed to prison, and upon
hearing and Conviction by the next Court, shall be adjudged to continue in
Prison, until the Court of Assistants shall see cause to release him. [1647.]

4. Whereas diverse persons, both Men and Women, living within this
Jurisdiction, whose Wives and Husbands are in England, or elsewhere, by means
whereof, they live under great temptations Lose, and some of them committing
lowe^^^ss and filthiness here amongst us, others make (...) to Women and
attempt Marriage, and some have attained it, and some of them live under
suspicion of uncleanness, and all to the great (...) of God, reproach of
Religion, Commonwealth and cour^^es

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, (...)
for the prevention of all such future evils, That all such married persons as
aforesaid, shall repair to their said Relations by the first opportunity of
shipping, upon the pain or penalty of twenty pounds, except they can show just
cause to the (...) to the next County Court, or Court of Assistants, after they
are Summoned by the Constable there to appear, who are hereby required so to
do, Constable to present such to Court.
upon pain of twenty shillings for every such default wittingly made:

Provided this Order do not extend to such as are come over to make way for
their families, or are in a transient way, only for Traffic or Merchandise for
some small time. [1647.]

5. As the Ordinance of Marriage is honorable amongst all, se should it be
accordingly solemnized;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; Who may solemnize
Marriage.
That no person whatsoever in this Jurisdiction, shall join any persons
together in Marriage, but the Magistrate, or such other as the General Court,
or Court of Assistants shall Authorize in such place, where no Magistrate is
near.

Nor shall any join themselves in Marriage, but before some Magistrate or
person Authorized as aforesaid.

Nor shall any Magistrate or other person Authorized as aforesaid, (...) before
publication
join any persons together in Marriage, or suffer them to join together in
Marriage in their presence, before the parties to be Married have been
published according to Law. [1646.]

IN Answer to the Question; Whether it be lawful for a Men that has buried his
fast Wife, to Marry with her that was his first Wifes natural Sister? The Court
resolves it en the Negative. [1679.]

MARSHAL.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; L. 1. p. 38,57.
That every Marshal shall diligently and faithfully Collect and I Leavy all
such fines and sums of Money, of every person for which he shall have Warrant
form the respective Treasurers, Marshal to leavy all Fines.
or other Authority, which he shall return to the said Treasurer with all
convenient speed, upon penalty of forfeiting two shillings out of his own
Estate, for every pound not Collected or Returned as aforesaid, or such fine as
any Court shall impose upon him for his neglect.

2. And every Marshal shall with all speed and faithfulness leavy the Goods of
every person for which he shall have Warrant, To serve all Executions
by virtue of any Execution granted and signed by the Secretary, or other Clerk
Authorized there into; and the said Goods so Leavied, shall with all convenient
speed, deliver to the Party or Attorney that obtained the Judgment and
Execution, or be liable to make full satisfaction to the party for all damage a
stained by his neglect.

And the said Marshal shall within two Months after the receipt of any such
Execution, so return Execution to the (...)
make Return of the said Execution, with what le has done by virtue thereof
under his hand to the Clerk that granted the same, to be by him kept and
Recorded; and if the Execution be not fully satisfied, the said Clerk shall at
the request of the party, grant Execution for the remainder;

And every Marshal neglecting to make return of Executions as aforesaid, shall
forfeit double to the damage any person concerned therein may sustain by such
neglect.

3. Further the said Marshals shall with like care and faithfulness, L. ^. p.
^5.
serve all Attachments directed to them, virtual not to be (...)
and return the same to the Courts to which they are returnable at the times of
the returns thereof, and henceforth no Marshal shall be Clerk or Recorder of
any Court.

4. And it is hereby Ordered, L. 3. p. 7.
That the Marshals Fees shall be twelve pence in the pound, to be paid by the
respective Treasures, for all fines leavied by the said Marshals, Marshals Fees
and returned to the said Treasurers, and for serving Attachments within one
mile one shilling three pence, to be paid by the party that imploys them; and
for serving Executions twelve pence in the pound, for all sums not exceeding
ten pounds, and for all sums above ten pounds and not exceeding forty pounds,
six pence in the pound more, and for all sums above forty pounds, and not
exceeding one hundred pounds, three pence in the pound more, and one penny in
the pound (...) for all sums above one hundred pounds, out of the Estate of the
person the Execution is served upon, over and above for the execution.

And in all cases, where the aforesaid, Fees for Leavying Executions or Fines,
will not answer the Marshals travail, and other necessary charges, the Marshal
or other Officer employed, shall have power to demand six pence per mile, and
upon refusal, to Leavy the same together with his other Fees.

5. And it is Ordered, A. 53. p. 20
That all Marshals and Constables within this Jurisdiction, shall henceforth
from time to time, allow and pay unto the Marshal General three pence out of
every fifteen pence they receive for serving Attachments, also three pence out
of every shilling due to them, for Leavying of Fines and Executions.

And it is further Ordered, Marshal General his Fees
That the said Marshal General, shall from time to time have, and enjoy to his
own use and benefit, the Custom of two pence per quart upon all such as do, or
shall Retail strong waters, and all such as shall fell under one Gallon at a
time, shall be accounted Retailers, whether Licensed or not, and the one half
of the fine of five pounds of all such persons as shall upon his information or
complaint be convicted to have sold strong waters without License; as also the
sole benefit of the Impost of all strong waters brought into the Country, which
this Court does allow as a meet encouragement and Sallary for the service of
the said Marshal General.

6. Whereas the Marshals and their Deputies have often need of Assistants in
the execution of their Office; L. ^. p. 10


It is Ordered that they and every of them, Marshal (...)
have and shall have the same power to enjoyne and charge any person to aid
them and assist them therein as every Constable has, and whosoever shall
refine, or not yield obedience thereto, shall in our the like penalty that
those do or should do, that Refuse to aid the Constable in his Office.

7. And upon cases of Fines and Assessments to be Leavied, L. ^. p. 45.
and upon Execution in civil Actions, Officer may have upon doors or chens
the Marshal or other Officer shall demand the same of the party at his house
or place of usual abode, and upon refusal or non-paiment, he shall have
power(calling assistance if he see cause) to break open the door of any House,
Ches^, or place where he shall have notice, that any Goods liable to such
Ieavie or Execution shall be, and if he be to take the person, he may do the
like, if upon demand he shall refuse to render himself.

8. And whatever charges the Officer shall necessarily be put unto, upon any
such occasion, Necessary ch^rgeste be leavied
he shall have power to leavie the same as he does the Debt, Fine or Execution,
and where the Officer shall leavie any such Goods upon Execution, as cannot be
conveyed to the place where the party dwells, for whom such Execution shall be
leavied without considerable charge, he shall leavie the said charge also with
the Execution.

The like Order shall be observed in leavying of fines, Goods exempt from
Execution.
Provided, it shall not be lawful for such Officer to leavie any man's necessary
Bedding, Apparel, Tools, or Arms, neither Imploments of House hold, which are
for the necessary upholding of his life, but in such cases, he shall leavie his
land or person according to Law, and in no case shall the Officer be put to
seek out any man's estate further then his place of abode, but if the party will
not discover his Goods or Lands, the Officer may take his person.

9. And it is Ordered, Officer doing wrong to make satisfaction
That if any Officer shall do injury to any by color of his Office, in these
or any other cases, he shall be liable upon complaint of the party wronged, by
Action or information, to make full restitution. [1647.]

Masters, Servants, Laborers.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Servants not to give or
truck
That no servant either Man or Maid, shall either give, sell or truck any
Commodity whatsoever without License from their Masters, during the time of
their service, under pain of fine, or corporal punishment, at the discretion of
the Court as the offense shall deserve.

2. And that all Workmen, Work the whole day
shall work the whole day, allowing convenient time for food and rest.

3. It is also Ordered, That when any Servants shall run from their Masters,
Servants run away to be pursued.
or any other Inhabitants shall privily go away with suspicion of civil
intentions, it shall be lawful for the next Magistrate or the Constable and two
of the chief Inhabitants where no Magistrate is, to press Men and Boats or
Pinnaces at the public charge, to pursue such persons by Sea and Land, and
bring them back by force of Arms.

4. It is also Ordered by the Authority aforesaid; That the Freemen of every
Town, may from time to time as occasion shall require, Wages to be (...)
agree amongst themselves about the prizes and rates of all workmens labor,
and servants wages. And every person inhabiting in any Town, whether Workmen,
Labourer or Servant, shall be bound to the same Rates, which the said I
rec^^en, or the greater part shall bind themselves unto, and whosoever shall
exceed those Rates so agreed, shall be punished by the discretion of the Court
of that shire, according to the quality and measure of the offense; And if any
Town shall have any cause of complaint against the Freemen of any other Town,
for allowing greater Rates or wages then themselves, the County Court of that
Shire shall from time to time, set order therein.

5. And for servants and workmens wages;

It is Ordered, Wages to be paid in court
That they may be paid in Corn, to be valued by two indifferent Freemen,
chosen, the one by the Master the other by the Servant or Workman, who also are
to have respect to the value of the work or service, to be valued
and if they cannot agree, then a third man shall be chosen by the next
Magistrate, or if no Magistrate be in the Town, then by the next Constable,
unless the parties agree the price themselves; Provided, if any Servant or
Workmen agree for any particular payment, then to be paid in specie, or
consideration for default therein; And for all other payments in Corn, if the
parties cannot agree, they shall choose two indifferent men, and if they cannot
agree, then a third as before.

6. It is Ordered, and by this Court Declared; Servants flying cruelty of Mast,
may be harbored
That if any Servant shall flee from the Tyrany and Cruelty of his or her
Master, to the House of any Freeman of the same Town, they shall be there
protected and sustained till due order be taken for their Relief, Provided due
notice thereof be speedily given to their Master from whom they fled, and to
the next Magistrate or Constable where the party so fled is Harbored.

7. Also that no Servant shall be put off for above a year to any other,
Servants not put put of (...) of a Mag.
neither in the life time of their Master, nor after their death by their
Executors or Administrators, unless it be by consent of Authority assembled in
some Court, or two Assistants, or otherwise all, and every such Assignement to
be void in Law.

8. And if any man smite out the Eye or Tooth of his Manservant or Maid
servant, Servants (...) to be (...)
or otherwise maim or much disfigure them (unless it be by mere casualty) he
shall let them go free from his service, and shall allow such further
Recompense as the Court shall adjudge him.

9. And all servants that have served diligently and faithfully, faith^^l
servant rew^ld
to the benefit of their Masters, Seven years, shall not be sent away empty;
And if any have been unfaithful, negligent or unprofitable in their service,
unfaithful p^^thed
notwithstanding the good usage of their Masters, they shall not be dismissed,
till they have made satisfaction according to the judgment of Authority.
[1630,33,35,36,41.]

MALT.
It is Ordered, A. 52. p. 12.
That no Ma^ster or maker of Malt, shall henceforth deliver or pass away any
Malt by him or his procurement made before it be cleansed from the dust and
tail, which arises in the Malting, drying and ordering it in his hands, on
penalty of twelve Pence per Bushel, upon conviction before any Magistrate or
Court, Malt to be clean (...)
the one half to the Informer, the other half to the Country.

This Court taking into serious consideration the great necessity of upholding
the stopie Commodities of this Country, A. 55.
for the supply and support of the Inhabitants thereof, and finding by
experience the bringing in of Malt, Wheat, Barley, Biscuit, Beef, Meal and
Flower, (which are the principal Commodities of this Country) from foreign
parts, to be exceeding prejudicial to the (...) of this place and people here;

Have therefore Ordered; That no person whatsoever, No Malt. Wheat, biscuit,
Be^^ is be brought on penalty of (...)
either Inhabitant or Stranger, shall directly or indirectly after the first of
March next, import into this Jurisdiction from any part of Europe, any of the
aforesaid Provisions, under the penalty of Confiscation of the same (except it
be for the Ships provisions) that shall be so imported, landed, set to sail*
or otherwise disposed, contrary to the intent of this Order.

And it is further Ordered and Enacted, Marshal or Constable to seize it.
That all Marshals and Constables where no Marshal is in the several Towns in
this Jurisdiction, are hereby required and empowered to make diligent search,
within their respective Towns and Harbors where any such Provisions are
Landed, Sold or otherwise disposed of, The fourth part for their pains
and to make seizure of the same for the use of the Country, for which each and
every Marshal and Constable shall have allowed them, one fourth part of what
shall be so seized, for their care and pains herein.

And all former Laws concerning Impost upon any of the Provisions aforesaid,
are hereby Repealed. [1652, 51.]

IT is Ordered, Repealed
That the Law prohibiting bringing in of Malt from foreign parts is Repealed,
so far as it respects the Importation of Malt.

Mills, Millers.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Millers To'd
That no Miller shall take above one sixteenth part of the Corn he grindes; To
have weights
and that evey Miller shall have always ready in his Mill, Weights and Scales,
provided at his own charge, to weigh Corn to and from Mill if men desire it.
[1635. 38.]

MILITARY.
FOrasmuch as the well ordering of the Militia is, a matter of great
concernment to the safety and welfare of this Commonwealth;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Militia commanded by
Majors
That the Military forces of Suffolk, Middlesex and Essex, shall be under the
command of the Sergeant Majors Chosen in each County; and that the Militia of
Norfolk shall be commanded by the Major of the Regiment of Essex, L. 2. p. 12.
Provided the said Militia be not drawn out of the said County to any
Regimental exercise: And if any of the said Majors be removed or discharged
their places, the Major General for the time being, shall within one Month at
furthest after such change, send forth his Warrant to each Town in the Shire,
to make choice of a Major in manner following, A. 56. p. 12.
viz. The Freemen, Householders, and such Soldiers as have taken the Oath of
Fidelity, before the fifteenth of May, [1656.] and no other, being met together
in their Respective Towns (by virtue of such Warrant from the Major General,
Majors how and by whom chosen
or from the General Court) shall give in their Votes for such a person as they
judge fit for the Office of Sergeant Major of that Regiment, which Votes shall
be sealed up by the chief Military Officer of the place, or by the Constable
(as the Warrant shall direct,) and sent by some Freeman, chosen by the Town, to
carry them to the Shire Town of that County, at such time as the Warrant shall
direct, where the said Votes shall be opened and numbered in the presence of one
or two of the nearest Magistrates and the said Freemen, and he that shall have
the greater number of Votes being a Freeman, shall be presented by one of the
said Magistrates unto the Major General, within one Week after such Election,
who shall by giving the Oath accustomed, and delivering him a Commission,
Instal and Confirm such Sergeant Major in his place.

2. And every Sergeant Major is hereby Ordered and Required, Regimental
meetings once in three years
once in three years to draw his Regiment, both Horse and Foot, in one
convenient place in the County, and to instruct and Exercise the Officers and
Soldiers in Military Discipline, according to his best skill and ability; for
which service he shall have twenty pounds allowed him out of the Treasury of
the Country for his pains and charges, for every such Meeting: Also every
Sergeant Major, may as often as he shall see cause send his Warrants to require
the chief Officer of each Company in his Regiment, Meeting of the Officers of
the (...)
to meet at such time and place as he shall appoint, and there with them to
confer, and give in command such Orders as shall by them be judged meet for the
better Ordering and Settling the particular Companies in Military Exercises; and
to impose fines and penalties upon such Delinquents as have not given
satisfaction to their Captain or chief Officer, for all defects either in their
Arms, Ammunition, Appearances, Watches, Offenses, etc.

And the Sergeant Major shall with the consent of the said Officers, give Order
to the Clerks of the several Companies, to take distress for the same within
one Month after such Order.

3. And for the settling particular Military Officers in every town of this
jurisdiction;

It is Ordered, Nomination of Officers of companies
that every Freeman, House holder and listed Soldier, having taken the Oath of
Fidelity as above said, (and no other) shall have liberty to give his Vote for
the Nomination of Military Officers of that Town or Company where he dwells; To
be allowed by the County Courts
Provided they be Freemen, and all persons so Nominated shall be presented to
the Court of that County, to be allowed and confirmed in their respective
Offices, unless the said Court shall see cause to the contrary; and no person
shall be acknowledged or accepted as an Officer of any Company without the
allowance and approbation of the County Court first had and obtained.

4. And in every Town where there is sixty four Soldiers (liable to attend
constant Training) besides the Officers, A. 93. p. 13.
such number of Soldiers shall be accounted a Foot Company, 64 Soldiers to be
a Company
and have liberty of Nomination of all the Officers of a Foot Company, and
shall have two Drums.

And in smaller Towns, where there shall be a less number then sixty four as
aforesaid, they shall have liberty of Nomination of Sergeants, and other
inferior Officers only, to teach and instruct them in the exercise of Arms.

And the Major of the Regiment shall have power to Order and Regulate the
smaller Towns, and to join them into one complete Company, (as occasion may
require) which shall have liberty of choice of all Officers as aforesaid. And
every Captain, Capt. Lie^. Ensi. to have commis.
Lieutenant and Ensign, shall have Commission from the General Court, for the
holding of their places, and exercise of their duties.

5. The said Military Officers of every Company, shall take care that their
Soldiers be well and completely Armed, and shall appoint what Arms every
Soldier shall serve with; Capt. to appoint the Sold. Arms
Provided two thirds of each Company be Musketeers, and those which serve with
Pikes, have Corslets and Head pieces: To exercise 6 days yearly
And they shall exercise their Soldiers Six days every year, when the Captain
or chief Officer shall appoint, by giving public warning thereof, three or
four days before the day of Exercise; Provided, that so many days as shall be
expended by Order of the Major of the Regiment, in the Exercise of the
Regiment, and in marching to and from the place of Exercise, shall be accounted
as part of their six days.

6. Also the three chief Officers of each Company, shall have power to punish
such Soldiers, as shall commit any disorder or contempt upon any day or time
of Military Exercise, or upon any Watch or Ward, 3 chief office to punish
disorders of Soldiers
by Stocks, Bilboes, or any other usual Military punishment, or by fine, not
exceeding twenty shillings, or may commit such Offender to the Constable, to be
carried before some Magistrate, who may bind him over to the next Court of
that Shire, if the cause so require, or commit him to Prison.

7. Every Foot Soldier shall be completely Armed and Furnished, the Pike man
with a good Pike well headed, Soldiers how to be armed
Corslet, Head-peice, Sword and Snapsack; the Musketeers with a good fixed
Musket, not under Bastard Musket Bore, nor under three foot nine inches in
length, nor above four foot three inches long, with a Pinning wire, Worm,
Scourer, and Mould, fitted to the Bore of his Musket, also with a good Sword,
Rest, Bandeliers, one pound of Powder, twenty Bullets, (...)
and two fathom of Match, upon the penalty of ten shillings for every defect;
And all other Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, (...)
except Magistrates and Elders of Churches, and other in a (...)
the President, Fellows and Students of Harvard College, shall always be
provided of Arms, and furnished as aforesaid, under the penalty aforesaid.

8. And if any person cannot procure Arms or Ammunition, Waring Arms, (...)
with such means as he has, if he shall bring to the Clerk so much Corn as by
apprizement of the said Clerk and two other indifferent men (whereof one to be
chosen by the party) shall be adjudged of greater value by a fifth part then
such Arms or Ammunition is of, he shall be excused of the penalty for want of
Arms until he be provided; And the Clerk shall endeavor to furnish him so soon
as may be by sale of such Goods so disposited, rending the party the overplus.

But if any person shall not be able to provide himself Arms and Ammunition,
(...) with Arms.
through mere poverty, if he be single, he shall be put to service by some
Magistrate, or the Constable shall provide him Arms and Ammunition, and shall
appoint him when and with whom to earn it out.

9. Every person above the age of sixteen years, shall duly attend all
Military Exercise and Service, A. 52. p. 13.
as Training, Watching, Warding, under the penalty of five shillings for every
fault, persons except from Training
except Magistrates, Deputies and Officers of Court, Elders and Deacons, the
President, Fellows, Students and Officers of Harvard College, and professed
Schoolmasters, Physicians and Chyrurgeons allowed by two Magistrates,
Treasurers, Surveyor General, Public Notary, Masters of Ships and other
Vessels above twenty Tuns, Fishermen constantly employed at all fishing
seasons, constant Herdsmen and such other as for bodily infirmity or other just
cause, shall by any County Court, A. 56. p. 12
or Court of Assistants (after notice of the parties desire to the chief
Officer of the Company to which he belongs) be discharged; also one servant of
every Magistrate and Teaching Elder, and the Sons and Servants of the Major
General for the time being, also such as dwell at remote Farms, or have a Ferry
to pass, shall be exempt from Watching in the Town, but shall Watch and Ward as
their chief Officer shall direct otherwise; and all Farms distant above four
miles from the place of exercising the Company, A. 53.
or have a Ferry to pass over, that have above twenty Acres of Land in Tillage,
and twenty Head of great Cattle upon such Farm, shall upon reasonable allowance
to the Company, have one man exempted from ordinary Trainings.

10. And it is Ordered, ^spans Band
That in every Town or Company there shall be chosen (as other Military
Officers are chosen) a discreetable man to be Clerk of the Band, and if any
shall refuse to accept the place, or to take his Oath, To call (...)
he shall pay to the use of the Company forty shillings and the Company shall
choose another, and all that refuse the place or Oath as aforesaid, shall pay
forty shillings a piece, till one does accept the place, and he that does hold
the place, shall have a fourth part of the fines for his labor. And the Clerk
shall upon every Training day twice, once in the forenoon, as also in the
afternoon, at such time as the Captain or chief Officer then in the field shall
appoint, call or cause to be called over, the lists of the names of all the
Soldiers, and shall give attendance in the Field all the day (except he have
leave from his Captain or chief Officer) to take notice of any defect by
absence of Soldiers or other offenses that may fall out in time of Exercise.

And the said Clerk shall twice every year view all Arms and Ammunition of the
Company, To view the Arms
and take notice that every Soldier be furnished according to this Law; to
which end, by direction of the chief Officer, he shall give notice to the
Soldiers, that upon such a Training day appointed, they are required to bring
(in the forenoon) all their Arms and Ammunition into the field, where they shall
be approved or disallowed by the judgment of the said chief Officer then in
the field; And further the said Clerk shall once in the year at least, Survey
the Arms of all other Inhabitants, and see (...) all (except as before
excepted) be provided in their Houses with Arms and Ammunition, and upon every
occasion, he is required to use all diligence to view every mars Arms, whether
they be completely furnished with all Arms and Ammunition as the Law requires.

And the said Clerk shall within one week after any default made, Give notice
to the Captain of all defects
or defect observed, present a List of the Names of all that are Delinquent,
and of their defects to the Captain or chief Officer of the Company: and shall
without partiality demand and receive all fines due for such defects, to (...)
with in ten days
according to this Law; which if any shall refuse to pay, he shall make
distress upon the Goods of such persons, as shall not within ten days after
their default be discharged, or have their fines mitigated by the Captain or
chief Officer of the Company, unless the said chief Officer shall see cause to
refer the Judgment and Determination of such default to the Major and chief
Officer of the Regiment at their meeting.

And the Clerk shall with the advice of the chief Officers of the Company, To
dispose of ones for the use of the Company
speedily lay out all fines received or leavied, in Ensigns, Dreems; Ha^berts,
C^ndle and Word for (...) Watch, or provide Powder and Arms for the poorer
sort, or otherwise as in their discretion they shall judge meet, for the use of
the Company.

11. And for the better ordering the Militia in the several Towns, in e^ses of
any sudden exigent;

It is Ordered, A. ^2. p. 14. and 53.
That there be a Committy of Militia in every Town, and that the Committy of
Militia in Boston, shall consist of the Magistrates living in the Town, the
chief Officer of the Horse, if living is Town, Committy of militia in the
several Towns.
and the chief Officer of each company of Feet, or the greatest part of them,
and in sudden exigents, any three of them may act when due means being used a
greater number cannot be assembled; which Committy shall have a Commission, who
shall also have power to appoint a Military Watch, when they shall see cause,
for the safety of the Town and Country; And Charlstown, Salem and I^swich shall
have the like Committy of Militia, who shall have like power by Commission: and
for all other Towns where there is one or more Magistrates, Their power
the said Magistrate or Magistrates, with the three chief Military Officers;
and where no Magistrate dwells, the Deputy or Deputies of the General Court,
with the three chief Officers of such Town, or any three of them, shall be the
Committy of Militia for such Town, and have power in all sudden exigents, to
order and dispose the Militia of their Town, for their own safety an defense,
till further Order be taken, and upon Alarm, or any invasion, to strengthen
their quarters, and to hinder any approaching or assailing them in a way of
Hostility, by bearing Arms in Companies, or refusing upon such approaches to
come under command, or give an account what they are, and wherefore they are in
such posture.

And every such Committy, in case of Alarm
where any such Alarm shall be given or received, or shall be assaulted as
aforesaid, is required with all possible speed to give intelligence to the next
Magistrate, and the Major of the Regiment where such Alarm is taken, or assault
made of the reason thereof, and state of the place so assaulted.

And the said Major is hereby required to send forth to procure intelligence of
the estate of any place so Alarmed or Assaulted, To give notice to the Major
and to Order Assistance to them from any other company or companies of his
Regiment, Major to Order Assistance
as the case shall require, and shall give constant intelligence to the
Government of Council of the Country, and Major General of the state of such
adairs with all convenient speed.

But no Major of any Regiment shall march with his Regiment out of the County
wherein he has command, To give intelligence to be Council and Major General
no^ cause any part thereof so to do without Order from the General Court,
Council of the Commonwealth, or Major General, except it be in pursuit of the
Enemy upon a Rout.

And in case of Death or absence of the Major, Major not to lead (...) Regiment
out of the County
upon any such occasion of service, the eldest Captain of the Regiment shall
supply his place till further order be taken; and the seniority of all Captains
and chief Officers of every Company in the several Regiments, Seniority of
Captains
shall be accounted according to the seniority of the Towns or Companies they
command, except the Commanders of the four Companies of Boston, A. 53. (...)
being of equal standing, A. 56. p. 12.
the seniority of the Captains shall be according to the priority of their
Commissions.

It is further Ordered, Committy to prets Soldiers
That henceforth all Warrants for impressing and raising of Soldiers, for any
expedition, shall be directed to the Committy of Militia of the several Towns,
who may execute the same by the Constable, A. 54. p. 3.
and the said Committy are hereby empowered and required to suppress all raising
of Soldiers, but such is shall be by the Authority of this Government.

And in all Towns where there are great Artillery, A. 55.
Forts or Batteries, the Committy of Militia, and Select men of the Town, shall
mount such Guns, To take care of great Guns
and fit them with appurtenances for service, and repair such Forts or
Batteries as they shall see necessary for the security of the Town, the charge
whereof the Select men are hereby empowered and required to leavie on the Estate
of the Inhabitants, and repair Forts
according to the Proportion of the Country Rate, to be collected by the
Constables of the said Town, for the use aforesaid.

WHereas in the Law tit. Military, Sect. 11. the three chief Military Officers
in each Town except Boston, together with the Magistrates, or Deputies thereof,
are appointed a Committy of Militia for such Towns will out mentioning the
Officers of the Horse, to be of that Committy;

This Court does Declare, That the Commission Officers of the Horse in the Town
where they dwell, Committy of Militia
shall be added thereto, and hereby are appointed and empowered to be of the
Committy of Militia for such Towns where they dwell; Any Law or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding. [1664.]

12. It is Ordered, Military watches (...)
That the Military Watches shall be set by beat of Drum half an hour after Sun
set, by the Military Officers in such places as they shall judge most
convenient, and shall be Ordered and Disposed by their command and direction;
And if any man shall shoot off a Gun after the Watch is set (except in case of
Alarm) he shall forfeit forty shillings.

The said Watch or Sentinels being set, Instruction and duty of Sentinels
shall examine all persons that shall come with in their Watch or Round, and
all they suspect they shall carry to their Guard, there to be kept till
morning, and before they be dismissed, they shall carry them to their chief
Offices to be examined and proceeded with according to law;

And if the Sentinel or Watch shall meet with such persons as shall be too
strong for them, or by (...) carriage shall give just cause of suspicion, or
will not submit to their command, or if they shall either draw upon them, or
offer any such affront in Words or Actions, as shall put them in fear or
hazard of their lives, they shall discharge upon them, and retire with speed
to the Guard and raise an Alarm; Provided always that in time of peace, when
the Council of War, or the chief officers of the Company shall not apprehend
present danger by the nearness of an Enemy, it shall not be in the liberty of
any Sentinel to hazard the killing of any person, except in his own necessary
defense; but if the cause require it, he shall retire to the Guard and raise an
Alarm by discharging his Musket and crying Arm, What shall be taken for an
Alarm.
Arm, which shall be taken for an Alarm by the Soldiers of that Town; and if
there appear danger to the chief Officer, he shall either strengthen his Guard,
or give a general Alarm, which shall be either the distinct discharge of three
Muskets, or the continued beat of the Drum, or firing a ^eacon, or the
discharge of a piece of Ordnance and two Muskets after it, Not answering the
Alarm, (...)
any of which in the night shall be accounted a general Alarm, which every
Soldier is immediately to answer, by repai^ing Armed to his Colors or Court
of Guard, upon the penalty of five pounds.

13. And upon any expedition, Smiths to repair Arms
upon occasion of any Enemy, or any present Military Service to be done, all
Smiths and other needful workmen, shall immediately repair such Arms and other
Necessaries as shall be brought unto them for that end, for which, they shall
not refuse such pay as the Country affords, Penalty
upon the penalty of five pounds for every such default, and for such neglect
at any other time more then ten days, shall forfeit for every such Offense ten
shillings.

14. The Surveyor General shall yearly give an account of the common stock of
Powder and Ammunition to the Council, A. 56. p. 12.
that the General Court being by them informed, may out of the public Treasury
make a constant supply according to the need of the Country.

15. Every Town shall be provided of a sufficient Watch house, under the
penalty of five pounds, L. 2. p. 1.
and shall also provide at their own charges (...) safe and convenient place to
keep all such Powder and Ammunition in, as the chief Military Officer by Order
of the General Court shall appoint, under the penalty of ten pounds.

And the Select men of every Town, Towns to provide watch (...) and stock (...)
shall provide for every fifty Soldiers, one Barrel of good Powder containing
near one hundred pounds, one hundred and fifty pounds of Musket Bullets, and
eight and twenty pounds of good Match, and after that proportion for every
Company of Soldiers, in number more or less; which they shall carefully reniew
from time to time as shall be needful, under the penalty of five pounds for the
want of every Barrel of Powder, one hundred and fifty pounds of Bullets and
eight and twenty pounds of Match as before mentioned, and the Select men of
every Town as aforesaid, are hereby Authorized to assess their inhabitants for
making the provisions aforesaid, which shall remain as a Town-stock, besides
all other Provisions of that kind. [1649.]

16. It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, A. 56. p. 12
That no Troop of Horse within this Jurisdiction, shall exceed the number of
seventy listed Soldiers besides Officers; Troops not (...)
and that the Troops raised in the several Counties be under the Command of the
Majors of the Regiment in the respective Counties, and all privileges formerly
granted to encourage Troopers shall be continued, A. 54. p. 5.
except free Ferrage, and free Commonage in divided and appropriate Commons: A.
56. p. 12.
And every Troop consisting of forty, shall have liberty of Nomination of all
Officers to be allowed and confirmed by the County Courts as the Foot Officers,
and the three chief Officers to have Commissions.

And every Trooper shall keep always a good Horse, Troopers how to be furnished
and be well fitted with Saddle, Bridle, Holsters, Pistols or Carbines and
Swords, under the penalty of ten shillings for every defect, and having Listed
his Horse, shall not change or put him off without License from his Captain or
chief Officers under the like penalty.

And every Trooper shall attend six days exercise yearly, To exercise six
days yearly
at such time and place as shall be appointed by the chief Officer, under the
penalty of five shillings for every default, to be leavied and distreined by
the Clerk of the Troop, who is hereby required to execute the place as the
Clerks of the Foot Companies mutatis mutandis.

And because the Troopers living remote do often avoid their penalities, or
occasion much travail and charge to the Clerk to collect the same;

It is Ordered that the Clerks of the Troops for their charge and travail in
leavying all fines, Clerk his fe^^
shall be allowed the Fees of the Marshal, to be by him leavied and distreined
together with the fines; Provided no such distress be made within one Month
after the default, that the parties may have liberty to present their excuses
to the Officers, who have power upon just cause to abate or remit the fines, as
the Officers of the Foot have in like cases.

And in case of Alarm, A. 53.
every Troop shall fit himself in all respects for service, and shall speedily
repair to the Guard in the Town where he dwells, under the penalty of five
pounds, How Troops are disposed in case of Alarm
and shall duly attend such service as the Committee of Militia of that Town
shall require, until he shall otherwise be commanded by Order from his Captain
or other Superior Officer: And no Officer of any Foot Company shall be a
listed Trooper. No Troop to be drawn out of the County
And no Troop shall be drawn out of the County upon any pretense by the Captain
and Officers thereof (except in pursuit of an Enemy upon a Rout) but by Order
of the Major General. And the Captains of Horse and of Foot respectively, the
Majors of the Regiments, and the Major General are required in their respective
charges, to take care the Military Orders respecting Foot and Horses be duly
executed and observed. [1645,47,48,52,53,54,55,56.]

Also it is Ordered; Troopers penalty
That no Trooper put off or change his Horse Without leave from his Commander,
under the penalty of five pounds, and that for nonappearance on days of
exercise, the fine shall be ten shillings, and that no Trooper being Listed may
at his pleasure disband himself without leave orderly obtained from his
Commander, and returned by certificate to the Commander of the Foot in the Town
to which they belong, under the penalty of such a fine as his chief Officer
shall impose, not exceeding fifty shillings.

For a merciful^ and clear ^rderserding of the int^rt of this Court in
reforem^^ to commissions granted to Military Officers;

It is Ordered and hereby Declared, That all Commissions of inferior Officers
be and do f^ard good and in (...), Officers Commissions
notwithstanding the death or removal of their Superior Officers.

It is also further Ordered, That all trained Soldiers, whether Horse or Foot,
shall repair to their several Quarters and (...) their Arms, immediately after
their disnassion upon Training days: And whosoever shall either singly or in
companies remains in Arms, and vainly spend their time and Powder by inordinate
shooting in the day or night after their Release; such Soldiers upon
conviction shall be punished by their Superior Officers order, Disorder in
Soldiers to be punished by the Officers
upon the next Training day at the lead of the Company, by sharp Admonition, or
otherwise, with any usual Military punishment at the discretion of the chief
Officer: Provided the Magistrate have not taken notice of the matter before.

It is also further Ordered; That all Soldiers, whether Horse or Foot, who
shall disobey the lawful commands of their Superior Officers upon any Training
day, either in time of exercise in the Body, or otherwise refusing to perform
any service which their Officers in their discretion shall judge expedient in
order to the furtherance and promoting Military work; such refractory Soldiers
shall be punished either by (...) or otherwise, at the head of the Company with
any usual Military punishments, at the discretion of the chief Officers.

It is also further Ordered, Repealed
and be it hereby Er^cted, that the Law limiting Troops, not to exceed seaventy
persons in a Troop, as also for allowance of five shillings per Annum is hereby
Repealed, in reference to any that shall be lifted after the publication of
this Order.

And that henceforth (...) shall be admitted to be a (...) Trooper, but such
whom themselves or Parents under whose government they are, do pay in a single
Country Rate for one hundred pounds estate, and in other respects qualified as
the Law provides: And the same certified under the hand of the Constable of the
Town where they live. [1663.]

FOrasmuch as complaints have been made to this Court, of very great inequality
in keeping and maintaining of Military Watches, the burden of that service
^ying ma^n^^, if not altogether upon such as bear Arms, whenseveral persons of
good I stare are free; All which considered,

It is Ordered, Military Watches
that henceforth all persons whatsoever, within this Jurisdiction, who are
liable to serve in Constables Watches, shall also be liable to the like service
in all Military Watches, either in their own persons, or by a sufficient supply
to be made by all such persons as aforesaid, or shall pay twelve pence in
money, and that under the penalty of five shillings for every such neglect, to
be leavied by the Clerk of each Company, by Warrant under the hand of the chief
Officer of the same. [1664.]

WHereas this Court has already provided for the well ordering and settling the
Militia of this Commonwealth, Major General and majors power to see that all
the Arms of the Country be re^dily (...)
as in the Law tit. Military, yet forasmuch as many Complaints are presented to
this Court, that the Said Orders are not so attended as is to be desired;
considering the present juncture of affairs between our English Nation and
foreign Enemies, who are now engaged in a Bloody War, which calls for a
prudential endeavor of our own safety against any foreign Invasion or sudden
Surprizal;

This Court does therefore Order and Enact, That the said Military Laws be by
all persons therein mentioned, forthwith attended in all respects; And for the
better effecting the same, the Major General is required forthwith by warrant
under his hand to the Majors of the several Regiments, to require them to make
diligent inquiry into the state of the several Companies under their charge,
and to be certified under the hands of the Commission officers, or chief
Officers where no Commission Officers are of each Company, of all defects of
Arms, Ammunition or otherwise in every respect; And the said Majors respectively
are required to give speedy advice to the Major General what posture their said
Regiments are in, and wherein the said Majors cannot of themselves forthwith
make redress of any defects in the said Companies, the said Majors with the
advice of the Major General have hereby power to use all lawful means to effect
the same.

And all inferior Officer are hereby required to yield ready Obedience to all
such Warrants sent to them by the said Majors respectively, Five pounds penalty
for defects of inferior Officers
or Major General, upon the penalty of five pounds for every such defect, to be
leavied by distress by such person as the said Major General and Majors of the
Regiments shall depute, All the fines to go to procure a stock of powder for
the company where the defects arise
which said fines shall be for a stock of Powder for the said Company where the
defects arise from time to time.

And whereas several Towns in this Jurisdiction, are not under the Command of
any Sergeant Major, as Dover, Portsmouth, etc. as also the Towns of the County
of Hampshire;

It is Ordered, The several Towns that are not under Majors of Regiments to be
regulated and ordered by the Major General
That the Major General take care for regulating of the Military affairs of
such Towns, till they are brought under a Major as in other Counties; And all
Military Officers of such places are required obedience to the Orders of the
Major General from time to time, upon the penalty above mentioned for every
defect. [1666.]

WHereas the Law, tit. Military Sect. 7. requires every Pike man to be
completely furnished (amongst other weapons with a sufficient Corslet) This
Court considering that Corslets are wanting to many Soldiers in several
Companies, and that supplies therein are not easily to be attained;

It is therefore now Ordered, Pike men to provide Buffe coats or Quilted coats
and by the Authority of this Court Enacted; That every Pikeman within this
Jurisdiction, shall be completely furnished, either with a sufficient Corslet,
Buffe Coat or Quilted Coat, such as shall be allowed by the chief Officer,
under whose command they from time to time shall serve, upon the penalty in the
recited Law already expressed; any Law, Custom or Usuge to the contrary
notwithstanding. [1666.]

THis Court considering the direction of our Patent, regulating to the staring
of at Military Officers in this Jurisdiction;

Do hereby Order and Declare; That all Commission Officers that at present are
in power, are confirmed according to their respective Commissions; but for the
time to come where new are to be chosen, it is only in the power of the General
Court, New officers are to be chosen
or in case of emergency for the Council of the Commonwealth, to Nominate,
Chosen, Appoint, and Empower all Commission Military Officers, excepting the
Major General, and Admiral by Sea, the choice of whom are otherwise provided
for by Law; and for all inferior Officers in Companies, they are to be chosen
and appointed by the Commission Officers of that Company, and where no
Commission Officer is by the Major of the Regiment. [16^8.]

THe Court considering that the Regiments are multiplied from three to six
since the Low was made, requiring the (...) Majors of every Regiment to draw
forth his Regiments once in three years, to exercise them in Military
Discipline: Regimental meetings


Do Order, That henceforth the Regimental Meetings shall be in this following
Order; i. e.

Suffolk this present year, 1671. Norfolk including the County of Portsmouth
and Dover, 1672 Middlesex Anno 1673 Yorkshire Anno 1674. Essex Anno 1675.
Hampshire Anno 1676.
And so to be continued in this Order successively from time to time.

And the Majors of Norfolk, Yorkshire and Hompshire are allowed toward their
expenses and entertainment, occasioned by that service ten pounds a piece
respectively for the time of that service, to be paid by their respective
County Treasurers.

And it is also Ordered, That henceforth the allowance of twenty pounds a piece
granted formerly to the Majors of the three old Regiments, shall be paid by the
County Treasures respectively, for such their service, any thing contrary
hereunto contained in the Military Law, Sect. 3. notwithstanding. [1671.]

MINES.
FOr encouragement of such as will adventure for the discovery of Mines; L. ^.
p. 12.
It is Ordered by this Court, (...)
That whosoever will be at the charge for the discovery of any Mine within this
Jurisdiction, shall enjoy the profits thereof, with a fit proportion of Lard to
the same, for twenty one years to their proper use, and also that such persons
shall have liberty to purchase the interest of any of the Indians in such Lands
where such Mines shall be found, provided they shall not enter upon any Towns
or persons Propriety without his leave. [1641.]

2. And any Inhabitant within this Jurisdiction, that shall have or find any
kind of Mine or Mines whatsoever, in any of their own proprieties, the whole
benefit and profit of such Mines are due and shall belong to such Proprietor of
Land wherein such Mine shall be (...), to them and to their Heirs for ever, as
any part of their Lands, (...) Possessions or Profits whatsoever, paying only
the fifth part of Gold and silver Oar according to proviso, made on that behalf!

MONEY.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; A. 52. p. 12.
That a Minthouse be Erected at Boston, Mint-house at Boston
and that the Master of the said Mint, and all the Officers thereof shall be
sworn and allowed by this Court, or by such as shall be Authorized by this
Court for that purpose.

And all persons whatsoever, have liberty to bring into the said, Mint, all
Bullion, Plate or Spanish Coin, there to be melted, and brought to Alloy of
Sterling Money by the Master of the said Mint and his sworn Officers from time
to time, by him or them to be Coined into twelve penny, Stamp of the Coin
six penny, and three penny pieces, which shall be stamped with a double Ring
on either side, with this Inscription, MASSACHUSETTS and a Tree in the center on
the one side, NEW ENGLAND with the year of our Lord, and the figure XII. VI.
III. according to the value of each piece on the other side, together with a
privy mark, which shall be appointed every three Months by the Governor, and
known only to him and the sworn Officers of the Mint.

And further, Value of the Coin
the Master of the Mint aforesaid, is hereby required to Coin all the said
Money of good Silver, of the just Alloy of new Sterling English Money, and for
value two pence in the shilling of lesser value then the present English Coin,
and the lesser pieces proportionably: And all such Coin as aforesaid, (and no
other except English) shall be acknowledged to be the current Money of this
Commonwealth, and to pass from Man to Man in all payments accordingly within
this Jurisdiction.

And the Mint master for himself and officers, Allowance for Coining
for their pains and labor Melting, Refining and Coining is allowed by this
Court to take one shilling out of every twenty shillings, which he shall stamp
as aforesaid, and it shall be in the liberty of any person, who brings into the
Minthouse any pullion, Plate or Spannish Coin, to be present and see the same
Melted, Refined any Alloyed, and then to take a Receipt of the Master of the
Mint for the weight of that which is good silver Alloyed as aforesaid, Weight
of the Coin
for which the Mint master shall deliver him the like weight in current Money,
viz. every shilling to weigh three pence Troy weight, and lesser pieces
proportionably, deducting allowance for Coynage as before is expressed.

And it is further Ordered; Mint-masters and Officers to be known
That a Committee be chosen by this Court to appoint a Mint-house in some
convenient place in Boston, and to approve and swear the Master and all the
Officers, and to Order and Determine what shall further appear necessary to
carry on this Order to effect.

2. And it is further Ordered; A. 54. p. 5.
That no Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction of Stranger, Exportation of Coin
prohibited on pain of patn of con(...) of estate
shall from henceforth send, carry or transport out of this Jurisdiction, by
Sea or by Land, directly or indirectly, any of the Money that has (...) or
shall be Coined in this Jurisdiction, except twenty shillings for necessary
expenses, on penalty of Confiscation, not only of such money so Coined, but
also all the visible estate of him that shall any way be found sending or
exporting any of the Coin aforesaid, one third part whereof shall be to the use
of the Informer and Officer, the other two thirds to the Country.

And that this Law may be duly observed;

The County Courts shall from time to time, S^^^tchers to be appointed
as there shall be need in Boston, Charlstown, Salem, Ipswich, Passataqua,
Isles of shoals, sudbury, and other needful places, appoint and Authorize meet
persons as Searchers, to examine and search all Person, Vessels, Packs,
Truncks, Chests, Boxes, or the like, that shall be transporting out of this
Jurisdiction, who finding any Money shall seize the same, and forthwith inform
the next Magistrate thereof, who shall issue out his Warrant for the present
seizure of the who^e visible Estate of the party so transporting contrary to
this Law, for the ^fe of the Commonwealth; And for the parties searching or
informing as is above expressed.

And it is further Declared, That all such Masters, Mariners or other persons,
that shall be found to be privy or consenting to the exporting of any of the
Coin aforesaid, To take (...)
out of this Jurisdiction, he or they shall for every such offense forfeit the
sum of twenty pounds a piece, to be to the uses aforesaid; And the several
Searchers shall take the Oath appointed for Searchers, only in s^ead of half, a
third part to be inserted, and in stead of certifying the Auditor General, to
insert to certify the next Magistrate.[1652. 54.]

FOr the better execution of the Law page 62. sect. 2. for the restraining the
E^portation of Money;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority hereof, That the persons
hereafter named, viz.

For Boston, Captain James Oliver, and Mr. Thomas Brattle or either of them.

For Charlstown, Captain John Allen. For Salem, Commissioners ^search his money
etc.
Mr. Edward Batter. For Pascataqua, Mr. Elias Stileman. For Marble head, Mr.
Samuel Ward. For Dedham, Ensign Fisher. For Braintry, Moses Fain. For Malberow,
William Kerly. For Springfield, Laurence Bliss.
Be all and every of them appointed, empowered and required to search for, and
seize all Moneys of the Coin of this Jurisdiction, that shall be of and or
discovered in any Ship or any other Vessel that has weighed And or to depart
from that Port where she ladeth, or all such Money that shall be found in any
persons Pocket, Cloak-bag, Portmantle, or any other thing belonging to them,
after such person has taken Horseback, to proceed and travail in his or their
Journey out of this Jurisdiction, from the first Town or Station whence such
persons begin their Travail: And all Money that such Searcher shall find
(except so much as is allowed by Law) he shall safely keep it until the next
Court of the Shire, and then present the same unto the said Court; and if it be
judged by the Court to be forfeited according to Law, then the said Court are
required to order the delivery of one third part to the Officer that seized the
same, and the other two third parts to return to the public Treasury of the
Country.

And it is further Ordered, That the Searches before-named, are hereby empowered
to break open any Chest, Trunk, Box, Cabin, Cask, Truss, or any other suspected
place or thing, where they or any of them conceive Money may be concealed, and
seize the same: And also they or either of them are empowered to require such
Assistance from any Constables or others, as to them may seem expedient, who
are to aid them upon the penalty of forty shillings fine for every neglect.
[1669.]

MONOPOLIES.
IT is Ordered, Decreed, and by this Court Declared; That there shall be no
Monopolies granted or allowed amongst us, but of such new inventions that are
profitable to the Country, and that for a short time.[1641.]

Oaths Subscriptions.
IT is ordered, No Oaths but what are imposed by the General Court
and by this Court Declared; That no man shall be urged to take any Oath, or
subscribe to any Articles, Covenants or Remonstrances of Public and Civil
nature, but such as the General Court has considered, allowed and required;
Officers Oath how long binding
and no Oath of any Magistrate or of any Officer, shall bind him any further
or longer then he is resident or reputed an Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction.
[1641.]

2. Forasmuch as diverse Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, A. 52. p. ^.
who have long continued amongst us, receiving protection from this Government,
have as we are informed uttered offensive speeches, whereby their fidelity to
this Government may justly be suspected, and also that diverse Strangers of
foreign parts do repair to us of whose fidelity we have not that assurance
which is commonly required of all Governments;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That the
County Courts or any one Magistrate out of Court, shall have power, Strangers
to swest fidelity to this Governm.
and is hereby Authorized to require the Oath of Fidelity of all settled
Inhabitants amongst us, who have not already taken the same, as also to require
the Oath underwritten of all Strangers, who after two Months have their Abode
here; And if any person shall refuse to take the respective Oath, he or they
shall be bound over to the next County Court or Court of Assistants, where if
he shall refuse, he shall forfeit five pounds a week, for every week he shall
continue in this Jurisdiction after his said refusal, unless he can give
sufficient security to the satisfaction of the Court or Magistrate for his
Fidelity during his or their residence amongst us:

Strangers Oath.
You A. B. do acknowledge yourself subject to the Laws of this Jurisdiction,
during your residence under this Government; And do here Swear by the great
Name of the Everliving GOD, and engage your self to be true and faithful to the
same, and not to Plot, Contrive or Conceal any thing that is to the hurt or
detriment thereof. [1652.]

OPPRESSION.
FOr avoiding such mischiefs as may follow by such indisposed persons, as may
take liberty to oppress and wrong their Neighbors, by taking excessive Wages
for their Work, or unreasonable prizes for such Merchandises or other necessary
Commodities as shall pass from Man to Man;

It is Ordered; That it any Man shall offend in any of the said cases, he shall
be punished by fine or imprisonment, according to the quality of the offense as
the Court to which he is presented, upon lawful trial and conviction shall
adjudge. [1635.]

PAYMENTS.
IT is by this Court Ordered and Declared; A. ^4. p. 4.
That all Contracts and Engagements for Money, Debts to be paid in the kind
considered for
Corn, Chattel or Fish, shall be satisfied in Kind according to Covenant, or
in default of the very kind contracted for, in one of the said kinds;
Provided that in such cases where payment in kind is not made according to
Covenant, all just damages shall be satisfied (together with the Debt) for not
paying in kind according to bargain; And in no case shall any Creditor be
forced to take any other Commodities for satisfaction of his debt, unless it be
according to his Contract, (...)
but it shall be lawful for such Creditor to imprisons the party till he make
satisfaction according to Covenant, or to take upon Execution such Goods,
Houses or Lands, as shall be to his satisfaction; any Law, Custom or Usage to
the contrary notwithstanding. [1654.]

WHereas the Law tit. Payments page 63. does make Corn, Cattle and Fish equal
with Money and to be paid as Money, when Money is intended for, which at that
time when the Law was made was as good as Money, but now is otherwise, and
proves prejudicial and injurious, as experience shows upon several accounts:
therefore as an Addition to, and explanation of that Law;

This Court does Order and Enact, All contrast and ^^^^meats (...) find road by
payment (...) contracted for, etc.
That henceforth all Contracts, Agreements, Engagements or Covenants for any
specie whatsoever, shall be paid in the same specie Bargained for; Any Law,
Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. [1670]

PETITIONS.
IT is hereby Ordered; L. 2. p. 13.
That all Petitions to the General Court, which are of a common and ordinary
nature, the Petitioner shall pay on the delivery thereof to the Secretary or
Clerk two shillings six pence for each Petitions; And all Petitions for
abatements of fines, mittigation of penalties, Payment for entering petitions in
the General Court
etc. shall pay unto the Clerk or Secretary as aforesaid ten shillings, And all
Petitions for Gratuities, or that concern Controversies between party and
party, Town and Town shall pay ten shillings; And all Petitions for Debts, or
other controversies between party and party brought from Inferior Courts,
shall pay ten shillings besides the charges of the Courts during the trial of
such cause.

And henceforth no Petitition whatsoever, A. 54. p. 1.
shall be received into the General Court, after the first four days of the
Court of Election, nor after the first week of any other Session.

Nevertheless, Time of Eatoy
It is hereby Ordered; That all such Petitions that concern any engagement of
the Country to any person, are hereby exempted; And that any Magistrate or
Deputy of the Court may present any Petition, wherein his own personal right is
concerned without payment, and that there shall be a true Entry made by the
Secretary of the number of Petitions that shall be delivered to the
Magistrates, Petitions exempt from payments
and the like account shall be kept by the Clerk of the Deputies, Secretary and
Clerk to secure the pay
of all Petitions received by the Deputies, and all such fees as are produced
by such Petitions, shall be received or secured by the Secretary or Clerk, and
discounted in part of their Annual allowance. [1648, 54.]

PIPE-STAVES.
WHereas information has come to this Court from foreign parts, of the
insufficiency of our Pipe-stave, ospectasly in guard of whom holes, whereby the
Commodity is like to the prohibited in these parts, to the great damage of the
Country;

It is therefore Ordered by this Courts and the Authority thereof; That the
Select men of Boston, ^eard (...) of Pipe staves
Charlsown, salem, Dover, Po^^smouth, Kimer^^, and all other Towns in this
Jurisdiction, where Pipe-staves use to be shipped, shall forthwith, and so them
time to time, as need shall require, nominate two men of each Town, skilful in
the Connecty, and such as can attend the service, Sworn
to be viewers of Pipe staves, who to chosen, shall by the Constable be
convented before some Magistrate, to between diligently and faithfully to view
and search all such Pipe staves as are to be transported to any parts of Spain,
Portugal, or within either of their Dominions or elsewhere, to be used for
nal^rg of ^ight C^^k, who shall cast by all such as they shall judge not
Merchantable, both in respect of worm-holes and due Assize, Assue of Pipestaves
viz. that are not in length (...) in breadth three inches and half without
lap, in thickness three quarters of on inch and not more of less then an eighth
part of an inch then three quarters thick, well and even bowed and sufficient
for use.

And they or some one of them, shall at all times upon request give attendance,
Pipe staves skipt unicochd to be. forfeit
and they shall enter into a Book the number of all such Merchantable
pipe-staves as they shall approve, and for whom.

And if any Man shall put aboard any Ship or other Vessel any Pipestaves other
then shall be so searched and approved, to the end, to be transported to any
part of Spain or Portugal, Searchers allowed
except they should be shipped for dry Cask, he shall forfeit the some whose
parcel or the value thereof, and the said Viewers shall be allowed two
shillings for every thousand of Pipe staves which they shall so search, as well
the Refuse as the Merchantable, to be paid by him that sets them on work.

And if any Master or other Officer of any Ship or other Vessel, Masters of
ships receiving unsearch staves forfeits it.
shall receive into such ship or Vessel, any parcel or Pipe-staves, to be
transported into any of the said Dominions, which shall not be reached and
allowed as Merchantable, and so certified by a note under the Lord of one of
the said Viewers; such Master shall forfeit for every thousand of Pipestaves so
uncvoly received five pounds except he can picture ^c of the said Viewers to
come aboard and search such Staves as they shall be delivered into the Ship;

Provided, Dry Cask staves
Cast or Refuse Staves, or other Red Oak Staves may be transported into those
parts (which may be of good ^c for Dry Cask) so as the same be carried in
distinct parcels, and not intermixed with Merchantable Staves, [1646.]

POOR.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That any Shire Court or
any two Magistrates out of Court, shall have power to determine all Differences
about lawful setting and providing for poor persons; and shall have power to
dispose of all unsettled persons into such Towns as they shall judge to be most
fit for the maintenance and employment of such Persons and Families, for the
case of this Country. [1039.]

And for the avoiding of all future inconveniences referring to the settling of
poor people that may need relief from the place where they dwell;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Order that settle poor
That where any person with his Family, or in case he has no family, shall be
resident in any Town or Peculiar of this Jurisdiction for more than three
months, without notice given to such person or persons by the Constable or one
of the Select-men of the said place, or their Order, that the Town is not
willing that they should remain as an Inhabitant amongst them; And in case
after such notice given, such person or person shall notwithstanding remain in
the said place, if the Select-men of the said place shall not by way of
complaint, Petition to the next County Court of that Shire for relief in the
said case, and the same prosecuted to effect; every such person or persons (as
the case may require) shall be provided for, and relieved in case of necessity,
by the Inhabitants of the said place where he or she is so found.

And it is further Ordered, That each County Court shall from time to time hear
and determine all Complaints of this nature, and settle all poor persons
according to directions of this Law, in any Town or Peculiar within this
Colony; and every such person or persons shall accordingly, be entertained and
provided for by the Select-men or Constable of the said place, at a Town
charge; And in case any Town or Peculiar shall find themselves agrieved at
such disposure of the County Court, they may Appeal to the next Court of
Assistants; And where any person or persons cannot according to this Law be
settled in any Town or Peculiar, they shall then be placed in any Town of that
County wherein they are found, according as the County Court shall appoint, and
their charges satisfied unto them by the County Treasurer.

POSSESSION.
THe Court taking into consideration the great neglect of many persons, A. 58.
p. 28.
in the Infancy of these Plantations, to observe any due order or legal course
for the confirmation of such Sales and Attentions of Horses and Lands, as have
passed from man to man, which thing may several ways be of very evil
Consequence to Posterity.

Does therefore Order and hereby Enact; That any person or persons that has
either himself or by his Grantees or Assigns, before the Law made for
direction about Inheritances, Title to Inheritances limited within 5 years
bearing date October the nineteenth, one thousand six hundred and fifty two,
Possessed and Occupied as his or their own proper Right, in see simple, any
Houses or Lands within this Jurisdiction, and shall so continue, whether in
their own Persons, their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or persons,
from, by or under them, without Disturbance, Let, Suit or Denial legally made,
by having the Claim of any person thereto, entered with the Recorder of the
County, where such Houses or Lands do lie, with the Names of the person so
claiming, and the Quantity, Bounds of the Lands of Houses claimed, and such
Claim prosecuted to effect within the term of five years next after the
twentieth of this present May, one thousand six hundred and fifty seven, every
such Proprietor, their Heirs and Assigns shall for ever after enjoy the same,
without any lawful Let, Suit, Disturbance or Denial, by any after Claim of any
person or persons whatsoever, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And for all Bargains or Alienations made, or to be made after the aforsaid
time, that every person concerned therein, observe the Directions given in the
above recited Law, upon peril of suffering all the damage that shall accrue to
them, their Heirs and Assigns by neglect thereof. [1657.]

PORTERS.
THere being a very great abuse in the Towns of Boston and Charlstown, A. 56.
p. 10.
by porters, who many times do require and exact more than is just and
righteous for their Labors;

It is Ordered by this Court; Porters to be ordered by the Select-men
That from henceforth the Selectmen of the said Towns from time to time, shall
have power to regulate in this case, and to state their Wages, as in their
understanding shall be most just and equal, as also to determine what persons
shall be employed therein. [1655.]

Pound. Pound-breach.
FOr prevention and due recompense of damages in Corn fields and other
Enclosures done by Swine and Chattel;

It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, Pound is every Town
That there shall be one sufficient Pound or more, made and maintained in every
Town and Village within this Jurisdiction, for the Impounding of all such Swine
and Chattel as shall be found in any Corn-field or other enclosure.

And whosoever Impounds any Swine or Chattel, shall give present notice to the
Owner if he be known, A. 57. P. 24.
or otherwise they shall be cried at the two next Lectures or Markets; And if
Swine or Chattel escape out of Pound, the Owner if known, shall pay all damages
according to Law.

And every person or persons having notice given them, or otherwise left in
writing at their House or place of their usual abode, Cattle impounded to be
reple^ved^ damage satisfied
of any of their Chattel Impounded or otherwise Restrained, shall forthwith
give satisfaction to the party so wronged, or otherwise Replovie their Chattel,
and prosecute the same according to Law, upon peril of suffering all the loss
and damage that shall come to their Chattel by standing in the Pound or other
lawful place of Restraint. [1645, 47, 57.]

2. And if any person shall resist or rescue any Chattel going to Pound,
Rescues and Pound breach
or shall by any way or means convey them out of Pound or other Custody of the
Law, whereby the party wronged may lose his damages, and the Law be deluded,
that in case of mere rescues, the party so offending shall forfeit to the
Treasury forty shillings. Fine or


And in case of Pound breach five pounds, and shall also pay all damages to the
party wronged, and if in the rescues any bodily harm be done to the person of
any Man or other Creature, they may have remedy against the Rescuers; (...)
whipped
And if either be done by any not of ability to answer the forfeiture and
damages aforesaid, they shall be openly Whipped by Warrant from any Magistrate
before whom the offender is convicted in the Town or Plantation where the
offense was committed, not exceeding twenty stripes for the mere Rescue or
Pound breach; And for all damages to the party; they shall satisfy by service,
as in case of Theft.

And if it appear there were any procurement of the Owner of the Chattel
thereunto, and that they were Abetters therein, they shall pay forfeiture and
damages as if themselves had done it. [1647.]

POWDER.
WHereas by favor of the Government in England, A. 52. p. 3.
several quantities of Powder and other Ammunition are yearly Imported into this
jurisdiction for our necessary use and defense; To the end the favor we
receive may not be Abused, nor our selves Deprived of the just and necessary
use thereof;

It is hereby Ordered and Enacted; Powder ^^otted to be (...) with the (...)
That all Merchants or others, that shall import into this Jurisdiction either
Powder, Lead, Bullets Shot, or any Ammunition whatsoever, shall give particular
notice of the quantity thereof to the Public Notary, upon the pain and penalty
of forty pounds, within one Month after the Landing of such Goods, who is
hereby enjoyed to take particular notice of the same, with the Mark and Number,
and faithfully to enter the same in a Book, and the Names of the Persons to
whom they are sold, or into whose Custody or power they are committed, that he
may give account thereof upon Oath to the Governor, Deputy Governor or any of
the Council from time to time; And the said Notary is hereby prohibited, upon
the penalty of one hundred pounds, to grant Certificate to any Merchant or
other of any such Goods but such as he shall have particular notice of, and
entered as aforesaid.

And to the end this Order may be duly observed, and that no person may plead
ignorance thereof;

It is hereby Ordered, That the Captain of the Castle shall upon the arrival of
any Ship or Vessel in the Massachusetts Bay, from any foreign parts, give
notice of the contents of this Order, to the Master or Merchant of any such
Vessels, and the Constables of all other Port-Towns in this Jurisdiction, are
hereby required to do the same. [1651.]

2. And it is further Ordered; L. 1. P. 45.
That no person (except for the defense of themselves and their Vessels at Sea)
shall transport any Gunpowder out of this Jurisdiction, without license first
obtained from some two of the Magistrates, upon penalty of forfeiting all such
Powder as shall be transporting or transported, or the value thereof.

And that there may be no defect for want of an Officer to take care herein;

This Court, the Court of Assistants, or any Shire Court, Searchers for powder
exporting
shall appoint meet persons, from time to time in all needful places, who have
hereby power granted them, to search all Persons and Vessels that are of any
way shall be suspicious to them to be breakers of this Order, and what they
find in any Vessel or Hands, without license as aforesaid, to seize the same,
and to keep the one half to their own me in recompense of their pains, and to
deliver the other half forthwith to the Treasurer. [1645. 51.]

Prescriptions.
IT is Ordered, Decreed, and by this Court Declared; That no Custom or
Prescription shall ever prevail amongst us in any Moral case, (our meaning is)
to maintain any thing that can be proved to be Morally sinful by the Word of
God. [1641.]

Prisoners, Prison, House of Correction.
IT is Ordered; Prisoners ear^ed at their own charge
That such Malefactors as are committed to any common Prison, shall be conveyed
thither at their own charge if they be able, otherwise at the charge of the
Country. [1646.]

2. For prevention and redress of many misdemeanors and evil practices, A. 55.
P. 10.
daily increasing;

It is Ordered, House of Correction, in each County
That there shall be an House of Correction provided in each County, at the
Counties charge, to be settled, ordered and improved as the Magistrates in each
County Court or Court of Assistants shall agree and direct.

3. And it shall be in the power of every County Court to make use of such
Prison as is at present erected in the County, A. 57. p. 25.
for an House of Correction, till Houses of Correction be provided and finished.

Also to provide and Authorize the Keeper or some meet person, County Court to
appoint a Master
to be Master of such House as they shall judge meet; And the Select men of the
Town where such House is appointed, Select men to provide Materials to work
shall procure in the most prudent way, some competent stock of Hemp, Flax, or
other materials, and upon account, to commit the same into the hands of the
Master of the House, to be employed at his discretion by the labor of such
Delinquents, as shall be committed to him by Authority, and the stock being in
value or kind preserved to such as put in the same, Masters sees
all the benefit attained by the labor of the person committed, shall be to
the use of the Master, allowing only so much as will keep the Delinquent with
necessary Bread and Water, or other mean food out of the same, or six pence out
of the shilling earned by his or her labor.

And at the first coming into the House of Correction, the Master thereof, or
any he shall procure, or the common Corrector residing in the Town, shall whip
every Delinquent, Delinquent to be corrected and kept to work
not exceeding ten stripes, and after shall employ him or her by duly stint,
and if the party be stubborn, disorderly or idle and not perform their task,
and that in good condition, the Master shall correct them or abridge them of
their food, as the cause shall require, till they are brought to some meet
order.

And it shall be in the power of one Magistrate, One Magistrate may commit to
the House or Correction
to commit idle persons or stubborn persons against such as have Authority over
them, Runawayes, Common Drunkards, Pilferers, Common night walkers and wanton
persons, as tending to uncleanness in speeches or Actions, etc.

And it shall not be in the power of the Master to deliver out of the House of
Correction, unless he has a Discharge of Warrant under the hand of a
Magistrate; and if the Delinquent be committed by the Court, not to be
delivered but by order of the Court, or under the hand of the greater part of
the Members of the Court. [1646, 55, 57.]

ON Complaint of the Keeper of the Prison, that some Malefactors and other
Prisoners have made escape, by means of some evil-disposed persons that supply
them with Instruments to effect the same;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the authority thereof, That if any
person whatsoever, shall any ways, either directly or indirectly convey any
Instrument or other thing whatsoever to any Prisoner, To prevent breaking of
Prisons
by which such Prisoner or any other Prisoner, either shall, may, or might
break Prison, or work him or her self unlawfully out of the same; if it were
for Debt, such person so transgressing shall pay the full Debt, and incur the
penalty of forfeiture of as much to the Country, or undergo such Corporal
punishment as the Court on whose proceedings such imprisonment followed, or the
Court of Assistants shall impose, order or appoint.

And if any Prisoner committed for offense or offenses, Criminal or Capital,
shall by such wicked compliance of any person, break Prison or make escape out
of Prison, or be found in preparation thereunto, the person or persons which
directly or indirectly conveyed such instruments* Tools, or other things,
whereby such Prisoner shall or might work his or her escape from Prison; such
person shall be liable to the same corporal punishment which the Prisoner was
liable unto, and also incur such further penalty by Fine, Imprisonment, or
Corporal punishment as the County Court, Court of Assistants or General Court
shall appoint: So that where the Prisoners are not actually escaped, in such
cases any Court to moderate as they shall see meet.

And if the escape of any Prisoner appear to be through the fault or neglect of
the Jailer, he shall then be liable to such penalties as the Prisoner was,
according as the Court which has cognizance thereof shall determine. [1669.]

IN Answer to some Questions propounded by the Keeper of the Prison for his
direction in the execution of his Office;

This Court do Declare; Directors to Prison keepers
That it is the duty of all Prison keepers from time to time to present a true
List of all the Prisoners to such Co^^ts of Judicature, as are properly to take
cognizance of their crimes, and not to discharge any their custody, but by the
Authority of the Law warranting the same, and that the Court or other Authority
taking cognizance thereof shall determine the Costs to be allowed the Keeper
for maintenance of the Prisoner, as (...) by whom he shall be satisfied, and
that where any are committed in any civil cause, the Plaintiff at whose suit
he is imprisoned shall secure the Keeper all his necessary expenses during his
Imprisonment, both for Food and Physic, and other necessaries for his
livelihood; And in case of his neglect so to do, the party imprisoned taking
his Oath before any Magistrate that he is not worth fire pounds, the Keeper
shall not stand further charged with him, but may dismiss such Prisoner his
custody; Any former Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is Declared by this Court; That the ordinary allowance to be made for
the Food of any Prisoner shall be two shillings sixpence the Week. [166^.]

Protestations contra Remonstrance.
IT is Ordered, Liberty to enter a dissent in cases in Court
and by this Court Declared; That it is and shall be in the liberty of any
Member or Members of any Court, Council or civil Assembly, in cases of making
or executing any Order that properly concerns Religion, or any cause Capital,
or Wars, or Subscriptions to any public Article or Remonstrance, in case they
cannot in Judgment and Conscience consent to that way the major vote or
suffrage goes, to make their Contra Remonstrance or Protestation in Speech or
Writing, and upon their Request to have their dissent Recorded in the Rolls of
that Court, so it be done Christianly and Respectively for the manner, and the
dissent only be Entered without the Reasons thereof, for avoiding tediousness.
[1641.]

Punishment, Torture.
IT is Ordered, None (...) twice for (...) (...)
and by this Court Declared; That no man shall be twice Sentenced by Civil
Justice for one and the same Crime, Offense or Trespass.

And for Bodily Punishments; L. 1. P. 50.
We allow amongst us none that are Inhumane, Barbarous or Cruel.

And no Man shall be beaten with above forty stripes for one Fact at one time,
Not above 40 (...) stripes
nor shall any Man be punished with Whipping, except he have not otherwise to
answer the Law, unless his Crime be very shameful, and his course of life
vicious and profligate.

And no men shall be forced by Torture to confess any Crime against himself or
any other, No-torture (...) fore conviction.
unless it be in some Capital case, where he is first fully convicted by clear
and sufficient evidence to be guilty, after which ^f the case be of that
nature, that it is very apparent there be other Conspirators or Confederates
with him, then he may be Tortured, yet not with such Tortures as are Barbarous
and Inhumane.

Records, Recorders, Clerks.
WHereas Records of the Evidence, whereupon the Verdict and Judgment in cases
does pass, being duly entered and kept, would be of good use, both for
Presidents, and to such as shall have just cause to have their cases Reviewed;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; A 52. p. 15.
That every Judgment given in any Court, L.P. 15.
or by one Magistrate, or by Commissioners, shall be Recorded in a Book, and
all the Evidences (which are to be given in, in Writing, in fair and large
Papers) shall be kept, and the party for whom such evidence is brought,
Evidence to be given in writing
shall pay to the Recorder or Clerk of the Court of filing and safe keeping the
same two pence for each evidence; and the foreman of every Jury shall
faithfully deliver up all Testimonies or other Writings committed to them, To
be kept on ^ile
unto the Recorder or Clerk of the Court, when they give in their Verdict in
every case.

And the Fees of the Recorder or Clerk of every County Court shall be as
follows, A. 57. p. 21.
for Transcribing a Copy of any evidence for every page consisting of twenty
eight or thirty lines, Recorders Fees
eight words in a line tw^^re pence, and proportionable to eight pence a page
for what it does exceed, For entry of a Mortgage or Sale of Houses or Lands
verbatim, not exceeding a page as aforesaid, twelve pence, and proportionable
to eight pence a page for what it does exceed; And for Attesting the Record on
the Original Deed six pence, and in like manner for Wills and Inventories, with
six pence a piece for filling up the Original and safe keeping thereof; And for
entering an Order for the determining of an Estate of such as dyed Intestate, or
other, wherein the Court is to give their approbation or determination twelve
pence, And for Entry of the Examination and Proceedings of this Court in any
Criminal Cases or Presentment, with the Judgment of the Court therein two
shillings and six pence; And for Entry of a Recognizance twelve pence, to be
paid or secured in Court by the Delinquent party; And for Entering a Judgment
acknowledged twelve pence; And for Entry of an Action one shilling six pence,
L. 2. p 7.
and a judgment thereupon six pence, and for making an Execution two shillings.

2. It is Ordered; Births, Deaths Marriages
That the Clerk of the Writts in the several Towns shall Record all Births and
Deaths of persons in their Towns, and for every Birth and Death they so Record,
they shall be allowed three pence, and they shall yearly deliver in to the
Recorder of the Court of the Jurisdiction where they live a true Transcript
thereof, together with so many pence as there are Births or Deaths to be
Recorded.

And all Parents, Parents, Masters etc to certify the Clerk
Masters of Servants, Executors or Administrators respectively, shall bring in
to the Clerk of the Writts, in their several Towns, the Names of such persons
belonging to them or any of them, as shall either be Born or Dye.

And also every new-Married Man shall likewise bring a Certificate under the
hand of the Magistrate which Married him unto the said Clerk, to be by him
Recorded, who shall be allowed three pence for the same, and the said Clerk
shall deliver as aforesaid unto the Recorder a Certificate, with a penny a Name
for Recording the said Marriage: And if any person shall neglect to bring a
Note or Certificate as aforesaid, together with three pence a Name to the said
Clerk of the Writts to be Recorded, Penalty of not certifying
more then one Month after such Birth, Death or Marriage, he shall pay twelve
pence to the said Clerk, who shall demand the same, and in case any shall
refuse to satisfy him, he shall then return the Name of such person or persons
to the next Magistrate or Commissioners of the Town where such person dwells,
A. 54. p. 24.
who shall send for the party so refusing; And in case he shall still persist
therein, shall give Order to the Constable to leavie the same: And if any Clerk
of the Writts shall neglect his duty hereby enjoined, he shall pay the
following penalties, viz. for neglecting a yearly return to the County Court
five pounds, Clerk to return all Births deaths See to the County Court
and for neglect of returning the name of any person returnable by this Order,
whether Born, Married or Dead, more then thirty days before his return to the
County Court five shillings, and that no neglect may be herein for the future,
the Clerk of each County Court is hereby enjoined from time to time, to
certify the County Courts respectively the Names of all such Clerks of the
Writts, who shall neglect to make their yearly return according to this Law,
who upon such notice given, shall send for such Clerks, and do in the case as
the Law requires.

3. It is Ordered and Declared, L. 1. p. 47.
That every man shall have liberty to Record in the public Rolls of any Court,
any Testimony given upon Oath in the same Court, Liberty to record testimonies
and evidences
or before two Magistrates, or any Deed or Evidence legally confirmed, there to
remain in perpetuam rei memoriam.

And that every Inhabitant of the Country, shall have free liberty to search
and view any Rolls, to view public Records
Records or Registers of any Court or Office, except of the Council, and to
have a Transcript or Exemplification thereof, Written, Examined and Signed by
the hand of the Officer, paying the accustomed fees.

And if any person or person repairing to any public Officer of this
Jurisdiction, A. 52. p. 9.
to view any Record or Writings committed to his charge, shall wittingly and
willingly Deface or Rent any such Record or Writing, upon complaint of such
Officer to any Magistrate, and proof by Oath of the said Officer, or other
sufficient witness, every person so offending shall forfeit by the party
concerned therein treble the damage that might have ensued or accrued to him or
them thereby, and shall also be fined as much to the Country, Penalty of
defacing Records
or suffer two Months Imprisonment without Bail or Main-prize, or stand in the
Pillory two hours in Boston Market, with a Paper over his head written in
Capital Letters, A DEFACER OF RECORDS. the special or particular punishment to
be determined by the next County Court where the Offense was committed, and
shall also stand bound to the good Behavior, during the pleasure of the Court.
[1639, 42, 43, 44, 47, 52, 57.]

REsolved upon the Question, Directions to Court-Officers to grant Copies, etc.
That the words Rolls, Records, or Register of any Court or office contained in
the Printed Laws, tit. Records, etc. Sect. 3. Page 69. are to be Interpreted
and understood only of such Acts of Court as concern particular persons in
matters of Justice, License, Grant or Approbation; or of such Laws as are of
public concernment. [1665.]

WHereas by reason that the Orders of this Court, Seasonable transcribing and
delivery of matters of public concern by the Secretary
referring to the Commissionating, Appointing and Impowring any particular
person or persons for any special trust, negotiation or other matter as from
time to time do arise, are not duly and seasonably Transcribed and Delivered
to those concerned therein, the expectation of this Court is many times
disappointed, and damage to the public does inevitably accrue;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; To the Marshal General
That the Secretary, from time to time, within ten days after the end of every
Sessions of the General Court, shall Copy out all such special Orders of this
Court as abovesaid, and deliver the same to the Marshal General, who shall
receive the same at the Secretaries house, and take Order for the speedy and
certain conveyance thereof, to those whom they are especially directed unto;
And for such Orders as do require a more speedy dispatch then the time above
limited, the Officers above named shall accordingly hasten the same.

Also the Marshal General shall from time to time receive all Warrants that are
to be sent to the several Towns from the Country Treasurer; Marshal General to
attend the Treasurers and Secretaries directions, etc.
(...) also the Laws that are at any time to be published, either Printed or
Written, and cause them to be delivered according to the direction given him
from the Treasurer or Secretary. [1668.]

REPLEVIN.
IT is Ordered and by this Court Declared, That every man shall have liberty to
Replevie his Chattel or Goods Impounded, Distreined, Seized or Extended, unless
it be upon Execution after Judgment, and in payment of fines; Provided he put
in good Security to prosecute the ^^^levin, and to satisfy such Demand as his
Adversary shall recover against him in Law. [1641.]

SABBATH.
UPon Information of sundry Abuses and Misdemeancurs committed by diverse
Persons on the Lord's Day, A. 53. p. 18.
not only by Children playing in the Streets and other places; But by Youths,
Maids and other persons, both Strangers and others, uncivily walking in the
Streets and Fields, travailing from Town to Town, going on Ship board,
frequenting Common-Houses and other places to Drink, Sport or otherwise to
mispend that precious time, which thing tends much to the Dishonor of God, the
Reproach of Religion, Grieving the Souls of Gods Servants, and the Profanation
of his Holy Sabbath, the Sanctification whereof is sometimes put for all
Duties, immediately respecting the service of God contained in the first Table;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That no
Children, Profaneness of the Sabbath
Youth, Maids or other persons shall transgress in the like kind, on penalty
of being reputed great provokers of the high displeasure of the Almighty God,
and further incur the penalty hereafter expressed, viz. That the Parents and
Governors of all Children above seven years old, (not that we approve younger
Children in evil) for the first offense in that kind, penalty
upon due proof before any Magistrate, Commissioner or Select man of the Town
where such offense shall be committed, shall be Admonished; For a second
offense, upon due proof as aforesaid, shall pay as a fine five shillings; And
for a third offense, upon due proof as aforesaid ten shillings; And if they
shall again offend in that kind, they shall be presented to the County Court,
who shall augment punishment according to the merit of the Fact.

And for all Youths and Maids above fourteen years old, and all elder persons
whatsoever, that shall offend and be convict as aforesaid, either for Playing,
uncivil Walking, Drinking, Travailing from Town to Town, going on Ship board,
Sporting, or any way mispending that precious time, shall for the first offense
be admonished, upon due proof as aforesaid, for a second Offense, shall pay as
a fine five shillings, and for the third offense ten shillings; And if any
shall further offend that way, they shall be bound over to the next Country
Court, who shall augment punishment according to the nature of the offense: And
if any be unable or unwilling to pay the aforesaid fines, they shall be whipped
by the Constable, not exceeding five stripes for ten shillings fine, and this
to be understood of such offenses as shall be committed during the Daylight of
the Lords day. [1653]

2. Whereas by too sad experience, it is observed, the Sun being set, both
every Saturday, and on the Lords day, A. 52.
young people and others take liberty to walk and sport themselves in the
streets or fields, in the several Towns of this jurisdiction, to the Dishonor
of God, and the Disturbance of others in their Religious exercises, and too
frequently repair to public Houses of Entertainment, and there sit Drinking,
all which tends not only to the hindering of due preparation for the Sabbath,
but as much as in them ^yeth renders the Ordinances of God unprofitable, and
threatens the rooting out of the power of Godliness, and procuring the wrath
and judgment of God upon us and our posterity; For prevention whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Drinking in Ordinanries
after Sun set
That if any person or persons henceforth, either on the Satter-day-night, or
on the Lords day night, after the Sun is set, shall be found sporting in the
streets or fields of any Town in this Jurisdiction, Drinking, or being in any
House of public Entertainment (unless Strangers or Sojourners in their
Lodgings) and cannot give a satisfactory Reason to such Magistrate or
Commissioner in the several Towns as shall have the cognizance thereof: penalty
Every such person so found complained of, and proved transgressing, shall pay
five shillings for every such Transgression, or suffer Corporal punishment as
Authority aforesaid shall determine. [1658]

THis Court being sensible, that through the wicked practices of many persons,
who do profane Gods Holy Sabbaths, and contemn the public Worship of his
House, the Name of God is greatly dishonored, and the Profession of his People
here greatly scandalized, as tending to all Profaneness and Irreligion; As
also that by reason of the late Order of October. 20. 1663. remitting the fines
imposed on such to the use of the several Towns, the Laws made for reclaiming
such Enormities are become ineffectual;

Do therefore Order and Enact; That henceforth all fines imposed according to
Law for Profanation of the Sabbath, Contempt or Neglect of Gods public
Worship, Reproaching of the Laws, and Authority here Established according to
His Majesty's Charter, All (...) for prohanation of the Sabbath, as formally to
be to the Counties, etc.
shall be to the use of the several Counties, as formerly; Any thing in the
abovesaid Law to the contrary notwithstanding. And in case any person or
persons so sentenced, do neglect or refuse to pay such Fine or Mulcts (...)
shall be legally imposed on them, or give Security in Court to the Treasurer
for payment thereof, every such person or persons to refusing or neglecting to
submit to the Courts Sentence, shall for such his Contempt be Corporally
punished, according as the Court that has cognizance of the case shall
determine. And where any are Corporally punished, their fines shall be
remitted. [1665.]

FOr the better Prevention of the Breach of the Sabbath;

It is Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof; That no servile work
shall be done on that day, namely such as are not works of Piety,
Sabbath Breakers
of Charity, or of Necessity, and when other works are done on that day, the
persons so doing, upon Complaint or Presentment, being legally convicted
thereof before any Magistrate or County Court, shall pay for the first offense
ten shillings fine, and for every offense after to be doubled; and in case the
offense herein be circumstanced with Profaneness, or high handed Presumption,
the penalty is to be augmented at the discretion of the Judges.

As an addition to the Law, for preventing Profaning the Sabbath day, by doing
servile work;

This Court does Order; That whatsoever person in this Jurisdiction shall
Travail upon the Lord's Day, either on Horseback or on Foot, or by Boats, from,
or out of their own Town, to any unlawful Assembly or Meeting, not allowed by
Law; are hereby declared to be Prophaners of the Sabbath, and shall be provided
against as the persons that Profane the Lord's Day, by doing servile work.
[1668.]

SAILERS.
WHereas many Miscarriages are committed by Sailors, L. 2. P. 14.
by their immoderate Drinking, and other vain expenses in Ordinaries, which
oftentimes occasions prejudice and damage to the Masters and Owners of the
Vessels to which they belong, their men being oftentimes Arrested for Debts so
made when their Ship: are ready to set sail; For Prevention whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That no Innekeeper,
Victualler or other, Seller of Wine, Beer or Strong Liquors, shall after
publication hereof, Arrest, Attach, or recover by Law, and Debt or Debts so
made by any Sayler or Saylors as aforesaid, except the Master or Owner of such
Ship or Vessel to whom such Sailors belongs, have given under his hand to
discharge the same; Any Law, Use or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

SALT
UPon Information given to this Court of great damage accruing, both to
Merchants and others, by reason no meet persons are appointed for to measure
Salt from such Ships as arrive in our several Harbors;

This Court does therefore Order and Enact; That there shall be in every
Maritime Town, within this Jurisdiction, one meet person appointed by the Town
from time to time, Salt to be measured
who shall diligently attend this service, upon due notice given by either
party concerned therein; and the same truly and faithfully to discharge, for
which he shall be allowed three half pence for every Hogshead, the one half to
be paid by the Buyer and the other half by the Seller;

And what Masters of Ships or other Vessels, or Merchants, shall sail in the
observation of this Order, he or they shall forfeit to the Country two
shillings for every Tun so disposed of, unless the parties shall otherwise
agree.

SALT-PEETER.
WHereas this Court has Encouraged and Authorized, some Persons to make
Gunpowder, and have promised to enable them thereunto, by such Public and
Necessary Orders as may conduce to the effecting the same;

The consideration whereof has moved the Court hereby to Order and Enact,
Select men to make Orders with penalty to propagate Salt-peeter, etc.
That the Select men of every Town (where the Powder makers Authorized by this
Court shall desire it) be Authorized and Required hereby to make and execute
such Orders in their respective Towns as they shall judgde meet (with the
advice of skilful persons) for increasing and procuring of Salt-Peeter, and to
impose such penalties as the Selectmen shall see meet, not exceeding ten
shillings for one offense, upon all persons that shall neglect or refuse to
perform such Order or Orders for the propagating and increasing of Salt Peeter
in their respective Towns:

And Moreover the said Select men are further Empowered to choose and appoint an
Officer or Officers, and to allow him a convenient stipend Annually for his
pains out of the fines or otherwise, to look to the executing such Orders as
they shall make in that behalf.

And it is further Ordered; That such Select men, who shall neglect or refuse
to make, and effectually Execute such necessary Orders as shall conduce to the
ends aforesaid, they shall be Presented at the Court of that County, and there
be fined for their neglect, at the discretion of the Court, not exceeding five
pounds for one offense; And this Law to be put in Execution forthwith after the
publication thereof, and this to continue during the Courts pleasure. [1666.]

Seal-Publick.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That the Governor for
the time being, or any other Officer to whom the custody of the Public Seal is
committed, do affix the publick-Seal unto all Commissions for Military
Officers, and to all other Commissions and Writings of public concernment,
that shall issue forth from this Court or the Council without paying any thing
for the Seal; And the Secretary for the time, shall write and procure the Seal
to be affixed, and deliver the said Commissions and other public Instruments
to the parties concerned; and for his Fees of Writing and Wax, he is allowed
one shilling for every Commission or other public Instruments, to be paid by
the Treasurer of the Country; And this Law to be in force, any Law, Custom or
Usage to the contrary notwithstanding. [1664.]

SCHOOLS.
IT being are chief project of Satan to keep men from the knowledge of the
Scripture, as in former times, keeping them in unknown Tongues, so in these
latter times, by persuading from the use of Tongues, that so at least the true
sense are ^^^^ing of the Original might be (...) and corrupted with false
glasses of Deceivers; to the end that Learning may not be buried in the Graves
of our fore Fathers, in Church and Commonwealth, the Lord assisting our
endeavors;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; Schools in towns
of 50 Families
That every Town-ship within this Jurisdiction, after the Lord has increased
them to the number of fifty House-holders, shall then forthwith appoint one
within their Towns, to teach all such Children as shall resort to him to Write
and Read, low maintained
whose Wages shall be paid either by the Parents or Masters of such Children,
or by the Inhabitants in general, by way of supply, as the major part of those
that Order the prudentials of the Town shall appoint; Provided that those which
send their Children be not oppressed by paying much more then they can have
them taught for in other Towns.

2. And it is further Ordered, Grammar school
That where any Town shall increase to the number of one hundred Families or
House-holders, they shall set up a Grammar School, the Master thereof being
able to Instruct Youth so far as they may be fitted for the University: Towns
neglect, to pay 5 (...) per Annum to the next School
And if any Town neglect the performance hereof above one year, then every such
Town shall pay five pounds per Annum to the next such School, till they shall
perform this Order.

3. Forasmuch as it greatly concerns the welfare of this Country, A. 54. p. 1.
that the Youth thereof be Educated, not only in good Litterature, but in sound
Doctrine;

This Court does therefore commend it to the serious consideration, Hetrodox
School Master not to be allowed.
and special care of our Overseers of the College, and the Select men in the
several Towns, not to admit or suffer any such to be continued in the Office or
Place of Teaching, Educating or Instructing Youth or Children, in the College
or Schools, that have manifested themselves unsound in the Faith, or scondalous
in their Lives, and have not given satisfaction according to the Rules of
Christ.

WHereas the Law requires every Town consisting of one hundred Families or
upwards to set up a Grammar School and appoint a Master thereof, able to
instruct Youth, so as to fit them for the College; and upon neglect thereof
the said Town is to pay five pounds per Annum to the next Latin School, until
they shall perform that Order;

The Court upon weighty Reasons judge meet to Declare and Order; A Grammar
School to be (...) Towns of 100 Families
That every Town of one Hundred Families and upwards, that shall neglect or
omit to keep a Grammar School, as is provided in that Law, such Towns shall pay
ten pounds per Annum unto the next Town School that is settled according to
that Law. [1671.]

SELF-MURDER.
THis Court considering how far Satan does prevail upon several persons within
this jurisdiction, to make away themselves, judges that God calls them to bear
testimony against such wicked and unnatural practices, that others may be
deterred therefrom;

Do therefore Order, That from henceforth, Self murders denied ordinary burials
if any Person Inhabitant of Stranger, shall at any time be found by any Jury
to lay violent hands on themselves, or be wilfully guilty of their own Death,
every such person shall be denied the privilege of being Buried in the Common
Burying place of Christians, but shall be Buried in some Common Highway where
the Select-men of the Town where such person did inhabit shall appoint, and a
Cart-load of Stones laid upon the Grave as a Brand of Infamy, and as a warning
to others to beware of the li^^e Damnable practices.[1660]

SHEEP.
WHereas the keeping of Sheep tends much to the benefit of the Country, and may
in short time make good supply toward the clothing of the Inhabitants if
carefully preserved; L. 1. p. 14.
and for as much as all places are not fit and convenient for that end;

It is Ordered by this Court; Liberty to keep Sheep on all Common.
That henceforth it shall be lawful for any man to keep Sheep on any Common, be
it for Cows, Oxen or otherwise, belonging to the Town where he lives, Five
sheep for one Cow.
or where at that time he may have Right of Common and that without limitation,
in Commons not stinted, and in such Commons that are stinted, it shall be
lawful for any Inhabitant to use any or all his proportion of Common for Sheep,
accounting five Sheep for one Cow, Steer or Ox; and further, it shall be
lawful for the Select-men of every Town from time to time, A. 56. p. 12.
to make such Orders in their respective Towns, Select-men to Order clearing of
Commons for sheeps pasture
for the clearing of their Commons of Wood and Brush, for keeping of Sheep, as
also for the fines of putting Rams to their Flocks, as they shall judge meet.

2. It is further Ordered; That if any man shall course Sheep with a Dog, ^word
killing sheep to be (...)
or otherwise molest them, by driving them from their feeding, he shall pay
five shillings for every such offense, besides double damages, and if any dog
shall kill any sheep, the Owner shall either hang such dog, or pay double
damages for the sheep, and if any dog has been (...) to course or bite Sheep
before, not being set on, and his Owner has had notice thereof, then he shall
both hang his dog, and pay for such sheep as he shall either bite or kill* And
if in such case he shall refuse to hang his dog, then the Constable of the Town
upon notice thereof, shall forthwith cause it to be done.

3. It is further Ordered; A. 53. p. 13.
That all Owners of Sheep, who shall put their Wool so sale, sheep to be washed
before shorn,
shall, and hereby are enjoined yearly to wash their Sheep in clear water not
being either salt, blackish or dirty, and shall take care they be not kept in
dirty or sandy Ground, cool to be made up clean
between the time of washing and shearing; And in making up the piecces to take
care no short Locks. Lumps of dirt, or course Tails be wound up therein, upon
the penalty of forfeiture of twelve pence a Sheep for all and every detect
aforesaid. [1648, 53, 56.]

Ships, Ship-Carpenters.
WHereas the building of Ships is a business of great Importance for the Common
good, and therefore suitable care ought to be taken, that it be well performed,
according to the commendable course of England and other places;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Surveyors
appointed to view all ships to building
That when any Ship is to be Built within this Jurisdiction, or any Vessel
above thirty Tunns, the Owner, or Builder in his absence, shall before they
begin to Plank, repair to the Governor or Deputy Governor, or any two
Magistrates, upon the penalty of ten pounds, who shall appoint some able man to
survey the Work and Workmen from time to time, as is usual in England, and the
same so appointed, shall have such liberty and power as belongs to his Office.

And if any Ship-Carpenter shall not upon his Advice, Their power
Reform and Amend any thing which he shall find to be amiss, then upon
complaint to the Governor, or Deputy Governor, or any two Magistrates, they
shall appoint two of the most sufficient Ship-Carpenters of this Jurisdiction,
and shall Authorize them from time to time, as need shall require, to take view
of every such Ship and all works thereto belonging, and to see that it be
performed and carried on according to the Rules of their Art.

And for this end an Oath shall be Administered to them, Oath
to be faithful and indifferent between the Owner and the Workman, and their
charges shall be born by such as shall be found I^ default: Charges
And those Viewers shall have power to cause any bad Timbers, or other
insufficient Work or Materials to be taken out and amended at the charge of
them through whose default it grows. [1641, 47.]

2. It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all Ships which come for
Trading only from other parts, Repealed.
shall have free access into our Harbors, and quiet Riding there, and free
liberty to depart without any molestation by us, they paying all such duties
and charges required by Law in the Country, as others do. [1645.]

THis Court having perused and considered the Letter received from his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, dated the 24 of June last, relating to
an Act of parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Encouraging and Increasing of
Shipping and Navigation; As an Addition and Explanation of former Orders made
by this Court concerning these Affairs;

It is hereby Ordered and Enacted; Officers Authorized about shipping
That the several Officers hereafter mentioned, are hereby Deputed and
Authorized to see that the said Act be performed, so far as it concerns the
Government of this Plantation, both in seizing Ships or Vessels inhibibited by
the said Act to Trade here, taking Bonds of all Ships and Vessels that Lades in
our Ports any Commodities expressed in the said Act, of the Growth, Product or
Manufactory of the English Plantations, who shall not produce certificate that
they have given Bond already as the said Act requires.

And in case of neglects or contempt, to seize such Vessels or Ships that Lades
the aforesaid Goods without giving Bond or showing Certificates: and to keep
accounts of all such Ships and Vessels, with the Names of the Masters, that
Lades here as aforesaid, and return an account twice every year, with Copies of
the said Bonds and Certificates unto the Governor for the time being, by him
to be transmitted to London, directed to the chief Officer there.

The Officers appointed are as follows;
For the Ports of Boston and Charlstown, Their Names
Mr. Edward Rawson. For Salem, Marble-head and Gloucester, Mr. Hilliard Veven.
For the River of Pascataqua and Isle of Shoals, and Ports adjacent, Captain
Brian Pendleton.
The Fees they are Authorized to take of every Ship-Master, are
For taking Bond, and Transcribing the Copy five shillings. For Receiving and
Entering a Certificate, And Fees
two shillings six pence. For giving Certificate, and Recording it, two
shillings six pence. Their part of seizures as the said Act directs.
And that all employed in this trust, do from time to time, make return of all
Bonds and Certificates by them passed to Mr. Rawson, who by the Governors
Advice shall make return thereof for England, Bonds of Ship-Masters, etc.
as the Act of Parliament requires: And that Mr. Rawson do from time to time
present the Council of this Common weal, or in default thereof the Court of
Assistants, with true Accounts of all Bonds and Certificates, and Copies of all
Letters that he shall send for England, in any wife referring to this matter.

Moreover it is Ordered; That the Secretary take special care forthwith to send
by the first opportunity four Copies of the Councils, and one of the Copies of
the Act of Parliament relating thereunto, to the four General Governments of
New England, viz. Plymouth, Connecticot, New Haven, and Road-Island. [1663.]

BE it also Enacted by the Authority of this Court; Penalty for drinking
healths See in ships or vessels.
That no Masters of Ships, or Seamen, having their Vessels Riding within any of
our Harbors in this Jurisdiction, shall presume to Drink Healths, or suffer
any Healths to be drunk within their Vessels by day or night, or to shoot off
any Gun after the Daylight is past, or on the Sabbath Day, on penalty for
every Health twenty shillings, and for every Gun so shot twenty shillings.

And the Captain of the Castle is hereby enjoined to give notice of this Order
to all Ships that pass by the Castle. [1663.]

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That all Ships and
Vessels above Twenty Tuns, that Trade within our Ports belonging to other
places; Ships of Burden to pay half a pound of Powder the Tun
or that the greater part of the Owners thereof, are not Inhabitants of this
Jurisdiction, shall pay half a pound of Gunpowder, or the full value thereof
in money, for every Tun of Burden they are of, every Voyage they make hither,
toward Provisions for Public Fortifications, which is to be paid to the
persons hereafter named, or to whom they shall Depute under their hands.

For the Ports of Boston and Charls-town Major General Leveret. For Salem and
Marble-head, Major William Hauthorn. For Pascataqua River, Mr. Richard Cutts.
And in case if Master or Commander of any such Ships or Vessels shall refuse
upon Demand to pay the same, it shall be lawful for the said Gentlemen, or any
one of them to send forth their Warrants to any Marshal or Constable, to
Distrein upon the Goods of such Master or Commander, or on any of the
Appurtinencies of their Vessels for the same, with the charges thereof; And the
Gentlemen appointed as aforesaid, shall be accountable to the General Court
when called thereunto, for what they shall receive by virtue of this Order, and
are to deliver the Powder or Money they have in their Hands once every year or
oftener unto the Surveyor General, excepting one shilling out of every twenty
shillings they shall receive, which shall be allowed them for Defraying their
necessary charges thereabout. [1667.]

TO prevent Calumny, Reproach and Prejudice to this Colony and the Inhabitants,
and Trade thereof;

It is Ordered; All trade with ships forbidden before the Government he
acknowledged
That no person shall henceforth Trade or Track with any Vessel that shall
Arrive upon our Coast, until the same shall come under command, and ride in our
usual Harbors, and have acknowledged the Government as the Law provides, upon
the penalties of all such Goods Traded, and such further punishment as the
Court of Assistants shall adjudge. [1670.]

SPINNING.
T His Court taking into serious Consideration the present streights and
necessities of the Country, A. 55. p. 11.
in respect of Clothing, which is not like to be so plentifully supplied from
foreign parts as in times past, and not knowing any better way or means
conduceable to our subsistence, then the improving of as many hands as may be
in Spinning Wool, Cotton, Flax, etc.

Does therefore Order, Select men to appoint (...) much each (...) shall spin
and be it Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all hands not
necessarily employed on other occasions, as Women, Girls and Boys, hall and
hereby are enjoined to Spin according to their skill and ability; and that the
Select men in every Town do consider the condition and capacity of every
family, and accordingly do assess them at one or more Spinners;

And because several Families are necessarily employed the greatest part of
their time in other business, yet if opportunities were attended, some time
might be spared, at least by some of them for this work;

The said Select Men shall therefore Assess such Families at half and quarter
Spinners, according to their capacities.

And every one thus aforesaid, for a whole Spinner, shall for time to come,
Spin every Year for thirty Weeks, three pound a Week of Linen, Cotton or
Woollen, and so proportionably for half and quarter Spinners, under the penalty
of twelve pence a pound short.

And the Select Men shall take special care for the Execution of the Order,
which may easily be effected by dividing their several Towns into ten, six,
five, etc. parts, and to appoint one of the ten, six or five, etc. to take an
account of their Divisions, and to certify the Select Men, if any be defective
in what they are assessed, who shall improve the penalties imposed on such as
are negligent, for the encouragement of those that are diligent in this work,
[1655.]

STRAYES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Finders of goods to
give notice to the Constable. to cry
That whosoever shall take up any Stray Beast, or find any Goods lost, whereof
the Owner is not known, he shall give notice thereof to the Constable of the
same Town, within six days, who shall enter the same in a Book, and take Order
that it be cried at their next Lecture or General Town meeting, upon three
several days; And if it be above twenty shillings value at the next Market or
two next Towns public Meetings where no Market is within ten miles, upon pain
that the party so finding, and the said Constable having such notice and
failing to do as is here appointed, to forfeit either of them for such default,
one third part of the value of such Stray or lost Goods:

And if the finder shall not give notice as aforesaid, Finders to apprize and
Record lost goods
within one Month, or if he keep it more then three Months and shall not
apprize it by indifferent men, and also Record it with the Recorder of the
County Court where it is found, he shall then forfeit the full value thereof:

And if the Owner appears within one Year after such Publication, Restore the
goods if the Owner appear in a year
he shall have restitution of the same, or the value thereof, paying all
necessary charges, and to the Constable for his care and pains, as one of the
next Magistrates, or the three Commissioners of the Town shall adjudge. And if
no Owner appear within the time prefixed, the said Stray or lost Goods shall be
to the use of the finder, paying to the Constable ten shillings, or the fifth
part of the value of such Stray or lost Goods, at the finders choice.

And it is Ordered; Stray beast to have a With about the neck
That every such finder shall put and keep from time time a With or Wreath
about the neck of every such Stray Beast within one Month after such finding,
upon penalty of loosing all his charges that shall arise about it afterward,
(provided that no person shall from the first of April to the twentieth of
December, take up any Horse Gelding or Mare for a Stray, Taking off the With,
or taking away the beast forfeit the value
or account or use them as Strayes, though the Owner thereof be not known;
unless it be taken Damage feizant in enclosures) Provided also, that if any
Owner or other, shall take off such With or Wreath, or take away such Beast
before he has discharged according to this Order, he shall forfeit the full
value of the thing (apprized as aforesaid) to the use of the finder. [1647.]

AS an Addition and Explanation of the Law tit. Strayes; This Court finding
that several inconveniences and troubles do arise about Strayes, Chattel and
Horses, Addition to the Law of Strayes.
etc. and that the temptation may be too great on some persons in remote Towns
and Farms, to take up Chattel, etc. and make Strayes of them, the whole benefit
^^^^^nding to themselves;

This Court does Order for the time to come, That all Strayes shall be first
cried in that Town of which they have the Brand-mark; To be cried in the Town
on which they have the Brand mark
And that all such Strayes and other lost Goods contained in the said Law,
shall be entered with the County Recorder in each County, and by him transferred
to the Country Treasurer within one Month; To be entered with the Recorder of
the County
and in case the said Goods and Strayes are not owned within one year, as is
therein expressed, then the one half, or the value of one half shall be to the
use of the Country, Half to the Country and the other half to the Finder
and the other half to the finder, the charges being first paid out of the
whole. [1666.]

STRANGERS.
WHereas we are credibly informed that great mischiefs have been done to other
Plantations by reason of Commanders, A. 51. p. 7.
Soldiers, and other Strangers; To prevent the like in this jurisdiction;

It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That henceforth all
Strangers of what quality soever, Strangers Arriving to be brought before the
Governor
above the age of sixteen years, Arriving in any Ports or Parts of this
Jurisdiction, in any Ship or Vessel, shall immediately be brought before the
Governor, Deputy Governor, or two other Magistrates, by the Master or Mate of
the said Ship or Vessel, upon penalty of twenty pounds for default thereof,
there to give an account of their occasions and business in this Country,
whereby satisfaction may be given, and Order taken with such Strangers as the
said Governor, Deputy Governor, two Magistrates, or the next County Court
shall see meet, who shall keep a Record of the Names and Qualities of all such
Strangers, to be returned to the next General Court.

And for the Publications of this Order;

It is Ordered, Capt. of the Castle to give notice of this Order
the same to be Posted upon the Doors or Posts of the Meeting houses and other
public places in all the Port Towns of this Jurisdiction:

And the Captain of the Castle shall make known this Order to every Ship or
Vessel as it passes by, and the Constable of every Port Town shall endeavor
to do the like to such Ships or Vessels before they Land their Passengers.
[1651.]

And if any Strangers, L. 1. p. 23.
or People of other Nations, professing the true Christian Religion, Strangers
to be succored
shall fly to us from the Tyrany or Oppression of their Persecutors, or from
Famine, Wars or the like necessary and compulsory Cause, they shall be
entertained and succored amongst us according to that power and prudence God
shall give us. [1641.]

Every person within this Jurisdiction, L. 2. p. 32,
whether Inhabitant or Stranger, shall enjoy the same Law and Justice that is
general for this Jurisdiction, which we constitute and execute one toward
another in all cases proper to our cognizance, without partiality or delay.
[1641.]

No Town or person shall receive any Stranger Resorting hither with intent to
Reside in this Jurisdiction, Strangers to have equal Justice
nor shall allow any Lot or Habitation to any, or entertain any such above
three Weeks, except such person shall have allowance under the hand of some one
Magistrate, upon pain of every Town that shall give or fell any Lot or
Habitation to any not so Licensed such fine to the Country as the County Court
shall impose, not exceeding fifty pounds, nor less then ten pounds; And of
every person receiving any such for longer time then is hereby allowed, except
in case of entertainment of friends resorting from other parts of this Country
in amity with us, No Town or person to entertain strangers without allowance
to forfeit as aforesaid, not exceeding twenty pounds, nor less then four
pounds; and for every Month after so offending shall forfeit as aforesaid, not
exceeding ten pounds, nor less then forty shillings.

And every Constable shall inform the Courts of all new comers, Finable
which they know to be admitted without License from time to time. [1637, 38,
47.]

Sureties and Goods Attached.
UPon Information of some inconveniences accruing to several persons, L. 1. p.
15.
in that men take themselves acquitted and free from all legal observations in
case of appearance in Courts, according to the express terms of the Bond, or
at most if the Principal there stay till Verdict and Judgment be given (which
if they be) they may then make away their Estates, or absent their persons
before the twelve hours be expired for granting Execution, whereby the party
recovering may either be deprived of, or much damaged in his just Rights;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Not
discharged till Judgment be satisfied
That henceforth all Goods Attached upon any Action, shall not be released upon
the appearance of the party, or Judgment given, but shall stand engaged until
the Judgment, or the Execution granted upon the said Judgment be discharged:

Nor shall any Surety or Sureties for appearance in any Court, except in
Capital or Criminal Cases, be released from his or their Bond until the
Execution as aforesaid be discharged and satisfied, or the person delivered to
the Marshal
or the Principal Person be surrendered into the hands of the Marshal or his
Deputy, who shall secure him till the Judgment be discharged, any Law, Custom
or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always That henceforth in all Civil proceedings (except in cases
where the Defendant is a Stranger) where Execution is not taken out and
Executed within one Month after that Judgment is granted, Goods and Persons
Attached one month after Judgment released
all such Attachments, whether on persons or Estates, with Sureties, shall be
released and void in Law; any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding: unless the Court that granted the Judgment shall see cause to
give further time, and respit of Execution in any particular case.

Swearing and Cursing.
IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; Swearing 10. 9.
That if any person within this Jurisdiction, shall Swear rashly or vainly by
the Holy Name of God, Swearing 10 9,
or other Oath, he shall forfeit to the Common Treasury for every such offense
ten shillings; and it shall be in the power of any Magistrate, by warrant to
the Constable, to call such person before him, and upon sufficient proof to
sentence such offender, or fit in stocks
and to give Order to leavie the fine; and if such person be not able, or shall
refuse to pay the said fine, he shall be committed to the Stocks, there to
continue not exceeding three hours, nor less then one hour.

2. And if any person shall swear more Oaths then one at a time, L. 2. p. 14.
before he remove out of the Room or Company where he so Swears, more Oaths
then one (...).
he shall then pay twenty shillings.

The like penalty shall be inflicted for Profane and Wicked Cursing of any
Person or Creature, and for the multiplying the same, as is appointed for
profane Swearing; and in case any person so offending, by multiplying Oaths or
Cursing, like penalty for Cursing
shall not pay his or their fines forthwith, they shall be whipped or committed
to Prison till they shall pay the same, at the discretion of the Court or
Magistrate that shall have cognizance thereof.

SWINE.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Select-men to make
Orders to prevent harms by Swine
That every Town-ship within this Jurisdiction, or the Select-men thereof, are
empowered and hereby required from time to time, to make Orders for preventing
all harms by Swine, in Corn, Meadows, Pastures and Gardens, as also all danger
to Children or elder persons in any respects by Swine, and to impose penalties
according to their best discretion, and to appoint one of their Inhabitants, by
Warrant under the hands of the Select-men, or the Constable where no Select-men
are, to leavie such fines and penalties; A. 1653.
and if any person chosen to see the Execution of this Order, shall neglect or
refuse the same, he shall forfeit five pounds, the one half to the Town, the
other half to the party that accepts the place, and performs his duty therein.

2. And where Towns Border each upon other, whose Orders is may be are various;

Satisfaction shall be made for harms done by Swine, Damage to be paid
according to the Town Orders where it is done
according to the Orders of the Town where the damage is done.

But if the Swine be Ringed and Yoaked, or otherwise, as the Orders of the Town
to which they belong, does require, then where no Fence is, or that it be
insufficient, through which the Swine come to Trespass, the Owner of the Land
or Fence shall bear all damages.

And it is hereby Declared; No Fence as damage
That all Fences made of Stone, Pales, Rails, Rivers, Creeks, or any other
Fences which are allowed (by such men as are appointed in the several Towns to
view Fences) to be sufficient against great Cattle, A. 51. p. 4.
shall be held and accounted sufficient against Swine, Fences sufficient
and all Swine breaking through such Fences, shall be liable to make
satisfaction for all Damages done.

3. And if any Swine be Impounded for Damage done, and there be kept three
days, No owners appearing Swine to be prized
and that no person will own them, then the party Damnified shall give notice
to the two next Towns where any are within five miles Compass that such Swine
are to be sold by an Outcry, within three days after such notice by the party
Damnified; and in case none will buy, he shall cause them to be Apprized by two
indifferent men (one whereof shall be the Constable or one chosen by him)
signified under their hands in Writing, and may keep them for his own use. And
in both cases, if the Owner shall after appear, the overplus according to the
said valuation (all Damages and Charges being paid) shall forthwith be rendered
to him.

And if any Town or Select men shall neglect to take Order for preventing harms
by Swine according to this Law, more then one Month after publication hereof,
such Town or Select-men shall forfeit to the Treasury forty shillings for every
Month so neglecting. [1647, ^^, 58.]

TILE-EARTH.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That all Tile-Earth to make Sale Ware, shall be
Dug before the first of the ninth Month, and turned over in the last and
first Month en^ueing, a Month before it be Wrought, upon pain of forfeiting
one half part of all such Tiles as shall be otherwise made, to the use of the
Common Treasury. [1647.]

TOBACCO.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That no man shall take any Tobacco within twenty
Poles of any House, or so near as may endanger the same, or near any Barn,
Corn, or Hay cock, as may occasion the firing thereof, upon pain of ten
shillings for every such offense, besides full Recompense of all Damages done
by means thereof:

Nor shall any take Tobacco in any Inn or common Victual House, except in a
private Room there, so as neither the Master of the said House, nor any other
Guest there shall take offense thereat, which if any do, then such person shall
forthwith forbear, upon pain of two shillings six pence for every such offense.
And all fines incurred by this Law, the one half part shall be to the Informer,
the other to the Poor of the Town where the offense is done. [1638, 47.]

Tolling of Cattle.
FOr the prevention of Felionious practices growing upon us, by Stealing of
Horse-kinde, and other Neat Cattle, and selling them as their own;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That there shall be a
Toll-Book kept in every Town by the Clerk of the Writts, wherein all
Horse-kinde, and other Cattle as aforesaid, bought of any person, shall be
Entered, with their Age, Color and Marks, at the peril of the Buyer, with the
Name of the Seller; and such Seller shall have two vouchers to Testify the
said Seller to be the proper Owner of such Horsekinde or other Cattle so sold;
or in case of Horse-kinde or Cattle so sold, shall be challenged by any other
person, the Vouchers in case of the escape of the Seller, shall be liable to
all damages that shall arise thereupon: And the Clerk of the Writts shall have
three pence of the Buyer, for entering every such Horse-kinde, or Neat Cattle;
And if any Horse-kinde, or other Cattle as aforesaid, so bought by any person
be not Tolled, nor Sellers, nor Vouchers found, upon challenge of any such
Cattle, the said Buyer shall be liable to all Damages, as the Felon himself
should be were he present: And any person or persons having lost any
Horse-kinde, or other such Cattle, shall have free liberty to search any
Toll-Book in any Town, in any such case. [1668.]

TOWN-SHIP.
WHereas particular Towns have many things which concern only themselves and
the ordering their own affairs, L. 2. p. 10.
and disposing of business in their own Town;

It is therefore Ordered, That the Freemen of every Town, with such others as
are allowed, Towns power to dispose Lands
or the major part of them, shall have power to dispose of their own Lands and
Woods, with all the Privileges and Appurtenances of the said Towns, to grant
Lots, and also to choose their own particular Officers, as Constables, Surveyors
for the Highways, and the like Annually, or otherwise as need requires;
Choose officers
And to make such Laws and Constitutions as may concern the welfare of their
Town, Provided they be ^ot of Criminal, but of Prudential nature, and that
their penalties exceed not twenty shillings for one offense, and that they be
not Repugnant to the public Laws and Orders of the Country. To make Orders


And if any Inhabitant shall neglect or refuse to observe them, they shall have
power to leavie the appointed penalty by Distress.

And if any man shall behave himself offensively at any Town meeting, the rest
then present shall have power to Sentence him for such offense, so as the
penalty exceed not twenty shillings.

2. And every Town-ship has power to choose yearly, or for less time, a
convenient number of fit men to order the Planting, and prudential Affairs of
their Towns, To choose Select-men
according to instruction given them in Writing, Provided nothing be done by
them contrary to the Laws and Orders of the Country, Provided also that the
number of the Select-men be not above nine.

3. And all Towns shall take care from time to time, To dispose of single
persons
to Order and Dispose all single persons and in mates within their Towns, to
service or otherwise, and if any be grieved at such Order or Disposal, they
have liberty to Appeal to the next County Court.

4. And it is hereby Ordered and Enacted; A.58.
That all English men, that are settled Inhabitants and House-holders in any
Town, of the age of twenty four years, and of honest and good Conversations,
being Rated at eighty pounds Estate in a single Country Rate, and that have
taken the Oath of Fidelity to this Government, 1670.
and no other (except Freemen) may be chosen select men, Jurors or Constables,
and have their Vote in the choice of the Select-men, for the Town Affairs,
Assessments of Rates and other Prudentials proper to the Town; Provided always
the major part of the companies of Select men be Freemen from time to time,
that shall make a valid Act, as also where no Select-men are, to have their
Vote in ordering Schools, Who may Vote in Towns
Hearding of Cattle, laying out Highways, and Distributing Lands; Any Law,
Use or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

IT is Ordered; That in stead of the sum of twenty pounds in the 4. Sect. tit.
Townships, it shall be ince^ted instead thereof eighty pounds; Provided this
change of that from be not interpreted to exclude any person from the
privilege granted him formerly in that Law. [1670.]

5. Whereas Complaints have been made, that many (especially in Boston) who are
meet and fit to serve the Country in the Office of Constable, A. 53. p. 1^.
take encouragement to withdraw from that service by reason of the smalness of
the fines that Towns have power to impose for such refusal;

It is therefore Ordered, That henceforth it shall be lawful for the Town of
Boston, to impose the fine of ten pounds; and for all other Towns, to impose
the fine of five pounds upon every such person (being legally chosen in the
respective Towns) that shall refuse to serve in the Office of a Constable in
the Town where he is chosen, Power to fine such as refuse the Office of
Constable
if in his person he be able to execute it:

And the Select-men of every Town are hereby empowered to Order and Require the
Constables to leavie the said fines by Distress, which shall be to the use of
the Town. [^6, 48, 47, 53, 58]

IT is Ordered; Townships privilege
That hereafter no Cottage or Dwelling place shall be admitted to the
privilege of Commonage for Wood, Timber and Herbage, or any other the
Privileges that lie in Common in any Town or Peculiar, but such as already are
in being, or hereafter shall be Erected by the consent of the Town. [1660.]

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority hereof, That the following Order
shall be directed and sent by the Clerks of the several Shire Courts, to the
Constables of the Towns within their Shire, who are enjoined faithfully to
execute the same; and if upon the Return made, it does appear that the Select
men are negligent in executing the Laws therein mentioned; the Court shall
proceed against them by Admonition, or fine, as the merit of the case may
require, and shall also dispose of single persons, or stubborn Children or
Servants to the House of Correction, according to the intent of the Law, any
Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

To the Constable of A.
WHereas the Law published by the Honored General Court, lib. 1. page 76.
sect. 3. do require all Towns from time to time, to dispose of all single
persons and in-mates within their Towns to service, or otherwise, and in page
16. tit. Children and Youth;

It is required of the Select-men, that they see that all Children and Youth,
under Family Government, be taught to read perfectly the English Tongue, have
knowledge in the Capital Laws, and be taught some Orthodox Catechism, and that
they be brought up to some honest employment, profitable to themselves and the
Commonwealth; and in case of neglect on the part of the Family Governors,
after Admonition given them, the said Select men are required, with the help of
two Magistrates, or next Court of that Shire, to take such Children or
Apprentises from them, and place them forth, with such as will look more
straightly to them.

The neglect whereof, as by sad experience from Court to Court abundantly
appears, does occasion much sin and profaneness to increase among us, to the
dishonor of God, and the ensnaring of many Children and Servants, by the
dissolute lives and practices of such as do live from under Family Government,
and is a great discouragement to those Family Governors, who conscientiously
endeavor to bring up their Youth in all Christian nurture; as the Laws of God
and this Commonwealth does require:

T Hese are therefore in His Majesty's Name, to require you to acquaint the
Select-men of your Town, that the Court does expect and will require, that the
said Laws be accordingly attended, the prevalen^y of the former neglect
notwithstanding: And you are also required to take a List of the Names of those
young persons within the Bounds of your Town, and all adjacent. Farms though
out of all Town Bounds, who do live from under Family Government, viz. do not
serve their Parents or Masters, as Children; Apprentices, Hired Servants, or
Journey men ought to do, and usually aid in our Native Country, being subject
to their Commands and Discipline, and the same you are to return to the next
Court to be held at (...) on the (...) day of (...) and hereof you are to make
a true Return under your hand, and not to fail.

WHereas in the Law tit. Town-ships, The several Towns, and Select-men of the
said Towns, have power to impose Penalties as the Law directs; And whereas many
Constables question whether it be their Duty to serve Warrants from the
Select-men for Persons to appear before them, and to leavie fines: For the
removal of such Doubts, as an Addition to the said Law;

This Court does Order and Require; That all Constables respectively, shall
serve all Warrants from the Select-men, and leavie all such fines as shall be
imposed by the said Town or Select-men. [1671.]

TREASURERS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; To keep perfect Accounts
That the Country Treasurer shall from time to time keep exact and perfect
Books of Accounts, of all Transactions for the Country, and particularly of all
Debts and Dues belonging to the Country, either by Forfeits, Fines, Rates, how
to disburse
Gifts, Legacies, Rents, Customs, in positions or otherwise, as by Whales,
Ship-wracks, and things of like nature, where the Owner is not known, and the
Country may claim a Privilege or Common Right unto; as also of all his
payments and disbursements for the Countries use, which he shall not make but
by virtue of some settled Custom, Law or Order of this Court, or by special
Order of this Court, or of the Council, nor shall he make any Payment to any
person indebted to the Country till such person either pay his Debt, or defaulk
so much as is due to the Country

2. And it is further Ordered; That henceforth there shall be Treasurers
Annually chosen in every County by the Freemen thereof, A. 54. p. 2.
who shall give in their Votes in each Town, County Treasurer. how chosen
on the day of Voting for Nomination of Magistrates, which shall be sent sealed
up by the same person to the Shire meeting, and there opened before the
Commissioners, who shall certify the County Courts under their hands, the Name
of the person chosen, Provided no Clerk or Recorder of any County Court shall
be chosen Treasurer for the County. No Clerk of Court to be Treasurer


And the said Treasurers, shall from time to time, keep exact and perfect Book
of Accounts of all Transactions of the County, and particularly of all Debts
and Dues belonging to the County, either by Forfeits, Fines, Rates, Guists,
Legaties, Rants, Customs or otherwise, as also all his Disbursements for the
Charges of the County Courts, Shire Commissioners, (...)
with all other peculiar charges of the County which he shall pay by Order of
the County Court, except the twenty pounds due to the Major of the Regiment for
the year of public exercise, which shall be paid by the Country Treasurer as
heretofore.

3. And it is Ordered; That all fines arising in any County Court, or by Order
of one Magistrate or Commissioners empowered in Criminal Cases, A. 53.
shall from time to time be paid in to the Treasurer of that County where the
Delinquent party does dwell, (...)
except only where any person shall be taken in the manner, and immediately
censured by Authority in any other County where such offense is committed.

4. It is Ordered; (...)
That the Secretary of the General Court and Court of Assistants, and the Clerk
or Recorder of every County Court, shall keep Books of Account, of all Dues
arising within the cognizance of the respective Courts, by Entry of Actions,
Fines or otherwise; as also a true account of the Fees of the Officers and
other charges of the Court, which belongs to the respective Treasurers to
satisfy; To certify the, Treasurers all Dues in 14 (...).
and within fourteen days after the end of every Court, the said Secretary and
Clerk, shall deliver to the respective Treasurers, a true Transcript of all
Fines and other dues, payable to the Country or County, Treasurers (...)
and the said Treasurers shall within one week after the Receipt of such
Transcript, direct his Warrant to the Marshal or Constable for the leavying
thereof.

And if any Treasurer, Secretary, Marshal or Constable, make default herein, he
shall suffer the penalty of making good all Damage that shall come thereby.

And every Treasurer, Treat allowance*
for his pains and service, is allowed one shilling in the pound of all fines
received by him, and to be free from all Country and County Rates.

And all Treasurers are hereby enjoined once every year, To give a yearly
Account
to give an account of all their Transactions; the Country Treasurer to the
General Court, or to such as the said Court shall appoint, and present the same
at the Court of Election yearly.

And the County Treasurers shall likewise yearly present their Accounts to the
County Courts; County Courts to false Taxes to defray County charges
and if there be not enough in the Treasurers hands to satisfy the charges of
the County, the said County Court shall give Warrant to leavie the Arrears upon
the whole County by Rate, to be leavied upon each Town and Person (except such
as are Rate-free) in proportion with the County Rate next before going, to be
collected by the Constables of each Town, who are hereby enjoined to attend the
same. [1648,54,57,58.]

WHereas the Law tit. Treasurers, does not so fully explain it self, as is
intended; in order to the Execution of the same, in reference to County
Treasurers;

This Court Declare; That the same Power and Directions gives to the Country
Treasurer in his place, County Treasure power and duty
is likewise intended to the County Treasurer in his Place and Limits:

For the better discharge of his Duty, and that every Constable be trusted with
the Collecting of any County Rate, which does not within his year pay in his
respective County Rate, and make up his Accounts with the Treasurer from which
he had his Warrant so to do;

Such Constable shall forfeit to the County forty shillings for his neglect,
and be liable to clear his Accounts within two Months; and that every County
Treasurer shall present the Names of such Constables as shall neglect their
duty to the next County Court; And that Corn or other Goods paid in to the
County Treasurers, shall be at the same prises that this Court shall from time
to time set for the Country Rate; Any Custom or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding. [1662.]

TRIALS.
IT is Ordered; No cause to be (...) brought to the Genesis Court
That all causes between Party and party, shall first be tried in some
Inferior Court; and that if the party against whom the Judgment shall pass,
shall have any new Evidence, or other new matter to plead, he may desire a new
Trial in the same Court upon a Bill of Review. And if Justice shall not be done
him upon that Trial, he may then come to this Court for Relief. [1642.]

2. It is Ordered, and by this Court Declared; That in all Actions of Law it
shall be the liberty of the Plaintiff and Defendant by mutual consent to
choose whether they will be tried by the Bench, Liberty for Trials by Bench or
Jury
or by the Bench and Jury, unless it be where the Law upon just reason has
otherwise determined; the like liberty shall be granted to all persons in any
Criminal case.

3. Also it shall be in the liberty of both Plaintiff and Defendant, and
likewise of every Delinquent to be judged by a Jury; Liberty to challenge
to challenge any of the Jurors, and if the challenge be sound just and
reasonable by the Bench or the rest of the Jury, as the challenger shall
choose, it shall be allowed him, and tales de circumstantibus Impannelled in
their room.

4. Also Children, Idiots, Distracted persons, and all that are Stangers or new
comers to our Plantation, shall have such allowances, and dispensations in any
case, whether Criminal or others, as Religion and Reason require. [1641.]

VAGABONDS.
THis Court being sensible of the increase of Profaneness and Irreligiousness,
by reason of the Vegrent and Vagabond life of sundry persons, as well
Inhabitants as Foreigners, that winder from their (...) Relations and Dwelling
places, from Town to Town, thereby drawing away Children, Servants, and other
persons, both younger and elder, from their lawful Callings and Employments,
and hardening the hearts of one another against all Subjection to the Rules of
Gods Holy Word, and the Established Laws of this Colony: All which to prevent;

This Court does hereby Order and Enact; That all such persons, where ever they
may be found in any place of this Jurisdiction, Vagabonds and wa^dring persons
be Apprehended by the Constable of the said place, with or without further
Warrant, and and brought before the next Magistrate; who if upon Examination,
shall find them to be such as do not give a good and satisfactory (...)
account of such their Wandering up and down, they shall proceed with and against
them as Rogues and Vagabonds, and cause them to be corporally punished, and
sent from Constable to Constable, until they come to the place of their abode:
Or in case they will not confess where their abode is within this Colony, nor
yet voluntarily depart out of the same, then to be sent to the House of
Correction, there to remain until the next Court of that County. [1662.]

VOTES.
IT is Ordered, and by this Court Declared; That all and every Freeman, and
others Authorized by Law, called to give any Advice, Vote, Verdict or Sentence
in any Court, Council or Civil Assembly, Liberty of Voting
shall have freedom to do it according to their true Judgment and Conscience,
so it be done orderly and in-offensively for the manner, and that in all cases
wherein any Freeman or other is to give his Vote, be it in point of Election,
or to be silent
making Constitutions and Orders, or passing Sentence in any case of
Judicature, or the like; if he cannot see Light or Reason to give it positively
one way or other, he shall have liberty to be silent, and not pressed to a
determinate Vote, which yet shall be Interpreted and Accounted as if he Voted
for the Negative. Neuters accounted on the negative.


And further that whenever any thing is to be put to a Vote, and Sentence to
be Pronounced, or any other matter to be Proposed, or Read in any Court or
Assembly, if the President or Moderator shall refuse to perform it, the major
part of the Members of that Court or Assembly, shall have power to appoint any
other meet person to do it, and if there be just cause, to punish him that
should, and would not. [1651.]

USURY.
IT is Ordered, Decreed, and by this Court Declared; That no man shall be
adjudged for the mere forbearance of any Debt, above eight pound in the
hundred, for one year, and not above the Rate proportionably for all sums
whatsoever, (Bills of Exchange excepted) neither shall this be a color or
countenance to allow any Usury amongst us contrary to the Law of God. [1641, 4
(...)]

WAMPAMPEAG.
IT is Ordered; That Wampampeag shall pass current in the payment of Debts, to
the payment of forty shillings, the white at eight a penny, the black at four,
Repealed. 1661.
so as they be entire without breaches or deforming spots, except in payment of
Country Rates to the Treasurer, which no Town or person may do, nor he accept
thereof from time to time. [1643, 48, 49, 50.]

WATCHING.
FOr the better keeping of Watches by the Constable in the time of peace;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; A. 52. p. 12.
That all Constables Watches in every Town of this Jurisdiction, shall begin
the first of May, and continue till the end of September, upon the penalty of
five pounds, to be leavied on every Constable neglecting the same.

And it shall be the care of the Constable, Constable to set the Watch
to see that the Watch be so warned, that it may not consist of all, or the
greater part Youths, but that able men be joined with them, that the Watch may
be a sufficient Watch; unless the Select-men of that. Town, who have hereby
power, shall otherwise Order and Dispose the said Watches, both respecting
time, place, A. 57. p. 25.
number and quality of persons, as to them shall seem most meet.

And all Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction (except such as are by Law exempted)
shall according as they are warned to serve the Country in the Constables
Watches, Select-men to order Watches
duly and strictly observe the charge given them by the Constables; And the
Constables in every Town from time to time, are hereby enjoined to give in
their charge to Watch men, that they duly examine all Night walkers after ten
of the clock at night (unless they be known peaceable Inhabitants) to inquire
whether they are going, Constables charg to the Watch
and what their business is; and in case they give not reasonable satisfaction
to the Watchmen or Constable, Night-Walkers to be secured
then the Constable shall forthwith secure them till the morning, and shall
carry such person or persons before the next Magistrate or Commissioner, to
give satisfaction for their being abroad at that time of night. And if the
Watchmen shall find any inhabitant or Stranger, after ten of the clock at
night, behaving themselves any ways debauchedly, or shall be in drink, the
Constable shall secure them, by commitment or otherwise, till the Law be
satisfied.

And further, the Constable is to give the Watch men in charge, Watch to cause
lights to be put out
to see all noises in the streets stilled, and lights put out (except upon
necessary occasions) for the prevention of danger by fire as much as may be.

And every Constable shall present to one of the next Magistrates or
Commissioners, L. 1. p. 52.
the Name of every person, who shall upon lawful warning refuse or neglect to
Watch or Ward, Neglect of Watching forfeit 5. 8.
either in person, or by some other sufficient for that service, and if being
convented, he cannot give a just excuse, such Magistrate or Commissioner shall
grant Warrant to any Constable, to leavie five shillings of every Offender for
such default, the same to be employed for the use of the Watch of the same Town.

And it is the intent of this Law, that every person of able body (not excepted
by Law) or of Estate sufficient to hire another, shall be liable to Watch and
Ward, or to supply by some other, Who (...)
when they shall be thereunto required; And if there be in the same House
diverse such persons, whether Sons, Servants or Sojourners, they shall all be
compellable to Watch as aforesaid; Provided, that all such as live or keep
Families at their Farms, being remote from any Town, shall not be compellable
to Watch and Ward in Towns. [1635, 46, 52, 57.]

THe Court understanding there is much inequality, in that diverse are freed
from those Watches whereof all do receive equal benefit, for an Explicacation
of the Law concerning, Constables watches;

Do Order, the Magistrates, Deputies of this Court for the time being, Persons
(...) Watches
Elders of Churches, the public sworn Officers of the Country, with the
Commission Officers in each Trained Band, be freed from all ordinary Watches
and Wards of the Constables, and no other persons, except such persons as shall
have special and personal Freedom by Order of this Court; any former Grant or
Custom notwithstanding. [1661.]

Weights and Measures.
TO the end Measures and Weights may be one and the same throughout this
jurisdiction;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Standards to be provided by the
Treasurer
That the Country Treasurer shall provide upon the Countries charge, Weights
and Measures of all sorts, for continual Standards, to be Staled with the
Countries Seal, viz. one Bushel, one half Bushel, one Peck, one half Peck, one
Ale quart, one Wine pint, and half pint, one Eln, are Yard, as also a set of
Brass Weights to four pound, which shall be after sixteen Ounces to the Pound,
with fit Scales, and steal Beams to weigh and try withal.

And the Constable of every Town within this Jurisdiction, shall within three
Months after publication hereof, Constables to provide Standards for Towns.
provide upon the Town charge, all such Weights, at least of Lead, and also
sufficient Measures as are above expressed, tried and Sized by the Country
Standards, and Sealed by the said Treasure, or his Deputy in his presence,
(which shall be kept and used only for Standards for their several Towns) who
is hereby Authorized to do the same, for which he shall receive from the
Constable of each Town two pence for every Weight and Measure so proved, (...)
and sealed. And the said Constable of every Town, Sealer to be chosen by the
Select men
shall commit those Weights and Measures unto the custody of the Select-men of
their Towns for the time being, who with the said Constable are hereby enjoined
to choose one able man to be Sealer of such Weights and Measures for their own
Town from time to time, and till another be chosen, which man so chosen, they
shall present to the next County Court, To be sworn at the County Court
there to be sworn to the faithful discharge of his duty, who shall have power
to send forth his Warrants by the Constable, to all the Inhabitants of their
Town to bring in all such Measures and Weights as they make any use of, in the
second Month from year to year, His duty
at such time and place as he shall appoint, and make a return to the Sealer in
Writing of all persons so summoned; that then and there all such Weights and
Measures may be proved and sealed with the Town Seal, (such as in the Order for
Town Cattle) provided by the Constable at each Town charge; (...)
who shall have for every Weight and Measure so Sealed one penny from the
Owners thereof at the first Sealing. And all such Measures and Weights as
cannot be brought to their just Standard, he shall deface or destroy; and after
the first sealing shall have nothing so long as they continue just with the
Standard.

And that none may neglect their Duty herein;

It is further Ordered by the Authority aforesaid; That if any Constable,
Select-men, or Sealer, do not execute this Order as to every of them
appertains, they shall forfeit to the Common Treasury forty shillings for every
such neglect, the space of one Month; and also that every person neglecting to
bring in their Weights and Measures at the time and place appointed, they shall
pay three shillings four pence for every such default, one half part whereof
shall be to the Sealer, and the other half to the Common Treasury, which the
Sealer shall have power to leavie by distress from time to time. [1647.]

2. This Court considering the Complaints of several Abuses, A. 55.
in Measuring Corn, Boards, and Cording of Wood;

Does Order, That it shall be in the power of the Select-men of every Town,
Select-men to appoint measures of Corn etc.
to appoint one or two, or more as need shall require, who shall be sworn
faithfully and uprightly, to Measure all such Corn, Wood or Boards, as they
shall be called unto; and that no man shall be forced to receive any Corn, Wood
or Boards, (except they agree thereunto) but such as is Measured by such person
or persons so appointed and Sworn; the parties receiving the Corn, Wood or
Boards, paying for the Measuring thereof. 1655.

WHARFAGE.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Rates for Wharfage
That these Orders shall be observed by all such as shall bring Goods to any
Wharf, and these Rates following be allowed:

First, For Wood by the Tun three pence; for Timber by the Tun four pence; for
Pipe staves by the thousand nine pence; for Boards by the thousand six pence.
for Merchants Goods, whether in Cask or otherwise by the Tun, six pence; for
Dry Fish by the Quintal one penny; for Corn by the Quarter one penny and a half
penny; for great Cattle by the Head two pence; for Goats, Swine, or other small
Cattle, except such as are sucking their Dams, by the Head a half penny; for
Hay, Straw, and all such Combustable Goods, by the Load six pence; for Stones,
by the Tun a penny; for Cotton Wool, by the Bag two pence; for Sugar, by the
Chest three pence: Provided that Wharfage be taken only where the Wharfs are
made and maintained; and that Wood, Stone and weighty Goods, shall be set up an
end, or laid seven foot from the side of the Wharf, upon penalty of double
Wharfage, and so for other Goods, and that no Goods lie on the Wharf above
forty eight hours without further agreement with the Wharfinger: And that it
shall be lawful for the Wharfinger to take according to these Rates out of the
Goods that are Landed, except they be satisfied otherwise.

2. And it is further Ordered; That none shall cast an Anchor, Graplin, or
Killack, (...)
within or near the Cove at Boston, where it may in danger any other Vessels,
upon penalty of ten shillings, half to the Country, half to the Wharfinger,
besides paying all Damages.

3. And that it shall not be lawful for any person to cast any Dung Draught,
casting in duty penalty (...).
Dirt, or any thing to fill up the Cove, or to annoy the Neighbors, upon
penalty of forty shillings, the one half to the Country, the other half to the
Wharfinger. [1647.]

WILLS.
WHereas it is found by experience, that some men dying, having made their
Wills for the disposing of their Estates, L. 2. p. 16.
that the said Wills are concealed, and not Proved and Recorded; and some
others dying Intestate, no Administration is sought for, nor granted in any
legal way, and yet the Wives; Children, Kindred, or same (...) of the Deceased,
(...) (...) others do enter upon the Lands, and possess themselves of the Goods
of the said Deceased, and the same are many times sold or wasted before the
Creditors to whom the Deceased was indebted knew of whom to Demand, or how to
recover their just (...); For prevention of such unjust and frauament dealings;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That if any Executor
Nominated in any Will, and knowing thereof, shall not at the next Court of the
County, which shall be above thirty days, after the decease of the party,
will, to be proved next Court
make Probate of any Will of any deceased party, or shall not cause the same to
be Recorded, by the Recorder or Clerk of that County Court where the deceased
party last dwelt, or if any person, whatsoever, shall not within the same time
take Administration of all such Goods, as he has or shall enter upon of any
Party deceased, (...) the estaxte without Administration obtained
or if any person or persons shall Alienate or (...) any Lands or Goods, before
they have Proved and Recorded the Will of the Deceased, or taken
Administration, and brought in a true Inventory of all the known Lands, Goods
and Debts of the deceased; every such person so Administering or Executing,
shall be, Liable to be Sued, and shall be bound to pay all such Debts
respectively, as the deceased party owed, Five pound per month ^wordD (...)
proving Wills
whether the estate of the deceased were-sufficient for the same or not, and
shall also forfeit to the Country so many sums of five pounds as shall be
Months betwixt the next Court of that County, after the death of the party as
aforesaid, and the proving of such Will, and Recording it, or the taking of
such Administration.

And if any person shall Renounce his Executorship, If Executor (...) Clerk to
give notice to Court
or that none of the friends or kindred of the deceased party that shall dy^
intestate, shall seek for Administration of such persons estate, then the
Clerk of the writts, of such Town where any such person shall die, shall within
one Month after his decease, give notice to the Court of that County to which
such Town does belong, of such Renouncing of Executorship, or not seeking of
Administration, Or forfeit 40 (...)
that so the Court may take such Order therein as they shall think meet, who
shall also allow such Clerk due recompense for his pains, and if any such
Clerk shall fail herein, he shall forfeit forty shillings to the Treasury for
every months default. [1649.]

2. And because many Merchants, A. 52. P. 15.
Seamen and other Strangers, resorting hither oftentimes, Dying and leaving
their Estates undisposed of, and very difficult to be preserved in the interim
from one County Court to another:

It is therefore Ordered, that it shall and may be Lawful for any two
Magistrates with the Recorder or Clerk of the County Court, Meeting together,
to allow of any Will of any decased party, to the Executors or other persons in
the Will mentioned, Two Magistrates to take probate at Wills.
so as the Will be testified on the Oath of two or more Witnesses, and also to
Grant Administration to the Estate of any person dying intestate within the
said County, to the next of Kin, To grant Administration
or to such as shall be able to secure the same for the next of Kin, and the
Recorder or Clerk of the Court, shall inform the rest of the Magistrates of
the County, at the next County Court, of such Will proved or Administration
Granted, and shall Record the same. [1652.]

3. And it is Ordered, L. 1. P. 53.
that when the Husband or Parents die intestate, L. 2. P. 6.
the County Court of that Jurisdiction where the party had his last Residence,
shall have Power to assign to the widow, such a part of his estate as they
shall judge just and equal; County Court to divide the estate undisposed.
as also to divide and assign to the Children or other Heirs their several
parts and portions out of the said estate.

Provided, the Eldest Son shall have a double Portion, and where there are no
Sons, Eldest Son a double portion
the Daughters shall inherit as Copartners, unless the Court upon just Cause
alleged shall otherwise determine. [1641, 49.]

WITNESSES.
IT is Ordered, Decreed and by this Court Declared, that no man shall be put to
Death, without the Testimony of two or three Witnesses, or that which is
equivalent thereunto. [1641.]

2. And it is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Testimonies
taken before one Magistrate.
That any one Magistrate or Commissioner Authorized thereunto by the General
Court, may take the Testimony of any person of fourteen years of age, or
above; of sound understanding and reputation, in any Case, Civil or Criminal,
and shall keep the same in his own hands till the Court, or deliver it to the
Recorder, Witnesses to appear personally living within ten miles
public Notary or Clerk of the writts, to be Recorded, that so nothing may be
altered in it. Provided that where any such witness shall have his abode within
ten miles of the Court, and there living and not disenabled by sickness or
other infirmity, the said Testimony so taken out of Court, shall not be
received or made use of in the Court, except the witnesses he also present to
be (...) Examined about it.

Provided also that in all Capital Cases, all Witnesses shall be present,
wheresoever they dwell. And in capital Cases,


3. And it is further Ordered by the Authority aforesaid, That any person
Summoned to appear as a Witness in any Civil Court between party and party,
Witness to have allowance for charge, Lid down.
shall not be compellable to travail to any Court or place where he is to give
his Testimony, except he who shall so Summon him shall lay down or give him
satisfaction for his Travail and Expenses outward and homeward, and for such
time as he shall spend in attendance in such case when he is at such Court or
place, the Court shall Award due Recompense. Two shillings a day
And it is Ordered that two shillings a day shall be accounted due satisfaction
to any witness for Travail and Expenses, and that when the witness dwells
within three miles and is not at charge to pass over any other Ferry then
betwixt Boston and Charlstown, then one shilling six pence per diem shall be
accounted sufficient, One shilling six pence a day.
and if any witness after such payment or satisfaction, shall fail to appear
to give his Testimony, he shall be liable to pay the parties damages upon an
action of the Case. And all witnesses in Criminal Cases shall have suitable
satisfaction paid by the Treasurer, upon Warrant from the Court or Judge before
whom the Case is tried. In Criminal Cases witness to be paid by the Treasurer,
and levied on (...) Delinquent.


And for a General Rule to be observed in all Criminal Cases, has where the
Fines are put in certain, and also where they are otherwise;

It is further Ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that the charges of
witnesses in all such Cases shall be born by the parties delinquent, and shall
be added to the Fines imposed, that so the Treasurer having upon Warrant from
the Court, or other Judge satisfied such Witnesses, it may be repayed him with
the fine, that so the witnesses may be timely satisfied and the Country not
damnified. [1647.]

WOLVES.
WHereas great Loss and Damage does befall this Commonwealth by reason of
Wolves, A. 48.
which destroy great numbers of our Cattle, notwithstanding provision formerly
made by this Court for suppressing of them: therefore for the better
encouragement of any to set about a work of so great concernmet;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that any person either
English or Indian that shall kill any Wolf or Wolves, Law about Wolves.
within ten miles of any Plantation in this Jurisdiction, shall have for every
Wolf by him or them so killed ten shillings, paid out of the Treasury of the
Country; Provided that due proof be made thereof unto the Plantation next
adjoining where such Wolf or wolves were killed: And also they bring a
Certificate under some Magistrates hand, or the Constable of that place unto
the Treasurer; Provided also that this Order does intend only such Plantations
as do Contribute with us to public charges, and for such Plantations upon the
River of Piscataway that do not join with us to carry on public charges, they
shall make payment upon their own charge. [1645.]

BEsides all other Considerations and Provisions for the destruction of Wolves;
it is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That every such Indian
or Indians, as shall any way destroy any Wolf or Wolves, and deliver the Heads
of such Wolves unto the Select men of any Township in this Jurisdiction; shall
receive of such Select men, either two pounds of Powder, eight pounds of Shot,
or one pound of powder, and four pounds of shot, and five shillings in Come or
other pay, or else they shall receive of the Country Treasurer, Ten shillings a
head, and no powder and shot, which such Indian shall choose; and such Select
men as shall pay any Indian according to their order, shall rebate it out of
their next Country Rate with the Treasurer; any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding, and all Select men or others that by virtue of this Order or
any other, shall make payment for any Wolves, shall cut off the Ears of all
such Wolves heads, and cause them to be buried, that so none may be twice paid
for. [1661.]

THis Court does Order, as an Encouragement to persons to destroy Wolves; That
henceforth every person killing any Wolf, shall be allowed out of the Treasury
of that County where such Wolf was Slain, Twenty shillings, and by the Town
Ten shillings, and by the Country Treasurer Ten shillings; which the Constable
of each Town (on the sight of the ears of such Wolves being cut off, shall pay
out of the next Country Rate, which the Treasurer shall allow. [1662.]

WOOD.
FOr the avoiding of Injuries by Carts and Beats, to Seller and Buyers of Wood;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That where Wood is
brought to any Town or House by Leat, it shall be thus Accounted and Assized; A
Boat of four Tuns shall be accounted three Loads, twelve Tuns, nine Loads,
twenty Tun, fifteen Loads, six Tun, four Load and half, fourteen Tun, ten Load
and half, twenty four Tun, eighteen Load, eight Tun, six Loads, sixteen Tun,
twelve Load, twenty eight Tun, twenty one Load, ten Tun, seven Load and half,
eighteen Tun, thirteen Load and half, thirty Tun, twenty two Load and half.

Except such Wood as shall be sold by the Cord, which is and is hereby
Declared, to be Eight foot in length, four foot in height, and four foot broad.
[1646, 1647]

WORKMEN.
BEcause the (...) of Hay, Corn, Hemp and Flax, comes usually so near together,
that much less can hardly be avoided;

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That the Constables of
every Town upon Requst made to them, shall Require any Artificers or
handy-crafts men meet to Labor, to work by the day for then Neighbors in
mowing, reaping of Corn, and inning thereof,; Provided that those men whom they
work for, shall deely pay them for them work;

And that if any person so Required shall refuse, or the Constable neglect his
Office herein, they shall Each of them pay to the use of the Poor of the Town,
double so much as such Days work comes unto;

Provided no Artificer or Handy-crafts-man shall be compelled to Work as
aforesaid, for others whiles he is necessarily attending on the like Business of
his own. [1646.]

WRECKS OF THE SEA.
IT is Ordered, Decreed, and by this Court Declared; That if any Ships or other
Vessels, be it Friend or Enemy, shall suffer Ship-wreck upon our Coasts; there
shall be no violence or wrong offered to their Persons or Goods, but their
Persons shall be Harbored and Releived, and their Goods preserved in safety,
till Authority may be Certified and shall take further Order therein.

Also any Whale, or such like great Fish cast upon any shore, shall be safely
kept, or improved where it cannot be kept, by the Town or other Proprietor of
the Land, till the General Court shall take Order for the same. [1641, 1647.]

WRITS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That henceforth all
Writts, Process and Indictments, shall by all Magistrates, the Secretary,
Clerks of the several Courts and Writts, be made and sent forth in his
Majesty's Name: i. e. You are hereby Required in his Majesty's Name etc: [1662.]

FINIS
PRESIDENTS and FORMS of things frequently Used.
TO [ I. B.] Carpenter, of [ D.] You are Required in His Majesty's Name to
appear at the next Court, Summons
holden at [ B.] on the day of the month next ensuing; to answer the complaint
of [ N. C.] for withholding a debt of (...) due upon a Bond or Bill: or for
two Heifers etc. sold you by him; or for work, or for a Trespass done him in
his Corn or Hay by your Cattle, or for a Slander you have done him in his name,
or for Striking him, or the like; And hereof you are not to fail at your
Peril. Dated the (...) day of the Month. [1641.]

TO the Marshall or Constable of [ B.] or their Deputy. You are Required in His
Majesty's Name to Attach the Goods, Attachments.
or for want thereof the Body of [W. F.] and to take Bond of him to the value of
(...) with sufficient Surety or Suretyes for his Appearance at the next Court
holden at [ S.] on the day of the Month; then and there to answer the Complaint
of [ T. M.] for etc. as before. And so make a true Return thereof under your
hand. Dated the (...) day etc.

By the Court R. F.

KNow all men by these presents, Bond for Appearance
that we [ A. B.] of [ D.] Yeoman, and [ C. C.] of the same, Carpenter, do bind
our selves, our Heirs and Executors to [ R. F.] Marshall, or [ M. O.]
Constable of [ D.] aforesaid, in(...) Pounds (...) upon condition that the said
[ A. B.] shall personally appear at the next Court at [ S.] to answer [ L. M.]
in an Action of(...) And to abide the Order of the Court therein, and not to
depart without License.

TO the Marshall or Constable of (...) You are Required in His Majesty's Name,
Replevin.
to Replevie three heifers of [ T. P.] now distreined or impounded by [ A. B,]
and to deliver them to the said [ T. P.] Provided he give Bond to the Value of
(...) with sufficient Surety or Suretyes to prosecute his Replivin at the next
Court holden at [ B.] and so from Court to Court till the Cause be ended; and
to pay such Costs and Damages as the said [ A. B.] shall by Law Recover against
him; And so make a true return thereof under your hand Dated etc.

By the Court R. F.

W Heras upon serious Consideration, We have concluded a Confederacy with the
English Colonies of New Plymouth, and (...), as the Bond of Nature, Reason,
Religion and Respect to our Nation does Require; Commissioners for the United
Colonies,


We have this Court, Chosen our Trusty and well beloved Friends, [ S. B.] and
[ T. D.] for this Colonie; for a full and complete Year, as any Occasions and
Exigents may Require, and particlarly for the next meeting at [ P.] And do
Invest them with full Power and Authority, to Treat and Conclude of all things,
Their Power
according to the true Tenor and Meaning of the Articles of Confederation of
the United Colonies, Concluded by the General Court held at Boston the
fifteenth of May. [1672]

WHereas I [ A. B.] am an Inhabitant within this Jurisdiction, Considering how
I stand Obliged to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by our Charter
and the Government Established thereby; Do Swear accordingly by the great and
dreadful Name of the Ever-Living God, Oath of Fidelity.
that I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to our Soveraingn Lord the King,
his Heirs and Successors; and that I will be True and Faithful to this
Government, and accordingly yield Assistance thereunto, with my person and
estate, as in equity I am bound;

And will also truly endeavor to Maintain and Preserve all the Liberties and
Privileges thereof, Submiting my self unto the wholesome Laws made and
established by the same.

And farther that I will not Plot or practice any evil against it, or consent
to any that shall to do: but will timely discover and reveal the same to
Lawful Authority now here established, for the speedy preventing thereof. So
help me God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

WHereas I [ A. B.] being an Inhabitant of the Jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts, and now to be made free; Do hereby acknowledge my self to be
subject to the Government thereof (Considering how I stand (...) to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by our Charter and the Government
established thereby: Free man's Oa^h.
Do Swear accordingly, by the Great and Dreadful Name of the Ever-Living GOD,
that I will bear Faith and true Alegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, his
heirs and successors,) and that I will be True and Faithful to the same, and
will accordingly yield Assistance and Support thereunto with my person and
estate, as in equity I am bound; And will also truly endeavor to maintain and
preserve all the Liberties and privileges thereof, submitting my self to the
wolesome Laws made and established by the same;

And farther that I will not Plot nor Practice any ^vill against it, or consent
to any that shall (...) do, but will timely discover and reveal the same to
Lawful Authority now here established, for the specify prevention thereof.

Moreover I do Solemnly bind my self in the sight of God, that when I shall be
called to give my Voice touching any such matter of this State wherein Freemen
are to deal, I will give my Vote and Suffrage as I shall in mine own Conscience
judge best to Conduce and tend to the Public Weal of the body, without
respect of persons or favor of any man. So help me God in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

WHereas you [ R. B.] Esquire. are Chosen to the place of Governor, over this
Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, Governor Oath.
for this year, and till a new be Cosen and Sworn, Considering how you stand
Obliged to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by our Charter and
the Government established thereby; Do Swear accordingly by the Great and
dreadful Name of the Ever-Living God, that you will bear Faith and true
Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors; that you
will in all things concerning your place according to your best power and
skill, Carry and Demean your self for the said time of your Government,
according to the Laws of God, and for the Advancement of his Gospel, the Laws
of this Land and the good of the people of this Jurisdiction.

You shall do Justice to all men without partiallity, as much as in you lies,
you shall not exceed the Limitations of a Governor in your place. So help you
God, in our Lord Jesus Christ.

WHereas you [ J. L.] are Chosen to the place of the Deputy Governor etc: as
in the Governors Oath, Deputy Governors Oath.
mutatis mutandis.

WHereas you [ S. B.] are Chosen to the place of Assistant over this
Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, for this year and until now be chosen and
Sworn; Considering how you stand Obliged to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, by our Charter and the Government established thereby; Do Swear
accordingly by the Great and dreadful Name of the Ever Living God, Assistants
Oath.
That you will bear Faith and true Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Heirs and Successors; That you will truly endeavor according to your
best skill to carry and demean your self in your place for the said time,
according to the Laws of God and of this Land, for the Advancement of the
Gospel, and the good of the People of this Jurisdiction; You shall Dispense
Justice equally and impartially, according to your best skill in all Cases
wherein you shall Act, by Virue of your place; You shall not wittingly and
willingly exceed the Limitations of your place, And all this to be understood
during your abode in this Jurisdiction. So help you God in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

WHereas you [ (...).] have been Chosen to the Office of a Sergeant Major
General, Major (...)
of all the Military Forces of this Jurisdiction for this present year;
Considering how you stand Obliged to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors by our Charter and the Government established thereby; Do Sweat
accordingly by the Great and dreadful Name of the Ever Living God, That you
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs
and Successors; And that by your best skill and ability you will Faithfully
discharge the Trust committed to you, according to the Tenor and Purport of
the commission gives you by this Court. So help you God etc.

WHereas you [ R. R.] are Chosen Treasurer for the Jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts for this year and until a new be Chosen, Treasurers Oath
Do promise to give out Warrants with all convenient diligence for collecting
all such sums of Money as by any Court, or otherwise have been, or shall be
appointed, and to pay out the same by such sums, and in such manner as you
shall be lawfully appointed by this Court, if you shall have it in your hands
of the common Treasury. And to return the names of such Constables as shall be
failing in their office in not collecting and bringing in to you such sums as
you shall give Warrant for: And tender a true Account of all things concerning
your said Office, when by the General Court you shall be called thereto. So
help you God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

WHereas you [ E. R.] are chosen Secretary for the year ensuing; Secretaries
Oath
You do here Swear by the Everliving God, that you will in all things
faithfully demean your self in the said Office; That you will truly and
uprightly, according to your best skill and Wisdom frame all Acts and
Instruments of public concernment referring to your Office, duly observing
such Directions as shall from time to time be given unto you by the General
Court or Council of this Commonweal, and fairly Record, and safely keep the
same: That you will not disclose the consultations of the General Court where
at any time you shall have express charge of secrefie, nor of the Council where
at any time you shall have like charge of secrefie: That you will without delay
impart to the Governor or Deputy Governor, what ever Letter or Information
shall come to your hand, referring to your Office, and of public Concernment
to the Commonweal, General Court or Council; and that you will not wittingly
or willingly exceed the limits of your place. So help, etc.

YOU [ W. A.] here Swear by the Name of the Everliving God; Public Notaries
Oath.
That in the Office of a Public Notary to which you have been chosen; You
shall Demean your self diligently and faithfully according to the duty of your
Office; and in all Writings, Instruments and Articles that you are to give
Testimony unto when you shall be required, you shall perform the same (...) and
sincerely according to the nature thereof, without delay or Covin. And you
shall enter and keep a (...) Register of all such things as belong to your
Office. So help you, etc*

YOU [ E. M.] shall diligently, Marshals Oath
faithfully, and with what speed you may, collect and gather up all such fines
and sums of money, in such Goods as you can find of every person, for which
you shall have Warrant so to do by the Treasurer for the time being; And with
like faithfulness, speed and diligence, leavie the Goods of every person, for
which you shall have Warrant so to do, by virtue of any Execution granted by
the Secretary or other Clerk Authorized thereunto for the time being: And the
same Goods so Collected or Leavied, you shall with all convenient speed deliver
in to the Treasurer, or the persons to whom the same shall belong; And you
shall with like care and faithfulness serve all Attachments directed to you
which shall come to your hands, and return the same to the Court where they are
returnable, at the times of the return thereof. And you shall perform, do, and
execute all such lawful Commands, Directions and Warrant, as by lawful
Authority here established, shall be committed to your care and charge
according to your Office. All these things in the presence of the living God,
you bind your self unto by this your Oath, to perform during all the time you
continue in your Office, without favor, scar, or partiality, of any person.
And if you meet with any case of difficulty, which you cannot resolve by your
self, you may suspend till you may have Advice from Authority: So help. etc.

FOrasmuch as every Magistrate, Associate, Commissioners for small Causes, etc.
are under an Oath of God, and that no provision has been made for such as are
invested with Magistratical power by this Court;

It is Ordered; That every man to whom such power is derived, shall henceforth
take the Oath here under written before some County Court or Magistrate, before
he Exert his Authority therein:

WHereas you [ A. B.] Appointed and Commissionated to Act and Do in sundry
respects as any one Magistrate may do, Commissioners Oath
as expressed in your Commission; You do here Swear by the Great and Dreadful
Name of the Everliving God, that you will faithfully Demean your self therein,
without favor or affection to any, to the best of your knowledge, according to
the Laws here established: So help you God, etc.

YOU [ M. N.] being chosen Associate for the Court for this year, Associates
Oath
and till n^w be chosen, or other Order taken; Do here Swear, that you will do
equal Right and Justice in all Cases that shall come before you, after your
best skill and knowledge according to the Laws here established, So help you
God, etc.

WHeresoever any Three Men are deputed to end Small Causes, the Constable of
the place within one Month after shall return their Names to the next
Magistrate, who shall give Summons for them forthwith to appear before them;
who shall administer to them this Oath:

YOU [ A. B.] being chosen and appointed to end small Causes not exceeding
forty shillings value, Three men's Oath
according to the Laws of this Jurisdiction for this year ensueing; Do here
Swear by the living God, that without favor or affection, according to your
best light; you will true Judgment give, and make, in all the Causes that come
before you: So help you God, etc.

YOU Swear by the Living God, Grand-Juries Oath.
that you will diligently inquire and faithfully Present to this Court
whatsoever you know to be a breach of any Law established in this Jurisdiction
according to the mind of God; And whatsoever Criminal Offenses you apprehend
fit to be here presented, unless some necessary and Religious tie of Conscience
truly grounded upon the Word of God bind you to secrefie. And whatsoever
shall be legally committed by this Court to your Judgment, you will return a
true and just Verdict therein according to the Evidence given you, and the Laws
Established amongst us: So help you God, etc.

YOU Swear by the Living God, that in the Cause or Causes now legally to be
committed to you by this Court; Petty-Juries Oath
You will true Trial make, and just Verdict give therein, according to the
Evidence given you, and the Laws of this Jurisdiction: So help you God, etc.

YOU Do Swear by the Great Name of Almighty God; Oath of Life and Death
that you will well and truly try, and true deliverance make of such Prisoners
at the Bar, as you shall have in charge, according to your Evidence: So help
you God, etc.

YOU Swear by the Living God, Witnesses Oath
that the Evidence you shall give to this Court concerning the Cause now in
question, shall be the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth: So
help you God, etc.

YOU Swear by the Living God, Untimely Death
that you will truly present the Cause and manner of the Death of [ J. B.]
according to Evidence, or the light of your Knowledge and Conscience: So help
you God, etc.

The Form of the Oath to be Administered to the Sergeant-Majors of the several
Regiments, and so Mutatis Mutandis to the other Military, Officers.
WHereas you [ R. S.] have been chosen to the Office of Sergeant Major of the
Regiment, Sergeant Major and other chief Officers Oath.
in the County of [ M.] for this present year, and until another be chosen in
your place; You do here Swear by the Living God, that by your best skill and
ability, you will faithfully discharge the trust committed to you, according to
such Commands and Directions as you shall from time to time, upon all occasions
receive from the Sergeant Major General, by virtue of his Commission from the
Court, and according to the Laws and Orders by this Court Made and Established
in this behalf: So help you God, etc.

YOU [ R. B.] Swear truly to perform the Office of a Clerk of a Trained Band,
Clerk of the Bands Oath
to the utmost of your Ability or Endeavors, according to the particulars
specified, (and peculiar to your Office) in the Military Laws: So help you God,
etc.

YOU shall faithfully Endeavor with all good Conscience, to Discharge this
trust committed to you, Commissioners of the Martial Discipline Oath
as you shall apprehend to Conduce most to the safety of this Commonwealth:
You shall not by any sinistre devices, or for any partial respects, or private
ends, do any thing to the hindrance of the effects of any good and seasonable
Councils: You shall appoint or remove no Officer by any partiality, or for
personal respects or other prejudice, but according to the merit of the person
in your apprehensions: You shall faithfully endeavor to see that Martial
Discipline may be strictly upholden, not easing or burthening any, otherwise
then you shall judge to be just and equal: You shall use your power over men's
lives, as the last and only means, which in your best apprehentions shall be
most for the public safety in such case: So help you God, etc.

WHereas you [ E. G.] are chosen Constable within the Town of [ C.] for one
year now following, and until other be sworn in the place: You do here Swear by
the Name of Almighty God, Constables Oath
that you will carefully intend the preservation of the Peace, the discovery
and preventing all attempts against the same: You shall duly execute all
Warrants which shall be sent unto you from lawful Authority here Established,
and shall faithfully execute all such Orders of Court as are committed to your
care: And in all these things you shall deal seriously and faithfully while you
shall be in Office, without any sinistre respects of favor or displeasure: So
help you God, etc.

WHereas you [ J. G.] are chosen an Officer for the Searching and Sealing of
Leather, Leather sealers Oath.
within the Town where you now dwell, for the space of a year, and till another
be chosen and sworn in your room; You do here Swear by the Ever living God,
that you will carefully and duly attend the Execution of your said Office with
all faithfulness for the good of the Commonwealth, according to the true
intent of the Laws in such case provided: So help you God, etc.

YOU [ C. D.] here Swear by the Ever living God, Clerk of Markets Oath
that you will from time to time, faithfully execute your Office of Clerk of
the Market in the Limits whereto you are appointed for the en^ueing Year, and
till another be chosen and sworn in your place: And that you will do therein
impartially, according to the Laws here established in all things to which your
Office has relation: So help you God, etc.

YOU [ S. S.] do here Swear by the Ever living God, that you will to your power
faithfully execute the Office of a Searcher for this year ensueing, Searchers
Oath
and till another be chosen and sworn in your place concerning all Goods
prohibited, and in special for Gun powder, Shot, Lead, and Ammunition: and that
you will diligently search all Vessels, Carriages, and Persons that you shall
know, suspect or be informed, are about to transport or carry any thing out of
his Jurisdiction contrary to Law. And that you will impartially seize, take,
and keep the same in your own Custody: one half part where of shall be for your
service in the said place, the other you shall forthwith deliver to the
Treasurer: All which Goods so seized and disposed you shall certify under your
hand to the Auditor General within one month from time to time: So help you
God, etc.

WHereas you [ T. D.] are chosen Apprizer of such Land or Goods as are now to
be presented to you; Apprizers Oath
You do here Swear by the living God, that all partiality, prejudice and other
sinistre respects laid aside, you shall Apprize the same, and every part
thereof, according to the true and just value thereof at this present by common
account by your best judgment and conscience; So help you God, etc.

WHereas you [ J. B.] are chosen Viewer of Pipe staves within the Town of [ B.]
You do here Swear by the Ever living God, that at all convenient times while
you shall be in place, Viewers of Pipe-staves Oath
when you shall be required to execute your Office, you shall diligently attend
the same, and shall faithfully without any sinistre respects, Try and Sort all
Pipe-staves presented to you, and to make a true (...) thereof according to Law
So help you God, etc.

WHereas you [ A. B.] are chosen Customer for the year ensueing, You do here
Swear by the Ever living God, Customers Oath.
that you will from time to time faithfully execute your Office to your best
skill, according to the Orders of this Court, for the Custom of all such Goods
as are Imported or Exported, due by Law unto the Country, and all other things
belonging to your Office, and to give a true Account to the Treasurer at the
end of every three Months from time to time, or when you shall by Law be
thereunto required: So help you God, etc.

YOU Swear, etc. That you shall Impartially view such Fish as are presented
before you, Viewers of Fish Oath.
and determine what part thereof is Merchantable, and which is Refuse Fish and
un-Merchantable, according to your best skill, Knowledge and judgment: So help
you God, etc.

WHereas you [ A. B.] are chosen a Packer of Beef, Pork, and other things for
the Town of [ B.] You do here Swear by the Living God, Packers Oath.
that you will well and truly Pack all Beef, Pork, and other things when you
shall be thereunto required; You shall Pack no kind of Goods but such as are
good and sound, not any Goods in any Cask that is not of a just and full Gage;
You shall also set your particular Mark upon all Cask Packed by you, and in all
things proper to the place of a Packer, you shall faithfully discharge the same
from time to time according to your best Judgment and Conscience: So help you
God in our Lord Jesus Christ. [1652.]

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 8 read and May 1671. in Bond slavery l. 3. r. or shall for as.
Coopers p. 17. l. 12. r. page 64. l. 24. r. page 88. p. 40. l. 4. r. the
Subscription l. 9. r. Administrators. p. 46. l. 5 r. Ministry l. 12. r.
Heterodox. l. ult. r. 1668. p. 54. sect. 2. of Fornication. l. 2. r. page 33.
and after Punishment r. page 67. p. 56. l. 28. r. privilege. l. 30. r.
suffrage. p. 57. l. 2. dele. made. p. 77. l. 22. r. appoint thereunto p. 84. l.
31. r. being thereof. p. 70. l. 2. r. page 39. p. 116. l. 1. r. relating p. 80.
l. 27. r. expressed. p. 15. for Sect. 18. r. 14. for. 17. r. 16. next page r.
folio 16. l. 6. r. that. p. 102. l. 21. r. 1670. p. 9. l. last but one r.
Feoffees in l. ult. r. 1671. p. 73. l. 8. ^ard p. 134. l. 17. r. proceed. p.
155. l. 11. r. Explication.

A Summary of the LAWS foregoing Alphabetically Digested, Wherein P. stands
for Page, and S. for Section; For the right Improvement whereof, the Reader
must supply the figures of some Sections in the Laws, where they are omitted:
A
Ability. Age.
F Or persons to pass away Lands etc. p. 1. S. 1. For choosing Guardians. ibid
For Plantiffs or Defendants. p. 2. s. 2. Who may defend the right of them that
are under age. ibid. Persons of any age to answer for Crimes, etc ibid. May
inform or present any in ^^demeanour. ib.
Actions
When Tryable. p. 2. s. 1. Rules for Entry. p. 2. s. 2. No Plea or Evidence
allowed after a case is committed to Jury. p 2 s 2 Of Trespass under 40. s. p.
2. s. 3. Brought to the General Court p 3. s. 6. Plaintiffs liberty to
withdraw. p 3. s. 7. In civil Actions every one secured form damage by non
appearance of any, See appearance, nonappearance. p 4. In involuntary
Trespass, not to proceed in case, See Cattle p. 18. s. 3
Appeal.
From Inferior Courts to Courts of Assistants p. 3. s. 1. How and when to be
Entered. ibid. From one Magistrate to County Courts ibid In criminal cases how
to be proceeded in ibid From Court of Assistants to General Court in case.
ibid. Execution not to be granted in case. s 1. In matter of Law to be
determined by the Bench. ibid. In matter of Fact by Bench and Jury. ibid.
Recording to be paid by the Appealants p. 4. s 2 Reasons therefore to be entered
six days before the Court. ibid. Not Prosecuted to effect the penalty. ibid.
Who may sit as Judges in such Actions. p 4. s 3 How to be proceeded in. ibid.
From Associates Court in Dover and Portsm. p. 4. s. 4. From one Magistrate to
County Court, see Burglary. p. 13. s. 2. Fom one Magistrate and Commissioners
of Towns, see Causes. p. 21. s. 2. From all or any the Commissioners of Boston
to Court of Assistants. p. 22. s. 3. By Disobedient children sentenced by a
Magistrate or Commissioner, see children. p. 27. s. 2. To County Court from
Select men doing damage by laying out High ways, see High ways. p. 65. s. 2.
From one Magistrate to County Court, see Lying, p. 92. By Towns and Peculiars
in case: see Poor p. 123. s 2. By single persons to County Court in case: See
Townships. p. 148. s. 3.
Appearance, Nonappearance.
Not punishable in case, p 4. Not to prejudice any in civil Actions. ibid.
Persons liberty not to appear on Summons in case, See Attachments. p 7. s. 2 Of
a person Indicted of a Capital crime, his Goods and Estate: to be seized in
case, See Capital Laws, p. 16. s. 17.
Appare.
Who may wear Gold, etc. p. 5. s. 1. Penalty of ten shillings on all not
allowed, ibid Further penalty. p. 6. s. 2.
Arrests.
Not allowed in case, p. 6. s. 1. Not against Sailors in case, see Sailors. p.
1 3 4
Associates.
One may punish Breach of the Peace, See Breach of peace. p. 11. s. 1. The
rules of punishment. ibid. To be allowed by the General Court, See Courts. p.
37. s. 7. With one Magistrate may keep a County Court. ibid. Their power. ibid.
Have Magistratical power, See Presidents. p. 166. Their Oath. ibid
Attachments or Summons.
May be taken out against any person. p. 7. s. 1. Not to be granted to a
Forreigner in case. ib. Of good, etc. persons to have legal notice, ibid. To be
served six days before the Court. s. 2. Pleading, etc. not a based how, ibid.
To express the case, ibid. To express in what name, the Plaintiff sueth p. 8.
s. 3. May be served by Marshals, s. 4. Or their Deputies, See from of
Attachments in Presidents, p. 162. May be directed to Constables, see Clerks of
Writts, p. 29. s. 1. Or their Deputies see Presidents, p. 162. Not granted
against Saylors, in case, see Saylors, p. 134. On Goods not freed till
Execution be served, see Sureties, p. 144. From of Attachment, and Summons, and
Bond, See Presidents. p. 162.
B
Bakers.
TO have a distinct mark for Bread. p 8. s. 1 To make Bread of due assize on
penalty, ib To Assize all Bread used in their Houses on penalty. p. 9. s. 2.
Ballast.
Not to be taken from any shore without leave, on penalty, p. 9. Not to be cast
into a channel, etc. on penalty ibid.
Barratry
What and how punished. p. 9.
Benevolence.
When to be granted. p. 9. s. 1 To public uses to be rightly improved, ibid
Bills.
Assigned good to the Assignee in case, p. 10.
Lond-slavery.
Not allowed, but servitude declared, p. 10.
Bounds of Towns and Persons^^^
To be laid out in twelve months after the Grant, p. 10. s. 1: Marks once in
three years to be reniewed, and when, on penalty of neglect. ibid Charges of
perambulation, how to be paid, ibid. Particular Bounds to be viewed once a year
on penalty. p. 10. s. 2
Brewers.
What persons to be allowed p. 11. Penalty on sale of bad Beer, ibid
Breach of the Peace.
What the penalty, who may punish, the rules of punishment p. 11. s. 1
Detainers of possession after Execution are breakers of the peace and Criminal
offenders s. 2 To be punished by the Court that gave Judgment ibid
Bridges.
Defective, by whom to be regulated p. 12. s. 1. By whom the charge to be
defrayed, ibid. see more s. 3.
Burglary and Theft.
What, how punished p 12 s 1. On the Lords day how punished ibid In Orchards
etc. how punished p 13 s 2 Stealing (...) and upwards how punished, s 3
Concealers of Theft, and taking private satisfaction, the penalty ibid
C
Capital Laws.
SEE p 14, 15 Firing a Dwelling House etc. see firing p 51 s 2 Heresy p 60 s 2
Quakers p 61 s 9 Jesuits p 67
Cask and Cooper, Gager, Packer.
Cask That are right to be of London assize p 16 s 1 To be marked with the
Gagers mark ibid
Cask That are defective, forfeited to the informer ibid Penalty to the Country
besides ibid
Coopers To have a distinct Brand-mark on penalty ibid To make all cask of good
Timber etc. and no other on penalty ib
Gager To Gage all cask for Liquor, Beef, etc. and no other on penalty ibid
Gager His Feast for Gaging ibid
Packers To pack no Beef, etc. but in cask of full assize on penalty ibid To
see Meat and Fish truly packed, s 2 His Fees for Packing ibid p 17 For viewing
ibid Fishor Flesh sold not marked forfeited ibid
Cooperstaves, See Pipestaves

Cattle, Cornfieldsd, Fences.
Cattle that feed without a Neeper, to be Branded p 18 s 3 Not marked
trespassing to pay double damage ibid Unruly, not to go without Fetters ibid
Trespassing, damage to be viewed by two of the Town and judged ibid Owners when
known to pay the damage, Rules to issue such damage, the damage secured, ibid
Goats
Found damage seizant to be secured ibid Doing trespass to any through their
own default, no damage to be paid ibid All harms by them, the Owners to pay
double damage p 18 s 4
Cornfieldsd.
Lying in common, to be fenced by the owners p 17 s 1 No Cattle to be put in
while Corn there ibid Who may determine differences about them ib Any Occupier
may Fence in several s 2 Partition Fences how to be made and ordered p 19 s 7
Proviso for House-Lot under ten Acres ibid Where insufficient, no damage except
etc. ibid and p 20. S 8
Cattle.
Damaging Indians Corn, to be made good in case See Indians p 76 s Damage by
Indians to be made good by them ibid p 77 Indians refusing to Fence, help being
tendered them, shall have no damage ibid Indians who have Land given them or
Purchased by them for Plantation, to be fenced at their own charge ibid
Charges Public.
No person to be employed in public service at their own charge p 22 s 1 Every
Inhabitant to bear public charge in Church and Commonweal s 2 Any not paying
their full proportion, compellable thereunto ibid
Country Rates
Lands and Estates Ratable where they lie, persons where they dwell ibid To be
leavied by Warrant from the Treasurer P 23 S 3 To be made in the sixth month
ibid Who and what is ratable ibid Rules for Assessments ibid To be paid where
persons are Assessed ibid To be paid in Corn at price set by the General Court,
or Commissioners mentioned, p 4 s 6 What is meant by publ. assessment, ibid. p
25 Goods tendered, for pay, to be prized on the place, if not determined by Law
p 26 s 6 Ministers Ordained, free from all Taxes except, etc. p 26 s 7
Children and Youth.
Youth, under 21 years of age, being trusted by any, without order in writing,
such persons shall lose their Debt p 27 S 4. Incurring any penalties, such as
are occasions thereof shall pay it ibid Children: Orphans in minority, not to
be disposed off but by Authority, except in Marriage p 28 s 6 The minority of
women in case of Marriage ibid Under 14 years of age profaning the Sabbath,
how punished, See Sabbath p 132 S 1
Chyrurgeons, Midwives, Physicians.
Not to use any violence or force in their practice in any case, without
consent P 28
Clerk of the Writts, Clerks
To keep Records of the Towns Brand-mark See Cornfieldsd p 18 s 3 To grant
Summons and Attachments, etc. see Clerk of Writts P 29 s 1 His fees ibid To
Record Horses shipped off, See Horses s 1 His fees ibid To Record Births, Deaths
and Marriages, See Records P 129 s 2 To make a return of the same yearly to
Clerks of County Courts, on penalty, ibid To keep a Toll-book to enter all
Cattle sold into, See Tolling P 147
Of Deputies
To keep on file the Constables returns of Deputies, See Deputies P 41 S ^ To
receive fees for entry of Petitions: See Petitions P 121 To give account of
Petitions entered to the Deputies, which shall be allowed as part of his Sallary
ibid
Of Courts.
To return Reasons of Appeal to the Court of Assistants, See Appeal p 4 s 2 To
sign Warrant for Executions in cases civil or criminal, see condemned p 30 s 2
To enter Graunts, Sales, etc. see Conveyances p 33 s 5 To signify to Country
or County Treasurer within 14 days what fines are imposed on any, See Courts p
51 To send Warrants to Towns to choose Jurors: See Jurors p 80 s 1 To grant
Execution for what is unpaid on a former Execution, see Marshall S 2 To
certify County Court the neglect of Clerk of Writts, see Records P 130 s 2 To
Record Straies and lost goods and return to the Country Treasurer, see straies
P 142 s 2 To send the Order about Children to Constables, see Townships P 149 s
7 To keep a Book of Account of Entry of Actions on penalty: see Treasurers, p
151 s 4 To enform Coun. Co. of any renouncing Excecutorship, etc on penalty see
Wills p 158 s 1 To enform County Courts of any Will proved, or Administration
granted S 2
Of Trained Bands.
May take Fines by Distress, by order of the Major and chief Officers, see
Military p 107 s 2 To provide Arms P 109 s 8 To take the Oath belonging to his
Office, and to pay a penalty refusal s 10 His duty, set Military P 109, 110 s
10
Of Troops.
To take the Oath belonging to his Office, P 113 s 16 To Leavy fines, and his
fees ibid When to make Distress ibid To Leavy fines for not Watching p 114 S 18
Of Markets.
To take the Oath of his Office P 8 s 1 His Duty ibid
College.
To be managed by Feoffees P 29 s ^ The major part of Feoffes may make Orders
ibid Dispose of Gifts and Revenues ibid The whole number may Repeal and Alter
Orders ibid May distribute the Countries allowance to President and Fellows
ibid
Commissioners. Of United Colonies.
Their Power: see Presidents P 163
Of Shires their duty.
By whom appointed, see Elections, P 47 s 3 To carry the Votes for Nomination
of Magistrates to be opened at Boston ibid The time when, and before whom to be
opened ibid To make return to the several Constables under their hands of the
persons to be nominated for Magistrates ibid Commissioner for Suffolk to
appoint the place for opening the votes ibid
Commissioners of Towns.
In every Town to receive and carry the votes for Nomination of Magistrates and
County Treasurers to the Shire meeting, when, and how to proceed: see Elections
P 47 s 3 To choose one out of themselves to carry the Votes of the Shire to
Boston ibid
For making Rates.
To join with the Select men in making Rates and by whom to be chosen P 23 s 3
To meet at the shire Town the first fourth day in September, with their
Assessments to be examined and corrected p 24 ibid To return to the Treasurer
under their hands what is to be leavied on every Town, on penalty ibid p 24
To prize Corn for Rates.
The Commissioners of ^ssex, Suffolk and Middlesex where the General Court does
not, to Prize Corn ibid
Commissioners of Boston.
To be annually chosen, see causes P 21 s 3 The number to be chosen ibid To be
approved by the Court of Assistants, and sworn by them, or Governor, or Deputy
Governor ibid To try Causes to ten pounds, the extent of their power, their
Court stated, to publish their Court days ibid To impose fines to 40. s. p 22
s 3 May by Warrant summon any offenders to appear, and may punish as one
Magist. ibid To have a Commission under the Secretaries hand ibid To fine
persons for galloping in the Town, See Galloping p 57 May fine any not brewing
Beer according to Law, See Inkeepers p 80 s 2 to have Magistratical power, se
Presid. p 166 Commiss. to try small Causes in Towns. To be chosen by Court of
Assistants or County Court, see Causes, p 20. s. 1. their power ibid to take an
Oath, see Presidents, p 166 May punish breach of the Peace, see breach of the
peace p 11 s 1 May punish unruly Children, see Childr. 27. 2 May punish any
entertaining such Childr. s 3
Every Commissioner on Oath.
May dispose of Cards and Dice brought in involuntarily, see Gaming p 58 s 4
May punish Gamesters by fine or corporal punishment ibid May punish or fine a
drunken Indian, see Indians s 11 May punish any that are drunk, see Inkeepers p
81 s 5 May punish wanton and rude singing in public houses s 17 May punish any
found in public houses after prohibition of Select men s 19 To keep Records of
Judgments given against any person, see Records p 129 s 1 May punish
prophaners of the Sabbath, see Sabbath p 132 s 1 May punish any drinking in
Ordinaries after Sun set s 2 May punish any neglecting to watch, see Watches p
154 s 1 May take the testimony of any of 14 years of age, see Witnesses p 158 S
2
A Commissioners Court.
May punish any Retailer of strong water, or private housekeeper, for
permitting any to tipple, See Inkeepers p 81. s 7. p. 82 s 8 No Commissioner
may give counsel in case See Counsel p 34 None to be allowed Commissioner in
any Town but such as are approved, see Causes p 22 s 4
Commissioners of Indians.
Authorized may issue Cases among themselves as one Magistrate, and to have
Officers to execute Commands and Warrants See Indians p 77 s 9 With one
Magistrate, have the power of a County Court ibid
Condemned.
No person to suffer within 6 days after judgment but in special cases p 30 s
1 Not to be unburied 12 hours except for Anatomy ibid
Constable his Office and Duty.
By Warrant to impress Workmen, See Bridges p 12 s 1 To leavy fines granted by
a Magistrate to 40 s. See Burglary, p 13 s 2 To return to County Courts what
fines received ibid By warrant to search for stolen goods and apprehend any
suspicious person s 3 To present the Gager to take Oath within a month on
penalty, See Ca^k p 16 s 1 To leavy fines by warrant from Select men, See
Cattle p 19 s 6 To serve Warrants or Attachments tryable before a Magistrate,
See Causes, p 20 s 1 To obey the Warrants of three Commissioners in Towns ibid
To obey and assist the Commissioners of Boston s 3 To warn Freemen to choose a
Commissioner in making Rates, see Charges Public, p 23 s 3 To collect Country
Rates, and pay to the Treasurers Order ibid To clear their acc^mpts with the
Treasurer on penalty p 25 s 4 To Press Boats or Carts to carry in Rates, and
to collect after expiration of his Office, ibid His danger in not obeying the
Treasurers Warrant ibid To leavy Rates on strangers s 5 To inform of persons
entertaining Youth, etc. See Children p 27 s 3 To serve Attachments, see Clerk
of Writts p 29 s 2 His Deputy may serve Attachments, See Presidents p 162 To
whip any that are sentenced thereto See Constables p 31 s ^ To collect Rates by
Order of Select men, ib. To convey offenders accord. to Warrant ib. To make Hue
and Cry where no Magistrate is near p 31 s 3 To pursue Hue and Cry ibid To
apprehend Offenders ibid To search for such persons on the Sabbath day, or else
p 31 s 4 To apprehend no person without Warrant in writing ibid May require aid
in the execution of his Office p 31 s 5 To have a Black staff tipped with Brass
when he executes his Office p 31 s 6 Not pursuing Hue and Cry the penalty, ibid
To Summon a Jury on untimely death, See Untimely death p 39 To return the names
of Deputies chosen, and for what time on penalty, see Deput. p 41 s 5 To leavy
Rates for Ministers maintenance, See Ecclesiastical p 45 S 18 To receive votes
for Election in case, See Elections p 47 s 2 To Summon Freemen for Nomination
of Magistrates, and when P 47 S 3 To signify to the Freemen who are to be put
to vote for Magistrates on the day of Election P 48 To apprehend by Warrant
deniers of Scripture, See Her^sie, P 59 S 2 To present idle Persons before a
Magistrate, See idle Persons P 66 To assist the Custom Master in case, See
Imposts P 68 S 2 To leavy by Warrant fines on any that refuse to assist the
Custom Master ibid To serve Warrants to press Workmen, See Impressess P 75 S
1 To convey Indians that are found with Liquors, etc. before a Magistrate or
Commissioner, See Indians P 77 S 11 To commit a drunken person to Prison, or
secure him in case, See Inkeepers, p 81 s 5 To inform a Magistrate or
Commissioner, or Select men (where no Magistrate or Commissioners are) of such
cases ibid To return all fines received of drunken persons to the Treasurer
ibid To make search for all offenders against this Law on penalty p 83 s 14 To
call the Freemen to choose Jurors and return the Warrant, See Jurors p 86 s 1 To
Summon any person residing here from their (...), See Marriage p 101 s 4 A
Constable with 2 Inhabitants where no Magistrate is, may Press Men and Boats
to pursue Persons, See Masters p 104 s 3 To enquire after Wheat, etc. landed
and put to sale from foreign parts, See Malt p 106 s 2 To carry a Soldier
before a Magistrate being required thereto by the chief Officers, See Military
p 108 s 6 To provide Arms for Souldies p 109 s 8 To Impresse Soldiers by Order
p 120 s 11 To leavy Rates for Fortification ibid To assist Searchers for many
on penalty, See Money p 119 s 3 To present Cullers of Pipestaves before a
Magistrate to be sworn, See Pipestaves p 122 To provide for poor persons by
Order, See Poor p 123 s 2 In Port Towns to signify to Merchants and Masters
the Law about Powder, See Powder p 126 s 1 To whip any thereunto sentenced, See
Sabbath p 132 s 1 To cause dogs using to course and bite sheep to be hanged in
case, See sheep p 138 s 2 To keep account of straies and lost goods, See
Straies p 142 s 1 In Port Towns to inform Masters of Ships with the Law tit.
Strangers p 143. s 1 To inform of strangers received contrary to that Law ibid
To leavy fines about Swine, where no Select men are see swine P 145 s 1 To
apprehend Swea^ers, see swearing p 144 s 1 To apprize Swine impounded and not
owned P 146 s 3 To leavy fines by Order of Select men, see Townships P 148 s 5
To acouaint Select men with the Order about Children P 149 s 8 To serve all
Warrants from Select men, p 150 s 9 To leavy fines by Warrant from the
Treasurer, see Treasurer P 151 s 4 To leavy County Rates ibid To apprehend
Vagabonds, with or without warrant, See Vagabonds p. 153. To warn and set the
watch, and give charge See watches, p. 154. s. 1. To present any defective in
watches to a Magistrate, ibid, To provide weights and measures see weights p.
^55. s. 1 To pay the Treasurer for sealing them, and to deliver them to the
Select men ibid To obey Sealers Warrants ibid To pay Indians for killing
Wolves, see Wolves p 159 s 1 To require Artificers to help in Harvest, see
Workmen p 16 j
Conveyances, Deeds.
For sale of Land or House not valid, etc. without Deed, etc. o^
acknowledgement before a Magistrate P 32 s 1 How to be made ibid What exempted
from this Law ibid Obtained by Dures invalid s 3 Fraudulent invalid ibid For
sale of House, etc. or Mortgage of no force against any other not being
acknowledged and Recorded, the Graunter being in possession s 4 Grauntee to
enter his Caution with Recorder of County Court ibid Grauntee to be bound to
Court of Assist. in case ibid
Council.
In the vacancie of the General Court, are the Governor and Assistants p 33 To
be called by Letters from the Govern. ^b. The Governor, Deputy Govern. with
six Assistants may impresse Soldiers ibid In extraordinary cases as many as
appear, make a valid Act ibid Their power p 34
Courts. General Courts
To appoint Brand-marks to Towns, see Cattle p 18 s 3 To be called by the
Govern. in case, see Council p 33 Superior Courts, The chief power p 34 s 1 To
raise Money, Taxes, and dispose of Lands ibid To make Laws, etc. ibid No act to
pass without consent of both houses p 35 s ^ The Acts of this Court to be
engrossed, and read the last day of every Session ibid Difference in cases of
Judicature, Civil or Criminal how issued ibid It only can pardon a Malefactor p
35 s 4 May send forth any person into foreign parts ibid Not to be dissolved
without consent of the major part thereof ibid. S To Judge of the miscarriage
of any before them P 36 S ^ to appoint persons to keep County Court in case p.
36. s ^ To allow of Freemen to be made, see Free men P 56 S 4 To conclude a
vindictive War, see Impresses P 73 S 2 To appoint persons to publish the Laws
to Indians, see Indians P 77 S 8 To appoint persons to inspect the Indians at
Natick, etc. as to their manners S 9 To give Commissions to chief Military
Officers, see Military P 108 s 4 To appoint Searchers for Powder, see Powder P
126 s 2 To punish any helping to break Prison, see Prison P 128 s 4 In defect
of a Law in Capital cases, etc. to judge, see privileges p 1 To dispose of any
Whale cast up, see wrecks at sea P 161
Court of Assistants.
May appoint 3 Free men in Towns to issue Causes to 40. s. see Causes P 20 S ^
To approve the Commissioners of Boston, and give them an Oath P 21 S 3 To be
kept at Boston by the Governor or Deputy Governor and Magistrates, See Courts
P 36 S 7 Their Power ibid Two Courts to be kept yearly, the time when, ib May
be called out of course by Governor or Deputy Governor for trial of a
Malefactor in Capital C^ses ibid To try Capital Cases ibid May discharge from
Prison Persons unable to pay fines, see fines p 51 To try Quakers, see Heresy
P 61 S 9 to try any suspected for Jesuits, se Jesuits, p 67 May order
satisfaction for damage done to Cattle by Indians, see Indians P 76 S 7 To
issue all matters beyond the cognizance of Indian Commis. Court, see Indians P
77 S 9 May approve of any married Person residing here from their Relations,
see Marriage P 102 S 4 May appoint Searchers for Powder, see Powder P 126 S 2
May order and improve the Houses of Correction, see Prison P 127 S 2 May Punish
any for helping to break Prison S 4 To keep a Record of all Judgments given,
see Records P 129 S 1 To adjudge Persons trading on the Coast in case, see
Ships P 141 S 6
County Courts.
To manage Benevolence, See Benevolence. p. 9. s. 2 May punish breach of the
peace see breach of peace. p. 11. s. 1,2 To regulate defective Bridges see
Bridges. p. 12. s. 1 May punish any for using other men's Cattle without leave,
when and how, see Cattle. p. 19. s. 5, Not to receive any Action proper to one
Magistrate, except in defamation and battery, see Causes. p. 20. s. 1. May with
the Select men place out unruly children, see children p. 26. s. 1. May dispose
of Orphans to service, p. 28. s. 6 To approve Clerks of writts, see Clerks p 29
s 1 To be kept by Magistrates in the County, or other Magistrates or such as
the General Court shall appoint, see Courts p 36 s 7 Their power ibid May
constitute Clerks and other Officers ib. To keep set times ibid May set out
Widows thirds in Lands, etc. see Dowries p 42 s ^ To provide for Ministers
maintenance, see Ecclesiastical p 45 s 18 to give Grand jurors charge of
enquiry of T owns neglect of providing an able Ministry p 46 s 19 May discharge
from Imprisonment such as are unable to pay fines, see fines p 51 to appoint
cullers of fish upon Oath, see fish p 52 s 2 to punish such as kill Mackrel
before July, s 9 to punish Fornication, see Fornication p 54 s 1,2 to order
maintenance of a Bastard, p 55 s 3 to give the Oath of Freedom to persons
allowed by General Court, see Freemen p 56 s 5 May punish Gamesters by fine or
corporal punishment, see Gaming p 58 s 4 to punish deniers of the Scriptures,
see Heresy p 5^ s 2 to Punish maintainers of Erronius Doctrine p 61 s 3 to
appoint men in Towns to lay out Country Highways, see Highways p 64 s 1 to
order the removal of encumbrances in Highways, see Highways p 65 s 3 to
Punish idle Persons p 66 s 2 to grant Licenses to Ordinaries, etc. See
Inkeepers p 79 s 1 May punish In keepers not giving account of draught of Beer,
see Imposts p 69 s 4 to order satisfaction for damage to Cattle by Indians, see
Indians p 76 s 7 to Punish Indian traders allowed, and not giving account, and
making Payment to the T reasurer p 78 s 12 Executions not to be granted till
twelve hours after Judgment, but by special order, see Appeal p 3 s 1 to
Punish such as Brew not Beer according to Law P 80 S 2 May Punish Retailers of
strong waters and private Housekeepers, for permitting tippling in their Houses
P 81 S 7 P 82 S 8 to give Oath to Searchers and Sealers of Leather, see Leather
P 89 S ^ May approve of any married Person rending here from their Relation,
see Marriage P 101 S 4 May Punish Workmen taking wages above what is set in T
owns by Freemen, see Masters P 109 S 4 May give the Oath of Fidelity to
Inhabitants and Strangers, see Oaths P 120 S 2 to dispose and settle Poor
Persons, see Poor P 123 S 2 May appoint Searchers for Powder, see powder P 126
S 2 May order and improve the House of Correction, see Prison P 127 S 2 to
appoint a Keeper to such House s 3 May punish any helping to break Prison, s 4
to keep a Record of all Judgments given, see Records P 129 s 1 May punish
Clerks of Writts not making a return of Births, etc. P 130. s 2 May determine
punishment for defacers of Records, see Records P 131 s 3 May punish Prophaners
of the Sabbath, see Sabbath P 132 s 1 May punish servile working on the Lords
day P 134 s 4 May punish Select-men neglecting Orders for Salt-Peeter, see salt
Peeter P. 135 May take Order about Strangers, see strangers P. 143 May dispose
of single Persons where Select-men neglect, see Townships P 149. s 7 May leavy
upon the County by Warrant to satisfy Arreares, see Treasurer: 151. 4. May
punish Constables neglecting to gather County Rates s. 5 To give Oath to
Sealers of Weights and Measures, see Weights 155. 1 May Punish Executors in
case, see Wills 157. 1 May order Estate where no Executor or Administrator 158.
2. May settle the Estate of Persons dying intestate s 3 Judges related to
Parties may not sit as judges in their case in any Court, see Courts 38. 9. In
difficult cases they may consult the General Court s. 11. The time and place
for County Courts 37. 7 to Punish reproachers of Courts and Magistrates 36. 6.
And the offenses of any Members thereof, ib Counties defective Bridges, see
Bridges, 17. 1. Penalty if any loose life etc. by defective Bridges s 2 Penalty
of treble damage in case ibid
Cruelty.
Not allowed P 39
D
Untimely Death.
THe enquiry how to be proceeded in, P. 39
Debts by Book.
T o be balanced in three years P. 40 For custom of Wines, etc. recoverable
by way of Action, see Imposts 68. 2.
Defamation.
Of Courts or Magistrates punishable, see Courts 35 6. By reproachful speeches
in open Court, ibid.
Delinquents.
Summoned by Court or Magistrate to answer a Presentment or Crime, not
answering when called the penalty, s^e ^urors, 87. 6
Deputies for the General Court.
Not to proceed to Judgen (...) in any case without an Oath, see Courts 34. 1.
to sit apart from the Magistrates and act, 35. 2 No Deputy to depart without
leave on penalty 35. 3. Exemption for Deputies of Dover, etc. ibid Miscarriages
among them, to be sentenced among themselves 35. 6. How to be chosen, see
Deputies 40. 1. Their power ibid May order their own House 40. 2. To be chosen
from Court to Court, or at most but for a year 41. 3. How to be qualified 41.
4. Not to be absent the time of their sitting, on penalty 41, 5. With the
Constable may take in Proxies for Elections, see Elections 47. 2. Such Proxies
to be sealed up and returned to the Court of Election ibid No Common Attorney to
sit as Deputy, see Deputies 41. 5.
Distress.
For Rates Ordered, see publ. charges 25. 4 On Corn or Hay etc. to be secured
on penalty, see Distress p 41.
Dowries.
What and when to be set out to widows, p 42 In case of omission, who may set
it out ibid To be enjoyed enduring widows lives ibid Of Lands set out not to
make strip and wast, ib
Drovers.
Their liberty p 42.
E
Ecclesiastical.
WHo may gather Churches 43. 1 How to be gathered ibid To have free exercise of
all Ordinances ^. 3 To Elect and Ordain their Officers ibid. s. 4 To admit and
dismiss Members, etc. ibid s 5 To have no humane injunctions imposed on them
ibid s. 6. May celebrate days of Fasting, etc. ibid. s. 7 The Elders of
Churches may meet about Church matters ibid. s. 8 May deal with their Members
under the hand of Justice ibid. s. 9 May deal with their Members of any rank
44. 10 Any Church member liable to Justice, ib. s. 11 No Church censure to
degrade any Officer in civil employ ibid Private meetings of Christians
allowed, s. 1^ Who may be constant Preachers and Ordained Elders. ibid. s 14 No
Ordination to proceed without notice given* ibid Open opposers of the Word etc.
how to be proceeded with 45. 15 Penalty on disturbing the peace and order of
Churches ibid Who may call and ordain Chapter officers, 46. 20
Elections.
Of Assistants yearly how to be determined, 47. 1. Of Governor, Deputy
Governor, Major General, Treasurer, Secretary, Commissioners of the United
Colonies how made ibid s. 2. Of Assistants how proceeded in ibid s. 13 Penalty
of any failing in their trust, ibid s. 3
Escheats.
What and how disposed p 49
F
Farms.
TO be of the same wherein they lie, p 49.
Fairs and Markets.
Where and when p 49
Ferries.
How to be regulated 50. 1. No Canoo to be used there on penalty ibid Weymouth
Ferridge what ibid When to take double Ferridge ibid Paying no Rent to the
Country to take no Ferridge of Magistrates, Deputies etc. 10. None to press
into Ferry boats without leave ibid s. 2 No Ferry to suffer any to come into
his Boat in case, on penalty ibid Who shall be first transported in Ferry boats
ibid
Fees.
For Entering of Actions, see Actions 2. 4. Additional Fees in case 3 5.
Of Clerk of Writts.
For Warrants, Replevin, Attachment, Bond see Clerk of Writts 28. 1. For
Recording Horses shipped off, se horses, 65. 1 For Recording Marriages se
marriage, 101. 2 Additional Fees in case ibid For Recording Births and Deaths,
see Records 130. s. 2. For Tolling Cattle, see Cattle p 147
Of Recorder and Clerk of County Court.
For filing Evidences etc. see Records 129. 1. and p 130
Of Commissioners Court of Boston.
See small Causes 21. 3.
Marshals.
See Marshals 103. s 4,5. Addition in case ibid
Clerks of Troops.
See Military 113. 16.
Fines.
To be presently paid, secured, or person committed p 51 May be respited by
Courts ibid In all Courts, or by Magistrate or Commissioners for the Country,
to be notified to the Treasurer in 14 days ibid For Galloping in Boston, what
to County Treasurer, see Galloping P 57 For keeping Christmas, and Gaming, see
Gaming p 57,58. s 1,2. For playing at Cards and Dice ibid s 3. For bringing in
Cards ibid s 4 For denying the Scriptures, what to Country Treasurer, see
Heresy 59. 2 On Masters that bring in Quakers 60. 4. On persons receiving
Quakers ibid For Vessels trading with Indians, see Indians 75. 3. For trading
with Indians, to the Country, s. 4 For selling Boat or Vessels to Indians, 76.
6. For insufficient Leather, see Leather, 90. 55. From all persons in all cases
to be paid to the Treas. of the County where the party dwells except, see
Treasures 151. 3.
Firing and Burning.
Woods or Common Ground, when unlawful, on penalty 51. 1. When lawful ibid Any
Frame, Timber, etc. wittingly and willingly burnt, the penalty ibid Any of 16
years of age firing a Barn, etc. how punished ibid s 2 A Dwelling Horse burnt,
how to be satisfied for ibid
Fish, Fishermen.
All Cullers of Fish to be sworn 52. 2. Sworn Cullers to be in all fishing
places ibid All fish approved by them to be received ibid The Cullers Sallery,
and by whom to be paid, ib. What fish declared Merchantable ibid Liberty to cut
Flakes regulated ibid s. 3 No Fish to be taken in spawning time on penalty
ibid. s. 4 No Mackrel for salting to be killed till July, on penalty of
forfeiture ibid. S. 5 Fish salted with Tartudas salt, and thereby spotted, not
Merchantable P 54. s. 6
Forgery.
What, and the penalty P 54
Fornication.
What, and the punishment 54. 1. By a Freeman, further punished ibid. s 2 The
reputed Father of a Bastard to maintain it. 55. 3
Freemen.
May order Fences in Common fields where no Select men, see Corn fields 17. 2.
May determine differences in case ibid May by their Feoffes or Proxies appear
on the day of Election, see Courts 35. 3 To send their Deputies to Gener.
Courts, ib. Persons allowed by General Court for Free men, to be sworn by
County Courts, 38. 12 To nominate such as shall keep Courts in Counties with a
Magistrate 36. 7. To give in their own Votes in Elections of Deputies, see
Deputies P. 40. According to their number may send Deputies to General Court
ibid Who may send, or not send ibid May choose their Deputies in another County
ibid. s. 2 May not choose any person unqualified on penalty 41. 4. No person
being a member of a Church not approved shall be made free, see Ecclesiastical
43. s. 2 And none else to put in Votes for Elections on penalty, see Elections
47. ^. Putting in more then one Vote for one man, the penalty ibid Not being at
the Election may put in their Votes at home before the Deputy and Constable
ibid s. 2 two or three with the Constable may receive Votes for Elections in
case ibid In Towns to choose a Commissioner to receive the Votes for Nomination
of Magistrates and County Treasurer to the Shire Town, and such persons to
choose a Commissioner among themselves to carry the Votes of that Shire to
Boston 48. 3. Exempted from voting in all civil Assembies ibid. s. 5 Qualified
according to Law, may be made free ibid. s. 4. In Towns to set the price of
workmens labor, see Masters. 104. 4. With others in Towns to dispose of Lands,
etc. see Townships 147. 1.
G
Galloping.
IN Boston, the penalty P 57.
Gaming and Dancing.
Not allowed in Ordinaries 57 1. No common house for Gaming, on penalty to
Housekeeper and Gamester ibid No Gaming for Money, or any to be abettors to
Gaming on penalty ibid No Dancing allowed in Ordinaries on penalty ibid Penalty
for keeping Christmas etc. 58. 2. Penalty for playing at Cards and Dice, ib. s.
3 Penalty for wilful bringing in Cards and Dice ibid. s. 4. Involuntary free
from penalty, upon giving notice to a Magistrate or Commissioner, ib. Persons
that have played and inform thereof free from the penalty ibid
H
Heresy.
SUndry Heresies and Errors obstinately persisted in, after conviction to be
punished with Banishment 58. 1. Witting and willing denyers of the Scriptures
being 16 years of age, how to be proceeded with 59. 2. Obstinate maintaining
the said Opinions after recantation, how punished ibid Muggleton's Books to be
brought to a Magistrate, on penalty 60. 3 The said Book to be burnt in Boston
ibid Penalty on Masters of Ships that bring in Quakers ibid. s. 4 Such Masters
to give security to carry them away, or be imprisoned ibid Penalty on persons
receiving and concealing Quakers ibid Penalty on encouragement of Quakers, 61.
5. Penalty for dispersing Quakers Books, ibid Penalty for reviling Magistrates
and Ministers ibid. s. 7 Publishers of Erroneous Doctrine, how punished ibid.
s. 8. Quakers to be apprehended, and how proceeded with ibid, s 9. Any persons
defending their Opinions, and stirring up mutiny, how to be proceeded with ibid
Order against Vagabond Quakers, 62. 10 Order against Vagabond Quakers only in
force, the rest suspended 63. 11.
Hides, See Leather. Highways.
For the Country to be laid out most conveniently with advice of the next
Towns, 64. 1 Not to be laid through Orchards, etc. ibid To be 6,8, or 10 Rod
broad ibid Any person endamaged by Highways to have recompense as therein is
provided, ibid Encumbrances in Highways to be removed 65. 3
Horses and Mares.
That are shipped off, to be Recorded by Clerk of Writts 65. 1. No Master of any
Vessel to receive any Horse or Mare aboard without a Ticket on penalty ibid No
person to sell or dispose of any Horsekind to any Indian on penalty ibid No
Stone Horses to go on Commons but such as are approved by Select men, ibid. s.
2 A Toll Book to be kept in every Town by Clerk of Writts p 147 All Horsekinde
and other Cattle bought, to be Tolld on penalty ibid The manner how Cattle must
be Tolld, ibid Any person that has lost Cattle may search the Toll Book ibid
Hue and Cry.
The charge to be born by the procurers, see Constables 3^. 7.
I
Idle Persons
SEE House of Correction p. 67
Jesuits
Forbidden to enter the Jurisdiction otherwise then the Law allows p 67 The
penalty on such, and how to be proceeded with ibid
Imposts on Liquors.
No Wines or Strong Water to be landed before Entry, on penalty of
confiscation p 67 Except what comes from England 67. 1. Goods confiscate how
disposed of ibid Customs to be paid when Goods are landed ibid The Custom
Master to have Deputies under him ibid Rates of Custom on Wines, etc. ibid The
Officers power and duty 68. 2 Masters or Merchants being strangers to pay 6. d.
a Tun for Ships above 200 Tun and 6. s 8. d. for lesser 69. 3. All Mum, Cider,
Ale, Beer to pay Excise ibid. s. 4 Explanation of Entry of Wines 70. 5.
Customs of Wines, etc. to be paid in money or the best of the Specie ibid
Imposts on Goods and Provision.
All Goods imported not exempt by other Laws, to be Ratable to the Country as
other Estates 70. 1. Every Factor or Agent to pay 10 s. for every 100 l.
imported ibid. s. 2. Every Master or Purser to certify to the Collector the
contents of this Lading before he break bulk, etc. ibid s 3 Every Collector to
enter the several parcels, and to whom consigned ibid s 4 Every one receiving
any Goods to give in to the Collector the full value 71. 5. Any person denying
or delaying payment, the Collector may leavy the same by distress ibid. s 6
The Collector may require, and if need be distrain, and none may refuse on
penalty ib. Penalty of falsifying, concealing or not producing Invoices of
Goods ibid. s 7 Penalty on any bringing in Cattle, and putting them to sale
before notice given to the Officer ibid. s. ^. Penalty of Beaver, etc. brought
in and sold or shipped before Entry ibid. S. 9. The Country Treasurer, with those
deputed by him under his Hand and Seal to attend the execution of the aforesaid
Laws, p 71,72. S 10. All Officers employed by him to be accountable to him at
all times ibid Goods having paid Customs, not to be ratable again that year
being in the Owners hands ibid. s. 1 The Governor and Council, or five
Magistrates may give directions in any question that may arise about Customs
ibid. s. 12 The Treasurers Office to have a Seal ibid No Master of Vessel to
deliver any Goods brought in without Order from the Collector ibid s. 13. The
revenue of all Goods brought in to Pascataqua to be paid in to the public
Treasury ibid. s 14. As also all Customs of Wines, Goods and Powder for ships
already received, to be paid to the Public Treasury ibid. s. 15. Goods
belonging to the Inhabitants of Pascataqua, to pay no Custom to the Treasurer
73. 16.
Impresses.
No Workmen to be compelled to work from home above a week together 7^. 1. None
to be compelled to public service or work, except the Press be grounded on
General Courts Act ibid. s. 2. Every person so pressed, to have reasonable
allowance for his service ibid Persons exempt from Office, Wars or public
service ibid None to be compelled out of the Jurisdiction, on an offensive, but
only on a defensive war ibid No man's Cattle or Goods to be pressed but by
Warrant grounded on some Act of General Court, and to be paid hire for them,
and reparation in case of damage ibid
Imprisonment.
No Bail or Main-prize to be taken for Capital cases, or Contempt in open
Court, p. 74.
Indians.
Right of Land declared 74. 1. Reduced to civility, to have Alotments among the
English ibid Civilized a competent number, so as to be capable of a Township,
on Petition to the General Court, shall have Lands set out ibid Shall have
relief in any Court against the English doing injury to them in their planting
Grounds, etc. ibid No person to give, barter, or sell any Arms or Ammunition to
them on penalty, s. 2. None of any foreign Nation or English to Trade with
them in this Jurisdict. p. 75. s. 3 Any person in this Jurisdiction may seize
on Vessels or Goods in trading with them, ib None directly or indirectly to
Trade with them but such as are allowed; on penalty, s. 4 Encouragement to the
Informer ibid None to give or sell Liquor to them on penalty, ibid. s. 5.
unless in sickness, s. 6. All Trading houses not allowed, to be demolished
ibid. s. 5. None to sell any Vessel to them on penalty, ibid. s. 6. The Laws in
force among us to be published to them in subjection to us once a year, 77. 8.
Powaws forbidden on penalty ibid. s. 10 Any person may seize any of them having
Liquors, and deliver both to the Constable ibid. s. 11. Trade with them for
Peltry and Ammunition to be allowed by the Treasurer 78. 12 Every allowed Trader
to pay for his License to the Treasurer, ibid. To give a true account ibid. The
Law touching Trade with them to be only during the Courts pleasure ibid
Indictments.
No Indictments, Complaint or Presentment of force if not made within one year
after the offense, except in Capital cases, and Fellonies above 10. s. wherein
persons damnified to have their remedy according to Law p. 79
Inkeepers.
Every one to pay for draught of Beer, Cider, etc. see Imposts 69. 4, To give
account once a month on penalty of forfeiture of their License or otherwise
ibid None may be a common Victualler, or sell Wine, etc. by retail without
approbation of Select men, and license of County Court on penalty, see
Inkeepers 79. 1. Merchants of Wine, and Stillers, etc, may retail Wine Liquors,
etc. ibid Every one to have a Sign within 3 months after license granted on
penalty ibid To be always provided with good Beer, as the Law provides, on
penalty p. 80 To put no Molosses in Beer Retailed, on penalty 80. 2. Not to
suffer any to be Drunk, or to drink excessively on penalty ibid. s. 3 That
shall conceal in his House any person Drunk, or not make stay of him till a
Constable come, the penalty ibid Whom they may entertain in the night season
81. 6. Their Licenses forfeitable in case 82. 9. To provide for Strangers
Horses on penalty 82. 10 To pay 50. s. per Butt for what Wine they draw, and to
account with the Treasurer every 6 months ibid. s. 11. To pay such Imposts on
Wines to the content of the Treasurer ibid To pay no Impost for what Wines they
sell by the Quarter-cask ibid To clear their Houses in Lecture times on penalty
83. 12 Their Licenses to be renewed yearly, ib. s. 15 Permitting wanton and
rude singing in their Houses, the penalty 84. 17 Entertaining persons forbidden
by the Select men, the penalty 85. 19 May not arrest, attach, etc. any Saylor
for Debt in case, see Saylors p. 134
Drunkenness.
Indians found Drunk, refusing to confess where they had their drink, to be
Imprisoned, see Indians 11. 77 Indians accusation of any person selling him
drink, shall be valid against the person, except he shall purge himself by
Oath, ibid Every Indian Drunk to pay 10. s. or be whipped ibid Every other person
Drunk, to pay the penalty, see Inkeepers ^0. 4 For excessive drinking, the
penalty, ibid
Tiplers
Tippling above half an hour, or at unseasonable times, or after 9 of the clock,
the penal. ib No Merchant, Cooper, etc. that keep wines to suffer any to drink
to excess, or be drunk, on penalty 81. 7 No Retailer of strong waters, or
private housekeeper to permit any to ^ipple in their houses on penalty 82. 8.
Retailars of strong water, to pay 2. d. the quart 82. 11. None to Still or
Retail strong water without license on penalty 83. 16. Strong-liquors in
Cases? not prohibited to be sold ibid Every person confessing his offense
against this Law, his testimony good against others 83. 13 Wanton and rude
singing in public houses penalty, and all present equally guilty in case 84.
17 Any person that shall keep a house of Entertainment, without license had,
and reniewed according to Law, the penalty, 84. 18 The penalty for any persons
frequenting Ale houses when forbiden by Select men, s. 19
Judgments. Executions.
When to be Entered, and when not, see Attachments 7. 1. Acknowledged before two
Magistrates and Clerk good in Law, see Courts, 34. 7 To be given by inferior
Courts upon the resolution of the General Court in difficult cases 38. 11 Any
Sale, Alienation or Assignment of a Judgment void in Law, see ^udgem. p. 85.
Every Judgment given against any person, to be Recorded in a book, see
Records, 129. 1.
Executions.
Not to be granted till 12 hours after Judgment, but by special Order, see
Appeal, 3. 1 Re^pited in case, see Attachments 7. 2 Every sale of Executions
void in Law, see Judgments p. 85 A person dying before Execution upon
Judgment is taken out, or before satisfaction received, may be reniewed by
Eecutors or Administrators, see Judgments p. 86 To be levied by Marshals, see
Marsh. 102. 2. In civil Actions void if not served within a Month after
Judgment, except the Court respit, see sureties p 144
Jurors, Grand-jurors to Present
Excess in Apparel, see Apparel p. 5 Tailors in case. see Additions to the Law,
ib. Neglect of Towns procuring an able Ministry, see Ecclesiastical 46. 19 The
breach of the Law tit. Indians Grand ^ury, and ^ury for Trials. 75. 5 To be
Summoned for County Courts out of their own County, see Courts ib. s. 7 No
Jurors to be summoned from Salem to Ipswich, nor ^^centra ibid To attend Courts
adjournments at the time appointed, see Courts Adjournment, p 38
Jurors.
At Come as Assistants, to be chosen out of Suffolk and Middlesex, see Iuries
86. 1. Jurors sworn to judge of matter, of fact and costs, the Bench of matter
of equity ibid A special Jury to be summoned for life or banishment, ibid.
Grandjuries to be summoned yearly to attend the several Courts, with their
duty, s. 2 Every Grandjuror to be allowed 3. s. per diem ibid Grand and
Pettyjuries may give in a special Verdict in case, the determination whereof
belongs to the Court 87. 3. All Jurors in matter of Fact, not finding the main
issue, may present what they find ibid Any Jury or Juror may in open Court
advise with any person to resolve or direct them before Verdict ibid. s. 5. No
Juror shall serve above one ordinary Court in a year, except Grand jurors, and
in cases of life and death ibid The Foreman of every Jury to deliver up all
writings committed to them, to the Clerk, see Records 129. 1. A Jury to be
summoned in case of untimely death, what to do, and to whom to make return, see
untimely death p. 39
L
Lands, free Lands.
All Lands granted, or to be granted to English Plantations or Persons by
General Court, to be accounted the right of such English, see Indians 74. 1.
Any person buying Land of any Indian without license of General Court
forfeited, s. 2 Graunts of Lands from Indians on term of years without license
forfeitable as if bought ibid. All our Lands and Heretages free from all
licenses upon Alienations, etc. see Lands p. 88. Any persons may purchase Lands
of Indians where Mines are discovered, see Mines, 116. 1.
Leather.
Raw Hides not to be transported on forfeiture, see Hides, 63. 1. Brought from
beyond Seas transportable, ib. To be preserved from corrupting on penalty ibid.
s. 2. No Butcher, Currier or Shoo-maker to exercise Tanning on penalty, see
Leather, 88. 1 No Tanner to be a Butcher, etc. ibid Gashing Hides in taking
off, penalty ibid Any Tanner putting to sale Leather insufficiently Tanned,
etc. forfeited 89. 2. Tan Fats set in Tan hills, etc. the penalty, ib Curriers
duty, with the penalty of neglect, ibid. s. 3.
Searchers of Leather.
To be sworn, their duty and power, ibid. s. 4 Neglect of their duty the
penalty, ibid How to dispose of insufficient Leather seized by them 90. 5.
Liberties Common.
Every person may freely Fish or Fowl in any Pond, etc. unless otherwise
appointed, etc 90. 2* No man shall come on another propriety without his
leave, and as in said Law expressed ibid
Lying.
Any Person of the age of 14 years making a lie, their punishment, stock, fine
or whipping to the fourth offense p 91. Persons under age, for lying to be
punished by their Parents ibid
M
Magistrates.
Governor, Deputy Governor and five Magistrates may order and direct for
removing obstructions referring to the Execution of Imposts, see Imposts, 7^.
12 Three Magistrates may keep a County Court, see Courts 36. 7. May order
satisfaction for damage done by Indians to the Cattle of English, see Indians
76. 7. With Select men, may place out unruly Children, see Children 26. 1. May
dispose of Orphans to service, 28. 6. May punish Inkeepers for neglect of
giving account of draught of Beer, See Imposts 70. 4. Two Magistrates may
punish Indian Traders allowed, for not giving a true account and payment to the
Treasurer, see Indians 78. 12. Consenting to an Assignment of a servant is
good, see Masters 105. 7 May out of Court dispose of, and settle poor persons,
see Poor 123. 1. May grant License to export Powder, See Powder 126. 2. May
appoint Surveyors of Ships to be built, See Ships 138. 1. May take Order about
Strangers, see Strangers p. 134 With the Clerk of Court may take the
acknowledgement of a Judgment, See Courts 36. 7.
One Magistrate,
May punish breach of the peace, see Breach of the Peace 11. 1. May suppress a
forceable detaining possession after Execution ibid. s. 2 May give Possession
ibid May imprison the detainer and abettors by Warrant to the Marshal ibid May
give Oath to Clerk of Markets, see Bakers 8. 1. May press Workmen to repair
defective Bridges, see Bridges 12. 3. May punish for Pilfring under 40. s. See
Burglary 13. 2. To return the Cases he issues to County Court ibid May punish
Corporally in case ibid May give Warrant to search for stolen Goods ibid May
proceed with any suspected according to Law p. 14 May give Gagers of Cask and
Packer s an Oath, see Cask 16. 1. May punish any for taking Cattle to use
without leave, when and how, see Cattle, 19. 5. May end small Causes under 40.
s. See Causes 20. 1. May sit in a Court with the Commissioners of Boston 21. 3.
May punish unruly Children, see Children, 27. 2. May punish any person
entertaining Children, etc. ibid. s. 3. May dispose of Offenders brought before
him, see Constable 31. 2. May punish any that refuse to aid a Constable ibid.
s. ^. May commit to Prison any that refuse to make acknowledgement of a Deed,
etc. see Conveyance 32. 4. May adjourn a Court in case, see Courts adjournments
p. 38. May Summon a Jury on untimely death, see Untimely death p. 39. May deal
with open opposers of the Word, etc. see Ecclesiastical 44. 15. May punish
persons for absenting from public Worship on the Sabbath 45. 16. One or two to
be present at opening Votes for Nomination of Magistrates, see Elections 47. 3.
May commit any person suspected for firing a house, etc. see Firing 51. 2. May
punish such as kill Mackrel before July see Fish ^4. 5. May punish for
Galloping in Boston streets, see Galloping p. 57. May punish Gaming or Dancing
in Ordinaries, see Gaming 57. 1. May dispose of Cards and Dice brought in
voluntarily ibid. s. 4 May commit to Prison any who wittingly and willingly
deny the Scripture, see Heresy 59. 2. May by Warrant exact fines on Masters
that bring in Quakers, and take security to carry them away 60. 4 May appoint
men to view Highways on complaint, see Highways 65. 3. May punish or bind
over Idle persons to the Court, see Idle Persons 6^. 1. May commit or bind over
to Court of Assistants any suspected to be a Jesuit, see Jesuits p. 67. May
fine any refusing to assist the Custom Master, see Impost 68. 2 With the
overseers of a work may Impresse workmen in the next Towns, and set wages, see
Impresses 73. 1. May fine or punish a Drunken Indian, see Indians 78. 11 May
punish any that brow not Beer according to Law, see Inkeepers 80. 2. May punish
Retailers of Strong Water, or private Housekeepers for permitting Tippling p.
81,82. s. 7,8. May determine all offenses against that Law 83. 13 May punish
wanton and rude singing in public Houses 84. 17 May commit any that keep a
House of Entertainment without license in case, s. 18 May punish any found in
public Houses prohibited by Select-men 85. 19 May Summon a person to answer a
Crime, see Jurors 87. 6. May give an Oath to proovers of Leather, see Leather
89. 3 May give Oath to Searchers and Sealers of Leather ibid. s. 4 May punish
Lying, see Lying p. 1 May punish Seamen de^erting their Voyage see Maritime ^^*
22. May allow of a Motion to Marriage in case, see Marriage 101. 3 May commit
to Prison any attempting Marriage in case ibid May join persons in Marriage,
102. 5 May not join or suffer any to join themselves in marriage before
publication ibid May pressmen and boats to pursue Runnawaies etc. See Masters
104. 3 May punish Malsters in case see Malt 106. 1 May committ a disorderly
Soldier to prison in case see Military p. 108. May by Warrant seize the estate
of any transporting our Coin, see Money, 118,2. May give the Oath of Fidelity
to Inhabitants and Strangers, see Oaths, 119. 2 May give Oath to cullers of
Staves, see Pipe-staves, p. 122: May commit Runawaies to the house of
Correction, see Prison. 127. 3. May give an Oath to a prisoner not worth five
pounds, p. 128. 5 To keep a Record of all Judgments granted by him against
any, see Records, 129. 1 May fine any newly married not returning their names
to Clerk of W^itts, 130. 2 May fine any defacing Records ibid May punish
Sabbath Breakers, see Sabbath, 132. 1 Or any drinking in Ordinaries after Sun
set ibid. ^. 2. May punish doing servile work on the Sabbath ibid. s. 4
Governor or Deputy Governor may appoint Surveyors of Ships to be built, see
Ships 138. 1. Governor or Deputy Governor may take order about Strangers, see
Strangers, p. 143 May allow a Stranger to reside in a Town, ib May punish
Cur^ets and Swearers, see Swearing p. 144,145 May punish and dispose of
Vagabonds, See Vagabonds p. 153 May fine any neglecting Watches, see Watches
154. 1 May take the Testimony of a person of 14. years of age, see witnesses
158. 2
Manslaughter.
Any person that shall kill another in the defense of himself or another, etc.
shall be blameless p. 92.
Maritime Laws.
The major part of Owners of Vessels agreeing in setting them forth, the minor
part Owners concluded therein 93. 1 Any Owner refusing, or by absence cannot
fit forth his part, the Master may take up on Bottomary ibid An Owner of Ship
or Vessel not assenting to let such Vessel, must manifest it by protest, etc.
ibid. s. 2. When Protests in such cases valid ibid No Voyage to be hindered by
such protest, ib. How the Dissenters part is to be secured, ib Owners of
Vessels living in several Countries how far the Master may act on their parts
94. 3. Masters or Mates non-attendance aboard, the penalty ibid. s. 4 Masters
agreement with their men for wages to be entered in a Book, with their men's
hands thereto, on penalty ibid. s 5 Masters to make due-provision for Seamen
and Passengers, on penalty 95. 6. No Master to ship any Seaman shipped by another
before, on penalty ibid. s. 7 No Seaman to ship himself with any man ^^till
cleared by the first imployer, on penalty ibid No Master to put into any
Harbor in his voyage, except necessitated etc. on penalty, s. 8. Masters may
alter their voyage in case, s. 9. Masters to pay mariners their wages, on
penalty, 96. 10 Damage* on goods aboard, how to be made good in case, s. 11. No
Master of a vessel to more near him that was first mored, on penalty, ibid. s.
12 Any Master under sail running aboard a Ship at anchor, to pay all damage,
97. 13. How goods thrown overboard to be made good, s. 14 A Vessel giving
over her voyage through insufficiency, the charge of Lading and unlading, by
whom to be paid, ibid. s. 15. Goods damaged at Sea by negligence, to be made
good by master and mariners, ib. s. 16 Damage done by one Ship on another, by
breaking loose, how to be made good 98. 17 Mariners absenting themselves from
their Ship, the penalty, ibid. s. 18. Mariners causing disturbance in a Ship,
to the prejudice of the voyage, how punished, ib. s. 19 Any person undertaking
to be a Pilot etc. and found insufficient, his penalty, ibid. s. 20. Mariners
to keep watch at Sea, and in Harbor, on penalty, 99. 21. Mariners deserting
their Voyage punishable in case ibid. s. 22 Mariners having received their
Wages and deserting the Ship to be pursued as Runawayes ibid. s. 23 Mariners
entertaining persons on board without leave, the penalty ibid. s. 24 Outrage by
Mariners on the Master how punished ^00. 25 Mariners in distress at Sea, not
to leave the Ship if no peril of life ibid. s 26 Mariners in case of Shipwreck
to endeavor the saving what may be, and to have recompense, if neglected, the
penalty ibid. s. 27
Marriage.
No man to strike his wife or woman her husband, on penalty 101. 1 No person to
be joined in marriage before Publication ibid. s. 2 The manner of Publication
ibid Any person making motion to marriage without consent of Parents, etc. the
penalty ibid. ^^. 3 No married person whose Husband or Wife is in other
Countries, may reside here in Case, on penalty ibid. s. 4. None may join
persons in marriage but a Magistrate or other persons appointed 102. 5. None
may join themselves in marriage but before such and that after Publication, ib.
No Man may marry his first wives natural sister ibid. s. 6. Every new married
person to give in his name to the Clerk of Writts, on penalty, see Records 130.
2
Marshalls their Office and Power.
To obey the Warrant of one Magistrate, see Breach of peace 11. 2 May require
aid in case ibid To serve Warrants or Attachments for cases tryable before one
Magistrate, see Causes, 20. 1 To assist and obey the Commissioners of Boston
21. 3. To levy fiues imposed by Court, see fines, p. 51 may Attach and Imprison
persons till fines are paid ibid By Warrant from a Magistrate to apprehend
deniers of Scripture, see Heresy, 59. 2. To Collect fines etc. by Warrant from
the Treasurer, on penalty, see Marshalls s. 1. Treasurer, 151. 4 To Levy
Executions on penalty ibid. s. 2. To make Returns of Executions, to Clerks in
two months, on penalty ibid. To serve all Attachments directed to them and make
return to the Clerks of Courts 103. 3. No Marshal to be a Clerk or Recorder of
a Court ibid Marshalls fees ibid. s. 4 Additional fees in case ibid Marshall
Generals fees ibid. s. 5 Marshalls and their Deputies may require aid in case,
as Constables may do, ibid. s. 6 Any refusing to aid them, the penalty, ibid
Marshalls or other Officers power in levying Fines, Amercements and Executions
ibid. s. 7. Where they are to make demand ibid The Officers charges to be
leavied with the Executions 104. 8 What Goods may not be taken by Execucution
ibid The Marshal may take the person refusing to discover Goods or Lands ibid
Marshal or other Officer doing wrong to any to make satisfaction ibid. s. 9 To
enquire after Wheat landed from foreign parts and put to sale, see Malt, 106.
2 Marshal General to receive of the Secretary, and send forth Orders of General
Court, see Records 129. 5 To send forth Treasurers warrants, etc. ibid
Masters, Servants, Laborers.
No Servant shall Give or sell any commodity without License 104,1. Time for
Workmen prescribed ibid. s. 2 Runaway Servants and other suspicious persons
how, and by whom to be pursued, ibid. s. 3. Workmens Wages to be set by the
Freemen in Towns ibid. s. 4. How Workmens wages to be paid, 105. 5. Servants
flying from cruelty may be harbored in case, ibid s. 6 No Servant to be put
off for above one year without consent of 2 Magistrates, ibid. s. 7 Servants
maimed by their masters, to have recompense; ibid. s. 8 Faithful Servants to
be rewarded, ibid. s. 9 Unfaithful Servants how punished, ibi s. 10 See more
Burglary, 13. 2.
Malt.
Penalty for malsters, if malt be not well made 106. 1. No wheat, barley etc.
to be brought in from foreign parts, on penalty, ibid.
Mills, Millers.
No Miller shall have above one sixteenth part for Toll of what he grinds p.
106 Every Miller to have Weights and Scales, ibid
Military.
The Sergeant Major by Warrant may require the chief Officers of the Regiment
to meet 107. 1 Such meeting may impose fines in case, ibid may order Clerks to
distrain ibid 64 Soldiers besides Officers shall be accounted a Foot Company
108. 4. The Major of the Regiment to order smaller Towns ibid Every Capt. Liev.
and Ens. to have Commission from the General Court ibid Every Captain shall
appoint what Arms every Soldier shall serve with ib. s. 5 Two thirds of every
Company to be Muskets; Pikes, to have Corslets and Head-pieces, ibid. Or Buff
or Quilted Coats 115. 20 Every Captain to exercise his Company six days in a
year ibid To give notice thereof three or four days before ibid Days expended
in marching to and fr^ at Regimental Exercise allowed part of the six days
ibid The three chief Officers may punish disorderly Soldiers, with the manner
how, ib s. 6 Soldiers how to be Armed, on penalty, s. 7 Who are to be provided
with Arms ibid Any Soldier wanting Arms, how to be supplied 109. 8. What
persons are exempt from Training, ibid. s, 9 Every Company to have a Clerk, his
duty, ibid. s. 10 To be upon Oath ibid Committee of Militia in every Town
stated their power and duty in case of Alarms, s. 11 No Major to lead his
Regiment out of the County, except, etc. ibid Seniority of Captain to be
according to the Seniority in Towns ibid Boston Captain preceedency by priority
of Commission ibid Warrant for Impressing Soldiers, to be directed to the
Committee of militia ib Committee of militia may suppress raising Soldiers by
any but this Government, ib Committee of militia with Select-men to mount
Artillery, and repair Forts, etc. ib. Commission Officers of Horse to be of the
militia ibid military Watches how to be set ib. s. 12 Firing a Gun after the
Watch set, the penalty ibid The duty of a S^^^el and Round ib. What shall be
accounted an Alarm ib. The Soldiers duty on an Alarm, on penalty ibid Smiths
and other Workmen to repair Arms on penalty 112. 13. Surveyor General yearly to
give account to the Council, of the stock of Powder, etc ibid. s. 14 Every Town
to have a Watch house, on penalty ibid. s. 15 Every Town to have a stock of
Powder, etc on penalty ibid Troops to be under the command of Majors of
Regiments 113. 16 Troopers privileges confirmed, what excepted ibid How to be
Armed ibid To exercise 6 days yearly on penalty, ibid Every Troop to have a
Clerk, his fe^^, ibid Officers of Horse may remit or abate fines* ibid Troopers
duty in case of Alarm, on penalty ibid No Officer of a Foo^ Company to be a
Trooper, ibid. No Troop to be drawn out of the County but by order of Major
General, except ibid No Trooper may put off or change his Horse without leave,
on penalty ibid Troopers fines for Nonappearance ibid No listed Trooper may
disband himself with out leave on penalty ibid A Trooper dismissed to be returned
by Certificate to the Commander of Foot in every Town ibid Inferior Officers
Commissions to stand good, on the death of Superior Officerr, 114. 17.
Soldiers being dismissed from Exercise to repair to their quarters ibid
Disorders of-Souldiers to be punished by the chief Officers ibid Troopers
listed after 63 not to have the allowance of 5. s. ibid Who may be listed as
Troopers ibid Who are liable to Military Watches, s. 19 Towns not under
particular Majors to be ordered by the Major General 115. 19. Commission
Officers to be chosen by the General Court, except, etc. 116. 21 Inferior
Officers to be chosen by Commission Officers, or Major, where no Commission
Officers are ibid Regimental meetings ordered ib. s. 22 The Majors allowance at
such meetings, what, and by whom to be paid ibid Commissions for military
Officers to have the Public Seal, see Seals Public, p. 135
Mines.
Discoverers of Mines to enjoy the profit thereof for 21 years, provided, etc.
116. 1. Mines found by any man in his own propriety, shall remain to the Owner,
except, etc ibid
Money.
The Mint house to be at Boston 116. 1. All Officers belonging to it, to be
sworn, ib. Every person may bring Bullion or Plate to be minted ib All money
minted, to be of Sterling. Alloy, ibid The Stamp and Inscription of money, ib. The
value of money Coined ibid Money Coined here to pass current ib Allowance for
Coining, and weight of Coin ibid No person to carry out the Coin of this
Country, on penalty 117. 2. Searchers for money exporting to be in all needful
places, their power ibid Such Searchers to take an Oath ib. may require
Assistance ibid
Monopolies.
No Monopoly allowed but of new Inventions that may be profitable p. 119
O
Oaths, Subscriptions.
NO Oath to be imposed, or subscription required, but what the General Court
has appointed 119. 1. No Oath binds any man or Officer, but while an
Inhabitant ibid All Inhabitants take the Oath of Fidelity, s. 2 All Strangers
to take the Oath prescribed, p. 120
Oppression:
What, and how punished p. 120.
P
Payments.
ALL Payments to be in Specie contracted for 121. 2.
Petitions.
Every Cause heard by General Court, to pay the charges of the Court, besides
Entry p. 121 When Petitions are to be received, when not ibid Who may present
Petitions without payment ibid Account of the number of Petitions to be
signified to the Court, as directed ibid
Pipestaves, Viewers of Staves.
Coopers staves to be culled, see Coopers, 17. 3 Two Viewers of Staves to be
chosen in every Town where they are shipped off, See Pipestaves p. 122 The
Viewers to be upon Oath, their power, ibid Assize of Staves ibid To (...)
account of Staves approved, and for whom ibid Pipestaves shipped not approved
forfeitable, is Searchers fees for culling ibid Masters receiving Staves on
board, not culled the penalty ibid Refuse Staves not prohibited transportation
ibid
Poor Persons.
To be disposed of by Shire Courts or two Magistrates out of Court 123. 1. Any
person not excepted against within a months, shall be reputed an Inhabitant in
Towns where thy are, ibid. s. 2 Any person excepted against, and not removing,
nor complained against to the County Court by any Town, the penalt. ib Where
persons cannot be settled in any Town, the County Court may order their
residence, the charges to be paid by County Treasurer ibid
Possession.
Title to Inheritances by Possession, declared p. 124
Porters.
To be allowed by Select-men, and their Wages determined p. 124
Plaintiffs and Defendants.
Plantiff asking advice of any that are to judge in his case may not prosecute
his Action, see Counsel p. 34 In such case shall pay costs to the Defendant and
so e^contra ib. To attend Adjournments of Courts, see Adjournments p. 38 Not
prosecuting their Actions at Court of Assistants to pay costs to the Defendant,
see Jurors 87. 4. Not appearing the first forenoon of the Court to be Non
suited ibid. s. 6. May make a new Entry in case ibid Defendant appearing in any
Court, having asked advice of any of the Judges, being proved to pay 10. s. to
the Plaintiff, see Counsel P. 34. To attend Courts Adjournments, See
Adjournments P. 38. To have Costs of the Plaintiff not prosecuting his Appeal,
see ^urors 87. 4. To have costs of a Plaintiff upon a Nonsuit ibid. s. 6.
Pound, Pound breach.
Every Town to have a sufficient Pound, 124. 1. Any Pounding Swine or Cattle to
give notice to owner or cause them to be cried, ibid Any Swine or Cattle
escaping out of Pound the Owner to pay all damage ibid Owners of Cattle to pay
damage or Replevin ibid No one to Rescue Cattle going to Pound, on Penalty
ibid. s. 2. Pound breach, the Penalty ibid Harms done to any by Rescue, to be
made good ibid Owners of Cattle ^^ttors in a Rescue, their penalty ibid
Powder.
All Powder, Lead, Shot, etc. imported, to be Entered with the Notary, on
Penalty, 125. 1. The Notary to keep a true account or such Goods ibid Not to
grant Certificate to any in case, on Penalty ibid The Captain of the Castle to
signify this Law to Masters and Merchants ib No Powder to be transported out
of this Colony without license, on Penalty, 126. 2.
Prescription.
What, P. 126 Presidents and Forms of Oaths etc. p. 102 --.
Prisoners.
Who may be imprisoned, see Arrests, 6. 1. Maintenance declared ibid Not to be
kept in Prison in case ibid Concealing Estate to be sold ibid Or under Bail for
Crime, to be tried at the next Court that has cognizance thereof, See Courts,
38. 10. To be conveyed to Prison at their own charge if able, see Prisoners
126. 1. No Person to be helpful to any to break Prison, on Penalty 127. 4 Any
Prisoner taking Oath he is not worth five Pounds, to be discharged 128. 5.
Prison Keepers.
Discharged of Prisoners in case, see Arrests 6. 2. More, see Courts 128. 5.
Danger 7. 3. Liberty to take Bail ibid To receive Persons Committed for
Drunkenness by Magistrate, Commissioner, or Select men, see Inkeepers 81. 5
Suffering any to escape, the Penalty, see Prison 127. 4. To Present a List of
their Prisoners to the Courts to whom the Cognizance belongs, 128. 5. Costs for
Prisoners maintenance to be determined by the Courts ibid
House of Correction.
To be erected in every County at their charge 127. 2. The Master to be
appointed by Coun. Co. ibid His Fees ibid Delinquents committed, how to be
punished, ibid The Master not to discharge any committed but by Warrant ibid
Privileges Civil.
No man to suffer any punishment, etc. but by virtue of some Law established,
or the Word of God P. 1. No man to be Imprisoned before the Law has sentenced
him in case, see Imprisonment p. 74 Any person may come to any public meeting,
and present any necessary motion, etc see Liberties Common 90. 1 Any person may
remove out of the Jurisdiction, if no legal impediment 91. 3.
Protestation.
How, and in what case to be made p. 128.
Punishment.
No man shall be sentenced twice for one offense p. 129. No man to be punished
with above forty stripes at one time ibid No man to be punished with whipping
in case ibid No torture to be used before conviction, ibid
R
Records.
ALL Evidences in any case, to be given in Writing, and kept on (...) 129. 1.
Every Parent, etc. to give the names of all born or dying to Clerk of Writts,
130. 2 Any person may Record Testimonies, etc. 131. 3. Defacing of Records, the
penalty ibid Any Person may view or search, Rolls, Records of Court, etc. ibid
Rolls, Records, etc. that may be viewed, interpreted ibid. s. 4.
Replevin.
Owners of Cattle impounded, may Replevin them, see Cattle 18. 3. To be granted
by the Clerk of Writts, see Clerk of Writts 28. 1. What may be Replevin'd,
when, and by whom, see Replevin P. 132
S
Sabbath.
PErsons absenting from public meetings on the Lords day, etc. the penalty,
see Ecclesiastical 45. 16. Profaning of the Sabbath what, see Sabbath 132. 1.
Youth Profaning the Sabbath, how punished ibid Persons above 14 years of age,
Profaning the Sabbath, how Punished ibid By the Lords day is meant day light
ibid Drinking in Ordinaries after Sun set the penalty 135. 2. Any Person not
paying their fines, or giving security, to be corporally punished, s. 3. Any
doing servile work on the Lords day, the penalty, 134. 4. What Travelers by
Land or in Boats to be accounted Prophaners of the Sabbath, ibid
Saylors.
No In-keeper, etc. may Attach, Arrest, etc. any Saylor for debt in case p.
134.
Salt.
In every Maritime Town, a measurer of Salt aboard Ships to be chosen p. 134
His allowance ibid Masters or Mariners non-observance of this Law, the Penalty
ibid
Salt-Peeter.
In all Towns where the makers thereof desire, Select men are to make Orders
for increasing Peeter p. 135 Penalty on any neglecting such Orders ibid Select
men neglecting to make and execute such Orders, the penalty ibid
Seal-Publick.
The Governor, or keeper of the Seal to affix the Seal to Military
Commissions, etc. from this Court or Council without pay p. 135.
Schools.
Every Town consisting of 50 House-holders to have a School for Writing and
Reading. 136. 1. How such School master shall be paid, ibid Where a hundred
House-holders are, must be a Grammar School, on penalty s. 2. No Hetrodox or
scandalous Schoolmaster to be allowed ibid. s. 3. Penalty on Towns for want of
a Grammar School increased 137. 4
Secretary.
To sign Warrants for Execution of persons sentenced to death by Court of
Assistants or General Court, see Condemned ib. s. 2 To give out Copies of the
names of persons allowed by General Court to be Freemen see Courts 38. 12 To
give notice of all fines to the Treasurer within 14 days, see fines ibid To
sign Warrants for levying Executions, see Marshals 102. 2. To receive in
Petitions at the General Court and take pay for them, see Petitions, p 121 To
give account of the number received by him to the Magistrate, which shall be
allowed as part of his Sallery ib. To deliver to the Marshal General Copies of
special Orders of General Court within ten days, see Records ibid. s. 5 To
write out Military Commissions, etc. for the Seal, see Seal-^ublick p. 135 To
keep account of dues by fines, etc. on penalty, see Treasurer 151. 4. To
present to the Council, or Court of Assistants an account of all Bonds, etc.
returned to England, see Ships 140. 3.
Self Murder.
Self-murtherers denied burial in common burying places, but etc. p. 137
Sheep.
Any person may keep sheep on commons whereto he belongs, 137. 1. Five sheep to
be allowed for one cow where commons are stinted, ibid None to course with a
dog, on penalty 138. 2 Any dog killing sheep to be hanged by the owner, on
penalty, ibid. All Wool put to sale, how to be washed and ordered on penalty,
ibid. s. 3
Ships.
Every Vessell-above 30 Tuns to be built, shall be Surveyed by such as are
appointed. 138. 1 The builder, or owners of such vessel to give notice on
penalty, ibid Surveyors power, ibid Any Ship-carpenter not following the
Surveyors advice, upon complaint, how to be proceeded with, ibid Officers
appointed to propagate the Art of Navigation, 139. 3 Rules for their proceeding
therein, and fees stated, ibid. No masters aboard their ships to drink healths,
or suffer others to drink them on penalty 140. 4. No person to fire a Gun after
Sun set, or on the Sabbath, on penalty, ibid The Captain of the Castle to give
notice of this Law, to all Ships passing the castle, ib. Every ship trading in
our Ports, not belonging mostly to this Country, to pay half a pound of powder
per Tun, ibid. s. 5. Officers, as receivers nominated ibid. Their Power, ibid.
Such are accountable to the Genesis Court ibid. No person shall Trade upon our
Coasts in case, on penalty, 141. 6.
Spinning.
To be disposed of and regulated in the several families by the Select men, p.
141
Strayes.
Every one taking up a Stray etc. the owner not known, to enform the Constab.
within six days, ibid. s. 1. Rules for the Constable in such case, ibid.
Penalty to finder or Constable on neglect, ib. The finder to apprize and Record
lost goods, on penalty, ibid. Lost goods to be restored to Owners within one
year after publication, on condition, ib. Finders of Strayes to put wyths on
beasts necks, on penalty, ibid. When Cattle shall be accounted Straies, ibid
Penalty to any taking off a with, or taking away a beast, ibid All Strayes
where to be first Cried, ib s. 2. Straies to be entered with the County
Recorder, ibid Strayes how to be disposed, in case, ibid
Strangers.
May sue Strangers in any Court, see Courts p 38. s. 8. Every Master or mate of
a Ship to bring all Strangers immediately upon their arrival before the
Gover^or other Magistrate, on penalty, see Strangers, p. 143. The Capt. of the
Castle to make known this Order to Vessels that pass by, ibid. Strangers
professing the true Religion, to be succored ibid. All persoons to enjoy equal
Justice ibid. No Stranger to have any Lot in any Town till allowed, nor to be
entertained above 3 weeks, on penalty ibid No person to receive a stranger
above three weeks, on penalty ibid
Sureties, and Goods Attached.
No Goods Attached to be free, till Execution upon Judgment be satisfied p.
144 Sureties, except in Capital or Criminal Cases, not to be free till
Execution be satisfied ibid
Swearing and Cursing.
Rash and vain Swearing and Cursing, how punished p. 145
Swine.
Any person chosen to execute Orders about Swine, the penalty 145. 1. All
damage by Swine, to be paid according to the Orders of the Town where damage is
done ibid. s. 2. What sufficient Fences against Swine ibid Swine Impounded and
not owned, how to be disposed of 146. 3. Towns or Select-mens neglect to make
Orders, the penalty ibid
T
Tile Earth.
WHen to be dig'd, on penalty, p. 146
Tiplers, and Tipleing.
See Inkeepers, p. 81-84
Tobacco.
May not be taken within 20 Poles of any house, etc. on penalty p. 146 Tolling
of Cattle, see Horses.
Town-ships.
To pay their proportion to building or repairing County Bridges, see Bridges
12. 1. Penalty by defective Bridges or Highways ibid. s. 2 Penalty of treble
damage in case ibid To choose yearly a Gager of Cask and Packer, see Cask, 16.
1. Any chosen, paying 40 s. the town must choose another, ibid. Neglect hereof
the penalty, ibid To have a distinct Brand mark, see Cattle, p. 18. s. 3 to
provide an house for the Ministry, see Ecclesiastical, 45. 17 May Impose a
fine on any chosen to Office, and refusing to serve, see Freemen 56. 2 To
restrain Indians from profaning the Sabbath, see Indians 77. 1^ To chose
Sealers of Leather, see Leather, 89. 4 Not to appropriate to any man any Pond
that is above Ten acres, see Liberties common, 91. 2 Danger, if not excepting
against persons at the County Court, see Poor, 123. 2 Where 50 Families are, to
haveone to teach to Write and Read, see Schools, 136. 1. Where one hundred
Families are, to have a Grammar School, on penalty ib. s. 2 To make Orders
against Swine, on penalty, see Swine 143. 3. May choose Select men to order the
Prudentials of their Town, see Townships, 148. 1. To dispose of single persons,
and Inmates, s. 3 May impose fines on any refusing to serve as Constables ibid.
s. 5 Who in them may have privilege of Commonage for Wood 149. 6 To pay 10. s.
for every Wolf killed by English, see Wolves 160. 3.
Select men's Duty and Power.
To Assess persons for their Garb, see Apparel 5. 1. To appoint persons to view
Town bounds, see Bounds p. 10 To order Fences in Common fields in case, see
Cornfieldsd 17. 2. To make Orders to repair Fences general and particular under
100 Acres 19. 6. And to impose fines ibid Not to neglect making such Orders on
penalty to the Town ibid To order repairs of Fences on the Owners neglect ibid
To give Warrant to the Constable to levy double damages in case ibid To try
Causes, and grant Executions in case see Causes 21. 2. To make Country Rates,
see Charges Publ. 23. 3. To Assess Strangers any Month 25. 3. To see to the
Education of Youth, on penalty, see Children 26. 1 To place out unruly Children
ibid The major part may approve the marriage of Orphans 28. 6. To Assess for
Ministers maintenance, see Ecclesiastical 48. 5. To receive of the County
Treasurer fines imposed on Quakers, etc. and to improve them, see Elections 48.
5 To lay out private Highways, see Highwayes 64. 2 To give recompense to any
damaged by such Ways laid out ibid. p. 65 To approve such Stone-horses as go
on Commons, see Horses 65. 2. To levy the penalty by Warrant for the Towns use
ib. p. 66 The penalty of Select-mens neglect ibid With the Collector of
Customs to rate persons in case, see Imposts 71. 7 Where no Magistrate or
Commissioners are may punish Indians for Drunkeness, see Indians, 77. 11 To
approve of persons to keep Ordinaries, etc. see Inkeepers 79. 1. Where no
Magistrate or Commissioners are may commit a drunken person to Prison or punish
according to Law, see Inkeepers 81. 5. To prohibit persons from public houses,
etc in case 85. 19. To receive a third part of all Leather and Shoos seized,
see Leather 90. 5. To Assess the Town for mounting Artillery, etc. see Military
110. 11. To Assess for Towns stock of Powder, etc. 112. 15 To crave the help of
County Courts against persons obtrudeing the Town, see Poor p. 123. To provide
for Poor settled by County Court ibid To allow Porters, and set their Wages,
see Porters p. 124. To provide materials for work in the House of Correction,
see Prison 127. 3 May* punish Prophaners of the Sabbath 132. 1. To make Orders
to produce Salt-peeter, see Salt-peeter p. 135. To impose fines on any
neglecting their Orders ibid To choose and allow an Officer an annual stipend to
execute their Orders ibid To provide for Schoolmasters maintenance see Schools
136. 1 Not to admit or suffer a Hetrodox or Scandalous Schoolmaster ibid. s. 3.
To appoint the place where self-murderers shall be buried, see Self-murder p.
137. To make Orders for clearing Commons for Sheep, see Sheep 137. 1. May
impose fines for putting Rams to flocks ibid To order spinning in their Towns,
see Spinning p. 141 To make Orders about Swine, see Swine p. 145 to manage the
Prudential affairs of the Town according to instructions in writing, see
Townships 148. 2. To require Constables to levy fines on such as refuse to
serve as Constables ibid. s. 5 With two Magistrates may put Children forth to
service 149. 8. May order and dispose Constables Watches, see Watches p. 154
With the Constable to choose a Sealer of Weights and Measures, see Weights, 155.
1 To appoint Measurers of Corn, Wood or Board 156. 2 To cut off the Ears of
Wolves they pay for to Indians for the Country, see Wolves, p. 160.
Treasurers.
To issue forth Warrants for Assessment yearly, see Charges Public 23. 3 For
levying the same ibid To pay to the Constable Charges of bringing Rates ibid
May distr^in the goods of Constable or any other person in case 25. 4. to pay,
100. l. per annum to the College, see College 30. 2. To pay charge of Hue and
Cry in case, see Constable. 32. 7. To pay for Victuals and Vessels Impressed,
see Council, p. 34 To pay charge of Elders meetings, when employed by the
Courts Order, see Ecclesiastical, p. 44. 13. To pay the Secretary for
writtings, see Seal-Publick p. 136 To keep Accounts of all transactions
belonging to his Office, as Debts, Dues etc. see Treasurers 150. 1. To make no
payments but by some Law or Order, ibid. His allowance, 151. 4. To give Account
once a year to the General Court, ibid. To provide Weights and measures as
Standards, see Weights, 155. 1. To Seal Town Standards, ibid To pay the charge
of Witnesses in Criminals see Witnesses, 159. 3 To pay for every Wolf killed
10 s. see Wolves, p. 159
County Treasurer.
To (...) or Hue and Cry, in case, see Constable, 32. 7. To pay to Select men
in Towns all Fines of Delinquent Quakers, see Elect. 48. 5 To give Warrant to
the Marshal to Levy Fines, p. 51. To receive Fines for Select men's neglect of
the Law title Horses, 67. 2 To pay for Poor, in case, see Poor, p. 123. To be
chosen Annually, time when, and manner how, see Treasurers, 150. 2. No Clerk of
Court to be Treasurer, ibid. May give Warrant to Marshalls or Constables to
Levy Fines, 151. 4 His Allowance, ibid To have the same Power in his place as
the Country Treasurer, 151. 5 To return to County Courts the names of
Constables not clearing their Accounts, ibid To pay twenty shillings so every
Wolf killed by English, see Wolves, ibid. s. 3.
Trials.
Any Person against whom Judgment has past in Civil Actions, may have a new
trial on Review, in case, 152. 1. Plantiffe and Defendant agreeing, may have
their Case tried by Bench, or Bench and Jury, except, ibid, s. 2. Every
Delinquent has liberty of a Jury, ibid. s. 3. Challenge may be made against
Jurors by Plaintiff or Defendant, if found just others to be impanelled ibid
What persons may have allowance in any case ibid. s. 4.
V
Vagabonds.
BEing Apprehended how to be proceeded with p. 152.
Vexatious suits.
How punished, see Actions ^. ^.
Votes.
When persons are capable of Voting, see Ability 1. 1. None to Vote in
Elections but Freemen, on penalty, see Elections 47. 1. Every person called to
Vote in any Court, etc. may act according to his own Judgment, see Votes p.
153 Neuters to be taken in the Negative ib. Who may put matters to Vote the
President refusing ibid The Governor to have a casting Vote in Courts of
Assistants or General Court, the President etc. in other Courts, see Courts 35.
6
Usury.
No man to pay above 8. per Cent. forbearance for a Debt, Bills of Exchange
excepted p. 153 Usury Contrary to the Law of God not allowed ibid
W
Watching.
WHen Constables Watches shall begin and end 154. 1 Who are liable to Watches
ibid Watches power and duty ibid Persons exempt from Watching 155. 2.
Weights and Measures.
Country Standards to be provided by the Treasurer 155. ^ A Sealer of Weights
and Measures to be in every Town ibid By whom to be chosen ibid to be sworn,
his Office and power ibid Neglect of Select-men, Constable or Sealer the
penalty ibid No man compellable to receive Corn, Wood or Boards, but by a sworn
measurer 156. 2.
Wharfage.
Where it may be taken 156. ^ The Rates allowed for Wharfage ibid Wharfage may
be taken out of the Goods in case ibid Penalty of casting an Anchor etc. in
Boston Cove 15^. 2 Penalty of throwing Dung, etc. into the said Cove ib. s. 3.
Wills.
Who may make Wills, Alienations, etc. see Ability. p 1. Penalty of Executors
not proving Wills in time, or entering on, or disposing Estates, see Wills 157.
1. Who may take Probate of Wills, and grant Administration 158. 2.
Witnesses.
Witnesses and parties concerned to attend Courts Adjournment, see
Adjournments, p. 38. Testimony of Gamesters good against others in case, see
Gamesters 58. 4. No man to be put to death without 2 or 3 witnesses, see
Witness 158. 1 the testimony of a person of 14 years of age may be taken out of
Court in any Case Civil or Criminal ib. s. 2. In what case such testimony shall
be good ibid Such testimonies how to be disposed of by them that tkke them ib.
Witnesses in Capital cases to be present Witnesses summoned to any Court, not
bound to appear in case 159. 3. What allowance witnesses shall have ibid
Witnesses in Criminal cases how paid, ibid Delinquents to pay all charges ibid
Wolves.
Every person English or Indian killing a Wolf, to be paid 10. s. by the
Treasurer 159. 1 Encouragement for Indians to kill wolves 160. 2. Every person
killing a wolf to have 20. s. of the County, and 10. s. the Town where it was
killd ib. s. 3.
Wood.
The quantity, how to be reckoned by the Boats p. 160 A Cord of Wood what ibid
Workmen.
Artificers in Harvest time compellable by the Constable to work p. 161.
Penalty on neglect of Constable or Workmen ibid
Wrecks of the Sea.
No violence to be offered to the person or goods of such as suffer Shipwreck,
p. 161 Any Whale cast up, to belong to the Country ibid
Writts.
All Writts and Processes to go forth in His Majesty's Name p. 161.
FINIS.

