Several Laws and Orders made at the GENERAL COURT, the 8th of October 1672. AS
ALSO Several Laws and Orders made at the GENERAL COURTS, Holden at Boston the
7th of May and 19th of October, 1673 And printed by their Order. Edward Rawson
Secr.
At the Second Sessions of the General Court Held at Boston the 8th of October,
1672.
IT is ordered and by the Authority of this Court Enacted; That all Strangers
coming into this Country, shall, and may henceforth have Liberty to Sue one
another in any Courts of this Colony, that have proper Cognizance of such
Cases; Strangers Liberties to Sue in any County Courts.
and that any Inhabitant may be sued by any Strangers who are on Immediate
Employ by Navigation, Mariner or Merchant, in any of our Courts, the said
Strangers giving in Security to the Clerk of the Writts to respond all
extraordinary Damages the said Inhabitants shall sustein, by being sued out of
the County to which he belongs; in Case the Stranger shall not obtein judgment
against such Inhabitant so sued, and the Law Title, special Courts is hereby
repealed and made void; Any Law, Custom or Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That in all Counties, where
there is but one Magistrate ^^ere, One Magistrate and one Associates Power
any one of the Associates for that County Court joining with the Magistrates
may act by them alone, (...) henceforth be accounted legally valid, and is
hereby allowed to all Intents and Purposes, as if done by two Magistrates; and
in those Counties where there is no Magistrate, any one invested with (...)
power with two Associates, have like Power committed to them to act as any two
Magistrates as above.

WHereas by sad experience; It is too obvious to all our people and others,
that the sin of Whoredom and Uncleanness grows amongst us, notwithstanding all
the wholesome Laws made for the punishing and suppressing such land Defiling
Evils; And whereas there is of late, too just ground to suspect a greater Evil
growing upon us, by the bold and audacious Presumption of some, to erect a
Stews, Whore House, or Brothel House; for the nourishing such wickedness, the
increase of which Evil, if not timely prevented, may tend to the debauching of
multitudes of persons, and tend to the utter ruins of their Estates, Soul and
Body.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; That if any
Person, Male, or Female, shall presume to set up or keep any such House,
wherein such wicked lusts may be nourished, and Whoredom committed, Courts
Testimony against, and Order to prevent Baudery
every such Baud, Whore, or vile Person, upon Conviction of such Offense or
Offenses; such Bawd, Whore, or vile Person, shall be severely whipped at the
Carts-tayle, through the Streets, where such Offense, or Offenses has been
committed, with Thirty Stripes, and thence to be committed to the House of
Correction, and by the Master of the said House to be kept with hard fare, and
hard labor, by daily Task, and in defect of their duty to be severely whipped
every night with Ten Stripes; and once at least in every Week, the said Baud
and his Accomplices in such vile and sinful Courses the Baud to be their Leader,
and the other two and two in hair Frocks and blew Caps by the Executioner to be
fastened to a hand-Cart, and forced along to draw all the filth laid up in the
Cart, through the Streets, to the Sea side going to the Gallows in Suffolk, and
in all other Counties where the Court of each Shire shall appoint, and so
returned to the House of Correction, to be alike kept with hard Fare and
Labor, according to the Custom of the House during the Courts pleasure, there
to remain.

At a General Court for Elections, Held at Boston, the 7th of May, 1673.
THis Court taking into serious Consideration the great necessity of Upholding
the staple Commodities of this Country, for the Supply and support of the
Inhabitants thereof, and finding by experience the bringing in of Malt (which
is a principal Comodity of this Country) from Foreign parts to be exceeding
prejudicial to the Inhabitants of this Colony.

It is therefore Ordered; That whosoever, whether Inhabitant or Stranger, 6 d p
Bushel to the Treasurer for Malt Imported from Europe
that shall directly or indirectly from henceforth Import into this
Jurisdiction, from any parts of Europe, any Malt; every such person shall pay
unto the Treasurer of the Country the Sum of six pence Per bushel, for Malt
so landed, besides the Rate of one penny per pound formerly Imposed, and the
Collector shall stand charged with gathering up of the said Impost, and to
return the same to the Treasurer.

WHereas all Fishermen settled Inhabitants, are by Law exempted from ordinary
traynings, Fishermen when at home liable to Training
which indulgence is by many persons improved when they are at home and not
employed in their callings, to be Spectators or otherwise idling, gaming, or
spending their time unproffitably, whereby such persons as attend their duty
and spend their time in that Service is discouraged; For the prevention
whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That all Fishermen
being Inhabitants, when they are at home (and not employed necessarily, and so
judged by the chief Officers) shall attend public Traynings, or else be fined
five shillings, as the Law directs for others absence. Any Law, Custom or
Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

THis Court having long since made an Order to prevent damage done by Horses,
title Corn fields etc. Sect. 3. But no penalty annexed thereunto. as an
Addition to the said Law;

This Court does Order the penalty on non observance thereof, with respect to
Horses, to be five shillings fine for every such offense to the Town where it
is Committed, Penalty for Horses going in the Commons and Damage done by them
besides any damage accrewing by every such Horse or Horse kind so unfettered
or unshakled as in the said Law is provided. And further that none shall be
permitted to keep a Horse or Horse-kind in the woods or Commons, but such as
are accepted free Commoners in any such Town, under the penalty of twenty
shillings a Horse for every such offense, to be disposed of as the Select men
shall see meet.

And further, as an explanation of the late Law respecting stone Horses not to
go upon the Commons uner the penalty of twenty shillings a month;

This Cout does Declare, that it is to be understood of twenty shillings for
every such Horse found on the Commons, so often as he shall be found there.

FOrasmuch as sundry unskilful persons have of late years, taken upon them to
boil, pickle, and Sell Sturgeon for Transportation, of which sundry Keggs, and
other Caske have proved corrupt and wholly unserviceable to the disappointment
and Damage of sundry Merchants and others, as also to the debasements of that
Comodity and reproach of the Country; which if duly Ordered, might be
beneficial to the Inhabitants for Transportation, and otherwise.

It is therefore Ordered and Enacted by the Authority of this Court; And be it
hereby Ordered and Enacted, that no person whatsoever, shall henceforth boil,
pickle, or pack up any Sturgeon for Sale in this Jurisdiction, but such as
shall be licensed thereunto by the County Court, where such persons Inhabit, on
Penalty of forfeiture thereof, one half to the Informer, and the other half to
the Country; And to the end, there may be no fraud or or abuse in the said
Comodity, every such licensed Person shall brand mark all Cask wherein it is
packed, with the letters of his Name, and that there be Searchers appointed and
Sworn to view all Sturgeon, made here or Imported, before it be sold, or in
kind passed away; who shall set their mark on such as they find sound and
sufficient in all respects, both as to the quality of the Sturgeon, and Gage of
the Cask, and that only such so marked, as above, shall be exported on penalty
of forfeiture of the whole value thereof, for whose care and labor the
Sturgeon boyler or Importer shall pay for the viewing and heading thereof after
Three Shillings Four Pence, P. Score for all Kegs and Firkins, from time to
time, and if any shall counterfeit, the Sturgeon Boylers or Packers, mark,
they, or he, shall forfeit Five Pounds to the Country, for every such defect;
And it is referred to the respective County Courts, to license able and fit
Persons to boil and pickle Sturgeon for Sale, as likewise to appoint Searchers
to view and mark the same, as abovesaid.

October 15th. 1673.
AS An Addition to the Law Title Freemen. SECT. III.

It is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; That henceforth, the
Names of such as desire to be admitted to the Freedom of this CommonWealth,
Addition to the Law for Admission of Freemen
not being Members of Churches in full Communion, shall be entered with the
Secretary from time to time at the Court of Election, and Read over before the
whole Court, sometime that Sessions, and shall not be put to Vote in the Court
till the Court of Election, next following.

AS An Addition to the Law of the Sabbath. Addition to the Law of the Sabbath.
SECT. II.

It is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; Besides the Penalty
upon the Persons there offending the public Housekeeper, where any such
Person or Persons are found so transgressing, (as in the said Law is expressed)
shall pay five Shillings to the Treasury of the County where the Offense is
Committed.

IT is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; That all Laws and
Orders of this Court, which are thought for to be published at the end of every
Sessions, shall be forthwith sent to the Press, and also read in the Market
place at Boston; Order for publishing the Laws
upon the fifth day, being a Lect^^^ day within Ten days after the end of such
Sessions, which being performed, Is, and shall be accounted sufficient
publication, and further that printed Copyer shall be dispersed, at the
discretion of the Treasurer and are taken for the same, by the Secretary and
Marshal General as the Law directs. fo. 231.

IT is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; That where there be
sundry Proprietors of Lands lying together, Order directing their Regulation of
Proprieties in common Pasture
and are enclosed by a Fence, although not by Consent of Parties, or by any
prudential act of Authority disposing the same into one Common Field, the Major
part of such Propriety may Order and Limit the proportion of Cattle that shall
be put to feed there on or may otherwise be limited and proportioned by the
Select men of the Town or Towns where such Lands do lie, according to the
direction of the Law tit. Cattle and Cornfieldsd. SECT. II.

THe Court observing the wicked and unrighteous practices of evil men to
Increase some Piratical seizing of Ships, Ketches, etc. with their Goods, and
others by rising up against their Commanders, Officers, and Imployers, seizing
their Vessels and Goods at Sea, exposing their Persons to hazard, etc. For the
Prevention whereof, and that due witness may be born against such bold and
notorious Transgressors

This Court does Order, and be it hereby Ordered and Enacted; That what Person,
or Persons so ever, shall Piratically or Felloniously seize any Ship or other
Vessel, whither in the Harbor, or on the Seas, Order to Prevent Piracy, etc
or shall rise up in Rebellion against the Master, Officers, Merchant, or
Owners of any such Ship, or other Sea Vessel and Goods, and dispoyle or
dispossess them thereof, and excluding the right Owner, or those betrusted
therewith; every such Offender, together with all their Accomplices, if found in
this Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended, and Legally convicted thereof, shall
be put to Death; Provided always, that any such of the said Company, (who
through fear or force have been deam'd to Comply in such wicked action); that
shall upon their first Arrival in any of our Ports or Harbors, by the first
Opportunity, repair to some Magistrate, or others in Authority and make
discovery of such a practice; shall not be liable to the aforesaid Penalty of
Death

IT is hereby Ordered and Declared; That it shall be lawful for any Person by
his lawful Attourny Authorized under his Hand and Seal, Order Impairing
Atturnies to Sue
and legally proved to be his Act and Deed, to Sue in any of our Courts, for
any right or Interest that he may have to any Estate of Lands or Goods, or any
part thereof, according to our Law; unless the Law upon the hearing thereof,
shall find just reason to demurre upon the validity of the Attourniship, in
one respect, or other,

IT is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; That the power and
Trust Committed to all Guardians, Guardians (...) in ^ase
is as full to recover and take all Estate into their hands, as if the Child
or Children themselves, for whom they are Guardians, were at age, and to
improve the estate for the Child or Childrens Advantage, till at Age; Generally
to act as far as Administrators may do, except by will of the deceased, the
Estate was Committed to an Executor, or others for their Education, until such
an Age, the Guardian giving Security to the Court for his faithful performance
of his Trust.

THis Court taking into Consideration, that the price (...) at in the Country
Rate, Valuation of Sheep to the Country and County Rates
is far above what the (...) no man might be discouraged from keeping that
useful Creature so (...) for food, and Clothing.

It is hereby Ordered and Declared; That all Sheep rateable in the Country
Rate, or what kind soever, shall be valued at five Pounds p. Score, in all
Country and County Rates; and this Order to take place in the sixth Month next.

AS an Explanation of the Law tit. Hides and Skins, Sect. the first Prohibiting
Transportation of unwrought Leather;

This Court Declares, Addition to the Law Tit: Sealerse of Leather
that by unwrought leather, is to be understood, not made up into Wares, and
further judge meet to Declare that no Leather being Tanned shall be sent to the
Curriers to be dressed before the Sealer of Leather have viewed, and set his
Mark thereunto, under such Penalty as the Law provides in this Case, Title
Leather.

IT is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; That if any Person
shall take away any Shallop, penalty for taking away Shallops, Boats Skifts
Cannoes, etc.
Boat, Skiffe, or Cannoo, from any Vessel, Wharfe, or from the Moaring, without
leave from the Owner or Master thereof; he shall pay to the said Owner or
Master. if it be Canoo, five Shillings, and for a Boat or Skiffe, Ten
Shillings, and if it be a Shallop Twenty Shillings, and so much per Day, for
every day after the first day Deteining, or not returning the same together,
with what ever Damage the said Owner, or Master, or the said Cannoo, Boat,
Skiffe, or Shallop, shall sustein thereby in any kind, to be judged by any
Magistrate, or Commissioner, Authorized by Law in like Cases; and further to
Fine the Party offending for his Trespass to the County, if there be cause.

WHereas by experience, many persons through Poverty, not able to pay the Fine
Imposed by Law, persons selling Liquors to Indians, liable in Case to Whipping,
etc.
on the Sale of Liquors to Indians, are thereby Imboldned to Transgress, as
Addition to the Law, P. 75. Sect. 5.

It is hereby Ordered; That Persons Transgressing that Law, and not paying the
Fine Imposed, shall be punished by Whipping, at the discretion of the judges,
and greatness of the Offense, any Law, Custom, or Usage notwithstanding.

IT being put to the Question; Whether Wine and strong Waters belonging to any
Inhabitant of Piscataqua, and Imported into these parts to the Market be liable
to pay duties according to the Law Title Imposts.

This Question is resolved on the Affirmative, Provided the said Goods have not
paid Impost in some of our Ports already according to Law.

FINIS.

