New Englands Crisis Or a Brief Narrative, Of NEW-ENGLANDS Lamentable Estate at
present, compared with the former (but few) years of Prosperity.

Occasioned by many unheard of Crueltyes practiced upon the Persons and Estates
of its united Colonyes, without respect of Sex, Age or Quality of Persons, by
the Barbarous Heathen thereof.

Poetically Described.

By a Well wisher to his Country.

BOSTON, Printed and sold by John Foster, over against the Sign of the Dove.
1676.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I never thought this Babe of my weak Fantasy worthy of an Imprimatur; but
being an Abortive, it was begged in these perplexing Times to be cherished by
the Charity of others. If its Lineaments please not the Reader better than the
Writer, I shall be glad to see it pressed to death: but if it displease not many
and satisfy any, its to me a glorious Reward, who am more willing than able to
any Service to my Country and Friend,

Farewell

New Englands Crisis
THE PROLOGUE.
THe times wherein old Po^pion was a Saint,
When men fared hardly yet without complaint
On vilest Cates, the dainty Indian Maize
Was eat with Clamp-shells out of wooden Trayes
Under thatcht Hutts without the cry of Rent,
And the best Sauce to every Dish, Content.
When Flesh was food, and hairy skins made coats,
And men as well as birds had chirping Notes.
When Cimnels were accounted noble blood
Among the tribes of common herbage food.
Of Ceres bounty formed was many a knack
Enough to fill poor Robins Almanac.
These golden times (too fortunate to hold)
Were quickly sinned away for love of gold.
It Was then among the bushes, not the street
If one in place did an inferior meet,
Good morrow Brother, is there ought you want?
Take freely of me, what I have you ha'nt.
Plain Tom and Dick would pass as current now,
As ever since Your Servant Sir and bow.
Deep-skirted doublets, puritanick capes
Which now would render men like upright Apes,
Was comlier wear our wiser Fathers thought
That the cast fashions from all Europe brought.
It Was in those days an honest Grace would hold
Till an hot puddin grew at heart a cold.
And men had better stomachs to religion
Than (...) to capon, turkey-cock or pigeon.
When honest Sisters met to pray not prate
About their own and not their neighbors state.
During Plain Dealings Reign, that worthy Stud
Of the ancient planters race before the flood
These times were good, Merchants cared not a rush
For other fare than Jonakin and Mush.
Although men fared and lodged very hard
Yet Innocence was better than a Guard.
T was long before spiders and worms had drawn
Their dungy webs or hid with cheating Lawne
New-Englands beautyes, which still seemed to me
Illustrious in their own simplicity.
T was ere the neighboring Virgin-land had broke
The Hogsheads of her worse than hellish smoke.
T was ere the Islands sent their Presents in,
Which but to use was counted next to sin.
T was ere a Barge had made so rich a freight
As Chocholatte, dust-gold and bitts of eight.
Ere wines from France and Moscovadoe too
Without the which the drink will scarsly do,
From western Isles, ere fruits and dilicacies,
Did rot maids teeth and spoil their hansome faces.
Or ere these times did chance the noise of war
Was from our towns and hearts removed far.
No Bugbear Comets in the crystal air
To drive our christian Planters to despair.
No sooner pagan malice peeped forth
But Valor snib'd it* then were men of worth
Who by their prayers slew thousands Angel like,
Their weapons are unseen with which they strike.
Then had the Churches rest, as yet the coals
Were covered up in most contentious souls.
Freeness in Judgment, union in affection,
Dear love, sound truth they were our grand protection
These were the twins which in our Counsels sat,
These gave prognostics of our future fate,
If these be longer lived our hopes increase,
These wars will usher in a longer peace:
But if New-Englands love die in its youth
The grave will open next for blessed Truth.
This Theme is out of date, the peaceful hours
When Castles needed not but pleasant bowers.
Not ink, but blood and tears now serve the turn
To draw the figure of New-Englands Urne.
New Englands* hour of passion is at hand,
No power except Divine can it withstand;
Scarce has her glass of fifty years run out,
But her old prosperous Steeds turn heads about,
Tracking themselves back to their poor beginnings,
To fear and fare upon their fruits of sinnings:
So that the mirror of the Christian world
Lies burnt to heaps in part, her Streamers furled
Grief reigns, joys flee and dismal fears surprise,
Not dastard spirits only but the wife.
Thus have the fairest hopes deceived the eye
Of the big swollen Expectant standing by.
Thus the proud Ship after a little turn
Sinks into Neptunes arms to find its Urn.
Thus has the heir to many thousands born
Been in an instant from the mother torn.
Even thus thine infant cheeks begin to pale,
And thy supporters through great losses fail*
This is the Prologue to thy future woe,
The Epilogue no mortal yet can know.
New Englands Crisis.
IN seventy five the Critic of our years
Commenced our war with Phillip and his peers.
Whither the sun in Leo had inspired
A feav'rish heat, and Pagan spirits fired?
Whither some Romish Agent hatched the plot?
Or whither they themselves? appears not.
Whither our infant thrivings did invite?
Or whither to our lands pretended right?
Is hard to say; but Indian spirits need
No grounds but lust to make a Christian bleed.
And here methinks I see this greazy Lout
With all his pagan slaves coil'd round about,
Assuming all the majesty his throne
Of rotten stump, or of the rugged stone
Could yield; casting some bacon rine-like looks,
Enough to fright a Student from his books,
Thus treat his peers, and next to them his Commons,
Kennel'd together all without a summons.
My friends, our Fathers were not half so wise
As we our selves who see with younger eyes.
They sell our land to english man who teach
Our nation all so fast to pray and preach:
Of all our country they enjoy the best,
And quickly they intend to have the rest*
This no wunnegin, so big matchit law,
Which our old fathers fathers never saw.
These english make and we must keep them too,
Which is too hard for them or us to do,
We drink we so big whipped, but english they
Go sneep, no more, or else a little pay.
Me meddle Squaw me hanged, our fathers kept
What Sqaws they would whither they wakt or slept.
Now if you will fight I Will get you english coats,
And wine to drink out of their Captains throats.
The richest merchants houses shall be ours,
We Will ly no more on matts or dwell in bowers
We Will have their silken wives take they our Squaws,
They shall be whipped by virtue of our laws.
If ere we strike it is now before they swell
To greater swarms then we know how to quell.
This my resolve, let neighboring Sachems know,
And every one that has club, gun or bow.
This was assented to, and for a close
He strokt his smutty beard and cursed his foes.
This counsel lightning like their tribes invade,
And something like a muster's quickly made,
A ragged regiment, a naked swarm,
Whom hopes of booty does with courage arm,
Set forth with bloody hearts, the first they meet
Of men or beasts they butcher at their feet.
They round our skirts, they pare, they fleece they kill,
And to our bordering towns do what they will.
Poor Hovills (better far then Caesar's court
In the experience of the meaner sort)
Receive from them their doom next execution,
By flames reduced to horror and confusion:
Here might be seen the smoking funeral piles
Of wildred towns pitched distant many miles
Here might be seen the infant from the (...)
Snatched by a pagin hand to lasting rest:
The mother Rachel-like shrieks out my child
She wrings her hands and raves as she were wild.
The brutish wolves suppress her anxious moan
By crueltyes more deadly of her own.
Will she or nill the chastest turtle must
Taste of the pangs of their unbridled lust.
From farms to farms, from towns to towns they post,
They strip, they bind, they ravish, flea and roast.
The beasts which wont their masters crib to know,
Over the ashes of their shelters low.
What the inexorable flames do spare
More cruel Heathen lug away for fare.
These tidings ebbing from the outward parts
Makes trades* men cast aside their wonted Arts
And study arms: the craving merchants plot
Not to augment but keep what they have got.
And every soul which has but common sense
Thinks it the time to make a just defense.
Alarums every where resound in streets,
From West sad tidings with the Eastern meets.
Our common fathers in their Councels close
A martial treaty with the pagan foes,
All answers center here that fire and sword
Must make their Sachem universal Lord.
This arms the english with a resolution
To give the vaporing Scab a retribution.
Heavens they consult by prayer, the best design
A furious foe to quel or undermine.
RESOLVED that from the Massachusetts bands
Be pressed on service some Herculean hands
And certainly he well deserved a jerke
That slipped the Collar from so good a work.
Some Volunteers, some by compulsion go
To range the hideous forest for a foe.
The tender Mother now is all bowels grown,
Clings to her son as if they would melt in one.
Wives claspe about their husbands as the vine
Huggs the fair elm, while tears burst out like wine.
The new-sprung love in many a virgin heart
Swells to a mountain when the lovers part.
Nephews and kindred turn all springs of tears,
Their hearts are so surpised with panick fears.
But doleful shrieks of captives summon forth
Our walking castles, men of noted worth,
Made all of life, each Captain was a Mar s,
His name too strong to staud on waterish verse*
Due praise I leave to some poetic hand
Whose pen and wits are better at command.
Methinks I see the Trojan-horse burst open,
And such rush forth as might with giants cope:
These first the natives treachery felt, too fierce
For any but eyewitness to rehearse.
Yet sundry times in places where they came
Upon the Indian skins they carved their name.
The trees stood Sentinels and bullets flew
From every bush (a shelter for their crew)
Hence came our wounds and deaths from every side
While skulking enemies squat undiscri'd,
That every stump shot like a musketeer,
And bows with arrows every tree did bear
The swamps were Courts of Guard, thither retired
The straggling blew-coats when their guns were fired,
In dark Meanders, and these winding groves,
Where Bears and panthers with their Monarch moves
These far more cruel slily hidden lay,
Expecting english men to move that way.
One party lets them ip, the other greets
Them with the next thing to their winding-sheets;
Most fall, the rest thus startled back return,
And from their by past foes receive an urn.
Here fell a Captain, to be named with tears,
Who for his Courage left not many peers,
With many more who scarce a number left
To tell how treacherously they were bereft.
This flusht the pagan courage, now they think
The victory theirs, not lacking meat or drink.
The ranging wolves find here and there a prey,
And having filled their paunch they run away
By their Hosts light, the thanks which they return
Is to lead Captives and their taverns burn.
Many whose thrift had stored for after use
Sustain their wicked plunder and abuse.
Poor peeple spying an unwonted light,
Fearing a Martyrdom, in sudden fright
Leap to the door to fly, but all in vain,
They are surrounded with a pagan train;
Their first salute is death, which if they shun
Some are condemned the Gauntelet to run;
Death would a mercy prove to such as those
Who feel the rigor of such hellish foes.
Posts daily on their Pegasean Steeds
Bring sad reports of worse then Nero's deeds,
Such brutish Murders as would paper stain
Not to be heard in a Domitians Reign.
The field which nature hid is common laid,
And Mothers bodies ripped for lack of aid.
The secret Cabinets which nature meant
To hide her master piece is open rent,
The half formd Infant there receives a death
Before it sees the light or draws its breath,
Many hot welcomes from the natives arms
Hid in their sculking holes many alarms
Our brethren had, and weary weary trants,
Sometimes in melting heats and pinching wants:
Sometimes the clouds with sympathizing tears
Ready to burst discharged about their ears:
Sometimes on craggy hills, anon in bogs
And miery swamps better befitting hogs,
And after tedious Marches little boast
Is to he heard of stewd or bakt or roast,
Their beds are hurdles, open house they keep
Through shady boughs the stars upon them peep,
Their crystal drink drawn from the mothers breal
Disposes not to mirth but sleep and rest.
Thus many days and weeks, some months run out
To find and quell the vagabonding rout,
Who like enchanted Castles fair appear,
But all is vanished if you come but near,
Just so we might the Pagan Archers track
With towns and merchandise upon their back;
And thousands in the South who settled down
To all the points and winds are quickly blown.
At many meetings of their fleeting crew*
From whom like hail arrows and bullets flow:
The English courage with whole swarms dispute,
Hundreds they hack in pieces in pursuit.
Sed hand impune, English sides do feel
As well as tawny skins the lead and steel
And some such gallant Sparks by bullets fell,
As might have cursed the powder back to Hell:
Had only Swords these skirmishes decided
All Pagan Sculls had been long since divided.
The lingering war out-lives the Summer sun,
Who hence departs hoping it might be done,
Ere his return at Spring but ah he will find
The Sword still drawn, men of unchanged mind.
Cold winter now nibbles at hands and toes
And shrewdly pinches both our friends and foes.
Fierce Boreas whips the Pagan tribe together
Advising them to fit for foes and weather:
The axe which late had tasted Christian blood
Now sets its steely teeth to feast on wood.
The forests suffer now, by weight constrein'd
To kiss the earth with soldiers lately brained.
The lofty oaks and ash do wagge the head
To see so many of their neighbors dead;
Their fallen carcasses are carried thence
To stand our enemies in their defense.
Their Myrmidons enclosed with clefts of trees
Are busy like the ants or nimble bees:
And first they limber poles fix in the ground,
In figure of the heavens unequal: all round
They draw their arras-matts and skins of beasts,
And under these the Elves do make their nests.
Rome took more time to grow then twice six hours,
But half that time will serve for indian bowers.
A City shall be reared in one days space
As shall an hundred english men outface.
Canonicus precincts there swarms unite,
Rather to keep a winter guard then fight.
A dern and dismal swamp some Scout had found
Whose bosom was a spot of rising ground
Hedged up with mighty oaks, maples and ashes,
Nursed up with springs, quick boggs and miery plashes
A place which nature coined on very nonce
For tigers not for men to be a sconce.
T was here these Monsters shape and faced like men
Took up there Rendezvous and (...) den,
Deeming the depth of snow, hail, frost and ice
Would make our Infantry more tame and wise
Then by by forsaking beds and loving wives,
Merely for indian skins to hazard lives:
These hopes had something calmed the boiling passion
Of this incorrigible warlike nation.
During this short Parenthesis of peace
Our forces found, but left him not at case.
Here english valor most illustrious shone*
Finding their numbers ten times ten to one.
A shower of leaden hail our captains feel
Which made the bravest blades among us reel.
Like to some ant* hill neatly spurned abroad,
Where each takes heels and bears away his load:
Instead of place and jewels* indian trayes
With baskets up they snatch and rust their ways.
Sundry the flames arrest and some the blade,
By bullets heaps on heaps of Indians laid.
The Flames like lightening in their narrow streets
Dart in the face of every one it meets.
Here might be heard an hideous indian'cry,
Of wounded ones who in the Wigwams fry.
Had we been Canibals here might we feast
On brave Westphalia gammons ready dressed.
The tauny hue is Ethiopick made
Of such on whom Vulcan his clutches laid.
There fate was sudden, our advantage great
To give them once for all a grand defeat;
But tedious travel had so crampt our toes
It was too hard a task to chase the foes.
Distinctness in the numbers of the slain,
Or the account of Pagans which remain
Are both uncertain, losses of our own
Are too too sadly felt, too sadly known.
War digs a common grave for friends and foes,
Captains in with the common soldier throws.
Six of our Leaders in the first assault
Craye readmission to their Mothers Vault
Who had they fell in ancient Homers days
Had been enrol'd with Hecatombs of praise.
As clouds dispersed, the natives troops divide,
And like the streams along the thickets glide.
Some breathing time we had, and short God knows
But new alarums from recruited foes
Bounce at our ears, the mounting clouds of smoke
From martyred towns the heavens for aid invoke:
Churches, barns, houses with most ponderous things
Made volatile fly ore the land with wings.
Hundreds of cattle now they sacrifice
For aerie spirits up to gormandize;
And to the Molech of their hellish guts,
Which craves the flesh in gross, their ale in butts.
Lancaster, Medfield, Mendon wildred Groton,
With many Villages by me not thought on
Die in their youth by fire that useful foe,
Which this grand cheer the world will over flow.
The wandering Priest to every one he meets
Preaches his Churches funeral in the streets.
Sheep from their fold are frighted, Keepers too
Put to their trumps not knowing what to do.
This monster War has hatched a beauteous dove
In dogged hearts, of most unfeigned love,
Fraternal love the I very of a Saint
Being come in fashion though by sad constraint,
Which if it thrive and prosper with us long
Will make New England forty thousand strong.
But off the Table hand, let this suffice
As the abridgment of our miseryes.
If Mildew, (...), Sword, and fired Towns,
If Slaughter, Captivating, Deaths and wounds,
If daily whippings once reform our ways,
These all will Issue in our Fathers Praise;
If otherwise, the sword must never rest
Till all New-Englands Glory it divest.
A Supplement.
WHat means this silence of Harvardine quils
While Mars triumphant thunders on our hills.
Have pagan priests their Eloquence confined
To no man's use but the mysterious mind?
Have Pawaws charmed that art which was so rife
To crouch to every Don that lost his life?
But now whole towns and Churches fire and die
Without the pity of an Elegy.
Nay rather should my quils were they all swords
Wear to the hilts in some lamenting words.
I dare not style them poetry but truth,
The dwingling products of my crazy youth.
If these essays shall raise some quainter pens
It Will to the Writer make a rich amends.
Marlburyes Fate
When Londons fatal bills were blown abroad
And few but Specters traveled on the road,
Not towns but men in the black bill enrol'd
Were in Gazetts by Typographers sold:
But our Gazetts without Errataes must
Report the plague of towns reduct to dust:
And fevers formerly to tenants sent
Arrest the timbers of the tenement.
Ere the late ruins of old Groton's cold,
Of Marlbury's peracute disease we are told.
The feet of such who neighboring dwellings (...)
Unto her ashes, not her doors returned.
And what remaind of tears as yet unspent
Are to its final gasps a tribute lent.
If painter overtrack my pen let him
An olive color mix, these elves to trim;
Of such an hue let many thousand thieves
Be drawn like Scare-crows clad with oaken leaves,
Exhausted of their verdant life and blown
From place to place without an home to own.
Draw Devils like themselves, upon their cheeks
The banks for grease and mud, a place for leeks.
Whose locks Medusaes snakes, do ropes resemble,
And ghostly looks would make Achilles tremble.
Limm them besmeared with Christian Blood and oil
With fat out of white humane bodies boiled.
Draw them with clubs like maules and full of stains,
Like Vulcans anvilling New-Englands brains*
Let round be gloomy forests with crac'd rocks
Where like to castles they may hide their flocks,
Till oppertunity their cautious friend
Shall jogge them fiery worship to attend.
Show them like serpents in an avious path
Seeking to sow the firebrarnds of their wrath.
Most like Aeneas in his cloak of mist,
Who undiscovered move where ere they list
Cupid they tell us has too sorts of darts.
One sharp and one obtuse, one causing wounds,
One piercing deep the other dull rebounds,
But we feel none but such as drill our hearts.
From Indian sheaves which to their shoulders cling,
Upon the word they quickly feel the string
Let earth be made a screen to hide our woe
From Heavens Monarch and his Ladies too;
And least our Jealousy think they partake,
For the red stage with clouds a curtain make.
Let dogs be gagged and every quickening sound
Be charmed to silence, here and there all round
The town to suffer, from a thousand holes
Let crawle these fiends with brands and fired poles,
Paint here the house and there there the barn on fire,
With holocausts ascending in a spire.
Here granaries, yonder the Churhes smoke
Which vengeance on the actors does invoke.
Let Morpheus with his leaden keys have bound
In feather-beds some, some upon the ground,
That none may burst his drowfie shackles till
The brutish pagans have obtained their will,
And Vulcan files them off then Zeuxis paint
The phrenzy glances of of the sinking saint.
Draw there the Pastor for his bible crying,
The soldier for his sword, The Glutton frying
With streams of glory-fat, the thin-jaw'd Miler
Oh had I given this I had been wiser.
Let here the Mother seem a statue turned
At the sad object of her bowels burned.
Let the unstable weakling in belief
Be mounting Ashurs horses for relief.
Let the half Convert seem suspended twixt
The dens of darkness, and the Planets fixed,
Ready to quit his hold, and yet hold fast
By the great Atlas of the Heavens vast.
Paint Papists mutterring ore their apish beads
whom the blind follow while the blind man leads,
Let Ataxy be mounted on a throne
Imposing her Commands on every one,
A many-headed monster without eyes
To see the ways which wont to make men wise.
Give her a thousands tongues with wings and hands*
To be ubiquitary in Commands,
But let the concave of her skull appear
Clean washed and empty quite of all but fear,
One she bids flee, another stay, a third
She bids betake him to his rusty sword,
This to his treasure, the other to his knees,
Some counsels she to fry and some to freeze,
These to the garrison, those to the road,
Some to run empty, some to take their load:
Thus while confusion most men's hearts divide
Fire does their small exchecquer soon decide.
Thus all things seeming open or secret foes,
An Infant may grow old before a close,
But yet my hopes abide in perfect strength.
The Town called Providence Its Fate.
Why muse we thus to see the wheels run cross
Since Providence it self sustaines a loss:
And yet should Providence forget to watch
I fear the enemy would all dispatch;
Celestial lights would soon forget their line,
The wandering planets would forget to shine,
The stars run all out of their common spheres,
And quickly fall together by the ears:
Kingdoms would jostles out their Kings and set
The poor Mechanic up whom next they met,
Or rather would whole kingdoms with the world
Into a Chaos their first egg be hurled.
There Is none this Providence of the Most High
Who can survive and write its Elegy:
But of a solitary town I write,
A place of darkness yet receiving light
From pagan hands, a miscellanious nest
Of errors Hectors, where they sought a rest
Out of the reach of Laws but not of God,
Since they have felt the smart of common rod.
T was much I thought they did escape so long,
Who Gospel truth so manifestly wrong:
For one Lots sake perhaps, or else I think
Justice did at greatest offenders wink
But now the shot is paid, I hope the dross
Will be cashiered in this common loss.
Houses with substance feel uplifting wings,
The earth remains, the last of humane things:
But know the dismal day draws near wherein
The fire shall earth if self dissolve and sin.
Seaconk Plain Engagement.
On our Pharsalian Plains, comprizing space
For Casars host brave Pompey to outface,
An handful of our men are walled round
With Indian swarms; anon their pieces sound
A Madrigal like heav ns artilery
Lightning and thunderbolts their bullets fly.
Here Is hosts to handfulls, of a fevv they leav
Fewer to tell how many they bereave.
Foolhardy fortitude it had been sure
Fierce storms of shot and arrows to endure
Without all hopes of some requital to
So numerous and pestilent a foe.
Some musing a retreat and thence to run,
Have in an instant all their business done,
They sink and all their sorrows ponderous weight
Down at their feet they cast and tumble straight.
Such who outlived the fate of others fly
Into the Irish bogs of misery.
Such who might dye like men like beasts do range
Uncertain whither for a better change,
These Natives hunt and chase with currish mind,
And plague with crueltyes such as they find.
When shall this shower of Blond be over? When?
Quickly we pray oh Lord! say thou Amen.
Seaconk or Rehoboths Fate.
I once conjectured that those tigers hard
To reverend Newmans bones would have regard,
But were all SAINTS they met twere all one case,
They have no reverence to an Angels face:
But where they fix their griping lions paws
They rend without remorse or heed to laws.
Rehoboth here in common english, Rest
They ransack, Newmans Relicts to molest.
Here all the town is made a public stage
Whereon these Nimrods act their monstrous rage.
All crueltyes which paper stained before
Are acted to the life here ore and ore.
Chelmsfords Fate.
Ere famous Winthrops bones are laid to rest
The pagans Chelmsford with sad flames arrest,
Making an artificial day of night
By that plantations formidable light.
Here Is midnight shrieks and soul-amazing moanes,
Enough to melt the very marble stones:
Firebrarnds and bullets, darts and deaths and wounds
Confusive outcryes every where resounds:
The natives shooting with the mixed cries,
With all the crueltyes the foes devise.
Might fill a volume, but I leave a space
For mercyes still successive in there place
Not doubting but the foes have done their worst,
And shall by heaven suddenly be cursed.
Let this dear Lord the sad Conclusion be
O! poor New-Englands dismal tragedy.
Let not the glory of thy former work
Blasphemed be by pagan Jew or Turk:
But in its funeral ashes write thy Name
So fair all Nations may expound the same:
Out of her ashes let a Phoenix rise
That may outshine the first and be more wise.
B. Tompson. ON A FORTIFICATION At Boston begun by Women. Dux Foemina Facti.
A Grand attempt some Amazonian Dames
Contrive whereby to glorify their names,
A Ruff for Boston Neck of mud and turfe,
Reaching from side to side from surfe to surfe,
Their nimble hands spin up like Christmas pyes,
Their pastry by degrees on high does rise.
The wheel at home counts it an holiday,
Since while the Mistress works it may play.
A tribe of female hands, but manly hearts
Forsake at home their pasty-crust and tarts.
To knead the dirt, the samplers down they hurl,
Their undulating silks they closely furle.
The pick-axe one as a Commandress holds,
While the other at her awkness gently scolds.
One puffs and sweats, the other mutters why
Cant you promove your work so fast as I?
Some dig, some delve, and others hands do feel
The little wagons weight with single wheel.
And least some fainting fits the weak surprise,
They want no sack nor cakes, they are more wise.
These brave essays draw forth Male stronger hands
More like to Dawbers then to Martial bands:
These do the work, and sturdy bulwarks raise,
But the beginners well deserve the praise.
FINIS.

