THE HEART GARRISONED OR, The Wisdom, and Care of the SPIRITUAL SOLDIER above
all things to safeguard his HEART.

Delivered in a Sermon which was Preached to the Honored GENTLEMEN of the
ARTILLERY COMPANY, on the Day of their ELECTION, at BOSTON in New England June,
5. 1676.

By Mr. Samuel Willard.

Prove. 25.28. He that has no rule over his own Spirit, is like a City that is
broken down, and without walls.

Phil. 4.7. And the Peace of GOD which passes all understanding, shall keep
your Hearts and Minds through Christ Jesus.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Samuel Green, 1676.

Prove, 4.23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the Issues of
Life.
THat the Life of a Christian is a continued Warfare, is a Truth, proved not
only by the Infallible Testimony of Scripture, but also by the unfailing
Observation and Experience of the People of God in all Ages; whose Entrance
into Christ by Conversion, is a listing them Soldiers in his Camp. This
Warfare, being attended with so much d^nger, managed with so much difficulty,
and the Issue being a matter of so great Consequence, as is but darkly shadowed
out by all the Warr^ and Combustions which are upon Earth; hence the Scripture
affords its spiritual Tracticks, and Directions for the prosperous manag^ng of
this holy War: Commending you therefore to the Field, for the Exercise of
Skill, and improving of your selves in what may belong to your Military
Function as men at Arms, give me feave to Rub up your memories little, in some
plain and practical duties of a Christian Souldier^

The words of my Text are the great Charge given by Jesus Christ, the true
Solomon (Captain General of the Hosts of his People) to all those that are
under his Colors, engaged in his Service. That the phrases or Terms used here
are Metapho^ical, or Allusive to matters Military, such as are Conversant in
the Original Language do understand. In the words observe four things.

1. The Subject about which this Charge is Conversant, the Heart, and that
under a Limitation, or especial Intimation, thy Heart, the Heart is here
Compared to a Castle or Fort, under the Service and Command of God, exposed to
the Assaults of Enemies, and in danger of damage by them; and every one has a
heart of his own to which he ows a particular Respect, and over which he has
an especial Charge.

2. The Charge it self, which is given: Keep thy Heart, the word signifies, to
Fortify, Protect, and defend; to keep a thing with Locks, and Bars, and a
strong Guard, as Ammunition or Treasure is kept, when an Enemy is expected to
make an Assault upon it, see Nah* 2.1. A Noun from this Verb is translated a
Watcher or Watchman, Jer. 4.1^. and another, a Tower or place to watch in,
Hab. 2.1.

3. The Emphasis which is put upon this Charge; with all Diligence, the English
of the Phrase is, with all keeping: or, as the Hebrew affix does bear, and is
often used, above all keeping: the word is often in Scripture Translated, to
preserve; and it properly signifies to be careful to keep off, or prevent any
mischief, that is likely to be done, if not looked to; it signifies to preserve
in Safety, Gen: 28 10. It is a Metaphor from a Watchman in a Tower, or a
Garrison in a Fortification; hence a Noun from this Verb, is Translated a
Watch, or a place to discry danger from, Hab. 2.1. and another is that
signifies the Watch, or time allotted to a several Company in their Turns to
stand out upon Observation: Exodus 14.24 Lam 2.19. and another that sign^fies a
Watch that is set, Neh. 13.30.

4. The force or weight of the Charge is added: for out of it are the Issues,
or outgoings of Life; q. d. if here thou be negligent, thy Life goes for it: it
is the Storehouse and Treasury of Life? Of all Laws, those that are Military
are the most strict and severe, to put men upon the more Care and Vigilance;
hence to neglect the heart is here presented as a Capital Crime: It is as much
as a man's Life is worth to be Sedulous, and Vigilant in his Charge. Hence,

It is the most weighty and solemn Charge lying upon every one that marches
under Christ's Standard, Doctrine.
diligently to keep his own Heart: there is indeed a great deal else which he
has to look to, as follows in the Sequel of the Chapter: his mouth, Lips,
Eyes, Hands, Feet, but all this is in order, and Subordination to the Heart.

The word heart in Scripture use, comes under various Accepta^ions: It is taken
properly for that Organ in the Body of a living Creature, which is the Fountain
of Life, Seat of the Vital Spirits, and Spring of motion and Operation:
Metaphorically, for the midst or Inside of any thing, so, the heart or midst of
the Oak, 2 Samuel: 18.14. the heart or middle of the Sea by a Metonimy of the
Subject, for the Soul in general, for the will, unedrstanding, Conscience,
Affections, memory, and lastly, for all the Faculties and Operations of the
Soul Collectively taken, whose prime Seat is in the Heart, so in the Text, the
heart of man is a little Kingdoms, or Dynasty which ows Fealty to the Crown and
Empire of Heaven, understanding, will, Affections, and all their Operations are
to be employed in Gods Service. The keeping of the heart here required implies,
and intends both danger and duty.

I. Danger, or else the work were Superfluous, and this danger is twofold.

1. That the Heart is exposed to Enemies which will seek the Life of it, who
are always watching to make a surprise: where no Enemy needs to be suspected,
no garrison needs to be kept, to train up Soldiers in times of peace, were an
Empty Flourish, were it not that War may arise; The Spirit of God would not
have us to be secure: or think our selves to be beyond the reach of spite and
malice, to do us harm, but to account that we dwell among Murderers, and in the
midst of deadly Enemies, who seek, and would gladly rob us of the Life of our
Souls.

2. That to lose the heart to those that (...) wait for it, is a great and sore
Loss; that it is not a piece of Lumber, which is little to be Cared for, but a
^owel to be preserved with utmost Care. In times of danger, it is better to
draw off from, and abandon such places as are of no Consequence, then to Expend
fruitless and Excessive Charges for the mainteining of them; where the Charge
out-bids the Rational Benefit, it is foolishly laid out, it is better left to
the Enemy, but is not thus in regard of the heart, and therefore we are
Commanded not to seek a safe Retreat from it, but stoutly to stand to it, and
upon no Terms to forgo it.

2. Duty, summarily Contained in three things.

1. That the Heart is to be kept for God, whose Right and Prerogative it is to
have the Rule over, and obedience of it: he challenges it as his own, Prove.
23.26. my Son give me thy heart; he requires it as our duty of Allegiance, as
the performance and discharge of our Sacramentum militare, to look after it,
neither are we to account any Service tedious, or hazards superstuous, that we
undergo in this design.

2. Hence it is to be kept from all those that would rob him of the Rule and
Command over it, all that would usurp his Title, and Challenge to themselves
Dominion of the Soul: we cannot serve two Masters, if we are for God, we must
be for no other, there are many that bid much for this Rule, and would fain
hold the Scepter, and have the Command of the heart; But, socium habet neminem,
he must have the sole and whole ordering of it, according to his own good
pleasure without Control.

3. Hence we are bound to supply our selves with all necessaries requisite for
the defense and preservation of our hearts from the force or fraud of the
Enemies of our Souls: what is a Soldier without Arms? or Arms without Skill?
or Skill without prudent Conduct? or all without Careful and watchful
Improvement? so that in all these things we are to be Furnished, that nothing
be wanting, least through our defect, and heedlessness we come under the
deserved blame of Imprudent and Careless Subjects.

I shall pass over the Reasons briefly.

Reason
1. From the worth or Excellency of the Heart, or Soul, this is the Nobler part
of man, the most Honorable, the man is called from it frequently in Scripture,
it is the most useful, take-it away, and the Body is left a Lump of
unserviceable matter, a mere piece of Corruption: it is more worth then a
world, Math. 16.26. it is the Palace of the great King, the Throne of the
Spirit of God, the Treasury of Heavenly Riches, if we had a Thuosand of natural
Lives to lose, the Loss of all were Invaluable, and to be despised, if Compared
with the Loss of this one^

From the great price which was paid for the Redemption of the Soul; it was
once in the hands of Enemies, Reason 2.
under the Power of destroying Evils, in slavery to cruel masters; but there
was a great Sum laid down to procure its Ransom: It is true, Christ redeemed
the whole man, Soul and Body are jointly his Purchase; but the Soul was the
great thing, hence there is an Emphasis put on that, Psalm.
16.23.3.30.3.33.22.35 3. Answerable therefore to the great Cost which was laid
out in Redeeming should be the Care in keeping: he that has been once in the
Enemies hand felt his Rage, tasted deep of his Cruelty, and for a great price
Ranso^med, will look to himself.

From the many Enemies which seek the Ruin of the Soul. Satan, whose great
design is at that; Reason 3.
In all his Indentures which he makes with any, his Bargain is for the Soul;
the drift of all his Assaults, and forcible and Politic Temptations, is to
deceive the Soul: the Trade which he drives is to Attempt all Courses that he
may devour it: he besieges the Heart, and if he can but get and keep his
Throne there, he is Content: As the Pope Answered to the Question, whether the
Recusant Papists should expose themselves to suffer Banishment, or rather go to
the Public Assemblies; let me have their hearts (said he) and let the Queen
have their Bodies: Satan is willing men should do, and take pains in doing
outward Services, he suffers them to read, hear, pray, give Alms, etc. they may
go as far as they will in bodily Service, only let him have the Homage of
their hearts: this is the strong hold whereof being possessed, he endeavors to
keep it with all his Force. The World; what is the design of the men of the
world, but, as Satan's Soldiers, either by force or fraud to get the Conquest
of this, either to draw the heart away from God by Temptations, or fright it
from Godliness by Persecution? and what use does Satan make of the things of
the world, but to make Traps and Snares, and baits to enveagle Souls, and
allure them after him, that he may make a Seizure on them? the world it is the
great Engine of Battery, which is used in the Siege which Satan lays to the
Soul. And Lust within; what does this lurk in the Soul for, but as a Spy
watching its Season and Advantage to betray it? what else is its business, but
to do all it can, to make the heart a Seminary of sinful thoughts, to entertain
all manner of wickedness? to keep Intelligence upon all the inward motions and
stirrings, and seek opportunity to Communicate it to Satan? lying in wait to
kill every good thought in its Birth, nay, to stifle it in its Conception? to
make a party strong within, that in a stress and shock of Temptation, may vote
a Resignation, and forcibly open the door thereunto? to be always plotting and
practicing secret Treason against the Crown of Heaven? thus are all our Enemies
combined to drive this one design to destroy our Souls.

Reason
4 From the danger the Heart is Exposed unto, if it be not Carefully and
Resolutely kept: it is always in danger of being led out of the way, by these
cunning Cheaters, drawn into sna^es with fair and Insinuating Speeches, trained
into Ambushments, and so be surprised by its Enemies; It dwells among Murderers,
such as are very sly and wise to do mischief; it is Environed on all sides
without, and within are Enemies, and if it Catch a wound, how dangerous must
that wound needs be? wounds in the Heart are mortal, a prick with a pin brings
Death there, which a deep gash in a Limb will not do: nothing but the Balm of
Christ's Blood will (...) the wounds of the Soul. Put these things together, and
they will spell to us the Truth of this Doctrine.

Use I. Of Information.

1. That the Life of a Christian here is a stat^ of Militancy; every man indeed
is a Soldier, either under Christ or the Devil; Engaged in a War, which will
Issue either in his Happiness or Ruin: the Christian especially is called into
a field of war, where he must grapple with Enemies Fierce and Cruel; fight for
his life, or else lose it; sadly therefore are they mistaken, who hope to
Arrive at a Crown of glory before they have first engaged themselves in a
warfare, h^c iter Elysium.

2. Hence the Life of a Christian is a Laborious Life. A Soldiers Employment,
if duly followed, is no matter of Ease or Pleasure, but he must learn to make a
Recreation of that which another would account a Death; to satisfy himself
with hunger, and Thirst, and Cold, and Travailing, and Watching and Battails:
how much more the Christian, who has,

1. A Watchful Enemy, and therefore he must not sleep: he has an Enemy who is
always lying in wait to find him at a disadvantage, and having so found him,
he will be sure to fall on, and at such a time we may be sure it is no little
mischief that he then does.

2. A busy Enemy, that loves not to ly still, and therefore he must not expect
long to be out of Actual Service; let matters go either way, Satan still
pursues his design, Marcellus-like, of whom Hannibal said, that he could never
be quiet, nec Victor, nec Victus; beating, or beaten, all was one.

3. An Unwearied Enemy, and hence the Christians Exercises must be Constant,
whom always fresh Forces of new and Vigorous Temptations are sent up against.

3. See here the Reason why so many Professors fall into Snares, are Caught in
Ambusher, and get so many wounds; It a^iseth through the great neglect that
there is in the world of the practice of this duty: It is the Judgment of
some, that it is nothing to be a good Soldier, needless to have, and if
needful, easy to attain to Skill: many more there be, who think it nothing to
learn the Rules of a Christian L^f^* and indeed a thing needless to acquaint
themselves with the ways of God, and how to keep themselves out of the Enemies
hand, neither do they regard how many wounds they receive, or what harm the
Enemy does them; having (as they pretend) that Panpharmacon, the Blood of
Christ to ^eal all: Let this therefore reprove that great neglect which is
found among the Army of Professors, of this so Important a Duty: Oh! what
little looking to, and careful keeping of our Hearts? the most of men think it
enough to look to their outward Conversation: how few attend this Duty in its
Extensiveness, to use all Endeavors about it? in its Intensiveness, to improve
all diligence? in its Eminency, to keep their heart above all keepings? there
is a great deal of Care now used, in these Times of danger and War, to keep
our bodily Lives from the Comm^n Enemy, to save our goods, we look after our
Flocks, and our H^rds, and we can give very good Reason for that; but are not
hearts mean while neglected? where almost is the man that uses diligence, Care
and endeavor about this ^ how loose and Remiss, how Careless and Secure are
we? how open do we lay our Hearts to Satan's Assaults? how little fortifying is
there against the Enemy, and standing upon our Gua^^? this is a matter to be
lamented; hence it comes to pass that Religion lies a bleeding, and many strong
men fall before the Force and Fraud of their Enemies: this deserves a Reproof;
Is not the Heart undervalued? men use to be most Careful of that which they
most p^ize, especially in Times of danger; and shall that which is most worth,
have least esteem? o^ do we know our Enemies? is either the (...) or Froud, or
Enmity of Satan discovered? neither do we set a due Esteem on the Glory of God,
shall we sin that grace may abound, God Forb^d. Nay, it Argues, that men are
not acquainted with their own Hearts, Jehu like, they presume their hea^ts are
right, know not, and therefore fear not those Trai^ors that are secretly lodged
within; and certainly the things of the world have too high a price set upon
them, m^n have not a true Judgment nor Valuation of things: well, these things
will bring sore Losses, and at the last (...) in sad Lamenta^ion and Mourning.

Use
2. For Exhortation and Direction: and here let me Challenge this whole Audience
to look upon themselves as Concerned in it: you see here what God expects at
your hands, and with what great Solemnity ^e ^equires it: every one of us ows a
heart to God, and he look, that we should keep it for him; there are many that
seek to Rob him of his Right, and therefore the more diligence and Industry
ought we to use; sad is their Condition who have Alienated Gods Right, and
betrayed to Satan, World, and their own Lusts, the Hold, and Possession of
their Hearts: let such mourn for their Apostasy, and lament for their
Infidelity, and sigh to Heaven for Deliverance, imploring the help of God for
their Recovery; get your Hearts into Subjection unto God, and then keep them
for him: let him have the Lordship and Dominion over them; suffer no Usurper to
assume his Throne.

For Motive.

1. Consider, the Equity of your Cause; no Change of Success can groundedly put
it into question, it is a defensive War, your Souls are Hostilely Invaded,
the whole Country of your Heart is filled with Enemies; there may be many N^ce
Scruples against a Foreign Invation; and I do believe that the People of God
oftentimes engage in needless Quarrels, and if they are beaten soundly they may
thank themselves: thus Josiah goes uncalled against Necho, to meet a Death he
might have avoided had he kept his place; but self Preservation is a Rule
written in the Law of Nature, practiced by all Ranks of Beings, and legible
enough in the Hearts of fallen men: your Cause is just, it is in Gods Right,
which is undeniable; it is for your own Preservation from Eternal Ruin, which
is Indubitable; it is against usurping Enemies who cannot make good the least
true Title against Cruel Enemies; whose tender mercies are cruelty, and it is
better dying in a good Cause then Conquering in a bad one:

2. Consider, the weight and greatness of the Cause you are engaged in:
Remember you carry your Life, Honor, Glory, Liberty in your right hand, which
must either manfully be defended, or basely lost: they are poor and trifling
things which the men of the world scufle and fight for, i^ compared with the
Exigencies of this Warfare: In particular.

1. Consider, the worth of that you fight for, and what you must lose, if you
lose the day: it is to keep your H^arts, your Souls from the Destroyer; you may
a little Ra^e the worth of them if you Consider, either the value which the
whole Trinity sets upon them, God the Father in those choice Decrees of
Election and Reprobation, when he intended the highest manifestation of the
glory of his Name in such as should be Eternal monuments of it, he chose Souls
to be the Subjects thereof: and God the Son in the great price of Redemption
which he paid for Souls, to buy them out of the hands of Divine Revenging
Justice, and purchase them for himself, that he might have Everlasting Society
with them, to which End he counted not his precious Life too dear to Sacrifice
to the displeasure of a justly provoked God: or God the Holy Ghost, in the
Labor and Care which he lays out about them, in striving and Endeavoring
with them in Ordinances and Providence with great patience for the promoving
of their Eternal good: or the holy Angels, in that Cheerful Ministration of
theirs to, and for the good of Souls: or Devils in their Constant and
Indefatigable pains which they take for to gain Souls to themselves, 1 Pet.
5.8. Or, Consider the Soul in its Capacities, it was made after the Image of
God, Aurae Divinae particula, endued with an Understanding capable of the most
Sovereign Truth, and Will fitted for a Closure with the chief good, Capacitated
for the Everlasting Fruition of God in Glory: is there any Excellency in man
above other Creatures, it is by this? Is there any worth in the body, it is
made so by this? and when it leaves it, it is an useless Carcass.

2. Consider, what great difficulty is in keeping the Heart, think therefore
how many Enemies it has that are practicing against it.

1. The Rebellious Flesh, which bears an Enmity against the Spiritual good of
the Soul, Romans ^.7. there is a world of this Rebellion in the best of us, which
is both Irreconcileably Opposite against God, not to be persuaded by Promises,
nor Terrified by Threatenings, Rom 7 5. and exceeding subtle to deceive, full of
Carnal Reasonings, and Politic Arguings: and also Resolute and Violent in its
way, heady in the Prosecution of its designs, ^^glect the Careful Inspection
over it, but for a moment, and it breaks Prison, and it plays Rex.

2. The Power and Po^icy of Satan, called Powers of Darkness, from their great
Force; Spirits from their Nature, and Spiritual Approaches which they make,
wily Adversaries, because of their sly and subtle Stratagem^; Foulers, having
from the beginning employed their Devilish wit to lay Ambushes in secret places
to Ensnare Souls; add to this their Sollicitous Endeavors without
discouragement, their Constant Sedulity without weariness in the pursuit of
their designs; these things render Satan Formidable.

3. What great matter of Temptation there is in the world; from the men of the
world, partly by feigned Friendship to draw away the Heart from God, and partly
by professed Enmity, and practiced Cruelty to fright it from his Service: and
from the things of the world, which are in their Nature so fitted and
Accommodated to seduce and allure, to draw away the Heart after them, and hold
it in Compliance, and so to lead the Creature into the Snares of the Devil.

3. Consider, what depends upon this Duty attended or neglected: keep thy Soul,
and keep thy Life: though God saves none for doing, yet he does it in a way of
doing: If we keep not our selves, God will not keep us, but in this way are we
led to Eternal Life: to neglect our Care and Watch, and guard, hazard our
Everlasting Ruin: God requires this of us as a Duty, to neglect it is to break
the Laws of Gods Camp: if the Heart be not kept, it will be lost, and it will
be an unspeakable Loss, so much as the S^ul is worth, such is the Loss:
Consider what is lost when the Soul is lost, God is lost, Christ is lost,
Heaven is lost, a Kingdom of glory is lost: and if all this be lost for want
of looking after, thou will when it is too late Cry out of thy Folly and
madness.

3. Consider, what Encouragement thou have to put forward in this Service; For,

1. God himself looks or, he observes all thy Labor and Fidelity, and he will
own all that thou do for him, thy sincere, though weak Endeavors shall be
accepted, yea, and Crowned too, and he so stands by thee, as one that ready is
to lend thee an helping hand when thou art in a Strait, and be thy strength
against Enemies that are more and mighty then thou art; be but true to him, and
thou shall never want Assistance from him, nor be discountenanced in what thou
do for him.

2. Thou marchest under a brave Commander, Jesus Christ the Captain of our
Salvation, valiant, prudent, successful; who never turned his back, when he was
Confronted with the Powers of Earth and Hell, and set upon by the wrath of an
angry God; upon whom his most watchful Foes could never take the least
Advantage, who never marched into the Field, but came out again a through
Conqueror; who has led Captivity Captive, overcome the World, triumphed over
Devils; he will both lead us up, and bring us off, what Coward would not be
valiant under such a Leader.

Nil desperandum Christo Duce. 3. Thou shall have both Success and Wages, do
but resist, by the grace and strength of God, and thy Enemies shall fly before
thee; hold out with a holy Resolution in the Cause of God, and thou shall
receive a Crown of glory, Immortality, and Eternal Life: in this Engagement
none ever were slain fighting; all the harm comes by flying: none ever that
engaged in this Cause had any Reason to complain that they served an hard Lord.

Now would you manage this business to Advantage, and defend this Fortress, so
as that it may be kept for God, and in his obedience, labor to be, and show
your selves good Soldiers of Christ.

I must needs acknowledge it far better for me to occupy a lower place in this
body, or part of the Army of the Church Militant, as being fitter to receive
then to give Instruction; but, it being the Lot and Custom of these days to
call forth, not always the most Skilful, to Ezercise others, and therein to
quicken up themselves, and to put forward in Military Skill. I submit to, and
own the Providence of God, and crave of him, who teaches the Hands to war
and the Fingers to fight, to direct these following Directions.

1. Get the Heart and Spirit of a Soldier: there are some Virtues belonging to
this Vocation, without which kept in Exercise a man can never be Renowned:
These are --

1. Prudence for the managing of affairs; without this, great strength attended
with never so much of Resolution, is but like Po^iphemus without an Eye: It was
the Commendation of Alexanders Army, though but small for so great an
undertaking as the Asian Conquest was, yet he scarcely had a Common Soldier,
but was fit to lead a Squadron, nor a Captain of a Phalanx, but knew how to
manage an A^my: and to this prudence is r^quisite, Skill to Consider, an^
Compare ^ll Cases, and suitably to apply them; and hence, both an Acquaintance*
with the History of form^^ ^^mes, and Ability to Judge between Ra^ional, and
either merely Casual, or Supernatural Events. It is not enough to know what
has been done, but why, else we may follow Presidents to our harm; thus Vano,
in that Fatal Battle of Cann^, takes Example from former Leaders, and draws up
his Army, narrow in Front, deep in Fla^ke, forgetting that that had been done
against the Elephants, whereas there were at that time none, and so exp^sed
himself to be gau^^d by the horse, o^ which the Enemy had great plenty, which
lost him the day. The Enemies of our Souls are wily, they come not up always
in one way or method, but have many Stra^agems, and subtle devices, and we must
neither be ignorant of them, nor yet of the way how to Circumvent and avoid
them.

2. Prowes^ or Fortitude: Courage is the Life of a Soldier; Cowardice is the
most disgra^^ful Epithe^e that can be put upon him, hence that, Ephesians. 6.10^ be
strong or Couragiou^: the proper work or Service belonging to War requires
this Spirit of Valor; he that is called to look danger in the Fac^, to expose
himself to push of Pike, dint of Sword, to meet with Rage and Fury, to see men
falling on the right and left hand, to pass through Fields scattered with dead
bodies, and garments rolled in Blood, had not he need to have some Spirits in
him? this is a Christians Constant Employment; his Enemies are potent and
furious, his hazards eminent, his Battles frequent, and many of his Fellow
Christians, some bleeding of deep and dangerous wounds which they have gotten,
and others Cowardly running away from their Colors, and betraying of their
Cause: oftentimes is he left, with Paul, alone, and no man to stand by him, or
second him when beset with Enemies; he had need then to strengthen his
Resolution.

3. Hardiness: hence is that Counsel given to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.3. as a good
Soldier of Christ endure hardness; ^ Soldier must expect to be acpuainted
with hardships, and should therefore harden himself for them: tedious marches,
hard lodging, Course Fare, to be pinched back and belly, exposed to Storms and
Tempests, stand out upon watchings, be ready to run up upon every Assault, and
not be afraid of blows* nor faint under wounds, these are the Lessons of the
School of War; hence men delicately brought up are no ways fit for Field
Service: great and sore are the difficulties that attend a Christian in his
Course and Pilgrimage here, every step of his way is Encountered with fresh
Trials, he goes not to Heaven in a Feather Bed of Ease and delicacy, but it is
through much Tribulation that he enters into glory.

4. Fear: the Scripture says, blessed is the man that fears always; there
is a fear not unbecomi^g a Soldier, nor a disgrace to his Courage, a fear of
exposing himself to unnecessary dangers, undertaking needless Tasks, running
upon unneedful hazards, pulling upon himself disadvantages, a Fear of Caution
not to make Imprudent Attempts, nor such Charges as savor more of vain glory
then wisdom, and bring a man Credit but by Accident: it is an easy matter to
lead men up against an Enemy, and Engage them in a Fight, but to bring them off
again with honor and Safety, his Labor, hoc opus est; It was a Counsel given
by a Fool, but well becoming a wiseman, when the King of Spain consulted his
Nobles how to get an Army over the Alps; nay rather, said he, Consider how to
get them back again? Satan has as well his Ambushes to Catch the heady, as his
Troops to pursue and overtake the Cowardly Christian: Fabious Maximus did more
against Vafrous Hannibal cunctando, by prudent and Considerate delays, then
Servilius Marcellus, and many other Hot-Spurs by furious Assaults, whom he
never failed to draw into Sna^es; and it is valor enough, in many Cases, not
to be afraid to stand upon our Guard, and keep our ground, till further and
better Opportunity.

5. Sobriety: he that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things, 1
Cor. 9.25. observable is that of the Poet: Invadunt urbem summo vinoq sepultam:
the world is full of sad Examples upon this Account: when was Babylon taken,
but when Belshazzar had been solemnizing his Birth day with his Court, (and
doubtless his Soldiers rock pattern from him) in his drunken Festival: yea,
the vanities of the world are the very weapons which Satan uses to wound the
people of God withal, who, through Intemperance and Ex^^s^ in lawful things,
betray ^the Cause of God: in licitis perimus omnes: how many are there who
having begun in the Spirit, have ended in the Flesh, being bribed and Corrupted
by the pleasures, profits, and honors of a vain world: sober Christians are
most like to be true and valiant: then was Rome in a rising posture, when the
Scepter and the Ploughshare could Interchangeably take their turns, as occasion
^equired: he that can be content with a dinner of Herbs, will not be tempted
with Pyrthu^'s gold, said, Fabritius to the Ambassador, seeking to draw him
away, to betray his Country to the Enemies of it: could we but seek and use the
world and things of it with a Spirit of ^nd^ff^rency, we were then fit for
Christ's Camp, as long as Satan can Catch us with these things, we shall make
poor work of it.

6. Fidelity: this, though it be last named, is not the least Virtue of a
Soldier: he that will not be true to his Trust, is not fit to be trusted:
Treachery is a thing so hated among men, the worst of men, that they who, for
the turn to their own Advantag^, love the Treason, yet never can endure the
Traitor, and hence they speedily take him out of the way, and that is most
frequently his Reward: God requires Truth in the inward part, that the Soul be
for him, and steadfast in his Covenant, and hold on without warping: Satan will
present and proffer many Bribes, tender and promise great things; worldly
Accomodations, Ease, pleasure, honor, etc. but the Christian has sworn to
God, and must perform, and if he be faithful unto the Death, if he hold out
against all alluring Temptations, he shall have a Crown; but if he look back,
he shall be judged as a Traitor, unworthy of Life.

2. Provide your selves with Armor of Proof, and Skill to use it: The
Scripture directs us to a (...) and gives us full and plain Rules for
improvement. A good Soldier, if unarmed, is not fit for Service, some pieces
may seem troublesome to carry, but they will be missed in the Fight if left
behind: well may he expect to be shot through that wants his Shield; how shall
the head be defended without the Helmet? what hurt can he do his Enemy, that is
without his Sword? and be sure it be the Armor of God, no other will save us,
or harm our Enemy a Soul void of true grace is easily carried by every Assault
that is made upon it* get a Shield of Faith, a Helmet of Salvation, a girdle of
Truth, a Breastplate of Righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit, etc. and learn
how to use your Arms; handling of Arms indeed begins to be accounted but a mere
Flourish, and unnecessary point of Discipline, and thereupon it begins to be
laid aside as useless: but I assure you, the Christian has to do with Enemies
Skilful to do harm, and if he himself be a bungler, he shall get many a
scratch, yea, and deep wounds too, yea, and it may be harm himself with his own
weapon: God is a man of War, he is the Teacher of Israel, go to him for
Instruction: pray much, and practice much, so shall the graces of the Spirit be
in use, and you shall rhrough Divine Assistance be able to repel your Soul
Enemies.

3. Make it your Calling and Employment to guard your Hearts, defend your
Souls, keep off your Enemies, and use all Courses to that End appointed in the
Word of God, and which have by the people of God been found to be Advantageous
in this design: here observe, the War is properly Defensive, the Heart is to
be kept, you are garrison Soldiers: therefore.

1. Fortify thy Heart with all Care: he that knows his own weaknes^, and his
Enemies both strength and Polic^, never thinks he has done enough, Phil. 3.11,
12. present grace will not do; some are ready to say that Forts are only
occasions to take off the Edge of true Valor, but our sad Experience has
taught us that the want, or weakness of them has cost many a Life: he that
has done most this way to his heart, shall find work enough to defend it, and
trial sufficient of his Courage, it may be we have some time found our selves
in the Assaults of Temptation to come off with shame and sorrow, through
neglect of seasonable strengthening our hearts against them: this should excite
us to the work especially, Considering we know not how soon we may be called to
run with Horsemen. I know the sturdy Spartans lived long without Walls, and
prospered; but Christians, like the Conies, are a feeble Folk, and it is
therefore their wisdom to take the Advantage of the Rock.

2. Prudently cut off all supplies from your Enemies, it is an Impolitick
Course to leave an Enemy that makes an Invasion, any thing behind to live upon:
make no Provision for the Flesh, is the Apostles Counsel; i. e. Cut off all
Provision when it comes to Assault you let it find none, hence, mortify Carnal
desires, call in wandering Affections, get your Hearts off from the things of
the world, is there any thing in thy heart, that cannot be useful and
serviceable for Christ, set fire to it, least the Enemy reap Advantage by it.

3. Be Careful in Reparations: a Fort always Assaulted is liable to Breaches,
Engines of War make many gaps, Temptations oftentimes make a way into the
Soul: observe therefore, where they are made, and how: take this here as a
Rule, if you would not be mistaken here, that a breach is not only then made,
when thy heart is drawn in to give its Consent to the Commission of sin, but
when the strength of thy Resolution against it is weakened; here the Enemy will
soon clap his Ladders: if God help thee to oppose Temptation with a full
Resolution of grace, the Bullets then are dampt; but if thou do but so much as
deliberate the Wall is shaken: having therefore found it, stop it presently,
call off vain and Impertinent Thoughts, and not only so, but, in a way of
Repentance, renew thy Vows, Prom^ses and Resolutions, little Breaches will soon
grow great ones, if not speed^^y made up.

4. Look well to the Watch: our Savior Christ gives strict Command again and
again, upon this Account; to sleep on the watch in time of a Siege is a Capital
Crime. It was a tart, but a just Sarcasme of that Captain, who in walking the
Rounds found one that should have been watching, asleep, drew his Sword, and
ran him through, saying, dead I found thee, dead I leave thee: how many
Examples of sad Consequence has the world Experienced upon this Account: look
to all within: know thou not that thou have a Soul Enemy lurking in thy
bosom, that will readily upon Advantage open the gates to Satan and the World?
keep a holy Jealousy upon thy Faculties, disarm thy Affections, and do severe
Execution upon any Lusts that are found ranging: keep an Eye upon Satan; walk
the Rounds of thy Soul continually; look to the Cinque Ports, set a strong
Guard upon every Sense, and know who stands at the Eye, Ear, etc. beware what
motion thou openest the door to; it is easy for an Enemy to put on the habit of
a Friend; stop every Suggestion without, and well examine it: every thing that
complains against sin is not grace: you know the Story of Zopirus, when his
Master could not take Babylon by ^orce, he mangles and cuts himself, and so
falls off, complaining of his Lords Cruelty, which won him so much Credit as
lost the City. Leave no place unguarded, trust none to its own strength, what
seeming Impossibilitis have been done upon such Advantages; beware of being
Imposed upon, Satan fre^uently Alarums us loudest, where he intends the least
Assaults, sends up Drums and Trumpets on one side, to draw us thither, whiles
he comes si^ently upon our backs. Keep your Eyes in your heads, and looking
round.

5, Put forward in ev^ry Assault, and fight Courageously: when thou art
Assaulted by Temptation, fly not before it, much less lay down Arms, and cry
Quarter, here is no mercy to be expected, our spiritual Enemies are
Vnreconc^leable, think this, If I yield I dye, if I resist I can but dye, think
of thy Oath given to God, remember none ever were overcome but by yield^ng; and
count it a quarrel worth the venturing thy Life in. It will be a Death or worse
to thee to bear the brand of a Coward, for throwing away more then the World
can Repair, for want of Resisting.

6. Finding thy own strength to f^il, which thou will do, call in help: much
debate is in the world about using Auxiliary Aid. I shall not now m^ddle with
the Question: though I know Abraham made use of help, and that of Heat^^n too;
this I am sure of, the present Case is out of dispute, n^^ther admits of those
Obiection^ which are made against humane Aid, Christ is both able and willing,
and Faithful too: keep therefore before thee a Constant Apprehension of thy own
Insufficien^y, let that direct thee to him. When I am weak, I am strong, a
Christian is never in more danger then when Carnally Confident: this wounded
Peter, and (...) a Saint besides; Consider thine Enemies, remember what poor
things have tempted thee* hence, when Temptation comes, first, with Jacob,
wrestle with God, and then wrestle with the Temptation by Faith, 1 John 5.4.
keep an Eye to Heaven, resolve by the grace of God, never to yield, do all thou
have to do through him strengthening thee.

7. After every Victory gotten or Politic Retreat of thine Enemy, beware of
growing Secure and Remiss: how often have a few wounded and beaten men gotten
signal Victories on such Advantages: Satan sometimes Retreats, and seems to
fly, like Hannibal, on purpose to draw us into an Ambush: but if God Assisting,
he be worsted, yet will he Rally again, thou art in a Country that will never
be Clear of Enemies, yea, Enemies whose Scouts are always out, and keeping
Espial upon thee; thank God for every Battle gained, but remember still, thou
art in the Field upon thy high places, and must therefore sing, not with thy
Harp, but Arms in thy hand, when was David surprised worst, but when he
thought himself clear of danger.

I have now done with the Directions, give me leave to speak a few words in the
Head of the Company, and so I shall deliver up my Commission: Remember, if you
are Christians, you are bound for Heaven, your way lies through the Enemies
Country, and you have a great Charge to carry with you, a Soul more precious
then what the world accounts most worthy Account; a Soul given up to God, and
devoted to his Service; a Soul which there are many who seek to Rob you of, and
ly sculking in every bush to surprise: be therefore vigilant, be sober, be
Courageous, be Faithful to God: Heaven is a prize reserved for him that keeps
his heart: keep this, and you keep all, lose it, and you lose all, neither is
there any Redemption or Ransom Valuable for its Recovery: God, and Christ, and
Angels look on to behold the Battles, and there is an Arm stretch from Heaven
to afford you help in time of need: be not dismayed, God is with you, whiles
you are true to him: be not discouraged, you shall shortly see all your Enemies
dead at your Feet: be not weary, after a few more Skirmish^s, a little more
Scuffling with sin, and Satan, and World, and the War will be at an End; and
that which is Laborious and hard in doing, will in the Review be delightful: --
haec olim meminisse.

How Cheerful can Soldiers after the Battle, discourse together of all the
hazards of the ^^ght? Heaven will be never the more unpleasant to remember what
we went through for it: Behold Christ is coming, and his Reward is with him: be
thou Faithful to the Death and thou shall have a Crown of Life; hold on to the
End, and thou shall be saved; if Christ lives, you shall live also: the
Conquest is sure, only be you Resolute, the day shall certainly be yours, and
in the End of your Warfare, you shall be possessed of an Inheritance,
Incorruptible, and that Fades not away, Reserved in Heaven for you, where you
shall enjoy Everlasting Triumph over all your Enemies, and Reap the F^uit of
your Labor, even Life Eternal.

FINIS

