THE GENERAL LAWS AND LIBERTIES OF NEW PLYMOUTH COLONY.
Revised and Published by Order of the GENERAL COURT. In June 1671.

CHAP. I. The General Fundamentals.
1. WE the Associates of New Plymouth, comeing hither as Freeborn Subjects of
the State of England, endowed with all and singular; the Privileges belonging
to such being Assembled; (...) to be made by the Freemen o^ their
representatives.
Do in Act, Ordain and Constitute; That no Act, Imposition, Law or Ordinance,
be made or imposed upon us, at pre^ent or to come; but such as shall be made or
imposed by consent of the Body of Freemen or Associates, or their
Representatives legally Assembled: which is according to the free Liberties of
the State of England.

2. And for the well-governing this Corporation; Annual Electio^^ by Freemen.
It is also Resolved and Ordered, That there be a Free Election Annually, of
Governor, and Assistants by the Vote of the Freemen of this Corporation; and
that none shall presume to impose themselves or any other upon us, but such as
are so chose, according to the privilege granted us by Charter.

3. That Justice and Right be equally and impartially Administered unto all, not
sold, denied or causelessly deserted unto any. Justice equally and (...).


4. It is also Enacted, that no person in (...) Government shall be endamaged
in respect of Life, (...) suffer but according to Law (...) this (...), Law
(...) God or L^w of England.
Limb, Liberty, Good name or Estate, under color of Law, or countenance of
Authority, but by virtue or equity of some express Law of the General Court of
this Colony, the known Law of God, or the good and equitable Laws of our Nation
suitable set us, being brought to Answer by due process thereof.

All Trials to be by a Jury.
5. That all Trials, whether Capital, Criminal, or between Man and Man, be tried
by Jury of twelve good and lawful Men, according to the commendable custom of
England; except the party or parties concerned, do refer it to the Bench, or
some express Law does refer it to their Judgment and Trial, or the Trial of
some other Court where Jury ^s not; in which case any party a^^ieved, ^ay
appeal, and shall have Trial by a Jury.

And it shall be in the libert^ of both Plai^^^f^^ and Defendant or any
Del^^quent, ^
that is to be try^^ by a Jury, (...) cha^^enge any of the Jurors, and if the
challenge be found ^ust and reaso^^ble by the B^nch, it shall be allowed him,
and others without just exception shall be impannelled in their room: And if it
be in case of Life and Death, the Prisoner shall have liberty to except against
six or eight of the Jury, without giving any reason for his exception.

6. That no Man be Sentenced to Death without Testimo^^ of two witnesses at
least, What testimon^ in ^^ses Capital.
or that which is equivalent thereunto, and that (...) or three Witnesses being
of competent Age, Understanding and of good Reputation* Testifying to the Case
in question, shall be accounted and ^xcepted as full Testimony in any Case,
though they did not together see or hear, and so Witness to the same individual
Act, in reference to circumstances of time and place; Provided the Bench and
Jury be satisfied with such Testimony.

7. And it is provided, as the supposed Privilege of our Charter, that all
persons of the age of twenty one years, power and liberty for all to Will (...)
their estate
of right Understa^^^ng and Memory, whether Excommunicated, Condemned or other,
having any Estate properly theirs to dispose, shall have full power and liberty
to make their reasonable Wills and Testaments, and other lawful Alienations of
their Lands and Estates; Be it only here excepted, that such as are Sentenced
for Treason against the Kings Majesty, except such as are sentenced for Treason.
the State of England, or the Commonweal; shall forfeit to the King or Colony
their personal Estate, their Lands being still at their disposal.

8. That whereas the great and known end of the first comers, in the year of
our Lord, (...) joy the pure worship of God
1620. leaving their dear Nat^ve Country, and all that was dear to them there;
transporting themselves over the vast Ocean into this remote waste Wilderness,
and therein willingly con^^cting with Dangers, Losses, Hardships and Distresses
sore and not a few; WAS, (...) without offense, they under the protection of
th^r Native Prince, together with the enlargements of his Majesty's Dominions,
might with the l^berty of a good Conscience, enjoy the pure Scriptural Worship
of God, without the mixture of Humane Inven^^ons and Impositio^^: And that
their Children after them might walk in the Holy ways of the Lord; And for
which end they obtained leave from King James of happy Memory and his
Honorable Council, with further Graunts from his Gracious Majesty Charles the
first and his Honorable Council, by Letters, Patents, for sundry Tracts of
Land, with many Privileges therein contained, for their better encouragement
to proceed ^n in so Pious a Work, which may especially (...) to the propagation
of Religion, etc. as by Letters Patents more (...), and with f^rther assurance
also of the continuance of our (...) and Privileges, both Civil and Religious,
under the Royal Hand and Seal of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second:
And (...) Hand of our God upon us, many others since the first comers are for
(...) end come unto us, and sundry others rise up amongst us, (...) Conscience
to wal^ in the Faith and Order of the Gospel; (...) many Churches gathered
amongst us walking according (...).

And (...) (by the Grace of God) we have now had near about fifty Years
Experience, of the good Consisten^y of these Churches, with Civil Peace and
Order, and also with spiritual Edification, together with the welfare and (...)
of that Government;

It is therefore for ^he Honor of God and the propagation of Religion, The
Churches of Christ ^ere to be protected in their peace (...) and orderly
walking* and the (...) of the (...) provided for.
and the (...) welfare of this Colony Ordered by this Court and the Authority
thereof, That the said Churches already gathered, or that shall hereafter be
ord^^ly gathered, may and shall from time to time by this Government be
protected and encouraged, in their peaceable and orderly walking, and the
Faithful, Able, Orthodox, Teaching Ministry thereof, duly encouraged and
provided for; together with such other Orthodox able Dispensers of the Gospel,
which shall or may be placed in any Township in (...) Government, where there
is or may be defect of Church Order.

9. And Finally, it is Ordered and Declared by this Court and the Authority
thereof, That all these foregoing Orders and Constitutions, All the foregoing
fundamental^ (...) to be preserved
are so Fundamentally essential to the just Rights, Liberties, Common good and
special end of this Colony, as that they shall and ought to be inviolably
preserved.

CAPITAL LAWS CHAP. II.
IT is Enacted by this Court and ^he Authority thereof, That if any person
having had the knowledge of the true God, Idolatry.
openly and manifestly, Have or Worship any other God but the Lord God, he
shall be put to Death, Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy. 13.6, 1^.

2. If any Person within this Jurisdiction, pro^^ssing the true God, shall
wittingly and willingly pre^ume to Blaspheme the Holy Name of God, Blasphemy.
Father, Son or Holy Ghost, with direct, express, presumptuous or high-handed
Blasphemy, either by wilful or obstinate denying of the true God, or His
Creation or Government of the World; or shall Curse God, Father, Son or Holy
Ghost, such Person shall be put to Death, Levit. 24.1^, ^6.

3. Treason against the Person of our Sovereign Lord the King, the State and
Commonwealth of England, Treason.
shall be punnished by Death.

4. That whosoever shall Conspire and Attempt any Invasion, Insurrection,
Conspiring against this Jurisdiction.
or Public Rebellion against this Jurisdiction, or the Surprizal of any Town,
Plantation, Fortification or Ammunition, therein provided for the safety
thereof, or shall Treacherously and Perfidiously Attempt and Endeavor the
Alteration and Subversion of the Fundamental Frame and Constitutions of this
Government; every such Person shall be put to Death.

5. If any Person shall Commit wilful Murder by killing any Man, Woman or
Child, Wilful Murder premeditate
upon premeditated Malice, Hatred or Cruelty, not in a way of necessary and
just Defense, nor by casualty against his Will; he shall be put to Death.

6. If any Person slays another suddenly in Anger and Cruelty of Passion;
Sudden murder in passion.
he shall be put to Death.

7. If any Person shall slay another through Guile, either by Poisoning or
other such Develish practices; Murder by guile poisoning
he shall be put to Death.

Witchcraft.
8. If any Christian (so called) be a Witch, that is, has, or consulteth with a
Familiar Spirit; he or they shall be put to Death.

9. If any Person lies with a Beast or Bruit Creature, by Carnal Copulation,
^estiality.
they shall surely be put to Death, and the Beast shall be slain and buried and
not eaten.

10. If any Man lies with Mankind, as he lies with a Woman, both of them
have committed Abomination; Soddomy.
they both shall surely be put to Death, unless the one party were forced, or
be under fourteen years of Age: And all other Sodomitical filthiness, shall be
surely punished according to the nature of it.

11. If any Person Rise up by False Witness, wittingly and of purpose to take
away any Man's life; False-witnes
he shall be put to Death.

Man-stealing.
12. If any Man Steals Mankind, he shall be put to Death or otherwise
grievously punished.

Cu^sing or smiteing Father o^ Mother.
13. If any Child or Children above sixteen years old, and of competent
Understanding, shall Curse or Smite their Natural Father or Mother, he or they
shall be put to Death, unless it can be sufficiently testified that the Parents
have been very Unchristianly negligent in the Education of such Children, or so
provoked them by extreme and cruel Correction, that they have been forced
thereunto, to preserve themselves from Death or Maiming.

14. If a Man have a Stubborn or Rebellious Son, of sufficient years and
understanding (viz.) sixteen years of Age, The Rebellious Son.
which shall not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and
that when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them; then shall his
Father and Mother, being his natural parents, lay hold on him, and bring him
before the Magistrates assembled in Court, and testify unto them, that their
Son is Stubborn and Rebellious, and will not obey their voice and chastisement,
but lives in sundry notorious crimes; such a Son shall be put to Death, or
otherwise severely punished.

15. If a Man shall Ravish a Maid or Woman, committing Carnal Copulation with
her by force; that is above the age of ten years, Rape.
or if she were under ten years of age, though her will was gained by him, he
shall be punished with Death or some other grievous punishment, according as
the Fact may be circumstanced.

16. Whosoever shall wilfully or on purpose, Burn any House, Ship, Barque or
other Vessel of considerable value; Wilful burning of House^ Ships etc.
such person shall be put to Death, or otherwise grievously punished, as the
case and circumstances of it may require.

CHAP. III. CRIMINALS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That what person soever
is to Answer any Criminal Offense, whether they be in prison or under Bail,
his Ca^e shall be heard and determined at the next Court that has proper
cognizance thereof, and may be done without prejudice of Justice.

2. It is Enacted by this Court, etc. Adultery how punished
That whosoever shall Commit Adultery with a Married Woman, or one Betrothed to
another Man, both of them shall be severely punished, by whipping two several
times, viz. once when the Court is in being, at which they were Convict of
Fact, and the second time as the Court shall Order; and likewise to wear two
Capital Letters, A. D. cut out in Cloth and sewed on their uppermost Garments,
on their Arm or Back; and if at any time they shall be found without the said
Letters so worn, whilst in this Government, to be forthwith taken and
publicly whipped, and so from time to time as often as they are found not to
wear them.

3. Be it also Enacted, That whosoever Commits Fornication, Fornication
without contra^^
before, or without lawful Contract, shall be punished by whipping, or else pay
ten pounds fine each of them, and be imprisoned during the pleasure of the
Court, not exceeding three days; If they be or will be Married
but if they be or will be Married to each other, then but ten pounds both, and
imprisoned as aforesaid, by lawful Contract, the Court understanding the mutual
consent of Parents, Guardians or Overseers, and a solemn promise of Marriage
made to each other by the parties, before competent Witnesses.

And if any Commit Carnal Copulation after Contract, After Contra^^
before Marriage, they shall be Amerced each of them fifty shillings, and be
imprisoned if the Court see Reason; And if any cannot or will not (...) the
fine, then to be punished by whipping. And for the more (...) of t^is
prevailing evil:

The Co^^t has further Determined, That such as transgress in any of these
ways, shall be convict in public Court; and their fines to be paid in money.

4. (...) many persons of late years have been and are apt to be injurious to
the Gods and L^ves of others, notw^thstanding all Laws and (...) to prevent and
punish the sam^;

^
It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That if any person
shall commit Burglary, by breaking up any Dwelling House, or Warehouse, or
shall forceably Rob any person in the Field, or Highways; First.
such Offender shall for the first offense be Branded on the right Hand with
the letter (B,) and if he shall offend in the same kind the second time,
Second.
he shall be Branded on the other Hand and be severely whipped; And if either
were committed on the Lords day, his Brand to be set on his Forehead; Third
offense.
And if he shall fall into the like offense the third time, he shall be put to
Death, as being Incorrigeable, or otherwise grievously punished, as the Court
shall Determine.

5. And whosoever shall steal or attempt to steal any Ship, Barque, or Vessel
of Burden, Stealing of Vessels or Ammunition.
or any Public Ammunition, shall be severely punished, according to the nature
of such a Fact, provided it extend not to Life or Limb.

Stealing or Purloining
6. That if any Stranger, or Inhabitant of this Government, shall be legally
convict of Stealing or Purloining any Horses, Chattels, Moneys, or other Goods
of any kind, he shall be punished by due reparation to the party wronged; and
a fine, or Corporal punishment, as the Court or three Magistrates shall
Determine; Provided that where such Sentence is not given by the Court, it
shall be at the liberty of the Delinquent to Appeal to the next Court, putting
in due caution there to appear and abide a Trial.

7. That any Magistrate may Hear and Determine such smaller Thefts and
Pilfrings, Smaller Thefts and Pilfrings
as exceeds not the damage or fine of forty shillings, or penalty of Stocking
or Whipping, not exceeding ten stripes, or only legal Admonition, as he shall
see cause; saving liberty of Appeal to the Delinquent as aforesaid.

8. It is Enacted by the Court, etc. That whosoever shall profanely Swear or
Curse by the Name of GOD, or any of his ATTRIBUTES, WORD or WORKS; Profane
Swearing
He or She shall be set in the Stocks, not exceeding three hours, or be fined
ten shillings, or be Imprisoned, according to the quality of the person; if a
Stranger, the Constable or his Deputy shall demand the fine, which if he
refuse, then to set him in the Stocks, not exceeding two hours.

9. This Court taking notice of great abuse, and many misdemeanors committed
by diverse persons in these many ways, Profaning of the Sabbath or Lords day,
to the great dishonor of God, Reproach of Religion, and Grief of the Spirits
of Gods People;

^
Do therefore Order, That whosoever shall Profane the Lords day, by doing
unnecessary servile Work, by unnecessary travailing, or by sports and
recreations, he or they that so transgress, shall forfeit for every such
default forty shillings, or be publicly whipped: But if it clearly appear that
the sin was proudly, presumptuously and with a high hand committed, against the
known Command and Authority of the blessed God, If presumptuously
such a person therein Dispising and Reproaching the Lord, shall be put to
death, or grievously punished, at the Judgment of the Court.

10. And whosoever shall frequently neglect the public Worship of God on the
Lords day, that is approved by this Government, Neglect of the public worship
shall forfeit for every such default convicted of, ten shillings, especially
where it appears to arise from Negligence, Idleness or Profaneness of Spirit.

11. Forasmuch as the open contempt of Gods Word, and the Messengers thereof,
is the desolating sin of Civil States and Churches;

It is Enacted, that if any Christian so called in this Government, Vilifying
the Scriptures
shall speak contemptuously of the Holy Scriptures, or of the Holy Pen men
thereof, or Holy Penmen o^ them
such person or persons shall be punished by Fine or Corporal punishment, as
the Court shall see reason, so as it extend not to Life or Limb.

Or shall behave himself contemptuously toward the Word of God Preached, or
any Minister thereof called, or the Word Preached
and faithfully dispensing the same in any Congregation, or the Ministers
thereof
either by manifest interrupting him in his Ministerial Dispensations, or
falsely and peremptarily charging him with Teaching Error, to the disparagement
and hindrance of the Work of Christ in his hands, or manifestly and
contemptuously reproach the Ways, or the ways of Churches or Ordinances of
Christ
Churches or Ordinances of Christ, being duly convicted thereof, He or They
shall for the first Transgression, be amerced twenty shillings to the Colonies
use, or be set in the Stocks, not exceeding four hours; But if He or They go on
to Transgress in the same kind, then to be amerced forty shillings or be whipped
for every such Transgression.

It is to be understood not hereby to deprive any of their lawful liberty, in a
modest and orderly way to propose his scruple for further satisfaction.

12. Although no Creature be Lord, or have power over the Faith and Consciences
of men, nor may constrain them to believe or profess against their Consciences,
yet it being a duty to restrain or provide against such as may bring in
dangerous Errors or Heresies, tending to corrupt and destroy the S^uls of men;

It is therefore Ordered, etc. That if any Christian (so called) shall within
this Jurisdiction, go about to subvert or destroy the Christian Faith, Heresy*
or Religion, by broaching, publishing or maintaining any such dangerous Error
or Heresy, or shall endeavor to draw or seduce others thereunto; every such
person so offending, and continuing obstinate therein, after due means of
conviction, shall be fined, banished, or otherwise severely punished, as the
Court of Magistrates duly considering the offense, with the aggrevating
Circumstances and Dangers like to ensue shall judge meet.

13. It is Ordered, etc. That where a Judgment is given in any Court, for any
person of House or Lands, Forceable detainer
upon the trial of the Title thereof, or other just cause, if the person
against whom the Judgment is given, does either forcibly detain possession
thereof, Entry and (...)
either against the Officer empowered to serve an Execution thereon, or after
Execution served, enter upon it again and so retain poss^ession by force, he
shall be accounted an high Offender against the Law and Breakers of the public
Peace; therefore ^peedily to Redre^s such a Criminal Offense, every Magistrate
is empowered and by his place has power to give Warrant and Command to the
Marshal, Off^cer and other men (whom he thinks meet to be employed in the
business) the Marshal or other Officer also requiring aid, greater or lesser
(as need requires) to suppress the force, and give Possession to the Owner, and
to imprison such as do appear to be Delinquents and their Aiders and Abettors,
to be forth comeing at the next Court that did give the Judgment in the Case,
there to make their Answer, and whom the Court does find guilty, to set such
fine or other punishment upon them as the merit of their several Cases does
require.

D^s^urbance of the peace
14. It is Ordered, etc. That whosoever shall disturb or undermine the peace of
this Jurisdiction or Inhabitants thereof, by plotting with others, or by his
own tumultuous and offens^ve carriage, traducing, quarreling, challenging, or
assaulting, or any other way tending to public disturbance, in what place
soever it be done, or shall defame any Court of Justice, or any of the
Magistrates or Judges of any Court in this Jurisdiction, Def^mation of Court or
Judge.
in respect of any Act or Sentence therein passed; every such Offender, upon
due proof made, shall be by the Court of Magistrates punished by fine,
imprisonment, binding to the Peace or good Behavior, according to the quality
and measure of the Offense or Disturbance, to them seeming just and equal.

Beating or ^urting of any person.
And that such as Beat, Hurt or Strike any other person, shall be liable to pay
unto the party hurt or stricken, together with such fine to the Colony, as on
consideration of the party smiting or being ^mit, and with what Instrument,
danger more or less, time, place, provocation, etc. shall be judged just and
reasonable to the merit of the Offense.

15. It is Ordered, etc. That if any person shall Forge any Deed or Conveyance,
Forging of (...), Bonds, etc.
Testament, ^^rd, Bill, Release, Acquittance, Letter of Aturney, or any
Writeing to pervert Equity and Justice, he shall pay the party grieved double
damages, and be fined himself so much to the Countries use, and if he cannot
pay it, to be publicly whipped, and burned in the ^ace with a Roman F.

16. Be it also Enacted; That if any Notary or Keeper of public Records,
Falsifying of Records
or Writeings, shall wilfully imbezle or make away any such Records or
Writeings of Concernment, committed to his keeping and trust, or shall on
purpose fals^fie or deface them, by racing out, adding to them, or otherwise;
Such Corrupt Officer shall lose his Office, be Disfranchized, and be burned in
the Face, or fined, according to the circumstances of the Fact.

(...) that cor^^pteth an Officer to such intent
17. And if any person shall endeavor to corrupt any Officer, that keeps such
public Records or Papers of concernment, to procure him to Deface, Corrupt,
Alter, or Imbezle any of them, he shall be severely punished, by Fine,
Imprisonment, or Corporal punishment, as the matter may be circumstanced.

18. It is Enacted by this Court, etc. That what person soever, being sixteen
years of age, Lying.
shall wittingly or willingly make or publish any Lie, which may be tending to
the damage or hurt of any particular person, or with intent to deceive and
abuse the people with false News or Reports, shall be fined for every such
default ten shillings, and if the party cannot or will not pay the fine, then
he shall sit in the stocks so long as the Court shall think meet; and if the
Offender shall come to a Magistrate, and own his offense, it shall be in the
power of that Magistrate to execute the Law upon him where he lives, and spare
his appearance at the Court, but in case where the lie is greatly pernicious to
the public weal, it shall be more severely punished according to the nature of
it.

19. It is Enacted by this Court, etc. That if any person shall wilfully, and
of set purpose, burn any man's fence; Wilf^l burning of Fences
he shall make good the damage to the party wronged, be amerced forty
shillings, and be bound to the good Behavior if the Court see reason.

20. And it is further Ordered; Breaking of Fen^e (...) or Gridge
That any person that shall wilfully and on purpose break down another man's
Fence, Gate or Bridge, to the annoyance either of a particular person, or a
neighborhood; he shall make up such said Fence, Gate or Bridge at his own
charge, pay the damage thereby sustained, and be amerced according to the
nature of the offense: saving the right of him that pulls up a Fence set on his
Land without his approbation.

21. And whosoever shall wilfully pluck up, remove or deface any Landmark or
Bounds between party and party, that have been, Removing of Land marks
or shall be orderly set up by persons thereunto appointed; he or they shall be
fined from twenty stillings to five pounds as the offense may be circumstanced.

22. It is Enacted by this Court, etc. Gaming at public Houses
That no In-keeper or public House, shall suffer any unlawful Games, nor any
kind of Gaming in or about his House, for money or moneys worth, Liquors,
Wine, Beer, or the like, on forfeit of forty shillings for the Master or Keeper
of the house, and ten shillings a piece from each Gamester.

23. Be it also Enacted, That no person in this Government, Playing at unlawful
Games
shall play at Cards, Dice, Cross and Pile, or any such unlawful Game, wherein
there is Lottery, at any private house or else where in this Government on
penalty of ten shillings fine, to be paid by every one that so plays, and
twenty shillings by the Master or Head of a Family that shall know of and
suffer such Gaming in his House or where he has Command.

24. It is Enacted by this Court, etc. W^aring vizard^
That no person in this Government shall wear any Vizards, or disguise by
strange Apparel, to lascivious and evil ends and purposes, on penalty of being
fined fifty shillings to the Colonies use, for every such default, or being
publicly whipped or bound to the good Behavior, as the Court may see reason.

25. Forasmuch as it is observed, that the sin of Drunkenness, does greatly
abound, to the dishonor of God, impoverishing of such as fall into it, and
grief of such as are sober minded; For prevention, and it may be suppression of
that growing and prevailing evil;

It is Enacted by this Court and Authority thereof, that whatsoever persons
shall be found drunk at any time in any Tavern, Ordinary, P^u^^ty of
dru^kenness
Alehouse or else in this Government, or be legally convict thereof, he or
they shall for the first default be fined f^ve shillings to the Countries use;
for the second default ten shillings, and if he or they will not, or cannot pay
the fine, then to be set in the Stocks, not exceeding two hours; for the third
transgression to be bound to the good behavior, and if he shall transgress a
fourth time, to pay five pounds or be publicly whipped, and so from time to time
as often as they shall be found tran^gressors in that kind: by Drunkenness is
to be understood, Drunkenness de^i^ed
one that ^^^ps or falters in his speech by reason of over much Drink, or that
staggers in his going, or that vomits by reason of excessive drinking, or that
cannot by reason thereof follow his calling.

26. Whereas notwithstanding all (...) and endeavors of this Court to prevent
that great and raging sin of Drunkenness; yet still many go on in it;

Therefore this Court does further Act, That the Names of such as are found to
be common Drunkards in this Government, shall be (...) or recorded, and that
whatever person or persons, whether Ordinary keepers or others, shall give,
sell or lend, either directly or indirectly any strong Liquors, or Wine, or
strong Beer unto any such person or persons, shall forfeit ten shillings, five
shillings to the Colonies use, and five shillings to the Informer.

And the Names of such as are so found in any Town, shall be set up in some
public place.

27. Whereas many have sustained great damage by indiscreet and untimely firing
of the Woods;

It is Ordered, etc. That none shall fire the Woods at any time, but they shall
give warning thereof to their neighbors about them, ^ntimely firing the woods
and the time of firing them, to be between the fifteenth of February and the
latter end of April; and if any shall unnecessarily fire the Woods, or not
observing this Order, damnifie any, he shall make good the damage, and be fined
ten shillings or be set in the Stocks.

28. And forasmuch as some have been injured by careless taking of Tobacco
abroad in the Streets, and near unto Barns, Stables, Hay-Stacks, or Corn-ricks;

It is hereby Ordered, etc. That whosoever shall be found smoking of Tobacco
in the Streets, Careless smoking of Tobacco
or in such places of danger, shall forfeit to the poor of the Town two
shillings for every such default, which the Constable may without further
Warrant, distrain and dispose of; and if it can be known that damage did accrue
unto any by such careless smoking of Tobacco, it shall be repaired by him that
was the occasion of it, or he shall be made to serve it out: Soldiers whilst
in Arms are dispensed with, to smoke it in the field.

And if any person or persons shall be found smoking of Tobacco on the
Lord's Day, going to, or comeing from the Meetings, within two miles of the
Meeting house, they shall pay two shillings for every such default, to the
Colonies use.

CHAP. IV. ACTIONS.
IT is Enacted by this Court, etc. That in all Warrants respecting Actions, the
special ground of the Action shall be expressed: ^
And that a circumstantial Error in a Summons or Warrant shall not be taken as
a sufficient ground for (...) suit, where otherwise both the party and case
intended may be (...) understood; and it shall also be expressed in the
Warrant, in wha^ quality the Plaintiff Sues, whether as Principle, Attorney,
Guardian or otherwise.

2. Because much time is lost in the beginning of Courts of Trials, by neglect
of timely Entry of Actions;

It is Enacted by this Court, That Actions shall be Entered upon, Time of Entry
or Actions
or before the first day of the Courts sitting, and not after; And in case any
Plaintiff shall delay his Entry longer then the forenoon of the first day of
the Court, he shall pay ten shillings to the Countries use, besides ordinary
Fees for Trial of Actions. And all persons whether parties or witnesses are
enjoined to attend their respective concerns the whole time of the Courts
public sitting until they are issued.

And shall present the whole plea and evidence before the case be committed to
the Jury, No further plea after (...) committed to Jury
and no other plea or evidence to be admitted to any person, any usage or
custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to this end all Marshals and Constables, are required to make their
ret^^ns of all such Warrants as they have served, sometime the first forenoon
of the Court that is to take cognizance of the case concerned therein.

3. Whereas in Suits and Actions brought into Courts between party and party,
sometimes the Plaintiff, and somet^mes the Defendant, Non-att^^dan^e upon
Actions
and sometimes neither of them d^ attend the call, to prosecute or answer, to
the great (...) of Court and ^ury, and others concerned in the case, and is
contrary to the laudable custom of all Courts in our Native Country and else
where;

It is therefore Ordered and Enacted, That if any Plaintiff have entered an
Action, to be tried in this Court, or which comes by Replevin, Plaintif^ damage
Review, or otherwise, and does not by himself or by his Attorney, make their
appearance and prosecute their Action, after they have been three times called
in Court, they shall be Nonsuited; ^
and if the Defendant appear not to such call, the Plaintiff appearing, the
Suit shall neverthele^s proceed: And if plaintiff or Defendant appear at their
call, they shall have their costs granted against him that appeared not; A ^ay
for re^entry
and if afterward both parties do agree to try the Case at the same Court,
they shall be allowed so to do, the Plaintiff paying for a new Entry, one half
to the Treasury, and the other to the Jury and Officers.

4. And if any person Summoned to answer any Presentment, ^
or for any Fact or Misdemeanour, do not appear at the time appointed, he or
they shall be proceeded against for contempt, except it appear they have been
prevented by the ^^and of God.

5. The ordinary settled charge for the trial of an Action in this Court, shall
be nine shillings, for the Jury, Secretary, and Marshal, distributed according
to the former custom of the Court, and two shillings sixpence per day to
Witnes^es: Charge of Trials
And if the Defendant obtain a Verdict, he shall not only have his Costs
allowed him for Witnesses as abovesaid; but two shillings sixpence per day for
what time he has necessarily attended on the Action, shall be given him
without Suit, and this shall bare the Defendant from Suit, unless by
Imprisonment, or otherwise he has been more then ordinarily damnified.

6. It is also Determined, That it shall be at the liberty of a Plaintiff, to
withdraw his Action at any time before the Jury bring in a Verdict if he see
cause, Plaintifs liberty to withdraw
in which Case he shall allow the ^efendant his full costs, and may afterward
Review his Suit at another C^^rt.

7. Be it also Enacted, That no man in any Suit, or Plaint against another,
Vexatious Suits
shall falsely pretend great damages, or debts, to vex or discred^t his
Adversary: And in all Case^ where it appears to the Court, that the Plaintiff
has wittingly wronged the Defendant, in commencing Suit, or prosecuting
Complaint or Indictment against him, he shall pay unto the Defendant double
costs, and be amerced twenty shil^ings or more, as the Case may be
circumstanced, for such his vexatious Suit or Plaint.

8. It is further Enacted, That in case a Plaintiff obtain not a Verdict,
Reviews
he may Review his Action if he see cause; as likewise may the Defendant, if he
be cast: but if either of them having fallen twice in his Case upon Review, do
still go on to Review, and be cast a third time, whereby it appears that he is
vexatious and troublesome to the Court and party prosecuted, he shall be
awarded to pay double costs to the party and twenty shillings fine to the
public Treasury.

9. Be it also Enacted, That a Jury bringing in a Verdict, the Bench concurring
and accepting it, Judgem^ granted
Judgment shall be forthwith granted: But if they concur not, the Jury may be
put upon further consideration of the Case; And if they still retain their
Verdict, they shall be required to give their Reasons on which it is grounded,
When Verdict rejected
which if they refuse, or having given their Reasons, they appear not of
weight, but the Jury through obstinacy or prejudice to the person or case, will
maintain their Verdict, the Court may in such case reject such Verdict, and
impannel another Jury, for the trial of the Action, A new Jury impannelled
at that Court or the next; but if the second Jury do in the substance of their
Verdict agree with the former, it shall be accepted.

10. It is Ordered by this Court, etc. That no Attachments shall be granted in
any civil Action to any Forreigner, against a settled Inhabitant of this
Jurisdiction, Foreigners shall not Attach Inhabitants without giving caution
for costs
before he has given sufficient Security or Caution duly to prosecute his
Action, and to answer the Defendant such costs and damages as the Court may
award:

And it is further Ordered, That in all Attachments of Goods and Chattles,
Lands, or Heriditaments, which may be in such case where the person cannot be
had, whether it be by foreigners or settled Inhabitants, legal notice shall be
given to the party concerned, or left in writeing at his House or place of
usual abode before the Suit proceed (...) he be out of the Jurisdiction, the
cause shall proceed to Trial, (...) Judgment shall not be entered till another
Court, at least a Month after; and if the Defendant do not then appear,
Judgment shall be entered, ^
but Execution shall not be granted before the Plaintiff has given sufficient
Security to be Responsal to the Defendant, and (...)
if he shall reverse the Judgment within one year, or such further time as the
Court shall see cause to Order.

11. Al^^^ugh is has been the common usage o^ this Court in ordinary cases,
not to allow Att^^^ments (...) any Go^^s or other (...), where the person can
be found to be responsible to the (...); the Court being apprehensive that in
some cases persons may be therein in^ured;

Do hereby Order, ^
That it shall henceforth be in the liberty of the Court, or any Magistrate, as
they or he shall see cause on con^^deration of circumstances attending the
ca^e, to grant Attachment either of the person or estate or both.

12. That a Summons from any Magistrate shall be ^ sufficient warrant to bring
any person within this Government, ^
to answer to any Suit commenced against him.

13. And that all Warrants, whether to Attach or Summon any to answer to an
Action, ^
Presentment or Complaint shall be served three complete working days before
the Court, or time appointed for appearance thereat.

14. Be it also Enacted; That henceforth Goods Attached to a Trial, ^
shall not be released upon the appearance of the party, or Judgment given,
but shall stand engaged until the Judgment, or the Execution granted upon the
said Judgment be discharged, which for the time thereof, shall be as the Court
shall Order, Nor Sureties (...)
nor shall any Surety or Sureties for appearance at any Court, except in
Capital or Criminal cases, be relea^^d from his or their Bond, until an hour at
least be expired after Judgeme^t in such case granted; any Custom or Usage of
this Court to the contrary notwithstanding.

15. Liberty is granted by this Court to any person, to improve one or two
Attorneys to help him in his Pleas; ^
provided they be persons of good repute, and such as the Court shall approve;
and the (...) Attorneys (...) required, ^s to be faithful to their Clyent, so
also to avoid fraudulent pleas that may have attendency to mis^ead the Court or
dar^en the case.

16. And it is Enacted, That if any person be proved a common (...), ^
by vexing others with unjust, frequent and troublesome Suits, it shall be in
(...) power of the Count, both to (...) his cause, and punish him for his
^arratry, by Fine or Imprisonment.

17. It is also Ordered by this Court, That none shall have power to pass away
Lands, Herid^taments, or other Estate, or be capable of Seeing or being Sued at
any Court in his own person, ^
until he attain unto the age of one and twenty years: But any Orphan may cho^e
their Guardians to act for them, at the age of fourteen years, to secure or
defend their Estate as may be requisite.

18. It is Ordered, etc. That no man's person shall be restrained or imprisoned
by any Authority whatsoever, before the Law has sentenced him thereunto, if he
can put in sufficient Security, Bail or Main-prize, for his appearance and
good Behavior in the mean time, unless it be in Crimes Capital, Who B^ilable
and Contempt in open Court, or in such case where some express Act of Court
does allow it.

No levy on lands where goods to be found not surety to be distrained where
principle sufficient and found
19. It is Ordered, etc. That no Debt be leavied on Lands or Rents, so long as
the Debtor has Goods and Chattels to be found to satisf^e; neither shall the
Pledges or Sureties be distrained, so long as the Principle is sufficient and
can be found.

nor beast of the plow or draught
20. That Beast of the Plough or Draught shall not be distrained for Debt, so
long as others may be found to satisfy the Debt except for damage feasant.

21. It is Ordered, That every man shall have liberty to Replevy his Chattel or
Goods impounded, Replevi^
distrained or seized, unless it be upon Execution after Judgment, or for
payment of Rates, or Fines, provided he put in good security to prosecute the
Replevin, and to satisfy such damage and charge as his Adversary shall recover
against him in Law.

Debts to be paid in specie.
22. That all Debts be paid in specie, according to Contract.

Fines to be forth with paid or ^ecuted
23. That when any Delinquents are fined to the Country, they shall forthwith
pay their fine or give security to the Treasurer for the same, or their persons
secured till they do.

and paid in money it exceed not 10. ^.
And that all fines not exceeding ten shillings shall be paid in money.

CHAP. V. COURTS.
THat the Affairs of this Jurisdiction may be the better carried on;

It is Agreed and Declared, that there be several Courts, for several purposes,
and of different constitutions and power.

And first of the General Court.
The General Courts constitution
THe General Court shall consist of the Governor, and Assistants, and Deputies
for each Town ship in this Jurisdiction, which Deputies shall be Annually
chosen, according to order of Court in that case provided, and shall be sent to
each General Court, with full power of all the Freemen deputed to them, and as
the Countries Representatives, together with the Magistrates, Power.
to consult of, and determine all such matters, and to make and establish all
such Laws and Orders as concern the public welfare of this Colony, the matter
of Election of Magistrates and other Officers only excepted, wherein every
Freeman is to give in his vote, according to the accustomed usage of this Court.

2. It is Enacted, that this General Court, ^
and all the Members thereof, shall meet and sit at Plymouth, on the first
tuesday in (...) Annually, (nothing extraordinary preventing) and that then
there shall be the Election of all our Magistrates, viz. a Governor and seven
Assistants, ^
and likewise the Election of two Commissioners for the United Colonies, ^
and our Treasurer, who shall be all chosen out of the Freemen, and by the free
Votes of the Freemen of this Corporation, and not otherwise.

And that at this Court also, the Deputies, Select men, Grand jurymen,
Constables, and Supervizors of the Highways, be presented to be established
in their respective places, all which being first dispatched, ^
then the Magistrates and Deputies shall continue together, to Consider and
Order all such other affairs of this Jurisdiction as fall within their
Cognizance, Trust and Power, until they shall see cause to dissolve or adjourn
the said Court unto another time.

3. It is also Ordered, That beside the said fixed Courts, (...) special
occasions
the Governor or in his absence, the Deputy Governor, and in their absence,
the greater part of the Magistrates of this Jurisdiction, shall have power to
Summon a General Court, either the whole body of Freemen, or their
Representatives at any time, as the urgent and extraordinary occasions of the
Jurisdiction, or any part thereof may require.

And if any of the said Magistrates, or Deputies shall without just cause,
either be absent at the first sitting of any of the said General Courts, (...)
without (...)
whether ordinary or extraordinary, or without leave depart, or disorde^ly
absent him or themselves from the service thereof, before the Court be
finished, he or they shall each of them pay twenty shillings, for a fine to the
Jurisdiction, for such absence or departure, ^
but if the absence or departure be mingled with Contempt, or wilful neglect,
the fine shall be increased, as the Court upon due consideration of the
offense, with the aggravations, shall judge meet.

4. And in regard that through Age, Inability of B^dy, or Vrgency of Occasions,
many of the Freemen cannot attend the Courts of ^lection;

Liberty is h^^^by granted to such of the Freemen as will not be there in
person, to send their Votes by Proxy, ^
viz. by the Deputies of their respective Towns; provided that such Votes be
given to the said Deputies in open Town-meeting, and shall by the Deputies, be
there sealed up severally (that is to say) Votes for Governor by themselves,
Assistants (...) themselves, etc. And that the Deputies also take a List of the
names of such as sent Votes by them, that they may answer for them when they
are called:

And that whosoever of the Freemen, do not appear at Election, in Person, or by
Proxy, he shall be for such neglect, Penalty of neglect.
amerced to the Treasury ten shillings.

5. Forasmuch as the Freemen of this Corporation, have been declared to be the
Associates of this Government, Freemens power
and have the privilege and power of chosing Officers, and by themselves or
their Representativ^s, together with the Magistrates, of making and Repealing
Laws, and managem^nt of ^he greatest concerns of this Commonweal.

It is therefore Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, That none
shall be admitted a Freeman of this Corporation, but such as are one and twenty
years of age at the least, and have the testimony of their neighbors, Who to
be admitted
that they are of sober and peaceable conversation, Orthodox in the
Fundamentals of Religion, and such as have also twenty pounds rateable Estate
(...) the least in the Government. And that the Court may be well informed,
that such as are to to be admitted Freemen are so qualified; (...)
they shall stand propounded a complete year, before they take up their
Freedom, (...) it be some person that is generally known and approved, and wh^^
or of whom the Court may make present improvement: And all Freemen to be taken
in at Election Courts only and in open Court.

6. And forasmuch as some corrupt Members may creep into the best and purest
Societies;

In what case to be (...)
If any Freeman of this Corporation, shall be discovered to be notoriously
vicious or scandalous, as common Liars, Drunkards, Swearers, Apostates from the
Fundamentals of Religion, or the like, or does manifestly appear to be
disaffected to this Government; upon legal and due conviction of all or any of
these, it shall be in the power of the General Court to Disfranchize him if
they see cause from the privilege of a Freeman.

And because it greatly concerns the good and Weal of the whole Colony, to have
a good choice made in the several Towns, of Select men, Deputies,
Grand-jury-men, Constables, etc. and it appears that some do abuse their
liberty in Voting for choice of such Officers, and are either (...) in their
choice;

Who to Vote in Town meetings for choice of O^ficers
It is therefore Enacted, That henceforth none shall have power to Vote on such
accounts in Town-meetings, but such as are Freemen of the Corporation, or
Freeholders of twenty pounds Rateable Estate, Orthodox in the Fundamentals of
Religion, of good Conversation, and having taken the Oath of Fidelity.

7. It is Enacted, That each Township in this Jurisdiction, do Annually Elect
and Chose one or two fit men out of the Freemen, Deputies to be annually elected
for their Deputies, with full power as aforesaid, to attend the service of the
General Court, and their Names presented to the Court per Constable
and the Adjournments thereof, or for the whole year, in pain of f^^ty
shillings, and the respective Constable, to return the Names of those so chosen
to the Court, in pain of twenty shillings to the Colonies use.

8. And if the Court to whom such Deputy or Deputies be presented, do upon the
taking notice of their Members, adjudge any of them to be unfit for such a
trust, In what case to (...) returne^ to the Town
then shall the Court return them with the reason thereof, unto the Town from
whence they were sent, that they may make choice of fitter persons to send in
their stead, as the opportunity will permit.

9. It is Ordered, etc. That nothing shall be concluded, and pass as an Act of
the General Court, ^
but by the consent and vote of the major part of the Court.

^
And the Governor, or in his absence the Deputy Governor, shall have a casting
Vote, whenever there shall be an Equi vote, either in the General Court, or
Court of Assistants.

10* That in case either of the Commissioners chosen, shall by Gods (...) to
attend the service thereof, The next Commissioner (...) in c^se
then the next in (...) for that choice shall attend that service in his stead.

11. And it is Ordered, That until the Court see cause for the Freemens annual
Electing of a Deputy Governor, The eldest Assistant to be Deputy Governor
the eldest Assistant shall supply that place i^ the Governors necessary or
unavoidable absence.

Secondly, Courts of Assistants or Magistrates.
FOr the better Administration of Justice;

It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof; That there
be and shall be a Court called the Court of Assistants or Magistrates* Courts
of Assist.
wherein all the Magistrates for this Jurisdiction shall meet and sit at
Plymouth, at least three times a year, namely the first tuesday in March, the
first tuesday in July, and the last tuesday in October, to hear, where and when
to sit
examine, and determine all Capital, Criminal, and Civil causes according to
Law, their power
and to receive and try all Appeals duly brought unto them from any Inferior
Court, or Sentence passed: And to call all the Inhabitants, Freemen, Planters,
or others to account, for the breach of any Laws or Orders established, or for
other misdemeanors, and to Censure them according to the quality of the
offense and Law in such case provided, and to Summons Juries of Inquests, and
Trials out of the Town-ships in this Jurisdiction, and to make and constitute
Clerks or other needful Officers, etc. in which meetings of the Magistrates,
less then four Magistrates shall not be accounted a Court.

2. And that Justice be not deferred, nor the Country needlessly charged;

It shall be lawful for the Governor or in his absence the Deputy Governor to
call a Court of Assistants, Liberty to call a Count of (...) on special occas^on
for the Trial of any Malefactor in Capital causes, or upon any other weighty
occasion, as he shall see cause.

3. That it shall be lawful for the Governor, Deputy Governor, or any two
Magistrates, Liberty to call a (...)
to call a special Court at the Request of any Stranger, or Forreigner for
Trial, in a case of considerable value; provided such Stranger put in Security
to defray the charge thereof, at which Court there shall not be less then three
Magistrates.

4. And that it shall be lawful for any Stranger, Liberty for (...) strang^r to
(...) anot^^r
upon Legal Summons, to enter any Action in any of these Courts, against any
person that is not an Inhabitant amongst us.

5. That the Bench shall have power to determine all such matters of Equity, as
cannot be Relieved by the Common Law* The Bench (...) power to determine
matters of (...)
as the forfeiture of an Obligation, breach of Covenants without great damage
or the like matters of apparent Equity.

6. It is also Ordered; That in all Laws which are or shall be made, where no
fine or penalty is expressed and limited, Laws without penalty ar^ liable to
reasonable penalties by the Court
all Transgressors are and shall be liable to such reasonable penalties or
punishments as the Court of Magistrates duly weighing the nature of the
offense, with the circumstances, shall judge meet.

Thirdly, The Court of Select-men.
FOr Prevention of unnecessary charge and travail to the Country, and
encumbrance to other Courts, by small causes;

It is Ordered, etc. That three or five fit men be Annually chosen by papers,
Select men's Election, Approbation
out of the Freemen in each Town-ship in this Government, and presented at
Election Court, who being approved by the Magistrates as Select-men and sworn,
and power
to the faithful discharge of their trust; shall have power to hear and
determine, by their best discretion, according to the Law here established, all
causes wherein either party is an Inhabitant of their Town, and the Debt,
Trespass or Damage, does not exceed forty shillings, and have hereby power to
send for Parties and Witnesses by Summons, which may be served by the party, or
Attachments directed to the Constable, as the case may require; as also to
administer Oaths to Witnesses, and also to grant Execution for the Leavying of
such Debts, or Damages for the use of the person damnified.

2. And if the party being legally Summoned, do not appear to Answer, the
Plaintiff shall notwithstanding have his Action proceed, etc. as is in that
case for other Courts before provided: Process of Action
see tit. Actions.

But where the party shall be Attached, and refuse to give Bond for his
appearance, or being Sentenced, refuse to give satisfaction, and no Goods
appear in the same Town where the party dwells, the Select men may then charge
the Constable with the party, to carry him before a Magistrate, to be forthwith
proceeded with according to Law, and not by the Select men, to be committed to
Prison in any case.

In wha^ case two of them may issue
3. And where any of the three Select men may be party in the case, or absent,
by an unavoidable act of Gods providence, then the other two are empowered to
issue the case, or the other Select men where there is no Magistrate; and the
Select men to have three shillings of the Plaintiff for every case they or any
two of them where there is but three agree to give verdict upon. Their (...)


And that henceforth no Debt or Action proper to their cognizance be received
(except in cases of Defamation or Battery) into any other Court but by Appeal.

Liberty of Appeal to the next Court of Assistants, being hereby granted to the
grieved party, either before or after one review of his case; provided he
tender his Appeal, Libert^ of Appeal
and put in Security before the Select men or one of them, to prosecute his
Appeal to effect, and to satisfy all damages before Execution as granted,
which shall not be till twelve hours after Judgment.

4. It is further Ordered, That all Appeals with the Security as aforesaid,
shall be Recorded at the charge of the party Appealing, and certified unto the
Court to which they are made, With the (...)
together with all the Testimonies according to which they gave in their
Verdict, and the Court Appealed to, shall judge according to those Testimonies
and no other; and if they find matter of Fact and Judgment according to Law
with the other Court, they shall not revoke the Sentence or Judgment, but
abate or increase damages as shall be judged right.

And that any of the Magistrates or Select men where no Magistrate is, at the
Appealants request, grant a Precept for the Defendants appearance at the Court
Appealed to; And if such Appealant do not prosecute his Appeal to effect
according to Law, shall besides his Bond to the party forfeit forty shillings
fine to the Country for such neglect.

It is further Ordered, That the Select men shall also hear and determine any
Difference, Debt or Damage whatsoever arising between any of the English in
their Town, and any of the Indians, except matters of a Capital or Criminal
Nature, and title of Land: Select men^ power in reference to India^^
Liberty also being granted to any of them grieved at the Sentence there
passed, to Appeal to the next Court of Assistants, and to be directed therein
by the Select men.

CHAP. VI. Presentiments, Inditements, Jurors and Juries.
IT is Ordered by this Court, That no person shall be Indicted, Presentiments and
Complaints to be made with in a year
Presented or Informed against to any Court or Magistrate within this
Jurisdiction for the breach of any penal Law, or any other misdemeanour, the
forfeiture whereof belongs to the Country, unless the said Indictment or
Information, etc. be made and exhibited within one year after the offense be
committed or else to be void and of none effect; provided always this Law
shall not extend to any Capital Offenses, or any Crimes that may concern loss
of Member or Banishment, or to any Treasonable Plottings or Conspiracies
against this Government, or to any Felonies above twenty shillings.

Nor shall it hinder any persons grieved for any wrong done to him, his Wife,
Children or Servants, or Estate, real or personal, but that every such person
shall have such remedies as formerly he might or ought to have.

2. It is Ordered; That if any person shall be Indicted of, or legally Charged
with any Capital Crime (who is not then in durance) and shall withdraw or
refuse to render his person to some Magistrate or Officer in this Jurisdiction,
Persons (...) must not withdr^w but surrender themselves
within one month after three Proclamations made publicly in the Town where he
did formerly usually abide, their being a full Month betwixt Proclamation and
Proclamation; his Lands and Goods shall be seized to the use of the
Jurisdiction (and Ordered with due respect to his family, as the Court of
Magistrates shall judge meet) till he make his lawful appearance; and such
withdrawing of himself shall be and stand in stead of one Witness to prove the
Crime charged, unless he can make it appear to the Court, that he was
necessarily hindered.

JVRORS and JVRIES.
IT is Enacted by the Court and the Authority thereof; That a Grand Inquest of
able and discreet men be Impannelled by the Governor and Ass^stants, Grand
jury to be Impannelled and Chosen
which are to be chosen out of the several Townships of this Government, as by
Warrant shall be directed to them, to serve His Majesty by inquiring into, and
presenting the breach of such wholesome Laws and Ordinances as are or sh^^l be
here established, and all such Misdemeanors as manifestly tend to the (...)
and detriment of Religion, Their duty
Civility, Peace, Society or Neighborhood they shall know or be informed of,
upon the Testimony of any one or more Witnesses upon Oath, to be committed by
any person or persons within this Jurisdiction, and to do any other service
which shall on His Majesty's behalf be required of them at such Courts and
times as shall by Warrant from the Governor or Magistrates be required of
them* Provided no person whatsoever, shall be bound to Inform, Present, or
Reveal any private Crime or Offense, wherein there is no peril or danger to
this Colony, or any Member thereof, when any necessary tie of Conscience binds
him to secrecy; unless it be in Testimonies lawfully required of them.

And every Grand-juror shall be allowed by their respective Towns two shillings
sixpence a day, for their time and charge whilst they attend any of the
several Courts, Fees
except the Courts of Election whereat they are presented to be sworn.

Penalty for not serving
And that such as refuse to serve on the Grand Inquest, being orderly Chosen,
shall be fined forty shillings to the Colonies use, (...) such as shall absent
themselves from attending their service at any of the Courts, they shall be
warned unto, shall be fined ten shillings unless they give sufficient reason
for such their absence.

Petty Jurors impannelled and sworn to find according to their evidence
2. That Petty Juries be Summoned by the Governor, or some other of the
Magistrates at such Courts as there may be occas^on, and be impannelled and
sworn truly to try between party and party, and shall f^nde the matter of ^^ct
with the damages and cost, according to their evidence, or truly to try
between our Sovereign Lord the King, and any Prisoner brought to the Bar, and
the Judges shall declare the Sentence, or direct the Jury to find according to
Law; and in all cases wherein the Law is obscure, so as the Jury cannot be
satisfied therein, they have liberty to present a special Verdict, viz. If the
Law be so in such a point we find for the Plaintiff, but if the Law be
otherwise, we find for the Defendant, in which case the determination does
properly belong to the Court. Liberty to g^^e a special Verd^ct
And all Jurors shall have liberty in matter of sect, if they cannot find the
main issue, yet to f^nde and present in their Verdict so much as they can; the
Foremans allowance being one shilling, and s^x pence a piece to the rest of the
Jurors for every Action that stands entered after they are sworn.

CHAP. VII. CONSTABLES.
IT is Enacted by the Court, etc. Constables Annually chosen
That in every Town in this Government, shall be Annually chosen one or more
fit men for Constables; whose Names shall by the Deputies of the Towns, and to
take oath
be returned to the Election Court, and shall there, or within a week after the
Court present himself to a Magistrate to take Oath.

2. That whosoever being chosen to the office of a Constable, does refuse to
serve therein, Penalty f^r refusing to serve
or will not take the Oath appertaining to that Office, he shall be amerced the
sum of four pounds, the one half to the Colony, and the other half to the
public use of the Town where he dwells; and the Town forthwith to choose
another.

3. And because a Constables place, though a place of trust, is also
burdensome;

It is Ordered; That if any man have borne the Office of a Constable, he shall
not be compelled to serve in the same Office, in the same Town, None to be made
consta^le twice in (...)

And (...) from (...) Military (...)


nor any other in this Government to which he may remove, in seven years
after; and that all Constables shall be freed from Training, and Military
Watches.

4. That if any Constable within this Government, have occasion to go out of
the Town^ship wherein he is Constable, for some time, Constable shall mak^ his
deputy
he shall have power to depute, and by due satisfaction procure another meet
person in his stead, as his Deputy, who shall execute the Constables place
during his absence, a^ effectually as he himself might do; provided that the
person whom he so deputeth, be not one that has served in the place within two
^ears before, except he be willing; And in case any Constable shall neglect to
provide and depute one in his stead, as aforesaid, to forfeit ten shillings for
every default.

5. That the gathering of Country Rates, Town Rates, Ministers Rates, also the
leavying of fines in the respective Towns, ^
and serving of Executions, by Warrant from any Lawful Authority here
established, shall belong unto the Office of a Constable, together with the
serving of such other Warrants and Summons, as shall be by the said Authority
directed to him; and shall have twelve pence for serving a Summons, Serve
Summons
two shillings sixp^nce for serving an Attachment, in ^and to be paid by the
Plaintiff, and returned again unto him by the Constable in case he fail in
serving thereof.

Marshals and Constables Directions.
6. THat Justice may be the better Executed, the Jurisdictions occasions
carried on, and that the Marshal and other Off^cers may know how to demean
themselves in their places;

It is Ordered; That in case of Rates, and Fines to be leavied, and in case of
Debts and Executions in Civil Actions, ^
the Officer shall first demand the Sum due of the party or at his house or
place of usual abode, but upon refusal or non-payment, he shall have power to
leavie the same upon any Goods liable to such Leavie or Execution wheresoever
it shall be; and if he be to take the person he may do the like, if upon demand
he shall refuse to render himself: And whatsoever charges the Officer in any
such case shall necessarily be put unto, in leavying or transporting the Goods
or Matters leavied unto the Treasurer or party concerned, who is to receive the
same, and leavy necessary charge
he shall leavie the said Charges also, as he does the Debt, Assessment or
Fine; Provided it shall not be lawful for any such Officer to leavie any man's
necessary Bedding, Good^ exempt from execution.
Apparel, Tools, Arms, or such Implements of House-hold-stuffe as serve for his
necessity, without express direction from the Court or some one of the
Magis^rates: But in such case he shall leavie his Land or Person according to
Law; and in no case shall the Officer be put to seek out any man's Estate
further then his place of abode, but if the party will not, or does not
discover his Goods, or Lands to a sufficient value, the Officer may take his
person, who shall be kept in durance at his own charge till he make discovery
of his Estate to satisfy the same, if he be solvent, but if he be in^olvent
then at the Creditors charge.

Officer doing wrong to make satisfaction
And it is also Ordered; That if any Officer shall do injury to any by color of
his Office, in these or any other cases, he shall be liable to make
restitution, upon complaint by Action or Information.

And it is further Ordered, That the Constabl^ or other Officer, that shall not
faithfully Collect such Rates, Assessments, Fines, or Debts and Dues, as shall
from time to time be committed to him, or required of him by order of any
lawful Authority here established, or that shall not attend his Order, to pay
or deliver the same so Collected unto the Treasurer, or any other person or
persons concerned therein, he shall be liable to make good all the damages that
comes thereby unto the party or parties wronged, and to suffer such punishment
by fine to the Country according to the trespass.

7. It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That the Constable shall
whip or punish any to be punished by Order of Authority, Constables to whip
(where there is not another Officer appointed to do it) in their own Towns,
unless they can get another to do it.

8. It is further Ordered; That any and every person tendered to any Constable
of this Jurisdiction, To receive and convey offenders
by any Constable or other Officer of our own, or belonging to any foreign
Jurisdiction in this Country or by Warrant from any such Authority, shall be
presently received and conveyed forthwith from Constable to Constable till they
be brought to the place to which they are sent, or before some Magistrate of
this Jurisdiction, who shall dispose of them as the justice of the cause shall
require; And all Hues and cries shall be duly received and diligently pursued
to full effect: and where no Magistrate is near, To (...) and cries
every Constable shall have full power to make, sign, and put forth Pursuits
or Hues and cries after Murderers, Man slayers, Peace-breakers, Thieves,
Robbers, Burgla^ers, and in case (...) put the^^ forth
and other Capital Offenders; as also to Apprehend without Warrant, to
ap^reh^nd offenders
such as are overtaken with Drink, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Vagrant Persons,
Night-walkers, provided they be taken in the manner, either by the sight of the
Constable, or by present information by others: As also to make search for all
such persons, either on the Sabbath day or other, when there shall be occasion,
in all Houses Licensed to sell either Beer or Wine, or in any other suspected
or disordered places, and those to Apprehend and keep* in safe Custody till
opportunity serve to b^ing them before one of the next Magistrates to further
Examination, provided, when any Constable is employed by any of the Magistrates
for Apprehending of any person, he shall not do it without Warrant in Writeing:
And if any person shall refuse to Assist any Constable or Marshal, All to (...)
the Common (...) Marshal in pain of 10.^,
in the Execution of his Office, in any of the things aforementioned, or
otherwise as occasion shall require, being by him required thereto, they shall
pay for neglect thereof ten shillings to the use of the Country, to be leavied
by Warrant from any Magistrate, before whom any such Offender shall be brought;
and if it appear by Good Testimony, that any shall wilfully, obstinately, and
contemptuously refuse or neglect to Assist any Constable, Wilful negle^t 40.^^
as is before expressed, he shall pay to the use of the Country forty shillings.

And that no man may plead Ignorance for such neglect or refusal;

It is Ordered, Constables Staff
That every Constable shall have a Black Staff tipped with Brass, as a Badge
of his Office, which as he has opportunity, he shall take with him when he
goes to discharge any part of his Office, yet notwithstanding, the want of his
Staff shall not hinder him from Executing his Office in any kind, if
occasionally he be without it, nor exempt any from assisting him therein, that
may know him to be the Constable.

And if any Magistrate, Constable, or other, upon urgent occasion, shall refuse
to do their best endeavor, Not raising Hues and cries in Capital cases fined
in raising and prosecuting Hues and cries by foot, and if need b^ by Horse,
after such as have committed Capital Crimes, they shall forfeit for every such
offense to the use aforesaid forty shillings.

9. It is Ordered, etc. That the Constables in their respective Town-ships,
shall warn Town meetings of their Inhabitants, Constab. to warn Town-meetings
as they shall receive Order from any of the Magistrates, Select-men or
Deputies of their Towns upon any due occasion to them seeming for such Town
meetings, in pain of twenty shillings for his neglect.

It is Ordered that three or five men be chosen in each Town-ship of this
Jurisdiction, by papers, The Towns to chose Raters
to make Assessments or Rates upon all the Inhabitants of their Town, as there
shall be need or occasion, for defraying of the public charge of the Country,
or the particular charges arising in their Town-ships according to Order of
Court in such case provided, or for leavying any fine laid upon the Town, and
if the Inhabitants of the Town do not come together upon the Constables
warning, and chose Raters, the Town shall forfeit five pounds to the Countries
use. In pain of 5 ^^.


And if the Raters so Elected, do not make such Rates committed and ordered to
them to be made, The Raters neglect
and transcribe and deliver or cause to be delivered a fair copy thereof to
their Constable, within fourteen days or sooner if the occasion shall require,
shall forfeit twenty shillings a piece, and if their neglect be mingled with
Contempt, and penalty
forty shillings a piece to the Country.

And it is further Ordered, That the Court or any two of the Magistrates may,
in case the Court to ch^se Raters
as need shall require, upon defect of any Towns choosing Raters, or the Raters
neglect to make such Rates, as by Order of Court are committed to them, make
choice of three men to make such Rate.

Fees for distress
10 It is also Ordered etc. That the Constable is empowered to make distress on
the Goods of such as neglect to pay their part of any such Rates as aforesaid,
in unto him or his Order in the Town ship, and to have one shilling for such
distress. And if he cannot get in all the Rates, Assessments, Liberty to gat^^r
(...) after his (...)
committed to him during the time of his Office, he shall notwithstanding the
expiration of his Office, have power with the Assistance of the next Constable
to leavie by distress all such Rates and leavies.

11. And in case the Constable neglect together in any of the said Rates,
Penalty (...) collecting of Rates
within forty days next after he has the said Rate, or sooner upon special
occasion, he shall be liable to pay it himself, and to be Recovered by Suit or
distraint on his goods, especially for such Rates as are not gathered and
brought in to the Treasurers Order, according to the time mentioned in his
Warrant; which if the Treasurer neglect, he shall be answerable to the Country
for the same; And if the Constable be not able to make payment, it shall be
Lawful for the Treasurer to distreyne for all Arrearages of Rates and Leavyes
any man or men of that Town where the Constables are unable, and that man or
men upon request to the Court, shall have Order to collect the same again
equally of the Town with his just damage for the same.

12. And for the more ^^ual and ready way of raising means for defraying (...)
public charges of all sorts;

Rules for making rates
It is Ordered that all Rates and Assessments, shall be equally proportioned by
the Raters, according to each man's different personal Abilities, Faculties and
(...) personal and real, being or reputed to be the Estate of each person in
the same Town, or otherwise under their Custody or managing, according to the
just valuation as near as may be, viz. Lands improved by Plough or Hough, or by
cutting and taking of Timber from it, or Renting it, and all Meadow Lands, and
Cattle of all sorts, Mills, Ships, Barques, Ketches, and other Vessels,
Merchantable Goods and other known Estate whatsoever, (Household Stuff and
Goods of that kind, provided and kept for that use and not for Trade, only
excepted.)

And for encouraging of Traffic;

It is Ordered, That Barques, Ketches and other Vessels, with what Stock is
employed in Traffic at home and abroad, shall be Rated but at the one half of
their value.

13. It is Enacted by the Court; That the Select men and the Constable or his
Deputy in each respective Town in this Government, shall diligently look after
such as sleep or play about the Meeting house, in times of the public Worship
of God on the Lord's Day, Constabl^ and Select (...) after such as sleep or play
about the meeting house (...) Lord's Day
and take notice of their Names, and return such of them to the Court, who do
not after warning given to them reform; as also such as practice unnecessary
violent Riding on the Lords day.

CHAP. VIII. Minister^ Maintenance.
WHereas this General Court taking into their serious consideration, the great
defect that either is or would be in any Town-ships of this Jurisdiction, where
there is wanting an Able, Godly, Teaching Ministry, and the great prejudice to
the souls of many like to ensue, and being desirous according to our duties,
that such defects should not be, for want of due encouragement to such as
either are or shall be employed in so good a work of the Lord; And in
consideration of the several Town-ships granted by the Court were so
accommodated, as that they might receive such a number of families as might
comfortably maintain the public worship of God there* do therefore judge, that
the whole, (...) Church and Town are mutually engaged to support the same;

And do therefore Order and Decree, That in whatsoever Town-ship there is or
shall be an Able, Godly, Teaching Ministry, which is approved by this
Government, that there three or four men be chosen by the Inhabitants, or in
case of their neglect, by any three or more of the Magistrates, to make an
equal and just Proportion or Rate upon the Inhabitants, according to their
Estates and Abilities, to make such convenient maintenance for his comfortable
attendance on his work, as shall be agreed upon by the Church in each Town-ship
where any is, with the concurrance of the rest of the Inhabitants, if it may be
had, or by the Magistrates aforesaid, in case of their apparent neglect; And
that distress be made by the Constable as in other just cases, upon such as
refuse or neglect to pay such their due proportions: But in case any Town
either by a free Contribution, or other good and honorable way, do effect the
end aforementioned, this Law not to be binding to them.

And forasmuch as it appears to be greatly inconvenient, that the Ministers
should be troubled to gather in the Rates for their maintenance, and it may be
an occasion to prejudice some persons against them or their Ministry;

It is Ordered, by this Court, That at June Court yearly, two meet persons in
each Town be appointed by the said Court, unless the Towns have provided, and
do present them, who shall take care of gathering in their Ministers
maintenance for that year, by in^^ting the people to their duty in that
respect, demanding it when due, and if need be by procuring distraint upon the
Estate of any that shall neglect or refuse to pay their Rates or Proportions
toward his support; and in case any Minister ma^e scruple to receive what is
so raised, it shall nevertheless be gathered as abovesaid, and be disposed as
the Court shall Order or advise for the good of the place.

Whereas it has been and is the pious care, and true intent of this Court,
that all such Plantations and Town-ships as are by them granted, should
maintain the public Sabbath Worship of God, and the Preaching of the Word, and
do to that and afford them such proportions of Land as may accommodate such a
society as may be able to maintain the some, and yet through the corruption or
sinful negligence of many, or most of the Inhabitants of some Plantations, they
do or may content themselves to live without the Ministry of the Word, to the
great dishonor of God, and danger of their Souls; and there being great reason
to fear that many may be acted therein by worldly and covetous Principles;

It is therefore Enacted by this Court, etc. That in such Plantations and
Town-ships, where no Minister is residing, especially if it appear that the
generallity of the Inhabitants are remiss in the obtaining one; The General
Court may and shall henceforth yearly impose a certain sum to be raised by
Rate, upon the Inhabitants of such Plantations or Town ships, which shall be
kept as a Stock for building a Meeting house, and for encouragement of a
Minister to labor amongst them, or other such pious use as the Court may
improve it in for their good.

2. And it is Enacted by this Court and Authority thereof, That no public
meeting be set up within this Government but such as the Court shall approve
of; No public meeting to be set up without approbation
wherein they shall have special care, that they allow such only as are
Orthodox in the Fundamentals of Religion, and in such places as it may not be
destructive, nor too much prejudicial to any already approved.

Education of Children.
FOrasmuch as the good Education of Children and Youth, is of singular use and
benefit to any Commonwealth; and whereas many Parents and Masters either
through an over-respect to their own occasions and business, or not duly
considering the good of their Children and Servants, have too much neglected
their duty in their Education, whilst they are young and capable of Learning;

It is Ordered, That the Deputies and Select men of every Town, shall have a
vigilant eye from time to time over their Brethren and Neighbors, to see that
all Parents and Masters do duly endeavor, by themselves or others, to teach
their Children and Servants as they grow capable, so much learning as through
the blessing of God they may attain, at least to be able duly to read the
Scriptures, and other good profitable Books printed in the English Tongue
(being their Native Language) and the knowledge of the Capital Laws, and in
some competent measure to understand the main Grounds and Principles of
Christian Religion, necessary to Salvation, by causing them to learn some short
Orthodox Catechism without Book, or otherwise instructing them as they may be
able to give a due answer to such plain and ordinary Questions, as may by them
or others be propounded to them concerning the same: And further that all
Parents and Masters do breed and bring up their Children and Apprentises in
some honest lawful calling, labor or employment, that may be profitable for
themselves, or the Country; and if after warning and admonition given by any of
the Deputies, or Select men, unto such Parents or Masters, they shall still
remain negligent in their duty, in any the particulars aforementioned, whereby
Children or Servants may be in danger to grow Barbarous, Rude and Stubborn, and
so prove Pests instead of Blessings to the Country; That then a fine of ten
shillings shall be leavied on the Goods of such negligent Parent or Master, to
the Towns use, except extreme poverty call for mitigation of the said fine.

And if in three Months after that, there be no due care taken and continued,
for the Education of such Children and Apprentises as aforesaid, then a fine of
twenty shillings to be leavied on such Delinquents Goods, to the Towns use,
except as aforesaid.

And Lastly, if in three Months after that, there be no due Reformation of the
said neglect, then the said Select men, with the help of two Magistrates, shall
take such Children or Servants from them, and place them with some Masters for
years, (boys till they come to twenty one, and Girls eighteen years of age)
which will more strictly educate and govern them according to the rules of this
Order.

2. For maintaining a Free School, vide The profits of Fishing at Cape Cod.
Chap. 11. Numb. 6.

Mispending of Time.
IT is Enacted by this Court, etc. That no Person, House-holder or other, shall
spend his time idly and unprofitably, under pain of such punishment as the
Court or Assistants shall think meet to inflict: The Select men (...) inform
the Court of them that lives id^ly
And the Se^lect Men of the several Towns are hereby required to give in a List
of the Names of such as mispend their time, whether House-holders or others;
and of all single persons that live from under Family Government, Will not be
Governed
or will not be Governed by their Parents or Masters where they live, that so
the Court may proceed with them as the case may require.

Marriages, Births and Burials, to be Registered.
IT is also Enacted, etc. R^gister to be kep^ o^ all marriages, births and
burials
That the Town Clerk in every Town in this Government, shall keep a Register of
the day and year of the Marriage, Birth and Burial of every Man Woman and
Child in that Town-ship, and shall have for the Registring three pence a
piece; And if any Father, or Mother, or person next in Relation, do neglect to
give an account to the Town Clerk, of the Name, and Birth day of their Child
within one Month after it is born, he or they shall be amerced for such neglect
three shillings, one half to the Colony, and the other half to the Town Clerk
that complains of it:

And whosoever shall neglect to give in their Names, and the day of their
Marriage to the said Town Clerk, within one Month after they were Married,
Exhibited at March Court yearly
shall forfeit for their neglect three shillings as abovesaid: in like manner
shall any Head of a Family, that neglects to give an account of any that are
Buried out of their Family within a Month. And the Town Clerk or Register
keeper of every Town, shall exhibit a true and perfect copy unto March Court
Annually, of all the Marriages, Births and Burials of the year past: Town Clerk
to publish Marriages
And lastly, That the Town Clerk, shall publish all Contracts of Marriages in
the Town, and shall have twelve pence as his Fee, for every such Orderly
Publication.

2. And for prevention of unlawful Marriages;

It is Ordered, That no person shall be joined in Marriage, before the
intention of the parties proceeding therein has been published three times at
some public meeting, How to be published
in the Towns where the parties or either of them do ordinarily reside, or by
setting up in Writeing, upon some Post of their Meeting house door in public
view, there to stand as it may be easily read, by the space of fourteen days.

3. That none shall be allowed to Marry that are under the Covert of Parents,
Guardians, Masters, or Overseers, without their consent and approbation.

None shall inveagle or steal the Affections of any maid under Covert without
consent of etc.
And Whosoever shall inveagle or endeavor to steal the Affections of any man's
Daughter, Pupil or Maidservant without his consent or leave, he shall be
punished by fine, so it extend not five pounds, or by Corporal punishment at
discretion of the Bench and according to the nature of the Offense. But if a
meet Marriage be orderly proposed, and any Master or Guardian, out of any
sinistre end, or covetous desire, will not upon reasonable terms suffer it to
be; it shall be in the power of the two next Magistrates, upon complaint, to
hear and determine the case, as they judge equal between both parties.

4. And as the Ordinance of Marriage is honorable amongst all, so should it be
accordingly solemnized;

It is therefore Ordered, etc. That no person in this Jurisdiction, shall join
any Persons together in Marriage but the Magistrate, Who may solemnize Marriage
or such other as the Court shall Authorize in such place where no Magistrate
is near, nor shall any join themselves in Marriage, but before some Magistrate,
or person Authorized as aforesaid; nor shall any Magistrate, or other person to
be Authorized, Nor without publication
join or suffer any persons to join together in Marriage in their presence,
before such persons Publication according to Law.

5. And that no man shall strike his Wife or any Woman her Husband, No man to
strike his wife or woman her hu^band
on penalty of such fine, not exceeding ten pounds for one offense, or such
suitable Corporal Punishment as the Court shall determine.

CHAP. IX. Town-Affaires.
IT is Enacted, etc. That every Town-ship in this Government, shall have
liberty and power to meet together, and make such Town Orders in prudential
matters as they shall find needful; and also to make such Rates and
Assessments as they have occasion for; Provided, that no Town Order do infringe
or be repugnant unto any Order of this Court.

2. That none be allowed to be Housekeepers, or build any Cottage or dwelling
House, until they have allowance of the Governor, some Magistrate, or the
Select men of that Town; Who shall be allowed to be Housekeepers
And that a speceal care be taken, that no single person that is of evil
conversation, or has not Arms to serve the Country, be suffered to keep such
house or live alone; And if upon due warning, such person do not put himself
into some well Governed Family, it shall be in the power of the next
Magistrate, or the Select men of the Town where he lives, to put him to service.

3. That if any person, whether Master of any Vessel or other, do bring in any
into any Town or Plantation in this Government, He that bring^ in any like to
be a charge (...) secure the To^n
without the approbation of the said Town or Townsmen, or do entertain or
receive any that come in, and are not so allowed, but are at the time of their
comeing, or within a Month after excepted against by the Constable or some one
of the Select men of the Town, he or they that so bring in, or entertain any
such persons likely to be burdensome or chargeable, shall either carry them
away again, so as to free the Town of them, or give Security to free the said
Town from charge concerning him, whilst he is there resident.

But if any man bring (...) Apprentise, or Covenant Servant for years, But if a
(...) only (...) time
that is at present sound and well, Bonds shall not be required of such Master,
but if his Servant fall sick or lame, he shall be maintained by his Masters
particular charge, during the date of his Indentures or Covenant, but shall
afterward be relieved by the Town.

4. That every Town in this Government shall maintain their own poor; And if
any that have relief from any Town, Poor men's children to be provided for
do not employ their Children as they ought toward the getting of a
livelihood; or if there be any other Family that cannot or does not provide
competently for their Children, whereby they are exposed to want and extremity,
It shall be in the power of the Select men of each Town, to place out such
Children into good Families where they may be better brought up and provided
for.

5. That if any person come to live in any Town in this Government, ^
and be there received and entertained three Months, if by sickness, lameness
or the like, he comes to want relief, he shall be provided for by that Town
wherein he was so long entertained, and shall be reputed their proper charge,
unless such person have within the said three Months been warned by the
Constable, or some one or more of the Select men of that Town, not there to
abide without leave first obtained of the Town, and certify the same to the
next Court of Assistants, who shall otherwise Order the person or charge
arising about him, according to justice.

6. But if any Children or elder persons shall be sent, or come from one Town
to another, to be Nursed, Schooled, or otherwise Educated, or to a Physician or
Chyrurgeon to be cured of any disease or wound, ^
etc. if such come to stand in need of Relief, they shall be Relieved and
maintained by the Town ship whence they came, and not by that Town ship where
they are so Nursed, Educated or at Cure; And in case they come or be sent from
any place out of this Colony; then if the Nurse, Educator, Physician or
Chyrurgeon do not take good security to discharge the Town wherein he lives
from all cost and charge, which shall or may befall concerning them, he that so
received them shall be the Towns Security in their behalf.

None shall come in to (...) without leave
7. That no person shall come into any Town or Peculiar in this Government to
live and inhabit, without the leave and approbation of the Governor and two of
the Assistants at the least.

8. That whosoever being resident within this Government, shall refuse to take
the Oath of Fidelity, Penalty of refusing the Oath of Fidelity
being orderly called thereunto, either by the Constable or any Magistrate; or
the Select men where he dwells, he shall be amersed to the Colonies use, in the
sum of five pounds, which if he cannot or will not pay he shall be punished by
Imprisonment or otherwise as the court shall order:

9. It is ordered etc. That in every Town-ship of this Government there shall
be a good sufficient Pound from time to time, for Impounding of such Horses, In
every Town a Pound
Cattle or Swine; as trespass any man's Corn field, or other enclosure. And
whosoever impounds any such, shall give present notice to the owner if he be
known, or otherwise they shall be cried on the two next Lecture days or
public meetings, and if any of them escape out of the Pound, the owner if
known shall pay all damages according to Law. And every person or persons
having notice given, or otherwise left in Writeing at their house, Cattle to be
Repleved or damage satisfied
or place of their usual abode, of any of their Cattle impounded or otherwise
restrained, shall forthwith give satisfaction to the party so wronged, or
otherwise Replevie their Cattle, and prosecute the same according to Law, upon
peril of suffering all the loss and damage that shall come to their Cattle, by
standing in the Pound or other lawful place of restraint: But if the owners be
not known or found, after such Beast be cried as aforesaid, or inquiry made
through the generality of the Town, with notice given to some of the Neighbors
of the next Towns, for their occasional inquiry likewise, that the owner may
take notice, make his claim, and pay the damage and charge, and if yet no owner
be found, then after due apprisement by indifferent men chosen by a Magistrate,
or any two of the Select men of the place, and the same Recorded in the Town
book, sale to be so far made that the charges be fully paid, and the remainder
kept till the owner be known, and the rest of the Cattle first marked to
distinguish them, to be again turned into Woods.

10. That if any shall Heard Cattle, on Lands that are another man's in
propriety, though not enclosed, and will not forbear so to do, Trespass to
Heard on any man's propriety
being warned by the owner or present possessor of such Lands, it shall be
accounted a Trespass Action.

11. Whereas complaint is made, that much Timber is fall'd and let lie and rot
on the ground, and not timely improved by such as falled it, to the great waste
of Timber, and spoil of the Commons;

It is therefore Enacted by this Court, etc. That whosoever shall fall any
Timber on the Common, Timber filled and not improved forfeit
and does not either Square or Rive it within six Months after it is falled, it
shall be lawful for any other of that Town to improve it as they see meet.

12. It is Ordered, etc. That every Town in this Government, Woolf traps in
every Town
shall have and keep B^ited and well tended two Woolf Traps in six seasons, on
penalty of five pounds.

That if any Indian do kill a Woolf and bring his Head to the Constable in
whose Town-ship he killed it, he shall have a Coat of Duffils, Indian^ (...),
for killing Woolfes
or fifteen shillings in other pay, by the Town in whose Bounds it was killed;
and if killed in this Jurisdiction, and not within any Town Bounds, then to be
paid by the Treasurer.

And if any English kill any Wolves in any Town ship, English paid by the Town
and bring their Heads to the Constable, they shall be paid thirty shillings
for every such Woolf by the Town wherein they were killed.

13. It is Ordered, etc. That every Town within this Government, Every Town to
^a^e a Standard for Corn
shall have a Standard for Measures of Corn, made and sealed by the General
Standard at Plymouth, and that round measures only shall be allowed.

Miller and Mills.
IT is Ordered, etc. Millers free from Training
That all Millers (that is such as are then engaged to the Tendance of a
Grist-mill) shall be free from Trainings and ordinary Watchings.

That no Miller shall take above the sixteenth part of the Corn he grindes for
Toll, Toll, Weights and Schoals
and that every Miller shall have always ready in his Mill Weights and
Schoals, provided at his own charge, to weigh Corn to and from the Mill if men
desire it.

That every Miller in this Government, shall keep in his Mill, Toll Dishes
two Toll Dishes, so made and sealed that one will hold a just Pottle upheaped,
and the other a Quart upheaped,; and shall pay ten shillings a Month, for what
time they use unsealed Toll Dishes, if complained of.

Cask and Coopers.
THat all Cask made or to be made in this Government, for Beef, Gage of Cask
Pork, Fish, Oil or any sort of Liquor, be made according to the Assize and
Gage of London; And that they be made of sound and well seasoned Timber; And
that every Cooper do Brand-mark his Cask with a distinguishing Brand-mark,
^oopers Bran^
on penalty of the forfeiture of all Cask that are not so made and marked, the
one half to the Informer, and the other half to the Colony.

Leather and Shoomakers.
UPon consideration of the damage or injury which many sustain by the ill
Tanning of Leather, and by the Shoo-makers ill making it up into Shoos and
Boots;

It is by this Court Ordered, That in every Plantation within this
Jurisdiction, where either Tanner or Shoo-maker, is employed in their Trades,
one or two Sealers shall be chosen and appointed as the occasions require, who
shall be under Oath faithfully (according to their best ability) to discharge
their trust, and shall seal no Leather but such as they judge sufficiently
Tanned, and fit to be wrought out, and sold in Shoos and Boots. And that every
such Plantation shall have two Seals, to distinguish between good Leather well
and sufficiently Tanned, and such as though Tanned enough, is in some other
respect defective, either by over-liming, or for want of being well wrought
upon the Beam, or by frost, or has received some damage in drying, so that
though it may serve for inward or middle Soles, yet not for other uses without
damage to the buyer; all which Leather so defective, shall be sealed with a
different Seal, that it may be known to be faulty.

But that which is not sufficiently Tanned, shall neither be sealed nor used in
Boots or Shoos, till it be duly Tanned; And that no Tanner within this
Jurisdiction, shall upon any pretense sell, deliver cause or suffer to be
delivered, or pass out of his hands or custody, any Hide or Hides till being
fully dry, they be first sealed by the Officer or Off^cers thereunto appointed,
under the penalty of forfeiting the said Leather or the value of it to the
Plantation where the offense is committed.

And it is further Ordered, That if any Shoo maker shall use, or put any
unsealed Leather either into Boots or Shoos, or put any of the forementioned
faulty Leather (though sealed as such) in any outward Seals, or upper Leather,
or in any other place which may be hurtful to the buyer or wearer, or shall use
any other way of deceit, in making up his ware, he shall make due and full
recompense to the person or persons wronged, and complaining, and shall suffer
such further punishment as his offense, considered with the circumstances shall
require.

And whosoever shall bring Hides from any other parts, and shall sell, or use
any of them for Boots or Shoos within this Jurisdiction, before they be sealed
by some Officer here, according to the import of this Order, or shall use them
in Boots or Shoos contrary to the intent thereof; the Hides so sold or used, or
the value of them shall be forfeited to the ^^^ntation where the offense is
committed, or such recompense or (...) shall be made or paid (if it be only of
ignorance) as the case may require; provided that if both buyer and seller be
faulty, they shall pay the forfeit betwixt them. The choosing and appointing of
which aforesaid Sealer or Sealers, the Print or Mark, which each Plantation
shall set upon their Seals, for good or faulty Leather, with the rate to be
allowed for sealing, being left to the several Plantations.

Highways.
IT is Ordered, etc. That if any Highway be wanting in any Town-ship of this
Government, upon complaint, Highways (...) Jury
that then the Governor or any of the Assistants Impannel a Jury, and upon
Oath charge them to lay out such Highways, both for Horse and Foot, as in the
best of their Judgments they shall find most beneficial for the Common
wealth, and as little prejudicial to particulars as may be: And that all old
Foot paths shall be still allowed, except other provision be orderly made; And
that where there are allowed Foot paths over any man's ground, which is fenced
up, the Owners of such Fences shall make sufficient Styles or Gates.

And where there is necessary use of a particular way to any man's particular
ground, for Carting or otherwise, through his neighbors Land, where no other
way is conveniently to be had, a Jury Impannelled as aforesaid, shall lay it
out, as may be convenient for the complainer, and least prejudicial to the
Owner of the Land through which it leads; Provided still, that the Town or
party concerned, satisfy such particular men damnified thereby, as two or
three men indifferently chosen by them shall determine, if it be not otherwise
provided for.

And that care be used to shut up such Gates or Bars allowed to such ways,
that damage may be prevented.

And that Common Highways be forty foot broad, especially in Wet, Low, Dirty
Grounds.

2. It is also Ordered, etc. That the Surveyors of High ways, shall give three
days warning to particular persons, ^
for themselves or their Teams when they are to amend the Highways, as often
as need shall require; And if any be warned as aforesaid, and shall neglect his
duty therein, he shall pay two shillings six pence a day for himself, and five
shillings a day for his Team for every such neglect to the Towns use, to be
leavied by distress on his Goods by Warrant to the Constable, from any of the
Magistrates, or Select men where there is no Magistrate near; to whom the Names
of such Delinquents shall be returned by any of the Surveyors.

3. And that the Surveyor if he see cause, shall hire either Man or Team, as
occasion requires for the said work, ^
and to be paid out of the fines aforesaid; And that the Surveyors warn not any
Man or Team twice to work on the Highways, before they have first gone over
all the Persons and Teams in the said Town-ship as aforesaid.

And that every Surveyor that shall neglect his duty in repairing the
Highways, shall forfeit five pounds to the Colonies use.

4. And that those warned to work on the High ways as aforesaid, shall appear
at the place appointed or places by the Surveyo^s, ^
with their Carts and themselves, fitted with Tools and Implements suitable to
the work* by the hour of nine in the morning, and work till four at evening,
allowing the space of one hour at Noon for Refreshment.

5. And that the Surveyors do at the end of their year, give an account of
their actings, ^
and what moneys of the Towns may be in their hands, unto the Select men of
their respective Towns, or such other as the Towns shall appoint for that
affair.

CHAP. X. Lands, Inheritances, and Wills.
^
IT is Enacted by the Court, etc. That whatsoever Lands have or shall be granted
by the Court to the respective Town ships, or to any particular persons, either
by the Court or particular Town-ships, shall be held to them, their Heirs,
Successors and Assigns for ever, according to the most free tenor of East
Greenwich, in the County of Kent, in the Realm of England, granted unto us in
our Charter or Patent, and our inheritances to descend according to the tenor
thereof.

2. That all Sales, Exchanges, Gifts, Mortgages or other Conveyances of Houses
and Lands, shall be acknowledged before some Magistrate, ^
before they be committed to public Record; Provided that all former
Conveyances, that were before this Order, shall be accounted good,
notwithstanding they be not, nor cannot be so acknowledged, being otherwise
duly proved.

^
3. That where Lands and Tenements fall in joint partnership, either by a Gift,
Grant or Purchase, or otherwise, if a partner dye before it be divided, the
Heirs or Assigns of the Deceased, shall not be deprived of their right, but
shall have his or their proportion with the Survivors, as if division thereof
had been formerly made; any Provision, Custom or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

It is also hereby Provided, That any Partner may sue out a division, as he or
they may see reason.

4. It is Ordered, That where no Heir, or Owner of Houses, Lands, Tenements, ^
Goods or Chattels can be found, upon the decease of the late ^estator or
Proprietor, a true Inventory of every such Estate, in all the parts and parcels
thereof, shall with the first convenience, be duly taken, and a just
apprizement made upon Oath, by fit men thereunto appointed by a Magistrate, or
in his absence by the Select-men of such Plantation where the said Estate is,
and the whole Estate to be seized to the public Treasury, till the true Heirs
or Owners shall make due claim thereunto, unto whom the same shall be restored
upon just and reasonable (...)

5. An act made July 10th. 1669. for quieting men's Estates and avoiding suits
in Law;

It is Enacted by the Court and the Authority thereof; That no person or person
having had for the space or term of ten years full past and expnce, In what
case (...) is barred
any Right or Title of entry into or cause of Action for any Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments whatsoever, now detained from him or them, shall thereinto
Enter or Commence Suit for, but within five years next after the end of this
pre^ent Session of Court, and at no time after.

And that no person or persons having had for the space or term of eighteen
years fully past and expired, any Right or Title of Entry into, or Cause of
Action, for any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments whatsoever, now detained from
him or them, shall thereinto Enter or Commence for, but within two years next
after the end of this present Session of Court, and at no time after.

And that no person or persons, shall at any time hereafter, make any Entry
into, or Commence Suit for any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, but within
f^fteen years next after his or their Right, Title or cause of Action, or Suit,
which shall hereafter first descend, fall or accrue to the same, otherwise such
Title shall be for ever after barred, and the party or parties claiming, and
his and their Heirs utterly excluded from Entry into the same; Provided
nevertheless, that if any person or persons which has or shall have such
Right, Title or Cause of Action, be or shall be at the time of the said Right,
Title or Cause of Action first descended, accrued or fallen, within the age of
twenty one years, Feme Covert, non compes mentis, imprisoned or beyond the
Seas, then such person or persons, his or their Heirs shall or may,
notwithstanding the said fifteen ye^rs expired, bring his Action or make his
Entry at any time within five y^ars next after his or their full age,
discoverture, coming of sound mind, enlargement out of Prison, or coming into
this Country, take benefit of, and rue forth the same, and at no time after the
said five years.

It is further Enacted by the Court, etc. That such person or persons as have
had Right or Title of entry into or Cause of Action, for any Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, hitherto detained from him or them, for the space or term of
twenty years fully past and complete, and neglected hitherto, to make his or
their Entry, or to Commence suit for the same, shall be for ever barred
excluded and utterly disabled from such Entry or Suit to be made, excepting as
in the abovesaid proviso, according as is provided by the Statute of England,
made Anno 2^. Jacobi Regis Cap. 16. Entitled An Act for Limitation of Actions
and avoiding Suits in Law.

It having been the usual manner and custom of this Court, as much as may be
to have recourse to the commendable Laws of England in such case wherein there
is no other Law by this Court provided more suitable to our condition.

WILLS.
WHereas it has been formerly Ordered by this Court, That all persons having
Estate, Real or Personal, being of competent Age, Understanding and Memory, may
by Will dispose thereof as he sees c^use:

Wills and Testaments (...) be (...)
It is also Enacted; That all such Disposals by Will and Testament, shall be
Signed and Sealed by the Testator, before one or two substantial Witnesses,
that may be able to Testify that it was his Will, and that he was when he made
it in such capacity as is above expressed.

and proved at Court
2. And that such Wills and Testaments be Exhibited and Proved by such as are to
Administer, at the next Court after the death of the Testator if it may be, and
that a true Inventory of the Estate duly valued, be then also presented and
left in Record with the Will, before Letters of Administration be granted.

and he W^ll (...) Recorded
And if any man dies without Will, his Widow, or such as would Administer, shall
present an Inventory of the Estate as above, at the next Court: And if it be a
single person, and one that has no Relations in the Country, or near the
place, that then the Governor or next Magistrate, appoint some meet person
there to make an Inventory, and present it to the next Court.

3. And inasmuch as some persons may be so suddenly surprised, that they may
not have opportunity to make a written Will;

It is Ordered by this Court, etc. That in such case, if any person do make a
Will Nuncupative, or a Verbal disposure of his Lands and Estate before two good
substantial Witnesses, Nu^^^pative Wil^s
that are neitheir Heirs nor Legatees, and they shall within three days commit
it to Writing, and at the next Court make Oath unto it, it shall be Recorded
and accepted as a Will.

Widows (...)
4. And if any Married man dies Intestate, his Widow shall have one third part
of the Rents and Profits of his Lands during her life, and a third of Goods and
Chattels, Debts being first paid, at her dispose.

^
5. And it is further Enacted, That if any man do make an irrational and
unrighteous will, whereby he deprives his Wife of her reasonable allowance for
her subsistency, upon the Woman's complaint it shall be in the power of the
Court to relieve her out of the estate, notwithstanding by Will it were
otherwise disposed; especially in such ca^e where the Wife brought with her
good part of the Estate in Marriage, or has by her d^ligence and industry done
her part in the getting the Estate, and was otherwise well deserving.

6. And it is further Enacted, That when any man dies Intestate, and leaves
diverse Children; ^
the Eldest Son shall have a double Portion with what he has already received
from him of his Estate, both real and pers^nal, ^
but shall not be instated in all the Lands, unless the Court see (...) the
rest of the Children shall inherit as Copartners, unless the Court upon good
ground shall otherwise dispose.

7. And if any person dye more indebted then their Estate of Goods and Chattels
can satisfy; if he have bought Lands in his life time, What case (...) to pay
debts
to the impairing of his Estate, otherwise such Lands shall be sold to pay the
Debts but not other, further then the Court may see cause.

CHAP. XI. Fishing and Fish.
THat Fishing and Fowling shall be free to all Inhabitants of this Government,
Fishing and Fowling
Provided that all Orders from time to time made by this General Court,
Provided that Orders reg^lating the same be obse^v^d
for the due Regulating of Fishing and Fowling be observed in place or places,
wherein special interest and propriety is justly claimed by the Court or any
particular person.

2. Whereas by providence, Whales and other great Fish are found a drift upon
the stream, and sometimes cast a sh^re in this ^urisdiction;

It is Ordered, That all such Whales as are cast up within the Bounds of any
particular Town-ship, or floating upon the stream, within a Mile of the shore,
against the said Bounds of any Town-ship, Wha^es.
shall be accounted the respective Towns falling within their Bounds as
aforesaid* allowing one full Barrel of Merchantable Oil to the Country for
every such Whale, and but half a Barrel if it be wasted or torn away after
parted, to be delivered to the Treasurers order at Boston.

And whosoever takes any Whale on drift at Sea, without those Bounds and
limits abovesaid, and bring them on shore, he shall have the one half, and the
Country the other half of the Oil, and the Country to allow case for their part
of the Oil.

And whosoever shall find any Whale a shore on the Cape or elsewhere, that is
out of any Towns Bounds, and is on the Countries Bounds or Limits, shall allow
the Country two Hogsheads of Oil clear and paid to the Country.

3. Whereas there has been great inconvenience as (...) converted by taking of
Mack^el at unseasonable times, whereby their in^rc^se is greatly diminished;

This Court does therefore Order, That henceforth no Mackrel shall be caught,
except for spending whilst fresh, ^
before the first of ^uly Annually on penalty of lo^s of the same, the one half
to the Informer, and the other half to the use of the Colony, and this Order to
take place from the twentieth of this instant (...).

Fishing at the Cape Cod.
4. FOr the better improving of Fishing for Mackrel at the Cape with Saynes or
Nets; that the Fish be not wholly des^royed or (...) off the Shore, with
constant Beating and Shooting at them with their Nets and Saynes;

It is Ordered by this Court etc. That none shall Set, Shoot or hall Said on
shore with Mackrel at the Cape, Time of Sayning for Mackrel
before the f^fteenth day of October yearly, nor after the twentieth of
November, on pena^ty of forfeiting for any Mackrel so taken without the Compass
of this time, eight shillings a Barrel to the Colonies use.

And that so good a Commodity be not spoiled, nor impaired by gripple Persons,
that only mind their present benefit; but that it may be ^^pt sweat and well
preserved for a Market, and so kept a Commod^ty;

It is further Ordered, That all such Mackrel taken by Saynes or Nets at the
Cape, ^ow to be O^dered
shall be there salted up in good sufficient Cask, and not in Lumber, neither
on Shore nor on Board of any boat, Ba^que or other Vessel, on penalty of
forfeiting to the Colonies use, the one half of what is so salted in Lumber and
not in tight Cask.

And forasmuch as the Lands where such benefit is made by Fishing with Saynes
or Nets, has been purchased by the Colony and are truly theirs;

It is also Ordered, That no Stranger, or such as are no Inhabitants of this
Government, shall make use of our Lands or Shore, for Sayning or halling of
Fish, but such as this Court give License to, on penalty of forfeiting all the
Fish of any kind so taken by any without leave.

And all Strangers that shall be allowed there to Fish as abovesaid, whether
taken in as partners with any of ours or otherwise, shall pay unto our Water
Baily, or such as the Court shall appoint to receive it, for the use of this
Colony, two shillings for every Barrel, or quantity of a Barrel of Mackrel
there caught in such a way; and such of our own Inhabitants as do so Fish
there, shall pay one shilling a Barrel, and all such payments, whether by our
own or Strangers, shall be made in money to the said Baily, or who is appointed.

And that peace and good order may be k^pt by all that Fish there, and that the
Colony may not be a^fraua^d of their a^e by any;

It is further Ordered; That the Master of any Vessel, that shall come there to
Fish, or some known person of their company, shall presently upon their arrival
there before they take any Fish, give under his hand to the Baily or his
Deputy, for their peaceable carriage there, and their due observance of the
Orders of Court concerning their Fishing, who shall thereupon give them a
Ticket under his hand for their improving the season as abovesaid; And if any
man do refuse so to do, he or they shall be discharged from making use of our
Land on shore there, at their peril; And if any prove troublesome, or disturb
their peace, sell ^iquor to the Indians, profane the Sabbath, or be otherwise
disorderly, the Baily or his Deputy is hereby empowered to carry such before the
next Magistrate, who may issue the case, send the Offenders to Prison, or take
Bond for their appearance as Court, as he shall see cause, and the whole charge
thereof to be born by him or them that do so offend.

And that the Water Baily be under Oath, as other public Officers, as for the
faithful discharge of his trust, so for his due and seasonable ordering, and
giving an account to the Treasurer for what is the Colonies upon Fishing
account, within one Month after the said Voyage is ended, or sooner if it may
be.

And for every Barrel of Herring at any time caught by Nets, on the said Cape
Cod Shore, Herring.
six pence per Barrel be paid by any Inhabitant that shall so take them, and
twelve pence per Barrel by Strangers.

And whosoever shall take any Basse on the aforesaid Shore with Nets, Basse.
shall pay to the Colonies use six pence per Quintal, according to a former
Order, and to be paid also in money.

5. And it is Ordered, etc. That if any Swine, belonging to either English or
Indians, do there annoy or trespass such as there Fish as abovesaid, in the
Mackrel seasons; Trespass by Swine
it shall be lawful for any to make seizure of such Swine, paying the one half
of the value of such Swine to the said Baily or his Deputy for the Colonies use.

6. It is also Ordered, That the profit arising to the Colony by the abovesaid
Fishing at the Cape, shall be employed and improved for the erecting and
maintaining of a Free School in this Government* ^
The Ordering and Management of which affair is committed to the Governor and
Assistants, or any four of them as they shall judge meet; Provided there be
some entrance made in order thereunto before June Court next; otherwise the
said profits to be Ordered as that Court shall see cause.

CHAP. XII. Military Affairs.
IN regard of the many appearances of danger toward the Country by Enemies
from abroad, or that may arise within us, Gods providence having disposed us in
this Corner of the Western World, so far from our Native Prince and People, The
grounds of putting the Colony into a posture of War
that we cannot expect that constant speedy protection and relief that they
might otherwise afford us; That we may be therefore in the better capacity
according to our power, to defend the interest of God, our Princes interest,
and our own;

It is Determined by this Court and the Authority thereof; That there shall be
at all times a standing Council of War in this Colony, A standing Council of War
consisting of the Governor and Assistants, as Annually chosen, and the like
number of other trusty and able men, chosen also by the General Court, and from
year to year filled up, if by death removed, or otherwise any of them may be
wanting, or incapacitated to perform their trust.

And the Governor or President is hereby empowered by his Summons, to convene
the said Council; who being assembled, or the major part of them, they or any
seven of them concurring, shall have full power to act as a Council of War; In
Establishing and Commissionating of Military Officers, in Pressing of Men,
Horses, Ships, Barques or other Vessels, their power
Arms, Ammunition, Provision, Carrages, or whatsoever else they may judge
needful, for the present Expedition; And al^o to raise Moneys by Rate, upon
the several Towns, or Plantations of this Government, according to their
several proportions, to defray the Charge thereof, and their Actings in such a
concern to be valid as if done by the General Court of this Colony, Provided
they cross not the Articles of confederation between the Confederate Colonies.

2. And it is Enacted by this Court, etc. That there shall be always kept and
maintained at Plymouth, A general stock of arms and Ammunition
or where else the Court or Council of War shall order it, a General or Public
Stock of Arms and Ammunition, to be improved as the Council of War shall order
for the common safety: besides which every Town in this Government shall at all
times have in readiness in their Town, such a Stock of Arms and Ammunition as
the Court have or shall particularly proportion them, T^wn st^ck
on such penalty as in our Court Records is expressed.

^
And every man from the age of s^xteen years and upwards, shall also be provided
with such Arms and Ammunition as the Court have determined, upon penalty
expressed in our said book of Records.

3. And for the better Disciplining and Training up of our men in the use of
Arms;

It is Enacted by this Court, etc. That there be at all times a General
Off^cer, ^
under the Title of a Major, or other, who shall h^ve command of all the Horse
and Foot of this Government, according to his Commission and Instruction in our
Book of Records.

4. And that in every Town within this Government, there be particular
Commanders so chosen and Commissioned, Particular Commanders
as is by Order of this Court provided, to exercise their respective Companies,
six days in the year at least, besides General Musters.

5. Concerning the raising of a Troop of Horse, Concerning raising of a Troop
of Horse
The number to be raised in the several Towns, their Privilege, Duty, and
Orders, The fines of Commanders, and private Soldiers, Horse, or Foot, and
also what are to be accounted serviceable Arms; Concerning Military Watches,
Ala^^ms etc. See the Old Book of Orders.

6. And it is further Enacted by this Court, etc. That if any man be sent forth
as a Soldier, and be so maimed in the service, Maimed Soldiers
that he is disabled from following his occasions, he shall be maintained by
the Colony whilst he lives, according to his quality, and the capacity in
which he served; and when dead, shall have the burial of a Soldier.

7. Be it also Enacted, That no Smith in this Government, Smith^ to (...) Arms
who is able to do it, shall refuse or neglect to amend any Arms brought unto
him for such purpose, he being tendered such current pay as for other work; as
he will answer it to the Court.

CHAP. XIII. ORDINARIES.
FForasmuch as there is necessary use of Houses of Common Entertainment, and of
such as Retail Wine, Beer, and Victuals; yet because there is so much abuse of
that lawful liberty, both by persons that entertain, and by such as are
entertained;

It is Ordered by this Court, etc. That none shall keep a Victualling house or
Ordinary, or shall Retail Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider, None to keep o^ victualling
house or ordinary but with License
or Strong Water, etc. but such as are Licensed thereunto by the Court of
Magistrates, on penalty of five pounds forfeiture to the Colonies use, except
it be for relief of some sick person, and the Ordinary Keeper has none.

2. And that whosoever is Licensed to keep such public house of Entertainment,
shall be well provided of Bedding to entertain Strangers and Travelers, and
shall also have convenient Pasturing for Horses, Ordinanses (...) to be provided
and Hay and Provender for their entertainment in the Winter, and shall not be
without good Beer; and if any Ordinary keeper do frequently fail in any or all
of these, upon complaint, he shall lose his License.

Price of Beer
3. It is further Enacted; That no In-keeper or Ordinary in this Government,
shall sell Beer for more then two pence the Ale quart, upon penalty of three
shil^ings and four pence for every such offense; Nor shall any Vintner or
Tavern gain more then eight pence upon the quart, in any Wine or Strong waters
that they retail, Wine and Strong waters
more then it cost them by the Butte or Cask as they bought, on penalty of
twenty shil^ings forfeiture for such offense duly proved.

4. Neither shall any Vintner or Ordinary keeper suffer any disorder, by
excessive drinking, in or at their House;

It is therefore Ordered, That he that suffers any person to drink Drunk or to
excess in his house, (...) suf^er^ng any to be drunk (...)
shall be fined for every such offense duly proved five shillings; And he that
suffers any Town dweller, unless it be upon any extraordinary occasion, or
public employment, to stay drinking in his House above the space of one hour,
the Ordinary keeper shall be fined two shillings six pence, ^
and the Inhabitant so offending one shilling.

5. And it is further Enacted, That no single person, Labourer or other, shall
be Dieted in any Inn or Ordinary in the Town to which he belongs. None to be
diated in O^di^^ries


And that no Ordinary keeper suffer any Wine or Liquor to be drawn in his House
on the Lords day to any, except in case of necessity, for the moderate relief
of those that are sick or faint for their necessary refreshment, and not to
young persons, or such as need it not, in pain of ten shillings to the Colony.

6. And for the preventing of the great abuse, by the excessive drinking of
Liquors and other Drink in Ordinaries, etc.

^
This Court Orders, That every Ordinary keeper in this Government, shall be
hereby empowered and required that in case any person or persons do not attend
Order, but carry themselves uncivi^ly, by being importunately desirous of Drink
when denied; and do not leave the House when required; such Ordinary keeper
shall return their Names to the next Court, that so they may be proceeded
withal according to the nature of the offense: and in case any Ordinary keeper
shall neglect so to do, he shall be fined five shillings for every default.

7. It is further Ordered by this Court; That two or three men, besides the
Constable and Grand-jury-men, be appointed and empowered, in each Town of this
Jurisdiction, to have the inspection of the Ordinaries, or in any other places
suspected, ^
to take notice of such abuses as may arise in reference to the premises or
otherwise, and make return thereof to the Court.

8. That no Ordinary keeper suffer any Servants or Children, Servants nor
Children may not buy (...) in Ordinaries with out consent of Masters or Parents
under the Government of their Masters or Parents to buy or ^it drinking any
Strong-liquors or Wine in their Houses, or where they have to do without
liberty from their Parents or Masters, except in case of necessity for their
relief, in pain of five shillings forfeit to the Colonies use.

CHAP. XIV. INDIANS.
IT is Enacted by the Court, etc. Indians not suffered to profane the Lords day
That the Indians especially such as live amongst or near the English
Plantations, be not suffered to profane the Lords day, by Hunting, Fishing,
Fowling, Travailing with burdens, or by doing any servile work thereupon: And
if any being forewarned do, and will contemptuously offend in that kind, the
Constable of that Town, shall bring him before the next Magistrate, or Select
men where a Magistrate is not, who upon proof of the Fact, may punish him by
fine or otherwise, as the matter may be circumstanced; and the like course to
be taken with such Indians as shall on the Lords day resort to English Houses,
unless upon extraordinary occasion.

2. And whereas it is found by experience, that the Indians who are naturally
perfideous, (...) abundantly more Insolent and Proud, when they are furnished
with English Arms;

It is therefore Enacted by this Court, etc. That whosoever shall Give, Lend,
Trade, Truck, or exchange with the Indians, so as to furnish them directly or
indi^^^tly with any kind of Arms, as Guns, Pistols, Swords, Prohibition of
trading Guns and amu^ition to the Indians
Rapiers, or the like, or Powder, Shot, or Lead, or Ammunition of any kind, he
or they upon due conviction thereof, shall forfeit to the Colonies use twenty
times the value thereof, which if he cannot pay, he shall other^ise be severely
punished, by Imprisonment or otherwise: And if any Indians that have Arms have
or shall at any time manifestly appear to be unfaithful and treacherous to us,
they shall forfeit such their Arms, and not be suffered for time to come, to
keep any unless particularly Licensed by the Court or Governor.

3. It is also Enacted, etc. That whosoever shall sell unto, or upon any
consideration, furnish any Indians with any kind of Boats, Barques,
Prohibition of Ba^ques and Boats
or such like Vessels, or Sails, or Tackling to fit up any Vessel, he or they
shall forfeit to the Colonies use, ten times the value of such prohibited
Goods, or be otherwise punished as the Court shall determine.

4. Whereas Complaint is made of Indians stealing of live Hogs from the
Eng^^sh, and selling them, and concealing it by cutting of the ears.

To prevent (...)
It is Enacted by the Court, That henceforth no Indians shall give any ear mark
to their Swine, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of such Swine, one half to
the Country, and the other half to him that shall make seizure on them; neither
shall any Indian bring any Swine to sell, with their ears cut off, or ear
marked, on the same penalty as above, except be bring good Testimonies that be
honestly obtained such Swine so marked, of some English.

And to prevent controversy about Swine;

It is Enacted, That no English shall claim any Swine in custody of the
Indians, but by their ear mark.

5. Be it also Enacted, etc. That no person, whether Inhabitant of this
Government or other, shall Purchase, Hire, or receive of Gift of the Indians,
any Lands that lie within the Line of this Government, without the allowance
and order of this Court, on pain of forfeiting for every Acre so bought, hired
or any way obtained of them five pounds to the Colonies use. And if the fine or
forfeiture cannot at present be obtained, the Lands so procured shall be
forthwith seized for the Colonies use.

Nor Timber or Herbage
Neither shall any Buy or Hire, or receive of Gift, any Wood, Timber, or Herbage
of the Indians, without the Courts allowance on pain of forfeiting five times
the value thereof to the Colonies use.

Horses may be sold to ^he Indians on condition
6. It is Enacted by the Court, etc. That liberty be hereby granted to the
English in this Government, to sell Horses to the Indians, Provided every Horse
so sold is brought to the Town Clerk of that Town where he is sold, and ten
shillings in money, and delivered to the said Clerk for the Colonies use, who
shall Record his Mark or Marks, and have twelve pence of the said Money for his
pains; and in case any shall sell any Horses or Horse Colt to the Indians, and
neglect so to do, he shall forfeit every such Horse, or the value thereof to
the Colonies use.

But no Mares sold nor kept by (...)
But no person within this Government, shall sell or give any Mare to the
Indians, in pain of the forfeiture of every such Mare, or the value thereof to
the use of the Colony: And that no Indian shall be suffered to keep any Mare in
this Colony, on like penalty of the forfeiture of evere such Mare to the
Colonies use.

And that the Country may not be defeated of the abovesaid ten shillings, under
pretense of lending Horses to the Indians, although sold to them:

It is therefore Ordered; That none shall give, lend or hire any Horse or Horse
Colt to any Indian or Indians in pain of ten shillings forfeit to the Colonies
use.

7. Whereas notwithstanding many Orders have been made for the prevention of
Drunkenness amongst the Indians, yet it does abound amongst them to the
dishonor of God, and occasion of many Outrages done amongst them, and other
inconveniences like more and more to ensue, if no stop be put thereto;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court, That whatsoever person or persons, does
directly or indirectly Give, Sell, Truck or Barte^, or any ways procure to or
for any Indian or Indians, any Wine, Cider or Strong-liquors, by whatsoever
name the said Liquor may be called, shall for every such offense forfeit, five
p^unds fine to the Colonies use; Provided this Order shall not extend to
restrain any charitable act, in relieving any Indian Bona fide, in any sudden
exigent of s^ckness, faintness, etc. not exceeding one drain or two, or by the
prescription and direction of some Physician, under the hand of a Magistrate
first obtained.

And it is Ordered, That the Accusation, Information or Testimony of any Indian
or other probable circumstance, shall be accounted sufficient conviction of any
English person or persons suspected to Sell, Trade or Procure any Wine, Cider
or Liquors as abovesaid, to any Indian or Indians, unless such English shall
upon their Oath clear themselves from any such act of direct or indirect
Selling, Trucking or Lending of Wine, Cider or Liquors to any such Indian or
Indians, and the same counted to be taken for conviction of any that Trade any
Arms or Ammunition to the Indians.

And in case any such offender be not able to pay his or their fine as
abovesaid, every such offender shall be publicly w^ipt

And it shall and may be lawful for any man to seize any Liquor, Cider or Wine
found in the custom of any Indian or Indians, and have it for his pains,
Provided he bring the (...) Indian or Indians before a Magistrate, or the
Select M^n of the Town, to be further examined about it.

CHAP. XV. HORSES.
WHereas many Qu^sti^ns, and sometimes troubl^s^me S^^s and (...), grow between
persons about Horses running together in the Woods unmarked, etc.

It is Ordered, That each Plantation within this Government, have a particular
Brand mark, ^
to distinguish the Horses of one Plantation from another, as by Order of Court
has been in that case provided and in use amongst us: bes^des which, every
Owner shall mark every of his Hor^e^, Mares or Colts with some distinguishing
mark, and that before (...), whereby one man's Horse kind may be known from
another, ^
and that in each Plantation there be an Officer appointed, either the Town
Clerk, or some other fit person, to Record each particular man's Horse kind, ^
with the Marks, Natural or A^t^^^cial, with the Color and Age thereof, as
near as may be known, with the year and day of the month, and to require as
satisfying evidence of his right, who presents any such Hor^e kind to be
Recorded as (...) to Record any defect of due evidence, that a way may be open
to other claims, and such Officer to have six pence for every Horse-kinde so
Recorded of the Owner thereof. Fees for entry


And that whatsoever Owner of such Horse-kinde, shall neglect to present them,
Forfeiture for Non-entry
or the Mark and Age thereof to such Officer, to be Recorded, being above one
ye^r old, from t^me to time, at or before the first of March Annually, shall
forfeit fi^e shillings, the one half to the Town, and the other half to the
Informer, excepting such Horses as any Owner keeps on his own ground.

And that no person take up any Horse kind running in the Woods, to carry out
of the Town-ship where they go, without f^st bringing them to the Officer
aforesaid, and carrying away without entry
to be Recorded, and to receive a Note from under his hand of the Marks, with
the Date thereof, on pain of forty shillings to the Colonies use; Paying like
Fees to the Officer as aforesaid.

Strayes to be (...)
2. If any man shall take up any Stray-horse, Mare, or Horse-kinde, he shall
within one Month give notice of it, with the Age (as near as he can) and his
color and marks, that so the Treasurer may cause them to be cried at three
Courts next following; and if any Owner be found, paying all due charges for
his taking up and keeping, he shall have his Horse or Beast: and no Owner (...)
shall (...) to the Colony, and the other to him that finds them
But if after he has been to publicly cried, no Owner appear in a year after
he was first cried; such Hor^e, Mare or other Beast, shall be one half to the
Country, and the other ha^f to him that took him up.

It is also Ordered, etc. That whosoever takes up any such Stray-Horse, Strayes
how used
Mare, etc. shall keep them well, and not wrong them by Drawing, Riding or
otherwise, whilst he is upon such enquiry as abovesaid; and that during the
time, he shall always keep a With about the neck of the Stray, by which it may
be commonly known.

3. It is Enacted by the Court, That none shall suffer to go at large to feed,
in any Commons within this Government, any Stoned Horse, being above two years
old, Stature of stone H^^ses to go at large
and not thirteen hands high at least from the lower part of the Hoof to the
upper part of the Wither, every hand containing four Inches Standard measure,
in pain to forfeit the same Horse or the value thereof, on penalty
the one half to the Country, and the other half to him or them which shall
seize such Horse of lower stature; So that first by the Ass^stance of the
Constable, or Select-men of any Town-ship where such seizure is made, or seizor
dwells; Such Horse being by the seizor first brought to the next Pound, shall
there by such an Off^cer, in the presence of three sufficient men, be measured
and found lower then the Stature above mentioned: This Order to take place from
and after the first of October, 1670.

4. That such Fences as are adjudged sufficient against ordinary Neat Cattle,
shall be allowed sufficient against Horses and Mares; And if Horses (...) so
wild that they cannot be impounded, ^
the Owner shall nevertheless satisfy the damage proved to be done by them, as
if impounded; and if the Horse kind which so trepasseth be not marked
according to Order, (...) Owner for such shall pay double damage.

5. And whereas there has been great Complaint of much Damage done by
Horse-kinde, and that many of them are and belong to Foreigners, either hither
brought, here bought, or known to the Owners thereof to be strayed into this
Colony, and here let run with their Increase year after year, to the great
Damage and Annoyance both of English and Indians;

It is therefore Ordered, That all such Foreigners Horse-kinde (other then
accidentally strayed, without the knowledge of the Owner) shall be taken out of
this Colony by the last of December next, in pain of the forfeiture of every
such Horse-kinde, the one half to the Colony, and the other half to him or them
that shall take every such Horse-kinde, found within this Colony after the said
time, other then such strayes as aforesaid, which shall be dealt with as by
Order in that Case provided.

And this Court Wills, That all such as are Inhabitants, as have any
Inspection over any the said Horses, to give timely notice thereof to the Owner
of such Horses as aforesaid.

ERRATA.
PAge 1 Line 4 Sect. 1 for in Act read Enact. page 3, 5, 7. in the Title, read
New Plymouth Colony. page 4 line 26. Sect. 10 for surely read severely.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I. Folio 1. Touching Fundamentals.
LAws to be made by the Freemen or their Representatives. 2 Annual Elections by
the Freemen. 3 Justice Equally and speedily to be Administered. 4 None so suffer
but according to Law, etc. 5 Trials to be by a Jury, and liberty to challenge
any of them. 6 What Testimonies in cases Capital. 7 Power and liberty for any
to Will away their Estate, except such as are Censured for Treason. 8 The great
end of coming into this Wilderness, was to enjoy the pure Worship of God, etc.
therefore the Churches of Christ here to be protected in their peaceable
orderly walking in the Ministry of the Gospel provided for. 9 All the foregoing
Fundamentals to be inviolably preserved.
CHAP. II. Folo 3. Touching Capitals.
1 Idolatry. 2 Blasphemy. 3 Treason 4 Conspiring against this Jurisdiction,
etc. 5 Wilful Murder premeditate. 6 Sudden Murder in Passion. 7 Murder by
guile or poisoning. 8 Witchcraft. 9 Bestiality. 10 Sodomy. 11 A False Witness.
12 Man-stealing. 13 Cursing or smiting Father or Mother. 14 The Rebellious Son.
15 Rape. 16 Wilful Burning of Ships, Goods, etc.
CHAP III. Folo ^. Criminals.
1 All Criminal Offenses are to be heard and determined at the next Court that
has proper cognizance thereof. 2 Adultery how punished. 3 Fornication Without
Contract. If they be or will be married. After Contract.
4 Burglary. First time, Second time, Third time.
5 Stealing of Vessels or Ammunition. 6 Stealing or Purloining. 7 Smaller Thefts
or Pilfering. 8 Profane Swearing. 9 Profanation of the Sabbath with the
aggravations. 10 Neglect of public Worship. 11 Vilifying the Scriptures and
holy Pen men thereof, or the Word Preached and the Ministry thereof, or the
Ways, Churches or Ordinances of Christ. 12 Heresy. 13 Forceable Detainer,
Entry and Possession. 14 Disturbance of the peace Defamation of Court or Judge.
Beating or hurting any person.
15 Forging of Deeds, Bills, Bonds. 16 Falsifying of Records. 17 He that
corrupts Officers to such intent. 18 Against Lying. 19 Against wilful burning
of Fences. 20 Breaking of Fences, Gate or Bridge. 21 Removing of Land marks. 22
Gaming at Public Houses. 23 Playing at unlawful Games. 24 Wearing of Vizards.
25 Penalty of Drunkenness; and Drunkenness defined. 26 That the names of
notorious Drunkards be enrolled. 27 Untimely firing of the Woods. 28 Careless
smoking of Tobacco.
CHAP. IV. Folio 11. Actions.
1 Ground of Nonsuit. 2 Time of Entry of Actions, and no further plea after
the Case is committed to the Jury. 3 Non-attendance upon Actions. Plaintiffs
Damage. Defendants Damage. A way for Re entry.
4 Non attendance on Presentiments. 5 Charge of Trials. 6 Plaintiffs liberty to
withdraw. 7 Vexatious Suits. 8 Reviews. 9 Judgment granted. When Verdict
rejected. A new Jury Impannelled.
10 Foreigners shall not Attach Inhabitants without giving Cautions for Costs,
Respect of Judgment and Execution. 11 Liberty to Attach Person or Estate. 12
Summon suff^cient Warrant. 13 Wa^rants when to be served: 14 Goods Attached
shall not be released until Judgment be satisfied, nor Sureties Bonds. 15
Atornies allowed. 16 Barratry pun^shed. 17 Age of di^cretion. 18 Who Bailable.
19 No Leavie on Lands where goods to be found, nor Surety to be distrained
where principals sufficient and found. 20 Nor Beast of the P^ough or Draught.
21 Replevin. 22 Debts to be paid in Spec^e. 23 Fines to be forthwith paid or
secured, and paid in money if exceed not ten shilling.
CHAX. V. Folio 14. Courts.
1 The General Courts Constitution and power. 2 Place and time of s^tting,
Election or Governor, etc. Establishing of Officers, Desolving or Adjou^nments
of Courts. 3 Power to Summon a General Court of the body of Freemen, or their
Repre^entatives on special occasions. Fine for Non appearance, or Departure
without License, Increased or cirCumstanced with Contempt. 4 Liberty to send
votes by Proxy, penalty of neglect. 5 Freemens power, who to be admitted, how
and when. 6 In what ca^e to be Disfranch^z^d; who to vote in T^wn meetings for
choice of Of^^ce^s. 7 Deputies to be Annually Elected, and their names
presented to the Court by the Constable. 8 In what case to be refused with the
Reasons returned to the Town. 9 No Act to pass without consent and vote of the
major part, who and when to have a casting vote. 10 The next Commissioner in
Nomination to attend in case. 11 The eldest Assistant to be Deputy Governor.
Secondly, Courts of Assistants or Magistrates Folio 17.
1 Courts of Assistants, where and when to sit, their power. 2 Liberty to call
a Court of Assistants. 3 Liberty to call a special Court at request of
strangers. 4 Liberty for one stranger to sue another. 5 The Benches power to
determine matters of equity. 6 Laws without penalty are liable to reasonable
penalties by the Court^
Thirdly, The Courts of Select-men. Folio 18.
1 Select-mens Election, Approbation and Power. 2 Process of Actions. 3 In what
case two of them may issue, their Fees, liberty of Appeal. 4 With the process
thereof, Select-mens power in reference to Indians.
CHAP. VI. Folio 19. Presentiments.
1 Presentiments and Complaints to be made within a year. 2 Persons Indicted of
Capital crimes must not withdraw, but surrender themselves.
Juror and Juries. Folio 20.
1 The Grand Jury to be impannelled and chosen. Their Duty. Fees. Penalty for
non-serving.
3 Petty-Juries Impannelled, and sworn to find according to Evidence, liberty
to give a special verdict.
CHAP. VII. Folio 21 Constables.
1 Constables Annually chosen, and to take Oath. 2 Penalty for refusing to
serve. 3 None to be made Constable twice in seven years, and to be freed from
Training. 4 Constable shall make his Deputy. 5 To gather Rates and Fines, and
serve Summons. 6 Marshalls and Constables Directons. To demand dues. To leavie
it on goods liable to leavie; and to leavie necessary charge and execution.
Goods exempted from execution. Officers doing wrong to make satisfaction.
7 Constables to Whip. 8 To receive and convey offenders To pursue Hues and
Cries, And in case to put them forth To Apprehend Offenders. All to assist the
Constable or Marshal in pain of ten shillings. Wilful neglect forty shillings.
Not raising Hues and Cries in Capital cases fined.
9 Constables to warn Town-meetings The Towns to choose Raters, on pain of five
pounds. The Raters Neglect and Penalty. In case the Court do choose Raters.
10 Fees for distress, liberty to gather Rates after his year. 11 Penalty for
non-collecting of Rates. 12 Rules for making of Rates. 13 Constable and Select
men to look after such as sleep or play about the Meeting Houses on the Lords
day.
CHAP. VIII. Folio 25.
Ministers Maintenance.
1 Ministers Maintenance 2 No public Meeting to be set up without approbation.
Education of Children. Folio 26.
For maintenance of a Free School. vide chap. ^1. numb. 6. The profits of
Fishing at Cape Cod. vide chap. ^1. numb. 6.
Mispending of time. Folio 27.
The Select-men to inform the Court of any that live idely, and will not be
governed.
Marriages, Births and Burials. Folio 27.
1 Register to be kept of all Marriages, Births and Burials, exhibited at March
Court. 2 Town Clerk to publish Marriages, how to be published. 3 That none
shall inveagle or steal the affections of any Maid under covert, without
consent of the Parents. 4 Who may solemnize Marriage; Marriage not to be
solemnized with out orderly publication. 5 No man to strike his Wife.
CHAP. IX. Folio 29. Of Town-Affaires.
1 Towns liberties to meet together. 2 Who shall be allowed to be
Housekeepers. 3 He who brings in any to be chargeable shall secure the Town,
but if an Apprentise during his time. 4 Poor men's Children to be provided for.
5 He that has been three months in a Town shall be there charged. 6 Such as
are sent to Nurse, School, etc. shall be relieved by the place whence they
came. 7 None shall come in to Inhabit without leave. 8 Penalty of refusing the
Oath of Fidelity. 9 In every Town a Pound, Cattle to be Replevied or damage
satisfied. 10 Trespass to herd on any man's propriety. 11 Timber felled and not
improved forfeit. 12 VVoolf traps in every Town Indians paid for killing
VVoolves. English by the Town.
13 Every Town to have a Standa^d for Corn.
Mills and Millers. Folio 31
Millers free from Training. Toll, Weights and Scoals. Toll-dishes.
Cask and Coopers. Folio 31.
Gage of Cask. Coopers Brand-mark their Cask.
Leather and Shoomakers Folio 32. Highways. 33.
1 High ways to be laid out by a Jury. 2 Surveighors of High ways to give
three days warning. 3 Penalty of non appearance to mend Highways. 4 Penalty
for Surveighors neglect to warn men. 5 Surveighors of Highways, at the years
end to give account.
CHAP. X. Folio 34. Lands Inheritances and Wills.
1 The tenor of our Lands. 2 Conveyances to be acknowledged before a
Magistrate. 3 Lands in partnership. 4 Escheats. 5 In what case entry into Land
is barred.
Wills. Folio 36.
1 Wills and Testaments must be witnessed. 2 And proved at Court, and the Will
and Inventory Recorded. 3 Nuncupative Wills. 4 Widows thirds. 5 Unjust Wills. 6
Double portion to the eldest; Daughters copartners. 7 In what case Lands to
pay Debts.
CHAX. XI. Folio 37. Fishing and Fish.
1 Fishing and Fowling free, provided that Orders regulating the same be
observed. 2 Whales. 3 Caching Mackrel at unseasonable times. 4 Time of Sayning
for Mackrel, Herring and Basse at Cape Cod and elsewhere, how to be Ordered. 5
Trespass by Swine. 6 The Profits arising by the said Fishing, how to be
improved.
CHAP. XII. Folio 40. Military Affairs.
1 The Grounds of putting the Colony into a posture of War; a standing Council
of War, their power. 2 A general stock of Arms and Ammunition. Town-stock.
Every man's particular. 3 A general Military Officer. 4 Particular Commanders. 5
Concerning raising of a Troop of Horse. 6 Maimed Soldiers. 7 Smiths to mend
Arms.
CHAP. XIII. Folio 41. Ordinaries.
1 None to keep Victualling Houses or Ordinary without License. 2 Ordinaries
how to be provided. 3 Price of Beer, Wine, Strong Water, etc. 4 Penalty of
suffering any to be Drunk, or stay Tippling at their Houses. 5 None to be diated
in Ordinaries. 6 Uncivil carrying at Ordinaries. 7 Men in each Town to have
inspection of Ordinaries. 8 Servants nor Children may not buy Drink in
Ordinaries without consent of Parents or Masters.
CHAP. XIV. Folio 43. Indians.
1 Indians not suffered to profane the Lords day 2 Prohibition of trading Guns
and Ammunition to Indians. 3 Prohibition of Barques and Boats. 4 To prevent
Indians from stealing Swine. 5 Nor Timber nor Herbage. 6 Horses may be sold to
the Indians on condition; But not Mares to be sold. 7 To prevent Drunkenness
amongst the Indians.
CHAP. XV. Folio 45. Horses.
1 Horses to be Branded, Marked, Entered; Fees for Entry, forfeiture for
non-entry, and carrying away without Entry. 2 Strayes to be Cried, and no Owner
appearing, shall be one half to the Country, and the other half to him that
find them. 3 Strayes how used; 4 Stature of Stone-Horses on penalty 5 What
Fence sufficient against Horses. 6 Foreigners Horses
FINIS

