NEW-ENGLANDS True Interest; NOT TO LIE: OR, A Treatise declaring from the Word
of Truth the Terms on which we stand, and the Tenure by which we hold our
hitherto continued Precious and Pleasant Things.

SHOWING What the blessed God expects from his People, and what they may
rationally look for from him.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached in Boston in New England, April 29. 1668. being
the DAY of ELECTION THERE.

By Mr. W. Stoughton, Preacher of the Gospel in Dorchester.

Isa. 51.7, 8. Hearken to me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
heart is my law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their
revilings. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: but my rigeteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation
from generation to generation.

Haggai 2.4. Yet now be strong, O Z^r^hbabel, says the Lord, and be strong, O
Joshua the High Priest, and be strong all ye people of the land, says the
Lord, and work: for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts.

Psalm. 81.13, etc. O that (...) people had hearkened to me, and Israel had
walked in my ways -- their time should have endured for ever, etc.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. J. 1670.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
COncerning this Sermon which is now offering it self to thy hand and heart, I
must say what I am fully persuaded of, viz. That it contains words of
uprightness and truth, and such as to many Auditors present at the public
Preaching of it, were very acceptable: when they came warm from the mouth and
spirit of the speaker, I doubt not, but they carried with them sweetness
through the ear to the heart of each rightly prepared hearer. To receive with
affection, is good, but not all the entertainment we owe to messages, sent by
the God of Salvations to his Vovenant People. Words of wisdom must be as Nails
fastened, Eccl. 12.11. the word of Christ must abide, Joh* 15.7. and dwell
richly in us, Col. 3.16. The helping forward of so good a work, has occasioned
a Person of Worth, eminently affected to thine, and this poor Countries best
good, in subserviency to the glory of the blessed God of Truth, to adventure
the publishing, of what the pious Author was well-nigh invincibly unwilling
should ever have come forth. In hearing, the attention mind must hold pace
with the speaker, following him through all particulars from the beginning to
the end of his Message: but in reading we have this advantage, that we may stay
and dwell upon what we have first a mind to, and by serious thoughts and
humble prayer, improve it to our good, without depriving our selves of
opportunity of doing the like, with any other part of it afterward. Thou have
now a help to reminde thee of many useful (but possibly forgotten) passages.
God, whose Providence has brought this to thy hands, expects a suitable
improvement: an awakening, humbling quickening, is the best use we can make of
it. Visible benefit and fruit, is l^ke to prove the best expedient to ease the
spirit of the too-unwilling Author, of that (...) which an excess of modesty
may have made him capable of, for being by a friendly violence thus thrust out
upon the Stage. Some persons, not born, but cut out of their Mothers Wombs,
have proved considerable for Action, if Histories may be credited. That Heavens
blessing may make this seasonable Sermon (...), is the hope and shall be the
humble prayer of him who is unfeignedly

Thine (...)

New-Englands True Interest; NOT TO LIE.
Isaiah 63.8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not
lie: so he was their Savior.


IN this Chapter (to give you only a very short view of the Context) you may
take notice of these three parts.

1. An Interlocution or Dialogue between Christ and his Church, contained in
the first six Verses. The unexpected appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
his glorious works of Vengeance upon his peoples enemies, and of Salvation to
his Church, it draws forth the Churches earnest Enquiries; and these her
Enquiries they draw forth Christ's distinct Answers, even as it is ^romised Jer.
33.3. Call upon me and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty
things which thou knew not. Christ loves to be questioned with concerning
his great works of Providence, because he desires to be known unto his people
in them; and to acquaint them with the great designs he has in hand, as here
he is graciously pleased to do.

2. An Acknowledgement of Praise from the Church, in the recounting, and
calling to mind of eminent passages of former mercy and kindness extended to
her, from ver. 7. to ver. 15.

3. The Churches earnest Prayer and pleading with God hereupon, from v. 15. to
the end: Look down from heaven, etc.

The Verse read, comes under the second of these Heads. Christ having declared,
not only his Person, but also his present design and work to be the wonderful
destruction of his and his peoples enemies, and the salvation of his Redeemed
ones; The Church is presently striking upon the same string of Mercy, and that
her faith and hope might be further confirmed, and her heart enlarged, she
presently echoes unto Christ, by telling over the former stories of his loving
kindness, ver. 7. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, etc. Now
(as one aptly notes upon the place) As good Historians do not only relate mere
naked matters of fact, but the persons also, and considerations moving so or
so, with the effects and resultances; so the Church, surveying here the loving
kindnesses of the Lord from an ancient date, suggests in the words read, the
Considerations upon which the Lord proceeded to be the Savior of this people;
For he said, etc.

The words of the Text may be thus divided. We have in them

1. The Lords just expectations of his people, and that promise which he makes
to himself of great things from them. He said, Surely they are my people,
children that will not lie.

2. The influence of these things upon the Lords Saviourly undertakings with
and for his people: So he was their Savior.

Or a little more largely the words hold forth to us

1. The best Relation wherein any people can stand, and that is to be the Lords
people.

2. That eminent Qualification which suits with such a Relation; To be children
that will not lie.

3. The Lords solemn Assertion and Consideration of such a Relation and
Qualification in the people spoken of; For he said, Surely they are my people,
etc. He affirms such a Relation, and he solemnly expects and promises to
himself such an answerable Qualification.

4. The Lords Engagements and Actings as a Savior toward this his people
hereupon, or as influenced by these things. Having such an expe^^^tion, and
conceiving such hopes of this people, as to promise (...) himself such things
from them, The Lord resolves to undertake, and does actually engage himself, in
the whole work of their Salvation: Proving them and trying them under a
singular dispensation, and long continued series of mercy, which began with
their Redemption out of Egypt, and so was carried on through the Wilderness
unto Canaan, as in the Verses following the Text is more fully declared.

God is here spoken of after the manner of men, as giving to himself the
grounds and reasons of his own great undertaking; And therefore the expressions
of the Text do no whit impeach the foreknowledge of God, whereby he knew from
the beginning what the rebellions and backslidings of this people would be,
even as in v. 10. we find it; but the Lord speaks as (...) judging of matters,
and taking up his hopes, according to the visible and apparent just grounds and
reasons of things, even as a prudent and wise man would in the like case have
done: for who is there that would not have promised to himself great things
from a people so engaged and circumstanced, in case so great mercy and
salvation were shown to them? Now that which the Lord promises to himself and
expects from them, is, That they would prove Children that would not lie.

To lie, in the sense of the Text, takes in deeds as well as words, yea matters
of fact more especially. The Spirit of God means hereby all Vnsoundness,
Perfidiousness, Prevarication with the Lord, whereby we go contrary to our
Engagements, and prove unfaithful to him. The word is translated in other
places to deal falsely, as Genesis 21.23. and to fail, Psalm. 89.33. It is to be
referred unto the matters of the Lords Covenant with his people. God expects
and promises to himself that in these things his people will keep touch with
him, and not shrink. Thus the Church asserts her uprightness, by removing the
Lie far from her self, Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant: the word is the same with
that in the Text; We have not lied unto thee in thy Covenant. This is the plain
meani^g of the words: They will be perfect, upright, faithful to me and with me
in all the concernments of my Covenant with them; I have this good persuasion
of them, and I will try them with mercy and salvation, to see how they will
answer and make good my expectations of them.

From this 8 th Verse, as relating unto the next foregoing, we may briefly take
up this Note:

The ^ountain and fullness of all the Blessings of the people of God, Observe.
it is contained in this, to have the Lord Jehovah to be their Savior. All the
loving kindnesses, all the Lords bestowings, all his great goodness and mercies
mentioned in ver. 7. they are summed up in, and made to flow from this one
thing in ver. 8. He became their Savior.

Reas. 1. From the Comprehensiveness of Salvation. It contains in it all the
good and blessedness of sinners, whether temporal or spiritual, and that in a
way of glorious Redemption from, conquest and triumph over, and destruction of
whatsoever can be found in opposition, whether by way of demerit, or as an
adverse working power. Of Salvation may every poor believing Soul, or People
say, and that in their worst and most distressed estate, All my well-springs
are in thee.

Reas. 2. From the infinite Sufficiency of the Undertaker, when the Lord
Jehovah is the Savior, or undertakes to become the Savior. Isa. 43.11.

Use 1. Learn we then, that we are to take notice of divine Salvation, or of
God as a Savior, in all that which the Lord has graciously bestowed upon us
his poor people in this Wilderness. Our Churches, our Ordinances, our Liberties
and Privileages, our Mercies this day, and unto this day from the beginning,
they are streams issuing from this one Fountainhead, and lines meeting in this
Center, Divine Salvation. We have enjoyed them, and do yet enjoy them in a way
of Salvation. Our Liberties and Privileges they are Redeemed Ransomed Mercies,
malign them who will. The Price, and Power, and Intercession of a Mediator, and
of many precious Saints, have given and continued them unto us. Many a time
have the Archers shot at them, Sins and Enemies, Satan and his Instruments have
stood in opposition; but the Salvation of God has prevailed, and does yet
prevail: so that we may make our entrance this day with that triumph of holy
(...), Luke 1.46, 47. Our souls do magnify the Lord, and our (...) do rejoice
in God our Savior.

Use 2. Then let us continue to draw all our waters out of these wells of
Salvation, the Redeeming grace, and power, Isaiah 12 ^.
and pity, and faithfulness of the Lord our God, as a Savior to us and with
us. They are men of use indeed, that have good buckets of Faith and Prayer to
let down here. Of such precious ones let the Governors of Judah say in their
hearts, Zech. 1^.5.
that these shall be their strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God. You that
can draw hence, spare no labor nor pains. The Well indeed is deep, but the
Spirit of God is with you; and these waters drawn out by a lively constant
acting of Faith, will abundantly recompense all our labor. By these shall the
inheritance of the Lord be refreshed when it is weary; yea, in due time, they
shall flow forth to be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein
shall go no galley with oars, nor gallant ship shall pass thereby, even waters
of plenty and security to the Lords people. Isa. 33.21.

But there are two other Observations from the words which I mainly intend;
unto which let me speak severally in the Doctrinal part of them, and so join
them both together in the Application.



This is a speaking of God after the manner of men, and in this way we utter
matter of truth concerning him; we speak of him things that are right, though
in a way of imperfection as to our manner. As God is said sometimes to will a
thing, but not according to his Omnipotency, for then it should be most
certainly effected: so he is said also to expect and look for some things, and
to make a promise of them to himself, but not according to his infinite
unerring Prescience. Thus the Lord says that he looked for grapes from his
vineyard, Isa. 5.2, 4. and ver. 7. He looked for judgment, but behold
oppression, for righteousness, but behold a cry. So Zeph. 3.7. I said, Surely
thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction: and in that Parable, Matthew.
21.37. They will reverence my son.

In this Doctrine there are three things to be spoken to.

First, The grounds and (...) of these Expectations of God, upon which, or
accordin^ unto which, he raises his hopes and confidences concerning any
people, so as to say of them, Surely they will be thus, or do thus, as I would
have them to be or do. Now here there are these five particulars, briefly as
the grounds of the Lords Expectations.

1. The special Relation of a people unto God; or that Covenant Relation
whereinto the Lord brings a people that they may be His; Surely they are My
people, and then it follows, Children that will not lie. The Lord founds his
whole Law, in the giving of it to Israel, upon a Preface of Interest in them,
Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God. A Parent expects more from a Child then
from any other, because of the Relation. Jer. 2.14. if Israel had been no more
then a servant or a home-born slave, the Lord had not expected so great things
from him; but now being a son, yea a firstborn, Exodus 4.22. this makes the
Judgments of God executed upon him for rebellions* and backslidings to be,
though more strange and astonishing* yet most just and righteous.

2. The Extraction of a people, or their descent from such and such Parents and
Progenitors; when they do not only stand in relation to God, but are born and
grow up into Covenant with him, as the seed and posterity of the Lords faithful
ones. This is implied in that expression of Children in the Text; i^ notes not
only their Relation unto God as a Father, but unto pious and religious
Parents, the Lords faithful Covenanting Servants. Religious Parentage and
Descent is of great moment with the Lord; hence he calls and names his people
so often in Scripture from their pious Ancestors. Thus the whole Race is called
Jacob and Israel, the seed of Jacob and of Israel, Psalm. 22.23. Isa. 45.19. the
Posterity of Abraham, etc. Covenanting holy Parents, they are a holy Root unto
their Seed, and the Lord may well expect that the Branches should be answerable
unto the Root. Romans 11.16.
Hence the Lord solemnly calls upon his people to look to the Rock whence they
were hewn, and to the hole of the Pit whence they were dug; to look unto
Abraham their father, and to Sarah that bare them, Isa. 51.1, 2.

3. The solemn actual Restipulations of a people unto God, whereby they do more
explicitly bind themselves, and come under voluntary deliberate Engagements
unto God. When God has the Vows and Promises, the Hands and Seals, the solemn
Covenant-Deeds of a people, now he may well expect that from such a time they
will never fail him more, but abide faithful and constant. Thus it was with
Israel, Jer. 2.20. Deuteronomy. 26.17. Josh. 24.21, 22.

4. The Advantages and Privileges of a people. A people in Covenant, are a
people of many Advantages, and the Lord builds his Expectations upon these,
Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4, 5. God looked for grapes from his vineyard, Isa. 5.
because he had fenced it, and gathered out the stones, and built a tower in the
midst thereof, and made a wine press therein, ver. 1, 2. When the rain comes
often upon the ground, the Husbandman expects meet fruit; and good reason,
because of this advantage: fruitful seasons afforded, make us to expect a
plentiful Harvest. If God be not wanting in Ordinances, in sending Messengers
one after another, in setting up Lights in the Candlesticks, in holding forth
the Rule unto a people, and discovering the Pattern of his house to them, etc.
he will certainly expect and require singular things from them: for unto whom
much is given, from them shall much be required, Luke 12.48. Psalm. 147.19, 20.
Mat. 11.20, 21, etc.

5. The primitive Constitution of a people, and their first ways of walking
with God according unto such a Constitution. When God made man at first, he
made him upright; when God does in a more then ordinary way of Providence form
a people, and settle them to be a people to himself, there is ever that which
is eminent in the primitive frame of things amongst them, which God expects
that they should keep to, and never make defection from. Thus God speaks of his
Vineyard, Isa. 5.2. it was planted with the choicest vine. So Jer. 2.21. Yet I
planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed. Thus also God speaks of Judges
as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, Isa. 1.26. David had his
first ways, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. and so Churches have their first ways, when they
newly come out of the forming hand of God: Now the Lord expresses not only
great disappointment, when these first ways are neglected, or quite altered
and cast off, as Jer. 2.21. How then art thou turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange vine unto me? but great displeasure also, and threats of
punishment, Rev. 2.4, 5. hence are those cutting Interrogatories, Gal. 3.1, 2,
3, 4.

Secondly, A second thing in this Doctrine is, The nature and tenor of this
dispensation of God, to try and prove a people with Mercies and Salvation under
his just Expectations of them, and promises concerning them. This we may take
in three particulars.

1. When the Lord enters into Covenant with any people, this Covenant of his is
a Covenant with Conditions. Foedus est promiss^^ sub certa condition. Hence
there are the Laws, as well as the Promises of the Covenant. As the Lord
obliges himself to us, so he requires something from us, and thus the
Commandments and Statutes of God are frequently called his Covenant, Psalm.
25.10. and 103.18.
Exodus 34.28. Deuteronomy. 4.13. The Lord does not bind himself but upon terms to any
people. In the purely spiritual Covenant, established with Believers only, as
there are the Laws of it, 1 Cor 9.21. so there is a sufficiency of grace
provided, and absolutely engaged, that there may be a performance and obedience
unto the end, and so that Covenant can never be made void or disannulled to any
that are ever brought into the bond thereof, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and 32.20.
But as to that external political Covenant, which takes in A Body of People,
here there is no such engagement of grace sufficient, infallibly to be bestowed
for the keeping of the same; and therefore it may be and is most frequently
broken and made void. God threatens to remove the Candlestick, Rev. 2.5. and
often has he done it. Israel and Judah were in the issue cast off, for
breaking the Lords Covenant.

2. God never is, nor can he be the first that fails in his Covenant with a
people. Their desertion or dereliction never begins with God, but themselves,
Hos. 13.9. You know the common and stated Rule in this case. Acts of pure
Dominion and Sovereignty they begin with God, and proceed wholly from him, Romans
9.11, 12, 13. but acts of Justice must have the demerit of the creature to be
founded upon; such is Gods forsaking of a people, Jer. 2.17. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

3. Hence there is a Probation-time belonging to the Covenant-state of a
people. The Lord will make a trial whether they will keep and be steadfast in
his Covenant, yea or no. He will not fail on his part, but he will be that unto
a people which he has engaged himself to be by Covenant; He will nourish and
cherish, He will instruct and teach, He will save and shine upon a people, and
keep the path of a gracious Covenant, without turning aside from the same, and
in such a course and way as this he will make a full proof and trial of them.
He will afflict in mercy whilst his hopes of them continue; He will bring many
special hours of temptation upon them one way or another; He will nourish and
keep up his hopes and expectations as long as may be, until he has a full
proof of them; and now if they fail him, there is a critical season of altering
and changing the course and way of his Providence toward them. From such an
hour, or day, or year, is such a person or people forsaken of God;
Probation-time cease, and blinding, hardening, ruining time comes in the room
of it: Luke 19.42. O that thou had known! but now they are hid from thine
eyes. Jer. 6.27, 28, 29, 30. Reprobate silver shall men call them, for the Lord
has rejected them.

Thirdly, The third thing is the Reason, which shall be only this one. Because
in such a way as this the Lord, does wonderfully glorify the wisdom, and
sweetness, and righteousness of his Administration and Government* The Cords of
such a dispensation are the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4. The Lord acts toward us
in a suitable way, as we are intelligent creatures, made after the image of God,
capable of judging and discerning the Reason and Equity of things, and of
arguing one thing from another, and choosing and preferring one thing before
another. As to his Elect, the Lord reaches their Souls with effectual grace in
this way: As to others, the Wisdom and Justice and Holiness of God, shine
forth in their hardening and preparation beforehand to destruction. This is a
way wherein there can be no exception laid against the Lord by any, but he
alone shall overcome in judgment. When the Lord shall triumph most in the
utter ruin of a gainsaying, backsliding, despising people, yet he shall also
retain the name and glory of a gracious and merciful God, because He often
would have gathered Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37. and there was nothing more to be
done to his vineyard which he did not do, Isa. 5.4.



That which the Lord does chiefly desire and require in and from his people,
that he does chiefly expect and promise to himself: That which he most abhors
and abominates, he least of all expects from them that are his. Now Truth is
that which the Lord desires, Psalm. 51.6. but the Lie is that which he hates,
Prove. 6.17. and 12.22. Isa. 30.8, 9.

Quest. 2.
What is it to be children that will not lie?

Answ.
The general meaning of this expression has been already given. Such as are
lying children, they are also styled corrupters, Isa. 1.4. unstedfast ones,
flatterers, whose hearts are not right, who keep not the Lords Covenant, Psalm.
78.10, 36, 37 Treacherous dealers, Hos. 6.7. A deceitful bow, Turners back,
etc. Psalm. 78.57. Hos. 7.16. By the contrary unto these we may know what it is
not to Lie. Thus we read of faithful children, Tit. 1.6. the Generation of the
just or Righteous, Psalm. 14.5. such whose hearts are not turned back, and whose
steps do not decline, Ps. 44.18.

More particularly there are these six things that the Lord requires from a
Covenanting people, that this Lie may not be charged upon them.

1. Purity of Doctrine and Worship. Mixtures and corruptions in these are
expressly called a Lie in Scripture Phrase, Hos. 11.12. Ephraim compasses me
about with Lies; i. e. with false Worship. Antichristianism is therefore called
a Lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. because it is a mix^ure of false Doctrines, and false
Worship. There are the lies of Error and Heresy, and the lies of Superstition
and Idolatry; the Lord in his Covenant engages his people against both. There
is no Error in Doctrine, or in Worship and Ordinances, but it tends some way
or other to alter, pervert, and corrupt the Lords Covenant with his people. By
this we are to judge of the danger of Errors and erroneous practices, and
answerably to watch against the infection of them.

2. Inward heart sincerity, or Covenant truth within, Psa. 51.6. Romans 2.29.
Prove. 3.1, 3. This the Lord has promised, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 31.33. and calls
for, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer. 4.4. and bitterly complains for the want of, Isa. 29.13.
Hypocrisy is a Lie, yea a fountain of Lies. A company of formal custome-born
Christians, what are they but an heap of Lies in the sight and esteem of God.
Now this inward heart sincerity it consists in Right principles, 1 Timothy 1.5.
Right aims and ends, Mat. 6.22. and a Right dependence or trust, Isa. 26.3, 4.
as a man's trust, dependence and shelter is, so is his uprightness and
sincerity. Such as have lying Refuges are lying children.

3. A conversation flowing from and suiting with truth and sincerity within.
That the power and life of practical godliness should be entertained into the
whole of our course and way before the Lord. To fail in this is to lie loudly,
1 John 2.4. and 4.20.

4. A visible and open profession and holding forth of, and witness-bearing to
the truths and ways of God before the world, Romans 10.10. David did not only
hide the word in his heart; but, says he, with my lips have I declared all the
judgments of thy mouth, Psalm. 119.11, 13. The Lord Jesus witnessed a good
confession, 1 Timothy 6.13. and herein we must also follow him, that we may be
true and faithful unto God. The danger in this matter will not excuse us from
the duty. There were an hundred forty and four thousand, Rev. 14.1. that had
the Fathers name written in their foreheads, they did not conceal nor hide
themselves. Hence Gods faithful ones during the whole reign of Antichrist are
styled the Lords witnesses. Revel. 11.3.
They are such as have their Banner of witness displayed, notwithstanding all
the bloody rage of Antichrist. To deny the name of Christ, or to wave the
public owning of truths and ways which the Lord Jesus owns and contends for,
this is to be Lying children, and dreadful will be the issue, if the word of
Christ be true, Mat. 10.32, 33. Mar. 8.38. Many cases there are in this matter
not here to be touched upon, but if we be the Lords, and he have any delight in
us, we shall not fail in the main of this duty. The Church of Christ has ever
had this visibility of a witness in her confession of the truths of Christ, and
opposition unto the lies of Antichrist, 1 Timothy 3.15.

5. Special fidelity answerable unto special trust committed. As the Lord Jesus
is the one great Steward, whom the Father has set up and appointed over all;
so there are many inferior subservient Stewards under him. Some are Stewards
in higher, some in inferior Ranks and capacities. There are diversities of
gifts which are dispensed, unto some eminency of parts and natural abilities,
unto some the wealth of this world, unto some a large and swaying interest in
the Many, unto some Authority and Office. Now all these gifts they are Talents
as well as Gifts; Gifts as freely bestowed and received, Talents in respect of
the end wherefore they are bestowed, viz. that they may be improved, and an
account given of them. To betray a man's trust, or not to improve his Talent, is
to lie and deal falsely, for of a Steward it is required that he be faithful, 1
Cor. 4.2. As every one has received the gift, so we are to minister the same
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. All the Lords
people are to be faithful in whatsoever trust is committed unto them, and in
special Magistrates and Rulers, and so also Ministers that are Stewards in the
House of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Luke 12.42, 43, 44.

6. Stedfastness and constancy, perseverence and holding out, and that in a way
of fellowship and Communion with the people of God, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25.
Backsliding children are lying children. To begin well, but not to hold out,
not to maintain our integrity, purity, fellowship, faithfulness unto the death,
this is breach of Covenant, and to belie the Lord and his ways, Jer. 2.5. Gal.
5.7, 8, 9. Coloss. 2.6, 7. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.

How is it said in the Doctrine, That so the Lord is, Quest. 2.
or becomes the Savior of his people?

1. There is nothing of Merit implied in it. Answ.


2. There is no bar put unto the Lords proceeding sometime with his people
upon terms of Sovereignty and Prerogative, in the dispensations of his grace
and mercy, as Isa. 57.17, 18, 19.

3. It is to be understood of the Lords ordinary way of dealing with his
people. It would be horrible presumption in us to expect and promise to our
selves Salvation in any contrary way; but in this way of fidelity and
faithfulness, it would be a sinful despondency not to hope, and expect it upon
terms of free grace.

Reas. 1. Because our fidelity and uprightness does now exactly answer the
fidelity and uprightness of God in the Covenant. Our truth does fitly answer
Gods truth and Covenant-All-sufficiency, Genesis 17.1.

Reas. 2. Because when the Lords people prove thus, Children that will not lie,
now they are his peculiar Glory. The Lord may and does in this case make his
boast of, and glory in his people, Job 1.8. If those who have Covenanted with
God, deal falsely in his Covenant, and prove Liars unto him, now they stain the
glory of God, reproach and pollute his Name; but if they maintain their
integrity, continue faithful and upright, now they are a Name and a Praise to
him; and for Israel his glory will the Lord place salvation in Zion, Isa.
46.13. Upon all the glory there shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5. With the upright
the Lord will show himself upright, 2 Samuel 22.26.

Reas. 3. Because this is the Aim, and shall be the final Issue of all the
providential dispensations of God toward his people, to make them to be such
children as will not lie. The Lord will never cease working, afflicting,
sifting, purging, till he bring his people to be of this frame, although there
be but a Remnant that will endure and hold out thereunto, Zeph. 3.13. Jer.
31.23. Isa. 1.25, 26, 27. Rev. 21.27.

The Application.

And here I shall consider that the words of the Text are spoken concerning a
People, even the Body of a Nation; and so my endeavor shall be to apply the
Truths delivered, unto this present Assembly standing before the Lord this day
as the Body of this People: Such in several respects is the Capacity of this
solemn Congregation, and unto you as such, my desire is to speak in the Name of
the Lord. For many a day and year, even from our first beginnings has this
word of the Lord been verified concerning us in this Wilderness; The Lord has
said of New England, Surely they are my People, Children that will not lie, so
has he been our Savior. Upon this Basis have all the Saviourly Undertakings
of the Lord been founded in the midst of us, and upon this bottom do we unto
this day abide.

The solemn work of this day is Foundation-work; not to lay a new Foundation,
but to continue and strengthen, and beautify, and build upon that which has
been laid. Give me leave therefore, Honored and Beloved, to awaken, and call
upon you, in the Name of him who sends me, with reference unto those
Foundations that are held forth to us in the Text, for if these should be out
of course, what could the Righteous do? If we should so frustrate and deceive
the Lords Expectations, that his Covenant Interest in us, and the Workings of
his Salvation be made to cease, then All were lost indeed; Ruin upon Ruin,
Destruction upon Destruction would come, until one stone were not left upon
another.

Let the Uses be these four.

Use 1. Of Information; to let New England know what that gracious infinitely
wise, holy and awful dispensation of divine Providence is, under which the Lord
has set us and continued us unto this day. We must look upon our selves as
under a solemn divine Probation; It has been and it is a Probation-time, even
to this whole People. Under great hopes, and singular eminent Expectations has
the Lord our God been trying of us, and is yet trying us in the ways of his
Salvation. There is this one voice of all his Providence toward us; they call
aloud unto us in this language of a Probation-time, To day if this my people
will hear my voice; To day if they will come up to the Lords Expectations, and
answer his promises; To day, that (...) whilst it is a day of Salvation,
whilst the Lord is yet so wonderfully preserving of us, displaying his Banner
over us, holding underneath the Everlasting Arms, and making us to taste so
much of his loving kind^^^^ and tender mercies every (...) Divine Expectations
frustrated will issue dreadfully, when the Lord shall make us know his breach
of promise, Numb. 14.34. This we must know, that the Lords promises, and
expectations of great things, have singled out New England, and all sorts and
ranks of men amongst us, above any Nation or people in the world; and this has
been and is a time and season of eminent trial to us. If I should say that the
very world, or common ordinary Professors expect great things from us at this
day, there is a great deal of weight in it; If I say that the faithful precious
suffering Saints of God in all other places, that have heard of the Lor^^
Providence toward us, do expect and promise great things from us, this is
far more; But to mention the Lords own Expectations, this is most of all,
these are certainly most solemn and awful. Every Expectation of God is most
just and righteous. Are not my ways equal? says God, Ezekiel. 18.29. Yes, most
equal, blessed God; Bountiful and Rich have thou been in all thy free
Bestowings; equal and just art thou in all thy greatest Expectations. If we do
but run over the forementioned grounds of divine Expectation, it will be
sufficient to commit the judgment of this case even to our selves, as Isa. 5.3.

As for special Relation unto God; whom has the Lord more signally exalted
then his people in this Wilderness? The Name and Interest of God, and
Covenant Relation to him, it has been written upon us in Capital Letters from
the beginning. God had his Creatures in this Wilderness before we came, and his
Rational Creatures too, a multitude of them; but as to Sons and Children that
are Covenant-born unto God, Are not we the first in such a Relation? in this
respect we are surely the Lords firstborn in this Wilderness. Of the poor
Natives before we came we may say as Isa. 63.19. They were not called by the
Lords Name, he bear not Rule over them: But we have been from the beginning,
and we are the Lords.

As for Extraction and Descent, if we be considered as a Posterity, O what
Parents and Predecessors may we the most of us look back unto, through whose
Loins the Lord has stretched forth the line of his Covenant, measuring of us
out, and taking us in to be a peculiar Portion to himself?

As for Restipulations, and Engagements back again to God; what awful public
Transactions of this kind have there been amongst us? Has not the eye of the
Lord beheld us laying Covenant Engagements upon our selves? has not his ear
heard us solemnly Avouching him, and him alone, to be our God and Savior? Has
not a great part of the world been a witness of these things, even of our
explicit ownings of, and Covenantings with the Lord as our God, laying this as
a foundation-stone in our Building; and of this we may say, It has been a
special Exasperation unto Adversaries and Ill-willers, that despised
New England has laid claim to, and publicly avouched and challenged a special
Interest in God above others.

As for our Advantages and Privileges in a Covenant-state here time and
strength would fail to reckon up what we have enjoyed of this kind; if any
people in the world have been lifted up to heaven as to Advantages and
Privileges, we are the people. Name what you will under this Head, and we have
had it. We have had Moses and Aaron to lead us; we have had Teachings and
Instructions, line upon line, and precept upon precep^; we have had Ordinances
and Gospel-dispensations the choicest of them; we have had Peace and Plenty; we
have had Afflictions and Chastisements in measure; we have had the Hearts, and
Prayers, and Blessing of the Lords people every where; we have had the Eye and
Hand of God, watching and working every way for our good; our Adversaries have
had their Rebukes, we have had our Encouragements, and a wall of fire round
about us. What could have been done more for us then has been done?

And then in the last place, as to New-Englands first ways; what glorious
things might here be spoken, unto the praise of free grace, and to justify the
Lords Expectations upon this ground? Surely God has often spoke concerning His
Churches here, as in Jer. 2.2. I remember the (...) of thy (...), etc. O what
were the open Professions of the Lords people that first entered this
Wilderness? How did our fathers entertain the Gospel, and all the pure
Institutions thereof* and th^se Liberties which they brought over? What was
their Communion and Fel^owship in the (...) of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ?
What was the pitch of (...) Brotherly love, of their Zeal for God and his
Ways, and against ways destructive of Truth and Holiness? What was their
Humility, their Mortification, their Exemplariness? How much of Holiness to the
Lord was written upon all their ways and transactions? God sifted a whole
Nation that he might send choice Grain over into this Wilderness.

Thus it has been with us as to grounds of Divine Expectation: And therefore
let us in the fear of God learn this great truth to day, and receive the
instruction thereof sealed up unto all our souls; That the great God has taken
up great Expectations of us, and made great Promis^ to himself concerning us,
and this has been, and is New-Englands day and season of Probation.

Use 2. Of Examination and Conviction as to the Returns that we have made to
God our Savior; and that proof which he has had of us, under such and so long
a trial. How have we kept our selves from being lying Children? Here is solemn
matter of Examination.

How the Lord has carried it toward us cannot but be manifest, Jer. 2.31. O
generation, see the word of the Lord, etc. How we have carried it toward God,
as it cannot lie in the dark, so it ought to abide under the most serious and
practical reflections of all Ranks and degrees amongst us, and of every soul of
us in special. Let it not be thought unseasonable to call upon you as a
Representative Assembly, to look heedfully into the glass of the Truth
delivered, that we may view the present face of things amongst us, even the
face of this our present time and generation; not as natural men, Jam. 1.23, 24.
to forget the same immediately, but as spiritual men to retain and judge of
things, and as gracious ones to lament and intercede with the Lord: O what a
sad Metamorphosis has there of later years passed upon us in these Churches
and Plantations? What a fruitful production of Lies has there been in the
midst of us? of Lies in Profession and Practice, in Doctrine and in
Conversation? Certainly the father of Lies has been bringing in his lies
apace; the lying spirit begins to have a large walk amongst us, venting and
discovering it self even to the very face of the God of Truth, and engaging the
Lord deeply in the quarrel (...)

Children there are many in this Wilderness; A numerous Offspring has the Lord
your God given unto you: But what are we the Generation Risen and Rising up?
Are we Children that will not lie? would to God it were so: Are we not rather a
multitude of us, such as keep not the Covenant of our God? that refuse to walk
in his ways? that flatter him with our mouths, and lie unto him with our
tongues? because our heart is not right with him, nor are we steadfast in his
Covenant, Psalm. 78.10, 36, 37.

When ever the Lord proves a people, He is most critical in observing the
discoveries that are made of them; we can in no wise lie hid under Divine
Probation. Hence says the Lord Jer. 2.21. How art thou turned into the
degenerate plant of a strange vine UNTO ME? that is, not unto me as an
Omniscient God that know all things before they actually come to pass; but unto
me upon Probation and trial made. It is a solemn thought for us to think, and a
solemn enquiry for us to make this day; what are we unto the Lord our God,
under all his trials of us? And it is a solemn Conviction and Charge against
us, to have it spoken, as it must be spoken in the Name of the Lord this day, O
New England, thy God did expect better things from thee and thy Children; not
Worldliness, and an insatiable desire after perishing things; not Whoredoms
and Fornications; not Revellings and Drunkenness; not Oaths and false
Swearings; not Exactions and Oppressions; not Slanderings and Backbitings; not
Rudeness and Incivility, a degeneracy from the good Manners of the Christian
world; not Formality and Profaneness, to loath Manna, to despise holy things,
to grow Sermon-proof and Ordinance proof; not Contentions and Disorders; not an
Itching after new things and ways; not a rigid Pharisaical Spirit; not a
Contempt of Superiors; not Unthankfulness and disrespect to Instruments of
choice Service; not a growing weary of Government, and a drawing loose in the
Yoke of God: Not these things, but better things, O New England, has thy God
expected from thee. But what has the Lord found? Do not you who are our
Fathers in the Commonwealth know? or cannot those Watchmen of the Lord tell
us, whom he has set for a Tower (...) Certainly all these false and evil
things, and that not by secret search only, but openly and in the view of the
world, has the Lord found. Alas! how is New England in danger this day to be
lost even in New England? to be buried in its own Ruins? How sadly may we
lament it that All are not Israel that are now of Israel? How is the good grain
diminished, and the chaff increased? The first generation have been ripened
time after time, and the most of them gathered in as shocks of corn in their
season; But we who rise up to tread out the footsteps of them that are gone
before us, alas! what are we? It is a sad name to be styled Children that are
corrupters; Isa. 1.4.
but are we not indeed many of us corrupted, and which is far worse Corrupters?
How is our wine mixed with water? what coolings and abatements are there to be
charged upon us in the things that are good, and that have been our glory? We
have abated in our esteem of Ordinances, in our hungring and thirsting after
the rich provisions of the House of God; in our good stomachs to all that which
is set before us upon the Table of the Gospel. We have abated in our Love and
Zeal, in our wise, tender and faithful management of that great duty of mutual
watchfulness and reproof.

There are many among us that have even suffered many things in vain; many that
having begun in the spirit, do now walk as if they were to be made perfect by
the flesh; many that are gone off from God in point of dependence, looking out
to secure some other friends and hiding-places to themselves besides the Lord,
against those changes of times that may come; many (as we may justly fear) that
would but too soon and too easily in a day of trial entertain a Lie in the
Worship of God, and return to the onyons and garlic of Egypt again. How has
that evil work of Strife and Division sprung up almost every where amongst us?
in which it is solemnly to be noted, that there is ever a mixture of sin and
punishment going together: In this thing certainly we have failed the Lords
Expectation; for he has said, Surely in a Wilderness, under the eye of
Observers, under such Leaders, and the free liberty of all those ways of Order
which Christ has appointed to build up the Peace and Communion of his people,
they will certainly be of one heart and soul, keeping the unit^ of the spirit
in the hand of (...) attainty, walk by the same rule, and mind the same thing.
Strict and impartial Examination would yield large matter of uncontrolable
Conviction as to such things as these. Alas! what way of God with us is there,
that has not issued in the discovery of the Lie amongst us? The Answers of
Prayer that we have so often, and so eminently received, these have discovered
our Lie, for we have as often returned again to folly. Our Afflictions removed,
these also have discovered the Lie, for with Hezekiah we have not returned
according to the benefit done unto us. The Death and Removal of the Lords
eminent Servants in one Rank and in another, this also has manifested the Lie
in many of us. Whilst they lived their Piety and Zeal, their Light and Life,
their Counsels and Authority, their Examples and Awe kept us right, and drew us
on in the good ways of God, to profess and practice the best things; but now
that they are dead and gone, Ah how does the unsoundness, the rottenness and
hypocrisy of too many amongst us make it self known, as it was with Joash
after the death of Jehojadah. In a word, we that stand before the Lord this
day, we have gone less with God then we did at first engage and bid him for all
his kindness, and then we began at first to yield him, for all the Mercies,
Privileges and Liberties of this Place. You that have tender and gracious
hearts, suffer these things to affect and afflict them day by day. Verily if
the load of them be not taken up and born by a considerable number amongst us
in such a way, there is great fear lest it crack and sink us without remedy.

Use 3. Of Exhortation. As we would have the Lord to be and to continue to be
our Savior, so let us set our selves to answer the Lords Expectations. Let
New England answer the Lords Expectations of New England, that the Lord Jehovah
may be as he has been New-Englands Savior.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, We are all bound in a Covenant of Truth, to and
with the God of Truth; There is an unworthy Messenger sent to you this day, to
put you in mind of your Obligations, and solemnly to call upon you to be True
men to God. New England men should be True men; let not the contrary hereunto
be our reproach either with God or man.

What the Lord expects from us has been laid down before; (...) not enlarge
upon those several Particulars (...) which I have in my aim, is, not any thing
of doubtful disputation, not merely Civils or Prudentials; but the sure and
certain, the often acknowledged, and stated, common Interest of the people of
God, and of you the Lords People in special; The Interest of Practical Piety
and Holiness, so much reproached at this day; The Interest of unmixed,
spiritual Gospel Worship, and of the sincere and open profession and owning of
the truths and ways of Christ, though persecuted and trampled on at this day
in the world; The Interest of Unity and Peace in the ways of Reformation, and
of expecting and waiting for the issue of all those great and Astonishing
Providence that are working every where; The Interest of these things, and of
just and Righteous Liberties in order hereunto, is all that which I intend. The
times are come, and hastening more and more, wherein faithfulness to God in all
these things, will be the most glorious Crown that can be worn upon Earth; A
Crown upon which it shall be graven, Here is the Faith and Patience of the
Saints. This then is the word of the Lord unto his New England Churches and
People this day, Let no man take this your Crown from you; R^v. 13.1^. and 14
12.
No Temptations, no Corruptions, no Insinuations, no Threatenings, no Fears, no
Adversaries.

If God had betrusted us here, but with a little; Luk* 16 10. M^t. 25 21, 23*
yet he that is unfaithful in a little, would be so in much; and he that is
faithful in a little, shall be made ruler over much: But the Lord has
betrusted us with much; with a very choice, and considerable part of the
Interest of his Name and Glory; and that too in the view of the world, and upon
manifold Advantages in our upholding, and cleaving to the same. God has thrust
down his people from their Advantages in other places; we have sinned against
ours, but the Lord yet continues them, as the Liberty and Privilege of this
day does testify aloud to us. New England has yet its Advantages as well as
its Engagements in this great matter of Owning the Cause of God, and standing
their ground for God and Christ and the Gospel. And this we must know, that
this is the time wherein he that is not with Christ is against him; the reason
is, M^t. 12 ^.
because the Controversy comes now to be stated more openly, and to be
avouched more professedly in the world. Antichrist is now displaying his
Colors, setting up his Standard, and so is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Anointed
King and Priest and Prophet, the Fathers Heir of all things. The field is large
whereinto the Forces on both sides are drawing; but the fight will be very
close, and the quarrel in the issue finally decided; there can be no
neutralizing therefore in this day. He that gathers not with Christ,
scatters abroad; we must declare for whom we are, and choose our side, there
will be no other Remedy. We indeed of these ends of the Earth have long since
made our choice; we have given up our selves to the Lord Jesus as to our
Spiritual King and Lawgiver, to be his portion and inheritance: Now that which
the Lord expects is, that we stick to this our choice, that we give not back a
whit, so as to become Liars unto that God who unto us has not been as waters
that fail. A poor man, says Solomon, is better then a liar, Prove. 19.22. to be
called Poor New England, this may seem to be a Reproach but in truth is not,
Prove. 1^.5.
for he that mocketh the poor reproacheth his maker; but to be called False and
lying New England, this shall be a blot and a reproach never to be wiped away.

As Satan said concerning Job, when God boasted as it were to him of his
integrity, Chap. 1.11. Put forth thine hand and touch all that he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face; and so again Chap. 2.5. So it may be Satan and his
Instruments may be tempting and saying concerning us; Let that people of so
much Profession in the Wilderness be but thus or thus proved and tried, let but
this or that happen to them, this or that Affrightment, this or that
Allurement; Let but such and such be once removed by death or otherwise, and
then it shall be seen what they will come to; It will then appear how they will
entertain the ways of the world, and give up Gospel and Ordinances and
Liberties as well as others, selling their Birthright even for a mess of
pottage. But shall it ever be thus indeed? God forbid. We have been listed in
the number of those followers of the Lamb who are called, Rev. 17.14.
and chosen and faithful; let us in the fear of God continue still to be of
them. Special marks of favor the Lord has been pleased from time to time to
set upon those faithful undertakings of his Servants in this Wilderness,
wherein keeping close to God in matters Civil and Ecclesiastical has ^^en the
design in truth and in sincerity: now the Lord evermore keep us from bringing
the marks of infamy upon our selves in any contrary way of walking. If the Lord
has named us his Witnesses, and has produced us as such unto the world; and
we should be now sinfully silent, or withdraw, or alter our Testimony, as to
any truth or way or work of his, O what a provocation would this be? It is a
day wherein the Lord has been Riding Circuit, and making proof of all Ranks
and degrees of men, and he has found them Liars; Mean men have been vanity,
Psalm. 62.9*
and men of high degree a lie; they have professed for Reformation, and to be
for the interest of Holiness and Gospel Worship, and for the just Liberties of
the Lords people, but in an hour of temptation he has found them Liars: Now
what does New England say? Will ye also go away? Let such a question tend to
establish your hearts the more; as it was the issue thereof upon the Disciples,
Joh. 6.67, 68, 69. It will be a woeful day indeed, when the Lord shall take up
those words of witness against us, Isa. 1.2, 3. It will be a doleful thing to
be of a broken credit with God, and for the Lord to pronounce us B^nkrupts. If
we frustrate the Lords Expectations, he will cut off ours. The one contains in
it the greatest aggravations of sin, and the other of punishment. We cannot
make God miserable by the one, ( for of these stones he can raise up children
unto Abraham) but we shall be miserable with a witness in the execution of the
other upon us. It has been the glory and the glorying of the Lords people,
that they have made no defection from him, no not in the saddest times, Psalm.
44.17, 18, 19. Let the same thing be our glory and our glorying.

In the further pressing of this Exhortation, let me a little more particularly
direct my self, 1. To the Remainders of the Ancient Stock amongst us. 2. To the
present Generation. 3. To our Honored Leaders and Rulers.

First, Unto those who are yet abiding with us of the first generation of the
Lords faithful Servants, those Plants of Renown wherewith God set his Garden
here at the first. Let me speak a few words unto you Fathers, because you have
^ town that which was from the beginning; you may take up the Apostle John's
expressions, and say, That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, 1 John 1.^, ^.
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Cause and
Inter^^^ (...) God in this Wilderness. You have had a long and large
E^^^^rience of things; you have seen all the great works which the Lord has
done for this people; you have been long rooted and satiated in the House of
the Lord: As you ought to be, and are, so we esteem of you, and account you to
be as a Crown and an Honor in the midst of us: Trials you have seen, and
trials you may yet further see, but your Triumph is now at hand. You have by
this time parted with the most and the choicest of your Contemporaries, your
Companions in the foundations of the work of Christ here* And your eyes behold
this day, that another Generation is risen up, and begin to stand thick upon
the Stage; and that, even of them, there is one, to whose lot it falls to speak
to you in the Name of the Lord this day. Now what is the sum of your desires,
and would be the chief and top of your joys, as to those you must shortly
leave behind you? Is it not that your children after you may be found walking
in the truth, ^ Joh. 4. ^ Joh. 4.
owning the Covenant of God, maintaining and upholding the same Interest of
Holiness and Reformation wherein you have been engaged before us? Then suffer
the word of Exhortation in a few words; And the Lord help you to consider the
season; Your season, who have not long to be Examples, and as the Salt in the
midst of us; and our season, who have not long to enjoy you. O believe much and
pray much for your Successors in the Cause and work of God; Exodus 10.2. Ps
78.4, 5, 6, 7.
show forth and declare all the works of God unto your Children; Charge and
adjure them to keep the Covenant of the Lord their God; forewarn them of such
ways and courses and persons, as you know, upon sufficient experience, to be
destructive to the peace and beauty of our Zion. As long as you are in this
Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13.
stir them up by putting them in remembrance, that they may be established in
all those truths and practices, which to own and abide in has been
New-Englands glory, and must be its preservatian and safety in whatever times
are coming upon us. You know what Examples unto this purpose you have in Moses
and Joshua and David; Deuteronomy. 29, etc Josh. 23 and 24 1 Kings 2. ^ Chron. 28.
The Lord plant in y^u the same love and zeal and care for the Name of God and
the welfare of your Posterity, before you go hence and be seen no more.

Secondly, Unto those who are the Generation risen and rising up (...) the
midst of us. Suffer me, my Brethren and Companions, who (...) one of you, to
direct this word of the Lord unto you also this day.

It is we that begin now to be the Body and Bul^ of this people every where,
and to stand up in the room of those that are gone before us; How well we do or
shall fill the same, the Searcher of all hearts he knows. This is sure, that
the work of God, and his Name, and his Expectations of great things, do this
day descend upon us; even of us has the Lord also spoken it, Surely These are
my people too, children that will not lie; for his Covenant is commanded unto
many Generations. It is high time then for us to be thoroughly awakened; It is
high time for us to stand up, Psalm. 105.8.
solemnly to receive the charge, and blessing of the Lord our God, and of his
faithful Servants that are departing from us. It is high time for us to prepare
the shoulder in good earnest, and to give our necks to the yoke of God, that we
may not be a fruitless, a faithless, a perverse Generation. Mat. 17.17. Deuteronomy.
32.5, 20.
It is true indeed that there are through grace some first Ripe Grapes to be
found amongst us, (though of such the Lord has been snatching away some, (as
of late) clusters in which the new wine was found, Isa. 65.8.
and much of the blessing of our Vine contained) but why should we frustrate
the Lord of that full vintage which he justly expects from our Generation. My
Brethren, we are the Seed of such as are and have been the friends of God; we
are the Children of the Covenant and of the Kingdom; O that all that see us
might acknowledge, Isa. 61.9.
that indeed we are the seed which the Lord has blessed. O that we might be as
that seed spoken of and promised Isa. 44.3, 4, 5. upon which the Lord will pour
his Spirit, and they shall spring up among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse. One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and
surname himself by the name of Israel. O inexcusable we if it be not thus! Were
our fathers as a noble vi^^, and shall we be as the degenerate plant of a
strange vine? shall our vine be of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah? were they as the best and choicest wine cheering God and man, and
shall we be as the sowrest vinegar? shall our wine be as the poison of dragons?
Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33
Shall all those precious things of God in this Wilderness, which were so
savoury and sweet unto our fathers, and for the enjoyment of which, they made
their bargain with God, and gave up their (...) elsewhere shall these be unto us
(...), husky (...) good shall this Birthright do us? Shall the world, and lusts
and sins, and vain liberties and new notions be more sweet unto us and thirsted
after, then Christ and Word and Ordinances, then strict and godly Government,
then the wings of Gods Covenant, then the labor and service of the House of
God? God forbid. When God first began to keep House in this Wilderness, it was
furnished with the choicest Household Stuff; He had much Plate and Jewels, and
other such precious things, Vessels of Gold and of Silver; shall we now rise up
to fill his House with mere Lumber, worthless cumbersome sorry stuff, that will
by no one be looked after in a day of burning, nor by any one lamented though
consumed in the fire? Shall not we bid as much as any in the world for an
Interest in the Lord God of our fathers? for such an Interest in him as our
fathers had in God? Shall not this be more to us then this whole Wilderness,
yea then the whole World can give to us beside? for the Lords sake let us not
be of any other frame. Let not the words of this Exhortat^on rise up as a
Testimony against any of you. And that they may not, but that we may be found
Children that will not lie, there are these Directions, omitting sundry others
that might have been given.

1. Make conscience, not only of being rightly informed in that cause of God
which we are here wrapped up in, and in adhering whereunto the Lord has hitherto
preserved and blessed his Churches and people, but also of getting a sight and
view of the divine beauty and glor^ thereof. There is nothing short of true and
real glory, divine spiritual glory, that can chain fast our Souls to the Cause
of God, so as to own and cleave to it in sincerity at this day. When God
carried out Abraham into another ^and, he appeared to him as a God of glory,
Acts 7.2. so did God appear unto our fathers in the way wherein he led them
hither, and in the Cause for which: Thus must he appear to us also, if ever we
abide steadfast with him in that Cause. It is therefore a most sweet Petition
that the Church makes Psalm. 90.16, 17. Let thy work appear unto thy servants,
and thy Glory unto their children. Babylon paints her face anew at this day;
Anti-^^^ist has varnished his Interest, so that there are many who (...) the
beauty of that Harlo^* O let us (...) His Cause and Interest amongst us: And
truly as to this Cause and Interest of God, there can be no other foundations
laid then those which have been laid. N-Englands true and main Interest, the
Cause of Christ in his Churches here, It is a fixed unalterable thing: It is
not now to be found out by any New Light. But alas, how many of us grow up and
never get one real view of the glory of it? of whom that complaint may be taken
up* Deuteronomy. 29.4. We have not unto this day had an heart to perceive, or eyes to
see, or ears to hear, no not unto this day. Let us take heed of enquiring of or
listening, in this matter, unto the determinations and glosses of such as have
had no standing in the ways of God here, but have been grafted in upon
By-Accounts, or move in the Excentrick Orb of some Private Interest distinct
from that of the whole. And let us also lay down this as a Rule; That
whatsoever it is that has been unanimously Rejected and Condemned in its
claims by the Acknowledged Eminentest Reformers in each Age, since the Apostasy
of Antichrist prevailed, This can never in these our days justify its Title
to that Cause of Christ that is to be maintained and contended for, Jer. 6.16.

2. Let us stand feelingly under the weight of all those Engagements that lie
upon us to be an upright Generation unto God. The Lord has laid all manner of
Engagements upon us; By his Covenant, into the bond whereof we are brought; By
all his Messengers and Servants whom he has sent, rising up early and sending
them; By his Providence from the beginning; Ours are All the Salvations, the
Experiences, the Miracles of Mercy and of Preservation that have been bestowed
upon this people and the Cause of God here at any time* yea though we were not
then born, Hos. 12.4, 5. And we have laid Engagements upon our selves; we have
said that we would be the Lords: and O what a God is it that we have engaged
our selves so solemnly unto? A God All sufficient. Surely our Fathers have not
inherited lies or vanity, and thing! wherein there is no profit, i^ inheriting
that God for their portion unto whom we as their Children have Covenanted our
selves.

3. Take heed of thinking it an easy matter to ser^e the Lord God of our
Fathers, and to answer his Expectations of us* (...) have such a (...) and
Churches and Worship is a Consuming fire. The Angel of the Lords Presence with
us will not pardon our iniquities. Exodus 23.21.
Joshua puts the Rising generation in mind of this solemn truth, Josh. 24.19,
20. Those that have gone before us in the Cause of God here, who and what were
they? Certainly choice and picked ones, whom he eminently prepared and trained
up and qualified for this Service; They were Worthies, men of singular
Accomplishments, and of long and great Experience; yet did they walk with fear
and trembling before the Lord in the sense of their own nothingness and
insufficiency for the Work here to be done. But we, poor we, alas what are we!
we want many seasonings which our Fathers had, we are poor raw things; we want
those eminent Conversions, those Schools of Experience, those Opportunities and
Advantages of gaining Knowledge, etc. which they had.

4. Look after the Root of the matter in your Souls. There are many empty
outside Custom born Christians now adays: A day of temptation will discover
what such as these will come to, when they are caught in Satan's snares, and
become the Reproach of the Gospel and of a good Cause. O let us get good sound
Principles, for want whereof the Profession of so many has run it self out of
breath, and broke its neck in these days. It has been said that a loose
Protestant is fit to become a strict Papist. A formal ungrounded Professor, he
will be fit for Satan's turn in these days. O get to be sincere in your
Principles, that your Repentance may be through Repentance, your Humiliation
deep, your Faith of the operation of God, your Love to God and his ways and
people, a fruit of Gods love in Christ unto your souls; It must be such a
generation that must save New-Englands All. ^atth. 3.9.
Don't boast it of being Abraham's Children; do not challenge and lay claim to
the distinguishing Privileges of the House of God in the pride and
unhumbledness of your hearts. Take heed of moving on in the ways of God upon
the strength of bare convictions and external motives only, whilst indeed such
ways are most unsuitable unto your unrenewed frame within, and to your
spirits, as yet unsubdued to the yoke of Christ, by (...) Gospel power making
of them willing in the day thereof. If (...), who shall be many in these days
wherein we live.

5. Take heed of and watch against all the various steps, degrees, methods
whereby men come to forsake and turn off from the Lord and his ways. 1. Men
use the Ordinance of God slightly and carelessly, 2 King. 10.31. they dwell in
Zion, but are strangers to the well-springs that are there. Under the fullness
of Ordinances they look not after that which their souls may eat and drink, and
be spiritually satiated with Church-watch, fellowship, discipline does them no
real inward good. 2. Now men grow secretly weary of all these things, as of a
garment that warms not, and bread that strengthens not; they are not tied by
the heart strings to pure Ordinances and Worship, and to a godly Government. 3.
Now men begin to question the ground and warrant of things. 4. Now they hearken
after Objections, and what may be cavill'd against the Ways and Institutions
of God. 5. Now they are imposed upon by deceitful workers; they greedily listen
unto what may be said for the ways and institutions, courses and customs of
men. 6. Now they take offense at persons and things, and suffer their spirits
to be imbittered. 7. Now being given up by God, they fall quite off; Men gather
them, they are joined in with the Instruments of Satan, and turn Underminers at
least, if not open Persecutors. O take heed and watch against all these things.
Enquire after all the first warpings of your hearts and spirits; be not
ignorant of Satan's devices. 2 Cor. 2.11.


6. Maintain a Reverend and High Esteem of godly Leaders, Civil and Spiritual
Guides, and be subject to them in the Lord. Account regular subjection to be an
excellent thing; and that a pliableness and yieldableness in this, carries an
excellency of spirit along with it. There is not only excellent Humility, but
excellent Wisdom also in such a course. The Order of God both in Civils and
Ecclesiasticals, duly Acknowledged, Reverenced, submitted unto in the Lord,
will bring so great a blessing with it of peace, gracious guidance, a happy
issue in difficult cases, and settlement, as too too often we have too much
felt and carnal wisdom and too little faith to believe.

7. Plead and improve the Lord Covenant with you, and in special your Baptism,
the first Seal of that Covenant, that you may be established and made faithful
with the Lord therein. If we forget and neglect the Lord in that wherein he
begins with us, and first visibly takes hold of us, no wonder if we make no
progress, but sit loose from God all our days.

These are the Directions that I would leave with you in the name and fear of
the great God to be thought of and put in practice. There is a Consideration or
two whereby I would yet further back this Branch of the Exhortation unto you of
the Present Generation, that are now listening unto this solemn word of God, and
so I shall pass on with as much speed as may be in that which remains.

1. The present work of God in these Churches it must stand or fall in our
hands; for it is now devolved upon us of the present Generation. It is true
indeed God can cut us off and graft in others; He can fill his House though we
were shut all of us out of doors; He can uphold his own name and glory though
we were swept to the dunghill: But that individual work which has been begun
and hitherto carried on in this place, it must stand and fall with us. Now
shall the enemy blaspheme because of us? shall Satan triumph as a conqueror in
us?

2. What will become of us, if we fail the Lord of his Expectations? O what
good shall we lose? what evil shall we bring upon our selves? whither shall we
cause our shame to go? will God care for a degenerate Race? when the
overflowing scourge shall pass, will there be any Sanctuary for us with the God
of Truth? What did it profit the Israelites in the Wilderness, that they had
all things according to the Pattern, but they themselves were a rebellious and
hard hearted generation* if we be transgressors we shall utterly perish;
Enemies and evils of all sorts shall have a bargain of us, Deuteronomy. 32.30. Except
their Rock had sold them. Judge. 2.14.

3. It is not long before the Lord will finish his great works in the world:
Antichrist shall be destroyed, Israel shall be saved; Zion shall be redeemed
with judgment, and her converts with righteousness; (...). ^.2^. Luke 18.7 8.
though the Lord ^ear long with his Elect, yet he will avenge them speedily.
That he bears long, has been already fulfilled; what remains therefore to be
accomplished, but only that now he avenge them speedily? shall we take this
season then wherein to fail the Lord? shall we be among the last Apostates, for
whom the forest vengeance is laid up in store? Yet a little while and he that
shall come will come, and will not tarry. Blessed are they that wait for, and
can abide the day of his coming. Shall we lose our share in those times of
Refreshment which are so near to come?

4. Consider and remember always, that the Books that shall be opened at the
last day will contain Genealogies in them. There shall then be brought forth a
Register of the Genealogies of New-Englands sons and daughters. How shall we
many of us hold up our faces then, when there shall be a solemn rehearsal of
our descent as well as of our degeneracies? To have it published whose Child
thou art will be cutting unto thy soul, as well as to have the Crimes reckoned
up that thou art guilty of.

Thirdly, In the third and last place This Exhortation is directed unto you who
are in place of Government respectively, and that may be this day our
Established Leaders and Rulers. Honored and much Esteemed; The Lord has
measured out an Inheritance for a precious Remnant of his people in this
Wilderness; we may with all humility acknowledge that we are his flock and the
sheep of his pasture; And here there is a solemn Trust that is invested in You
who are Rulers, committed unto you by God and by men; your Mothers Children,
though not in anger, do make you the Keepers of the Vineyard: so that Gods
Expectations and his Peoples are upon you in a special manner. Do You also
answer these Expectations, that as in your public capacities you are more
peculiarly the Children of the Most High, so you may be also Children that will
not lie. Psalm. 82.6.
If you be true to God, to his Truths, to your Trust, according to your
Abilities and Opportunities of doing for God, his Interest and People; then
know, that whatever may for a time become of that Cause and those precious
Concernments, which are upon your hearts to save, though with your lives, if
called thereunto; yet you your selves shall be sure to enjoy the Salvation of
God. Be you fixed therefore in your Orb, and not as those Stars that now adays
fall from Heaven; that you may continue to be in the midst of us, as the light
of the morning, 2 Samuel 23.4.
a morning without clouds, and as the clear shining after rain. The Foundations
of your Government have been Righteousness* of this there is a Record on High;
and the Lord has added Peace hitherto. Now your Power and Authority does (...)
professedly, and by fundamental Constitution, in a (...) serviency to the
Interest Power and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the welfare of his
Saints. This you acknowledge and own, and it is your glory; And herein is
required your Fidelity and Constancy, that you may continue Ruling with God,
(...). 11.12.
and faithful with his Saints. This is that which God expects and promises to
himself, that you Rule and Govern this People for him; And that you lay out
your selves, in all regular ways, to the utmost, to preserve us from Apostasy,
and from being lying Children, or false with the Lord in his Covenant. You who
are our Judah, our Ruling Tribe, you are the Bow, This People are as the Arrows
(that I may allude to what we find Zech. 9.13.) if you be but Bent right, and
have Strength and Steadiness, we shall hope, through mercy, to be shot directly
forward, and in some good measure to reach the Mark aimed at. We know that your
care and solicitude is, lest the Ruin of any thing that is of God should be
under your hand; And indeed the Lord has set you for the defense of all that
which is His in this remote corner of Christ's Inheritance: You are the Keepers
of our Walls; and therefore for Zions sake, even for our own sakes, we do in
the Name of the Lord solemnly wish you this day, and at all times, Prosperity;
we wish you Wisdom, Spirit, Fidelity; we wish you an Healthful Countenance and
Constitution of Affairs; we wish you the Counsels of Truth and Peace. There be
many at this day, The Brood of Antichrist, that are Travailing with Mischief,
and the hope of some of them is to have a good Lying-in of it, even here
amongst us; but they shall All of them bring forth a Lie: Psalm. 7.14. Job 15*
35.
But be you Exhorted to travail with the designs and work of God, plotting how
to Exalt the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, the Righteousness Holiness and Peace
thereof more and more, that so you may be as the Mountains that bring forth
peace, and the Hills that bring forth Righteousness unto the Lords people.
Psalm. 72.3.
You know how your Style runs in the language of the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 82.6.
you are called Gods, and we do therefore account you Worshipful; Now to be a
God (as one in this case speaks) is to be above all Fears, all Hopes, all
Temptations; to be immutable, and not to appear so much as in the shadow of a
change. Thus it must be with you in your (...). And therefore as you are called
Gods, mind this your Glory. But yet though you be (...) we must not think to
find you without Infirmities* your (...) that a multitude of Infirmities is
compatible therewith, only there may be Infirmities where there is not the
Lie. Weakness and Falseness are vastly different; ask this grace, that the
latter may never be charged upon you; And so the Lord, in remembering you for
good, according to all that you have done for this people, and for his Name,
shall spare you also, according to the multitude of his mercies.

I cannot insist here upon all those particulars wherein the Expectations of
God and of his people are (...) upon you; your first ways have engaged you
deeply. Magistrates and Rulers they are not only Foundation-stones, (...)
Supporters of the Common wealth; Zech. ^
but they must be also ^orner-stones in the Foundation, to Couple and Unite;
They must be Healers. Isa 3.^
And the good Lord guide you, and prosper you as to this part of your work,
that such a mercy, Uniting and Healing mercy, may be called after your name.
When the unfeigned friends and sincere promoters of Reformation, on the one
side; and those that hate Reformation, on the other side, make up the two
Parties; now (as is observed) the fire of Contention is natural; Homogeneous
things are congregated, and Heterogeneous are segregated: But when both the
Sides do grow up from the former sort, and they themselves become divided, the
fire of this Contention, because of the quite contrary ^ffect, is (...)
natural. The Lord pour out the Blood of Christ upon the last spark of this
fire, for its utter extinguishing.

Many Knots and Intricacies there may be, and Clouds of darkness upon some
matters in disquisition, which none but a gracious God can dissolve; in these
things the Lords people are to exercise mutual forbearance. Circumstantial
Differences ought not to breed Substantial Divisions; that would be a Monstrous
and Gigantine birth. It is wrong done to the Christian name so much as to
question, Whether that diversity of Apprehension in lesser and dubious matters
amongst the Lords people ought to be born withal, which can and does suffer a
Regulation in order to the Unity and Peace of the whole. But yet the true
Christian Gospel- Liberty, was never unto this day a Womb big with
Licentiousness. And here there is one Posi^^^^ (...) never be denied by any
that have but the (...) of Reason entire; ^iz. That no (...) ever in the
Conscience of the contrarywi^^ (...) right to public Liberty and Countenance,
(...) attended to, does indeed tend to the undermining (...) in the issue to
the overthrow of the state of these Churches (...) that wherein it is of God,
and has been largely and (...) owned by him. And of this case and the
application thereof* those who are in Authority may and ought to judge. And
further, (...) therefore think it much, if such Opinions as are not only in
themselves, but even in the minds of those that ^old them, un-Churching to so
many precious Societies of Christ, I mean (...) visible Church State, be very
harsh and unpleasant, and the uncontrolled scope of them much more distastful.
Certainly a weaker Body cannot, ought not to do that, or suffer that upon it
self, or in it self, upon the account of Charity to another, which a stronger
Body may, and in some cases may be bound to do or suffer. All regular Charity (
caeteris paribus) begins first at home. There are the Peculiar Constitutions,
and different Capacities of places to be considered, according as God in his
infinite Wisdom does order and suffer matters to be circumstanced; Men truly
Conscientious ought to make Conscience here, what they venture upon, or what
they demand and ask of Authority. There is but one thing more that in these
matters I would seriously mind you of, and that is a piece of seasonable and
sound Advice which some-where I meet with, unto this purpose for the substance,
That where differences of Apprehension and Opinion do happen amongst godly
Reformers in their Enquiries after the Will and Way of God; It be thoroughly
labored that such Points of Difference be accurately stated, and unto the
utmost that may be possible narrowed, and some Rules of Practice for the
preservation of Order and Peace mutually fixed, and a Probatum est set upon the
Experience of them, during the life time of those who have been first in such
matters of Debate and Controversy; for otherwise if this should be neglected,
and they being dead and gone others spring up after them to inherit a diversity
of Names from them, the business of Reconciliation and Composure would be in a
far more difficult posture, and rather go backward then forward, as sad
Experience in the Christian world has already Testified.

But I may not hold you longer upon these things. In a word, do all the Lords
work in your public (...) faithfully and vigorously. Execute Justice
impartially* (...) a Terror to evil doers; Encourage all them that are
faithful; Put new life into all public Work that languisheth; Look to (...)
scattered unformed places in your Jurisdiction, and that enjoy not settled
public Worship and Teaching. And as the sum of all, Fall not off from any
thing upon any pretense whatsoever, which adhering unto, God has hitherto
(...) you and this People; for this would be to Lie unto God, yea to make him a
Liar in the voice and testimony of all his former (...).

I have but a few words of Direction in (...) to leave with You also, Honored
and much Esteemed, and so shall finish this Use.

1. Wait upon God in your Places for discovery of Light and Truth, that you may
understand the way of this people, Prove. 14.^*
and the Lords way with us, and in the world too at this day; that so your
Wisdom and Knowledge may be the stability of our times. Isa. 33.6.
God will not be unwilling to communicate Light to you in his own way, Eccles.
8.5. Every lesser Star (as one speaks) has light enough for it self; but no
less then a Sun can give light to the World. Rulers had need to be full of
light. (...) your eye upon all occasions be upward u^^o the Father of Lights;
and so shall his eye be fixed upon yours, Psalm. 34.^. and 32.8.
and this eye of his shall guide you.

2. Secure your hearts and spirits as to sincerity before the Lord, J^h. 5.44.
Psalm. 25.21. and 78.72. Prove. 11.^.
and for that end seek the honor that comes from God only. Integrity and
uprightness shall preser^e and guide you. An unbyassed Magistracy shall never
want Assistance. Watch against private narrow Self Ends; that if in an hour of
trial and temptation, some proffer of a private good, or to save your own
particular state, should be strongly managed by Satan, to draw you off from the
Public and Common Interest, (...) you may abide resolved and constant
thereunto. It was the Resolution of an Heathen, No Immortalitatem quidem contra
Re^^publicam ^^ciperem. Heb. 11.24, Exodus 32.10* Romans ^ ^^
Moses his Refusal and the Apostle Paul's wish are known to you. Say you should
do much of Gods work, but not with a sincere aim at Gods ends, this would be to
Lie unto him. Thus Jeh^ was a Lie in all he did. Let there be no variation of
the Compass with you as to sincere and upright aims and ends. God will make
large allowance to weaknesses, but then there must be sincerity.

3. Study Unity among your selves, and in your own Counsels, that our first
wheels may move with the sweetness and undisturb^^ness of a Celestial divine
Harmony.

4. Drink deep of the love of God in Christ, who shed his Blood to save his
Church, ^
that your love to the Ways and Ordinances and Churches and People of God, may
have its rise and nourishment from this fountain. It is such a love alone that
will constrain (...) and remain unquench'd though in the midst of many waters.

5. Arm your selves with Courage; if you will be good Magistrates, you must be
such as dare to act your Consciences: and Arm your selves also with Patience (I
will join them both together) for the burden of the people must be born. Get
from under the influence of carnal fears, these will make you to lie, Isa.
57.11. You have been taught by Experience to expect Oppositions, Trials,
Exacerbations; wickedness will proceed from the wicked; there will be a
tumultuating of the passions and lusts of men, yea and of the corruptions of
good (...) too, under the strict exercise of Government, when the Reins of
Authority are held straight. Without a good measure of holy Patience and
Courage you will not hold out. You must have so much Courage as to seek out
that labor which belongs to your Office and Honor; so much Courage that it
may not be dreadful to you, to be so hemmed in with duty on every side as to
(...) way of Retreat.

6. Look upon Faith to be the way to Fidelity; if you will not believe you
shall not be established. Faith undertakes all upon the engagement of God.
Faith bottoms the Soul upon the promise, and b^^ds it up in a way of
supplications. Know it, that if you will be found faithful with God at this day
in the work of Rulers, you must be neither Lower nor Middle, but Vpper-Region
men, and there is nothing but Faith, and the constant lively exercise thereof
that can carry you so high. Such as live upon futura contingentia, they will be
miserably uncertain, up and down, now here and now there, but Faith, the eye
and design, the hope and the heart of Faith, fix wholly upon things that are
unchangeable. Secure your hearts therefore in a single dependence upon, and
sole trust in God; Commit your way to the Lord at all times, and do not consume
away in your own fears and cares and contrivances.

7 When you have behaved your selves with the greatest sincerity and integrity
in your places, and have been able to do most for God, still look for your
Acceptance with God, Genesis 6.8.9. Neh. 13.22.
and your Reward from him as of Free Grace only. This is to be upright in the
upshot of all.

Finally, have you not often received encouragements from the promises? has
not the Lord been present with you in d^fficulties? have you not been often
refreshed with the testimony of a good Conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity you have managed what has been in your hand? 2 Cor. 1.12.
have you not been a Government enquiring after the mind and will of God, given
to prayer, and to advise with the Word of God and the faithful dispensers of
the same? Now then go on, even this year also, in this your might, Being and
Doing All for God; And He that is indeed the great Shepherd and Stone of
Israel, shall be in the midst of you, The mighty Coun^ellor, The Prince of
Peace, upon whose shoulder the Government is and shall be.

Use 4. Of Encouragement and Assurance to all the Lords people here in this
Wilderness. Let us but prove Children that will not lie, and we shall not want
Salvation. If we lie not, the vision shall not lie. Nothing but our own Lie can
shut us out from the Salvation of God. Our great work lies in this to keep from
being lying children; we may now confidently leave the work of saving us with
God. Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Yea our Enemies in this way shall be found Liars unto us; Achitophel shall die
in Childbed, not being able to give life and birth to his mischievous
Conceptions. Balaam may set up his A^tars, and offer his Sacrifices, and seek
Enchantments once and again, but without success, when the Lord beholds not
this iniquity in Jacob* Numb. 23 21. Exodus 19 4 5, 6 Isa. 26.1, 2.
nor sees this perv^rseness in Israel. If the Lord preserve unto us a faithful
People, a faithful Ministry, a faithful Magistracy, He will then Appoint
Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks to us. It is New-Englands Lie that must open
the door unto New-Englands Ruin, which the Lord for ever preserve us from, and
set a double Lock of faithfulness upon all our Souls, that we may be both
faithful to God, and also faithful with his Saints. I will but briefly note
unto you a few particulars out of Psalm 125. and so shut up all.

First, We have a time and season of sore trial and exercise supposed, by
reason of the budding and blossoming of the Rod of wicked men, and its lying
upon the Lot of the Righteous for a time, ver. 3.

Secondly, We have the different and contrary behavior of persons under such
an hour of temptation. Some are Children that will not lie; they are good in
such evil times, they are upright in their hearts, v. 4. and they trust in God,
v. 1. Others they prove Liars, they turn aside into crooked ways, they shrink
and prevarica^e with God, and warp off from the straitness of the Rule, and the
uprightness of the Cause of God, v 5.

Thirdly, We have the different issue which the Lord m^kes with these diff^rent
persons. 1. Those that turn aside into crooked ways, and so prove Liars to
God, He ^ads them forth with the workers of iniquity; they are not men that do
at the first openly pass over into the Tents of wickedness, but in such a day
of (...), they are unsound with God, and have their By-ways of sinful l^titude
and compliance, playing fast and loose with a good Cause, under corrupt byasses
and fair pretenses; such as these, whoever they be, even the best of them, the
Lord shall make them to go with workers of iniquity. (1) Workers of iniquity
are of a vile low esteem both with God and his Saints, so these turners aside
shall be cast out of the heart and esteem of Christ and of his Saints, if ever
they had any repute they shall lose it (2) Workers of iniquity proceed on and
grow worse and worse, Heb. 10 38.
2 Timothy 3 13. so it is the curse of God upon crook^d ways that they are ever
headlong down-hill ways. Men think they will go but thus far or so far in
treacherous false ways, and remain hid all the while under some fair cloak,
but they shall proceed until they be known, Prove. 10 4. (3) Workers of
iniquity are ever cut short of their designs, Psalm. 21.11. so it shall be wi^h
these. (4) Workers of iniquity stumble in, and da^h themselves against all the
Righteous ways of God, and so shall these warp^^s, Hos 14 9. (5) Workers of
iniquity are snared in their own way, so shall these that ^o turn aside, they
shall be entangled and hang in the bushes and thickers of their own
contrivances, Prove. 14.14.
Psalm. 5 9 10. and 7.14, 15, 16. (6) Workers of iniquity shall be turned into
Hell, and so shall those that choose crooked ways, Prove 1.32. The turning away
of the simple shall slay them. There are but two bundles at the last day, that
great Harvest day; the bundle of life, and of the workers of iniquity: D^vid
prays that he may not be found in this bundle, Psalm. 26.9. but into this shall
all that turn aside be ^athered; They shall go (...) their Companions in the
issue; whatever they would be thought to be here, yet they shall inherit Hell
and Damnation at the last under this very Title of Workers of iniquity, Mat.
7.23. But 2. with the Upright and such as continue Trusting in God in the hour
of Temptation* the Lord deals after another manner; unto these Children that
will not lie he becomes a Savior. (1) They shall be as Mount Zion which cannot
be moved, but abides for ever. Ungodly ones like chaff are blown away, Psalm.
1.4.
but Mount Zion Abides for ever, ver. 1. (2) The Lord will be round about them
for ever, v. 2. they need not fear then the siege, the encamping, the assaults
of enemies though they be Round about; the Lord is both the Cente^ and
Circumference too, in the safety and security of his upright ones: for as here
he is said to be round about them, so Psalm 46.^. He is said to be in the midst
of them also. (3) The Lord will do them good, ver. 4. The goodness of the Lord
is a Cordial sufficient against all fainting, Psalm 27.13. there is all
Salvation contained in it, Zech. 9 16, 17^ (4) The Lord will give them Peace,
^ver last. Peace shall be upon Isra^l, i. e. upon Israel walking uprightly.
According to Rule, and not crookedly, Gal. 6.16.

These are the true and faithful sayings of God. They are and ought to be for
our encouragement, that we through patient continuance in well-doing, and the
comfort of such Scriptures might have hope. Let come what will come, if we
Answer what the Lord has said of us, That Surely we are his People, Children
that will not lie; He will then most Assuredly and most Seasonably Become
New-Englands Savior. Isa 51.7, 8. and 26.1, 2.

FINIS.
(...) 3. for persons read reasons. p. 31. l. 4 read Ordinances. The rest are
literal.


