Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the SESSIONS Of the GENERAL COURT Held at
Boston the 13th. of October 1675. As also at the SESSIONS of Court held at
Boston the 3d. of November 1675. And Printed by their Order, Edward Rawson
Secr.
Indians Prohibited being in Boston.
WHereas not withstanding the COUNCILS former Prohibition of all Indians coming
to, or remaining in the Town of Boston, we find that still there remains
ground of Fear, that unless more effectual Care be taken, we may be exposed to
mischief by some of that Barbarous Crew, or any Strangers not of our Nation by
their coming into, or residing in the Town of Boston;

This Court does therefore Order and Declare;

First, Courts proclamation Prohibiting Indians to be in Boston.
That from the Publication hereof, no person or persons whatever in the said
Town, shall upon any pretense whatsoever, Entertain, own or Countenance any
Indian, under the Penalty of being a Betrayer of this Government.

Secondly, That there be a Guard appointed at the end of the said Town toward
Roxbury, to hinder the coming in of any Indian, until Application be first made
to the Governor, or Council if sitting, and then to be admitted with a Guard
of two Musketeers, and to be remanded back with the same Guard, not to be
suffered to lodge in Town, unless in Prison: Provided, that if any Indian or
Indians that shall be employed upon any public message or business shall come
up to the said Guard, they shall forth with be conveyed to the Governor or
Council, and be by him or them disposed of, and secured during their necessary
stay for the dispatch of their business, and then to be conveyed as abovesaid.

Thirdly, That it shall be lawful for any person finding any Indian in Town
without said Guard to Apprehend and Secure him.

Fourthly, That Care be taken by the Military Watch to prevent any from coming
by Water to the said Town, either from Dorchester or Roxbury Neck in Cannoes,
or otherwise, and that there be special Care taken of places where Ammunition is
kept.

Fifthly, That Order be given to Charlstown Ferry not to Land any Indian at the
said Town without Order from the Governor, and then to be guarded with two
Musketeers.

Sixthly. That it shall be lawful for any person, upon any Indians approaching
the said Town, either by Water or Land, without a Guard, as abovesaid to
Apprehend and secure him.

Seventhly, That Account be taken of all Strangers, who are not his Majesty's
Subjects, and that they remain not in Town, unless Security be given for their
Fidelity: And that none be admitted but upon the like Security: And that no
Master of any Vessel bring in any without acquainting the Governor therewith,
and presenting their Persons in order to their Examination who if upon their
Examination can give no good Account of their business, and Security for their
Good Behavior, shall be sent to Prison, unless they do forthwith depart.

Eighthly, That it shall not be lawful for any Inhabitant, from the Declaration
hereof, to Entertain any Stranger in his House, or for time to come, till this
Order be reversed, without leave granted by Authority, upon the penalty of any
Fine Authority shall see meet to impose; And the Commissioners, and the Select
Men, and Captains of Boston are Ordered and Required respectively to have a
special Care that this Order in the several parts thereof be duly observed and
attended.

WHereas it is found by Experience that Troopers and Pikemen are of little use
in the present war with the Indians, now for the Improvement of them to more
or better Advantage;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That all Troopers shall
forth with furnish themselves with Carbines and Ammunition proportionable, Law
requiring Troopers to furnish themselves with Carbines.
and also be liable to be Impressed by the Committee of Militia in the Towns
where they live to serve as foot Soldiers during the said war, Provided
always that one fourth part of the Troopers in each Town be reserved for the
use of the Country as such. Three parts of Troopers liable to press in the
Towns they live.
And all Pikemen are hereby required forthwith to furnish themselves with Fire
Arms, and such a quantity of Ammunition from time to time as the Law requires
Musketeers to be furnished with, Pikemen to furnish themselves with Fire Arms,
any LAW, USAGE or CUSTOM to the contrary notwithstanding.

A Thousand Fire Arms to be sent for.
WHereas the given necessity of a speedy supply of Fire Arms, Muskets and (...)
in this time of War with the Indians;

It is Ordered by this Court, that a Thousand Fire Arms be accordingly procured
with all convenient expedition for the use of the Country, A thousand Fire Arms
to be sent for.
Payment whereof to be made out of the public Treasury to such Merchants as
are agreed with for their procuring thereof by the Committee appointed by this
Court for that end. And that the said Arms shall be proportionably distributed
to the several Towns of the Colony: And the Select Men of the respective Town
are hereby enabled to raise Moneys to make payment to the Treasurer for their
several Proportions. and way of payment for them.


Committees of Militia's Power to Garrison Towns;
IT is Ordered by this Court; That the Committees of Militia's in the several
Towns through out this Jurisdiction* they, Power of Committees of Militia to
Garrison the Towns etc. present Invasion etc.
or the major part of them, the chief Military Officer of the Town being
present, shall settle and dispose the several inhabitants of their respective
Towns into such a posture as several Exigents appearing call for, and that into
one or more Garrisons. All persons in the several Towns upon penalty of five
shillings per day, being hereby obliged to labor in, and provide such
Fortification or Fortifications as they shall agree upon; And all the
Inhabitants to attend their places in such Fortification or Garrison as they
are appointed unto, and in case of Alarm or Invasion, to appear at and for the
defense of such places as by the Committee they are appointed unto: and no
Inhabitant, or Soldier to leave his Station upon any employ whatsoever, but
according to Order from the chief Officer.

2. And that the several small Frontier Towns which are judged not able of
themselves to bear the distress of the War, shall have their Women and Children
(except so many as are necessary to abide) removed unto the next Inland Towns,
and be there improved for the best Advantage, and least charge, until further
Order be taken, and Soldiers added to the said Towns for Garrison as shall be
judged necessary by this Court, or Council of the Commonwealth, the said
several Towns providing them with Victual during their abode.

3. That the said several Committees are hereby Ordered particularly to inspect
the several stocks of Ammunition and Arms in their several Towns, Committees
power to Inspect Arms in their Town as a stock, etc.
and the same to Alter, Augment and Dispose as they judge meet.

And the Committees of Militia in the several Towns are hereby Authorized to
Asses upon all such persons of Estate within their Towns (as are by the County
Courts or Committees of Militia exempted from ordinary Trainings) so many Fire
Arms, Committees of Militia's power (...) Assessments for Arms.
Muskets or Carbines, with a proportionable stock of Powder and Ammunition, as
the said Committees respectively shall appoint, to be always kept in their
hands, to be in a readiness for the Countries service, under the like penalties
as the Law provides for the Furniture of every private Soldier; and such Arms
from time to time are to be surveyed and viewed by the Clerks of the Trained
Bands in the several Towns, who shall upon any defect levy the same Fines that
the Law provides for particular Companies: And all such persons as shall be
Assessed, and shall accordingly provide three Fire Arms, shall be freed from
being sent abroad to the Wars, except in extreme and utmost necessity.

Troopers to pay Rates.
WHereas Troopers are exempted from paying Head-money, and Rates for their
Horses.

This Court Judges it meet to restrein that Privilege during this present
War; Troopers to pay Rates of their Heads and Horses.
And do Order that Troopers pay in that Case as others do (provided Troopers
have their Privilege for one Rate in the Year) And likewise the Castle
Soldiers pay their Head-money as other men; Any LAW USAGE or CUSTOM to the
contrary notwithstanding.


