THe worthy Author of this Narrative (of whose Fidelity we are well assured) by
his great pains, and industry in collecting and compiling the several
Occurrences of this Indian War, from the Relations of such as were present in
the particular Actions, has faithfully, and truly performed the same, as far
as best information agreeing could be obtained, which is therefore judged meet
for public view; and we whose Names are underwritten, deputed by the Governor
and Council of the Massachusetts Colony to peruse, and license the same, have
and do accordingly Order it to be imprinted, as being of public benefit, and
judge the Author to have deserved due acknowledgment and Thanks for the same.

Boston, March 29. 1677. Simon Bradstreet. Daniel Denison. Joseph Dudley.


A NARRATIVE OF THE TROUBLES WITH THE INDIANS In NEW ENGLAND, from the first
planting thereof in the year 1607. to this present year 1677. But chiefly of
the late Troubles in the two last years, 1675. and 1676.

To which is added a Discourse about the War with the PEQUODS In the year
1637.

By W. Hubbard, Minister of Ipswich.

And the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a memorial in a Book, and
rehearse it in the ears of Joshua; for I will utterly put out the Remembrance
of Amalek from under heaven Exodus 17 14. Wherefore it is said in the book of the
wars of the Lord, what he did in the red sea, and in Brooks of Ar^^^ Numb: 21
14 As cold waters to a thirst. soul, so is good news from a far Country. Prove.
25. 25.

Expressa Imago, et quasi speculum quoddam vitae humanae est historia, quia
talia vel similia semper posi^^^i^ mundo accidere. Th^^^e. Historia tradit quae
facta sint, et quae semper fiat futura, donec eadem manet hominum natura Idem.
Historiae cogni^i^ ^^tissima insti^utio, et praeparatio est ad actiones
politicas, et illustris Magistra ad perferendas fortunae vices. Polyb.

Published by Authority.

BOSTON; Printed by John Foster, in the year 1677.

To the Honorable JOHN LEVERET Esquire Governor of the Colony of the
Massachusetts; JOSIAH VVINSLOW Esquire Governor of the Colony of Plymouth; WILLIAM
LEET Esquire Governor of the Colony of Connecticut.
NOtwithstanding the great and unvaluable good that has in all ages of the
World accrued to Mankind by Order and Government, yet such is the depravedness
of man's nature, and imperfection of his knowledge, that it is as well hard to
find out, as difficult to maintain, such a Form and Order of Government as will
prove a sufficient Fence and security for so great a treasure as is the common
good, and public safety. After the sad and long experience of former times,
some have thought no means can be found out so effectual for the upholding and
and preserving the same, with all the sacred and civil rights and privileges
thereunto belonging, as a liberty for people to design and choose out from
among themselves, the persons that are to be entrusted with those great
concerns. Whatever may be said for the extolling the happiness of them that
have such an advantage in their hands, all that may be comprehended within the
compass of such a power, it is for the present in the principal and leading
part thereof devolved upon your selves in all the three Colonies of
New England; who by the choice of the free people in those your several
Jurisdictions, are now called to act your several parts as chief on the public
stage of Government. Ever since you have taken your turns at the helm, there
have been very boisterous winds and rough Seas, threatening the shipwreck of
all; which notwithstanding, you need not be discouraged, while due
consideration is had, to whom, and what you have embarked with you. When once
the great Roman Conqueror, and chief founder of their Monarchy, was passing the
Adriatic Sea in a disguize, the Pilot being dismayed with the fierceness of
the wind, the raging of the waves, his Passenger pulled off his disguize, and
bid him be of good courage and not fear, for the carried Caesar, and all his
Fortunes: Surely Jesus Christ and all his promises, in which you are not a
little concerned, is a far better ground of comfort and encouragement in a
stormy season. Luther was wont to say, or did once in a great exigent say, that
he had rather ruere cum Christo quam stare cum Caesare; accounting Christ a
better friend, though falling as to the world to trust to, then Caesar standing
in power, according to the words of Christ himself, greater is he that is in
you, then he that is in the World: So as all such may say with the Prophet,
Rejoice not against me O mine enemy; for when I fall, I shall rise, when I sit
in aarkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me; which I trust your selves have
had so much experience of, in these late dark dispensations, that if sometimes
you have not seen, yet always you have believed that Light was sown for the
righteous, and that there shall be a clear breaking forth of the sun, after the
tempest is over; what God has planted, shall not by man, or any of Satan's
Instruments be plucked up. It is with young Colonies, as it is with trees newly
planted, which those winds, as one says, that are not so boisterous as to blow
down, do so far advantage as to shake them to a greater fastness at the root.
The Sovereign Ruler of the World does usually by such ways and means bring
about his peoples good, at the first, not well understood, nor easily brooked,
till the quiet fruit of righteousness be discerned to spring up unto all such
as are exercised therein. It has been no small advantage that the staff of
Government, and the shields of this part of the earth were put into your hands
(before the Boar out of the Wood has broke into this Vineyard) who under God
we trust may be found the repairers of the breach, and the Restorers of Pa^hs
to dwell in, while both your selves, and those under your charge. and conduct,
are looking unto him, who is promised to be the peace of his people when the
Assyrian shall come into their land.

The consideration of the power wherewith you are invested, together with the
great Wisdom, Faithfulness and Courage by which it has been managed by you,
in your several stations, has induced me to desire that the Historical
discourse ensuing might pass into public view under the umbrage of your
Protection. If a reason be demanded for the entituling so many names of worth
to the patronage of so small and inconsiderable a Volume; I need no other
Apology at this time, then I find in the words of the Wise Man; there are cases
wherein ^n^o are better then one, and a threefold Cord is not casily ^roken:
For it being like to pass through your several Jurisdictions, I conceived it
might need a p^sport of safe conduct from him that does preside in either of
them. It carries nothing with it but truth, (as I hope will be found) which may
well expect to meet with a ready Welcome, and suitable entertainmen^ in every
honest mind* but all men are not so equally balanced in their affections as to
bear with plain dealing, and give that harmless dove a resting place in their
minds for the sole of her soot. Of all Writings, those that are historical,
specially while the things mentioned are fresh in memory, and the actors
themselves surviving, had need be pursued with a wary^pace. Notwithstanding the
great care that has been taken to give all and every one, any way concerned in
the subject of the discourse, their just due, and nothing more or less, yet
perhaps some critical Reader will not let every sentence pass without some
censure or other. It was once by a great man accounted no small offense in an
harmless Poet, that some of his titles were misplaced as they were marshalled
up in their order: If any Historian should commit an error parallel thereunto, a
pardon, as it may be needed, in such a Script as is the present Narrative, so
may it be the better expected while pa^^ing up and down under the guard of your
authority, yea tho it should chance to be an offense of an higher nature; as
the mi^^iming of some p^ssages, mistaking the distance of some places, or too
often touching upon the same particulars, which could not be well avoided in a
Collection of so many occurrents too hastily drawn up, though true, yet
unseasonably, or out of due time coming to light without a total omission of
some material passages. It was intended at the first only as a private essay,
wherein to bind up together the most memorable passages of divine providence,
during our late, or former troubles with the Indians, it might have remained in
the place where it was first conceived and formed, or been smoothered as an
imperfect Embrio, not worthy to see the light, if some such as your selves had
not both quickened the being, and hastened the birth thereof. Something of this
nature may be of use to posterity, as well as to those of the present
Generation, to help them both to call mind, and carry along the memory of such
eminent deliverances, and sp^cial preservations granted by divine favor to the
people here; as it was of old commanded of God himself, that a Register should
be kept of those Wars, which in opposition to others, were in a peculiar
manner to be called the Wars of the Lord; and such are these here treated of,
if any, since miraculous deliverances have ceased, may truly be said to deserve
that title. If it had fallen into some ab^er hard, it might have been set forth
with better choice of words, and more fit expressions, that might have left a
deeper impression on the minds of those who are most concerned to retain it;
however it being now like to be brought to public view, I have presumed to
offer it to your selves, as on the accounts forementioned, so also as a
testimony of my thankful and deserved acknowledgment of that wisdom and
integrity abundantly shown forth in the administration of your authority.

Much honored and Honorable, I have nothing more to add, but the engagement
of my continual and daily prayers to the God of the Spirits of all flesh, that
he would carry you through all troubles, difficultyes and trials you may be
conflicting with, whither personal or political, and that he would bless your
Counsels at home, prosper your enterprises abroad, and long continue your
light in the present Generation, for his own glory, and his peoples good, that
after you have served your Generation here, your memory like that of the just,
may be blesed, and that you may leave peace as the inheritance of the remaining
Israel of God in these ends of the earth, which is and shall be the earnest
wish, and constant desire

From my Study 16th. 12th. 1676. of Your most humble and Devoted Servant,
William Hubbard.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe following historical Essay, was when first drawn up, intended only for the
satisfaction of a private Friend, and not for the use of the public; therefore
hope I may be excused, if I fall short therein of that exactness, which might
be expected from one that designedly undertook a Work of this nature: however
tursting more to the judgment of some who have accidentally had the perusal
thereof, then mine own, I am not unwilling that others should receive benefit
thereby. The Compiler of an History can challenge little to himself but
methodizing the work, the materials being found to his hand: diligence in
gathering them together, and faithfulness in improving them, is all that is
upon point required of him, in both which I have endeavored to make good, what
the profession I have now taken up obliges me unto. The matters of fact therein
related (being rather Massacres, barbarous inhumane outrages, then acts of
Hostility, or valiant achievements) no more deserve the name of a War, then
the report of them the title of an History, therefore I contented my self with
a Narrative. Much of what is therein mentioned, dep^nding on the single
authority of particular persons, an exact description of every occurrent was
har^ely to be obtained: All Soldiers are not like Caesar, able to describe
with their pens, what they have done with their Swords: But the most material
passages inserted, were either gathered out of the Letters, or taken from the
mouths of such as were eye or ear-witnesses of the things themselves; and
those also persons worthy of credit. In such passages as were variously
reported by the Actors, or Spectators, that which seemed most probable is only
inserted. If any error be committed about the Situation or distance of places,
it may deserve an excuse rather then a censure: For our (...) in the pursuit of
their enemies being drawn into many desert places, in (...) Woods, and unknown
Paths, which no Geographers hand ever measured, scarce any vultures eye had
ever seen, there was a necessity to take up many things in reference thereunto
upon no better credit sometimes then common Report. One or two passages need a
more particular excuse, or at least explication As where it is said, p. 2. that
the first Colony was sent hither (...), 1606, The mistake is easily helped, by
minding the Reader that the Patent or Commission was that year granted, when
also Capt. Henery Ch^^^ons was sent over upon some further discovery of the
Country, before the Adventurers would hazard a greater charge: soon after the
departure of the said Challons, the same year Sr. John Popham, one of the
principal undertakers, sent out another ship to second him under the Command of
Capt. H^man, Martin Prin of Bristow being Master, who not finding Challons (for
he miscarried in his design being seized by some Strangers in the way) yet
returning with good news, the next year they sent out two (...) with an hundred
men, with Ordnance and other Provision, under the conduct of Capt. Geo^g^
Popham, and Capt. Rawley Gilbert, who built a Fort in some place about Saga de
hoch, called St. George^ Fort, the ruins of which are remaining to this day,
as some say. Probably other like mistakes may be observed, in describing the
bounds and dimensions of some of the Patents, and grants of land belonging to
the other Colonies, but an Historian being no Pretorian Judge, his report
cannot prejudice any peoples Jurisdiction, or persons propriety.

Further also where it is said, p. 7. That the Indians had lived peaceably with
the English here near forty years, ever since the Pequod War; it is to be
understood with reference to public acts of Hostility; for particular
mischiefs have been committed by several Indians in some parts of the Country
but the actors were not abetted therein by any of their Countrymen: As (...)
Nantucket, an Island to the eastward of Cape Cod, where in the end of the year
1664. some villainous Indians murdered some that suffered shipwrac^ upon that
Island, yet justice was done upon two or three of the chief actors. In like
manner within a few years after the Pequod Wars, Mris. Hutchinson was killed
by the Indians near a Dutch Plantation; about which time some other insol^ncies
of like nature were acted by the Indians southward, either upon long Island, or
in some place within New Haven Colony. Also a murder was committed at
Farmington, another at Woburn, by some Indians in their drunken humors, upon a
maidservant or two, who denied them ^rink. All which hinder not the truth of
what is affirmed in the Narrative, such murders being too frequently committed
in the most peaceable places in the world. Such errors as are the
forementioned, being overlooked by the Candid Reader, it is presumed, there
will not be many other faults to be complained of, unless such as are merely
Typographical, or else were ocasioned by the dropping in of particular
passages, after the whole was drawn up, which I was willing to insert, although
it occasioned the discourse in some places, to be a little more confused then
else would have been. If ever the matter require another edition, more
acurateness may be observed. If those into whose hand th^se shall happen to
come, find any satisfaction about the occur^^urrents, that have here fallen
out, the Publisher shall account his pains well b^stowed.

To the Reverend Mr. William Hubbard on his most exact History of New-Englands
Troubles.
WHen thy rare Piece unto my view once came
It made my Muse that erst did smoke to flame:
Raising my Fancy so sublime, that I
That famous forked Mountain did epsy;
Thence in an Ecstasy I softly fell
Down near unto the Helliconian Well*
Where Poetry, in Prose, made I did see
By a Mercurian Brai^, which sure was Thee;
Such is thy modest Style enriched with Sense,
Invention fine, faced with Eloquence:
Thy florid Language quaintly does express
The Truth of matter in a comely Dress;
C^^ching the Sen^^ in such a pleasing Strain
As makes the Readers Heart to leap again:
And sweetly draws him like those Lotteries
Which never miss but always win the Prize:
But whither reves my Muse? What can be done
By'm that augment^ the Sea, or lights the Sun?
Go on brave Worthy* and let these Essays,
Like fair Aurora usher in the Rays
Of a Refulgent Sun arising clear
Hence to illuminate our Hemisphere;
(...) the after Ages may extol the High-One
For's Loving kindness to our little Sion:
And may our Senators with due regard
These and thy future labors all reward;
Though not in full, yet such encouragement,
As may in them be ^ust, to thee content;
For the present Age, and those that shall ensue,
Will be perpetual Debrtors unto You.
Fame shall with Honor ^rown the^^ and we will raise
Thy lasting Monument in Groves of Bays.
Heavens bless thee in thy Wor^, and may success
Attend thee here, hereafter Happiness.
J. S.

UPON The elaborate Survey of New-Englands Passions from the NATIVES By the
impartial Pen of that worthy Divine Mr. WILLIAM HUBBARD.
A Countries Thanks with Garlands ready lie
To wreathe the Brows of your Divinity
Renowned Sir: to write the Churches War
In ancient times fell to the Prophets share
New-Englands Chronicles are to be had
From Nathans Pen, or Manuscript of Gad.
Purchase wrote much, Hacluyt traversed far,
Smith and Dutch John de Laet famous are,
Martyr, with learned Acosta thousands too,
Here Is noveltyes and style which all out-doe,
VVrote by exacter hand then ever took
Historians Pen since Europe we forsook.
I took your Muse for old Columbus Ghost,
Who scrapt acquaintance with this western Coast,
But in converse some pages I might find
Then all Columbus Gemms a brighter mind.
Former Adventures did at best beguile
About these Natives Rise (obscure as Nile)
Their grand Apostle writes of their return*
Williams their Language; Hubbard how they burn,
Rob, kill and Roast, lead Captive, flay, blaspheme;
of English valor too he makes his Theme,
Whose tragical account may Christened be
New-Englands Travels through the bloody Sea.
Drake (...) ^enown by creeping round the old;
To treat of this New World our Author's bold.
Names uncouth which never Minshew could reduce
By's Polyglotton to the vulgar use.
Unheard of places like some New-Atlantis,
Before in fancy only, now Newlandis:
New found and subtle Stratagems of War,
We can quaint Elton and brave Barriffe spare:
New Discipline and Charges of Command
Are clothed in Indian by this English hand.
Moxon who drew two Globes, or whosoere
Must make a third, or else the old ones tear,
To find a Room for thy new Map by which
Thy friends and Country all thou do enrich?
Gratitudinis ergo apposuit B. T.
The Printer to the Reader.
BY Reason of the Authors long, and necessary absence from the Press, together
with the difficulty of reading his hand, many faults have escaped in the
Printing, either by mistaking of words, or mispointing of Sentences, which do
in some places not a little-confound the Sense, which the Reader is desired to
correct before he begins to read.

Page 1. l. 9. for eight r. right. page 3 l. 13. for Northwest r. most northerly
place. p. 4. l. 15 for Council of Plymouth r. of some Gentleman that had a
grant of the Council of Plymouth. p. 5. l. 19. for Pequod. r. Narrhaganset. p.
6. l. 1^ after charge r. bu^ p. 10. l. 14. after him r. ^^. p. 15 l. 35. leave
out the first that. p. 25 l 4. for defense r shelter. p 27. l 7. for heads r.
arms. p. 30 l r4 for attended r. altered. p 31. l. 4 for that r. their. p 34 l
9. for for h^^ses r. horses. p. 43. l. 7. for being r. were. p. 47. l. 40 for
not r. now. and leave out for the present. l 17 for therefore being r. were p.
4^ l 1. leave o^t ^o. l 14 before besides. r. and, or further. p. 5^. l. ^. for
over r. upon p 54 l 3. r. Massachusetts Regiment. l ult for there. r. their. p.
55. l 15. for from r. ^o. l 27. for hoping r. hoped p. 5^ l. 5 for 1665 r 1675.
p 58 l. 8 r Ia^^ p. 61 l for and (...) for the rest r. that. l. 18 after cause
r. which. p 68. l 21 for 27. r. ten or twelv^ p 81. l 11. after trusted r. that
deceived them. l. 29. after at r. tha^ p 104 l. 22. for on Pocasset side (...)
Plymouth.

In the second Part. p 81. between the seventh and eighth line, a whole line is
casually omitted in most of the Copyes viz. As for predictions or Presages of
the present troubles. p 82 l 29. for blinded r. blended p 83 l 24 leave out
but. l 31 r. harrassed. p^ g 4 l. 20 r. dispersed for disposed. l 16. after
Gentiles put the Parenthesis. p. ^7. l. 4. for Stockain r. S^ockam.

A NARRATIVE OF THE TROUBLES With the Indians in NEW ENGLAND, From the first
Planting thereof to the present time.
KNown unto God are all his works from the foundation of the world, though
manifest to us, only by the events of time, that fruitful mother of all things,
which in the former age did bring forth, at least did bring to light the
knowledge of this western World, called America, that in all foregoing times
and ages, lay hid in this obscure and remote Region, covered with a veyle of
ignorance, and looked up from the knowledge of all the rest of the Inhabitants
of the Earth. To whom the honor of its investigation does of eight more
properly belong, is sufficiently declared by the Hystory and Reports of such as
were ey witnesses thereof, and not in ended to be any part of the pre^ent
disquisition. The most considerable part of all the North side of America, is
called New England. In the fertility of the Soil, salubriousness of the Air,
and many other commodious advantages, most resembling the Country from whence
it borrowed its appellation. For the knowledge thereof the World is most
beholding to the discoveries of the English, under the conduct of Sebastian
Cabbot a famous Porreguez about the year 1497. though since much perfected by
the industry and travels of Captain Gosnold, Captain Hudson, Captain Smith, and
others of the English Nation. North America this posthumous birth of time, is
as to its na^^vity, of the same standing with her two elder Sisters Peru and
Mexico, yet was suffered to ly in its Swadling-clothes, one whole Century of
years, nature having promised no such Dowry of rich Mines of Silver and Gold to
them that would espouse her for their own, as she did unto the other two, which
possibly was the reason why she was not so hastily deflowred by her first
discoverers, nor yet so early courted by any of the Princes of Europe, lying
wholly neglected as it were, until a small company of Planters, under the
command of Captain George Popham, and Captain Gilbert were sent over at the
charge of Sir John Popham in the year 1606 to begin a Colony upon a Tract of
Land about Saga de hoch, situate on the south side of the River of Kennibeck
and about that called Shipscot River, about twenty miles south-West from
Pemmaquid, the most Northerly bound of all New England. But that design within
two years expiring with its first Founder, soon after some honorable persons
of the West of England, commonly called the Counsel of Plymouth, being more
certainly informed of several Navigable Rivers and commodious Havens, with
other places fit either for Traffic or Planting, newly discovered by many
skilful Navigators, obtained a Grant by Patent, under the great Seal from King
James of blessed memory, of all that part of North America, called New England.
From the 40 to the 48. gr ^of North Latitude. From which Grand and Original
Patent, all other Charters and Graunts of Land from Pemmaquid to Delaware Bay,
along the Seacoast, derive their Lineage and Pedigree; thus was that vast tract
of Land, after the year 1612. cantoned and pa^celled out into many lesser
Divisions and parcels, according as Adventurers presented, which said Graunts
being founded upon uncertain, or false Descriptions, and Reports of some that
Traveled thither, did many of them interfere one upon another, to the great
disturbance of the first Planters, and prejudice of the Proprietors themselves,
as is too well known by any that have had occasion to stay never so little
amongst them, many of whom are yet surviving. For notwithstanding the great
charge and vast expenses the first Adventurers were at, the first Proprietors
of the whole Province of Main and others (reaching from the head of Casco Bay
North-east to the mouth of Pascataqua River about sixty miles Westward) and the
hopes they migh have conceived of being the first Founders of NewColonies, and
of enlarging their Estates and Inheritances by those new acquired possessions
and Lordships, there was little profit reaped from thence, after the rich
fleeces of Beaver were gleaned away, nor any great improvement made of those
large portions of Lands, save the erecting of some few Cottages for Fishermen,
and a few inconsiderable Buildings for the Planters, which were on those
occasions drawn over the Sea, to settle upon the most northerly parts of
New England.

But whither it were by the imprudence of the first Adventurers, or the
dissoluteness of the persons they sent over to manage their Affairs, or whither
want of faithfulness or skill to manage their trust, they were by degrees in a
manner quite deserted almost of Laws and Government, and left to shift for
themselves, by which means at last they fell under the Jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts Colony, not by Usurpation, as is by great mistake suggested to his
Majesty, but by necessity, and the earnest desire of the Planters themselves,
to accept of whom, those of the Massachusetts Colony were the more easily
induced, in that they apprehended the bounds of their own Patent, by a
favorable Interpretation of the words describing the Northern Line [Three
miles beyond the most Northerly branch of Merimack River] do reach somewhat
beyond Pemmaquid, the North-west limits of all New England.

This was the first beginning of things in New England, at which time they were
not unlike the times of old, when the people of Judah were said to be without a
Teaching P^iest, and without Law; and no wonder things were no more
successfully carried on.

In the Year 1620. a Company belonging to Mr. Robinsons Church at Leyden in
Holland, although they had been courteously entertained by the Dutch, as
Strangers sojourning amongst them, yet foreseeing many inconveniences like to
increase, and that they could not so well provide for the good of their
Posterity, under the Government of a foreign Nation: they resolved to entreat
so much favor from their own Sovereign Prince King James, as to grant them
liberty under the shelter of his Royal Authority, to place themselves in some
part of New England, then newly discovered; wherefore having obtained some kind
of Patent or Grant, for some place about Hudsons River, they set sail from
Plymouth in September for the Southern parts of New England, but as they
intended to bend their course thither ward, per varios casus, per tot
discrimina rerum; they were at last cast upon a bosom of the South Cape of the
Massachusetts Bay, called Cape Cod, about the 11th of November, from whence the
Winter so fast approaching, they had no opportunity to remove; and finding some
encouragement from the hopefulness of the Soil, and courtesy of the Heathen,
they resolved there to make their abode for the future, which they did, laying
the foundation of a new Colony, which from the remembrance of the last Town in
England they sailed from, they called New Plymouth; containing no very
considerable Tract of Land, scarce extending an hundred miles in length through
the whole Cape, and scarce half so much in breadth where it is broadest. The
first Founders of that Colony aiming more at Religion then Earthly Poss^ssions,
aspiring not to any large dimension of Land, in their settling upon those Coasts.

At Weymouth also was a Plantation begun by Mr. Weston in the year 1622. but it
came to little.

The North and South Border of the Massachusetts Bay being thus planted, the
middle part was the more easy to be filled up, which thus was brought about.
Some Gentlemen and others, observing how it fared with those of New Plymouth,
were desiring upon the like ground to make the same attempt for themselves,
wherefore having by a considerable sum of money purchased of the Council of
Plymouth, all their right and interest in a Plantation there begun in the
Massachusetts Bay, and having attained a confirmation thereof by Patent from
King Charles of famous memory, in the year 1628, they sent over a Governor with
several persons to lay some foundation of an other Colony in the Massachusetts
Bay: and in the year 1630, more of the persons interested in the said Patent
(thence commonly called Patentees) with several other persons, intending to
venture their lives and all with them, transported themselves and their
Families into the said Massachusetts, who did in a short space of time by the
accession of many hundreds, who every year flocked after them, make such
increase, that in the space of five or six years, there were twenty
considerable Towns built and peopled, and many of the Towns first planted,
became so filled with Inhabitants, that like Swarms of Bees they were ready to
swarm^, not only into new Plantations, but into new Colonies, insomuch that in
the year 1635 a new Colony began to be planted upon Connecticut River, partly
by combination amongst themselves, removing from some Towns about the
Massachusetts Bay, and partly by the interest of a Patent purchased of that
honorable Gentle man Mr. Fennick, Agent for the Lord Sey, and Lord Brook, the
Lords Proprietors of the said River Connecticut, at the mouth of which River
they had built a fort, (called after their own titles Sey-Brook Fort)
commanding the passage of the said River. Yea such was the Confluence of people
making over into those parts, that in the year 1637 a fourth Colony began to be
planted, bearing the name of Newhaven from the first Town erected therein,
seated near the midway betwixt^ Hudsons River and that of Connecticot. The Sea
coast from the pitch of Cape Cod to the mouth of Connecticot River, inhabited
by several nations of Indians, W^mpanoogs (the first Authors of the present
Rebellion) Narhagansits, Pequoes, Mohegins, as the more inland part of the
Country by the Nipnets (a general name for all inland Indians betwixt the
Massachusetts and Connecticut River) The Seacoast Southwest from Plymouth was
first possessed by some discontented with the Government of the Massachusetts
Colony, from which some being exiled, others of their friends accompanying of
them, settled themselves upon a fair Island to the South-west of Cape Cod, now
called Road-Island, others settled upon the Mayn, at a place called Providence,
and so by degrees planting toward Narrhaganset Bay, made another Plantation
called Warwick, which places are since by Patent conferred upon the Inhabitants
of Road-Island; the rest of the Country from Pequod River to the River of
Connecticot, falling within the bounds of Connecticot Colony by Patent also,
since confirmed to the said Colony. Things had been very prosperously and
succesfully carried on in all the foresaid Colonyes and Jurisdictions, from the
year 1620, to the year 1636, at which time the Pequod Indians, the most warlike
and fierce of all the Indians in that part of the Country, who had made all the
rest of the Indians to stand in awe, having committed many barbarous outrages
upon their neighbor Indians, both Narhagansets on the east side, and Mohegins
on the west side of them: and also upon the English and Dutch, as they came
occasionally to traffic with them: and in the year 1634, having barbarously
murdered Capt. Stone and Capt. Norton, as they were trading with them.
Afterward one Oldham coming amongst them upon the like account. In l^ke manner
having committed several outrages upon the planters about Connecticut River,
the Inhabitants of all the Colonyes, unanimously setting upon them in the
beginning of the year 1637, they were easily suppressed, about 700 of them
destroyed, the rest either fled to the Mohawkes, by whom they were all cut off
that escaped, or else sheltring themselves under the Narhagansets and Mohegins
their neighbors, they were by the power of the English all subjected to one of
those two Nations of the Indians. Miantonimoh the chief Sachem or Lord of the
Narhagansets, expecting to be sole Lord and Ruler over all the Indians, after
the pequods were subdued, began to quarrel with the Mohegins upon the account
of Sovereignty, notwithstanding a firm Agreement was made betwixt the English
and the said Narhagansets in the year 1637, when they had helped to destroy the
Pequods, and also notwithstanding the tripartite League between the said
Narhagansets, the Mohegins, and the English at Hartford (the chief Town of
Connecticut Colony) made in the, year 1638, wherein the said Indians were
solemaly engaged not to quarrel either with the Mohegins, or any other Indians,
until they had first asked the advice of the English, to whose determination
they had likewise obliged themselves to stand, in all following Differences
among them. Yet did these ambitious Narhagansets specially their chief Leader
Miantonimob; bare such an^ inveterate hatred against the Mohegins, that they
were every year picking quarrels with them. The Mohegins on the other side
though not so numerous, yet a more warlike people and more politic, always
made their recourse to the English, complaining of the insolences of the
Narhagansets, contrary to their League, so as they would hardly be kept from
making open war against them, when they say all other attempts to kill and
destroy Vncas the Mohegin Sachem, by Treachery, poison, and Sorcery prove
ineffectual. Insomuch that at last the malice of Miantonimoh and his
Narrhagansets grew to that height, that they began to plot against the English
themselves, for defending of Vncas. But it being discovered by Vncas and some
of his men to the English, Miantonimoh was sent for by the Massachusetts Co^rt
to come to Boston when he came there, he would have denied those things laid to
his charge, he was conv^cted by one of his own fellowers; and instead of
standing to his promise, to deliver him to the Mohegin Sachem whose Subject he
was, going homeward he cut^ off his head, to prevent his telling m^re tales.
And with great discontent as he was going home said he would come no more at
Boston, wherein he proved a truer prophet then he himself believed when he
uttered the words, for in the end of the same year 1643 making war upon Vncas,
he was taken prisoner by him, and soon after by the advice of the Commissioners
of the four Colonyes, (at that time united firmly into a League offensive and
defensive, on which account they were after that time called the united
Colonyes of New England: though since that time they are reduced but to three
Colonyes; that of New Haven and Connecticot by the last Patent being conjoined
in one) his head was cut off by Vncas, it being ju^tly feared, that there would
never be any firm peace, either betwixt the English and the Narhagansets, or
betwixt the Narhagansets and the Mohegins, while Miantonimoh was left alive:
however the Narhagansets have ever since that time borne an implacable malice
against Vncas, and all the Mohegins, and for their sakes secretly against the
English, so far as they durst discover it.

In the years 1645, and 1646. they grew so insolent, that the Commissioners of
the united Colonyes were compelled to raise Forces to go against them, but when
they perceived that the English were in good earnest, they began to be afraid,
and sued for peace, and submitted to pay a tribute to satisfy for the charge of
preparation for the war, but were always very backward to make payment until
the English were forced to demand it by new Forces, so that it appeared they
were unwillingly willing to hold any friendly correspondence with the English,
yet durst they never make any open attempt upon them, until the present
Rebellion, where in that they had no small land, is too too evident,
notwithstanding all their pretenses to the conrary, as will appear in the
sequel of this History.

Thus it is apparent upon what Terms the English stood with the Narhagansets,
ever since the cutting off Miantonimoh, their chief Sachems head by Vncas, it
being done from the advice and Counsel of the English Anno 1643. As for the
rest of the Indians, ever since the suppressing of the Pequods in the year 1637
until the year 1675, there was always in* appearance amity and good
correspondence on all sides, scarce an English man was ever known* to be
ass^^lted or hurt by any of them, until after the year 1671, when the son of
one Matoonas, who ^s was supposed, being vexed in his mind that the design
against the English, intended to begin 1671 did not take place, out of mere
malice and ^pight against them, slew an Englishman traveling along the Road,
the said Matoonas being a Nipnet Indian, which Nipnets were under the command
of the Sachem of Mount-hope the Author of all the present mischiefs. Upon a due
enquiry into all preceding transactions between the Indians and the English,
from their first settling in these coasts, there will appear no ground of
quarrel that any of them had against the English, nor any appearance of
provocation upon one account or other; for when Plymouth Colony was first
planted, within three months after their first landing, March. 16. 1620.
Massasoit the chief Sachem of all that side of the Country repaired to the
English at Plymouth, and entered into a solemn League upon sundry Articles
printed in N. E. Memorial 166^. P. 24. the words are as follows.

1. THat neither he, nor any of his should injure or do hurt to any of their
people. 2. That if any of his did any hurt to any of theirs, he should send the
Offender that they might punish him. 3. That if any thing were taken away from
any of theirs, he should cause it to be restored; and they should do the like
to his. 4. That if any did unjustly war against him, they should aid him; and
(...) any did war against them, he should aid them; 5. That he should send to
his neighbor Confederates, to certify them of this, that they might not
wrong^ them, but might be likewise comprised in these Conditions of Peace. 6.
That when his Men came to them upon any occasion, they should leave their Arms
( which were then Bows and Arrows) behind them. 7. Lastly, that so doing, their
Sovereign Lord King James would esteem him as his Friend and Ally.
The which League the same Sachim, Sept. 25. 1630. a little before his death,
coming with his eldest Son, afterward called Alexander, did renew with the
English at the Court of Plymouth, for himself and his Son, and their Hours and
Successers: and after that he came to Mr. Browns, that lived not far from Mount
Hope, bringing his two Sons, Alexander and Philip with him, desiring that the^e
might be Love and Amitv after his death, between his Sons and them, as there
had been betwixt himself and them in former times: yet it is very remarkable,
that this Massasoit, called also Woosamequen (how much soever he affected the
English, yet) was never in the least degree any ways well affected to the
Religion of the English, but would in his last Treaty with his Neighbors at
Plymouth when they were with him about purchasing some Land at Swanzy, have had
them engaged never to attempt to draw away any of his People from their old
Pag^n Superstition, and Devilish Idolatry, to the Christian Religion, and did
much insist upon it till he saw the English were resolved never to make any
Treaty with him more upon that account, which when he discerned, he did not
further urge it: but that was a bad Omen that notwithstanding what ever his
humanity were to the English, as they were Strangers) for indeed they (...)
repayed his form kindness to them, by protecting him afterward against the
insolences of the Narrhagansets) he manifested no small displacency of Spirit
against them as they were Christians: which strain was evident more in his Son
that succeeded him, and all his People, in so much that some di^cerning persons
of that Jurisdiction have feared that that Nation of Indians would all be
rooted out, as is since come to pass. The like may be observed concerning he
Narrhagansets, who were always more civil and courteous to the English then
any of the other Indians, yet never as yet received the least tincture of
Christian Religion, but have in a manner run the same fare with the rest of
their Neighbors of Mount Hope, there being very few of them now left standing.
Nor is it unworthy the Relation, what a person of quality amongst us has of
late affirmed, one being much con^ersant with the Indians about Merimack River,
being Anno. 1660. invited by some Sagamores or Sachims to a great Dance (which
solemnities are the times they make use of to tell their stories, and convey
the knowledge of fore past and most memorable things to Posterity)
Passaconaway, the great Sachim of that part of the Country, intending at that
time to make his last and farwell speech to his Children and People, that were
then all gathered together, to whom he addressed himself in this manner:

I am now going the way of all Flesh, or ready to die, and not likely to see you
ever met together any more. I will now leave this word of Counsel with you,
that you take heed how you quarrel with the English, for though you may do them
much mischief; yet assuredly you will all be destroyed, and rooted off the
Earth if you do: for, said he, I was as much an Enemy to the English, at their
first coming into these parts, as; any one whatsoever, and did try all ways and
means possible to have destroyed them, at least to have prevented them fitting
down here, but I could no way effect it (it is to be noted that this Pass
conaway was the most noted Pawaw and Sorcerer of all the Country) therefore I
advise you never to contend with the English, nor make war with them: And
accordingly his eldest Son Wonnalancet by name, as soon as he perceived that
the Indians were up in Arms, he withdrew himself into some remote place, that
be might not be burt by the English, or the Enemies, or be in danger by them.

This Passage was thought fit to be inserted here, it having so near an
agreement with the former, inmamtting some secret awe of God upon the hearts of
some of the principal amongst them, that they durst not hurt the English,
although they bare no good affection to their Religion, wherein they seem not a
little to imitate Balaam, who whatever he uttered, when he was under the awful
power of divine illumination, yet when left to himself, was as bad an Enemy to
the Israel of God as ever before.

But to return, whence there has been this Digreffion:

After the death of this Woosamequen or Massasoit, his eldest Son succeeded him
about twenty years since, Alexander by name, who notwithstanding the League he
had entered into with the English, together with his Father, in the year 1639.
had neither affection to the Englishmens persons, nor yet to their Religion,
but had been plotting with the Narhagansets, to rise against the English; of
which the Governor and Council of Plymouth being informed, they presently sent
for him to being him to the Court, the person to whom that service was
committed, was a prudent and resolute Gentleman, the present Governor of the
said Colony, who was neither afraid of Danger, nor yet willing to delay in a
matter of that moment, he forthwith taking eight or ten stout men with him well
armed, intended to have gone to the said Alexanders dwelling, distant at least
forty miles from the Governors house, but by a good providence, he found him
whom he went to seek as an Hunting House, within six miles of the English
Towns, where the said Alexander with about eighty men were newly come in from
Hunting, and had left their Guns without doors, which Major Winslow with his
small company wisely seized, and conveyed away, and then went into the Wigwam,
and demanded Alexander to go along with him before the Governor, at which
message he was much appalld, but being told by the undaunted Messenger, that if
he stird or refused to go he was a dead man; he was by one of his chief
Counselors, in whose advice he most confided, persuaded to go along to the
Governors house, but such was the pride and height of his Spirit, that the
very surprizal of him, raised his Choler and indignation, that it put him into
a Fever, which notwithstanding all possible means that could be used, seemed
Mortal; whereupon entreating those that held him Prisoner, that he might have
liberty to return home, promising to return again if he recovered, and to send
his Son as Hostage till he could so do; on that consideration he was fairly
dismissed, but dyed before he got half way home: Here let it be observed, that
although some have taken up false Reports, as if the English had compelled him
to go further or faster then he was able, and so fell into a Fever, or as if
he were not well used by the Physician that looked to him, while he was with
the English, all which are notoriously false; nor is it to be imagined that a
person of so noble a disposition as is that Gentleman (at that time employed to
bring him) should himself, or suffer any else to be uncivil to a person allied
to them, by his own, as well as his Fathers League as the said Philip also was;
nor was any thing of that nature ever objected to the English of Plymouth, by
the said Alexanders Brother, by name Philip, commonly for his ambitious and
haughty Spirit nicknamed King-Philip, when he came in the year 1662. in his own
person with Sansaman his Secretary and chief Counselor to renew the former
League that had been between his Predecessors and the English of Plymouth: but
there was as much correspondence betwixt them for the next seven years as ever
had been in any former times, what can be imagined therefore, besides the
instigation of Satan, that either envied at the prosperity of the Church of God
here seated, or else fearing lest the power of the Lord Jesus, that had
overthrown his kingdom in other parts of the World, should do the like here,
and so the stone taken out of the Mountain without hands, should become a great
Mountain it self, and fill the whole earth, no cause of provocation being by
the English; For once before this in the year 1671 the Devil, who was a
Murderer from the beginning, had so filled the heart of this salvage Miscreant
with envy and ma^ice against the English, that he was ready to break out into
open war against the Inhabitants of Plymouth, pretending some petite injuryes
done him in his planting land, but when the master of controversy came to be
heard before diverse of the Massachusetts Colony, yea when he himself came to
Boston, as it were referring his case to the Judgment of that Colony, nothing
of that nature could be made to appear, whereupon in way of submission, he was
of necessity by that evident conviction forced to acknowledge that it was the
naughtiness of his own heart, that put him upon that Rebellion, and nothing of
any provocation from the English, and to a Consession of this nature, with a
solemn renewal of his Covenant, declaring his desire, that this his Covenant
might testify to the world against him, if ever he should prove unsaithfull to
those of Plymouth, or any other of the English Colonyes therein, himself with
his (...) Counselors subscribed in the presence of some Messengers sent on
purpose to hear the difference between Plymouth and the said Philip. But for
further satisfaction of the Reader, the said Agreement and Submission shall
here be published.

Tannton, April 10th. 1671
Where as my Father, my Brother and my self have formerly submitted our selves
and our People unto the Kings Majesty of England, and to this Colony of
New Plymouth, by solemn Covenant under our hand; but I having of late through
my indescrition, and the naughtiness of my heart violated and broken this my
Covenant with my friends, by taking up Arms, with evil intent against them,
and that groundlesly; I being now deeply sensible of my unfaithfullness and
folly, do desire at this time solemnly to renew my Covenant with my ancient
Friends, and my Fathers Friends above mentioned, and do desire this may
testify to the world against me if ever I shall again fail in my Faithfulness
toward them (that I have now and at all times found so kind to me) or any
other of the English Colonyes; and as a real pleage of my true intentions, for
the future to be faithful and friendly, I do freely engage to resign up unto
the Government of New Plymouth, all my English Arms, to be kept by them for
their security, so long as they shall see reason. For true performance of the
premises I have hereunto set my hand together with the rest of my Council.

In presence of William Davis William Hudson. Thomas Brattle. The Mark of P.
Philip chief Sachem of Pocanoket The Mark of V. Tavoser The Mark of ^ Capt.
Wisposk^ The Mark of T. Woonkaponehunt. The Mark of 8 Nimrod.


TO which for the further clearing the Justice of the present war, the Result
of the debate of the Commissioners of the united Colonyes about the matter of
the War shall here be inserted.

At a Meeting of the Commissioners of the united Colonyes held at Boston,
September 9^h. 1675.
WE having received from the Commissioners of Plymouth a Narrative, showing
the Rise and several steps of that Colony, as to the present War with the
Indians, which had its beginning there, and its progress into the Massachusetts,
by their insolences and outrages, murtbering many persons, and burning their
Houses in sundry Plantations in both Colonies. And having duly considered the
same; do declare, that the said War does appear to be both just and necessary,
and its first Rise only a defensive War. And therefore we do agree and
conclude that it ought to be jointly prosecuted by all the united Colonies, and
the Charges thereof to be borne and paid as is agreed in the Articles of
Confederation.

John Winthrop. James R chards. Thomas Danforth. William Stoughton. Josiah
Wir^ss^w. Thomas H^nckley.


Yet whatever his submission was before, or his subjecting himself and his
people to our King, or his engagement to pay a sum of money in part of the
Charges then occasioned by him (nor have the English in or about Plymouth,
since, or before that time been any ways injurious unto him, or any of his
people) all which are fully declared in a Narrative given by the Commissioners
of the Colony of Plymouth, wherein they also signify that the settlement and
issue of the former controversy between Philip and them; was obtained and made
(principally) by the mediation, and interposed advice and counsel of the other
two confederate Colonyes, and also in a letter under the Governors hand, in
these words, -- I think I can clearly say that before these present troubles
broke out, the English did not possess one foot of Land in this Colony, but
what was fairly obtained by honest purchase of the Indian Proprietors: Nay,
because some of our people are of a covetom disposition and the Indians are in
their Streights easily prevaited with to part with their Lands, we first made a
Land, that none should purchase or receive of gift any Land of the Indians
without the knowledge and allowance of our Court, and penalty of a Fine, five
pound per Acre, for all that should be so bought or obtained. And le^^ yet they
should be straightened, we Ordered that Mount-Hope, Pocasset and several other
Nicks of the best land in the Colony (because most suitable and convenient for
them, should never be bought out of their bands or else they would have sold
them long since. And our neighbors at Rehoboth and Swanzy although they bought
their Lands fairly of this Philip and his Father and Brother, yet because of
their vicinity, that they might not trespass upon the Indians did at their own
cost set up a very substantial Fence quite cross that great Neck between the
English and the Indians, and paid due damage if at any time any unruly horse
or other beasts brake in and trespassed. And for diverse years last past (that
alloccasion of offense in that respect might be prevented) the English agreed
with Philip and his, for a certain sum yearly to maintain the said Fence, and
secure them selves. And if at any time they have brought Complaints before us,
they have had Justice impartial and spee^^^y, so that our own people have
frequently complained, that we erred on the other hand in skewing them over
much favor.

Marshfield, May 1. 1676. Jos. Winslow.




Yet did this treacherous and perfidious Caitiffe still harbor the same or
more mischievous thoughts against the English then ever before, and has been
since that time plotting with all the Indians round about to make a general
insurrection against the English in all the Colonyes; which as some prisoners
lately brought in have confessed, should have been put in execution at once, by
all the Indians rising as one man, against all those plantations of English,
which were nex^ them. The Narrhagansets having promised, as was confessed to
risewith 4 thousand sighting men in the Spring of this present year, 1676. But
by the occasion hereafter to be mentioned about Sausaman, Philip was
necc^ssitated for the safety of his own life to begin his Rebellion the year
before, when the Design was not fully ripe. Yet some are ready to think, that
if his own life had not now been in jeopardy by the guilt of the foresaid
Murder of Sausaman, his heart might have failed him, when it should have come
to be put in execution, as it did before in the year 1671. which made one of
his Captains, of far better Courage and resolution then himself, when he saw
his cowardly temper and disposition, fl^^g down his Arms, calling him white
Liver'd Curre, or to that purpose, and saying, that he would never own him
again, or fight under him, and from that time has turned to the English, and
bath continued to this day a faithful and ^esolute Soldier in their quarrel.

That the Indians had a Conspiracy amongst themselves to rise against the
English, is confirmed by some of the Indians about Hadly, although the plot was
not come to maturity when Philip began, the special providence of God therein
overruling the Contrivers: For when the beginning of the troubles first was
reported from Mount-Hope, many of the Indians were in a kind of a Maze, not
knowing well what to do; sometimes ready to stand for the English, as formerly
they had been wont to do; sometimes inclining to strike in with Philip (which
at the last they generally did) which if it had been foreseen, much of that
mischief might have been prevented that fell out in several places, more by
perfidious and treacherous dealing then any other ways: the English never
imagining that after so many obliging kindnesses received from them by the
Indians, besides their many engagements and protestatitions of friendship, as
formerly, they would have been so ungrateful, persideously false and cruel as
they have since proved.

The occasion of Philips so sudden taking up arms the last year was this,
There was one John Sausaman a very cunning and plausible Indian well skilled in
the English language, and bred up in the profession of Christian Religion,
employed as a Schoolmaster at Natick, the Indian Town, who^ upon some
misdemeanour fled from his place to Philip, by whom he was entertained in the
room and office of a Secretary, and his chief Counselor, whom he trusted with
all his affairs and secret counsels: But afterward, whither upon the sting of
his own Conscience; or by the frequent Solicitations of Mr. Eliot, that had
known him from a child, and instructed him in the principles of our Religion,
who was often laying before him the heinous sin of his apostasy, and r^^urning
back to his old vomit, he was at last prevailed with to for sake Philip, and
return back to the Christian Indians at Natick, where he was haptized,
manifesting public Repentance for all his former offenses, and made a serious
Prosession of the Christian Religion: and did apply himself to Preach to the
Indians, wherein he was better gifted then any other of the Indian Nation; so
as he was observed to conform more to the English manners then any other
Indian: yet having occasion to go up with some others of his Countrymen to
Namasket; whither for the advantage of Fishing, or some such occasion, it
matters not; being there not far from Philips Country, he had occasion to be
much in the Company of Philips Indians, and of Philip himself: by which means
he discerned by several circumstances, that the Indians were plotting anew
against us; the which out of faithfulness to the English, the said Sausaman
informed the Governor of, adding also, that if it were known that he revealed
it, he knew they would presently kill him. There appearing so many concurrent
testimonies from others, making it the more probable, that there was a certain
truth in the information, some inquiry was made into the business, by examining
Philip himself, and several of his Indians, who although they would own
nothing; yet could not free themselves from just suspicion; Philip therefore
soon after contrived the said Sausamans death, which was strangely discovered;
notwithstanding it was so cunningly effected, for they that murdered him met
him upon the Ice on a great Pond, and presently after they had knocked him
down, put him under the Ice, yet leaving his Gun and his Hat upon the Ice, that
it might be thought he fell in accidentally through the Ice and was drowned:
but being missed by his friends, who finding his Hat and his Gun, they were
thereby led to the place, where his body was found under the Ice: when they
took him up to bury him, some of his friends, specially one David observed some
bruises about his Head, which made them suspect he was first knocked down,
before he was put into the water, however, they buried him near about the place
where he was found, without making any further inquiry at present: nevertheless
David his friend, reported these things to some English at Taunton (a Town not
far from Namasket) it occasioned the Governor to inquire further into the
business, wisely considering, that as Sansaman had told him, that if it were
known, that he had revealed any of their plots, they would murder him for his
pains: wherefore by special Warrant the body of Sansaman being dug again out
of his Grave, it was very apparent that he had been killed and not drowned. And
by a strange providence, an Indian was found, that by accident standing unseen
upon a Hill, had seen them murdering the said Sansaman, but dirst never reveal
it for fear of losing his own life likewise, until he was called to the Court
at Plymouth, or before the Governor, where he plainly confessed what he had
seen. The Murderers being apprehended, were convicted by his undeniub^e
Testimony, and other remarkable cirumstances, and so were all put to death,
being but three in number; the last of them confessed immediately before his
death, that his Father (one of the Councellers and special Friends of Philip)
was one of the two that murdered Sansaman, himself only looking on. This was
done at Plymouth Court. held in June 1675. insomuch that Philip, apprehending
the danger his own head was in next, never used any further means to clear
himself from what was like to be laid to his charge, either about his plotting
against the English, nor yet about Sansamans death: but by keeping his men
continually about him in Arms, and gathering what Strangers he could to join
with him, marching up and down constantly in Arms, both all the while the Court
sat, as well as afterward; the English of Plymouth hearing of all this, yet
took no further notice, then only to order a Military Watch in all the adjacent
Towns, hoping that Philip finding himself not likely to be Arraigned by Order
of the said Court, the present Cloud might blow over, as some others of like
nature had done before; but in conclusion, the matter proved otherwise, for
Philip finding his Strength daily increasing, by the flocking of Neighbor
Indians unto him, and sending over their Wives and Children to the Narhagansets
for security (as they use to do when they intend War with any of their Enemies)
Immediately they began to Alarm the English at Swanzy (the next Town to Philips
Country) as it were daring the English to begin, at last their insolences grew
to such an height, that they began not only to use threatening words to the
English, but also to kill their Cattle and rifle their houses; whereat an
English man was so provoked, that he let fly a Gun at an Indian, but did only
wound, not kill him, whereupon the Indians immediately began to kill all the
English they could, so as on the 24th. of June 1675. was the Alarm of war first
f^unded in Plymouth Colony, when eight or nine of the English were slun in and
about Swanzy: They first making a shot at a company of English as they returned
from the Assembly where they were met in way of Humiliati^n that day, whereby
they killed one and wounded others, and then likewise at the same time, they
slew two Men on the Highway, sent to call a Surgeon, and barbarously the same
day murdered six men in and about a dwelling House in an other part of the
Town, all which outrages were committed so suddenly, that the English had no
time to make any resistance: For on the 14th. of the same Month, besides
endeavors used by Mr. Brown of Swanzy one of the Magistrates of Plymouth
Jurisdiction, an amicable Letter was sent from the Council of Plymouth to
Philip showing their dislike of his prastises, and advising him to dismiss his
strange Indians, and not suffer himself to be abused by false Reports,
concerning them that intended him no hurt, but no answer could be obtained,
otherwise then threatening of War, which it was hoped might have been prevented,
as heretofore it had been, when things seemed to look with as bad face as then
they did. However the Governor and Council of Plymouth, understanding that
Philip continued in his resolution, and manifested no inclination to peace,
they immediately sent up what Forces they could to secure the Towns
thereabouts, and make resistance as occasion might be, and also dispatched away
Messengers to the Massachusetts Governor and Council, letting them know the
state of things about Mount-Hope: and desiring their speedy assistance: upon
which care was immediately taken with all expedition to send such supplye^ as
were defired: But in the mean time two Messengers were dispatched to Philip, to
try whether he could not be diverted from his bloody enterprise. so to have
prevented the mischief since fallen out, hoping, that as o^ce before, viz. Anno
1671. by their mediation, a stop was put to the like Tragedy; so the present
war might by the same means have been now turned aside: For in the said year
Philip had firmly engaged himself, when he was at Boston, not to quarrel with
Plymouth until he had first addressed himself to the Massachusetts for advice
and approhation: But the two Messengers aforesaid, finding the men slain in the
Road June 24. as they were going for the Surgeon, apprehended it no safe to
proceed any further, considering also, that a peace now could not honorably be
concluded after such barbarous outrages committed upon some of the neighbor
Colony: Wherefore returning with all speed to Boston, the Massachuset Forces
were dispatched away with all immaginable have, as the ex^gent of the matter
did require, some of them being then upon, or ready for their March, the rest
were ordered to follow after, as they could be raised. The sending forth of
which, because it was the first engagement in any warlike preparations against
the Indians, shall be more particularly declared.

On the 26th. of June a Foot-Company under Capt. Dani^l Henchman, with a Troop
under Capt. Thomas Prentice, were sent out of Boston toward Mount-Hope; it
being late in the afternoon before they began to march, the central Echpse of
the Moon in Capric. happened in the evening before they came up to Naponset
River, about twenty miles from Boston, which occasioned them to make an halt,
for a little repast, till the moon recovered her light again. Some melancholy
Fancyes would not be persuaded, but that the Eclipse falling out at that
instant of time, was ominous, concriving also that in the center of the Moon
they discerned an unusual black spot, not a little resembling the scalp of an
Indian: As some others not long before, imagined they saw the form of an Indian
Bow, accounting that likewise ominous (although the mischief following was done
by Guns, not by Bows) both the one and the other, might rather have thought of
what Marcus Crassus the Koman General, going forth with an Army against the
Parthians, once wisely replied to a private Soldier, that would have dissuaded
him from marching that time, because of an Eclpse of the Moon in Capricorn
[That he was more afraid of Sagitarius then of Capricornus] meaning the Arrows
of the Parthians (accounted very good Archers) from whom as things then fell
out, was his greatest danger. But after the Moon had waded through the dark
shadow of the Earth, and borrowed her Light again, by the help thereof, the two
Companies marched on toward Woodcocks House, thirty miles from Boston, where
they arrived next morning; and there retarded their motion till the afternoon,
in hope of being overtaken by a Company of Volunteers, under the Command of
Captain Samuel Mosely, which accordingly came to pass, as on June 28th. they
all arrived at Swanzy, where by the advice of Captain Cuworth, the Commander in
chief of Plymouth Forces, they were removed to the Head Quarters, which for
that time were appointed at Mr. Miles his house, the Minister of Swanzy, within
a quarter of a mile of the Bridge, leading into Philips Lands. They arriving
there some little time before night, twelve of the Troop unwilling to loose
time passed over the Bridge, for discovery into the Enemies Territories, where
they found the rude welcome of eight or ten Indians firing upon them out of the
Bushes, killing one William Hammond, wounding Corporal Belcher, his Horse being
also shot down under him; the rest of the sard Tropers having discharged upon
those Indians that ran away after their first shot, carried off their two dead
and wounded Companions, and so retired to the main Guard for the night,
pitc^ing in a Bar^icado about Mr. Miles his house. The Enemy thought to have
braved it out by a bold assauld or two at the first; but their hearts soon
began to fail them when they perceived the Massachusetts, and Plymouth Fo^c^s
both engaged against them: for the next morning they shou^ed (...) h^ce, at
half a miles distance, and nine or ten of them showing (...) this side the
Bridge: our Horsemen with the whole body of the Privateers under Captain
Mosely, not at all daunted by such kind of Alarms, nor willing so to loose the
Bridge, ran ^^^le (...) down upon them over the said Bridge, pursuing them a
mile and quarter on the other side: Ensign Savage, that young Martial Spark,
scarce twenty years of age, had at that time one bullet lodged in his Thigh,
another shot through the br^ms of his Hat, by ten or twelve of the Enemy
discharging upon him together, while he boldly held up his Colors, in the
Front of his Company: but the weather nor suffering any further action at that
time, those that were thus far advanced, were compelled to retreat back to the
main Guard, having first made a shot upon the Indians as they ran away into a
Swamp nearby, whereby they killed five or six of them, as was understood soon
after at Narhaganset: This resolute charge of the English ^ces upon the Enemy
made them quit their place on Mount-Hope that very night, where Philip was
never seen after; till the next year, when he was by a divine Mandate sent
back: there to receive the reward of his wickedness where he first began his
mischief: the next day Major Savage (that was to command in chief over the
Massachnset Forces, being come up with other Supplies about six a clock over
night) the whole Body intended to march into Mount-Hope, and there beat up the
Enemies quarters, or give him Battle, if he durst abide it: but the weather
being doubtful, our Forces did not march till near noon, about which time they
set out, with a Troop of Horse in each wing, to prevent the danger of the
Enemies Ambuscadoes; after they had marched about a mile and and half, they
passed by some Houses newly burned: not far of one of them they found a Bible
newly torn, and the leaves scattered about by the Enemy, in hatred of our
Religion therein revealed, two or three miles further they came up with some
Heads, Scalps, and Hands cut off from the bodies of some of the English, and
stuck upon Poles near the Highway, in that barbarous and inhumane manner
bidding us Defyance, the Commander in chief giving Order that those monuments
of the Enemies cruelty should be taken down, and buried: the whole body of the
Forces still marched on, two miles further, where they found diverse Wigwams of
the Enemy, amongst which were many things scattered up and down, arguing the
hasty fl^ght of the Owners; half a mile further, as they passed on through m^^y
Fields of stately Corn, they found Philips own W gvam; every place giving them
to perceive the Enemies ha^ty departure from thence; after they had marched two
miles further they came to the Sea sid^, yet in all this time meeting with no
Indians, nor any sign of them, unless of their flight to some other places. The
season like to prove very tempestuous, and rainy, Captain Cudworth with some of
the men of Plymouth passed over to Road-^stand. The Forces under Major Savage
were forced to abide all night in the open Field, without any shelter,
notwithstanding the abundance of rain that fell, and in the morning, despairing
to meet with any enemy on MountHope, they retreated back to their Quarters at
Swanzy, in the way meeting with many Indian dogs, that seemed to have lost
their Masters. That night Capt. Prentice his Troop for convenie^cy of Quarters,
as also for discovery, was dismissed to lodge at Seaconke or Rehoboth, a Town
within six miles of Swanzy. As they returned back in the morning, Capt.
Prentice divided his Troop, delivering one half to Leiutenant Oak^s, and
keeping the other himself, who as they rode along, espied a company of Indians
burning an house; but could not pursue them by reason of several Fences, that
they could not g^e over till the Indians had escaped i^to a Swampe. Those with
Leiutenant Oaks had the like discovery, but with better success, as to the
advantage of the ground, so as pursuing of them upon a plain, they slew four or
five of them in the Chase, whereof one was known to be Thebe a Sachem of
Mount-Hope, another of them was a chief Counselor of Philips; yet in this
attempt the Lieutenant lost one of his company, John Druce by name, who was
mortally wounded in his bowels, whereof he soon after dyed, to the great grief
of his companions. After the said Troop came up to the Headquarters at Swanzy,
they understood from Capt. Cudworth that the enemy were discovered upon
Pocass^t, an other neck of Land lying over an arm of the Sea, more toward
Cape Cod: However it was resolved that a more narrow search should be made
after them, both upon Mount-Hope, and upon the ground between Swanzy and
Rehoboth to scour the Swamps, and assault them if they could find where they
were entrenched. Capt. Henchman and Capt. Preentice were ordered to search the
Swamps; while Capt. Mosely and Capt. Paige with his Dragoons attending on Major
Savage, should return back into Mount hope that they might be sure to leave
none of the enemy behind them, when they should remove to pursue them elsewhere.

About ten a clock the next morning, July. 4. Capt. Henchman after a long and
tedious March, came to the Head Quarters, and informed that he came upon a
place where the enemy had newly been that night, but were escaped out of his
reach: But that night before they were determined of any other motion, Capt.
Hutchinson came up from Boston with new Orders for them to pass into
Narrhaganset, to treat with the Sachems there, and if it might be, to prevent
their joining with Philip. Capt. Cudworth, by this time was come up to the Head
Quarters, having left a Garrison of forty men upon Mount-Hope Neck. The next
morning was spent in consultations how to carry on the Treaty; it was then
resolved, that they should go to make a peace with a Sword in their hands,
having no small ground of suspicion that the said Narhagansets might join with
the enemy wherefore, they thought it necessary to carry all the Messachuset
Forces over into the Narhaganset Country, to fight them if there should be
need; Capt. Mosely passed over by water to attend Capt. Hutchinson in his
dispatch; the other Companys with the Pro^pers ^iding round about: as they
passed they found the Indidians in Pomhams Country (next adjoining to Philips
Borders) all fled, and their Wigwams without any people in them.

After they came to the Narhaganset Sachems, three or four days were spent in
a trea^y, after which a peace was concluded on sundry Articles between the
Messengers of Connicticut Colony (who were ordered to meet with those of the
Massachusetts) and the Commanders of the Forces sent against Philip: Hostages
were also given by the said Narhagansets for the performance of the agreement.
A Copy of the said Agreement, and the Articles on which a Peace was concluded,
here follow. It being always understood, that Plymouth Colony was included in
the said Agreement, although their Forces were not then present, but remained
at home near the enemies Borders, to secure their Towns, and oppose Philip as
there might be occasion, if he offered to make any new actempt in the mean time,

ARticles, Covenants and Agreements had, made and concluded by and b^tween
Major Thomas Savage, Captain Edward Hutchinson, and Mr. Joseph Dudley, in
behalf of the Government of the Massachusetts Colony, and Major Wait Winthrop and
Mr. Richard Smith on behalf of Connect^cut Colony on the one party, and
Agamaug, Wompsh, alias Corman, Taitson, Tawageson Counselors and Attournies to
Canonicus, Ninigret, Matataog, old Queen Quaiapen, Quananshit and Pomham the
six present Sachims of the whole Narhaganset Country on the other party,
referring to several diff^rences and troubles lately risen between them; and
for a final conclusion of settled Peace and Amity between the said Sachims,
their Heirs and Successors for ever, and the Governors of the said
Mass^chusets and Connecticot, and their Successors in the said Goverments for
ever.
I. That all and every of the said Sachims shall from time to time carefully
seize, and living or dead deliver unto one or other of the abovesaid
Goverments, all and every of Sachim Philips Subjects whatsoever, that shall
come or be found within the precincts of any of their Lands, and that with
greatest diligence and faithfulness.

II. That they shall with their utmost ability use all Acts of Hostility
against the said Philip and his Subjects, entering his Lands or any other Lands
of the E^g^^sh to ki^land d^stroy the said Enemy, until a cess^^tion from War
with the said Enemy be concluded by both the abovesaid Colonies.

III. That the said Sachims, by themselves and their Ag^nts, shall careful^y
search out and deliver all stolen goods whatsoever taken by any of their
Subjects from any of the English, whether formerly or lately, and shall make
full satisfaction for all wrongs or injuries done to the Estate of any of the
Subjects of the several Colonies, according to the judgment of in^ifferent
men, in case of dissatisfaction between the Offenders and the off^nded Parties,
or deliver the offenders.

IV. That all Preparations for War, or Acts of Hostility against any of the
English Subjects, shall for ever for the future cease; together with all manner
of Thefts, Pilferings, killing of Cattle, or any manner of breach of p^ace
whatsoever shall with utmost care be prevented, and instead thereof their
strength to be used as a Guard round about the Narraganset Country, for the
English Inhabitants safety and security.

V. In token of the abovesaid Sachims reality in this Treaty and Conclusion,
and for the security of the several English Goverments and Subjects, they do
freely deliver unto the abovesaid Gentlemen, in the b^half of the abovesaid
Colonies, John Wobequob, Weowchim, Pewkes, We^new, four of their near Kinsmen
and choice Friends to be and remain as Hostages in several places of the
English Iuris^ictions, at the appointment of the Honorable Governors of the
abovesaid Colonies, there to be civi^ly treated not as Prisoners, but otherwise
at their Honors Discr^tion, un^il the abovesaid Articles, are fully
accomplished to the satisfaction of the several Goverments, the departure of
any of them in the mean time to be accounted breach of the Peace, and of these
present Articles.

VI. The said Gentlemen in the behalf of the Goverments to which they do
belong, do engage to every the said Sachims and their Subjects* (...) or any of
them shall seize and bring into either the abovesaid English Goverments, or to
Mr. Smith Inhabitants of Narhaganset, Philip Sachim alive, he or they so
delivering, shall receive for th^^ pains, forty ^rucki^g cloa^h Coats, in case
they bring his Head they shall have twenty like good Coats paid them: for every
living Subject of said Philip^ so delivered, the deliverer shall receive two
Coats, and for every Head one Coat, as a Gratuity for their service herein,
making it appear to satisfaction, that the Heads or Persons are belonging to
the Enemy, and that they are of their seizure,

VII. Thesaid Sachims do renew and confi^^m unto the English Inhabitants or
others, all former Graunts, Sales, Bargains or Conv^yances of Lands, Meadows,
Timber, Grass, Stones, or whatever else the English have heretofore bought or
qui^tly possessed and enjoyed* to be unto them, and their Heirs, and Assigns
for ever; as also all former Articles made with the Confederate Colonies.

Lastly, The said Counselors and Attorneys do premeditately, seriously, and
upon good advice, Covenant, Conclude and Agr^e all abovesaid solemnly, and call
God to witness they are, and shall remain true Friends to the English
Goverments, and perform the abovesaid Articles punctually, using their utmost
endeavor, care and faithfulness therein:

In witness whereof they have set their Hands and Seals. Petaquanscot July 15.
1675. Signed, Sealed and Delivered in the presence of us underwritten, being
carefully Interpreted to the said Indians before Sealing. Daniel Henchman.
Thomas Prentice. Nicholas Paige. Joseph Stanton Interpreter. Henry Hanlaws.
Picue B^kow. Job N^ff. Tawageson his mark C. Taytson his mark D. Agamaug his
mark T. Wampsh, alias Corman his mark. X.


During this Treaty of Peace with the Narhagansets, Captain Cudworth with the
Forces of Plymouth under his Command, found something to do nearer home, though
of another nature as it proved, sc. to make War whilst the other were (as they
thought) making peace: in the first place therefore he dispatched Captain
Fuller) joining Lieutenant Church together with him in Commission) with fifty
in his Compa^y to P^c^ss^t, on the same account, as the other went to
Narhaganset^ eit^er to conclude a Peace with them, if they would continue
Friends and give Hostages for the confirmation thereof, or fight them if they
should declare themselves Enemies, and join with Philip; himself intending to
draw down his Forces to Rehoboth, to be ready for a speedy March to Tau^ton,
and so down into the other side of the Country upon the news that some of the
Enemy were burning and spoiling o^ Middleburrough and Dartmouth, two small
villages lying in the way betwix^ P^cass^t and Plymouth. Upon thursday July 7.
Captain Fuller with Cap^ain Church wen^ into Pocasset to seek after the Enemy,
or else as occ^sion (...) serve, to treat with those Indians at Pocasset, with
whom Mr. Church was very well acquainted, always holding good correspondence
with them: After they had spent that day and most of the night, in traversing
the said Pocasset Neck, and Watching all night in an House which they found
there, yet could head no tidings of any Indians; insom^ch that Captain Fuller
began to be weary of his design: Mr. Church in the mean while ass^ring him that
they should find Indians before it were long: yet for greater expedition they
divided their Company, Captain Fuller taking down toward the Seaside, where it
seems after some little skirmishing with them, wherein one man only received a
small Wound, he either saw or heard too many Indians for himself and his
Company to deal with, which m^de him and them betake themselves to an House
near the Waterside, from whence they were fetched off by a Sloop before night
to Road Island. Captain Church (for so may he well be styled after this time)
marched further into the Neck, imag^ning that if there were Indians in the
Neck, they should find them about a peas-field not far off: as soon as ever
they came near the said field he espied two Indians in the pease, who also had
at the same time espied him, and presently making some kind of shout, a great
number of Indians came about the field, pursuing the said Capt. Church and his
men in great numbers to the sea side: there being (...) above fifteen with
Church, yet seven or eight score of the Indians pursuing after them. Now was a
fit time for this young Captain and his small Company to handsel their valor
upon this great rout of Indians, just ready to devo^^ them: But victory stands
no more in the number of Soulders, then Verity in the plurality of voices: And
although some of these fifteen had scarce courage enough for themselves, yet
their Captain had enough for himself, and some to spare for his friends, which
he there had an opportunity of improving to the full. When he saw the hearts of
any of his followers to fail, he would bid them be of good Courage and fight
stoutly, and (possibly by some divine impression upon his heart) assured them
not a bullet of the enemy should hurt any one of them; which one of the
Company, more dismayed then the rest, could hardly believe, till he saw the
proof of it in his own person, for the Captain perceiving the man was not able
to fight, made him gather Rocks together for a kind of shelter and Baricado:
for the rest, that must either of necessity fight or fall by the enemies. It
chanced as this faint-hearted soldier had a flat stone in his arms, and was
carrying it to the shelter that he was making upon the Bank, a bullet of the
Enemy was thus warded from his Body by which he must else have perished, which
experience put new life into him, so as he followed his business very ma^fully
afterward, insomuch that they defended themselves under small defense hastily
made up all that afternoon, not one being either sl^in or wounded, yet it was
certainly known that they killed at least fifteen of their Enemies: and at the
last, when they had spent all their Ammunition, and made their Guns
unserviceable by often fiting, they were fetched all off by Capt. Goldings
Sloop, and carried safe to Road-Island in despite of all their Enemies; yea,
such was the bold and undaunted courage of this Champion Capt. Church, that he
was not willing to leave any token behind of their flying for want of courage,
that in the face of his Enemies he went back to fetch his Hat, which he had
left at a Spring, whether the extreme heat of the weather, and his labou^ in
fighting had caused him to repair for the quenching of his thirst an hour or
two before. It seems in the former part of the same day, five men coming from
Road-Island, to look up their Cattle upon Pocasset Neck, were assaulted by the
same Indians, and one of the five was Capt. Churches Servant, who had his Leg
broke in the Skirmish, the rest hardly escaping with their lives: this was the
first time that ever any mischief was done by the Indians upon Pocasset Neck.
Those of Road-Island were hereby Alarmed to look to themselves, as well as the
re^t of the English of Plymouth, or the Massaehusets Colony.

This Ass^ult rather heightened and increased then daunted the courage of Capt.
Church; for not making a cowardly flight, but a fair retreat, which providence
offered him by the Sloop aforesaid, after his Ammunition was spent, he did not
stay long at Road Island, but hasted over to the Mattachuset Forces, and
borrowing three files of Men of Capt. Henchman with his Lieutenant: Mr. Church
and he returned again to Pocasset, where they had another skirmish with the
Enemy, wherein some few of them fourteen or fifteen were slain, which struck
such a terror into Philip, that he be ^ook himself to the Swamps about
Pocasset, where he lay hid till the return of the rest of the Forces from the
Narhagansets, like a wild Boar kept at a Bay by this small party till more
hands came up.

Thus were the Plymouth Forces busied, during the time of the Treaty with the
Narhagansets, which being issued as it was.

On Friday July 15. Our Forces Marched for, and araived at Rekoboth where
having no intelligence of the Enemy nearer then a great Swamp on Pocasset,
eighteen miles from Taunton; they marched next day twelve miles to an House at
Matapoiset (a small Neck of Land in the bottom of Taunton Bay, in the midway
between Mount-hope and Pocasset Neck) from whence they marched for Taunton.
July 17. whither after a tedious March of twenty miles they came in the
evening, and found the People generally gathered into eight Garrison Houses:

On Monday July 18. they Marched eighteen miles before they could reach the
Swamp where the Enemy was lodged, as soon as ever they came to the place,
Plymouth Forces being now joined with them, ou^ Soldiers resolutely entered in
amongst the Enemes, who took the advantage of the thick under-wood, to make a
shot at them that first entered whereby five were killed outright, seven more
wounded, some of whose wounds proved mortal: After the first shot, the Enemy
presently retired deeper into the Swamp, d^serting their W^gwams (about an
hundred in all) newly made of green Barks, so as they would not burn: in one of
them they found an old man, who confessed that Philip had been lately there;
having spent some time in searching the Swamp, and tired themselves to no
purpose, yet it was said one half hour more would have at that time utterly
subdued Philip and all his power. The Commander in chief, (night drawing on
apace) not thinking it safe to tarry longer in so dangerous a place, (where
every one was in as much danger of his fellows as of his foes, being ready to
fire upon every Bush they see move (supposing Indians were there) ordered a
Retreat to be founded, that they might have time to dispose of their dead and
wounded men, which accordingly was attended: Plymouth Forces who had entered in
the rear, retreating in the front. It was judged that the Enemy being by this
means brought into a Pound, it would be no hard matter to deal with them, and
that it would be needless charge to keep so many Companies of Soldiers
together to wait upon such an inconsiderable Enemy, now almost as good as
taken: whereupon most of the Companies belonging to the Massachusetts were drawn
off* only Capt. Henchman with an hundred Foot being left there, together with
Plymouth Forces, to attend the Enemies motion, being judged sufficient for that
end. Ma^or Savage, Capt. Paige with Capt. Mosely and their Companies returned
to Boston: Capt. Prentice with his Troop were ordered toward Mendham, where it
seems, about the middle of July, some Indians, wishing well to ^^ilips design,
had made an assault upon some of the Inhabitants, as they were at their labor
in the Field, killing five or six of them: as soon as they had done, (...) away
into the Woods, so as they co^ld not easily (...): The Inhabi^a^ts of the some
Village, lying so in the heart of the Enemies Country beg^n to be discouraged,
so as within a little time after they forsook the place, abandoning their
Houses to the ^ury of the enemy, which by them were soon after turned into
ashes. But to return to king Philip, who was now lodged in the great swampe
upon Pocasset Neck, of seven miles long: Capt. Henchman and the Plymouth Forces
kept a diligent eye upon the enemy, but were not willing to run into the mire
and dirt after them in a dark Swamp being taught by late experience how
dangerous it is to fight in such dismal Woods, when their eyes were muffled
with the leaves, and their heads pinnioned with the thick boughs of the trees,
as their feet were continually shackled with the roots spreading every way in
those boggy Woods. It is ill fighting with a wild Beast in his own den. They
resolved therefore to starve them out of the Swamp, where they knew full well
they could not long subsi^t: To that end they began to build a Fort, as it were
to beleaguer the enemy, and prevent his escape out of the place, where they
thought they had him fast enough. Philip in the mean time was not ignorant of
what was doing without, and was ready therein to read his own doom. so as if
he tarryed much longer there, he knew he should fall into their hands from whom
he could expect no mercy: The c^se being therefore desperate, he resolved with
an hundred or two of his best fighting men to make an escape by the Water, all
passages by the land being sufficiently guarded by the English Forces. The
Swampe where they were lodged be^^g not far from an arm of the Sea, coming up
to Taunton, they taking the advantage of a low tide, either wa^ed over one
night in the end of July, or else wafted themselves over upon small R^tes of
timber very early before break of day, by which means the greatest part of his
Company escaped away into the woods, leading into (...) Nipm^ck Country,
^together unknown to the English Forces, that lay encamped on the other side of
the Swamp. About an hundred or more of the women and Children, which were like
to be rather burdensome then serviceable were left behind, who soon after
resigned up themselves to the mercy of the English. Philips escape thus from
Pocass^t could not long be concealed after the day appeared, there being much
champaign Lard through which he was to p^ss, so as being discovered to some of
R^hoboth, the Inhabitants presently followed him, together with a Party of the
Mohegins (that a little before come to Boston, off ring their Service against
Philip, and were sent up into those parts to be ^^dered by Capt. Henchman but
be o^e they came to him were easily persuaded to go along with any of the
English that were ^^g^ged in the pursuit of Philip) News also thereof was
carried to Capt. Henchman, who as soon as he could get over with six files of
men (rowing hard all or most part of the day to get to Providence) followed
after the enemy. The Mohegins with the men of Rehoboth, and some of Providence
came upon their Rear over nigh^, H^w about thirty of them, took much plund^r
from them, without any co^side^able (...) to the English. Capt. Henchman came
not up to them (pursuing them only by the Track) till the Skirmish was over,
and having marched twenty two miles that day was not well able to go any
further that night; on the other hand, the Fo^ces that came from Rehoboth and
that belonged to Plymouth, having left their horses three miles off could not
go back to fetch them without (...) of time, and therefore looking at it
altogether bootless to go after them in the morning, returned back the next
day, leaving Capt Henchman with his six Files, and the Mohegins to pursue the
Chase to Nips^tchet, which he d^d the next morning. Capt. Henchman, that he
might the better engage the Mohegins to march with him thirty miles gave them
half his p^ovision, and was himse^f recruited again by the care of Capt.
Edmunds of Providence, and Leiutenant Brown, who brought provision after him to
the Nipmuck Forts. Mr. Newman the Mini^ter of Rehoboth deserved not a little
Commendation for exciting his neighbors and friends to pursue thus far after
Philip* animating of them by his own example and presence: But what the reason
was why Philip was followed no further, it is better to suspend, then too
critically to enquire. This is now the third time when a good opportunity of
supp^essing the Rebelion of the Indians, was put into the hands of the English;
but time and chance happens to all men, so that the most likely means are
often frustrated of their desired end. All humane endeavors shall arive at no
other success, then the Counsel of God has preordained, that no flesh might
glory in their own Wisdom, but give unto God the praise of all their
Successes, and quietly bear whatever Miscariages he has ordered to befall
them. It appears by the issue of these things, that although this wound was not
incurable, yet much more blood must be taken away before it could be healed.
But by this means Philip escaped away to the Westward, kindling the flame of
War in all the Western plantations of the Massachusetts Colony wherever he
came, so that by this fatal accident, the fire that was in a likely way to be
extinguished, as soon almost as it began, did on the sudden break out through
the whole Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, both Eastward and Westward,
endangering also the neighbor Colony of Connecticut. Which has also suffered
somewhat by the ^ury of this Flame, though not considerable to what the other
Colonyes have undergone.

While things after this manner proceeded in and about the Colony of Plymouth,
the Commissioners of the rest of the Colonyes were consulting and advising what
was to be done for preventing the mischief threatened from spreading any
further, fearing (as indeed there was too much cause) that although Philip only
appeared to make the first attempt yet more either already were, or soon might
be be persuaded to join with him in acting this b^oudy Tragedy.

It has been already declared what has been done for the securing of the
Narhagansets; those that were sent as Messengers on that errand, always
reported that the elder people were in appearance, not only inclinable to
peace, but seemed very desirous thereof, insomuch as their two eldest Sachems
expressed much joy when it was concluded; but as since has appeared, all this
was but to gain time, and cover their treacherous intents and purposes, that
they might in the next Spring fall upon the English plantations all at once, as
some prisoners lately brought in have owned and confessed; not have any of
those Indians with whom the present War has been, ever regarded any agreements
of peace made with the English, further then out of necessity and ^lavish fear
they were compelled thereunto, as may be seen by the Records of the united
Colonyes from the year 1643 to the present time, notwithstanding all their fair
pretenses; for Ninigret, the old Sachem of the Narhagansets, who alone of all
the rest of that Country Sachems disowned the present war, and refused to have
any hand therein, yet was it proved to his face bebe^ore the Commissioners, in
the years 1646 and 1647, that he had threatened they would carry on the war
against the Mohegins, whatever were the mind of the Commissioners, and that
they would kill the English Cattle, and heap them up as high as their Wigwams,
and that an English man should not stir out of his doors to piss, but they
would kill him; all which he could not deny; yet did this old Fox make many
promises of peace; when the dread of the English ever since the Pequod-war
moved him thereunto; foreseeing as he is said to have told his neighbors, that
they would all be ruined if they made War with the English, as is since come to
pass. However the good hand of God was seen in so ordering things, that the
Narhagansets were for the present restrained from breaking out into open
Ho^tili^y against the English, at that time when Philip began* which if they
had then done, according to the eye of reason, it would have been very
difficult, i^ possible for the English to have saved any of their inland
plantations from being utterly destroyed. Thus has God in his Wisdom suffered
so much of the rage of the Heathen to be let loose against his people here, as
to become a Scourge unto them, that by the wrath of men, praise might be
yielded to his holy Name, yet has he in his abundant goodness restrained the
remainder that it should not consume.

The next thing in order to be related, is the calamity that befell the Village
of Brookfi^ld, which notwithstanding all the care that was taken, fell into the
hands of the perfideous Nipuet Indians, as shall here in the nex^ place be
declared; only as we pass along to remind the Reader in a few words, what wa^
the issue of Capt. Henchmans pursu^t of Philip: the Plymouth Forces being
returned home, as was said before, Cap. Henchman with his six Files of men, and
the Mohegin Indians, having continued in the pursuit of Philip till they had
spent all their provision, and i^ed themselves, yet never coming within sight
of Philip; the Mohegin Indians in their Company directed them to Mendham, and
then leaving them, returned also to their own Country. Capt. Henchman in his
march toward Mendham, or at Mendham, met with Capt. M^sely coming up to bring
him Provision, and advertizing him of what succ^ss he had met withal in the
pursuit; they attend their course, for Cap^a^n Henchman was sent down to the
Governor and Council, to know what they should do: they presen^ly reminded him
to Pocasset, and ordered him to stay there if there were need, or else to draw
off* surrendering the Fort he had been building to Plymouth Forces, which last
was chosen by those of Plymouth, whereupon Capt. Henchman returning to Boston,
was ordered to disband his men. Capt. M^sely was ordered to march to Q^abaog or
Brookfield, where he continued a while, the other Captains sent up for the
relief of the people the^e, and to s^ek after the Enemy in those Woods, and
after sometime spent in rang^^g the Country the eabou^s, and not meeting with
any of the Infidels, he with his Company came downwards, searching the Woods
betwix^ Lancaster (where a Man and his W^fe with two Children were slain on the
Lord's Day. Aug. 22.) and Malberough, where also a Lad keeping Sheep, was shot
at by an Indian that wore a sign, as if he had been a Friend: the Indian was
sup^osed to belong to the Hassanemesit Indians, at that time confined to
M^lberoug^, where they had liberty to dwell there in a kind of a Fort: The next
day the Inhabitan^s sent to demand their Guns, Capt. Mosely acquainted
therewith, marched to the Fort and found much suspicion against eleven of them,
for singing and dancing, and having Ballets and Slugs, and much Po^der hid in
they Baskets; insomuch that eleven of them were sent down Prisoners to B^ston
upon suspicion, that they had an hand in killing the fou^ at Lancaster, and
shooting at the M^lb^rough Shepherd: But upon T^yal, the said Prisoners were
all of them qui^^ed from the Fast and were ei^ther released, or else were with
others of that so^^, sent for better securi^y* and for preventing future
trouble in the like kind to some of the Islands below Boston toward Nantasket.

About this time Capt. Mosely was sent with a Company of Soldiers to some
Indian Plantations up M^rri^ack River, as high as Penny-^ook; but they found no
Indians there; thos^ that belonged to the pl^ce having withdrawn themselves
from that N^^ive place, that they might, no^ meddle in the presence quarrel, as
is confidently believed that Woonalans^^ the Sachim of that Country had so
resolved. That Coast being clear of the Enemies, Capt. Mosely soon after was
sent up with his Men to the Towns Westward about Ha^ly, if it might be, to
subdue the Enemy, who a little before* and at that time, was doing all the
mischief he could in those We^tern P^antations, both by Fire and Sword.

But to return and pursue the Rebellious Indians, and keep pace with them in
our History, though our Forces as yet could never overtake them in the Woods.
The Governor and Council of the Mass^chusets were sensible of as much danger
from the Nipnet Indians, as from the former: they being the Inland part of the
Country betwixt the Seacoast and Connecticut River Westward, and the Towns
about the Massachusetts Bay Eastward, whereupon some persons that used to Trade
with the said Nipnets, were sent to found them, and find how they stood
affected, for which also there was the more reason, because they were always
in subject on to the Sachim of Mount-Hop; and so w^^e the mo^^e like to engage
in the present quarrel; of which there had been sufficient proof already: when
on the 14. of July, some of the Nipnet Indians next bordering on Philips
Country, set upon some of Mendham (a Town situate Northward from Mount-Hope,
within 36. Miles from Boston,) where they killed four or five persons which was
the first mischief done upon any of the Inhabitants within the Jurisdiction of
the Massachusetts, acted as was said by one Matoonas who was Father to him that
had committed a murder soon after Philips first Rebellion, An. 1671. The
Messenger that was sent thither, brought word back that they ^ound the said
Indians wavering; the young men very furly and insolent, the elder ones,
showing some inclination to maintain the wonted peace: Soon after, July 28.
1675. Capt. Wheeler was sent to assist (Capt. Hutchinson with a party of twenty
Horse to Treat further about the Peace, who going first to Quabaog or
Brookfield a Town situate about si^ty or sev^nty miles from Boston, in the
Road of Connecticot. lying about twenty five miles from the said River, and not
far distant from the chief feat of the Nipnet Indians. The Inhabitants of the
said Brookfield had been so deluded by those Treacherous Villains that they
fearing no danger, first ob^ained of those Nipnets, the promise of a Treaty
upon the second of August, whereupon some of the chief of the Town riding along
unarmed with the said Wheeler and Hutchinson, with their party of Horse until
they came to the place appointed, but finding no Indians, ^o secure were they,
that they ventured along further, to find the T^^^cels at their chief Town,
never suspecting the least danger, but when they had rode four or five miles
that way, they fell into an Ambush, of two or three hundred Indians, laid in
such a narrow passage, betwixt a steep full on the one hand, and an hideous
Swamp on the other, that it was ^carce possible for any of them to escape,
eight of them being shot down upon the place (whereof three were of
Brookefield) and three mortally wounded whereof Capt. Hutchinson was one, Cap.
Wheeler also was near loosing his life, whose horse was shot down under him,
and himself shot through the body, so that all manner of hopes to escape had
been removed from him, had it not been for his Son, who was (by Gods good
providence) near or next unto him, being a man of undaunted courage
(notwithstanding his own Arm was broken with a Bullet) yet with great
nimblenes^ and agility of body, d^smounting himself, speedily mounted his
Father upon his own Horse, himself getting upon an other, whose Master was
killed, by which means they both escaped, and were afterward cured. Much ado
had those that were left alive to recover B^ookefield, which in all prob^b^lity
they had never done (the common Road being way laid with Indians on every side
as was afterward known)* had it not been for one well acquainted with those
Woods, who led them in a by path, by w^^ch means they got thither, a little
before the Indians, who quickly came ^^o^king into the Town, with full intent
to destroy it with fire and Sword. But by special providence the Inhabitants
were all gathered to the principal house of the Village (there being scarce
twenty in the Town) before the barbarous Mis^rean^s came upon them, immediately
setting fire upon all the dwelling houses, with most of the other Buildings in
the Town save that one into which the Inhabitants were retired, the which they
several times attemp^ed to burn, but were almost miraculously defeated of their
purpose by the immediate hand of God. In the Mount of the Lord it shall be
seen. For when they had for two days assaulted that poor handful of helpless
people, both night and day pouring in shot upon them incessantly with gunns,
and also thrusting poles with Firebrarnds, and rags dipped in brimstone tied to
the ends of them to fire the house.

At last they used this devilish Scratagem, to fill a Cart with hemp, (...) and
other combustible matter, and so thrusting it backward with poles spliced
together a great length, after they had kindled it; But as soon as it had begun
to take fire, a Storm of rain unexpectedly falling, put out the Fire, or else
all the poor people, about seventy souls, would either have been consumed by
merciless flames, or else have fallen into the hands of their cruel enemies,
like Wolves continually yelling and gaping for their prey.

Thus was that distressed Company strangely delivered, who have for ever cause
to say with the Psalmist, Blessed b^the Lord, who has not given us a prey to
their teeth, our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowlers, the
snare is broken and we are escaped. For the next night Major Willard, by
accident hearing of the danger the People were in, as (...), came with forty
eight Dragoons to their relief. The occasion which b^ought Major Willard and
Capt. Parker of Greton with forty six more, so timely to their relief was this
Major Willard in pursuance of his Commission from the Governor and Council,
was upon Wednesday August the 4th in the morning, marching out after some
Indians to the Westward, to secure them: just as they were setting forth, some
of Malberough, who had intelligence by those that were going to Connecticot,
and forced to return, what distress Brookfield was in, and knowing of Major
Willards purpose to go out that morning from Lancaster, sent a Post to acquaint
him therewith, which though it did not find him in the Town, yet overtook him
before he had gone above four or five miles from the place: whereupon,
conceiving it more needful to succor Brookfield in so eminent danger, then to
proceed further upon his intended design: he altered his course and marched
directly thither, being about thirty miles distant when the tidings were
b^ought him; so he arrived there that night very seasonably, about an hour
after it was dark, or else in probability they had all perished before the
relief sent up from Boston could have reached them, which was not till three
days after. The providence of God l^kewise in bringing in the said Major so
safely, as well as seasonably to their relief, was very remarkable. For the
Indians had subtly contrived to cut off all reli^f sent, before it could come
at them, by laying Ambushes, and placing their Scou^s, at two or three miles
distance round the Town: About an hundred of them were lodged at an house not
far off in the way toward Boston, to cut off any Succor that might come from
thence: but it is supposed they were so intense upon the project they were
about for firing the House, concluding it would without fail take place, that
either they d^d not mind their business of Watching, or making such a noise
for joy thereof, that they did not bear their Sentinels when they shot off
their Guns, at two miles distance. It is said that another party of the
Indians, let the Major and his Company purposely pass by them, without any
opposition, waiting for the blow to be given at their first approach near the
house, then to have themselves fallen upon their Rear, and so to have cut them
all off, before the besieged understood any thing thereof. But it pleased God
so to order things in providence, that no notice was taken of them by the
Besiegers, nor were they at all discerned by them till they had made themselves
known to their Friends; and were admitted within the Court of Guard; which when
the Enemy had notice of, they poured in their shot abundantly upon them, but
they were now sheltered from the danger thereof: only it seems their Horses
were exposed to their fury, so as many of them were ma^med and killed, as were
most of the Cattle belonging to the Inhabitants of the place soon after. This
Honored Person Major Willard continued at Brookfield after this famous exploit
for the preservation of the poor besieged at Brookfield, diverse weeks to order
such Companies as were sent up that way for the securing of the Plantations on
that side of the Country; and not long after he went himself also to Hadly upon
the like service of the Country in the present War: But after some time spent
in those parts, he returned back to his own place, to order the affairs of his
own Regiment, much needing his presence, and leaving the Forces about Ha^ly
under the command of the Major of that Regiment.

But to return to what was in hand before, after the Indians understood that
succors were come in to the beseiged, they fired all that they had left
standing for their own shelter while they had beseiged the place before
mentioned, ran all away into their own dens, in the neighboring woods: however
it was confessed by one of themselves, that the enemy had eighty of their men
k^lled and wounded in this business. But ere we pass any further in pursuit of
the History of these matters, it will not be amiss to let the Reader understand
the horrible perfidious and treacherous dealing of these Nipnet Indians, who of
all other had the least reason as to any pretense of injury, yet did most
deceitfully and barbarously join with Philip and his Indians, after they had
been several times sent unto by the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts,
by the advice of Plymouth, to have prevented their R^sing, as well as the
rising of the Narhagansets, and also had faithfully promised not to meddle in
the quarrel, as may more fully appear by the Engagement under the hands of
their Sachems, some time before Capt. Hutchinson and Capt. Wh^^ler were sent up
to them, which by reason of the have and unskilfullness of the Messengers on
that behalf sent, is not so fit for public view: but the account of it from
their ^e^urn, under their hand and oath, July 24. 75. when Leiut. Ephraim
Curtice spoke with five of the Nipnet Sachems, four too many to govern so small
a people, but lying upon the head of the principal Indian Territoryes, they
were divided into so many small parties, two of whom, viz. Sam Sachem of
wesh^cum, and Netaump were executed together afterward at Boston. All of them
did at that time solemnly renew their Covenant and promise under their hands to
come to Boston to speak further with the Governor, instead of which what they
perfidiously did against Capt Hutchinson and others, has already been declared.

Upon the report of this sad Disaster that befell the Inhabitants of
Brookefield, Forces were sent up under the Command of Capt. Lothrop and others,
to pursue after those Indians, harboring about those places, and if it might
be, to prevent them from joining with the Indians upon Connecticut River, who
as yet had not discovered themselves as willing to espouse Philips interest,
but rather made some semblance to the contrary. There was much time spent by
Major Willard, and several Companyes of Soldiers left under his command, about
the Nipnet Country, but all to no purpose; for partly by the treachery of some
of the Indians that came to their assistance, that seemed to favor the
English, but rather acted in behalf of the enemy, partly by the subtletyes of
the enemies themselves, who could easily by their scouts disc^rn the approach
of our soldiers, and by the nimbleness of their feet escape them: our
Soldiers could never meet with any of them, but only by that means driving
them further Westward, they gathered all the Indians they could to their party
about Pecomptuck. alias Dearfield, Swamscot, and Squakeag, where were some
plantations of the English newly began, whom they assaulted in the next place,
and did what mischief they could upon them.

It is here to be noted that although that worthy patriot and experienced
Soldier Major Willard hearing of the distress of Brookefield by some that were
traveling to Connecticut was the first that relieved the distressed people of
Quabaog or Brookefield, yet Major Pinehon of Springfield also by accident
hearing of their Calamity, had not only sent word thereof to Hartford (from
whom he received a supply of five and twenty or thirty soldiers under Capt.
Wats) but did also send a Band of men under Lieut. Cooper (who was afterward
villanously slain by Springfield Indians) who with those sent from Hartford,
and some Indians belonging to Springfield (seemingly forward to help the
English) made up four score or thereabouts; these marched down to Brook^fi^ld
the same day that Capt Lothrop and Capt. Beens came up from the Massachusetts,
who having spent some time in searching the woods about Springfield, and
finding none of the Indians, did the next day march up to a place called
Memini^isset by the Indians, where Capt. Hutchinson and Capt. Wheeler were
assaulted, and finding no sign of any Indians amongst those woods and Swamps;
the Company that came from Springfield, left the other Soldiers (who returned
to their Quarters at Brookfield) and went up themselves further northward, at
least twenty miles from the said Brookfield, and finding no track of Indians in
all those woods, they returned back to Springfield, leaving enough to defend
the people of Brookefield, and the garrison there.

By this it appears, that the Indians by this occasion were driven more
westward into the woods between Hadly and Squakheag. where they soon effected
their design, viz. to leaven the Indians on that side the Country with the same
prejudice and malice against the English, with which they themselves were
(though without cause) in bittered; for in a few days the device took place
amongst Hadly and Dearfield Indians, and was presently put in execution by the
said Indians, withdrawing from the English and assisting Philip and the Nipnets
to spoil and destroy all the towns westward, as soon after came to pass: yet
at the first some of the Hadly Indians pretended real friendship to the
English, and offered themselves to fight against Philip, but the Mohegin
Indians that came afterward from Harford began to suspect the Treachery of the
other, and told the English plainly, that no good would be done, while any of
that Company went along with them in pursuit of the Enemy, for as was said,
they would always give some shout when they came near the Enemy, as if they
should thereby wish them to look to themselves; insomuch that the said Hadly
Indians fell into great suspicion with the English, and for a proof of their
Fidelity, they were required to bring in their Arms to the English, but upon
that motion they delayed a little, but that very night they fl^d away from
their Dwellings, which was in a Wooden Fortification, within a mile of
Hatfield, whereby they plainly discovered that they had secretly plotted to
join with Philips Party, as far as they had an opportunity to do them any
eminent service: some think the English failed in point of prudence not
managing that business so warily as they might, which if they had done, their
de^ection had been prevented, but it is most probable that Philip had hired
them to own his quarrel, by sending them gifts in the Spring, and that the body
of the said Indians were most readily inclined thereunto: But the Sachims and
the elder ones of them, seemed loath ^t first to engage against the English. In
conclusion, when they had so falsely left their Dwellings, and were running
after Philip and the Nipnet Indians (at that time harbored in those Woods) the
English were so provoked, that were under Capt. Lothrop and Capt. Beers, that
they pursued after them very early the next morning, and overtook them about
ten miles above Hatfield, at a place called Sugar^ loaf Hill, and had a small
skirmish with them, wherein there were nine or ten of the English slain, and
about twenty six Indians: yet the rest escaped; and so joined with Philip and
his Company, presently after which accident, they were so emboldned, that upon
the first of September, about seven days after they set upon Dearfield, killed
one Man, and laid most of the Houses in ashes. About two or three days after
they fell upon Squakeag, another new Plantation, fifteen miles higher up the
River, above Dearfield, where they killed nine or ten of the People, the rest
hardly escaped into the Garrison house.

The next day, this disaster not being known, Captain Beers, for fear of the
worst, with thirty six men, was sent up to the said Squakeag, with supplies
both of men and provision to secure the small Garrison there, but before they
came very near to the Town, they were set upon by many hundreds of the Indians
out of the Bushes by a Swamp side, of whom Capt. Beers (who was known to fight
valiantly to the very last) with about twenty of his men, were by this sudden
surprisal there slain, the rest flying back to Hadly. Here the Barbarous
Villains showed their insolent rage and cruelty, more then ever before, cutting
off the heads of some of the slain, and fixing them upon Poles near the
Highway, and not only so, but one (if not more) was found with a Chain hooked
into his under jaw, and so hung up on the Bow of a Tree, (it is feared he was
hung up alive) by which means they thought to daunt and discourage any that
might come to their relief, and also to terrify those that should be
Spectators with the beholding so sad an object: insomuch that Major Treat with
his Company, going up two days after, to fetch off the residue of the Garrison,
were solemnly affected with that doleful fight, which made them make the more
have to bring down the Garrison, not waiting for any opportunity to take revenge
upon the Enemy, having but an hundred with him, two few for such a purpose.
Captain Appleton going up after him, met him coming down, and would willingly
have persuaded them, to have turned back, to see if they could have made any
spoil upon the Enemy, but the greatest part advised to the contrary, so that
they were all forced to return, with what they could carry away, leaving the
rest for a booty to the Enemy, who shall ere long pay a sad reckoning for their
Robberies and Cruelties, in the time appointed: but the sufferings of the
English were not as yet come to their height, for after they were come to
Hadly, the Commander in chief taking Counsel with the Officers of the
Soldiers, ordered them that were then present to Garrison the Towns about; some
to be at North-Hampton, Hat field, Dearfield, and some to remain at Hadly where
were the Headquarters of the English. But perceiving that little good was to
be done upon the Enemy in those parts, it was agreed that what Corn was left at
Dearfield, being threshed out as well as they could in those tumults (about
three thousand Bushels was supposed to be there standing in stacks) should be
brought to Hadly, and wait further time to fight the Enemy. It came to C.
Lothrops turn, or rather it was his choice with about eighty men to guard
several Carts laden with Corn, and other Goods, the Company under Capt. Mosely
then quartering at Dearfield intended that day to pursue after the Enemy. But
upon September 18. that most fatal day, the saddest that ever befell
New England, as the Company were marching along with the Carts (it may be too
securely) never apprehending danger so near, were suddenly set upon, and almost
all cut off (not above seven or eight escaping) which great defeat came to pass
by the unadvised proceeding of the Captain (who was himself slain in the first
assault) although he wanted neither courage nor skill, to lead his Soldiers;
but having taken up a wrong notion about the best way and manner of fighting
with the Indians (which he was always wont to argue for) viz. that it were best
to deal with the Indians in their own way, sc. by skulking behind Trees. and
taking their aim at single persons, which is the usual manner of the Indians
fighting one with another, but herein was his great mistake, in not considering
the great disadvantage a smaller Company would have in dealing that way with a
greater multitude: for if five have to deal with one, they may surround him,
and every one take his aim at him, while he can level but at one of his Enemies
at a time: which gross mistake of his, was the ruin of a choice company of
young men, the very flower of the County of Essex, all culled out of the Towns
belonging to that County, none of which were ashamed to speak with the Enemy in
the gate: their dear Relations at home mourning for them, like Rachil for her
children, and would not be comforted, not only because they were not, but
because they were so miserably lost. (The like mistake was conceived to be the
reason of the loss of the former persons, slain with the said Lothrop, pursuing
the Indians that ran away from Hadly, and of the twenty sl^in with Capt. Beers
men, who betook themselves at first to their Trees and at the last a few got to
their Horses soon after their Captain was shot down.) For had he ordered his
men to March in a Body, as some of his fellow-Commanders advised, either
backward, or forward, in reason, they had not lost a quarter of the number of
them that fell that day by the edge of the Sword. For the Indians,
notwithstanding their sublety and cruelty, durst not look an Englishman in the
fa^e, in the open field, nor ever yet were known to kill any man with their
Guns, unless when they could ly in wait for him, in an ambush, or behind some
shelter, taking aim undiscovered; so that although it was judged by those that
escaped, that there was seven or eight hundred Indians at least that encountered
that Company of eighty of English, yet if they had k^pt together in a Body, and
fought Marching, they might have escaped the numbers of the Enemy, with little
loss in comparison of what they sustained. For the valiant and successful Capt.
Mosely, and his Lieutenant, coming* though too late) to their rescue, marched
through and through that great body of Indians, and yet came off with little or
no loss in comparison of the other. And having fought all those Indians for
five or six hours upon a march, lost not above two men all that while, nor
received other damage besides eight or nine that were wounded, which yet were
carried to their quarters at night at Hatfield whereas if these had proceeded
in the same way of fighting as Capt. Lothrop did in the morning, they might
have been surrounded, and so have been served as the former were: but God had
other wise determined in his s^c^et counsel, and therefore that was hid from
the one which was a m^ans to preserve the other Company.

Other releif also was seasonably sent in, viz. a Company of English, and
Mohegin or Peq^od Indians under the Command of Major Treat, who was in the
morning marching another way, viz. up toward Squakh^ag to seek after the enemy
that way, with about an hundred soldiers, Indians and English, upon whose
approach the enemy, pretty well a^quainted by this last encounter with the
valor of the English, immediately went clear away, giving Major Treat and
Capt. Mosely, who returned to Dearfield that night, an opportunity to bury the
slain the next day. As Capt. Mosely came upon the Indians in the morning he
found them stripping of the ^lain, amongst whom was one Robert Dutch of
Ipswich, ^aving been sorely wounded by a bullet that rased to his skull, and
then maul^d by the Indian hatchets, left for dead by the Salvages, and stripped
by them of all but his skin, yet when Capt, Mosely came near, he almost
miraculously as one raised from the dead came toward the English, to their no
small amazement, by whom being received and clothed, he was carried off to the
next garrison, and is li^ing and in perfect health at this day* May he be to the
friends and relations of the rest of the slain, an emblem of their more perfect
resurrection at the last day to receive their crowns among the rest of the
Martyrs that have laid down or ventured their lives as a testimony to the
truth of their Religion, as well as love to their Country.

This fore defeat of Capt. Lethrop and his men, was the more to be lamented, in
that (falling out so soon after two other of the like nature) it so emboldned
the enemy, that they durst soon after adventure upon considerable towns, though
well garisoned with soldiers, and gave them occasion of most insolent Braving
the Garrison at Dearfi^ld the next day, hanging up the garments of the English,
in sight of the Soldiers, yet on the other fide of the river. However it
pleased God, who is always wont to remember his people in their low estate, to
put such a restraint upon them, that when they passed very near the Garrison
house at Dearfield (wherein were not left above twenty seven soldiers) their
Captain using this strategem, to cause his trumpet to sound as if he had
another troop near by to be called together, they turned another way and made
no attempt upon the house where that small number was, which if they had done
with any ordinary resolution, so small an handful of men cousd hardly have
withstood the force of so many hundreds as were then gathered together.

What loss the Enemy sustained by the resistance of Capt. Lothrop and his men,
(who no doubt being all resolute young men, and seeing they should be forced by
the hard law of the sword to for^ go their lives, held them at as high a rate
as they could) is not certai^ly known. It has since been confessed by some of
the Indians themselves, that they lost ninety six of their m^n that day. Capt.
Moselyes men coming suddenly upon them when they were pillaging of the de^d,
fell upon them with such a smart assault, that they drove them presently into a
swamp following them so close, that for seven miles together they fought them
upon a march, charging them through and through. Per^z Savage and Leiut,
Pickering his Leiutenants deserving no little part of the honor of that days
Service, being sometimes called to lead the Company in the front, while Capt
Mosely took a little breath, who was almost melted with laboring, commanding,
and leading his men through the midest of the enemy.

The Indians gathered together in those parts, appearing so numerous, and, as
might justly he supposed, growing more confident by some of their last
successes, and the number of our men being after this sad rate diminished,
Recruits also not being suddenly to be expected, at so great a distance as an
hundred miles from all supplies, the Commander in chief with the Officers, saw
a necessity of slighting that Garrison at D^^rfield, employing the Forces they
had to secure and strengthen the three next towns below upon Connecticut River.
And it was well that counsel was thought upon; for now those wer^ched Caitiffs
begin to talk or great matters, hoping that by degrees they might destroy all
the towns thereabout, as they had already b^gun: Their hopes no doub^, were not
a little heightened by the accession of Springfield Indians to their party, who
had in appearance all this time stood the ^irmest to the interest of the
English of all the rest in those parts: But they all hanging together, like
Serpents eggs, were easily persuaded to joy^ with those of Hadly (there being
so near alliance between them, for the Sachem of Springfield Indians was the
father of Hadly Sachem) not only by the success of their treacherous and
bloodthirsty comp^nions, but by the same inbred m^lice and antipathy against
the ^^glish manners and Religion.

The (...) of Springfield were not unsensible of their danger, and therefore
had upon the first breaking forth of these troubles been t^ea^ing (...) their
Indians, and had received from them the firmest assurance, and pl^dges of their
faithfulness, and friendsh^p that could be immagined or desired, both by
Covenant, promises and Hostages given for s^curity, so as no doubt was left in
any of their minds: Yet did these faithless and ungrateful Monsters plot with
Philips Indians to burn and d^^troy all Springfield, as they had done
Brookfield before: to that end they sent cunningly and enticed away the
Hostages from Hartford where they were, perhaps too securely watched over, a
day or two before: Then receiving above three hundred of Philips Indian^ into
their Fort, priva^ely in the night time, so as they were neither discerned nor
suspected: Yea so confident were such of the inhabitants as were most
conversant with the Indians at their Fort, that they would not believe there
was any such plot in hand, when (...) was strangly revealed by one Toto an
Indian at Windsor, better affected to the English, (about eighteen or twenty
miles below Springfield, upon the same River) and so by Post tidings thereof
brought to Springfield the night before, insomuch that the Lieutenant of the
town, Cooper by name, was so far from believing the Stratagem, that in the
morning himself with another would venture to ride up to the Fort, to see
whether things were so or no. The Fort was about a mile from the town; when he
came within a little thereof, he met these bloody and deceitful Monsters,
newly issued out of their Equ^^ Trojanus to act their intended mischief, they
presently fired upon him diverse of them, and shot him in several places
through the body, yet being a man of stout courage, he kept his horse, till he
recovered the next garrison house, his companion they shot dead upon the place*
by this means giving a sad alarm to the town of their intended mischief, which
was instantly fired in all places where there were no Garrisons. The poor people
having never an Officer to lead them, being like sheep ready for the slaughter,
and no doubt the whole town had been tot^lly destroyed, but that a report of
the Plot being carried about over night, M^jor Treat came from Westfield time
enough in a manner for their rescue, but wanting boats to transport h^s men,
could not do so much good as he desired. Major Pynchon com^^g from Ha^ly with
Capt. Appleton and what Forces they could bring along with them, thirty two
houses being first consumed, preserved the rest of the town from being turned
to ashes, in which the over credulous Inhabitants might now see (what before
they would not believe at the burning Major Pynchons Barns and Stables a few
days before, to a very great damage of the Owner) the faithless and deceitful
friendship amongst those perfidious, cruel and hell^ sh Monsters.

Amongst the ru^nes of the said ^wellings, the saddest to behold was the house
of Mr. Pelatiah Glover, Minister of the Town, furnish^d wi^h a brave Library,
which he had but newly brought back from a Garrison wherein it had been for some
time before secured, but as if the danger had been over with them, the said
Minister a great Student, and an helluo librorum, being imp^tient for want of
his Books, brought t^em b^ck to his great sorrow, fit for a Bonfi^e for the
p^oud insulting enemy. Of all the mischiefs done by the said enemy before that
day, the burnof this town of Springfield did m^re then any other* dis^over the
said Actors to be the ch^^^ren of the Devil, ^ull of all s^b lety and malice,
there having been for about forty years so good correspondence betwixt the
English of that town and the neighboring Indians; But in them is made good
what is said in the Psalm, that though their words were smoother then oil, yet
were they drawn swords.

After some little time spent in garisoning the place, and helping the
Inhabitants to secure what they had left, the English soldiers most of them
returned back to Hadly their headquarters, and Major Pynchon being so full of
encumbrances, by reason of the late spoils done to himself, and his neighbors
at Springfield, could not any longer attend the Service of commanding in Chief
as he had done before, wherefore being according to his earnest Request to the
Council eased of that bur^en; Capt. Samuel Appleton was ordered to succeed in
taking the charge of the Soldiers left in those upper towns, by whose
Industry, skill and courag^, those towns were preserved from running the same
fate with the rest, wholly or in part so (...) turned into ashes. For the enemy
growing very confident by the late successes, came with all their fury the
nineteenth of October following upon Hatfield, hoping no less then to do the
like mischief to them, they had newly done to Springfield: But according to the
good providence of Almighty God, Major Treat was newly returned to Northampton,
Capt. M^sely and Capt. Poole were then garisoning the said Hatfield, and Capt.
Appleton for the like end quartering at Hadly, when on the sudden seven or
eight hundred of the enemy came upon the town in all quarters, having first
killed or taken two or three of the Scouts belonging to the town, and seven
more belonging to Capt. Mosely his Company: But they were so well entertained
on all hands where they attempted to break in upon the town, that they found it
too hot for them. Major Ap^le^on with great courage defend^^g one end of the
town, and Capt. Mos^ly as stoutly maintaining the middle, and Capt. Po^le the
other end, that they were by the (...) of the English instantly beaten off,
without doing much h^rm. Capt. Apple^ons Sergeant was mortally wounded just by
h^s side another (...) passing through his own hair, by that whisper telling
him that death was very near, but did him no other harm. Night coming on, it
could not be discerned what loss the enemy sustained, diverse were seen to
fall, some run through a small river, others cast their guns into the water (it
being their manner to venture as much to recover the dead bodies of their
friends, as to defend them when alive)

At last after the burning of some few barns, with some other buildings, the
enemy hasted away as fast as they came on, leaving the English to bless God who
had so mercifully delivered them from the fury of their merciless foes, who had
in conceit without doubt, devoured them all: But this resolute and valiant
repulse, put such a check upon the pride of the enemy, that they made no
further attempt upon any of those towns for the present, but winter drawing on,
they retired all of them to their general rendezvouze at Narhaganset, where we
shall leave them for the present plotting their general design of accomplishing
their intended mischief against the English the next Spring.

Our Western Plantations upon Connectieut River, were the stage whereon were
acted the most remarkable passages of this barbarous War hitherto, which was
soon after removed into many other places of the Country in the Winter and
Spring following, whither our discourse must in the next place pursue it: There
was not any great matter acted by the Enemy amongst the Plantations upon the
great River during the Winter, after the assault made upon Hatfield October 19.
It is evident that the body of them returned to Narrhaganset upon the approach
of the Winter, which set in more early then it used in other years: where
Philip did bestow himself in the winter season is not so certain; some say that
he repaired further westward, to try his fortune with those Indians that ly
toward Albany, near the Dutch River: others more probably conceive that he lay
hid in some part of the Narrhtganses Country; for though he was not certainly
known to be about the Fort at Narrhaganset, when it was taken by our Forces in
the winter, yet as soon as ever they were driven out of the Country in
February, he was found amongst them that did the mischief at Lancaster in that
month.

Some straggling parties of them remained about North-Hampton, Westfield and
Springfield some time after their defeat at Hatfield; seven or eight of the
Inhabitants of North-Hampton in the end of October, venturing to fetch in some
of their Harvest, that was left somewhere out of the Town, were in danger of
being surprised, having laid their Arms under their Cart, so as being destitute
of means to make their defense, they were glad to fly away with the Horses out
of their Cart, leaving what they were about to the pleasure of the Indians that
assaulted. Major Treat upon the hearing the Alarm, presently repaired thither,
but could not come time enough to destroy any of the Enemy, not yet to prevent
the^r burning of four or five Houses, with two or three Barns that stood
somewhat out of the Town. Within a little time after they killed three of the
same Town, as they were at work in a Meadow not far from the Town: they
intended also to have burned the Mill, but it was too well guarded by two files
of Muskeriers lodged there for the purpose, who put them beside their intent,
Six or seven of Spring field soon after going to the Mill at Westfield (that
which belonged to their own Town being burned October 5th.) and venturing
without Arms, three of them were killed by some of the Enemy, who took the
advantage also to burn four or five Houses that belonged to the said Westfield:
but by the end of November the coast was pri^ty clear of them, u^^less some few
of them that lay lurking in the Swamps thereabouts all the winter, doing some
small mischief upon some ou^-dwellings of Springfield.

The expedition into the Narrhagauset Country f^llows in order in the next
place to be related; but before we come thither, a little no^ce (...) be taken
by the way, of an unsuccessful attempt upon the Indi^^s about Hassan^m^^it and
Poppachuog, whi^her Capt. Henchman was sent in the beginni^g o^ November: where
also C^ptain Sill was ordered to meet him with another C^mpany from Cambridge,
with intent to have beat up the Indians quarters in those parts: they being
known to have had an hand in the ou^r^ges committed upon those that belonged to
Malb^rough and Menaha^; cutting off the scalp of a millers Boy, who is yet
alive.

November 1. 1675. Capt. H^nchman marched out of Boston intending to visit the
Indians about Hassenem^sit: the third day they saw some fires of the Indians,
yet could not meet with them that made them: the 4th day they marc^ed to some
part of the Indian Plantations called Hassenemesit: the Captain would have
taken up his quarters a mile on this side, bu^ some of his Offic^rs overruled
him, to whose importunity he gave way, and marched a mile further toward the
Enemy, and by that means saved the Miliers youth, taken the week before from
Malberough; for in the morning very early, as the Scouts were looking out, they
spyed a Wigwam, where ome Indians that had carried away the youth, had lodged
a^l night in some Wigwam near by, when the Indians saw our Souldie^s, they
hasted away, and left the Malberough youth behind them* who by that means
escaped their hands. Our men under Capt. Henchman marched on to Poppachuog, and
finding the Indians all fled, (although they perceived by a Messenger
accidentally sent back, that the Indians f^llowed them all that way they
marched) they came back to Mendham to settle things in that Town: some of the
Inhabitants informed them of some Indian W^gwams about ten miles off: the
Captain with Philip Curtice his Lieutenant, resolved to give them a camisado in
their Wigwams that night: to that end, they mounted two and twenty upon Horses,
riding up ten miles into the Woods, and when they came near the Wigwams, they
dismounted, and intended presently to march up, and give an assault upon them,
after they had first made a shout to fright the Enemy: they ordered one half to
follow the Lieutenant, the other to follow the Captain, when they came within a
quarter of a mile of the place, their Dogs began to bark, at which they ^op^d,
and by and by marching again, intended presently to fire in upon them, but the
Captains foot ^lipping, he could hardly recover himself, when suddenly looking
behind him, he saw no man following of him: the Lieutenant had five behind him,
who with those five resolutely fired on that side he was appointed to make the
ass^ule upon; but they were repulsed by the Indians, who firing out of their
dens, shot down the Lieutenant and another, the rest presently ran away to a
fence: the Captain with all vehemence urged them to stay, they replied, they
(...) back but only to charge, yet went clear away, by which means, togeth^^
with the cowardice of the former, so sad a loss befell the Company, which ^ould
not easily be repaired: however the Enemy presently deserted the Wigwan and
gave our men the next day an opportunity to fetch off their two dead men, and
bury them, and so with grief and shame were constrained to return to their
quarters at Mendham, to whose Inhabitants they gave notice of 200 bushels of
Corn belonging to the Indians, that might have been preserved, which for want
of hands was lost by the fire, that the Enemy might not be benefited thereby.
It appears by the foregoing passage, that the time of our deliverance was not
yet come, and that God had further trials to acquaint us with before he would
turn his hand upon our Enemies. But it pleased the Lord in mercy so to order
things, that they themselves fell into that pit they were digging for others,
as shall appear more fully in what follows.

The English Plantations about Hadly being for the present set a little at
l^^erty by the Indians drawing off, like Seamen after a Storm, counted it the^^
best course to repair their tackling against another that may be next coming,
wherefore the Inhabitants concluded it the safer way to make a kind of
Barricado about their Towns, by setting up Pallizadoes or cleft wood about
eight foot long, as it were to break the force of any ^udden assault which the
Indians might make upon them; which counsel proved very successful; for
although it be an inconsiderable defense against a Warlike Enemy, that has
strength enough, and confidence to Lesiege a place, yet it is sufficient to
prevent any sudden assault of such a timorous and barbarous Enemy as these
were, for although they did afterward in the Spring break through those
Pallizadoes at NorthHampton, yet as soon as ever they began to be repulsed,
they saw themselves like Wolves in a Pound, that they could not fly away at
their pleasure, so as they never adventured to break through afterward upon any
of the Towns so secured.

As for those of Springfield, they were now and then Alarmed with a few
skulking Indians lurking about in the adjacent Woods; as once at the Long
^eadow, where half a score of them were seen about an house r^mote from the
Town, who were pursued by a party of the English toward Windsor, and so
escaped, after the English had made one shot upon them, not knowing certainly
how many they killed. So at another time, a few of those barbarous wretches
killed a poor man belonging to Sp^ing field, as he was going to his house to
look after his Corn on the other side of the River, and after th^^ had killed
the man, they burnt down his house; yet attempted no further mischief upon that
part of the Town that had escaped the fury of the Flames, October 5. By which
it is evident, that all the number of Indians that had assaul^ed them before,
had not d^awn themselves for the present to t^eir winter (...), some to the
Dutch River, but the greatest number of them to be su^e were found in the
wi^ter at the Narrhaganse: Fort, where we shall leave them for the present till
the Forces of the U^ited Colon^es shall fire them out of their nests.

The Soldiers continuing some time at Hatfield after this victory, as we may
well call it (for it seems to have given the first check to the rage of the
heathen within the Ju^isdiction of the united Colonyes, they have been observed
ever since to have been on the losing hand, seldom or never daring to meet our
Soldiers in the open Field, unless when they have very great advantage as to
their numbers, or covert of the woods and bushes: although like some ranging
Beasts they have done much mischief several times si^ce, when they were ready
to expire or when the pangs of death were coming upon them) our forces
therefore being all called home, save some left for garisoning the towns
thereabouts.

The Commissioners of the united Colonyes taking into serious Confideration the
present state of things, viz. that there were before this time so many hundreds
g^thered together into one Body, and that there was great reason to fear, if
they were let alone till the next spring they might all rise together as one
man round about us, and that one Town after another might easily be destroyed,
before any help could be dispatched to them. On the one hand the sharpness of
the winter in these pa^ts was well weighed, so extreme that it might hazard the
loss of a thousand men in one night, if they were forced to lodge abroad in the
open field; as also the d^fficulty, if not impossibility of sending any relief
to them at any distance, the depth of snow usually making the ways unpass^ble
for diverse months together

On the other hand it was considered, that if the enemy were let alone till the
next summer, it would be imp^ssible to deal with them, or find them any where,
but they might (...) one company of Soldiers after another, as was seen by the
experience of the former year. Considering also that the Narhagansets, the most
numerous of all the rest, and the best prov^ded of provision of all the other
Indians, had now declared themselves our enemies, who if they were let alone
(...) the winter was over, we should be unable to deal with so many enemies at
once, that could on a su^den on any occasion (...) themselves like grasshoppers
all over the Country.

It was therefore finally agreed upon by the general consent of all, to to fall
upon the winter quarters of our enemies, by a more considerable Army (if I may
so call it) gathered out of all the three Colonyes, and that with all
expedition, at farthest not to exceed the tenth of December before they should
have a thousand men in arms ready for the design.

As for the late League made or rather renewed with the Narhagansets, it was
sufficiently evident and known, that they had all along from the first day when
it was confirmed broken every article of it, specially in not delivering up the
enemies which had sheltered themselves with them all this while, which though
they did not positively deny, yet did nothing but find excuses, to de^er it one
week after another, till at the last they would be excused till the next
Spring, upon pretense that they could not before that time get them together.
Beside the favoring of those that fled to them, and supplying the whole Body
of the enemy with victuals, upon all occasions. It was likewise strongly
suspected that in all the late proceedings of the enemy, many of their young
men were known to be actually in arms against us, many of whom were found
either wounded amongst them in their wigwams, or else were occasionally seen
returning back, after exploits abroad, to be healed of their wounds at home.
Also some of our men's guns that were lost at Dearfield were found in the Fort
when it was fired. Therefore all scruples as to the justness and necessity of
the war being removed, the only question was, whether it were feasible and
expedient in the winter. The exigent was very great, and the choice very hard:
But as David when he was streightened with many difficultyes at once, cho^e
rather to fall into the hands of God whose mercyes were great, though he might
be provoked to cause his jealousy to smoke against those of his own heritage
for a time: so in this exigent it was generally conceived to be most expedient
for the Country, to cast themselves upon the providence of a merciful and
gracious God, rather then by delays to expose themselves to the treachery and
cruelty of a perfidious enemy.

A War therefore speedily to be carried on in the very depth of winter, being
agreed ^p^n, care was taken for supplies, as the difficulty of such an affair
so circumstanced did require, though possibly not with so much necessary care,
and so suitable provision, as had been desired, if what came afterward to pass
could have been foreseen (which peradventure might be the reason things went on
so heavily for want of well oyling the wheels) in the mean time a small Army of
a thousand fighting men, well appointed, were ordered by the Commissioners to
be gathered by proportion out of all the Colonyes; of which number the share of
the Massachusetts was to be five hundred and twenty seven, the rest were to be
supplied out of Plymouth and Connecticut Colonyes, All other supplies were
taken care for, as well as the suddenness of the Expedition, and difficulty of
the season would allow. The said thousand men, beside some Volunteers of Indian
Friends, were by the time and place appointed as near as could be had, called
together, and a Commission granted to the honorable Josiah Winslow Esquire, the
present Governor of Plymouth Colony, a man of known ability and integrity,
every way so well qualified wit^ courage and Resolution, as well as prudence
and discretion, as might have preferred him to the conduct of a far greater
Army then ^ver is like to be gathered together in this part of the world, in
this or in following Generations. And indeed as he was the first Governor over
any of the united Colonyes in New England of them that were born in the place,
so may he well pass for a pattern of any of the succeeding race, that may come
after.

Under him as Commander in Chief were ordered six Companyes from the
Massashusets, under the Command of Major Appleton, Capt. Mose^y, Capt.
Gardener, Capt. Davenport, Capt. Oliver, Capt. Johnson, Five Companyes from
Connecticus under Major Treat, Capt. Siely, Capt. Gallop, Capt. Mason, Capt.
Wats, and Capt. Marshal, Two Companyes from Plimonth, under Major Bradford and
Capt. Goram.

Under the Governor of Plymouth as Commander in Chief in this Expedition, were
sent as Majors of the Forces belonging to each Colony, Major Robert Treat for
the Forces belonging to Connecticut, and Major Bradford for those of the Colony
of Plymouth, and Major Samuel Appleton for those of the Massachusetts, to whom
by the honorable Major General of the said Colony were six Companyes of Foot
delivered at Dedham; December the 9th. 1675, containing in number 465 fighting
men, besides ^ Troop of Horse under the Command of Capt. Thomas Prentice
attending upon them. That night they marched to Woodcocks about 27. miles from
Dedham. The next night they arrived at Seaconck; Capt. Mosely and his Company
went from thence with Mr. Smith by water, the rest ferried over the water to
Providence.

The next day, December. the 12th. they passed over Patuxet River, and then
marching through Pomhams Country, at night they met with Capt. Mosely and his
Company at Mr. Smiths in Wickford, the place intended for their Headquarters.
Capt. Mosely in his way thither had happily surpri^ed thirty six Indians, one
of whom he took along with him as a Guide, Peter by name, that was at that time
under some disgu^^ with his Countrymen, or his Sachem, which made him prove
the more real friend to our forces in that service, wherein he faithfully
performed w^hat^h promised, and without his assistance our men would have been
much at a loss to have found the enemy, until it had been too late to have
fought them.

Two days after, December. 14. Five Files of men sent out under Sergeant Bennet
and another, upon the Scout, killed one man and one woman, and brought in four
more by one of the clock: the whole Company marched after into some of the
Sachems Country, where they burnt an hundred and fifty Wigwams, killed seven of
the enemy, and brought in eight Prisoners when they returned at night.

The next day an Indian called Stone-wall-Iohn pretended to come from the
Sachems, intimating their wiilingness to have peace with the English, yet could
the Messenger hardly forbear threatening, vapouring of their numbers and
strength, adding withal that the English durst not ^ight them: whatever were
pretended by this treacherous fellow, some of his Crew as he went home met with
some of Capt. Gardners men, that were straggling about their own business
contrary to order, and slew his Sergeant, with one o^ two more. Two also of
Capt. Olivers men were kill^d in like manner; a solemn warning for Soldiers
not to be too venterous in an enemies Country. For preventing the like mischief
upon other Companyes, more care was taken as they passed to the Headquarters,
some of the Companyes being lodged three miles there from. Capt. Moselyes,
Capt. Davenp^rts and Capt Olivers Company being also sent about that time to
bring Major Appletons Company to the general Quarters, a few desperate ^ndians
creeping under a stone wal^ near the place, fired twenty or thirty gunns at
Mosely in particular, a Commander well known amongst them, but the rest of the
Company running down upon them, killed one of them, and scattered the rest.

The next day Capt. Prentice with his Troop, being sent to Petequamscot,
returned with the sad news of burning Ierry Bulls Garrison house, and killing
ten English men and five women and children, but two escaping in all. This is
the chance of war which they who under take, must prepare to undergo.

The next day brought from the same place a little better news, though not
enough to balance the sorrow of the former, viz. that Connecticut Forces were
come thither with three hundred English, and an hundred and fifty Mohegins,
ready fixed to war on the behalf of the English against the Narhagansets their
mortal enemies; and by the way meeting a Party of the enemy, they slew five or
six of them and took as many Prisoners. The whole number of all our Forces
being now come, the want of provision with the sharpness of the cold, minded
them of expedition, wherefore the very next day, the whole Body of the
Massachuset and Plymouth Forces marched away to Pettyqua^scot intending to
engage the enemy upon the first opportunity that next offered it self: To the
which resolution those of Connecticut presently consented, as soon as they met
together, which was about five a clock in the afternoon: Bulls house intended
for their general Rendezvouze, being unhappily burnt down two or three days
before, there was no shelter left either for Officer or private Soldier, so as
they were necessicated to march on toward the enemy through the snow, in a cold
stormy evening, finding no other defense all that night, save the open air, nor
other covering then a cold and moist fleece of snow. Through all these
difficultyes they marched from the break of the next day, December 19. till one
of the clock in the afternoon, without either fire to warm them, or respite to
take any food, save what they could chew in their march. Thus having waded
fourteen or fifteen mile through the Country of the old Queen, or Sunk Squaw
of Narhaganset: they came at one a clock upon the edge of the Swamp where their
guide assured them they should find Indians enough before night.

Our Forces chopping thus upon the seat of the enemy, upon the sudden, they had
no time either to draw up in any order or form of Battle, nor yet opportunity
to consult where or how to assault. As they marched Capt. Mosely and Capt.
Davenport led the Van, Major Appleton and Capt. Oliver brought up the Rear of
the Massachuset Forces; General Winslow with the Plymouth Forces marched in the
Center; those of Connecticut came up in the Rear of the whole Body: But the
Frontiers discerning Indians in the edge of the Swamp, fired immediately upon
them, who answering our men in the same Language, retired presently into the
Swampe, our men followed them in amayn^, without staying for the word of
Command, as if every one were ambitious who should go first, never making any
stand till they came to the sides of the Fort, into which the Indians that
first fired upon them betook themselves.

It seems that there was but one entrance into the Fort, though the enemy found
many ways to come out, but neither the English nor their Guide well knew on
which side the entrance lay; nor was it easy to have made another; wherefore
the good providence of Almighty God is the more to be acknowledged, who as he
led Israel sometime by the Pillar of fire, and the Cloud of his presence a
right way through the Wilderness, so did he now direct our Forces upon that
side of the Fort, where they might only enter though not without utmost danger,
and hayard. The Fort was raised upon a kind of Island of five or six acres of
rising land in the midst of a Swamp; the sides of it were made of palizadoes
set upright the which was compassed about with an bedge of almost a rod
thickness, through which there was no passing, unless they could have fired a
way through, which then they had no time to do. The place where the Indians
used ordinarily to enter themselves, was over a long tree over a place* of
water, where but one man could enter at a time, and which was so waylaid that
they would have been cut off that had ventured there: But at one corner there
was a Gap made up only with a long tree, about four or five foot from the
ground, over which men might easily pass: But they had placed a kind of a Block
house right over against the said tree, from whence they sorely galled our men
that first entered, some being shot dead upon the tree, as Capt. Johnson, and
some as soon as they entered, as was Capt. Davenport, so as they that first
entered were forced presently to retire, and fall upon their bellyes till the
fury of the enemies shot was pretty well spent, which, some Companyes that did
not discern the danger, not observing, lost sundry of their men, but at the
last two Companyes being brought up besides the four that first marched up,
they animated one another to make another assault, one of the Commanders crying
out, They run, they run, which did so encourage the Soldiers that they
presently entered amain. After a considerable number were well entered, they
presently beat the enemy out of a Flanker on the left hand, which did a little
shelter our men from the enemies shot, till more Company came up, and so by
degrees made up higher, first into the middle, and then into the upper end of
the Fort, till at the last they made the enemy all retire from their Sconces,
and fortified places, leaving multitudes of their dead Bodies upon the place.
Connecticut Soldiers marching up in the Rear, being not aware of the dangerous
passage over the tree, in Command of the enemies Blockhouse, were a^ their
first entrance many of them shot down, although they came on with as gallant
resolution as any of the rest under the conduct of their wise and valiant
Leader, Major Treat

The brunt of the Battle, or danger that day lay most upon the Commanders,
whose part it was to lead on their several Companies in the very face of Death,
or else all had been lost; so as all of them with great valor and resolution
of mind, as not at all afraid to die in so good a cause, bravely lod on their
men in that desperate ass^ult; l^aving their lives in the place as the best
testimony of their valor, and of love to the ^^use of God and their Country:
No less then six brave Captains fell that day in the assault, viz. Capt.
Davenport, Capt. Gardner, Capt. Johnson of the Massachusetts, besides Lieute^^^.
Vpham, who died some months after of his wounds received at (...) time. Capt.
Gallop also, and Capt. Siely, and Capt. Marshal (...) of those that belonged to
Connecticut Colony. It is usually seen that the valor of the Soldiers is much
wrapped up in the lives of their Commanders, yet was it found here, that the
Soldiers were rather enraged then discouraged by the loss of their Commanders,
which made them redouble their Courage, and not give back after they were
entered the second time, till they had driven out their Enemies: So as after
much blood and many wounds dealt on both sides; the English seeing their
advantage, began to fire the Wigwams, where was supposed to be many of the
Enemies Women and Children destroyed, by the firing of at least five or six
hundred of those smoaky Cells.

It is reported by them that first entered the Indians Fort, that our Soldiers
came upon them when they were ready to dress their Dinner, but our sudden; and
une^pected assault put them besides that work, making their Cookrooms too hot
for them at that time, when they and their Mitchin fried together: and probably
some of them eat their Suppers in a colder place that night: most of their
Provision as well as their Hutts being then consumed with fire, and those that
were left alive forced to hide themselves in a Cedar Swamp, not far off, where
they had nothing to defend them from the cold but Boughs of Spruce and Pine
Trees: for after two or three hours fight, the English became Masters of the
place, but not judging it tenable, after they had burned all they could set
fire upon, they were forced to retreat, after the Daylight was almost quite
spent, and were necessitated to retire to their quarters, full fifteen or
sixteen miles off, some say more, whither with their Dead and Wounded men they
were to march, a difficulty scarce to be believed, as not to be paralleld
almost in any former age.

It is hard to say who acquitted themselves best in that days service, either
the Soldiers for their manlike valor in fighting, or the Commanders for their
wisdom and courage leading on in very face of death; There might one have seen
the whole Body of that little Regimental Army, as busy as Bees in a Hive, some
bravely fighting with the Enemy, others haling off, and carrying away the Dead
and Wounded Men (which I rather note) that none may want the due testimony of
their valor and faithfulness, though all ought to say, not unto us, but unto
thy Name, O Lord, etc.

For though there might not be above three or four hundred at any time within
the Fort at once, yet the rest in their turns came up to do what the exigence
of the service required in bringing off the Dead and Wounded men: The Major of
the Regiment, together with Captain Mosely, was very serviceable, for by that
means the Fort being clear of the Dead bodies, it struck a greater terror into
the Enemy, to see but eight or ten dead bodies of the English left, then to
meet with so many hundreds of their own slain and wounded Carcasses. The number
of the slain was not then known on the Enemies side, because our Men were
forced to leave them on the ground: but our victory was found afterward to be
much more considerable then at the first was apprehended; for although our loss
was very great, not only because of the desperateness of the attempt it self)
in such a season of the year, and at such a distance from our quarters, whereby
many of our wounded men perished, which might otherwise have been preserved, if
they had not been forced to march so many miles in a cold snowy night, before
they could be dressed) yet the ^nemy lost so many of their principal fighting
men, their Provision also was by the burning of their Wigwams, so much of it
spoiled, at the taking of their Fort, and by surprising so much of their Corn
about that time also; that it was the occasion of their total ruin afterward:
they being at that time driven away from their habitations, and put by from
Planting for that next year, as well as deprived of what they had in store for
the present winter. What numbers of the Enemy were slain is uncertain, it was
confessed by one Potock a great Councellor amongst them, afterward taken at
Road-Island, and put to Death at Boston, that the Indians lost seven hundred
fighting men that day, besides three hundred that dyed of their Wounds the most
of them: the number of old men, women and children, that perished either by
fire, or that were starved with hunger and cold, none of them could tell. There
was above eighty of the English slain, and a hundred and fifty wounded, that
recovered afterward.

There were several circumstances in this Victory very remarkable.

First, The meeting with one Peter a fugitive Indian, that upon some
discontent, flying from the Narrhagansets, offered himself to the service of
the English, and did faithfully perform what he promised, viz. to lead them to
the Swamp where the Indians had seated themselves within a Fort raised upon an
Island of firm Earth, in the midst of a Swamp, whither none of the English
could have Piloted them, without his assistance, the place being near eighteen
miles from the place where they were quartered.

Secondly, There being by a special providence directed just to a place where
they found so easy entrance, which if they had missed * they could never have
made a way through the Hedge, with which they had surrounded the Pa^lizadoes of
the Fort in half a days time.

And Thirdly, If they had entered by the way left by the Indians for passage,
they might have been cut off, before they could have come near their
Fortification.

Lastly, In directing their motion, to begin the Assault just at the day they
did, for if they had deferred but a day longer, there fell such a storm of Snow
the next day, that they could not have passed through it, in diverse weeks
after: And then on the sudden there fell such a Thaw, that melted away both Ice
and Snow, so that if they had deferred till that time, they could have found no
p^ss^ge into their fortified place.

All which considerations put together, make it a signal favor of God to carry
them through so many difficulties to accomplish their desired end. For after
they were retired from their quarters, but sixteen miles from that p^^ce, the^e
was so great want of Provision, the Vessels being frozen in at the Ha^bour
about Cape Cod, that should have brought th^m^ elief, and the Frost and Snow
set in so violently, that it was not p^ssib^e for them, with all the Force they
could make (so many of their ab^est Soldiers b^ing slain and wounded) to have
made another onset: But the goodness of Almighty God was most of all to be
admired, that notwithstanding, all the hardship they endured that (...), in
very cold Lodgings, hard Marches, Scarcity of Provision, yet not one man was
known to die by any disease or bodily distemper, save them that perished of
their wounds.

Our Forces being compelled by the foresaid ^ccasions, to ly still some Weeks
after, hoping also that the Enemy so sorely broken, would gladly have sued for
peace: But as was said of old, God hardened their hearts to their own ruin and
destruction afterward. For as soon as our Soldiers were able to March,
finding that all the Enemies overtures of peace, and prolonging of treaties,
was only to gain time that they might get away into the Woods. They pursued
after them, and sometimes came upon their Rear, but then they would immediately
fly an hundred ways at once into Swamps, so as our men could not follow them,
or if they did, could not see two of them together * so that now there was
little good like to be done, unless they could take them at some advantage. At
length having spent all their Provision, and tiring themselves in pursuing of
them six^y or seventy miles, up thro^gh the Woods toward Malberough and
Lancaster, Towns that ly in the Road to Connecticot, having killed and taken
near seventy of them: our Soldiers were ordered to return toward Boston, to
recruit themselves, supposing that the Narrhagansets, and those with them were
so enfeebled that they would have no mind suddenly to assault any of the
Engiish Towns.

If any desire a more particular account of the loss which we sustaind at the
taking of the Narhaga^set Fort, December 19th. 1665. they may take it as here
it follows.

Besides the six Captains mentioned before, that either were slain in the
assault, or dyed afterward of their wounds, to whom may be reckoned Lieut.
Vpham, that dyed lately at Boston, of the wounds he then received There were
slain out of the Company belonging to Wounded. Major Appleton. 3. 22. Capt.
Mosely. 9. 10. Capt. Oliver. 5. 10. Capt. Gardener. 7. 11. Capt. Johnson. 3.
11. Capt. Davenport. 4. 15. in all, 31. 79. There were slain and wounded.
Of New Haven Company, 20. Of Capt. Siely his Company. 20. Of Capt. Wats his
Company. 17. Of Capt. Marshal his Company, 14. Of Plymouth Company under Major
Bradford and Capt. Goram. 20. In all, 91.

If there had not been so great a distance between the place of the fight and
their Quarters, and so much cold attending them in their retiring thereunto,
some better account might have been given of that expedition, then now they
were able to do. For a March of sixteen or eighteen miles is too much to
breathe a fresh Soldier, unless he were well mounted, but enough to kill the
heart of them that have been wearied with a long and tedious fight. As for the
coldn^ss of the weather, although it be a good Be some to sweep the Chamber of
the Air (which might be the reason there was no more Diseases amongst them) yet
it is an unwelcome Companion to wearied, especially to wounded men, in so ^ong
a Retreat.

But the want of Provision falling in conjunction with the unseasonableness of
the Weather, and length of the way hindered our Forces from (...) attempt upon
the enemy, which if they could have attended, it was thought it might have put
an end to our troubles; but he that holds the scales of victory in his hand,
turns them to which side, and by what degrees pleases himself best.

The rest of the winter was spent in fruitless Treaties about a peace, both
sides being well wearied with the late desperate Fight, were willing to refresh
themselves the remaining part of the winter, with the short slumber of a
pretended peace, at least with a talk or Dream thereof: our Commanders aim
therein was Christian and good, if it had proceeded, sc. to have prevented the
shedding of more blood: And possibly some of the elder and wiser of the enemy,
did really desire what was pretended by them all, (for they had now full proof
of the valor and resolution of the English, which some of them upon former
successes might be ready to question) and they could not but see their
destruction already begun, in the loss of their dwellings, and all their
provision, as well as the slaughter of the best part of their fighting men; but
either through consciousness of their barbarous treachery, and falsehood they
could not trust others, and so were willing to run the utmost hazard, as people
hardened to their own destruction. The particular passages of the treaty being
carried on by the enemy only in pretense, and by our men (that soon discerned
their fraud) rather out of nece^^^ty, to conceal their incapacity of engaging
them anew, then any real expectation of a good effect, are not worthy the
relating. However though the Foot were unable to do any Service in the depth
of the snow, and sharpness of the cold, The Troop was sent out upon all
occasions to scout about the Country, who brought in daily much of the enemies
corn and Beans, which they had hid in Barns under the ground, or at least kept
them from making use of their own provision, or spoiling the English Cattle;
now and then also bringing in Prisoners from their Quarters, as they were
straggling about to get victuals.

On the twenty seventh of December, Capt. Prenti^e was sent into Pom^ams
Country, where they burnt near an hundred Wigwams, but found never an Indian in
any of them.

On the 28th, of December a Squaw was sent to them, who had been taken in the
Fight, with a pro^^er of Peace, if they would submit to such Terms as were
propounded; the principal of which was, the delivering up all Philips Indians
that were with them; The Squaw returned not pretending that she was lame and
unable to come again; bu^ the thirtieth of December, an Indian came ^nom the
Sachems with seeming thanks for the peace proffered, yet complained, we made war
upon them and gave them no notice; but his mouth was soon stopped, by the
answer which was made him: he owned, as the Squaw had said before, that they
lost three hundred of their best fighting men, and so did two Prisoners of
theirs taken January the 4th, whereof one being of Philips Company was put to
death. The Messenger that was sent was fairly dismissed, with the express
mention of what tearm^ they must expect, if they desired a peace.

Ian. There came two Messengers from them, as they said to make way for a
treaty of Peace; who laid the blame upon Canonchet, that came down to Boston,
in October last, to confirm the peace with the Commissioners of the united
Colonyes, as if he had misinformed them; viz. that they were not by the former
treaty to have delivered up the Mompanoogs, or Philips Indians, until the said
Canonchets Brother one of the Hostages at Hartford, was released. This was but
a mere pretense, for he and they too better understood the particulars of the
agreement: For by chance the Articles which they had of the peace concluded
with them were found open (whether purposely or accidentally was not known) in
a Wigwam in the Fort when it was taken, so as they could ^ot be ignorant of the
Articles of the Agreement

Ian. 5. An English child of about three or four years old, taken from Warwick,
was sent in to put the better pretense upon the treaty mentione^.

Ian. 8. The Messengers were sent back, and told what they must trust to. In
the afternoon a Messenger came from Ninigrtt the old Sachem of Narrhagansets,
who brought a letter from Mr. Stanton the Interpreter, signifying the reallity
of the said Ninigret his friendship to the English, and the streights of the
enemy, that co^n was two shillings a pint with them. Yet notwithstanding all
their difficultyes, they rather delayed the time till they could get away, then
really endeavored the making a peace, as was soon manife^^^ For that young
insolent Sachem Canonchet, and Panoquin, said they ^^uld fight it out to the
last man, rather then they would become Servants to the English.

Ian. 10. Fresh supplies of soldiers came up from Boston, wading through a
sharp storm of snow, that bit some of them by the heels with the frost. The
next day one that came with them going out with the Scouts, fell amongst the
Indians Barns, in one of which, as he was groping to find corn for the relief
of his horse, he catched hold of an Indians hair under the leaves, who
presently held up his hands, when the soldier was drawing his sword, to spare
his life, which was granted; but after he was brought to the Headquarters, he
would own nothing but what was forced out of his mo^th, by the woolding of his
head with a cord, wherefore he was presently judged to dye as a Wompanoog.

Ian. 12. Another Messenger came from Canonicus, desiring the space of a month
longer, wherein to issue the treaty, which so provoked the Commander of our
Forces, that they resolved to have no more Treatyes with the enemy; but prepare
to assault them, with Gods assistance as soon as ever the season would permit;
and it was high time to take up that resolution, for within a few days after,
they understood by some that were taken Prisoners; that the enemy were gone, or
going into the Nipmuck Country.

Within a few days after, about the 16th. Ian. the scouts brought in one
Ioshuah Tift a Renegado English-ma^, of Providence, that upon some discontent
amongst his neighbors, had turned Indian, married one of the Indian Squaws,
renounced his Rellgion, nation and natural Parents all at once, fighting
against them. He was taken by Capt. Fenner of Providence, who with some of his
neighbors were pursuing some Indians that had driven away their Cattle, This
Tift being one of the Company was wounded in the knee, and so was seized by the
English* he had in his hab^t conformed himself to them amongst whom he lived.
After ex^mination he was condemned to die the death of a Traitor. As to his
Religion he was found as ignorant as an Heathen, which no doubt caused the
fewer tears to be shed at his Funeral, standers by being unwilling to lavish
pity upon him that had divested himself of nature it self, as well as
Religion, in a time when so much pity was needed elsewhere, and nothing left
besides wherewith to relieve the Sufferers.

Ian. 21. Capt. ^^entice his Troop being abroad met with a Party of the enemy,
of whom they took two Prisoners and killed nine; in which exploit, something
happened very remarkable, for one W. D^dge of Salem riding in company with
another Friend, they happened to meet with two Indians, the said Dodge being
better horsed then his friend, made after the foremost, leaving hi^ friend to
deal with the hindmost, but his Pistol missed firing, whereupon the Indian
taking him by the leg turned him off his horse, and getting upon him was about
killing him with his knife, which W. Dodge by chance espied, and came time
enough to rescue his friend, and dispatch the Indian lying upon him, and yet
overtook the first Indian he was pursuing, time enough to do his business
also: by that means he did three good offices at once, saved the life of one
Friend, and slew two of his Enemies. But within two or three days after, the
weather much altering from what it was, induced our Forces to take the first
opportunity to pursue the enemy, who as understood by Messengers from
Providence, were now upon their flight into the Nipmuck Country: But so many
difficultyes were cast in their way, that they could not be ready time enough
to prevent the mischief they did at Warwick, as they took their Farewell of
their Country: For,

Ian. 27. They dispoyled Mr. Carpenter of two hundred sheep, and fifty head of
Neat Cattle, and fifteen horses; all which they drove along with them, and were
gone too far to be rescued before our Forces set out. Two that belonged to the
said Carpenter were wounded, and one of the enemies slain. As they marched
after the enemy, they found a good house burned, with a barn belonging to it.
They perceived also that the enemy dealt much in Horseflesh, meeting with no
less then sixty horses heads, in one place which they had left behind them. Our
Soldiers in their pursuit came upon their Rear, killed and took about seventy
of them, yet never could come to charge them, for they would presently betake
themselves into Swamps, and not two of them run together, so as they saw it was
an endless work to proceed further in the chase of such an enemy; but our
Forces having pursued them into the woods between Marlberough and Brookfield in
the Road toward C^nnecticut, were constrained to turn down to Boston in the
beginning of February for want of provision, both for themselves and their
horses, which gave an occasion to the loss of those lesser Towns that were
destroyed by the Nipnet Indians who presently joined with the Narrhagansets,
upon their first approach, as shall be related after wards.

About the tenth of February next, some hundreds of the Indians whether Nipnets
or Nashaway men (is uncertain) belonging to him, they call Sagamore Sam, and
possibly some of the sto^test of the Narrhagansets that had escaped the Winter
brunt fell upon Lancaster a small Village of about fifty or sixty Families, and
did much mischief, burning most of the Houses that were not Garisoned: and
which is most sad and awful to consider, the House of Mr. Rowlandson, Minister
of the said Lancaster, which was Garisoned with a competent number of the
Inhabitants* yet the Fortification of the House being on the b^ck side, closed
up with Firewood, the Indians got so near, as to fire a Leantoo, which burning
the House immediately to the ground, all the persons therein, were put to that
hard choice, either to perish by the fl^mes with the House, or to yield
themselves into the hands of those cruel Salvages, which last (considering that
a living Dog is better then a dead Lion) they chose, and so were forty two
persons surprised by the Indians, above twenty of the Women and Children they
carried away Captive, a ruesul spectacle to behold, the rest being Men, they
killed in the place, and reserved for further misery: and many of the rest were
not slain in fighting, were killed in attempting to escape. The Minister
himself was occasionally a^sent, to seek help from the Governor and Council,
to defend that place, who returning, was entertained with the ^ragical news of
his Wife and Children surprised, and being carried away by the Enemies, and his
House turned into Ashes, yet it pleased God so to uphold his heart, comforting
himself in his God, as David at Ziklag, that he would always say, he believed
he should see his Wife and Children again, which did in like manner soon come
to pass within five or six months after; all save the youngest, which being
wounded at the first, died soon after among the Indians.

And such was the goodness of God to those poor Captive Women, and Children,
that they found so much favor in the sight of their Enemies, that they offered
no wrong to any of their persons, save what they could not help, being in many
wants themselves. Neither did they offer any uncivil Carriage to any of the
Females, nor ever attempted the chastity of any of them, either being
restrained of God, as was Abimelek of old, or by some other accidental cause,
withheld them from doing any wrong in that kind.

Upon the report of this Disaster Capt. Wadsworth then at Malberough with about
forty resolute men, adventuring the rescuing of the Town that was remaining:
and having recovered a Bridge they gat over safe, though the Planks were pulled
off by the Enemy, and being led up in a way, not discovered by them, they
forced the Indians for the present to quit the place, after they had burnt and
destroyed the better half of it. Yet afterward it not being judged tenable, it
was abandoned to the pleasure of the insulting Foe.

Ten days after they were so flushed with this success, that two or three
hundred of them came wheeling down to Medfield a Town twenty miles from Boston,
westward from Dedham, which they surprised very early in the morning (and
though there were one hundred and sixty Soldiers in it or more, besides the
Inhabitants) they burnt near one half of the Town, killing about twenty
persons, but by the resistance of the Soldiers, as soon as ever they could be
gotten together (it being at or before break of day, none in the least
s^specting such an assault so early) they were quickly forced to forsake the
place, and so (not without some loss) took their way to Plymouth Colony.

The Western Towns above Connecticut, were the chief Seat of the War, and felt
most of the mischiefs ther^of in the end of the year 1675. but the Scene is now
to be changed; and the other Towns and the Villages that ly Eastward nearer
Boston, must bare their part in the like Tragedies: for as was said before, the
Narrbagansets having been driven out of the Country, fled through Nipnet
Plantations, toward Watch^set Hills meeting with all the Indians that had
harbored all Winter in those Woods about Nashaway, they all combined together
against the English, yet divided their numbers, and one half of them were
observed to bend their course toward Plymouth, taking Medfield in their way,
which they endeavored to burn and spoil, Feb, 21. 1675. as their fellows had
done Lancaster ten days before.

The surprizal of this Medfield in regard of some remarkable circumstances it
was attended with, is not unworthy a more particular Relating the manner
thereof: the loss of Lancaster had sufficiently awakened and alarmed the
neighboring Villages, all to stand upon their guard; and some had obtained
Garrison Soldiers for their greater security, as was the case with the Town of
Medfield, within twenty two miles of Boston. And at that time were lodged
therein several Garrison Soldiers, besides the Inhabitants; yet being billated
up and down in all quarters of the town could not be gathered together till a
great part of the Town was set on fire, and many of the Inhabitants slain,
which how it could be effected is strange to believe: But most of those inland
Plantations being over run with young wood (the Inhabitants being every where
apt to engross more Land into their hands then they were able to subdue) as if
they were seated in the mi^st of a heap of Bushes: their Enemies took the
advantage thereof, and secretly over night, conveyed themselves round about the
Town, some getting under the sides of their B^rns and senses of their Orchards,
as is supposed, where they lay hid under that covert, till break of day, when
they suddenly set upon sundry Houses, shoo^ing them that came first out of
their doors, and then fired their Houses, especially those houses where the
Inhabitants were repaired to Garrisons, were fit for the purpose: some were
killed as they attempted to fly to their Neigbo^rs for shelter: some were only
wounded, and some taken alive and carried Captive: in some Houses the Husband
running away with one child, the wife with another, of whom the one was
killed, the other escaped: they began at the East end of the Town where they
fired the House of one Samuel Morse, that seems to have been a signal to the
rest to fall on in other parts: most of the Houses in the West or Southwest end
of the Town were soon burnt down: and generally when they burnt any out houses,
the Cattle in them were burnt also. Two Mills belonging to the Town were burnt
also: a poor old man of near an hundred years old, was burnt in one of the
Houses that were consumed by fire. The Lieutenant of the Town, Adams by name,
was shot down by his own door, and his Wise mortally wounded by a Gun fired
afterward accidentally in the House. After the burning of forty or fifty
houses and barns, the Cannibals were frighted away out of the Town over a
Bridge that lies upon Charls-River, by the shooting off a piece of Ordnance 2
or 3 times: when they had passed over the Bridge they fired one end thereof, to
hinder our men from pursuing them, they were thought to be above five hundred:
There were slain and mortally wounded seventeen or eighteen persons, besides
others dangerously hurt. The loss sustained by the Inhabitants amounted to
above two thousand pounds. This mercy was observed in this sad providence, that
never a Garrison house was lost in this surprisal; nor any of the principal
Dwellings, so as the chiefest and best of their Building escaped the sury of
the Enemy, who as they passed the Bridge left a writing behind them, expressing
something to this purpose, that we had provoked them to wrath, and that they
would fight with us this twenty years (but they fell short of their expectation
by nineteen) adding also, that they had nothing to loose, whereas we had
Houses, Barns and Corn: these were some of the bold threats used by the
barbarous crew, but their rage shall proceed no further then the counsel of God
had determined. The week before was heard a very hideous cry of a kennel of
Wolves round the Town, which raised some of the Inhabitants, and was looked
upon by diverse as an ominous presaging of this following Calamity.

Another assault was feared, but as soon as the Soldiers could be g^^thered
together, they turned their backs, as if they never intended to visit them
more: whether these Indians went when they left Medfield is not so certainly
known; the Soldiers in the Town not having opportunity to pursue them over the
River, by reason that the Bridge was part of it burned: but it is most probable
that they took their way toward Plymouth, and continued about that side of the
Country for the future, waiting opportunities to do what mischief they could to
the English in those parts: For within a month after this assault of Medfield,
there was near six hundred of them seen about Patuxit and Providence, where
Capt. Pierce with about fifty of his men were lost, though with no great
advantage to the Enemy, who at that time lost above double that number: our
worthy Captains in this and other exploits being called to imitate Sampson, who
was content to dye with his enemies, that he might overthrow them thereby: it
havin^g so fallen out with many of our choice Commanders and Soldiers at
Deerfield, Narrhaganse^, Patuxit, and likewise not long after at Sudbury.

The Governor and Council of Plymouth perceiving by the report of these
outrages committed upon the Towns of the Massachusetts, that they were like to
be visited this Spring by their old Neighbors, sent out Capt. Pierce of
S^ituate about the latter end of March, with about fifty English, and twenty of
their Christian Indians about Cape Cod who proved none of his worst Soldiers,
as the sequel of this his last expedition will declare.

Capt. Pierce, as is said before, being sent out to pursue the Enemy, marched
toward Patuxit, where he understood the Indians were many of them gathered
together: he being a man of resolute courage, was willing to engage them though
upon never so great disadvantage: some say the Indians by counterfeiting,
drilled him into a kind of Ambush, possibly more of them discovered themselves
after he began to engage then he was aware of: and being gotten over the River
in pursuit of them, where he discovered so great a number of them, he drew down
toward the side of the River, hoping the better by that means to prevent their
surrounding of him, but that proved his overthrow, which he intended as his
greatest advantage: for the Indians getting over the River, so galled him from
thence, that he was not able to defend himself thus assaulted on all sides, and
himself not being able to travel much a foot, was thereby hindered from retiring
to any better place in time; so as he saw himself constrained to fight it out
to the last; which he did with most undaunted Courage, and as is said, to the
slaughter of an hundred and forty of his enemies, before himself and his
Company were ^ut off. It is said also that being apprehensive of the danger he
was in, by the great numbers of the enemy, like to overpovver him with their
multitude, he sent a Messenger timely enough to Providence, for relief, but, as
Solomon says, A faithful Messenger is as Snow in harvest, another is as smoke
to the eyes and vinegar to the teeth. (whether through ^loth or Covvardize, is
not much material) this message was not delivered to them to whom it was
immediately sent; by accident only some of Reh^both understanding of the danger
after the evening exercise (it being on the Lords day, March 26. 1676.)
repaired to the place, but then it was too late to bring help, unless it were
to be Spectators of the dead C^rkases of their friends, and to perform the last
office of love to them.

It is vvorth the noting, what faithfulness and courage some of the Christian
Indians with the said Capt. Pierce shevved in the Fight: one of them, A^os by
name, after the Captain was shot in his leg or thigh, so as he was not able to
stand any looger, would not leave him, but cha^ging his gun several times,
fired stoutly upon the enemy, till he saw that there was no possibility for him
to do any further good to Capt. Pierce, nor yet to save himself, if he stayed
any longer; therefore he used this policy, perceiving the Enemy had all blacked
their faces, he also stooping down, pulled out some blacking out of a pouch he
carried with him, discolored his face therewith, and so making himself look as
like Hohamack^ as any of his Enemies: he ran amongst them a little while and
was taken for one of themselves, as if he had been searching for the English,
until he had an opportunity to escape away among the Bushes: ther^ (...)
imitating the Cuttle (...), which when it is pursued, or in dang^r, casts out
of its body a thick humor, as black as ink, through which it passes away unseen
by the pursuer.

It is reported of another of these Cape Indians (Friends to the English of
Pli^outh) that being pursued by one of the Enemies, he betook himself to a
great Rock, where he sheltred himself for a while. at last perceiving that his
Enemy lay ready with his Gun on the other side, to discharge upon him, as soon
as he stirred never so little away from the place where he stood: in the issue
he thought of this politic Stratagem to save himself, and destroy his Enemy,
(for as Solomon said of old, Wisd^me is better then Weapons of War:) he took a
stick, and hung his Hat upon it, and then by degrees gently lifted it up, till
(...) ^thought it would be seen, and so become a fit mark for the other that
watched to take aim at him: the other taking it to be his head, fired a Gun,
and shot through the Hat; which our Christian Indian perceiving, boldly held up
his head and discharged his own Gun upon the real head, not the hat of his
Adversary, whereby he shot him dead upon the place, and so ^ad liberty to march
away with the spoils of of his Enemy.

The like subtle device was used by another of the Cap^ Indians at the same
time, being one of them that went out with Capt. Pierce; for being in like
manner pursued by one of Philips Indians, as (...) former was* he nimbly got
behind the but end of a Tree newly turned up by the roots, which carried a
considerable breadth of the surfac^ of the Earth along with it (as is very
usual in these parts, where the roots of the Trees ly very ^^eet in the ground)
which stood up above the Indians height, in form of a large Shield, only it was
somewhat too heavy to be easily weilded, or removed: the Enemy Indian ^ay with
his gun r^ady to shoot him down, upon his first disserting his station; but a
subtle wit taught our Christian Netop a better device, for boring a little hole
through this his broad Shield, he discerned his enemy, who could not so easily
discern him; a good Mu^ketier need never desire a fairer mark to shoot at,
whereupon discharging his Gun, he shot him down: what can be more just then
that he should himself be killed who lay in wait to kill another man? -- ^eque
enim L^x jn^tior ulla ^st,
Quam necis A^tifices art perire su^.


Instances of this nature show the sub l^ty and dexterousness of th^se Natives,
if they were improved in ^eats of Arms: and possibly if some of the English had
not been too shye in making use of such of them as were well ^^f^cted to their
interest, they need never have suffered so much from their enemies: it having
been found upon late experience, that many of them have proved not only
faithful, but very serviceable and helpful to the english; they usually proving
good Seconds, though they have not ordinarily confidence enough to make the
first Onset.

But to return to the proceeding of the Indians toward P^imouth.

Feb, 25. They ass^ulted Weymouth, and burned seven or eight houses and b^rns
there, which Weymouth is a town lying toward Plymouth Colony.

March 12. following, They assaulted the house of one Mr. Clark in Plymouth,
cruelly murdering eleven persons that belonged to two Families that lodged
therein, and then fired the house. The cruelty toward these persons was the
more remark^ble, in that they had often received much kindness from the said
Clarke. It is the usual custom of such Debtors, to use them worst, of whom
they have taken up much kindness upon trust before ^and.

March 17th. Another party of them fell upon Warwick, a place beyond Philips
Land; toward the Narrhaganset Country, where they burnt down to the ground all
but a few houses, left standing as a Monument of their barbarous fury. The like
^ischief was acted by them upon the houses of the E^glish remaining in the
Narrhaganset Country.

This 26 of March being the first day of the week, as the first of the year
after our Julian account, seemed ominous at the first on sundry accounts,
thr^atning a gloomy time, yet proved in the issue, but as a louring morning
before a lightsom^ day:

For* besides the burning of Marlburr^u^h, at least a great part of it on the
same day; a very sad accid^^t f^ll ^ut the same time at Springfield, as shall
he specified hereafter; (...) that which b^fell (...) Pierce, which is already
related, with whom fe^^ so many of his (...) on the same day also: yet had the
Enemy no c^use to (...), being (...) by the valor of the English, to give so
many of their own lives (...): some few made their escape, as is said by (...)
the three forementioned, another by a like shift, not only s^ve^ (...), but
helped an English man to escape also, whom he ran after with ^is Haatchet in
his hand, as if he were about to k^ll him; whereby both of them made a shift to
get away: the rest were all lost (the unfaithfulness of the Messenger being as
was intimated b^for^, the cause of their slaughter) unto a few that hardly
escaped by the advantage of the bushes, giving them opportunity to pass unseen,
yet was it confess^d by a Prisoner of the enemy, taken afterward by the
English, that they ^o^t an hundred and forty in that encounter. And had not the
said English by wading after the enemy over a River, made their ammunition
useless, there had not half so many of them been cut off. From thence they
turned back toward Rehoboth near Swanzy, where on March. 28. they burnt th^rty
Barns, and near upon forty dwelling houses, thereby as it were threatening the
utter desolation of that poor town; and so proceeding on that side the Country,
they burnt the very ne^t day about thirty houses in Providence in the way
toward Narrnaganset.

But it was now full sea with Philip his affairs, for soon after the tide of
his successes began to turn about the Sea coast, which made way for the falling
of the water up higher in the Country. For about this time news came to Boston
that our neighbors and friends of Connecticut Colony hearing of the attempts
of the enemy on that side of the C^untry, sent a p^rty of their Soldiers,
under the Command o^ Capt. George Denison with some friendly Indians, part
Mohegins and Pequods. part Nianticks belonging to Ninigret a Narrhagans^t
Sachem, who never engaged in this quarrel against the English: who in pursuit
of the enemy; meeting with a considerable part of them about the Narrhaganset
Country, killed and took forty and five of them, without the loss of one of
their own men. This Victory was the more considerable, in that several of the
chief Captains of the enemy were at this time killed or taken; amongst whom was
Canon^het (who came down to get seed-corn to plan^ at Squakbea^) he was the
chief Sachem of all the Narrnagansets: the son of Mianto^imoh, and the heir of
all his fathers pride and insolency, as well as of his malice against the
English, a most perfi^ious villain, who had the last October been at Boston,
pretending to make a firm pe^ce with the English, but never intending to keep
one Article thereof: Therefore as a just reward of his wickedness was he
adjudged by those that took him to dye, which was accordingly put in execution
at Stonington, whither he was carried: There his head being cut off was carried
to Hartford: The M hegins and Pequod^ that had the honor to take him prisoner,
having the honor likewise of doing justice upon him, and that by the prudent
advice of the English Commanders, thereby the more firmly to engage the said
Indians against the treacherous Narrhagansets. There are differing ^ reports
about the manner of his taking, and by whom, whither the Indians or the English
first took hi^, however it was sufficient ma^ter of rejoicing to all the
Colonyes of the English, that the Ringleader of almost all this mischief, and
great Incendiary betwixt the Narhagansets and us, dyed himself by that sword of
war which he had drawn against others.

Not long after Capt. George Denison of Stonington, with sixty six Vo^unteirs,
and an hundred and twelve ^^equods, ki^led and took seventy and six of the
enemy, amongst whom were two Narrhaganset Sachems, one of which was the
Grandchild of Pomam (who is accounted the most warlike and the best soldier
of all the Narrhaganset Sachems) taking at the same time 160* bushels of the
enemies corn, no small damage to our Enemies at that time, and all this without
the loss of one man of the said Captains followers.

The greatest mischief which after this time was done by the enemy in Plymouth
Colony, was by burning of houses and burns, which they might easily do, the
Inhabitants in most of those Towns being repaired to garrison houses for their
greater security: For about the 20th. of April, fifty of the enemy burnt about
nineteen houses and barns at Situate, but were so resolutely encountered by a
few of the Inhabitants, that they were driven away, and thereby prevented from
doing of further mischief.

Not long after, May. 8. they burned about seventeen houses and barns in
Briage-water, a small town in Plymouth Colony, twenty seven miles on this side
Taunton* but it pleased God just at the time to send a Thunder shower, which
put out the fi^e, or else it might have prevailed much further.

It is very remarkable, that the Inhabitants of the said Bridge-water never yet
lost one (...), the sword of the enemy* though the town is situate within
Plymouth Colony, yet have they helped to destroy many of the enemy None knows
either love or hatred by all that is before them in things of this nature: nor
ought standers by that may escape think, themselves less sinners then those
that so perish by the sword of the enemy: Yet about this time four of the
Inhab^^^nts of (...) were killed, as they were at their work in the field,
(...) by it is said, thir^y children were made Fatherless: So unsearchable are
the judgments of the Almighty, and his ways past finding out.

During these Calamities, Gods Dispensations have been very vari^us, as well in
reference unto Towns and Villages, as unto pe^s^ns: As if some places had been
by special providence marked out to preservation, as others unto destruction;
of which no other reason can be rendered according unto man, then the good
pleasure of God so to o^der and d^spose of events, which sometimes as Solomon
says are all one to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean.

And because special notice is taken of the Town of Bridge-water, the which
although it is seated, as it were, in the midst of danger, and has been often
assaulted by considerable numbers of the Enemy, yet never lost^any one of their
Inhabitants, young or old; a particular account shall here be given of the most
remarkable passages of divine providence relating to that Plantation since the
War began. June 26 1675 When Philips malice against the English, mixed with a
particular prejudice against Governor Winsl^w, began to boil up to the height
of an open Rebellion, the people of Swanzy being like to be distressed by the
Indians, a Post was instantly sent to the Governor of Plymouth, the way lying
through Bridge water, the said Post returned the next day: and about 9 or 10 of
the clock, as he passed through the Town, left an Order from the Governor for
the raising of twenty men, well armed and furnished with Horses, to b^
forthwith dispatched away for the relief of Swanzy; seventeen were all that
could be raised on the sudden, who were sent thither that night, and were the
first that were upon their ma^ch in all the Country; and possibly they fared
not the worse for their forwardness: as Deborah the Proph^tess, blessed God for
them that offered themselves willingly among the People: These seventeen of
Bridgewater were June 21. ordered by Capt. Bradford to Metapoisit a place at
twelve miles distance from Swanzy, to strengthen the Garrison at one Bourns
House, wherein were seventy persons, amongst whom were only found sixteen men.
After they had ma^ched five miles of their way, having Mr. Browns Son for their
Pilot, they met with some Swanzy people, newly turned out of their Houses (by
which they were to pass) who having not as yet resisted unto Blood, yet made
doleful lamentations, wringing of their hands; and bewailing of their losses,
very much also persuading Bridge-water men to turn back, because of the danger,
but they having so clear a call, had also more cou^age, then cowardly to desert
the cause of God and his People, left they should the^eby betray the lives of
so many of their friends into the Enemies hands; and so by the good hand of God
toward them, came safe to Metapoiset that night.

The next day in the morning, a part of them went to guard Mr. Brown their
Pilot back to his quarters; in their return they came suddenly upon a party of
Indians, about thirty in all; they were within shot one of another, but the
English having no Commission to fight, till they were assaulted, and not being
impeached in their passage, they returned safe to their Garrison at Metapoiset:
the Indians presently drawing off, and fi^ing three Guns (though not with
intent to do them any hurt, as was conceived) gave a shout, and so left them,
when this party of the English drew near to their Garrison, they met with a
company of Carts going to fetch Corn from an house deserted near by, about a
quarter of a mile off from Mr. Bournes House, the Soldiers gave them notice of
the Indians which they had discovered, and withal advised them by no means to
venture any more, because of the danger; but they were resolved notwithstanding
these earnest persuasions of the Soldiers to have another turn, which they
soon found to be to the peril of their own lives, six of them being presently
after either killed right out, or mortally wounded, as soon as they came to the
Barn where was the Corn; these six are said to be the first that were slain in
this quarrel. The Soldiers at the Garrison hearing the Guns, made what haste
they could to the place, but being most of them in that interim, gone to look
their Horses they could not come time enough to the relief of their friends,
yet upon their approach, they who had done the mischief presently fled away:
one Jones hard pursued by two Indians was by their coming delivered from the
extent of the Enemies cruelty, but having received his mortal wound, had only
that favor thereby, to die in the Arms of his friends, though by the wounds
received from his Enemies.

The next week, fifteen of those Soldiers looking after their Horses, fell
into an Ambush of twenty of the Indians, but being prepared for the encounter,
they discharged their Guns upon each other: but ou^ men received no hurt, some
of them felt the wind of the bullets passing by their faces; what damage the
Enemy received is uncertain, yet some of the English report they found some of
their enemies dead bodies in the place afterward.

Thus were they not only preserved in many perils themselves, but became
instrumental also; for the preservation of most of that Garrison, who with their
goods by their means, with the help of a small party of Plymouth Forces sent
thither after the six were killed (as is mentioned before) were soon after
transported safely to Road-Island.

Many outrages were that Summer committed upon their Neighbors at Taunton and
Namasket, yet it pleased God to protect this poor Town of Bridge-water from any
other hurt; till the beginning of April next, when themselves with their
Neighbors of Taunton and Rehoboth, were strongly solicited to desert their
Dwellings, and repair down to the Towns by the Sea side, but God encouraged
them to keep their stations notwithstanding the extreme danger then presented.
It is reported that Philip gave order that Taunton and Bridge-water should not
be destroyed till the last, which is all the favor to be expected from an
enemy, but these things are only in the hands of God, and not to be determined
by man.

April 9. being Lords day, A small party of the Enemy came down upon the said
Bridge-water, burnt an out-house and barn, broke up and rifled several other
houses in the same quarter of the Town, which are notwithstanding yet
remaining; they sent out a party of their men to pursue them that night, and
many days after, but could not hear of them.

May 7 the Lords day also (no doubt but the betterness of the day, will
increase the badness of their deed attempted thereon) they had intelligence of
a great body of Indians dispersed that way, with intent to have fallen upon the
Town that ve^^^^ay, but were casually prevented by a great deal of rain that
fell the night before: however they were resolved to foreslow no opportunity,
wherefore on the next day ( May 8. about three hundred of them, one Tisg^ogen
being their chief Leader, at 8 or 9 in the morning made an assault upon the
east end of the Town, on the South side of the River: many of the Inhabitants
stayed at home that morning because of the intelligence the day before, and so
were the more ready to entertain them; some that not taking that warning
ve^tured into the field about their occasions, were in danger of surprizal, but
by the special favor of God, escaped, and came time enough to help defend
their own and their neighbors dwellings, being shot at, and hard pursued a
considerable way.

The Indians presently began to fire the town, but it pleased God so to spirit
and encourage several of the Inhabitants, issuing out of their Garrison houses;
that they fell upon them with great resolution, and beat them off; at the same
instant of time, the Lord of Hosts also fighting for them from heaven, by
sending a storm of thunder and rain very seasonably, which prevented the
burning of the houses which were fired: The Soldiers also fighting under the
banner of Gods special protection (...) so successful in repelling the Enemy,
that they neither had any of the (...) or taken, and but one wounded. The
Indians by this (...) resi^tance, being beaten off to the skirts of the Town,
made a fresh onset upon a other quarter thereof, on the north side of the River
where they had done much more mischief, but that God stirred up sundry of the
people to venture out of their fortified houses, who fired upon the enemy, and
beat them from their dwellings, so as in the evening they drew off to an
out-house, three miles distant from the town: the next day the Inhabitants
expected another assault, but the enemy having burned the house and barn, where
they kept their Rendezvouze over night, and one house more not far distant,
they marched all clear away for that time.

Thus it pleased God so to order his dispensations, toward this small Town, as
a brand plucked out of the fire, that they did but just taste of this bitter
cup, which others drank deeper of; yet had they not such mercy, as these had,
mixed therewith: under God, the courage of the Inhabitants was a great means of
their preservation, for they fired so stoutly upon the Enemies, that they durst
not come very near any of the Garisoned Houses, saluting them only at a
distance. God was eminently seen upholding the spirits of all sorts, men and
women, so as no consternation of mind was seen upon any of them, during the
whole time of the dispute.

In this assault they lost but thirteen dwelling-houses, whereof five only were
in the Town (the rest being outhouses and deserted for the present) with some
few Barns, and some of their Cattle; all which was a very inconsiderable loss,
in comparison of what befell others, and themselves might have endured, if God
had not by his special favor prevented,

July 14, and 15. Another party of Indians came down upon the North-west side
of the Town, but with no better success; for they had no Commission from the
Lord of Hosts to touch any of the persons of the Inhabitants, their power
reaching only to the slaying of their Cattle at this time.

July 18, 19, 20. They sent our parties after the Enemy to pursue them by their
Track, who fell upon some of them. On the twentieth they took sixteen, whereof
two were men: on this day they had to assist them, it seems some of the Bay
Indians sent them from Captain Brattle; some of the Captives informed, that
there were but 70 or 80. in the Company, and but ten or twelve men amongst
them: but within a few days, these Bridge-water-men, shall find better
success in pursuit of their Enemies, when Philip himself shall hardly escape
their hands as shall be seen afterward.

While one party of the Enemy thus acted their part in and about Plymouth
Colony* toward the Seacoast, other parties of them were not idle in the
Massachusetts Colony, where they assaulted many places, doing what mischief they
could by firing of Houses, and killing several persons in the inland
Plantations.

March 2. They assaulted Groton: the next day over night Major Willard with
seventy Horse came into the Town; forty Foot also came up to their relief from
Watertown, but the Indians were all fled, having first burned all the Houses in
the Town, sav^ four that were Garisoned, the Meeting House being the second
house they fired, Soon after Capt. Sill was sent with a small Party of Dragoons
of 8 Files to fetch off the Inhabitants of Groton, and what was left from the
spoil of the enemy, having under his conduct about sixty Carts, being in depth
from front to rear above two mile: when a party of Indians lying in ambush, at
a place of eminent advantage, fired upon the front and mortally wounded two of
the vaunt Carriers, who dyed both the next night; and might (had God permitted)
have done eminent damage to the whole Body, it being a full hour before the
whole Body could be drawn up, which was done with care and Courage: but the
Indians after a few more shot made* without doing harm, retired, and made no
further assault upon them, being the same Party of Indians which the day before
had burned some part of Chelmsford. Soon after this Village was deserted and
destroyed by the enemy: yet was it a special providence, that though the carts
were guarded with so slender a Convoy, yet there was not any considerable loss
sustained.

The Surprizall of Groton was after this manner.
On March, 2. The Indians came in the night and rifled eight or nine houses and
carried away some cattle, and alarmed the Town.

On March, 9. About ten in the morning a parcel of Indians (having two days
lurked in the town, and taken possession of three outhouses and feasted
themselves with corn, diverse swine and poultry which they there seized) laid an
ambush for two Carts, which went from their garrison to fe^ch in some hay,
attended with four men, two of which espying the enemy, made a difficult
escape, the other two were set upon, and one of them slain, stripped naked, his
body mangled, and dragged into the highway, and laid on his back in a most
shameful manner: the other taken Captive; and after sentenced to death, but
the enemy not concuring in the manner of it, execution was deferred, and he by
the providence of God escaped by a bold attempt the night before he was
designed to slaughter, and fled to the Garrison at L^ncaster, the cattle in both
towns wounded, and five of them (...) outright.

March, 13. Was the day when the enemy came in a full body, by there own
account 400. and thought by the Inhabitants to be not many fewer. The town was
at this time (having been put into a fright by the sad Catastrophe of Lancaster
the next bordering town) gathered into five Garrisons, four of which were so
near together, as to be able to command from one to the other, between which
were the cattle belonging to those Families driven into pastures, which
afterward proved their preservation; the other was near a mile distant from the
rest.

This morning the Indians (having in the night placed themselves in several
parts of the town) made their Onset; which began near the four Garrisons; for a
body of them having placed themselves in Ambuscado, behind a hill, near one of
the Garrisons, two of them made discovery of themselves, as if they had stood
upon discovery. At this time diverse of the people, nothing suspecting any such
matter (for the day before, many had been upon discovery many miles, and found
no signs of an Enemy being so near) were attending their occasions, some
^^ddering their cattle, some milking their Cows, of whom the Enemy might easily
have made a seizure, but God prevented; they having another design in hand, as
soon after appeared: These two Indians were at length espied, and the Alarm
given* whereupon the most of the men in the next Garrison, and some also of the
second (which was about eight or nine pole distant) drew out and went to
surprise these two Indians, who kept their station till our men reached the
b^ow of the hill, then arose the ambush and discharged a volley upon them,
which caused a disorderly retreat, or rather a rout, in which one was slain,
and three others wounded: mean while another ambush had risen, and come upon
the back side of the Garrison so deserted of men, and pulled down the
Palizadoes: The Soldiery in this rout, retreated not to their own, but passed
by to the next Garrison, the women and children mean while exposed to ^azard,
but by the goodness of God made a safe escape to the other fortified house
without any harm, leaving their substance to the enemy, who made a prey of it,
and spent the residue of the day in removing the corn and household stuff (in
which loss five Familyes were impoverished) and firing upon the other Garrison:
here also they took some Cattle. No sooner was the signal given by the first
volley of shot, but immediately in several parts of the town at once, did the
smoakes arise, they firing the houses.

In the afternoon they used a stratagem not unlike the other, to have surprised
the single Garrison, but God prevented. An old Indian if an Indian passed along
the street with a black sheep on his back, with a slow pace, as one decrepit:
They made several shot at him, but missed him* at which several issued out to
have taken him alive, but the Watchman seasonably espying an ambush behind the
house, gave the signal, whereby they were prevented.

The ^^ght following the enemy lodged in the town, some of them in the Garrison
they had surprised, but the Body of them in an adjacent valley, where they made
themselves merry after their savage m^^ner. The next morning they gave two or
three Volleyes at Capt. Parkers Garrison, and so marched off, fearing as was
thought that supply might be ^^^igh at ^and. This assault of theirs was managed
with their wonted subtlety and barbarous cruelty: for they stripped the body of
him whom they had slain in the first onset, and then cutting off his head,
fixed it upon a po^e looking toward his own land. The corpse of the man slain
the week before, they dug up ou^ of his grave, they cut off his head and one
leg, and set them upon poles, and stripped off his winding sheet. An In^^nt which
they found dead in the house first surprised, they cut in pieces, which a^^e
^ward they cast to the ^wine. There were about forty dwelling houses burnt at
that time, besides other buildings. This desolation was followed with the
breaking up of the town, and scattering of the Inhabitants, and removal of the
Candlestick, after it had been there seated above twelve years.



Concerning the surprising of Groton, March 13. There was not any thing much
more material, then what is already mentioned, save only the insolency of John
Monoco or one eyed John, the chief Captain of the Indians in that design* who
having by a sudden surprizal early in the morning seized upon a Garrison house
in one end of the Town, continued in it, plundering what was there ready at
hand, all that d^y; and (...) night did very familiarly in appearance, call out
to Capt. Parker that was lo^ged in another Garrison house, and entertained a
great deal of Discourse with him, whom he called his old Neighbor: dilating
upon the cause of the War, and putting an end to it by a friendly peace: yet
often mixing bitter Sarcasmes, with several blasphemous scoffs and taunts at
their praying and worshipping God in the meeting house, which he deridingly
said he had burned. Among other things which he boastingly uttered that night:
he said he burnt Medfield (though it be not known whither he was there
personally present or no) Lancaster, and that now he would burn that Town of
Groton, and the next time he would burn Chelmsford, Concord, Watertown,
Cambridge, Charlstown, Roxbury, Boston, adding at last in their Dialect, What
Me will, Me d^: not much unlike the proud Assyrian (if his power had been equal
to his pride) sometime threatened against Jerusalem, but was by the remarkable
providence of God, so confounded within a few months after, that he was bereft
of his four hundred and fourscore (of which he ^now boasted) and only with a
few more Bragadozio's like himself, Sagamore Sam, old I^thro, and the Sagamore
of Quobaog were taken by the English and was seen (not long before the writing
of this) mirching toward the G^llows (through Boston S^reets, which he
threatened to burn at his pleasure) with an Halter about his neck, with which he
was hanged at the Towns end, September 26. in this present year 1676. So let
thine Enemies perish O Lord, and such contempt be poured on all them that open
their mouths to blaspheme thy holy Name.

Things looked with a pretty sad face about those parts at this time; yet
though the Righteous fall seven times, let not their Enemies rejoice, for the
Righteous shall rise again, but their wicked Enemies shall fall into mischief,
and rise no more. It was ebbing water with New England at this time, and a
while after; but God shall turn the stream before it be long, and bring down
their Enemies to lick the dust before them.

After this April 17. Captain Sill, being appointed to keep Garrison at Groton,
some Indians coming to hunt for Swine, three Indians drew near the Garrison
house, supposing it to have been deserted, were two of them slain by one single
shot made by the Captains own hands, and the third by another shot made from
the Garrison.

The danger which these inland Towns were like to be exposed unto from the
Enemy, after they were driven out of the Narrhaganset Country, was foreseen by
the Council of the Massachusetts, yea they had some intimation thereof from the
Enemy themselves: but they were not well able to prevent it, in that
unseasonable time of the year; no way ^it for marching of Soldiers, and
transporting of Provisions (the Winter then beginning to break up in this
Country) for while our Forces were up in the Narrhaganset Country, in the
Winter, a couple of Christian Indians were sent as Spies into the Nipnet and
Narrhaganset Country, through the Woods in the depth of Winter, when the ways
were impassable for any other sort of people: these two, by name James and Job
ordered their business so prudently, as that they were admitted into those
Indian habitations, as Friends, and had free liberty of Discourse with them;
they were at the first a little jealous of them, but by the means of one ^yed
John (a great Cap^ain of the Indians, that afterward l^d them that spoiled
Grot^n, who having been a C^mpanion of one of the said Spies both (...) Hun^i^g
and in fighting against the M^ha^ks fo^merly; so esteeme^ of him, that he would
not suffer any of the rest to touch him) they passed through all the Indian
Towns lying thirty miles distant from Qu^baog, and twenty miles northward of
the Road to Connecticut: one of the said Spies returned about Ian. 24.
info^ming those that sent him, what he had observed, both the number of the
Indians (about three hundred in all) also their several Towns, and what
provision they had: plenty of Venison, much Pork from the English men's Hogs
which they had taken, they confessed likewise that he and some of his party had
killed the People at Nashaway the last year, suspected to have been done by the
Indians of Malberough: he told them also they intended to burn Lancaster within
three weeks after that time, which accordingly they did much about the same
time: adding moreover that some Frenchmen were with them at Pocomptu^k,
encouraging of them to go on with their designs, promising them assistance,
which made some ready to think the Indians were stirred up by the French to do
all this misc^ie^, but more of that afterward: what might be gathered from the
foresaid premises is easy to conceive; whereupon new Forces with as much speed
as the season would allow were raised and sent up into those parts, under the
command of Major Savage in chief: they were dispatched away in the beginning of
March, and appointed to meet with such as should be sent from Connecticut
Colony, which they did about Quabaog, and so intended to march directly up to
those Indian Towns about Watchuset Hill to the Northwest: but the Indians were
gone, and our Forces in the pursuit of them, taking the wrong path m^ssed of
them, yet ranging through those woods, they were at one time sudenly assaulted
by a small party of Indians firing upon them, wounding Mr. Gersh^m Bulk^y, by a
shot in his Thigh, and killing one of their Soldiers, after which as they
marched along, they accidentally fell upon another small party of the Enemy, of
whom they slew some, and took others, to the number of sixteen, yet could not
meet with the main Body of the Enemy who it seems had passed over a great River
by Rafts, so our men could follow them no further, wherefore turning down
toward Hadly and North^hampton, whether it was supposed the Indians intended
to pass, They came very seasonably to the relief of the said Towns, which else
had been in danger of being lost. For,

March 14. The Enemy fell upon North-Hampton, and in three places broke through
the Fortification of Palizadoes, set up round about the Town a little before,
for their better security: but the Town being at that time full of Soldiers,
they were quickly repulsed, after they had killed four men, and two women, and
fired four or five dwelling houses, and as many barns, with the loss of many of
their lives as was supposed.

While our Forces under Major Savage continued on that side of the Country, a
sad accident fell out at Springfield, the certainty of which, it is judged meet
here to relate, to prevent mistakes* the matter having through a great
oversight been otherwise represented, then indeed it was, not only to the
prejudice of Truth, but to the disadvantage of some persons concerned therein.
While the Soldiers were quartered amongst the several Towns upon Cinnecticut
River; a party of the Troop were quartered at a place, belonging to Springfield
called the Long Mea^^ow, three miles from the Town below (...) Windsor: several
of the ^nhabitants having most of the Winter ^ept from the public meeting on
the Lords days, for fear of the Enemy, were encouraged to adventure to the
Assembly, on the 26 of Ma^ch, riding in the company of the Troopers; but having
heard of no Indians thereabouts a good while, were more secure then they had
cause, for riding some of them with women behind them, and some with their
Children in their Arms yet not so careful as to keep in the middle, but rather
in the Rear, and at a pretty distance straggling from the rest of the Company, a
party of Indians lying in the Bushes as they rode along, fired upon the
hindmost, and killed two and wounded others: those in the Front having also
Women and Maids behind some of them, were at a stand to know what to do,
fearing they might expose those Women they had in their company, if they should
ride back (in that winding Road made through a woody place for a mile or two to
gether) to look after them that were behind, at the last one that came riding
up, told the foremost company there was no hurt, and that they were all coming:
they that were before rode away with all speed to the end of the Town, where
setting down the Women, the Troopers returned back, but too late to recover too
poor Women and two children, who upon the first assault were thrown off their
horses, and immediately based into the Bushes, and through a swamp on the other
side of a steep (...), so as they could not be heard of all that afternoon, nor
the next day, till toward night, although they were diligently searched after
by all the Troopers in and about the Town; At last when they were discryed just
by a Swamp side, the cruel wretches endeavored to have killed them all, but in
haste only wounded them with their hatchets, yet so as one of the poor
creatures recovered; the other with the children dyed of their wounds before
they were brought home, or within a little time after. They did not complain of
any incivility toward them while they were in their power; but by the Farewell
given them, at their parting, they found it true by their own experience, that
the tender mercyes of the wicked are cruelty

There happened no other matter of moment worthy the reporting, while our Forces
tarryed in those parts, and the Commanders observing that the enemy was turned
back again through the Woods, toward the Massachusetts Bay, after a months time
retired back yet could never meet with the enemy in their return through the
Wo^ds, although while they were at the towns aforesaid, they understood of
several attempts made upon Sudbury, Marlberough, the most part of which last
they destroyed March^ 26. which made the Inhabitants forsake their Dwellings,
leaving only a few houses garisoned with Soldiers, the better to secure a
passage to the towns westward upon Connecticut River.

The Inhabitants of S^dbury* with the soldiers under Leiut* ^aco^s of
Marlberough sufficiently alarmed by the ^ate mischief done about those Towns,
resolved to try what work they could make with the enemy in the night,
whereupon going forth March 27. toward morning, they discerned where the enemy
lay by their fires, (near three hundred of, them) and that within half a mile
of a garrison house, near the place where they had ^one so much mischief the day
before. Such was the courage and resolution of the E^glish, though but forty in
number, Townsmen and Soldiers, that they adventured to discharge upon them as
they lay by their fires, when it was so dark that an Indian could hardly be
discerned from a better man, yet God so directing, they discharged several
times upon them, wounded thirty, fourteen of whom either dyed of their wounds
the same day or soon after, which had been chief agents in this present
mischief against the English. Such was the success of this skirmish that the
Assailants came off without the loss of one man.

After this time the enemy began to scatter about in small parties, doing what
mischief they could about the Massachusetts, killing a man at Weymouth, another
at Hingham, as they lay skulking up and down in Swamps and holes, to assault
any that occasionally looked never so little into the woods, sometimes alarming
the towns about Boston by discharging gunns upon particular persons: at
^illerica, Braintree, and at Rentham, near about which place in the Road to
Rehoboth, they assaulted one Woodcocks house, killed one man, and one of his
sons, wounded another, and burned his sons house.

Notwithstanding the little success of former attempts, Philip and his men have
one prize more to play in the Massachusetts Colony, before they go off the
stage, and then we shall soon see their power visibly declining every where,
until their final overthrow come upon them. There were several small Patryes
of them scattered up and down all over the Country, yet the main Body of them
was still lurking up and down in those woods that lie between Brookefield,
Marlburrough and Connecticut River. Possibly they had some hope of d^iving all
the Country before them to the towns upon the seacoast; for having burned the
deserted houses at Marlburrough, April, 17. the next day they set upon Sudbury
with all their might, (hoping ^is like) to do there, as they had done at the
Towns next beyond it. They did at the first prevail so far as to consume
several houses, and barns, and kill several persons, ten or twelve of the
English, that came from Concord to assist their neighbors at Sudbury, a town
distant five miles from them, at the first hearing of the alarm; who unawares
were surprised near a Garrison house, in hope of getting some advantage upon a
small Party of the enemy that presented themselves in a Meadow; a great number
of Indians that lay unseen in the bushes, suddenly rose up, and intercepting
the passage to the Garrison house, killed and took them all.

But our sorrows and losses that day are not yet come to their height; for in
the after part of the same day, that resolute stout-hearted Soldier, Capt.
Wadsworth (who had not long before, with not above forty men, rescued
Lancaster, when it was in danger to have been all lost at once) being sent from
Boston with fifty Soldiers to relieve Marlburrough, having m^rched five and
twenty miles, and then understanding the Enemy was gone through the Woods
toward Sudbury: this unwearied Company, before ever they had taken any
considerable rest, marched immediately back toward Sudbury (that lies ten miles
nearer Boston) and being come within a mile of the Town, they espied a party of
Indians (...) far from them, about an hundred, not more, as they conceived,
these they might easily deal with; who retiring back a while, drew Capt.
Wadsworth and his Company above a mile into the Woods, when on the sudden a
great body of the Enemy appeared, about five hundred as was thought, who
compassi^g them in round, forced them to the top of an hill, where they made
very stout resistance a considerable while; but the night drawing on, and some
of the Company beginning to scatter from the rest, their fellows were forced to
follow them, so as the Enemy taking the chase, pursued them on every side, as
they made too hasty a retreat, by which accident, being so much overpow^red by
the Enemies numbers, they were most of them lost: the Captain himself, with one
Captain Brocklebank (a choice spirited man, much lamented by the Town of Rowly
to which he belonged) and some others that fell into his Company as he marched
along, scarce twenty escaping in all; so as another Captain and his fifty
perished at that time, of as brave Soldiers as any were ever employed in the
present service.

Thus as in former attempts of like nature; too much courage and e^gerness in
pursuit of the Enemy, has added another fatal blow to this poor Country.

The same day another party of the English coming from Brookefield, whithey
they were sent as a Convoy with Provision for the Garrison, were in danger
likewise of falling into the hands of the same Indians, yet riding upon a good
speed, and keeping their Guns always ready presented against them they met,
they never durst fire at them: only three or four having unadvisedly first
discharged their gunns against the Enemy, and falling too much in the reet of
their Company, were cut off and lost. It is reported by some that afterward
escaped, how they ^^uelly tortured five or six of the English that night: yet
whatever their ^^^cess was this day, it was observed by some (at that time
their Prisoners, and since released) that they seemed very pensive after they
came to their Quarters, showing no such signs of rejoicing, as they usually
were wo^^ to do in like case; whither for the loss of some of their own
Company in that days enterprise; (said to be an hundred and twenty) or whither
it were the Devil in whom they trusted, and to whom they made their address the
day before, by sundry Conjurations of their Powawes? or whither it were by any
dread that the Almighty sent upon their spirits, upon their execrable
Blasphemies, which it is said they used in the torturing of some of their poor
Captives (bidding Jesus come and deliver them out of their hands from death if
he could) we leave as uncertain, though some have so reported, yet sure it is
that after this day, they never prospered in any attempt they made against the
English, but were continually scattered and broken, till they were in a manner
all consumed. After this time, however they had braved it before, they seemed
to apprehend that it was scarce feasible for them to withstand the power of the
English, and therefore seemed more inclinable to a peace, by several overtures
made by them, if they knew how to have brought it about. For during these
encounters they were willing to admit of some kind of treaty with the English,
about the releasing of sundry of their Captives, which they took at Lancaster
in February last, and elsewhere: To that end sundry attempts were made by help
of several of the Praying Indians (as they use to be called) about the
redemption of some of the women and children, which were at time in their
possession, and by degrees something was effected that way: possibly their own
present sufferings and wants that were upon them, might induce them thereunto*
For by this time the Spring of the year came on, their provision was all spent,
and they forced to live wholly upon ground-nuts, and upon the flesh of the
E^glish creatures, both horse and neat cattle, which they daily plundered. The
Ground-nuts running up to seed in the summer, began to grow so sticky, as they
were scarce eatable; the flesh also of the English cattle proving unwholesome
for their Bodies, filling them with sundry diseases. One of them having eaten
much horseflesh, complained that he had before eaten horse, and now horse
began to eat him, meaning some deadly disease growing upon his eating such
rank flesh, unwholesome for their Bodies, especially without salt, as their
usual manner is. The fishing season also began now to come in, wherein they use
to take abundance of all sorts, with which those great Rivers up the Country
are abundantly stored: they use to take thereof, and drying it in the smoke,
make provision thereof for the greatest part of the year; and if the war
continued, they could not but see they should utterly be cut off therefrom, and
that if the planting season also were l^st, they should be in great want of
summer fruits, s^. beans and squashes (besides their corn) with which they were
wont to live all the latter part of the summer. Upon all considerations, they
seemed pretty inclinable to hearken to a peace, though some were apt to think
they would never have kept it, further then would stand with their own
advantage, and that their present desire thereof was only to gain time.

A person formerly acquainted with the Indians about Lancast^^, did adventure
upon the forementioned overtures, to go amongst them to try if he could not
prevail with them for the redemption of the Ministers wise, taken Captive in
Febraury last from L^ncaster, and through the favor of him who having the
hearts of all in his hand, inclines them as he pleases, obtained the desired
end upon an inconsiderable sum, which gave encouragement to the Council to
send two Messengers on the like errand the same week, to procure the redemption
of others, not without success: The former, viz. M^s. Rowlandson being brought
to Boston upon the Election day, May, ^d. it was generally looked at as a smile
of providence, and doubtless was a return of prayer, and answer of faith, with
which her husband had been upheld, and supported from the day of her Captivity;
his two children also were returned back not long after, more by the
overruling hand of God ( that turns the Captivity of his people as the
streams of the South; and sometimes inclining them to pity his Servants, that
are of themselves more cruel then the Sea Monsters) then by any other
contrivance of man's policy,

And yet no^withstanding motions of this nature about the redemption of some of
our Prisoners still in their hands, there was no cessation of arms between us.

About this time Letters were sent down from Connectiont Colony, informing the
General Court then assembled at Boston, that some of the Mohawkes (a sort of
fierce and savage Indians, yet mortal enemies to these we were at wars
withal) had fallen upon some of Philips Party, and destroyed many of them:
likewise that many of them were destroyed by Fevers and Fluxes, with other
distempers falling amongst them, which was some reviving to our hopes, that the
foot of our enemy should slide in due time, and that destruction was hastening
upon them, though still they were perm^t^ed to do mischief in sundry particular
places of the Country, which must be minded as we pass along.

Those Indians that were our professed enemies, after they had been beaten out
of the Narrhaganset Country, Febr. 1. tarried awhile at Winimazeag, a place two
days journey north of Quabaog, where they divided themselves into two
Companies, one of them tarried on that side the Country, the other made toward
Plymouth Colony, taking Medfield in their way, from whence as they marched
along they met with a notable repulse at Boggiston, a small Hamlet, or Company
of Farms not far from the said Medfield where they attempted a G^rrison, but
meeting with stout resistance, they left the enterprise; and kept on their way
toward Plymouth Colony, where they scattered themselves up and down, waiting
for opportunityes to spoil and destroy the English Plantations on that side of
the Country.

Besides what is already mentioned, on May, 11* a party of them ass^u^ted the
town of Plymouth, burnt eleven houses and five barns belonging thereunto: on
the other side, a small party of the English scouting about in pursuit of the
Indians, fell upon a Party of them, that lay waiting in ambush; but being
discerned by an Indian in the Company of our men that gave timely notice, our
soldiers had an opportuity thereby to make the first shot, and thereby not
only prevented a mischief to themselves, but killed also some of the enemy,
(one of whom was observed to be of more note then his fellows by his attire)
the rest f^ed away from them that pursued, though but a small company; so that
there were daily reciprocal acts of hostility in those parts.

Within a few days after this, seven houses and two barns more were burnt by
the enemy, in and about Plymouth: who did the like mischief about the same time
to the remaining houses of Namasket or Middleborough.

About this time, another sort of Indians that belonged to Wamesit a place near
Chelmsford, bordering upon Merrimack (who had been provoked by the rash,
unadvised, cruel act of some of the English, about October. 27. and November. 4.
had fired upon them several gunns, both at Chelmsford and Woburn, to the
killing of some, and wounding of others upon suspicion that the said Indians
were guilty of burning a Barn, and Hay-stack not far off) suddenly turned our
enemies, after the winter was over having first withdrawn themselves from the
place assigned them, and where they had been relieved all the winter (some of
them after a former revolt) and took their opportunity to fire Mr. Falconers
house in Andover town early that Spring, and wounded one Roger Marks, and
killed his horse. Two more houses about Shawshin beyond the said Andover, were
burned about Mar. 10. Also they killed a young man of the said town, Apr. 8.
theson of George Abbot; And another son of his also was carried away the same
day, who yet was returned some few months after, almost pined to death with
hunger.

At the same time they killed some of their Cattle, cutting out only the
tongues of some of them for haste; being shot at by several of the Inhabitants
from their Garrisons.

Mar. 10. A. Concord two men going for Hay one of them was killed.

At Chelmsfor^, the said Wamesit Indians, about March 18 before, fell upon some
houses on the north side of the River; burnt down three or four that belonged
to the Family of Edward Colburn: the said Colburn, with Samuel Varnham his
neighbor, being pursued, as they passed over the River to look after their
Cattle on that side of the river; and making several shots against them, who
returned the like again upon the said Indians, (judged to be about forty) what
success they had upon the en^my, was best known to themselves; but two of
Varnhams sons were slain by the enemies shot before they could recover the
other side of the River. Apr. 15. also were 14. or 15. houses burnt there.

Not long before this* Febr. 1. 1675. Tho. Eames that kept a Farm at Sudbury,
whose dwelling was three or four miles out of the town, had his house assaulted
and fired, his wife killed, and his children carried Captive among the Indians.

Also two men were killed at a Farm about Concord, Isaac and Jacob Shepard by
name, about the middle of February, and a young maid that was set to watch upon
an hill, of about 15. years of age, was carried Captive; who strangly escaped
away upon an horse that the Indians had taken from Lancaster a little before.
In the like strange manner did one of Eames his children escape away about May
3. last; traveling thirty miles alone in the woods, without any relief till he
came to an English town. Eames his house was assaulted when himself was from
home, by an Indian called Netus (not long after slain at Malborough) which had
been very familiar with the English, with nine or ten more of his company, as
perfidious and barbarous as himself: They burned all the dwellings that
belonged to the Farm, Corn, Hay and Cattle, besides the dwelling house with
what was therein; it is probable those at Concord were killed by the same hands
about a fortnight after.

Many such like remarkable instances of special providence might be mentioned*
if it were convenient to insert such particular passages into the general
Narrative of the late troubles from our barbarous enemies.

On May 3. a party of them killed a man at Haverhill, upon the edge of
Merrimack River; and passing over the said River to Bradford, spoiled ^^other
Family; killing one Thomas Kemball, and carrying his wife and five Children
captive, forty miles up into the woods; although it was questioned whether this
last mischief were done by any of Philips party, but rather by some that
belong^^ to the Eastward Indians, of which there may be occasion (God willing)
to speak more afterward.

For the suppressing of these insolences, several Companies of fresh
soldiers, both horse and Foot were raised in the Massachusetts, by the
Governor and Council of that Colony, and sent out to suppress the common
enemy; the Foot under the command of Capt. Sill, Capt. Cutler, Capt. Holbrook,
the Horse under the Command of Capt. Brattle, Capt. Prentice, Capt. Henchman,
Commander in chief: these several Companies modelled as aforesaid, were sent
out Apr. 27. 1676. to range the woods toward Hassanamesit.

Upon the 6. of May, they met with a considerable. party of the enemy: they
were first discovered by the Natick scouts pursuing a Bear and at the first not
discerning that the Natick Indian scouts belonged to our men, it gave some
advantage to our forces; our Horsemen falling upon them before they were well
aware, killed and took of the Enemy about sixteen, which they took notice of at
the present, although it was confessed by the enemy, that they lost twenty that
encounter. It was reported that the sounding of a trumpet without order, did
much hurt, but the Commander in chief affirms, that it was no disadvantage to
the service in hand, it neither being heard by our own Foot, not yet by the
enemy. If any error was committed by the English Companies, it was in that the
Horse did not timely enough draw down from the top of the hill, whereby they
came to be discovered by the enemy; who thereupon made the more haste to
escape: However it was no small loss to the enemy, some of the slain being
known to be considerable persons; and it struck such a terror into them, that
they never durst face our men afterward; for although after our men returned
to their Quarters at Medfield, they saw two hundred fires in the night, yet
they could never come near them again to fight any company of them: but the
season proving rainy, hindered any further pursuit of them at that time. And
soon after this the soldiers being visited with sickly distempers by reason of
an ^pidemical Cold at that time prevailing through the Country, they were for
the present released for the recovery of their health, with intent to be called
together again at a more convenient time; this was done May the tenth.

During this interval of time, upon a report that a party of the Enemy that
were discovered about Rehoboth, busy in fishing in a River thereabouts, Capt
Brattle was sent up about the 23d. of May, who with the help of so^e of the
Inhabi^ants, killed eleven or twelve of them without the loss but of one of our
men: Had they not discovered some of ours on the opposite shore, it was
conceived a greater spoil might have been made amongst them.

But in the next place we must take notice of the proceedings of the enemy
about Connecti^nt: The greatest Body of them made toward Plymouth Colony early
in the Spring as was said before, where we shall leave them for the present,
and observe what the remainiug part of them did westward.

Some sc^ttering parties were sku^king about Springfield, and those lower
towns, upon a small number of whom Capt. Holioke (newly chosen Captain of
Springfield in the room of his father lately deceased) handse led his office,
early in the Spring: for having notice of some of them in those woods, he
marched after them with ten or twelve resolute young men, and waiting his
opportunity, surprised them near the great River, so as two or three of them
were left dead upon the place, another mortally wounded, got on to an (...) in
the river, where it was concluded he took his last nights lodgi^g The other
being sorely wounded, was taken alive, and brought home to Spring field, where
he confessed many things to one of the Inhabitants that understood their
language, owning the truth in many things against his own company, and soon
after dyed of his wounds.

This was bu^ a Preparative to an higher piece of service, which Capt. Holioke
was soon after engaged in* and wherein be acquitted himself beyond expectation;
and taking more pains then ordinary, in making his retreat, he gat a Surfeit,
that ended his days in September following about Boston.

About the beginning of April likewise some of the Inhabitants about Ha^ly,
attending their tillage at Hockanum, within three miles of the town, and having
a guard of soldiers with them, yet three of the compa^y were casually slain by
a party of the enemy, that lay in wait for such an opportunity. One of them was
Mr. Goodman, a deacon of the Church, that went a little beyond the Command of
the Soul^iers that came to guard them, to view the fence of his own land: and
two others that contrary to express order, would venture upon the top of an
high hill, near by, to take a needless and unseasonable view of the Country,
were shot down by the enemy before they could recover their Corpse du guard.

But the great Company of the enemy, that stayed on that side of the Country,
and about Watchuset Hills, when the rest went toward Plymouth, though they had
been disappointed in their planting, by the death of Canonchet, were loath to
loose the advantage of the fishing season then coming in; wherefore having
seated themselves near the upper Falls of Cunnecticut River, not far from
Dee^field, and perceiving that the English Forces were now drawn off from the
lower towns of Hadly and Northampton, now and then took advantag^s to plunder
them of their Cattle, and not fearing any assault from our Soldiers, grew a
little secure, while they were upon their Fishing design, insomuch that a
couple of English-lads lately taken captive by the enemy, and making their
escape, acquainted their friends at home how secure they lay in those places,
which so animated the Inhabitants of Hadly, Hatfield and Northampton, that they
being willing to be revenged for the loss of their cattle, besides other
preceding mischiefs, took up a resolution with what strength they could raise
among themselves (partly out of garrison soldiers, and partly of the
Inhabitants) to make an assault upon them, which if it had been done with a
little more deliberation, waiting for the coming of supplies expected from
Hartford, might have proved a fatal business to all the said Indians: yet was
the victory obtained more considerable then a first was apprehended; For not
having much above an hundred and fifty fighting men in their Company, they
marched silently in the dead of the night, May 18. and came upon the said
Indians a little before break of day, whom they found almost in a dead sleep,
without any Scouts abroad, or watching about their wigwams at home; for in the
evening they had made themselves merry with new milk and roast beef, having
lately driven away many of their milch cows, as an English woman confessed,
that was made to milk them.

When they came near the Indians rendezvouze, they allighted off their horses,
and tied them to some young trees at a quarter of a miles distance, so marching
up, they fired amain into their very wigwams, killing many upon the place, and
frighting others with the sudden alarm of their Gunns, made them run into the
River; where the swiftness of the stream carrying them down a steep Fall, they
perished in the waters, some getting into Canooes, (small boats made of the
barks of ^irchen trees) which proved to them a Charons boat, being sunk, or
overfet, by te shooting of our men, delivered them into the like danger of the
waters, giving them thereby a pasport into the other world: others of them
creeping for shelter under the banks of the great river, were espied by our men
and killed with their swords; Capt. Holioke killing five, young and old, with
his own hands from under a bank. When the Indians were first awakened with the
thunder of their gunns, they cried out Mohawks, Mohawks, as if their own native
enemies had been upon them: but the dawning of the light, soon notified their
error, though it could not prevent the danger.

Such as came back spoke sparingly of the number of the slain* some say there
could not in reason be less then two or three hundred of them that must
necessarily perish in the midst of so many instruments of destruction managed
against them with such disadvantages to themselves. Some of their prisoners
afterward owned that they lost above three hundred in that Gamizado, some
whereof were principal men Sachems, and some of their best fighting men that
were left, which made the victory more considerable then else it would have
been; nor did they seem ever to have recovered themselves after this defeat,
but their ruin immediately followed upon it. Yet such was the awful hand of
Providence, in the chose of this victory, mixing much bitter with the sweet,
that it might well be called a costly victory to the Conquerors, that so no
flesh should glory in it self.

The Indians that lay scattering on both sides of the river, after they
recovered themselves, and discovered the small number of them that assailed
them, turned head upon the English, who in their ret^eat were a little
disordered, for want of the help of the eldest Captain, that was so enfeebled
by sickness before he set out, that he was no way able for want of bodily
strength (not any way defective for want of skill or courage) to assist or
direct in making the retreat: For some of the enemy fell upon the Guards that
kept the horses, others pursued them in the rear, so as our men sustained
pretty much damage as they retired, missing after their return thirty eight of
their men: And if Capt. Holioke had not played the man at a more then ordinary
rate, sometimes in the Front, sometimes in the flank and rear, at all times
encouraging the soldiers, it might have proved a fatal business to the
assailants. The said Capt. Holiokes horse was shot down under him, and himself
ready to be assaulted by many of the Indians, just coming upon him, but
discharging his pistolls upon one or two of them, whom he presently dispatched,
and another friend coming up to his rescue, he was saved, and so carried off
the soldiers without any further loss.

It is confidently reported by some that were there present at this engagement,
that one told above an hundred Indians left dead upon the place; and another
affirmed that he told near an hundred and forty swimming down the Falls, none
of which were observed to get alive to shore, save one.

The loss that befell our men in the retreat, was occasioned principally by the
bodily weakness of Capt. Turner, unable to manage his charge any longer, yet
some say they wanted powder, which forced them to retire as fast as they could
by Capt. Turners order.

It is said also by one present at the fight, that seven or eight in the rear
of the English, through haste missed their way, and were never heard of again;
and without doubt fell into the Indians hands, and it is feared some of them
were tortured.

About sev^n days after this, they were minded to try the chance of War
again, and see if they could not recover their loss, by returning the like upon
the English: For,

May 30. A great number of them appeared before Hatfield, fired about twelve
houses and barns without the Fortification of the town, driving away multitudes
of their Cattle, and their Sheep, spreading themselves in the meadow near the
town: which bravado so raised the courage of their neighbors at Hadly, that
twenty five resolute young men ventured over the river, to relieve Hatfield in
this distress, who charged the enemy with such undaunted courage and resolution
( Audaces fortuna juvat) that they beat down five or six at the first shot they
made, so making way through the thickest of their enemies, that lay ready to
take aim at them behind every tree, as they passed by; yet they escaped all
their shot till they came within a little of the town they came to relieve,
where they lost five of their twenty five.

The enemy being amazed at the resolution of our men, being but so small an
handful, that they fled immediately from the town; having lost twenty five of
their men in the enterprise.

The Council of the Massachusetts, gathering by these proceedings of the
Indians, that their desire of peace was only to gain time, Ordered that the
forces raised before Apr. 27. and for a time released should be hastened out
again to range the woods toward Hadly, and those parts; made an agreement with
Hartford Colony to send forces from thence to meet them about Brookfield, and
so to scour along on both sides Connecticut River, to disrest the enemy what
they could, and keep them from fishing in those waters, their hope of planting
being now almost over.

To this end about May 30. 1^96. the Forces under Capt. Henchman were called
together again, and sent to Brookfi^ld to meet with those expected from
Hartford Colony: In the way* ours by the direct (...) of Tom. Doublet (a Natick
Indian, who was a little before employed in the redemption of Captives)
following tracks of Indians, came upon a party of the enemy fishing i^ Weshacom
Ponds toward Lancaster, of whom they killed seven, and took 29. most women and
Children; yet belonging to consirerable Persons, it made the success the more
to be valued. Our Forces being by this means retarded, could not meet with
those of Connecticut at Brookfield; but followed them the week after; having
first returned from Weshacom to Malborough to supply themselves with
ammunition; and so marched directly toward Hadly, where they met with
Connecticut Forces; and from thence according to mutual agreement, ours marched
on the east side of the river, and Connecticut Forces on the West, up toward
Squakheag; coming to Deerfield, and the great Falls thereabouts, they sent up
their Scouts, but not hearing of the enemy, they marched up no higher, being in
no good capacity to have gone further if there had been occasion, by reason of
a tedious Storm of rain, which occasioned much damage in their Ammunition and
Provision. While our Forces lay about Deerfield, some of our soldiers ranging
lighted upon the Body of Capt. Turner, about Greens River, in passing of which
stream he was supposed to have received his mortal wounds.

While our Forces continued thereabouts, they did the enemy some little spoil
in seizing much of their Fish, and goods stolen from the English, and hid in
their b^^ns, under ground; conjecturing also that they found 4. or 5. places
where some of the English had been tortured to death by cruel burning, after
they had been fastened between stakes set in the ground: but not meeting with
any of the enemy; they all hasted homewards, conceiving that having been forced
from their quarters in those parts, they were drawn down lower, toward the
English plantations, eastward viz. Plymouth and the Massachusetts. What success
C. Henchman's forces had in their retiring homeward, and what they observed of
the motion of the Indians, take in the words of his own Letter June, 30.
-- Our Scouts brought intelligence, that all the Indians were in a continual
motion, some toward Narrhaganset, others toward Watchuset, shifting gradually,
and taking no each others Quarters, and lay not above a night in a place. They
27. ditto, brought in two Squaws, a boy and a girl, giving account of five
slain. Yesterday, they brought in an old fellow brother to a Sachem, six Squaws
and children, having killed five men, and wounded others if not killed them, as
they supposed by the blood found in the way, and an h^t shot through. These and
the other inform that Philip and the Narrhagansets were gone several days
before to their own places, Philips purpose being to (...) what mischief (...)
co^ld (...) the English. By ^dvice drew out a commanded Party under the conduct
of Capt. Sill, (...), sixteen Files of Englis^, all ^y Tr^^p, and the Indians,
^xcepting one ^ile, being all we could make provision for, for what with the
falling short of the Bread promised us, and a great deal of that we had proving
moldy, the rest of the Forces had but one Biske^ ^ man to bring them to this
place: This party were ordered (...) Wa^chuset, and so to Na^haway and the
Washakem Ponds, where we have notice Indians were, and so to return unto this
place. whereby your Honors Letter th^^ came to me yesterday morning I
understood that provision was ordered for (...); and which we found to our
great relief, which we found last night coming hither weary and hungry. The
commanded Party we left at Quonsiquomon, where they int^^ded to stay awhile for
the last Scouts we sent out: Eleven Prisoners we had in all, two of the ol^est
by counsel we put to death, the other nine the Commissary is ordered to convey
to Boston, with the Baggage, horses and se^^e of their attendants not sit for
the Service.

Daniel Henchman.




It appears plainly by the contents of the said Letter, as well as by many
other testimonies, that about this time the Indians our Enemies, who hitherto
had been linked together as Brethren in iniquity, and cruelty, were now
strangly divided and separated the one from the other: some impute it to an
assault made upon them by the Mohawkes, who falling upon Philip with the Inland
Indians, slew about fifty of them, whereupon they of Philips Company resolved
to return to their own Country, and do what mischief they could to the English
thereabouts: This was roported by an Indian brought to S^aco^k, I^ne, 29. 1676.
taken at Providence. Others are ready to think, that it was upon some quarrel
amongst themselves, occasioned by an evil spirit sent from God upon them, that
thereby they might, being soattered, the more easily be taken and ruined by the
English; now that the time of vengeance was com^, when they shall be called to
an account for all their former outrages and crueltyes; for now is the snare
hastening upon them, wherein they shall be hampered in their own devices, so to
betaken and destroyed: it cannot but be acknowledged as a very remarkable
Providence, that Capt. Hen^hman in his late expedition to Hadly, killed and
took about eighty four of the Enemy, without the loss of any one of his own
men: the like favou^able success happened to Major Talc^t, in his passage from
Norwich to Quabaog, as was said before, and soon after his return.

But by that time our Forces were returned home as far as S^^bury; they were
ordered upon the sol^citation of the Governor of Plymouth, two Companies of
them a^ least, to march away immediately to Dedham, and so to Seaconk or
Re^oboth, to join with Major Bradford in the pursuit of Philip, who was it
seems with many hundreds of his Barbarous Followers fallen upon the English
Plantations thereabouts, and whither also a little before, Capt. Brattle with a
Troop of Horse, and Captain Mosely with a Foot Company were sent up from Boston
to pursue after them, now flocking in great numbers into those Woods; there was
at this time no small hope of surprising Philip: several reports being brought
that he was seen in this and that place, not with above twenty or thirty men
attending on him: but his time was not yet fully come, nor had he as yet fully
accomplished all that mischief, he was like to be suffered to do: For upon July
1st. 1676. a party of his Indians committed an horrid and barbarous Murder upon
Mr. Hezekiah Willet in Swanzy, an hopeful young Gentleman, as any in those
parts; they used frequently to keep a Sentinel on the top of their House, from
a Watch-house built thereon, whence they could discover any Indians before they
came near the house, but not hearing of the Enemy in those parts for a
considerable time, that necessary piece of circumspection was omitted that day,
whereby that deserving person was betrayed into their cruel hands, for within a
quarter of an hour after he went out of his own doors, within sight of his
House, he was shot at by three of them at once, from every one of whom he
received a mortal wound; they after their barbarous manner took off his head:
and carried it away with them (which yet was soon after recovered) leaving the
Trunk of his body behind, as a sad monument of their inhumane cruelty: the same
Indians, not being above thirty in number, took away a Negro belonging to the
same Family, who being faithful to his Masters, and the Countries interest,
ventured his life to make his escape, which was the preservation of many
others: for the said Negro being a little acquainted with their Language,
discovered to the English after his escape, Philips purpose to seize such and
such places: in the first place to assault Taunton, which in all probability
had been in great danger, if their treacherous plots and purposes had not so
wond^^fully been made known before hand. The said Negro affirmed, that there
was near a thousand of them, for he observed, that although they had killed
twenty head of Neat Cattle over night, yet there was not any part of them left
the Next day at eight of the Clock in the morning: by this special Providence
the Enemy was defeated of their purpose, and never after had any opportunity of
doing any considerable damage to the English in that part of the Country. So as
after this day we may truly date the time of our Deliverance, and beginning of
Revenges upon the Enemy: Now is their own turn come, when it shall be done
unto them, as they have served us: They that before led otherr into Captivity,
must themselves hence forth go into Captivity: And they that killed with the
Sword, must themselves be killed with the Sword, as in the Sequel of this
Narrative will abundantly be manifest; The History of which before we shall any
farther pursue, we must a little while wait upon our Friends, (those Forces
sent from Connecticut) in their return back into their own Colony, which before
i^ be done, some things should be premised concerning the occasion of their
coming, and the Success that did attend them in their march thither.

Our Friends and Brethren of that Colony, although they had never actually felt
half of those miseries, that befell the people of the other two, yet never
denied their Assistance to the suppressing of the common Enemy, yea, sometimes
they did afford it, before it was expressly desired; according to the Tenor of
the Articles of Confederation, and Rules of common prudence; considering that
if the fire of this War were not timely extinguished, it would end^nger their
own Fabric: Therefore according to Agreement, the Council of that Colony
ordered their successful Commander Major Talcot to meet with our Forces at
Brookfi^ld, or Quabaog in order to the pursuing of the Enemy in those parts: In
the way as they were from Norwich marching thither, Divine Providence so far
smiled upon the Enterprise, as to give them an opportunity to surprise fi^ty
one of the Enemy, of whom nineteen were slain, without the loss of any one of
their own Company, which could not but much enbanse the price of the victory to
the Conquerers.

The like Success had their friends which they left behind (the Volunteers
gathered out of the three Town^ by the Sea side, New London, Stonington, and
Norwich,) ^ad who were some of them released by Major Talcot, when he first
began his March, that they might the better in the absence of the Army, guard
their own Towns: for before the retu^n of the Forces under Major Talcot, to
that side of the Country, they had made two Expeditions against their Enemies
the Narrhagansets, that were s^ulk^ng up and down on that side of the Country;
In one of which they killed and took above thirty, the most of which being men,
(...) said to have been slain by them.

In the other about forty five, the most of which probably were w^men and
Children, but being all young Serpents of the same brood, the su^ duing or
taking so many, cught to be acknowledged as another signai victory, and pledge
of Divine favor to the English. But to return, it was not without the special
direction of Providence that those Hartford Forces were sent to those Western
Towns a week before those of the Massachusetts could get th^ther; for otherwise
one or those Towns might have been lost; seeing that on the twelfth of June,
soon after, if not the n^xt day, after they arrived there; The Enemy, as if
resolved to try the utmost of their power, viol^ntly assaulted the Town of
Hadly, with a body of about seven hundred men, at five or si^^ in the morning,
laying an Ambush at one end of the Town, while the greater part of them were
ala^m^ng the other: But the Conn^cticut Forces being at that time quartered in
the Towns thereabouts, (who were English, and friendly Indians, P^q^ods, and
Mobegins, about five hundred in all) that were ready at hand, besides, those
that had been quartered there, ev^r since March, (who had been left by Major
Savage when he left those parts, under the Command and Charge of Captain
Turn^r, slain at the great Falls, as is noted before,) but since commanded by
Cavtain S^am. These by their Jo^^^ and ready resistance, wherein the Hence of
Palizadoes su^rounding the Town, was no little advantage, gave the Indians such
a smart Repu^se, that they found the pl^ce too ho^^for them to abide it. For
the Soldiers or Townsmen within, firing a piece of O d^a^ce, it so aff^ighted
the Salvages, or a party of them, against whom it was discharged, that although
they had just before surprised, and oss^ssed an house at the North end of the
Town, if Information mistake not, yet they instantly fled, leaving some of
their d^ad upon the place; Nor did they any considerable mischief with all
their numbers, save firing a Barn about that end of the Town, and slaying two
or three of the Soldiers, or too daring Inhabitants, who would against
expres^order adve^ture to go without the Fortification.

It was accounted by some, that were present near the time of that Assault, a
great over sight, that having so fair an opportunity to chase the Enemy upon so
considerable advantage, it was let slip, and not improved: For Conn^cticut
Soul^ie^s being all, or most of them su^nish^d with ho^s^s, they might have
been soon ^vertak^n, and many of them destroyed: but God hid it from ^h^ir
Eyes; The Co^mander in c^^^f, it is sa^d, q^a^tered at one of the Towns on the
W^st side of the R^^^r, and did not a^prehend the advantage, till the Season
was over: Nor wa^ an^ (...) as an (...) ex^ect^d from the Enemy, so early in
the morning; It being a general observation heretofore, that they seldom, or
never used to make any Attempt in the night time; part of which could not b^^
be imp^oved in way of proparation for su^^ a design.

But the Lord of Hosts who is wis^ in Counsel, and wonderf^^lan w^^^ing, would
find some other way to de^^roy our Enemi^s, w^tere in the hand of his
Providenc^, should more remarkeably be seen, that so no (...) should glory in
its own wisdom or str^ngth, but that Salvation might a^p^ar, to be from the
Lord alone. The rest of this Month was spent without any othermatter of moment
happening therein.

The Governor and Council of the Massachus^ts, taking into serious
consideration, the many meiciful O^currents that had been (...) ^^us,
notwithstanding the mixing of many dispensations of a contrary nature,
accounted themselves bound to make some (...) acknowledgment thereof, to him
who^e Name alone is worthy to be praised. The 29th. of that month of June, was
set a part as a day of public Thanksgiving to God, who had remembered his
people thus in their ^ow Estate. And that matter of Thanksgiving might not be
wanting at the day appointed, the very day before were most of our English
Captives brought back from the Indians, and many more soon after, to the number
of sixt^en, whose (...) might then well be filled with Laughter, and their
Tongues with singing, both of themselves, and all that were any ways concerned
in their welfare.

And as this day appointed for solemn and public Thanksgiving, was ushered in
by several special mercies, so also was it followed with many remarkable
benefits.

For besides the preserving the Town of North-Hampton, Ma^ch, the scurteenth,
and Hadly, ^une the twelfth, by the opportune^ standing of (...) Forces the
very night before they were Assaulted: The saving the people of Marlborough
from being cut off, was very observable, when Mr. Graves by his occasional
going from the Sermon, being forced thereunto by the extremity of the Tooth
Ach, March, 26. discovered the Indi^^^ ready to Assault the Tow^, and so else
the people might have been ^ut off, had not that Accident Intervened. It is
certain, that after the end of this M^nth, the power of the Enemy began every
where to fail; for the Body of the Enemy, that ^ad lurked about Connecticut
River all this Spring, being visited with sundry diseases, disappointed of
their fishing, and pu^ by their planting, began to fall at variance amongst
themselves; the Hadly and Pocumtuck Indians quarrelling with Philip for
fetching all this mischief about, and occasioning the English and them to fall
out, with whom they had always good Corresp^ndence, and lived loving^^
together, but now they were like to be ruined by the (...). This quarrel
proceeded to that height, that from that time forwa^^, those several Indians
that had for so long time been combined together, (...) to part, and every one
to shift for themselves, and return to their own homes: Philip to Mount-hope,
and the Narrhaganseis to their own Country again: the Nipnets and the Riv^r
Indians, bending their course some Westward, others North-word toward
Pennicook upon Merrimack, intending to shift for themselves, as well as they
could for the s^^ure; all which is like to be the real and true state of the
^^le with the ^ndian^ which were our Enemies: for the next News we heard of
Philip, was that he was gotten back to Mount-Hope, now like to become
Mount-Misery unto him, and his Vagabond-Crew, and that his Friends and Al^yes,
that had hitherto stood as Neuters, waiting only which way the Scale of Success
and Victory would turn, began now to sue for mercy at the hands of the English:
The Massachusetts Government having un^erstood something of this nature, put
forth a Declaration, that whatsoe^er Indians should within fourteen days next
ensuing come in to the English, might hope for mercy.

Amongst sundry that came in, there was one named James the Printer the
Sup^^added Title distinguishing him from others of that name: who being a
notorious Apostace, that had learned so much of the English, as not only to
read and write, but had attained likewise some skill in printing, and might
have attained more, (had he not like a falfe Villain ran away from his Master
before his time was out) he having seen and read the said Declaration of the
English, did venture himself upon the Faith thereof, and came to sue for his
Life; he affirmed, with others that came along with him, that more Indians had
dyed since this War began of discases (such as at other times they used not to
be acquainted withal) than by the Sword of the English.

Not long after many of them came and offered themselves, to the number of near
two hundred, Men, Women, and Children; and many more would have done the like,
but their Consciousness of gui^t made them co^^lude, that their Cruelties and
barbarous Murders could never be forgiven by the English.

But what Occurrents happnend next shall be declared in their order.

About the end of June News was brought to Boston, that Philip with a sm^ll
party of his men, lurked about Swanzy or Rehoboth, and that he might ^^sily be
taken; an Indian offering to bring them to the place where they ^^ight find
him; whereupon Souldior was instantly s^n^ a^ay, from Boston who spent some
time in searching all the wood^ o^ that side of the Country, but at last were
forced to return having m^ssed of what they aimed at.

Plymouth Colony likewise sent out Soldiers upon the same account, under Major
Bradford, who by the help of some Indians of Cape Cod, always true to the
English interest, not only escaped an Ambush laid for ^^em, w^er^by most of
them might have been cut off, but slew many of those that ^^^d wait for them,
without any loss to themselves: yea further a Squaw Sachem of Sakonet, one of
Philips Al^yes, having first sent three Messengers to the Governor of
Plymouth, to sue for life and liberty; promising submission to their Government
on that condition, but understanding that Plymouth Forces were abroad, before
her Messengers returned, she with her People, about ninety in number, rendered
themselves up to Major Bradf^rd, so that above one h^ndred and ten we^e killed,
and taken upon composition that day.

The like success had the Conn^cticut Forces sent into the Narrhaganset Country
under the conduct of the wonderfully successful Major Talco^, Capt. George
Denison, Capt. Newbery, with other worthy Commanders of the said Forces; for
about the second of July, 1676. As the said Comm^nders with the Forces under
them were pursuing the Enemy in, and about the Narrhaganset Country toward
Mount-hope, hearing that Philip with his black Regiment of Wompanoags was
thereabouts, their Indian Scouts from the top of an hill discovered a great
nnmber of the enemy that had newly pitched their Station within the semicircle
of a Swampe. The English Soldiers were all mounted on horseback, to the number
of near three hundred; wherefore the Commanders ordered the Indians to be ready
at the top of the hill upon a signal given to run down amain upon the enemy
securely lodged in the hollow of the Swampe just opposite against them, while
their Horsemen being divided into two squadrons to ride round the hill, so that
at the same instant, both the Horsemen upon the two wings, and the Indians a
foot rushing down suddenly upon the enemy put them into an horrible fright,
making a lamentable outcry; some getting into the Swampe, the rest that were
prevented by the Horsemen, and the friendly Indians coming so suddenly upon
them were all taken prisoners; Capt. Newbery with his troop alligh^ing from
their horses ran into the Swampe after them, where they killed at least an
hundred, as was judged by some then present; taking also many prisoners out of
those habitations of darkness; the enemy scarce daring to make any resistanc^;
for none of the English, and but one or two of the M^he^ins and Pequods were
hu^^i^ that assault: Yet it was affirmed by a (...) p^es^nt on the place, that
with those they killed and took at Warwick neck, in their return home (which
were no^ much above six^y) that they killed and took of the enemy at that time
above three hundred young and old. At the same time was taken the old Squaw of
Narrhaganset, commonly called the old Queen.

They were necessitated with this booty to return homewards to gratify the
Mohegin and Pequod Indians that accompanied them, who had done them very good
service in the pursuit, having lost one or two of their men in the chase: But
their return hom^, was, as it proved in the issue, more beneficial, then their
longer stay might have been, to have made a fruitless pursuit after Philip
(whose time was not yet come although hastening apace) for in their return they
met sixty of the enemy, all of whom they slew and took, so as their Sword
returned not empty.

Within a few days after, two hundred of the enemy within Plymouth
Jorisdiction being distressed with Famine, and fear of danger, came and
submitted themselves to the Government there: But three of the company were
presently derected of a cruel murder, and villainous ass^ult upon one Mr.
Cla^kes house of Plymouth; by a well minded Squaw that was among them (hoping
that possibly such a discovery would be pleasing to the English) and
accordingly adjudged forthwith to undergo condign punishment, which the rest
that surrendered themselves were no whit troubled at, such kind of Villains,
being always exempted from (...) acts of favor and mercy. Those two hundred
that had newly surrendered themselves, that they might give full proof of their
f^delity, offered to lead a Party of the English ^o a place not far off, where
twenty more of the enemy might be surprised amongst whom also was one, known to
be a bloody murderer of an English man that year before; accordingly eight
English men took fourteen of the said Indians, and the next day brought in all
the aforesaid twenty of the enemy, with the said murderer; who was presently
executed, the rest being accepted into favor.

It is affirmed likewise that five or six Sachems of Cape God, toward the
eastern part of it, came with three hundred Indians to make peace with the
English, on the 6th. of July; one of the said S^chems earnestly desiring the
English that none of them might be suffered to sell any strong Liquors to the
Indians, the trading of which, possibly has had no small influence into the
present mischiefs.

The next day, July the 7th. a small party of ours, with a (...) friendly or
Christian Indians with them killed and ^ook seven of the enemy in the woods not
far from Dedham, one of which was a Narrhaganset Sachem; who either himself,
informed, or by some other at that time, certain intelligence was brought to
Boston, that some of our enemy Indians were gotten to Albany, informing people
there, that they might the more easily get powder and ammunition, that the
English and they were now at peace* One of the said Indians was the Sachem of
Spring field, a bloody and deceitful villain; It is hoped that he is now taken
in the snare from whence he shall never be suffered to escape.

Philip by this time could not but think his ruin hastened apace* yet that he
might, in imitation of him that stirred up all this mischief, express the more
wrath, because he knew his time was but short, intended if possible, to destroy
one town more of the English before his turn came; wherefore July, 11. with all
the Force he could get, or that he had left he intended to set upon Taunton,
having as was conceived, many hundreds in his company: but his design being
strangly discovered by a Negroe, whom they had taken captive a little before,
that having lived near the Indians before, understood much of their Language,
who making his escape from them, acquainted the Inhabitants with the plot; who
having timely notice, furnished themselves with Soldiers, whereby they were
able to repulse the enemy upon his first approach: so as he only fired two
houses, and then fled away: Except the Lord keeps the City the Watehman
watches but in vain.

The 22d. of this month of July, as is hinted before, the Companyes sent from
Concord, May, 30. up toward Hadly, having spent much time and pains in
pursuit of Philip all the Country over (whom they could not yet overtake)
having tired themselves with many long and tedious Marches through the desert
woods, before they returned home some of them were sent toward Mount-Hope, yet
was their labor well improved, and followed with good success at the la^t: for
in ranging those woods in Plymouth Colony, they killed and took, by the help of
Capt. Mosely's Company and Capt. Brattles Troop joining with Major Bradfords
Company of Plymouth Colony, an hundred and fifty Indians, with the loss of
never an English man.

It was feared that Philip and his Company would have returned into the Nipnet
Country, to prevent which, several Horsemen were sent to guard the pasage; but
he lu^ked about his own Country in swamps and other secret places, where he was
as yet hid from the sight of the English, although many times they happened to
lodge very near him, insomuch as an Indian Captive promised in two hours time
to bring our Soldiers to the very place where he was; but they not being able
to pass the ne^est way, came a little too late; for they being so hotly
pu^sued, ^as^ed away, leaving much of their treasure behind them; then Kettles
boiling over the fire, their dead unburyed, and twenty of their party were
overtaken, that fell into the English hands: Philip himself, and some few of
his straggling followers, making their escape by a Raft over an arm of the Sea
into another neck of land on Pocasset side, not daring to trus^ himself any
longer in Metapoyset woods, so full of our English Soldiers, as well those of
Plymouth, as of the Massachusetts Colony, who a^most every day meeting with some
of his party, much lessend his number. Capt. Church, that active and unwearied
Commander of Plymouth Colony, was at this time as well as long before, out upon
the chase with but e^ghteen English, and twenty two Indians that were friends,
had four several engagements with Philips party, wherein he spo^led seventy six
of the enemy, without the loss of one of his own men. In several of th^se
skirmishes, thos^ Indians that upon submission had their lives given them, have
done notable service in hunting out the enemy in all the^r lurking places.

At another time they took Philips Squaw, and one of his chief Counselors; and
about that same time, another Sachem about Pocasset, with forty Indians
submitted himself to the Government of Plymouth, on promise of life and liberty.

It seemed that now the time of our deliverance was come, and the time also for
the dest^uction of our enemies: for the last week in July, the Massachusetts
understanding that some Indians were seen roving up and down the woods about
Dedham, almost starved for want of victu^ls, sent a small Company of twenty six
Soldiers, with about nine or ten Christian Indians, who pursued and took fifty
of the enemy, without any loss to the English, at which time also, a good
quantity of Wam^amp^ag and powder was taken from the enemy. That which
increased this victory was the slaughter of Pomham, who was one of the stoutest
and most valiant Sachems that belonged to the Narhagansets; whose courage and
strength was so great, that after he had been mortally wounded in the fight, so
as himself could not stand; yet catching hold of an Englishman that by
accident came near him, had done him a mischief, if he had not been presently
rescued by one of his Fellows. Amongst the rest of the Captives at that time,
was one of the said Pomhams sons, a very likely you^h, and one wholse
cou^te^ance would have bespoke favor for him, had he not belonged to so bloody
and barbarous an Indian as his father was.

These success^s being d^^ly br^ited abroad among the Indians, put many of them
into a t^emb^^ng condition, not know^^g well how to dispose of themselves: some
that h^d been less active in these Tragedies, and were rather led by others,
then any wise incl^ned to mischief themselves, adventured to submit themselves,
of which number was one of Nipnet Sachems, called Sagamore John, who July ^7.
came to surrender himself to the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts at
Boston, bringing along with him one hundred and eighty of the Enemy Indians.
This John that he might the more ingratiate himself with the English, who^e
friendship he was now willing to seek after, did by a wile get into his hands,
one Matoonas, an old malicious Villain, who was the first that did any mischief
within the Massachusetts Colony July. 14. 1675. baring an old grudge against
them as is thought, for justice that was done upon one of his Sons, 1671. whose
Head ever since stands upon a Pole near the Gibbet where he was hanged up: the
bringing in of this malicious Caiti^e, was an hopeful presage, that it would
not be long before Philip himself, the grand Villain, would in like manner
receive a just reward of his Wickedness and Murders.

Sagamore John, that came in July 27. affirmed, that he had never intended any
mischief to the English at Brookefield the last year (near which Village it
seems his place was) but that Philip coming overnight amongst them, he was
forced, for fear of his own life, to join with them against the English.
Matoonas also when he was brought before the Council, and asked what he had to
say for himself, confessed that he had rightly deserved Death, and could expect
no other, adding withal, that if he had followed their Counsel, he had not come
to this; for he had often seemed to favor the Praying Indians, and the
Christian Religion, but like Simon Magus, by his after practice, discovered
quickly, that he had no part nor portion in that matter.

About this time several parties of English, within Plymouth Jurisdiction, were
willing to have a hand in so good a matter, as catching of Philip would be, who
perceiving that he was now going down the wind, were willing to hasten his
fall. Amongst others a small party, July 31. went out of Bridge-water upon
discovery, and by providence were directed to fall upon a Company of Indians
where Philip was, they came up with them, and killed some of his special
Friends, Philip himself was next to his Uncle, that was shot down, and had the
Soldier that had his choice which to shoot at, known which had been the right
Bird, he might as well have taken him as his Uncle; but it is said that he had
newly cut off his Hair, that he might not be known: the party that did this
exploit were ^ew in number, and therefore not being able to keep altog^^her
close in the rear, that cunning Fox escaped away through the Bushes und^^^erned
in the rear of the English: that which was most remarkable in this design, was
that trembling fear discerned to be upon the Indians at this time, insomuch
that one of them having a Gun in his hand well laden, yet was not able to shoot
it off, but suffered an English Soldier to come close up to his breast, and so
shot him down, the other not being able to make any resistance: nor was any of
the English hurt at this time.

The like terror was seen in others at that time, for within two days after,
Capt. Church, the terror of the Indians in Plymouth Colony, marching in pursuit
of Philip, with but thirty English men, and twenty reconciled Indians, took
twenty three of the Enemy, and the next day following them by their Tracks,
fell upon their Head quarters, and killed and took about an hundred and thirty
of them, but with the loss of one English man: in this engagement God did
appear in a more then ordinary manner to fight for the English, for the Indians
by their number, and other advantages of the place, were so conveniently
provided, that they might have made the first shot at the English, and done
them much damage; but one of their own Countrymen in Capt. Churches Company,
e^pying them, called aloud unto them in their own Language, telling them, that
if they shot a Gun, they were all dead men; with which they were so amazed,
that they durst not once offer to fire at the English, which made the victory
the more remarkable: Philip made a very narrow escape at that time, being
forced to leave his Treasures, his beloved Wife and only Son, to the mercy of
the English, Skin for Skin* all that a man has will he give for his life: His
ruin being thus gradually carried on, his misery was not prevented but
augmented thereby; b^ing himself made acquainted with the sense and
experimental feeling of the Captivity of his Children, loss of Friends,
^^aughter of his Subjects, bereavement of all Family Relations, and being
stripped of all outward Comfor^s before his own life should be taken away. Such
Sentence sometime passed upon Cain, made him cry out, that his punishment was
greater then he could bare.

This bloody wretch has one week or two more to live, an object of pity,
bu^^a spectacle of divine vengeance, his own Followers beginning now to plot
against his life, to make the better terms for their own; as they did also
seek to betray Squaw Sachem of Pocasset, Philips near Kins-woman and
Confederate. For,

August 6. An Indian willing to shift for himself fled to Taunton, offering to
lead any of the English that would follow him, to a party of Indians, which
they might easily apprehend, which twenty attempted, and accordingly seized the
whole Company, to the number of twenty six all but that Squaw Sachem her self,
who intending to make an escape from the danger, attempted to get over a River,
or arm of the Sea near by, upon a Raft or some pieces of broken wood; but
whether tired and spent with swimming, or starved with cold and hunger, she was
found stark ^aked in Metapoiset, not far from the waterside, which made some
think, that she was first half drowned, and so ended her wretched life, just in
that place where the year before she had helped Philip to make his escape: her
head being cut off and set upon a Pole in Taunton, was known by some Indians
then Prisoners, which set them into an horrid Lamentation; but such was the
righteous hand of God, in bringing at the last that mischief upon themselves,
which they had without cause thus long acted against others.

Philip, like a Salvage and wild Beast, having been hunted by the English
Forces through the Woods, above an hundred miles backward and forward, at last
was driven to his own Den, upon Mount-hope, where retiring himself, with a few
of his best Friends into a Swamp, which proved but a Prison to keep him fast,
till the Messengers of death, came by Divine permission to execute vengeance
upon him, which was thus accomplished.

Such had been his inveterate malice and wickedness against the english that
despairing of mercy from them, he could not bear that any thing should be
suggested to him about a Peace, insomuch as he caused one of his Confederates
to be killed, for propounding an expedient of peace; which so provoked some of
his Company, not altogether so desperate as himself, that one of them (being
near of kin to him that was killed) fled to Road-I^land, whither, that active
Champion Capt. Church was newly retired, to recruit his men for a little time,
being much tired with hard marches all that week) informing them that Philip
was fled to a Swamp in Mount-hope, whether he would undertake to lead them tha^
would pursue him. This was welcome news, and the best Cordial, for such Mar^ial
Spirits: whereupon he immediately, with a small Company of men, part English
and part Indians, began another March, which shall prove fatal to Philip, and
end that controversy betwixt the english and him: for coming very early to the
side of the Swamp, his Soldiers began presently to surround it, and whether
the Devil appeared to him in a Dream that night, as he did unot Saul, for^
boding his Tragical end (it matters not) as he intended to make his escape out
of the Swamp, he was shot through the Heart by an Indian of his own Nation as
is said, that had all this while kept himself in a neutrality until this time,
but now had the ea^^ing vote in his power, by which he determined the quarrel
that had held so long in suspense; in him is fulfilled what was said in the
Prophet, Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled, and deal^st
treacherously and they dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou shall cease
to spo^^ thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee, (...). 33: 1.

With Philip at this time fell five of his trustiest Followers, of whom one was
said to be the Son of his chief Captain, that had shot the first Gun at the
English the year before. This was done August 12. 1676. a remarkable testimony
of divine favor to the Colony of Plymouth, who had for their former successes,
appointed the 17th day of August following, to be kept as a day of solemn
Thanksgiving to Almighty God. There having been so strange a turn of providence
observed in the late successes obtained in and about Plymouth Colony, it may
not be amiss here to enquire into the occasions that did lead thereunto, and
also into the progress and continuance thereof, after the slaughter of Philip
that grand Rebel.

In the precedent Narration frequent mention has been made of one Capt.
church, whom God has made an instrument of signal Victories over the Indians
in that Colony, and of great advantage in that respect to th^^ w^ole
Jurisdiction. It hapened that the said Capt. Church some time in June last,
viz. of this present year, 1676. passing over in a Canoo from Pocasset to
Road-Island, as he used frequently to do (having had much employment upon the
said Neck of Land, so called) several Indians whom he had known before at
Lakenham (a Village on Po^^ss^t si^^) b^ckned to him, as if they had a mind to
speak with him; he having had so much exper ence as well as others of their
Treachery, was not willing to adventure presently to come near them; but when
they seemed to ^rge very much, and made many signs to him, and at last laid
down their Guns in his sight, be began to think with himself, there might be
something in the matter more then ordinary, therefore resolved to go a little
nearer to the shore, and then he perceived they had a great mind to speak with
him, using much importunity for that end, insomuch as he ventured to go a shore
amongst them, having but one Englishman, and two Indians with him, he directed
them to keep off the Canoo, while he discoursed with the Indians ashore: as
soon as ever he came amongst them; they told him they were weary of fighting,
and that they had fought so long by Philips instigation, but they could not
tell for what end, and therefore were resolved they would fight no longer; and
that which they desired of him only was, that he would make way for them to the
Governor, that they might live quietly amongst the English, as they had done
before, and that they would deliver up their Arms, or would go out with them,
if he pleased to accept of them, and fight for him: to that end they desired a
time to parley with him, further about that business, at what time and place he
would appoint: He told them he would meet them two days after at Saconet, a
place up higher upon the said neck, about twelve a clock; accordingly he came
to the said place, and found the same Indians, with some others, and their
Sunk Squaw, or chief woman of that Indian Plantation, there ready to meet him.

After they had fallen into discourse about the beginning of the war, as well
as the success and mischief of it, they would have put the blame off from
themselves, and laid it upon the English: But he presently convinced them by an
undeniable evidence, that they first began the war; For said he upon this
Pocasset, July, 7. 1675. you first fought with some of Road-Island, whereof one
was my own Servant, whose leg you brake, and the same day you shot at my self
and Company, before ever we meddled with you: They were so fully convinced
herewith, that they found nothing to reply, but fell into other discourse about
a peace, which they seemed very desirous to obtain upon any equal terms, as
was said before.

There were about fifteen of the Indians present, beside their Sunk Squaw
(which is with us their Governess or Lady) in conclusion they engaged for ever
after to leave Philip, and to go out with him; which they did forthwith, as
soon as he had obtained a peace for them with the Governor.

It is here to be minded, that these were not properly Philips Indians, but
belonged to the Sakonet Squaw, who was nearly related to Philip, and her
Subjects had hitherto fought in Philips Quarrel, till they saw nothing but
misery and mischief like to be the issue of it to themselves, as well as their
neighbors. About twenty or thirty of these Sakonet Indians have constantly
gone out with Capt. Church ever since, and not only been faithful and
serviceable to him, but very successful in every enterprise they have gone
about, nor has he lost any of them in any skirmish with the other-Indians: And
it is said that this act of these Indians broke Philips heart, as soon as ever
he understood it, so as he never joyed after, or had any success in any of his
designs, but lost his men one time after another, till himself at last fell
into the hands of these Indians under Capt. Churches Command: For at the swamp
when Philip was ^^ain, Capt. Church appointed an Eng^ish man and an Indian to
stand at such a place of the swampe, where it happened that Philip was breaking
away; the morning being wet and rainy, the English man's gun would not fire, the
Indian having an old Musket with a large touchhole, it took fire the more
readily, with which Philip was dispatched, the bullet passing directly through
his heart, where Ioab thrust his darts into rebellious Absalom.

Thus did divine vengeance retalliate upon this notorious Traitor, that had
against his league and Covenant, risen up against the Government of Plymouth,
to raise up against him one of his own people, or one that was in league with
him, as he was with the English: The Indian that did this execution was called
Alderman of Sako^e^ that had never done any act of hostility against the
English.

By these passages it is manifest, that as the hearts of all are in the hand of
God* so he ^urns them as he pleases, either to favor his people, or to hate
and deal subtly with his Servants, as seems good to him.

Since this engagement with the Sakonet Indians, to leave Philip, and to go
out with Capt. Church, it is credibly affirmed; that such has been their
success, that since June aforesaid, to the end of October next following, there
have been seven hundred Indians subdued, either by killing or taking Captive,
by the means (...) Capt. Church and his Company, part Indians and part
English* besides three hundred that have come in voluntarily to submit
themselves to the Government of Plymouth.

It appears thus by the sequel of things, that after the Lord has
accomplished his work upon his people, that he is beginning to call his enemies
to an account, and punish them for the pride of their hearts, and for all their
treachery and cruelty against his Servants.

Philips Captains have run the same fa^^ with himself, some before and some
after his own Fall.

In June last one Tia^^q a great Captain of his, his wife and child, or
children being taken, though he escaped himself at first, yet came since and
surrendered himself.

The next noted Captain of Philips Indians that was brought in after Philip^
death, was one called Tespiquin, a notorious Villain, next to Philip, he was
called the black Sachems son: It was this Tespiquin that burnt so many houses
in Plymouth lately. Capt. Church with his Company were in pursuit of him in
September last, two days before they could get near him, at the last on the
third day, they found the track made by the said Tespiquins party, as they went
to fetch apples from the English Orchards: This was something a blind track,
therefore they were forced to take up their quarters that night without
discovering any place of their Rendezvouze. The next morning about nine of the
^lock, they came to their first Rendezvouze, from which they were newly gone:
at one a clock they came to the second, and missing them there, they soon after
came to the third track, wherein after they had m^^ched a while, they perceived
they grew very near them, by the ^rying of a child which they heard: the place
was near Lakenham upon Po^asset neck, so full of bushes that a man could not
see a rod before him: Capt. Church ordered his men to march up together in one
rank, because he discovered the Indians were laid in one Range by several
fires; so that by that time they all came up into an even rank pretty near
together, within a few yards of them, as he had appointed, they all suddenly
rushed altogether in upon them, and catched hold of them, not suffering any to
escape; there being about fifty of them in all: Tespequins wife and children
were there, but himself was absent; as also one Jacob, and a girl that
belonged to that company. The Captains leisure would not serve him to wait till
they came in, (though the Indians said they might come that night) whe^efore he
thought upon this project; to leave two old Squawes upon the place, with
victuals, and bid them tell Tespiquin, that he should be his Captain over his
Indians if he were found so ^^out a man, as they reported him to be; for the
Indians had said that Tespiquin could not be pierced by a bullet, for said
they, he was shot twice, but the bullets glanced by him and could not hurt him.
Thus the Captain marched away with his booty, leaving this Trap behind him to
take the rest* the next morning he came to see what his Trap had caught, there
he found Jacob aforesaid (a notorious wretch) and the gi^^e he missed before,
but not Tespiquin: But within a day or two after, the said Tespiquin, upon the
hopes of being made a Captain under Capt. Church, came after some of the
Company, and submitted himself in the Captains absence; and was sent to
Plymouth, but upon trial (which was the condition on which his being promised a
Captains place under Capt. Church did depend) he was found penetrable by the
English gunns, for he fell down at the first shot, and thereby received the
just reward of his former wickedness.

About a Fortnight after the surprising of Tespiquin, was one Totoso^^ company
taken, wherein were above fifty persons: but Totoson himself escaped, and is
out still in Rebellion, unless vengeance has overtaken him since.

The next that was seized after the former, was one called Annawan; a very
subtle, politic Fellow, and one of Philips chief Counselors; he had about
twelve men, and as many Women and Children in his Company, who were discovered
by their shooting at the English Horses, and other Cattle; some of whom being
taken, they made known the rest. Capt. Church (...) that time had but five
English men, and twenty Indians. The place where this Annawan had betaken
himself, was a ledge of Rocks inaccessible, but at one place, which by a few
hands, might easily have been defended against a great number of Assailants:
but Capt. Church by direction got up to their Wigwams before they were aware:
and pleasantly told Annawan, that he came to sup with him that night; whereat
the said Annawan (who had fallen (...) upon the Earth, exp^cting to have his
head cut off) looked up and cried Taubut, in their Language; thank you, as one
being much affected with the generosity of our English Captain; they found some
of the English Beef boiling in their ^ettles: After Supper much discourse had
with the said Annawan, they lay down to sleep together in the Wigwam: Capt.
Church laying one of his legs upon A^^^wans Son, and the other upon himself,
that he might have notice, if any of them offered to stir: after midnight
Annawan rose up, and Capt. Church was presently awake, and intended to watch
after his Prisoner: he thought at the first he might have gone forth upon some
necessary occasion; but not long after, he returned again, having fetched out
of a Swamp hard by, two Horns of Powder and a large Belt of Peag, supposed to
be Philips Belt, all which he delivered to Capt. Church, in way of thankful
acknowledgement of his courtesy. Amongst other Discourse that passed between
them, concerning (...) occasion of the War, and carrying of it on: the Indian
would fain have excused Philip, and laid the blame upon the Praying Indians (as
they are distinguished from others by that Character) and others of the younger
sort of his Followers, who coming with their several ^ales (which he li^ened to
sticks laid on a heap) till by the multitude of them a great fire came to be
kindled: they make much use of parabolical expressions; for so said Solo^on,
Where no wood is, there the fire go^th out; s^ where there is no tale-^earer,
(...) strife cease, Prove. 26. 20. But Philip had had large and long
experi^^^e of the gentleness and kindness of the ^nglish; both to himself and
to his P^^ple so as unless he had born an (...) and malicious mind against the
(...), he would never have ^^earkened to those stories, contrary to his
^aithful promise and Allegiance.

The said Annawan confessed also, that he did believe by all those late
occurrents, that there was a great God, that overruled all; and that he had
found, that whatever he had done to any of those, whether Indians or English,
the same was brought upon himself in after time. He confessed also, that he had
put to death several of the English, that they had taken alive, ten in one day:
and could not deny, but that some of them had been tortured: and now (...)
could not but see the justice of the great God upon himself, with many other
things of like nature. But whatever his confessions of this nature were, being
(...) him by the power of Conscience, after he was delivered up to Authority,
he was put to death, as he justly had deserved.

It is said that Philip when he first began his Rebellion, had about three
hundred fighting men under him, besides those that belonged to his Kins-woman,
Wetamoe, drowned about Taunton, that had almost as many under her, as himself.
And one Quenopin, a Narrhaganset Sachem, that lived near him, and joined with
him in his quarrel with the English: But it is certain that there are scarce
any that are now left that belonged to either of them: so as although the
Almighty has made use of them to be a scourge to his People, he has now
turned his hand against them, to their utter destruction, and exti^pation from
off the face of the earth, peradventure to make room for others of his People
to come in their room, and in their stead.

As for the rest of the Narrhagansets, that joined in Philips quarrel, it is
already declared, what end they were come unto. As for the rest of the Indians,
whither Nipnet, Nashaway, Pacomp^uck, or Hadly and Springfield Indians; it is
not so certain what is become of them: But after their separation one from the
other about July last; it was observed by all the Tracks in those Woods, they
went still westward* and about the middle of August last, a great party of them
were observed to pass by West field, a small Town to the west of Springfield,
and were judged to be about two hundred* News thereof being brought to Major
Talcot, he with the Soldiers of Connecticut Colony under his command, both
English and Indians, pursued after them as far as Ausotunnoog River (in the
middle way betwixt West field, and the Dutch River, and Fort Albany) where he
overtook them, and fought with them; killing and taking Prisoners forty five,
whereof twenty five were fighting men, without the loss of any one of his
Company besides a Moheg in Indian: many of the rest were sorely wounded, as
appeared by the dabbling of the Bushes with blood, as was observed by them that
followed them a little further.

It is wri^ten since from Albany, that there were sundry lost besides the forty
five forementioned, to the number of threescore in all; and also that an
hundred and twenty of them are since dead of sickness: so as Vengeance seems to
be pursuing of them as well as the rest.

Several of the^r Friends that belonged to Nashaway, and the places a^joyning,
repaired to Pas^ataqua, hoping to shroud themselves under the Wings of some
honester Indians about Quechecho, under pretense of a Dec^^tation set out by
the Governor and Council of the Massa^^^sets in the beginning of (...) last:
but some of our Forces, under Capt. Hath^rne and Capt. Sill, with the help of
Major Walden, Captain Frost, and others r^siding in those parts, being than in
a readiness, separated the vile, and wicked from the rest, and sent them down
to the Governor at Boston, where eight or nine of the Ringleaders, such as
one eyed John, Sagamore Sam of Nashaway, chief Actors of the late outrages, and
bloody mischiefs had justice done upon them soon after.

As for the Massacres and Calamities that befell the English further Eastward,
they shall in the second part of this Narrative be declared.

The Indians being thus dispersed several ways, were strangly confounded, and
destroyed one parcel after another* until there was none left in the western
or southern parts, that durst make any opposition all the following part of the
year.

As for those that ^^ed westward toward Albany, we shall there leave them for
the present, wishing we may never hear more of them: Only a person of Quality
informs, that at Hartford, in September last, he was present at the
examination of one Choos, an Indian, formerly of Connecticut, but one of the
Narrhaganset Fort the last winter, who confessed that he was one of that
Company of Indians that went westward the month before toward Hudsons River;
but after the fight at Ausotunnoog, he said he returned back to Connecticut for
fear of the Mohawks; and that he lay hid about Farmington, till he was almost
starved; and then he went to the Seaside, to make use of the Oister-bank at
Stratford for his relief, where he was espied by the Indians, and so brought to
Hartford.

He affirmed, that there were above two hundred and fifty fighting men amongst
those Indians that fled westward, besides women and children; and that near two
hundred of them passed the great River below Albany, and were shel^^red by the
Indians of that place, called Moheganders; but about eighty of them tarried on
the hither side of that River near a Dutch village. But he being convicted of
fighting against the English, was condemned to dye, and executed about the same
time.

Some few of the rest were skulking about the Narrhaganset Country the last
Fall, hoping to shelter themselves under Un^^^ but he not willing to give them
countenance against the mind of his friends at Connecticut, has since
abandoned them to shift for themselves, who have been most of them taken and
brought in prisoners to the English this winter.

About the Month of October last, Mr. Stanton chanced to come from Se^conke
with three Indians in his company P^qnods, or Mohegins, they hearing by a
Captive at one of the next towns that there was a parcel of the enemy not for
off, presently left Mr. Stanton, and pursued after them, whom they soon after
overtook, and made them all prisoners: amongst them was an old man, not able to
go their pace, but promising to come after them, they spared his life: but as
soon as the men returned at night from hunting, the old man told them what had
befalne their women and children; whereupon the next morning they presently
following after them, overtook them, and so recovered the prisoners, and ^lew
one of the three that carried them away; the other two hardly escaped; one of
them is called Major Simon, being part a Peqnod and part a Narrhagansc^, but of
extraordinary strength and courage; he perceiving the danger they were in,
challenged to fight hand to hand with any five of them with their hatches; but
they unwilling to hang their success upon the hazard of a single Combat, came
all toward him at once, whereupon first discharging his gun amongst the whole
Company, he brake through them all by force, and so escaped their hands, with
one more that was one of his companions. This Simon has since been very active
in killing and taking many of the enemy; some say that he with his own hands
has taken and killed above threescore; and either out of hatred to the enemy,
or love to the English, is this last week gone with the Soldiers to the
eastward, in pursuit of our quarrel against them in those parts.

At another time not long before, when he was out against the enemy; he came
suddenly upon a great number of them, as they were spread under a steep bank,
from whence leaping down into the midest of them he killed diverse, and took
others: Fighting it seems is a recreation to him, for he is seldom at home
above four or five days together.

Some say that in one of his former expeditions, being much wearied and spent,
he laid him down to sleep; but toward morning he fell into a dream, wherein he
apprehended the Indians were upon him, where suddenly rising up he espied the
Indians coming toward him; but presently presenting his gunns against them, he
so frighted them, that they gave him an opportunity to make an escape from a
multitude of them.

Since the beginning of December last, News coming down to Boston, that
mischief was done about Seaconk, and Rehoboth, by some remainder of the Indians
thereabout, killing their swine and horses; several of Medfield went out after
them, and pursuing them by their track, came upon a small party, of whom they
took three, one of which escaped, while some of the company were going after
the rest: They which were taken confessed there were a parcel about
threescore, that were lurking up and down in those Woods, the said two Indians
were brought into Boston, Jan. 8.

A Commiss^on was formerly granted to Peter Ephrai^ an Indian of Natick, to go
out in pursuit of them, with twenty nine of his Company: a few of the English
went with them from Medfield, who being tired with marching in the Snow soon
returned. The Indians kept on in their design, and ^ghted upon a considerable
party of the Enemy, having traced them, till they found where they lodged over
night; they surrounded them early in the morning, as their manner is, and then
offered them quarter, if they would yield: eight resolute fellows refused, who
were presently shot down, the rest were all seiz^d, the whole being in number
forty two. This was done abont the middle of January (...), since which time,
several such exploits have been done by them.

Ian. 23. last, The same Company of Natick Indians took two and twenty of the
Enemy, among which were five able men, and five Arms: they sent the Prisoners
home by five of their Company, the rest went further in the chase.

Ian. 26. last, Another parcel of the Enemy were brought in, eight in number,
of whom five were men; amongst whom was the Indian called Cornelius: who three
years since was indicted for killing an Englishmans Cow; upon which he is said
to have uttered several threatening speeches, that he would kill English men,
and their Cows too; which was now remembered against him, when he was in
particular called to account, for having an hand in killing some of the English
and Indians also in league with us, for which he was sentenced to die, and was
accordingly executed on Febr. 15. last.

Concerning the rest of the Indians, either in the Colony of Plymouth,
Connecticut, or the Massachusetts; there is no occurrent more of moment come to
light, since the end of August last, save what is last mentioned before; yet is
it very remarkable that although terms of peace were offered to all that would
come in and surrender themselves (as appears by a Declaration put out July
last) and that a Nipnet Sachem called John, did thereupon with a considerable
number of his Company come in, and offer themselves, and were accordingly
secured of their lives, and other concernments; yet did that treacherous Varlot
make an escape away, this winter from Capt. Prentices House (under whose charge
he was put, about Cambridge Village) and with above twenty more fled away into
the Woods, to shift for himself, amongst the rest of his bloody Companions;
they were presently pursued, but had gone tho fast and too far to be overtaken:
whither it were consciousness of their own guilt, that having had an hand in
the blood of the English, they feared vengeance hung over their heads: or
whither they liked not the English manners so well, as to be confined
thereunto: wild creatures ordinarily love the liberty of the woods, better than
the restraint of a cage. They made none acquainted with their design before
they went away; and as yet little account can be given of them: only it is
known that one or two of their number have since been killed; and that one or
two of their Families are entertained by Uncas; but what is become of the rest
is yet uncertain: There were but seven of the Company men; so as they are not
capable to do much mischief. Some of late have travailed through the woods of
Connecticut, but met with no Indians, nor did they hear of any in their passing
between that place and this.

And because in the present Narrative, there has been frequent mention made of
Unc^^ the Mohegin Sachem, and of his faithfulness to the interest of the
English, I add in this pl^ce, that it is suspected by them that knew him best,
that in his heart he is no better affected to the English; or their Religion,
then the rest of his Countrymen; and that it b^^n been his own advantage, that
has led him to be thus true to them who have upheld him, as formerly against
the Pequods, so of late against the Narrhagansets: yet has he not long since
been convinced of the truth of our Religion, and vanity of his own, as himself
has solemnly confe^sed, which will ^viden^ly appear by this following passage,
which I shall here represent just as it was, from under the hand of that
Reverend person it relates unto, viz. Mr. Fitch, Pastor of the Church at
Norwich, near unto which Vncas his place is.

There was a great drought the last Summer, but as it seems, it was more
extreme in those parts then with us about the Massachusetts; and although
probably, the English might have prayed for rain themselves without any motion
from the Indians, yet their address to the said Mr. Fitch on such an account,
with the consequences thereof, is very remarkable, which take in his own words,

Concerning the Drought etc. the true Narrative of that Providence is this,
In August last, such was the want of rain, that the Indian corn was not only
dried and parched up, but the apple trees withered, the fruit and leaves fell
off as in Autumn, and some trees seemed to be d^ad with that D^ought: the
Indians came into town and did lament their want of rain, and that their
Powawes could got none in their way of worship desiring me that I would seek to
God for rain: I appointed a Fast day for that purpose. The day being come, it
proved a clear day without any clouds, until nigh sun setting, when we came
from the Meeting, and then some Clouds arose; the next day remained cloudy,
then Vncas with many Indians came to my house, Vncas lamented there was such
want of Rain; I asked whether if God should send us rain, he would not
attribute it to their Powawes: He answered no, for they had done their
uttermost and all in vain: I replied, if you will declare it before all these
Indians, you shall see what God will do for us; For although this year he has
shown his anger against the English, and not only against the Indians, yet he
has begun to save us, and I have found by experience twice in the like case,
when we sought him by Fasting and Prayer, he has given us Rain, and never
denied us. Then Vncas made a great speech to the Indians (which were many)
confessing that if God should then send rain it could not be ascribed to their
powawing, but must be acknowledged to be an answer of our prayers. This day the
clouds spread more and more, and the next day there was such plenty of rain,
that our River rose more then two foot in height.

By all that is recorded in the Narrative foregoing there are none into whose
hands it shall come, but will be sensible that the present time has been a day
of great rebuke and trouble to the poor people so journing in this wilderness,
upon whom sundry calamities have broke in at once this last as well as in the
former years: in many places they have been visited with sickness, and
mortality more then in many years before, depriving them of many worthy and
useful persons; amongst others the loss of Mr. John Winthrope the late worthy
Governor of the Colony of Connecticut, is as it ought, much lamented by all,
who dyed at Boston, April 5. 1676. in the 73. year of his age, whither he was
occasionally called the last winter to sit with the rest of the Commissioners,
of the united Colonyes, to consult about the great affairs of them, now newly
engaged in these troubles from the Heathen. He was the eldest son of the famous
Governor of the Massachusetts, deceased, March, 26, 1649. Pr^les fimilima
Parenti. The memory of the Father, though he dyed so long ago yet lives still
in the minds of the surviving Generation, and is like to continue much longer,
by the remembrance of the eminent virtues found in this the eldest of his
offspring, who being not long after, or about that time called to take up his
residence in that Colony, was by the importunity of the people there, prevailed
with to accept of the Governors place, which for a long time after, he held
over that Colony though annually chosen thereunto; being so well furnished with
many excellent endowments, as well moral as political and philosophical, which
rendered him most fit to be an healer of that people. Though we are dealing in
another subject, yet shall not pass by his Tomb, as we go along, without
paying the homage due to the memory of so honorable a Gentleman.

After all the forementioned Calamityes and troubles, it pleased God to alarm
the town of Boston, and in them the whole Country, by a sad Fire, accidentally
kindled by the carelessness of an Apprentice, that sat up too late overnight,
as was conceived; which began an hour before day, continuing three or four, in
which time it burned down to the ground forty six dwelling houses, besides
other Buildings, together with a Meeting house of considerable bigness: some
mercy was observed mixed with the judgment; for if a great rain had not
continued all the time (the roofs and walls of their ordinary buildings
consisting of such combustible matter) that whole end of the town had at that
time been consumed.

Whereby we see that God by his providence can turn our dwellings into ash^s,
without the help of either foreign or domestic enemies. Which consideration
may awaken all from security, and confidence in these uncertain and unstable
possessions, that have no firmer Foundation, that may so soon after their first
erection, be eaten up by the flames of fire, before the iron teeth of time have
had leisure to devour and feed upon them.

God grant that by the Fire of all these Judgments, we may be purged from our
Dross, and become a more refined people, as Vessels fitted for our Masters use.
A SUPPLEMENT Concerning the WAR with the PEQUODS.
Reader,
I Could willingly have now expected that my Indenture being cancelled, I might
have had a discharge from any further labor of this nature; but least I be
found to have falsified my word passed in the Title of the Narrative, according
to the Civilians Rule, Nihil dicitur factum quamdiu aliquid superest ad
agendum; as also that other, Non absolutus est debtor qui multa reddit, sed
qui omni^; being some intimation ba^h already been made of great toruble with
the Pequod Indians, at the first sesling of the Plantations upon C^nnecticut
River, that I may make even, though not over measure, I shall i^ ^he last place
give this following account thereof, either left under the hands of such as
^^m^anded i^ ^bief in that action, or from the mouth^^ of some saithf^l
Witnesses, that were not only then present, but personally co^^^^ned and
engaged in that Ser^ice.

THere was a Nation of the Indians in the Southern parts of New England, called
Pequods, seated on a fair Navigable River, twelve miles to the Eastward of the
mouth of the great and famous River of Co^^ecticot; who (as was commonly
reported about the time when New England was first planted by the English)
being a more fierce, cruel, and warlike People then the rest of the Indians;
came down o^t of the more inland parts of the Contine^, and by force seized
upon one of the goodliest places near the Sea, and became a terr our to all
their Neighbors, on whom they had exercised several acts in inhumane cruelty;
insomuch that being fleshed with Victories over their Fellow-indians; they
began to thirst after the blood of any Foreigners, English and Dutch that
accidentally came amongst them, in a way of Trade, or upon other Accounts.

In the year 1634. they treacherously and cruelly murdered Captain Stone, and
Captain Norton, who came occasional^y with a Bark into the River to Trade with
them. Not long after, within the compass of the next year, they in like
treacherous manner, slew one Mr. Ol^ham (formerly belonging to New Plymouth,
but at that time an Inhabitant of the Massachusetts) at Block Island a place not
far from the mouth of their Harbor, as he was fairly Trading with them:
besides some other such like acts of persideous cruel^y toward some of the
Dutch, that had formerly been trading up Connecticut River: by which practices
perceiving that they began to stink in the nosthrils of their Neighbors, whose
revenge they now began to fear, and not willing to have to deal with too many
Enemies at once, they imitated the subtlety of the Children of Ammon, when they
began to stink before David; endeavoring to strengthen themselves with
alliance of some of those they had formerly provoked, that by their assistance
they might defend themselves against the rest, not doubting but to make their
part good with their foreign Enemies, if they could be reconciled to their
Indian Neighbors, the Narrhagansets, or other homebred Enemies, if they could
but fortify themselves by a League of Friendship with any of their foreign
Neighbors that were newly come to plant in these parts. To this end they sent
Messengers with gifts to the Massachusetts in the latter end of the same year
1634. the first Messengers were dismissed without an answer: but they being
sensible of their own danger, and of the great importance a peace with the
English of the Massachusetts might be, pursued the business very earnestly,
sending Messengers a second time, who offered much Wampam (Indians Money) and
Beaver; with these second Messengers the Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts had much conference many days; and at last after the best advice
they could take amongst themselves, concluded a Peace and Friendship with them,
upon these Conditions.

1. That they should deliver up to the English those persons amongst them that
were guilty of Captain Stones Death, and the rest that were with him.

2. That if the English desired to Plant in Connecticut they should give up
their right to them.

3. That the English should thence forward Trade with them as their Friends,
which was a chief thing aimed at, ^ the said Pequods being at that time in War
with the Dutch, and the rest of their Neighbors, on the Reasons forementioned,
to these conditions they readily agreed, and also cunningly insinuated their
desire that their new Confederates, the Massachusetts should mediate a peace for
them with the Narrhagansets; intimating likewise their willingness that a part
of the Present which they promised to send should be given to them, standing so
much upon their ho^our, that they would not be seen to give any thing
themselves; such was the pride and height of Spirit lodged in this company of
Treacherous Villains, the Dr^gs and Lees of the Earth, and Dross of Mankind.

As for Capt. Stone's death they slily evaded the guilt of it, falsely adding
that there were but two left that had any hand therein, and that it was a just
quarrel wherein he was slain: for, said they, he surprised some of our men, and
would by force have compelled them to show him the way up the River, whereupon
the said Stone coming ashore, with two more, was watched by nine of our men
(say they) who finding the^ asle^p in the night, slew them to deliver our own
men, one of whom going afterward to the Barque, it was suddenly blown up,
whereas the truth of the matter was thus,

The said Capt. Stone formerly belonging to Christophers in the West Indies,
occasionally coming to these parts, as he passed between this place and
Virginia put in at that River, where the Indians after they had been often on
board his Vessel to trade with him; at the last came friendly on board as they
used to do, but finding the Captain asleep in his Cabin, took the opportunity
to murder him as he lay, casting a Covering over him that he might not be
discerned by the res^ whom they pre^ently after dispatched one after another,
all but Capt. Norton, who made flout resistance, for a long time defending
himself in the Cook-room of the Bark, till the gunpowder which he had set in
an open vessel, to be more ready for his use, accidentally took fire, by which
fatal accident he was so burned and his eyes so blinded that he could not make
any longer resistance, but forthwith fell into the hands of these cruel and
bloudthirsty wretches, who after they had taken away his life made a prey of
all that was in the Vessel.

As for Mr. Oldman he was indeed murdered at an Island called by the India^s
Manisses (since known among the English by the name of Block-Islan^) bu^ those
that murdered him (probably Inhabitants of the said Island) fled presently to
the Pequods, by whom they were sheltered, and so became also guilty themselves
of his blood, which ere long was revenged by them, as is in the next place to
be declared.

The English of the Massachusetts after the peace concluded with the Pequods,
sent a Bark thither for trade, that trial might be made of the reality of
their friendship, but they found them treacherous and false, and that no
advantage was to be had by any commerce with them, insomuch as they took up a
resolution never more to have to do with them; which the said Indians
perceiving, made no account of the former peace, but took all advantage to do
us mischief, not only by harboring those who had murdered Mr. Oldham, but
surprising many of the English in the year 1636. when Connecticut River began
first to be planted, diverse of whom were killed (nine at one time in April
1637.) by them about Wethers field, when the Plantation then first began, so as
they could not pass up and down the River without a Guard, but they would be in
danger of being cut off or carried away, as two Maids were said to be; thirty
men have been killed by them in all; those who fell into their hands alive,
were cruelly tortured after a most barbarous manne^, by insulting over their
Prisoners in a blasphemous wise, when in their dying Agonies, under the
extremity of their pains (their flesh being first fl^shed with knives, and then
filled with burning Embers; they called upon God and Christ with gasping
groans, resigning up their Souls into their hands; with which words these
wretched Caitifs used to mock the English afterward, when they came within
their hearing and view.

About the same time some Agents sent over by the Lord Say, and the Lord Brook,
built a Fort at the mouth of Connecticut River, wherein was placed one
Lieutenant Gardener, and a convenient number of Soldiers to secure the place,
intended soon after to be planted, but all the winter following (soil.) in the
end of the year 1636. they were little better then besieged by the said
Salvages, not daring to stir out of command of the Fort, but they were ready to
b^ seized by these their barbarous Enemies: At one time the Lieutenant himself
with ten or twelve of the Soldiers; marching out of the Fort, with an intent
to pass over a N^ck of Land, to burn the Marshes; as soon as ever they were
passed over the straight of the Neck, they espied a Comp^ny of Indians making
toward the said I^tmus, which if they could not recover, they see they must
all perish; whereupon returning back with all speed, they very narrowly
escaped, and were two or three of them killed notwithstanding, before they
could get back into the Fort, which was presently surrounded wit^ multitudes of
them; but the discharging of a plece of Ordnance gave them warning to keep
further from the Walls: sometimes they came with their Canooes into the river
in vie^ of the Soldiers within the Fort, and when they apprehended themselves
out of reach of their gunns, they would imitate the dying groans and
invocations of the poor Captive English, which the English Soldiers were
forced with silent patienc^^^ bear; not being then in a capacity to requite
their insolent blasphemies. But they being by these horrible outrages justly
provoked to indignation, unanimously agreed to join their Forces together to
root them out of the earth with Gods Assistance.

The Colony of the Massachusetts did immediately set about it in the latter end
of the Summer (1636) by sending out fourscore men under the Command of Capt.
Endicot of Salem, who went to the Pequoa Country by water, with Commission to
treat with the said Pequods, first offering terms of peace, if they would
surrender the Murderers of the Eng^^sh, and for bear further acts of
hostility, or else fight them.

The Captain aforesaid coming ashore with his Company, by a message sent them
by an interpreter, obtained some little speech with a great number of them at a
distance; but after they understood what was propounded to them, first
cunningly getting b^hind a hill, they presently ran away into the Woods and
Swamps, where there was no pursuing of them: however one discharging a gun
among them as they were taking their fl^ght, stayed the course of one, which
was all that could be done against them for that time.

Winter approaching, and no encouragement presenting further to pursue them; at
that time it was resolved better to return back for the present, and wait a
further season when more Forces could be gathered together to pursue the
quarrel to the utmost.

During this interim the Pequods perceiving that they had by several late
injuryes and outr ages, drawn upon themselves the hatred of all the English, as
well as of their own people by former wrongs; and distrusting their own ability
to deal with them all at once, did at the last by all subtle insinuations, and
persuasions, try to make their: peace with the Narrhagansets, using such
Arguments as to right reason seemed not only preg^^nt to the purpose; but also
(if revenge that bewitching and pleasing passion of man's mind had not b^inded
their eyes) most cogent and invincible: But they were by the good providence of
God witheld from embracing those counsels, which might otherwise have proved
most pernicious to the design^of the English: viz. That the English were
Strangers, and b^gan to over spread the Country, the which would soon be
possessed by them to the depriving the ancient inhabitants of their right, if
they were not timely prevented; and that the Na^^hagansets would but make way
for their own ruin, by helping to destroy the Peq^ads; for after themselves
were subdued, it would not be long ere the Narrhagansets themselves, would in
the next place be rooted out likewise: Whereas if they would but join together
against the English they could demonstrate how the English might easily either
be destroyed or forced to leave the Country, and that without any danger to
themselves: telling them also that they never need come to any open Battles,
they might destroy them only by firing their houses, and killing their Cattle,
and lying in wait for them as they went about their ordinary occasions; which
course if it were pursued, they said their new and unwelcome neighbors could
not long subsist; but would either be ^^arved with hunger and cold, or forced
to forsake the Country.

Matchiavel himself if he had sat in counsel with them could not have
insinuated stronger reasons to have persuaded them to a peace.

It is said that so much reason was apprehended in these motives, that the
Narrbagansets were once wavering, and were almost persuaded to have granted an
ear to their advice and persuasion and joined all against the English; but when
they considered what an advantage they had put into their hands by the strength
and favor of the English, to take a full revenge of all their former injuries,
upon their inveterate Enem^es, the thought of that was so sweet that it turned
the scale against all other considerations whatsoever.

The report of the unheard of cruelties fore mentioned filling the ears of the
English throughout the Country; it was agreed by the joint consent of the
English throughout the three Colonies to (...) all their Forces together, for
the suppressing the common Enemy, early in the Spring Anno, 1637. who were also
moved thereunto by their own necessities as well as by the earnest request of
their Friends at Connecticut.

Those of Plymouth being written unto by the Governor of the Massachuse^s,
appeared very cordially willing thereunto, to which end they agreed to send
fifty men at their own charge, with as much speed as the matter required, with
sufficient Leaders appointed, and a Bark provided to carry them Provisions,
and tend upon them on all occasions; but before they could be dispatched away
the next Spring, News was brought that the Enemy was wholly routed, so as their
journey was stopped, and their good will accepted for the deed; as if they
really had been there to have born their part in the Service, their
nonappearance in time and place being not to be im puted to any backwardness
in their minds; but to their too late invitation to the Service; the motion
fetching a large compass from Connecticut down to the massachusetts; from whom
in the last place they were solicited thereunto. And for the other two
Colonies, those of Connecticut being quickened on by the sp^rr of necessity, and
present sense of the insolency daily acted at their very doors, were soonest
upon their March, and by the good hand of God upon them, had given the main
stroke before their Friends of the Massachusetts could come up with them, yet
was there no repining for the want of the glory of the Victory, nor was their
any cause, those that were the chief actors therein being forward to give God
the glory of the whole, and not willing to pocket up any thing thereof
themselves, acknowledging that they never saw more of God, or less of man in
any business of that nature, as may more fully be understood by particulars
ensuing.

The Colony of the Massachusetts determined to send an hundred and six^y, of
whom an hundred and twenty were ordered under the conduct of Capt. Patrick of
Watertown, and Capt. Trask of Salem, Capt. Stoughton of Dorchester, being to
command in chief; with whom was sent that holy man of God Mr. John Wilson
(Pastor of the Church of B^ston) the Charets and Horsemen of our Israel, by
whose Faith and Prayer as sometimes was said of Luther (in reference to
Germany) the Country was preserved, so as it was confidently believed that no
Enemy would break in upon a place whilst he survived, which as some have
observed accordingly came to pass.

The matter requiring great expedition, and it being long before the whole
company could be dispatched away, Capt. Patrick with forty men were sent away
before hand, to be sure to meet with those of Connecticot in case they should
be in action, before the rest of our Forces could get into a readiness, which
accordingly came to pass; for the main business in taking the Fort was over,
even before the said Patrick could get thither. Capt. Underhill was sent by Mr.
Vane the Governor to Saybrook the winter before to strengthen the Garrison
there. The assaulting and surprising of which, being the most remarkable piece
of service in that whole expedition; take it as it was delivered in writing by
that valia^^, faithful and prudent Commander Capt. Mason, chief in the action,
who lived long after to reap the fruit of his labor, and enjoy the benefit of
that days service, having an Inheritance given him in that part of the
Country, as a just reward of his faithful service on that day as well as at
other times. Wequash a Pequod by Nation, but disgusted by the Sachem, proved a
good guide, by whose direction they were led to a Fort near Mystic River, some
miles nearer then Sassacous his Fort, which they first intended to assault.

On the second Wednesday of May, being the tenth day of that Month, we set
sail with ninety men of the English in one Pink, one Pinnace, two Boats toward
the Pequods, with seventy River Indians, ^^ving somewhat a long passage to
Saybrook Fort, about forty of our Indians desired to go down by land on
Saturday, but on Monday they went forth from the Fort, and meeting seven
Pequods and Nianticks, they flew five outright, took one Prisoner and brought
him, into Saybrook Fort, where he was executed by Captain Underhill, the other
escaped.

On Monday we all landed at Saybrook Fort, and stayed there till tuesday; Capt.
Underhill joining ni^eteen men with himself to us: whereupon we sent back
twenty of ours to strengthen our Plantations: and so set sail on thursday
toward Narrhaganset, and arrived there on friday

On Saturday my self, with Capt. Underhill, Leiftenant Sealy, with our guard
marched to Canonicus by land, being about five miles distant, where we were
kindly entertained after their manner: having bad parley with him, we sent to
Miantonimo, who would give no present answer: and so our Sabbeth being on the
morrow* we adjourned our m^eting until Monday, at which time there a sembled
Mi^ntonimo (...) the chiefest of them about two hundred men; and being solem^ly
se^ for Conseltation after their manner; we told them we were now going God
(...), to revenge the wrong committed and blood shed by their and our enemies,
upon our native Countrymen, not any way desi^ing their and, unless they would
voluntarily send, which they did exceedingly approve of: moreover we told them
that the English and they had always (...) friends for ought we knew, and so
we were with the Indians that had not wronged Englishmen, the which they
acknowledged, and so made a large description of the Pequods Country, and told
us they would send men with us; so we resolved there to keep our rendezv^^ze a
Canonicus his Plantation on the morrow might being Tuesday: but the wind being
sti^^, we could not land our men ^ll five or six of the clo^k in the afternoon,
at which time I landed on Narrhaganset shoa^ with thirty two men and so marched
to the place of Rendez^ou^e formerly appointed: Capt. (...) ^ill and my
Leiftenant landed (...) rest, and so came up to me that night. About two hours
before day came a^ Indian with a Letter from Capt. Patrick, being then at Mr.
To. Williams his plantation with forty men, who desired us to stay for his
coming and joining, not intimating when that would be: the which being
considered and debated. We thought could not be our safest course, (though his
present assistance was much desired) for these Reasons.

First. Because the day before when we had absolutely resolved to go, the
Indians plainly told us they thought we were but in jest, and also that
Englishmen did talk much but not fight, nay they concluded that they would not
go on: and besides if we should defer, we feated we should be discovered by
reason of the frequent recourse between them by certain Squaws (who have mutual
recourse) whereupon we were constra^^ed to set forward toward the Pequods, with
seventy seven English, and about sixty River Indians, and as I suppose near
about two hundred Narrhagansets, and marched that night to the eastern
Nia^ticks, where we kept our Rendezvouze that night; The Sachem of the place
adding about an hundred of his men unto us.

We set forward and marched about ten miles, where making an Alta (or halt)
there we held a consultation with the Indians that desired to know what we
intended; we told them that we resolved to assault Sassacous his Fort, at which
they were all stricken, and as it were amazed with fear, as they plainly
confessed; and so after long debate and pressing of them taxing them with
cowardice, some of them resolved to go along with us, though I suppose they
had no such intent, as appeared afterward; some of them left us to the number
as I suppose of an hundred or less; and marching on five miles further, we made
another Alta, where they told us we had near a dozen miles to Sassacous his
Fort as we gathered by their relation: Being very weary in traveling with our
arms, ammunition and provision; we were constrained to alter our resolution, and
resolve to attempt that Fort the which they had formerly described to be three
or four miles nearer; and also one of Capt. Vnderhills men falling put it out
of doubt. But whosoever says that Capt. Underhill had any falling out about
that or any thing else, does speak untruth: for we both resolved to Sassacous
his Fort, as we concluded in our consultation at ^^^rrhagauset, and so
continued our resolution till we received the former (...) as grounds
sufficient to persuade us to the contrary, and (...) pr^f cu^e that which was
most likely to be accomplished.

They drew a Plot of the seituation of the Pequods and described Sassaco^s his
Fort to be the nearest, which was the chief cause we determined to (...) that
first, and had no reason leading till our last Alta, where upon the reasons
formerly mentioned, we changed our res^^n^ion: (...) is they much desired and
very much rejoy^ed; for it was dre^dfull to them to hear the name of Sassacous.

From thence we marched two or three miles where we kept our rendezyonze,
supposing we had been within one mile of the Fort: They having sent an Indian
to discover before hand, brought us news that they were secure, having been
fishing with many Canooes at Sea, and diverse of them walking here and there.

About two hours before day we marched toward the Fort, being weary and much
spent; many of us having slept nothing at all.

And so we began to march toward the Fort, the Lord being pleased wonderfully
to assist and encourage us; after a tedious march of three or four miles, about
break of day we came fair in view of the Fort standing on the top of an hill
^ot steep; the Indians all falling back, were suddenly vanished out of sight,
so we made an Alta, and sent back for our Guide, who had promised to go with
us to the Fort, but his heart we saw much failed him; we asked him what they
intended who promised to wing us* and to surround the Fort; he told us they
were much afraid; but he seeing our resolution went to them and prevailed with
diverse of them to come up to us; we told them their best course would be to
flank the Fort on both sides, and having no time longer to confer, we
proceeded; Capt. Underhill to the western entrance with one division, my self
with the other to the eastern as silently as possibly we could, so it pleased
God we came up with the Palisado within two rod, before we were discovered, at
which time a dog began to bark and an Indian c^ied out, but not being my self
rightly informed by the Indian of the right entrance, though there was a little
postern door, the which I had thought to have attempted to break down with my
foot; but the Lord directed me otherwise for the better; for I then feared we
could not there (...) with our arms, which proved true, so I suddenly hasted
to the Palisado, and putting in the muzzle of my piece, discharged upon them,
and so the rest with all celerity; and suddenly hastened on toward that side
which stood toward the water; where I concluded was an entrance, and instantly
fell upon it, being only barred with two great forked boughs, or branches of
some tree, and hasting over them, I drew one after me my Lieutenant the other
way outward; then we suddenly fell upon the Wigwams, the Indians ceyed out in
most hideous manner, some issuing out of the Wigwams, shooting at us
desperately, and so creeping under beds that they had. We had resolved awhile
not to have burned it, but being we could not come at them, I then resolved to
set it on fire, after diverse of them were slain, and some of our men sor^
wounded: So entering one of their wigwams, I took a firebrand [ at which time
an Indian drawing an arrow had killed him, but one Davi^ his Sergeant cut the
Bow-string with his Co^rtlace] and suddenly kind^ed a fire in the matts
wherewith they were covered, and fell to a retreat and surrounded the Fort; the
fire increasing violently, insomuch as that they were constrainned to climb to
the top of the Palisadoe; from whence they were soon fetched down, ^ suppose to
the number of an hundred and forty; many of of them issuing forth were suddenly
slain either by the English or Indians, who were in a ring without us, all
being dispatched and ended in the space of an hour, having two of our men
slain, and sixteen wounded.

Being very hot and dry we could very hardly procure any water, where we
continued one hour not knowing what course to take or which way to go, our
Pinnaces not being come in, neither did we know how far, or which way to go to
them; our Interpreter being an Indian and they so hurried and ditracted with a
few hurt men, but chiefly as I conceive with fear of the Enemy, who suddenly
approached, that we could hardly come to speak with him, who knew nothing what
they intended.

But the Enemy approaching they began to cleave unto us, and I verily think
du^st not leave us.

Our Pi^naces then coming in view with a fair gale, being guided as it were to
serve o^^ necessity by the good hand of God, which I think was never more
eminently seen in a matter of like moment and less of man in several passages.
Then we set our men in order and prepared for fight and began to march toward
the Harbor where the Pinnaces were to ride: the Enemy approaching Capt.
Underhill with diverse Indians and certain English issued out to encounter them,
but they would not stand to it, for the most part they lay behind Rocks, Trees
and Bushes, we marched on they still dogging of us; sometimes desperately
hazarding themselves in open field, where some of them were stain in open view,
and as we hear many wounded: I was somewhat ca^^lous in bestowing many shot
upon them needlessly, because I expected a strong opposition; and thus they
continued to follow us till we came within two miles of our Pinnaces where they
wholly left us, which was near six miles as I conceive, having then about two
miles more to the River.

Four of our wounded men we were forced to carry our selves, while at length we
hired the Indians to bear them, both in this and all their following
enterprises against the Pequods:

Here note that one Wequash a Pequod fell from his Countrymen, and proved a
Guide to the English.

This service being thus happily accomplished by these few hands that came from
Connecticut, within a while after, the Forces sent from the Massachusetts under
the conduct of Captain Stoughton as Commander in chief arrived there also, who
found a great part of the work done to their hands, in the surprizal of the
Pequods Fort as aforesaid, which yet was but the breaking of the nest, and ^^ke
^el^ng those ^^^vage Wolves; for the Body of them, with Sassacous the chief
Sachem (whose very (...) war a terror to all the Narrhaganse^s) were dispersed
abroad and scattered all over their Country, yet so far dismayed, that they
never durst make any assault upon the English, that in several parties were
scatered about in pursuit of them.

It was not long after Capt. Stoughtous Soldiers came up before a news was
brought of a great number of the Enemy, that were discovered by the side of a
River up the Country, being first trapanned by the Narhagansets, under pretense
of securing them, but they were truly hemmed in by them, though at a distance,
yet so as they could not, or durst, not sti^ from the place, by which means our
Forces of the, Massachusetts had an easy Conquest of some undreds of them who
were there (...) up as in a Pound: not daring to fight, not able to fly away,
and so were all taken without any opposition: the men among them to the number
of thirty were turned presently into Charons Ferry-boat under the command of
Skipper Gallop, who dispatched them a little without the Harbor; the Females
and Children were disposed of according to the will of the Conquerers, some
being given to the Narrhagansets, and other Indians that assisted in the
service.

The rest of the Enemy being first fired out of their strong hold were taken
and destroyed, a great number of them, being seized in the places where they
intended to have hid themselves, the rest fled out of their own Country over
Connecticut River, up toward the Dutch Plantation. Our Soldiers being resolved
by Gods assistance to make a final de^^ruction of them, were minded to pursue
them which way soever they should think to make their escape, to which end in
the next place, our Soldiers went by Water toward New Have^, whether they
heard, and which in reason was most likely) they bent their course? soon
after they were informed of a great number of them, that had betaken
themselves to a neighboring place not far of, vvhither they might hope it was
not like they should be pursued; but upon search they found fifty or sixty
Wigvvams, but without any Indians in any of them, but heard that they had
passed along tovvard the Dutch Plantation, vvhereupon our Soldiers that were
before, all embarked for Quill^piack, afterward called New Haven, and being
landed there, they had not far to march unto the place where it was most
probable they should either find or hear of them; accordingly in their m^rch
they met here and there with sundry of them, whom they flew or took prisoners,
amongst whom were two Sachems, whom they presently beheaded; to a third that
was either a Sachem or near a kin to one, they gave his life upon condition
that he should go and enquire where Sassacous was, and accordingly bring them
word; this Indian overlooking all other national or n^tural obligations, in
consideration of his life that was received on that condition, proved very true
and faithful to those that sent him, his order was to have returned in three
days, but not being able within so short a time to make a full discovery of
the business, and also find an handsome way to escape, he made it eight days
before he returned, in which something fell out not a little remarkable; for
those he was sent to discover, suspecting at the last by his withdrawing
himself that he came for a Spy, pursued after him, so as he was forced to fly
for his life, and getting down to the Seaside he accidentally met with a
Canooe a little before turned adrift, by which means he padled by some shift o^
other so far out of the harbou^, that making a sign he was discerned of some
on board one of the Vessels that attended on our Soldiers, by whom being taken
up he made known what he had discovered: But after he was gone Sassacous
suspecting (and not without just cause) what the matter was, made his escape
from the rest with twenty or thirty of his men to the Mohawkes, by whom himself
and they were all murdered afterward, being hired thereunto by the
Narrhagansets, as was confidently affirmed and believed.

Thus this treac^erous and cruel Villain with his Companions, having against
his Faith and promise, as well as contrary to the Laws of nature and nations,
murdered several others, both of the Dutch and English Nation, is in the same
manner himself against the laws of Hospitality murdered by those to whom he
fled for refuge; V^ngeance is mine says the Lord, I will repay it.

It is worthy our observation, that this Sassacous the chief Sachem of the
Pequods, as Philip of Mount-hope, (both of them in their several times and
places the contrivers of many bloody and cruel mischiefs, yet) escaped the
hands of those whom they had so many ways provoked to the u^most degree of
indignation, that so they might not too much gratify their own spirits in
taking revenge; but it must be brought about by those means, in which the glory
of divine vengeance and justice shall more eminently shine forth, that it might
be truly said of them as Adonibesek confessed of himself, As I have done, so
God has requited me. But to return.

The rest of the P^quods from whom Sassaco^^ had made an escape, shifted every
one for himself, leaving but three or four behind them (when a party of our
Soldiers according to the direction of him that was sent as a Spy came upon
the place) who would not or could not tell them whither their Company were
fled; but our Soldiers ra^ging up and down as providence guided them, at the
last, July 13. 1^37. they lighted upon a great number of them, they pursued in
a small Indian town seated by the side of an hideous Swamp (near the place
where Fairfield or Stratford now stand) into which they all slipped as well
P^quods as natives of the place, before our men could make any shot upon them,
having placed a Centin^^ to give warning; Mr. Ludlow and Capt. Mason with half
a score of their men happened to discover this crew. Capt. Patrick and Capt.
Tra^k with about an hundred of the Massachuset Forces came in upon them
presently after the alarm was given; such Commanders as first happened to be
there gave special order that the Swamp should be surrounded (being about a
mile in Compass) but Lieutenant Davenport belonging to Capt. Trask his Company,
not hearing the word of Command, with a douzen more of his Company in an over
eager pursuit of the enemy, rushed immediately into the Swamp, where they were
very rudely entertained by those evening wolves that were newly kenne^^ed
therein; for Lieft. Davenport was sorely wounded in the Body, John Weagwood of
Ipswich in the belly, and was laid hold on also by some of the Indians; Thomas
Shirman of the said Ipswich in the neck; some of their neighbors that ventured
in with them were in danger of the Enemies arrows that flew very thick about
them, others were in as much hazard of being swallowed by the miery boggs of
the Swamp wherein they stuck so ^ast, that if Sergeant ^iggs of ^o^bury had not
rescued two or three of them they had fallen into the hands of the enemy; but
such was the strength and courage of those that came to the rescue, that some
of the Indians being ^^ain with their Swords, their friends were quickly
relieved, and drawn out of the mire and darger.

But the Indians of the place, who had for company sake run with their Guests
the Pequods into the swamp, did not love their friendship so well as to be
killed with them also for company sake, wherefore they began to be ^^ink
themselves that they had done no wrong to the English, and desired a parley
which was granted, and presently understood by the ^^ears of Thomas Stanton an
exact Interpreter then at hand, upon which the Sachem of the place with several
others their wives and children, that liked better to live quietly in their
wigwams then be buried in the Swampe, ^ame forth and had their lives granted
them: after some time of further parley with these, the interpr^^er was (...)
^n to (...) the (...) to the rest, but they were Possessed with (...) of (...)
and fullenness that they resolved rather to fell their lives for what they
could get there; and to that end began to let fly their arrows thick against
him as intending to (...) his blood some part of the price of their own; but
through the goodness of God toward (...), his (...) was not (...) be sold on
that account, he being presently fetched (...).

By this time night drawing on, our Commanders perceiving^ on which side of the
Swampe the enemies were lodged, gave order to cut through the Swamp with their
swords, that they might the better (...) them round in one corner; which was
presently done, and so they were begir^ in all night, the English in the (...)
p^ying them with s^ot all the time, by which means many of them were killed
and buried in the mire, as they found the next day. The Swamp by the
forementioned device being reduced to so narrow a compass, that our soldiers
standing at twelve foot distance could surround it, the enemy was kept in all
the night: but a little before day break (by reason of the Fogge that uses to
arise about that time observed to be the (...) of the (...)) twenty or thirty
of the lustiest of the enemy brake through the (...), and escaped away into the
woods, some by violence and some by (...) dropping away, some of whom not
withstanding were killed in the pursuit; the rest were left to the mercy of the
Conquerers, of which many were killed in the swamp like ^ulle^ dogs, that
would (...) in their self-willedness and madness s^ (...) be shot through or
(...) in pieces, then receive their lives for the asking at the (...) of those
into whose power they were now fallen: Some that are yet living and worthy of
credit do affirm, that in the morning entering into the Swamp, they saw several
heaps of them fitting close (...); upon whom they discharged their pieces laden
with ten or twelve (...) bullets at a time; putting the muzzles of their pieces
under the boughs within a few yards of them; so as besides those that were
sound dead (near twenty) it was judged that many more were killed and su^k into
the mire and never were minded more by friend or foe: of those who were not so
desperate or sullen to fell their lives for nothing, but yielded in time, the
male Children were sent to the Bermudas, of the females some were distributed
to the English towns, some were disposed of among the other Indians to whom
they were deadly enemies as well as to our selves.

This overthrow given to the Pequods struck such a terror into all the Indians
in those parts (some of whom had been ill-affected to the English before) that
they sought our friendship, and tendered themselves to be under our protection,
which they then obtained, and have never since forfeited it any of them till
this late rebellion of Philip the subject of the discourse (...). Amongst the
rest of the Prisoners special notice was taken of the Wife of a noted, Indian
called Mononotto, who with her Children submitted her self, or by the chance of
the war fell into the hands of the English: it was known to be by her
modia^ion that two English maids, (that were taken away from W^thersfield upon
Connecticut River) were saved from death, in requital of whose pity and
humanity, the life of her self and her children was not only granted her, but
she was in special recommended to the care of that honorable gentleman Mr.
John Winthrop, for that time being the worthy Governor of the Massachusetts;
who taking notice of her modest countenance and behavior, as well as of her
only ^equest (not to suffer wrong either as to the honor of her body or fruit
of her womb) gave special charge concerning her according to his noble and
Christian disposition.

After this slaughter at the Swamp the Pequods being upon every turn exposed to
revenge of the Mohegins on one side, and Narrhagansets on the other, chose
rather to submit themselves to the English, by whom they were, put, some under
the Mohegin, and some under the Narrhagansets, which at last proved the
occasion of the present quarrel as is conceived, through the ambition of
Miantonimo, as was at first related.

This was the issue of the Pequod War, which in the day of it here in New
England was then as for midable to the Country in general as the present War
with Philip; the experience of which because it may administer much matter of
Comfort and encouragement to the surviving Generation, as well as of praise and
thanksgiving to almighty God from all those who have thus long quietly enjoyed
the benefit and reaped the fruit of their labor, and courage who engaged
therein: the more pains has been taken to search out the broken pieces of that
Story and thus put them together before the memory thereof was buried in the
ruins of time, and past the recovery and knowledge of the present age, the
which though it be here in the last place recorded, should in the first be
remembered.

A MAP OF NEW ENGLAND,
Being the first that ever was here cut, and done by the best Pattern that
could be had, which being in some places defective, it made the other less
exact: yet does it sufficiently show the S^^tuation of the Country, and
conveniently well the distance of Places.

The figures that are joined with the Names of Places are to distinguish such
as have been assaulted by the Indians from others.

map of New England

A Table showing the Towns and places which are inhabited by the English in
New England: those that are marked with figures, as well as expressed by their
names, are such as were assaulted by the Indians, during the late awful
revolutions of providence.
NVmb. 1. Mount-hope. A gallant neck of Land where Philip, dwelt who first
began the insurrection against the English, June 24. 1675.

2. The place where stands the town of Swanzy consisting of forty dwelling
houses, most of them very fair Buildings, just at the entrance on to
Mount-hope, where were June, 24. 1675, ^^ain six men at B^urnes Garrison, in
Metapoiset (another Neck marked *) not far from the former) and three wounded
as they came from the public Meeting, two kill^d that went for the Surgeon:
and a negro of Mr. Mile's wounded, so as he dyed soon after. Also Layton Archer
and his son were slain June 25. which three belonged to Road Island, but were
killed at the Fall River, though by misinformation it is elsewhere published
that it was done June 24. Also eighteen houses were burnt within Mounthope,
that belonged to Swanzy town; the rest of the town being all burned the next
year, June 16. 167^. save six houses that are yet standing: besides the
barbarous murder of Mr. Hezekiah Willet, June 26. 1676.

3. Middleburrough, formerly called Nam^^ket, where Sausaman was slain: it is
situate between Plymouth and Tauton, and is misplaced in the Map. Here one ^
Marks was walking in a field of Indian corn, in July 1675. had his thigh bone
broke by a shot from an Indian, after which he lay forty eight hours before he
was found, and yet was alive, but his wound was so putre^^ed, that he dyed
thereof: When the town was first assaulted, the Miller running back to shut
down his mill, was assaulted by seven Indians at one time, by eleven at
another, had several bullets shot through his coat, yet gat safe to the
Garrison, but the people were forced to retire to Plymouth with their goods
soon after; when the whole village was destroyed by the Indians.

4. Dartmouth, where in July 1676. a man and a woman were slain by the Indians;
another woman was wounded and taken; but because she had kept an Indians child
before, so much kindness was showed her as that she was sent back, after they
had dressed her wound; the Indians guarded her till she came within sight of
the English.

5. Seaconke or Reh^both, where were burned eight farm houses in the end of
June, and beginning of July 1675. on March 28. 1676. forty five dwelling houses
were there burned, whereof thirty eight were inhabited, and the owners thereby
turned out of doors, and left without house or harbor. Beside ^I. barns, two
corn mills, one Saw-Mill burnt at the same time. June 10. 1676. eight farm
houses were there also consumed by the fire of the enemy. The persons ^^ain
here were seven, four with Capt. Pierce, March 26. 1676. another March 28.
another Apr. 28. The last May 29.

6. Pecasset, where were some houses burned July 1675. and seven o^ eight slain
in the Swamp near the place: here also Capt. Church gave the enemy a notable
defeat the same month.

7. Tanton, where were fifteen persons slain by the Indians, eleven men, two
maids, and two youths: besides a man slain in the fight with Capt. Bcers; some
in the year 1675. and some 1676. Page 25. 26.

8. Mendam, where were the first English slain within the Massachusetts Colony,
to the number of five or six, July 1675. within a few months after the whole
village was destroyed. page 26, 27, 31.

9. Brookefield or Squabaog, was destroyed by the Indians August 2. 1675.
thereof the chief inhabitants viz. John Eires, John Pritshet and Richard Coy,
treacherously slain under pretense of a treaty. page 32. 33.

10. Deer field or Pocumtuck, a village newly planted, where Sept. 12. 1675.
diverse were slain, and the houses burned by the enemy. Between this place and
Northampton was a Skirmish with the enemy, 1675. eight or nine of the English
were there slain, and twenty six of the enemy. Near unto this place was Capt.
Lothrop set upon with seven or eight hundred Indians, whereby himself, and most
of his Soldiers, to the number of 73. cut off Sept. 18. 1675. page 36, 37, 38,
39. The fight at the Falls, a little beyond de^r field. page 91. It is
considerable that that the evening before Capt. Turner and Capt. Holicke gave
the enemy a Camizado in the wigwams, they had been feasting and dancing, having
before they laid down to sleep filled their bellyes with new Milk, (as an
English woman then in their hands, did declare, who was made to milk Hatfi^ld
Cowes, which a day or two before they had driven away. So that when they were
most secure, destruction came upon a great part of them, to the number of three
hundred and fifty, as was judged by such as were there. vide page 91.

11. Squakheag, another village newly begun, which was also destroyed Sept.
1675. near unto this place Capt. Beers was slain, and nineteen of his men, as
they went to r^lleve the garrison there. page 37.

12. Spring field, which was treacherously assaulted October. 5. 1675. by three
or four hundred Indians, when L. Cooper and two more were slain, and 35. houses
burned with other bu^ldings belonging thereunto. Some others were there slain
in the winter following, page 41. Within a few miles of this place Capt. Samu^l
Holioks handselled his office with the slaughter of four or five of the enemy.
Three or four were here slain the winter following.

13. Hatfield, a small town seated on the west side of Connecticut River, over
against Hadly, which was furiously assaulted by 700 Indians, October. 19. 1675.
yet was the place preserved b^ the valor of the English with the loss but of
one man, Sergeant Norton by name, page 42. although seven or eight of the Scouts
were that day surprised and slain by the enemy, and one or two of the town. It
was assaulted also 1676. when five men were slain that came to their relief
from Hadly. page 93.

14. North-Hampton, a fair town three or four miles distant from Hatfield,
which was several times assaulted by the enemy, yet was preserved with the loss
but of a few of the people, and the burning of seven or eight of the houses
thereof, page 44. 77.

15. Hadly, a considerable town on the east Ede of Connecticut River, violently
assaulted by the enemy, yet no considerable hurt done, June 12. 1676. only some
few were surprised and flain, page 94. that without order would venture without
the Palizadoes. In the March before one Goodman Deacon of the Church, was slain
at Hoccanum, belonging to Hadley, and two more that went against order and
Command, to the top of mount Holioke.

16. West field, a small town seven miles west from Springfield, where some few
houses were burned before or in the winter, 1675. and three or four persons
slain, as they passed toward Springfield, page 44.

17. A Village called Quonsigomog in the middle way between Marlborough, and
Quabaog, consisting of about six or seven houses.

18. Ier. Bulls garrison house, at Pettiquemscot, surprised and sundry persons
slain; a very great damage to the design then in hand against Narrbaganset
Fort. page 50, 51.

19. Canonicus Fort taken by the Forces of the three Colonyes, December. 19.
1675. though with the loss of many of the English, 79. being slain right out,
and about an hundred wounded; of the enemy were slain by the confession of some
prisoners, about 300 of their best men; though Ninicrafts men who buried the
dead there left, speak not of a third part so many, page 51, 52.

20. Warwick, a town near Providence seated upon a neck of land, environed by
the sea, was all of it burned by the enemy at several times, the chief mischief
there done, was upon the 16. March 1676. and the place wholly deserted by the
Inhabitants for a time; yet but one man killed, that was too confident of his
safety, as is said.

Providence, is the town next Warwick, where were eighteen houses burned June
28. 1675. March 29 following, fifty four houses were there burned, and most of
the rest as they were deserted by the Inhabitants withdrawing to Road-Island.

Petuxet is another small place within four miles of Providence, where were
twelve houses burned in the beginning of March, 1676. page 66. 67. It was by a
small brook called Abbots Run, that falls into Patuxet, (a River near
Providence) where Captain Pierce and his men were slain. ibid.

Bridgwater, a small town between Tanton and Weymouth. page 68.

21. Lancaster, or Nashaway. a small town of about 50. familyes, was assaulted
Febru. 10. 1675. by 500. Indians in five several companies; yet they took but
one garrison house; wherein were forty two persons, but eight or nine
soldiers, whereof but one escaped; the rest were women and children, who were
most of them returned after some months Captivity. And to prevent mistakes, let
it here be observed, that none of the women were abused, or murdered, but one
that was big with child, unable to travel, and much discontented, whom the
Indians, having made a great fire, and gathered a Ring about her, first knocked
her on the head, after they had pulled off her clothes, then barbarously cast
her into the Fire. No credit is to be given to any other reports of Cruelty
toward any English Woman in that part of the Country.

23. Groton, surprised March 2. as is related page 60. and 61. the place
consisting of about 60. families, was soon after deserted, yet are there 14. or
15. houses left standing to this day, though not inhabited for the present.
page 73.

25. Wickford, where was Mr. Smiths house the rendezvouze of our soldiers, the
last winter, when they spoiled the Na^^haganset Fort.

28. Medfield, a midling town, ten or twelve miles beyond Dedham, surprised by
the Indians; seventeen persons slain, and much of the town burned, page 61, 62.

31. Marlborough, a town ten miles beyond Sudbury, in the way to Connecticut,
the people repairing in time to garrison houses, were not many of them slain;
yet were many or most of their houses burned that were deserted, March 26. 1676.

32. Sudbury, A convenient town, violently assaulted Apr. 18. 1676. p. 79. by
eight or nine hundred Indians (the Inhabitants speak of 1400) a tripartite
company intending to have carried all before them, yet slew but three of the
inhabitants, besides ten or eleven that came to their relief from Concord, that
were sadly lost for want of good conduct. Feb. 1. ^675. Tho. Ea^es his house at
a farm three miles distant from the town, his corn, cattle, barns all burned,
his family captived; the next day his sons wife dyed; Eames himself being from
home.

33. Concord, a considerable town five or six miles to the North-west of
Su^bury; they sustained not much damage in the town, save only in some Farms
that were at some distance there from: two men threshing at a Barn, a young
maid set to watch, was carried captive and the men both slain; the maid
strangly escaped soon after. page 80.

34. Chelmsford, where were many deserted houses burned in the beginning of
April 1676. belonging to one Ed. Colburn, that had formerly purchased the seat
of Capt. Web. And to Samuel Varnha^, who had two sons slain in the Boat as they
were passing the River.

35. Andover, a small town fifteen miles west from Ipswich; where also in April
was one or two killed, and one taken Captive.

36. 17. 38. Hingha^ and Weymouth, in each of which was one or two killed April
19. 1676. in the same mone^^ two or three were k^l^ed at Andover, Haverhill,
Bradford.

39. Woburn, where some skulking Indians, that had robbed some of their gardens
at Cambridge of linen came into a house, killed a woman and two children, but
being pursued, and shot at, as they sat by a swamp side, they dropped their
bundle of linen, in which was found wrapped up the scalp of one or both the
children.

40. Casco, a large Bay scatteringly inhab^ted and full of I^ands, where Sept.
1. 1675. Mr. Purchase his house was plundered.

Sept. 9. following Wak^ly's house and family were spoiled.

12. ditto. Two houses burned of Mr. Mountjoy's, and two young men slain as
they were fowling.

19. One slain at Blew-point; another wounded, so as he dyed the next day.

20. A man and his wife slain.

Oct^b. 19. following, eleven or twelve houses burned at Scarborough a place
not far from Casco. with 500 bushels of corn in barns.

October. 9. Lieut. Augur mortally wounded, and his Brother slain; and two more
wounded.

10. ditto. Henery Williams sorely wounded on Sawco sands or Downs, marvelously
escaped from two Indians passing to Blackpoint.

13. Capt. Wincol, that came to relieve Black-Point, had two of his men slain,
and two more with an Inhabitant wounded; himself and his Party engaged the same
day with an hundred Indians or more; yet was delivered by the shelter of an
heap of Bolts: But nine men coming to their relief from Sawco were all slain on
the Dow^s the same day: Thomas Rogers one of the nine, his house burned the
next day. Part. 2. page 25. 26.

15. Lieut. Alcock of Kitt^ry buried them.

16. ditto. The Body of Winter-^arbour houses were fired by the enemy; three
men slain, and one woman carried away.

17. Six houses fired on the north side of Sawco River.

18. Six or seven houses fired by the enemy at Sawco by night, which were the
first that were fired in the night time.

50. Sawco, Where Major Phillips his habitation was, assaulted Sept. 18. 1675.
page, 16, 17.

The 3d. of November. twenty of the Inhabitants of Scarborough or Black-point,
were set upon by sixty Indians, by whom they had been destroyed, bu^ that
Ensign Tipping, the week before sent from Boston for the Relief of that place,
came seasonably to their relief.

6. ditto, a Boston Soldier was mortally wounded: several houses that day
burned, yet were they by the valor of the English beaten into Swamps, but what
number of them was slain, is uncertain.

21. Two houses more burnt at Sawco.

51. Wells, where two or three were killed, Par. 2. page 26.

55. F^lme^^h, on the hither side of Casco Bay, where August 11. about thirty
four persons were killed and taken by the Indians p. 32. 33. 34

54. Spurwink, and Richmonds Island, where Mr. Fricrs Ketch with ten men was
taken, October. 11. 1676. Par. 2. p. 45, 46.

47. York; at Cape Nidduck belonging thereunto, were seven barbarously
murdered, Sept. 25. 1676. Par. 2. page 51.

48. Totennock Fort. which lies up Kennibeck River, whither the Indians are
said to have fled, when Major Walden arrived there with his Soldiers in
February last, 1676. and from whence the enemy came down when they seized the
Iehabitants of Kennibeck, and Arowsick Island, Aug 11. 1676 which is icituate
in the mouth of the said River.

It is Reported by some of the Inhabitants of Kenn^beck, lately fled, or rather
driven from thence, that about five years since, four English men were slain by
the Amoroscoggin Indians, up Pegypscot River, that runs into Kennebeck; but it
was concealed by the wicked Traders of those parts, for fear of discovering
their wicked manner of trading with the Heathen; which if it had been duly
enquired into, when it was first done, much of what followed might have been
prevented; -- Quid ^on mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sa^ra Fames?


But such Gains have proved like Aurum Tholousa^^m to some of the Inhabitants
of those parts.

Kennibeck, how taken and when, Par. 2. page 41. there is said to be about
fifty three killed and taken about Kennibeck, and at Aronsick Island. Aug. 13.
1676.

A Postscript.
COncerning the Narrhagansets, this is further to be added here, that Mr.
Thomas Stanton, and his son Robert, who have a long time lived amongst them,
and best acquainted with their language and manners of any in New England, do
affirm that to their knowledge, the Narrhaganset Sachems before the late
troubles had two thousand fighting men under them, and nine hundred arms, yet
are they at this day so broken and scattered, that there is none of them left
on that side of the Country, unless some few* not exceeding seventy in number,
that have sheltered themselves under the Inhabitants of Road-Island, as a
Merchant of that place worthy of credit, lately affirmed to the Writer hereof.
It is considerable by what degrees they have been consumed and destroyed.

The first week in April last, viz. 1676. Canonchet their chief Sachem, having
with this people been driven out of his own Country, by the sword of the
English the winter before; breathed still nothing but rage and cruelty against
them, bearing himself upon his great numbers: yet as appeared in the issue
himself and they that escaped with him, were not so much preserved from the
present calamity that befell the rest in their Fort, as reserved to another and
more ignominious death. For all the whole Body of the Indians to the westward
trusting under the shadow of that aspiring Bramble; he took a kind of care of
them upon himself: wherefore foreseeing so many hundreds could not well subsist
without Planting, he propounded it in his Council, that all the West
Plantations upon Connecticut River, taken from the English, should this last
Summer be planted with Indian-Corn: which was indeed in it self a very prudent
consideration: To that end he resolved to venture himself with but thirty men,
(the rest declining it) to fetch seed-corn from Seaconk, the next town to
Mount-hope; leaving a Body of men, not fewer then fifteen hundred to follow
him, or meet him about Seaconk the week after. This Adventure brought him into
the snare, from whence he could not escape: For Capt. George Denison of
Stonington, and Capt. Avery of New London, having raised forty seven English,
the most part Volunteers, with eighty Indians, twenty of which were
Narrhagansets belonging to Ninegret; commanded by one called Catapazet. The
rest Pequods under Casasinnamon, and Mohegins under Oneco, Son to Vncas, being
now abroad upon their third Expedition, which they began March, the twenty
seventh, 1676. and ended on the tenth of April following. They met with a stout
Indian of the Enemies, whom they presently slew, and two old Squaws, that
confessed Nanunttenoo, alias Canunchat, (those chief Sachems usually changing
their names at every great dance, and by that name of Nanunttenoo was he then
known,) was not far of; which welcome New put new Life into the wearied
Soldiers, that had traveled hard many days, and met with no Booty till now;
especially, when it was confirmed by Intelligence the same instant, brought in
by their Scouts, that they met with new Tracks which brought them in view of
some Wigwams not far from Patucket, by some called Blackstones River, in one of
which the said Sachem was at that moment divertizing himself, with the recital
of Captain Pierces slaughter, surprised by his men a few days before, but the
Alarm of the English at that time heard by himself, put by that discourse,
apalled with the suddenness thereof, as if he had been informed by secret Item
from Heaven, that now his own turn was come: so as having but seven men about
him, he sent up two of them to the top of the Hill, to see what the matter was,
but they affrighted with the near approach of the English, at that time with
great speed mounting over a fair Champagna on the other side of the Hill, ran
by, as if they wanted time to tell what they saw; presently he sent a third,
who did the like; then sending two more on the same Errand, one of these last
either endued with more Gourage, or a better S^^se of his duty, informed him in
great have that all the English Army was upon him; whereupon, having no time to
consult, and but little to Attempt an escape, and no means to defend himself;
he began to dodge with his pursuers, running round the Hill on the contrary
side; but as he was running so hastily by, Catapazat with twenty of his
Followers, and a few of the English, lightest of foot, ghessed by the swiftness
of his motion, that he fled as if an Enemy, which made them immediately take
the Chase after him, as for their lives; he that was the swifter pursuer, put
him so hard to it, that he cast off first his Blanket, then his silver la^'d
Coat, (given him at Boston as a pledge of their friendship, upon the renewal of
his League in October before,) and Bolt of Peag, which made Catapazat conclude
it was the right bird, which made them pursue as cage^ly as the other fled; so
as they forced him to take the water, through which as he over hastily plunged,
his foot slipping upon a stone, it made him fall into the water so deep, as it
wetted his Gun, upon which Accident, he confessed soon after, that his heart
and his bowels turned with^^ him, so as he became like a ^otten stick, void of
strength; insomuch, as one Monopoide a P^quod, swiftest of foot, laid hold of
him within (...) Rod of the River side, without his making any resistance;
Though he was a very proper man, of goodly feature and great Courage of mind,
as well as strength of body; one of the first English that came up with him,
was Robert S^^nton* a young man that scarce had reached the twenty second year
of his Age, yet adventu^ing to ask him a question, or two, to whom this many
Sachem looking with a little neglect upon his youthful face, replied in broken
English; you much Child, no understand matters of War; let your brother, or
your chief come, him I will Answer, and was as good as his word; Acting herein,
as if by a Pythagorean (...), some old Roman Ghost had possessed the body of
this Western Pagan: And like Attilius Regulus, he would not accept of his own
Life, when it was tendered him, up on that (in his account) low Condition of
Compliance with the English, refusing to send an old Counselor of his to
(...) any motion that way, saying, he knew the Indians would not yielld; but
more probably he was not willing they should, choosing rather to sucrifice his
own, and his peoples loves to his private (...) of Revenge, than timely to
provide for his own, and their safety, by (...) the Counsels of a Peace, so
necessary for the general good of all; He continuing in the same his obsti^ate
Resolution, was ca^ryed soon after to Stonington, where he was shot to death,
by some of his own quality, (...). the young Sachem of the Mohegins, and two of
the Pequod^ of like quality. This was the Confusion of a damned wretch, that
had often opned his mouth to blaspheme the Name of the living God and these
that make profession thereof. He was told at large of his breath of Faith, and
how he boasted he would not deliver up a Wampanoog, or the paring of a
Wampanoogs nail, that He would burn the English alive in their houses, to
which he replied, others were as forward for the War as himself; and that he
desired to hear no more thereof. And when he was told his Sentence was to dye,
he said, he liked it well, that he should die before his heart was soft, or had
spoken any thing unworthy of himself. He told the English before they put him
to death, that the killing him, would not end the War; but it was a
considerable step thereunto, nor did it live much longer after his death, at
least, not in those parts; For after Sudbury fight, when the Sun of their hopes
was at its highest. April the eighteenth following, it wisibly declined, till
it set in a night of obscure and utter darkness upon them all, as is to be
feared.

The Inhabitants of New London, Norwich, and Stonington, appr^^hensive hensive
of their danger by reason of the near bordering of the (...), and upon other
prudent considerations, voluntarily lifted themselves under some able
Gentlemen, and Resolute Soldiers amongst themselves, Major Palms, Captain
George Denison, Captain Avery, with whom, or under whom, within the compass of
the year, 1676. they made ten or more, several Expeditions, in all which, at
those several times they killed and took two hundred and thirty nine of the
Enemy, by the help and assistance of the Pequods, Mobegins, and a few friendly
Narrhagansets. Besides thirty taken in the long march homeward, after the Fort
fight, December the nineteenth, 1675. and besides sixteen Captived in the
second Expedition, not reckoned within the compass of the said Number: together
with fifty Guns; and spoiling the Enemy of seven ^^shels of Corn.

In January they went again in pursuit, and took five men and a Boy.

Certain Nipnets intended to have sheltred themselves under Unc as; but he
perceiving it would be distastful to the English, soon shab'd them off; so as
they were in the beginning of the Winter brought into Boston, many of them by
Peter Ephr^im, and Andrew Pityme, with their Fellows.

In all which Exploits, neither they, nor any of their Follow^es sustained any
loss by the Sword of the Enemy, or sickness: As is expressly declared by the
Reverend Minister of Stonington, Mr. James Noyce, which is a matter very
Admirable to consider, engaging all that were any way concerned in such signal
Testimonics of Divine Favor, to be ready to pay their Vaws to the most High,
who alone teaches the hand: of his people to war; and their fingers to fight.

But the greatest ^low given to the Narrhagansets was by Connecticut Forces
under Major Talcot, July the second, as is related, part, l. page 97.

Amongst the rest of the Prisoners then taken, was a young sprightly Fellow,
seized by the Mohegins; who desired of the English Commanders that he might be
delivered into their hands, that they might put him to death, more ^^jorum;
sacrifice him to their Cruel Genius of Revenge, in which brutish and div^lish
passion they are most of all delighted: The English though not delighted in
blood, yet at this time were not unwilling to gratify their humor, lest by a
denial, they might disoblige their Indian friends, of whom they lately made so
much use: Partly also that they might have an ocular demonstration of the
Salvage, barbarous Cruelty of these Heathen: And indeed, of all the Enemies
that have been the Subjects of the precedent discourse; This Villain did most
deserve to become an Object of Justice and Severity: For he boldly told them,
that he had with his Gun dispatched nineteen English, and that he had charged
it for the twentieth; but not meeting with any of ours, and unwilling to loose
a fair shot, he had let fly at a Mohegin and killed him; with which, having
made up his number, he told them (...) was fully satisfied. But as is usually
said, Justice Vindictive has iro^^^ands, though leaden feet: This cruel
Monster is fallen into their power, that will repay him seven fold: In the
first place therefore, making a great Circle, they placed him in the middle,
that all their Eyes might at the sametime, be pleased with utmost Revenge upon
him; They first cut one of his Fingers round in the joint at the Trunck of his
hand, with a sharpknife, and then brake it off, as men use to do with a
slaughtered Beast, before they uncase him; then they cut off another and
another, till they had dismembered one hand of all its digits, the blood
sometimes spirting (...) in streams a yard from his hand, which barbarous and
unheard of Cruelty, the English were not able to bear, it forcing Tears from
their Eyes; yet did not the Sufferer ever relent, or show any sign of Anguish:
For being asked by some of his Tormentors, how he liked the War? he might have
replied, as the Scotch Gentleman did after the loss of a Battle, that being
asked how he liked the match sc. with our Prince of Wales, (which there was the
occasion of the quarrel) made Answer, he liked the match well ^ough, but no
whit liked the manner of the wooing written by such Lines of blood; but this
unsensible and hard hearte^ Monster Answered, he liked it very well, and found
it as sweet, as English men did their Sugar. In this frame he continued, till
his Executioners had dealt with the Toes of his feet, as they had done with the
Fingers of his hands; All the while making him dance round the Circle, and
sing, till he had wearied both himself and them: At last they brake the bones
of his Legs, after which he was forced to sit down, which it is said he silently
did, till they had knocked out his brains. Instances of this nature should be
Incentive unto us, to bless the Father of Lights, who has called us out from
the dark places of the Earth, full of the Habitations of Cruelty. When the
Dayspring from on high shall visit those that sit in this Region of darkness,
another Spirit will be poured upon them, and ^hen the feet of them that bring
the glad Tidings of Gospel Salvation will appear more beautiful to them than at
present they seem to do. And when these Mountains of Prey shall become the holy
Mountain of the Lord, they shall either hurt, nor destroy, nor exercise Cruelty
therein.

Moreover, in the beginning of April, 1677. Certain Intelligence came from
Pascataqua; That some strange Indians had fallen upon Major Waiderns Indians,
and destroyed several of them.

It is also informed, that the Indians of Kennibeck have lately surprised five
or six of the Soldiers by an Ambush, as they were about to have buried some of
the bodies of their Friends, slain in those parts before the last Winter: And
that they had the last week done the like mischief to such a number of the
inhabitants of Black-point, which is a solemn Presage of another Storm like to
fall upon those Eastern parts, unless God prevent, this Summer ensuing.

For the further satisfaction of the Reader concerning the perfidiousness and
falssness of our Enemies, and the Justice of our Cause, we shall close this
Narrative with the Articles which Philip Sachem of Paukamaket, or Mount-hope;
subscribed in the year, 1671.

WE PHILIP and my Council and my Subjects, do Acknowledge ourselves subject to
his MAJESTY the King of England, and the Government. of N-Plimouth, and to
their Laws.

2ly. I am willing and do promise to pay unto the Government of Plymouth, one
hundred pounds in such things as I have: but I would entreat the favor that I
might have three years to pay it in, forasmuch as I cannot do it at present,

3dly. I do promise to send unto the Governor, or whom he shall appoint, five
Wolves heads, if I can get them: or as many as I can procure, until they come
to five Wolves yearly.

4ly. If any difference fall between the English and my self, and People, then
I do promise to repair to the Governor of Plymouth, to rectify the difference
amongst us.

5ly. I do promise not to make war with any, but with the Governors
approbation of Plymouth.

6ly. I promise not to dispose of any of the Lands that I have at present, but
by the approbation of the Governor of Plymonth.

For the true performance of the premises of the said Sachem, Philip of
Paukamakett, do hereby bind my self, and such of my Council, as are present,
our selves, our Heirs, our Successors, faithfully, and to promise, in Witness
thereof, we have hereunto subscribed our hands; the Day and Year above Written;
In the Presence of the Court and diverse of the Magistrates and other Gentlemen
of the Massachusetts; and Connecticut. The mark P of Philip the Sachem of
Pankamakett. The mark [of Vncompaen. The mark [of Wo^okom. The mark 7 of
Somkame.


FINIS.
Soli Deo gloria.
A NARRATIVE OF THE TROUBLES With the Indians in NEW ENGLAND, From Pascataqua
to Pemmaquid.
THe Occasion, Rise and Progress of the War with the Indians in the Southern
and Western parts of New England, together with the Issue, and Success thereof,
has in the former part of this Narrative, been already declared. Before an
Entrance be made into a Relation of those Troubles that befell the Eastern and
Northern parts of the said Country from the Indians inhabiting those parts; it
will be requisite to give some general Description of the place, as being less
frequented, and so more unknown then the other, like Heralds that use to
Blazon the Field before they meddle with the Charge, as an Historian once said,
That so the Reader may not miss the Truth in Story, by being unacquainted with
the places whereon the discourse proceeds; Briefly therefore, that more cost
and pains be not spent in the surveying a barren, and Rocky Country, then will
quit cost; The List or Border here being known to be more worth then the whole
Cloth; That whole Tract of Land, being of little worth, unless it were for the
Borders thereof upon the Seacoast, and some Spots and Skirts of more
desirable Land upon the Banks of some Rivers how much soever it be valued by
them that know nothing thereof, but by the uncertain and fallible Reports of
such as have only Sailed by the Country, or viewed some of the Rivers and
Havens, but never passed through the heart of the Continent. The whole being
scarce worth half those men's lives, that have been lost these two last years,
in hope to save it.

This North part of New England, did first like Z^rah put forth its hand,
thereby inviting the Adventurers to twist the Scariet Thread of their hopes
about the same, by that Auspicious beginning they were ready to promise
themselves great prosperity in having that Advantage before others, to plant
and people that part of the Country.

But that fair opportunity was almost quite lost, by some Fatal, and
mischievous Accidents, happening soon after that noble Enterprise was first set
a foot, as has been already in part, and may hereafter more fully be declared.

The first place that ever was possessed by the English, in hope of making a
Plantation in those parts was a Tract of Land, on the Westside of the River of
Kennibeck, then called Sag at a wocke, since Saga-de-hocke: other places
adjoining were soon after seized, and improved for Trading and fishing. The
more remote, and furthest Northward at this time belonging to the English
(Penobsot forty years since being surprised by the French, and by them held to
this day) is called Pemmaquid, distant seven or eight Leagnes from Kennibeck,
and is the utmost Boundary of New England, being about forty Leagues distant
from the mouth of Pascataqua River. That Pemmaquid is a very Commodious Haven
for Ships, and has been found very Advantageous to such as use to come upon
these Coasts to make fishing Voyages; South West, or South East, from whence
about six or seven Leagues lies an Island called Monhiggon, of much use on the
same account for fishing, it lying three or four Leagues into the Sea from
Damarils Cove, (a place of like Advantage for the Stages of Fishermen in former
times) There have been for a long time seven or eight considerable dwellings
about Pemmaquid, which is well accommodased with Pasture Land about the Haven
for feeding Cattle, and some Fields also for Tillage; All the Land improvable
for such uses being already taken up, by such a number of Inhabitants as is
already mentioned.

In the mouth of the River of Kennibeck lies a considerable Island calced
Aronick, some years since purchased by Major Clarke and Capt. Lake two
Merchancs of Boston; on which they built several large dwellings with a
Warehouse, and many other Edifices near the water side, It being intended by
the Owners for a place of Trading, as well as Planti^g; there being many of
late seated there, fit to c^rry on each design, where also was built a fort,
which if it had been carefuliy defended, might have proved the defense, and
Security of all that side of the Country, as it used to be their Magazine, up
higher beyond the River of Kennibeck, four Leagues Eastward toward Pemmaquid,
in another considerable River called Ships-Coat, upon the Banks of which were
many scattered Planters, who lately flying from their dwellings for fear of the
Indians, left as was judged, a thousand head of neat Cattle for the use of the
Indians, that made the late Insurrection against the Inhabitants of those
parts, besides their Fields and Barns full of Corn

There is another River that issues into Kennibeck, a little higher up into the
Country called Pegypscot, that comes down from behind Casco Bay. This Pegypicot
is the seat of the Amoscogging Indians, who have had a great, if not the
principal hand in the late mischiefs.

Some few Leagues to the South of Kennibeck lies that famous and spacious Haven
called Casco Bay, the North East Cape of which is made by an Island called
Saguin; The Southern or opposite point of Land is called Cape Elizabeth, which
is in the Bosom of this Bay, being about eight or nine Leagues over at the
mouth of it, and abundance of small Islands, many of them being inhabited by
Fishermen, and others; one of the principal of that sort, is called Jewels
Island. There are many places about the Bay fit to make commodious habitations;
and on the South side of it is a small Village called Falmouth; All, or most of
it, lately destroyed by the Indians.

Not far from Casco to the Southward, or South-west, still is a River called
Spurnuik, over against which lies Richmond Island, not far from the main Land,
being divided therefrom by a small Channel soordable at Low water, It has for
a long time been the Seat of Mr. Jordan, in right of Mr. Winter, the former, if
not the first promoter thereof whose daughter he married.

The next Plantation Southward is called Scarborough, a small Village seated
upon black point, over against which is another point, for distinction from the
former called blue point: This black point was lately the Seat of M. Iosselin,
being a parcel of the Province of maine, or falling within the Prec^ncts
thereof, and was formerly by Patent granted to the said Iosselin or his
Predecessors, since purchased by Mr. Scotto of Boston.

Saco River lies next in order to Pascataqua, a Navigable River; where Major
Philips had a commodious Situation ately; at the mouth of which River lies
winter Harbor, encompassed on one side by a Neck of Land, formerly the
Propriety of one Mr. Winter whose Name it still retains, but lately purchased
by Major Pendleton, where he enjoyed a very comfortable Seat and habitation.

There is another Harbor lying a little Southward of Saco made by that which
is called Cape Porpuise; a convenient Sear for Fishermen, as are most of the
other places above named. Between Cape Porpuise and Pascataqua there are but
two small Towns more, (though ambitious of great Names the one called Wells,
the other York, Wells is seated upon a small River or Creek affording a small
Harbor fit only for Barks and smaller V^ssels; on each side of which Town
lies a small River, the first called Kennihank, the second Maguncuck the other
Town is called York, formerly known by the Name of Agamenticus, from an high
Hill of that Name not far off therefrom. The point of Land which lies between
the said Fowns, is called Cape Nidduck, making a small Harbor likewise, into
which issues another pretty River, on the Banks of which is Sc^tuate the Town
of York. All or most of the forementioned Towns and Plan^ations are seated
upon and near, some River greater or lesser, whose streams are principally
improved for driving of Saw-Mill^; Those late Inventions, so useful for
destruction of Wood and Timber, specially of Fur Tr^es, which do so abound in
those Coasts; that there is scarce a River or Creek in those parts that has
not some of those Engine^ ^^ected upon them.

The upper Branches of the samous River of Pascataqua, being also employed all
of them that way, namely, Sturgeon Creek, Salmon F^lls, Newechewannick,
Quechecho, Oyster River, Swamscot, Greenland, Lamprey-Eele River, together with
the Towns of Exete^, and Dover, seated upon, or near some of the main Branches
thereof, whose principal Trade is in Deal Boards, cut by those Saw-Mills,
since their Rif^ Timber is near all consumed. On each side of that brave
Navigable River of Pascataqua down toward the mouth of it, are seated on the
North side the Town of Kittary (a long scattering Plantation made up of several
Hamlets) on the South side the Town of Portsmouth, to which belongs the great
Island, lying in the mouth of the said River, a place of considerable Trade,
these late years, the which together with Strawberry Bank the upper part of the
said Town of Portsmouth, are the Magazine, and chief, or only place of Commerce
and Trade for all the Pantations, betwixt it, and Casco Bay; All the said
Plantations have in these last two years, viz. 1675. 1676. felt more or less of
the Rage and Cruelty of the Barbarous and perfidious Indians belonging to that
side of the Country, As shall more particularly be declared in what follows,
after a short discourse of the first planting that side of the Country which
may serve as a kind of Prologue to the following Tragedy.

This part of New England began first to be planted about the same time with
Virginia, viz. in the year 1606. There the first Letters Patents granted by the
King for the Limitation of Virginia, did extend from 34 to 44 Degrees of North
Latitude, and was divided into two parts, namely the first, and the second
Colony; The former was appropriated to the City of London, The other, to the
Cities of Bristol, Exeter, and Town of Plymouth, each of which had Laws,
P^iviledges, and Authority for the Government, and advancing their several
Plantations alike, As says, Capt. Smith in his general History of Virginia,
and New England. This second Colony of New England promising but little
Advantage to the Undertakers, by reason of its Mountainous and Rocky
Situation, found but few Adventurers forward to promote the planting thereof,
after the death of Sir John Popham, who was the first that ever procured men,
or meant to possess it; for when the main Pillars are removed, what can be
expected but that the whole building should fall to the ground. Yet,
notwithstanding the discouragements the first Planters met withal in their
first Winter seasoning, in that cold and rocky desert (which made them all
return home in the year 1608) did Sir Francis Popham his Son, having the Ships
and Provision which remained of the Company, and supplying what was necessary
for his purpose, send diverse times to the Coasts for Trade and Fishing, of
whose loss or gain, as says my Author, himself was best able to give account.
And some of the Ships sent by him, and the Earl of Southhampton, with other
Noble Adventurers, did bring home some of the Natives of the place in one of
the next following years, by whose Informations, some of the first Undertakers
were encouraged once more to try the verity of their hopes, and see if possibly
they might find something that could enduce a fresh Resolution to prosecute so
pious and Honorable a work.

But in the mean time before there was yet any Speech, or endeavor to settle
any other Plantation in those parts, That about Saga de hock being thus
abandoned for the present by the first Undertakers, The Frenchmen immediately
took the opportunity to settle themselves within our Limits, which being
understood by those of Virginia, they discrectly taking into their
consideration the inconveniences that might arise by suffering them to harbor
there, Sir Samuel Argal was sent with Commission to displace them, which he
with great discretion, de^^erity and Judgment performed about the year 1613.
The which made way for the Plantation at Nova Scotia, granted afterward^ by
King James to Sir William Alexander one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Council of Scotland. The said Argal seized the Forts which the Frenchmen had
built at Mount Mansel, St. Croix, and Port Rual, and carried away their
Ordnance, with other Provisions to the Colony of Virginia, to their great
Benefit. The said places were held by the English diverse years after, till
about the year 1635. by Commission from the Scotch Lord a foresaid, but how his
right came afterward to be alienated to any of the French Nation, does not
concern us with Reference to the business in hand, further to enquire.

Things remaining in this posture for the space of near seven years, some of
the first Adventurers apprehensive of better hopes of good that might ensne by
a fresh Attempt, Resolved to set the design a foot a second time, to which End
several Ships were sent on that account in the year 1615. but with as bad
Success as the former; for in the year before, viz. 1614. Capt. Smith desirous
to promote the Colony of New England, as well as that of Verginia came thither
with two Vessels, and returned back to England in the lesser of them, with
intent to be there again that next year, to promote the said Plantation; But
after he was gone, one Thomas Hunt master of the Shi^p, he left behind, like a
wicked Varlot, to prevent the carrying on the Plantation, that he and a few
Merchants might wholly enjoy the benefit of the Trade of the Country, after he
had made his Voyage, seized upon four and twenty of the poor Innocent Natives,
that in confidence of his honesty, had put themselves into his hands, then
clapping them under Hatches, carried them away to Malego, whither he was bound
with the fish he had made upon the Coast, for that Market: But this vile act,
although it kept him for ever after from any more employment in those parts,
yet that was the least part of the mischief that attended his wicked practice;
for upon the Arrival of the Adventurers Ships the next year; Two Natives of
the place that had been some years in England, and coming back unto the said
Ships, as soon as they understood the iniuty so Treacherously done to their
Countrymen, they contracted such an hatred against our whole Nation, that
although one of the said Natives dyed soon after, yet the other called Epenow,
studied how to be Revenged, which he so far found means to Effect, that he
frustrated this second Attempt of settling a Plantation in these parts.

Yet did not the Adventurers cast off all hope of carrying on their design,
wherein Providence within a few years after so favored them, that one or more
of the Salvages called Tisquamtum and Samoset, carried away by Hunt, was
brought back to Newfound Land, from whence he was soon after conveyed by the
prudent endeavor of Capt. Mason (then Governor of the Plantation begun upon
Newfound Land) into the hands of some of the Adventurers by whose means they
hoped to work a peace betwixt the said Natives on that Coast where the fire had
been kindled before; for the Adventurers employed Capt. Thomas Darmer, a
prudent and industrious Gentleman to settle the affairs of the Plantatjon, now
a third time revived again about Kennibeck, in the year 1619, or thereabouts.
By his prudence and care a lasting peace was made betwixt the Natives of the
place, and the English, who were but a little before so abhorred by them, for
the wrong formerly received, so as the Plantation began at last to prosper, and
continue in good liking, and Assurance of the Friendship of their Neighbors,
that had been lately so exasperated against them. This Tisquanium
forementioned, was not a little Instrumental, and helpful to the Plantation
begun at New Plymouth about the following year, viz. 1620. in their weak
beginnings, there being frequent mention of his Name, as also of one Samoset, a
Native of the same place, by the like Providence brought back to Kennibeck, and
from thence with Tisquantum came to the New-planters at Patuxet, or Plymouth,
and brought them into acquaintance with Massasoit, the great Sachem about those
parts; without whose Friendship that new Plantation would hardly have subsisted
long.

This Story premised is the more to be minded in this place, because the
Friendship upon the means and occasious aforesaid, confirmed betwixt the
Indians in these Eastern parts, and the English, had continued steadfast and
Constant to this year, when it was broken by another Treacherous and wicked
practice, of a like nature, and parrallel to that of the foresaid Hunt. As may
more fully be declared afterward.

Possibly the like saci^^ction may prove the more probable means to procure a
settled peace. But to return, whence this Digression has been made. Some years
were spent to bring things to this Issue: The Adventurers were put to much care
and pains before they could get their Patent confirmed, and Renewed again; many
Obstructions they met withal from some Interlopers that begen to look into the
Trade of this Country, and would irregularly have had a share-therein, or made
it common to all Traders, to which End they pe^i^ioned to a Parliament then
called, to bring about their Ends, but at the last it was settled firmly in the
hands of sundry Noble and worthy Patentees, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and
Merchants, commonly known by the Name of the Council of Plymouth, who had the
absolute power under the King, for making all Grants, and disposing of all
Lands from the 40th. to the 48th. Degrees of North Latitude; All which was
accomplished about the year 1621. Some printed Relations that speak of these
Transactions, write much of the flourishing state, and hopeful prosperity of
this Plantation, published about forty or fifty years since, yet did it never
appear by what followed, that any considerable Advantage did ever accrue to the
first Undertakers from this their New-Plantation of the Eastern parts, unless
by the Trade of Fish, and Furrs, which latter continued not long; As for the
former, The chief benefit redounded only to them that managed it by their own
particular Stocks, and personal Endeavors: And if without offense it may be
spoken, the multitude of Patents soon after granted to several Gentlemen of
Brok^n Fortunes, have provided but places of an Honorable Exile or
Confinement, whither many deserving persons of better Education then Fortune,
were sent to shift for themselves in a Foreign Land, without being further
Troublesome to those nearer home, on whom they had their hopes and Dependence;
yet it must not be denied but that some of the Undertakers were at vast
Expenses, casting their Bread upon these waters, where none of their Friends
and Relations have as yet had opportunity to find it. The Reason of which is
not hard to give, in Reference to all those Lands and Territories that lie to
the Eastward of Pascataqua River. One man Cause has been the multiplicity of
Grants and Patents for the dividing of the said Tract of Land, for beside the
strise that has been occasioned by the Intricacy and indistinctness of their
Liberties and Bounds, (enough to have maintained a greater number of Lawyers,
then ever were the Inhabitants) If the Grantees had been supplied with monyes
proportionable to their writes and Controversies about their bounds and
Ju^isdictions, which sometimes they have been ready to decide with their
Swords, witness those fatal Names imposed on such Accounts upon some p^aces
belonging to those parts, as Bloody point, Black and Blew point, and every
considerable Parcel of Land being by Patent granted to several particular
persons, hindered the erecting of Town-ships and Villages, which if it had been
otherwise disposed of, might have been full of Towns, and well peopled, and
thereby the Inhabitants had been able to have stood upon their Guard, and
defended themselves against the common Enemy, whereas now they were but like
scopae dissolutae, or like his Arrows that being bound up in one bundle could
not be broken by an ordinary Force, but being loose, were easily snapt asunder,
by any single hand. Another Reason might be, the employing of such Agenis and
Instruments as either wanted Skill or Fidelity to manage what they were
betrusted with, which made many of the Adventurers long ago complain, that (in
stead of Bills of Exchange and other Returns which they expected) they received
nothng but large Inventoryes of the wants of their several Plantations, and the
Servants sent over to improve them, which were all the Returns that many of
them ever received for the large Sums of money many disbursed for the carrying
on their affairs

A third Reason may be the several Changes of Government the Inhabitants have
passed under, which have occasioned not only much vexation, and Expenses to
such as were upon the place; but much discouragement to several others, who by
the commodiousness of the Soil, would willingly have chosen Station in those
parts, had they seen any hope of a settled Government, ever like to have been
obtained; which is not hard to demonstrate, by giving a little touch as we pass
along, on the several changes of Government, the places forementioned have been
molded into, and the several Proprietours of, have claimed Interest in the
Land. In the year 1624. A Patent was granted by the Council of Pli^outh, the
grand Proprietours, to Captain Mason for a large Tract of ^and about
Pascataqua, but it not being distinctly bounded, himself, with Sir Ferdinando
Gorges obtained a joint Patent in the year 1629. for the Land betwixt Saga
de-Hock East, and Naum Keag West, but that also interferring with the Bounds
ganted before that time to sundry Gentlemen and Merchants that had obtamed a
Patent from the South of Charles River to the Northward of Merrimack; Capt.
Masons bounds were afterward by Consent, (as is said) of his Agent or Agents,
reduced to some Branches about Pascataqua River (who yet could not agree with
those that acted in the Name of Shrewsbury men) but being wholly neglected by
the pretended Proprietour or his Successors, (till of late days) was by the
desire of the Inhabitants yielded up to the Massachusetts Government, near
twenty years since.

In the year 1630. A Patent was granted by the said Council of Plymouth (signed
by the Earl of Warwick, and Sir Ferdinand^ Gorge^i, and sealed with the common
Seal of the Council aforesaid) to John Die, Thomas Impe, Grace Harding, and John
Roach of London, for a large Tract of Land on the South of Saga-de Hock forty
mile square by the Sea side, and so up into the Country: John Die before said,
and his Partners took in another as Partner, and Associate with them, Mr.
Richard Dummer of Newbury in New England, in the year 1638. to whom they
delivered the Oreginal Patent, with an order from them and in their Name, to
take up the Land deseribed in the Patent, but, he being denied opportunity to
Effect it, as also a Ship formerly sent by the Patentees for that End, not
accomplishing their desire, they not long after sold all their Interest in the
said Patent, to one Mr. Rigby a Lancashire Gentleman, who made Mr. Cleaves his
Agent to manage the business of his purchased Interest in the said Patent; To
whom Mr. Dummer was ordered to deliver the Original Patent, which accordingly
he did: what trouble was occasioned soon after between the said Mr. Cleaves and
Mr. Vines Agent for Sir Ferdinando Gorges, is well known to the Inhabitants of
the place, and need not be here mentioned; nor yet how the said Mr. Rigby came
afterward to loose his Interest (at least with the Inhabitants) in the Patent.

In the year 1632. Sir Ferdinando Gorges not resting in the joint Patent
obtained for himself, and Capt. Mason, obtained a distinct Patent for himself,
and got it confirmed by King Charles the first of blessed and famous memory,
for all that large Tract of Land from Saga-de-hock to Pascataqua River, and so
about an bundred miles up into the Country, by the Name of the Province of
Maine. What benefit and Improvement was ever made thereof by his Agents, or
Successors, is best known to themselves; But for the Inhabitants, who upon one
account or another had been induced, either by any prec^dan^ous grant or
liberty from himself, or his Agents, to take up any Land within the Bounds of
the said Province; They finding much inconvenience and trouble for want of an
orderly and settled Government, did at the last petition the general Court of
the Massachusetts to be taken under their Jurisdiction and Government (reserving
the Liberties and Privileges of their former purchases and Grants, as to
Title, possession and propriety to themselves) which was granted them, though
not only, and altogether upon the grounds on which it was desired by the
Petitioners. Yet notwithstanding all this, were not things settled either to the
comfort or content of the Inhabitants: for sometimes some demanded Right of
Jurisdiction over them by virtue of Sir F^rdinando's Pa^ent, sometimes
Comm^ssioners employed by his Highne^^ the Duke of York, attempted to settle a
Government amongst the people, sometimes they tried what might be done by
Agreement amongst themselves, but after their Return for England, by one means
or other, the Government relapsed again into the hands of the Massachusetts,
although a Supersedeas thereunto seems to have been put by an order from his
Majesty this last year.

By these several Vic ssitudes and changes of Government, the flourishing of
the said Province has been much obstructed, which else might have been much
advanced, and the Inhabitants been put into a Capacity to have secured
themselves against the late Barbarous Incursions of the Indians; and possibly
those Exorbitanci^s that many of the present Proprietours have run into, to the
just provocation of the Indians, might thereby have been prevented, and so the
mischief also which has ensued, might thereby have been averted: For a well
ordered Government would never have suffered those things that n^w were
connived at, which if they had been timely looked into bysuch as had absolute or
positive and unquestioned power of Rule in their hands, would have been
otherwise ordered, the present mischief that is come upon those places, might
thereby have been, if not prevented, yet more easily redressed, then now is
like to be.

As for the Tract of Land that lies Eastward beyond Kennibeck, betwixt that and
Pemmaquid, it is said to have belonged to one Mr. Aldworth, and his
Successors; who was Alderman of Bristol, and one that had a Patent thereof,
and employed some as his Agents, that did sometimes reside upon the place; And
was lately settled in some order of Government by his Highness the Duke of Yorks
Commissioners, by whom also was an Agreement made betwixt the Sagamores of the
Indians in those parts, and the English, at a Court kept by their Appointment
in Kennibeck, which if it had been observed, might in all probability have
prevented in great measure the quarrel which is now fallen out betwixt the
English and the said Indians: For upon some Jealousies of the Rising of those
Indians about twelve or thirteen years since, it was agreed, that if any
mischief should happen to be done by the English or Indians, one against
another, though it were to the killing any person, neither side should right
themselves, but complaint should be made to the Sagamores if the Indians did
the wrong, and to the Court, if it were done by the English; Both which did
promise satisfaction should be made, for the preventing any quarrel: The Names
of the Sachems, as likewise of them that were in power at the Court, do still
remain upon public Record. But matters of Government in those parts being
since collapsed; no Authority more then what was merely voluntary and
persuasive being owned. Things are now brought to that miser^ble state, which
follows next to be declared.

Ever since the first ^^ling of any English Plantation in those parts about
Kennibeck for the space of above fifty years the Indians always carried it
fair, and held good Correspondence with the English, until the News came of
Philips Rebellion, and Rising against the Inhabita^^s of Pli^^^th Colony in the
End of June 1675. After which time, it was apprehended by such as had the
Examination of the Indians about Kennibeck. That there was a general surmise
amongst them, that they should be required to assist the said Philip, although
they would not own, that they were at all engaged in the Quarrel. The like
Jealousy did appear in all the Indians that inhabited to the Eastward of
Pascataqua, which plainly shows that there was a design of a general Rising of
the Indians against the English, all over the Country, (possibly as far as
Virginia, the Indians there making Insurrection the same year,) and that many
if not most of them were willing it should succeed, although the Elder and
wiser of them liked it not, fearing the Issue, as they had cause: But many of
the young men about Casco Bay* and Amonoscoggan were certainly known to flock
thither the last year, and did, sundry of them, come short home. Forherein they
acted but like Salvages, as those in Virginia did, fifty year before, showing
themselves friendly and Courteous to their new neighbors, till they had an
opportunity to do them mischief. So that notwithstanding many of the
Inhabitants in the Eastern, as well as in the Western parts of the Country,
that were wont to Trade with the Indians, were not willing to believe any such
pu^pose amongst them, but were ready to think, some of the Ruder sort of the
Engglish, by their imprudent and irregular acting^, had driven them into this
Rebellion; yet is it too to evident, that the said Indians (who naturally
delight in bloody and deceitful actions (did lay hold of any opportunity that
might serve for a pretense to be put upon their barbarous practices. The
Indians about Wammeset and Pascataqua, that had joined with their Country men
in their rising against the English the last winter, when they were pinched
with hunger in the cold Winter following returned back to the English, and
desired to make peace, and firmly engaged to continue their wonted Friendship;
yea, some of them, as if they were really sorry for their murders, and
Cruelty, of their own voluntary motion came with the Prisoners they had taken,
and resigned them up to the English; yet when their own Ends were Answered, and
another opportunity was offered of doing further mischief of like nature: they
presently returned to their former practice, as is well known of Simond and
Andrew, that had killed some, and led others Captive in the last spring from
Bradford and Haverhill, who came in the End of June to Mai^^ Walderns, bringing
home English Prisoners with them, yet did the very same Indians within less
then two Mo^^^s after j^yn^ with the Amonoscogga^ and Kennibeck Indians, in a
commi^^ing the sa^ tragedy that were last acted in those parts; Yet was he and
the other his Par^ner ^uffered to escape, for want of suffcient guarding the
Prison, where they were put, in order to further Trial. But sero sapiunt
Ph^yges; It is hoped that we shall after some few more Experiences of this
nature, learn to be ware of this subtle Brood, and Generation of Vipers, ever
since Enmity was put between the Seed of the woman and the Seed of the Serpent;
It has been the portion of her Seed in every Generation, and in every Nation
to meet with the sad Effects of that Enmity; Nor can they ever expect to find
better dealing from any of the other sort, further then either fear of their
power, or hope of benefit by their favor, may induce them to another
disposition, as we the Inhabitants of New England have found by this late, and
sad Experience in Reference to these Pagans in the West amongst whom our Lot is
cast, they proving, as one says of the M^hometans in the East, like a nest of
Hornets, that if any one of them chance to be provoked, they will be all about
his Ears that comes near them. But it is now time to begin with the particulars
of the Tragedy it self, that the Reader account not the Prologue too long. It
was on the 24th. of June 1675. when the first mischief was done by the Indians
about Mount-Hope, before twenty days were over, the fire began to kindle in
these the most remote and most Northerly bounds of the said Country, or two
hundred and fifty miles distance, and upon this occasion; July the 11th. 1675.
A Letter was brought to Kennibeck from one Henry Sawyer an Inhabitant of York,
signifying the news of the Indians rising about Plymouth, and that a course was
taken to disarm the indians along the shore. This rumor did so far awaken the
Inhabitants of those parts that the very next day at a general meeting of the
English at one Capt. Pattishals bouse, several offered themselves as
Volunteers, to go up the said River of Kennibeck, to make discovery of the
Indians Fidelity, or else to fight them, if occasion were. The third day after,
marching up the River to Quegeseck, they met with the Inhabitants of Ships Cot
River, which is a River lying about twelve or fourteen miles to the North East
of Kennibeck. Diverse of the Indians thereabouts, by the peaswasions of one Mr.
Walker, that used to trade with them, brought down an incon siderable part of
their Ammunition, as a few Guns, a little Powder and Shot, with a few knives:
About seven of the Kennibeck Indians, and five of those called Ammoscogging
Indians, about Pegypscot, (a river more Southward toward Casco) made this show
of bringing in their Arms Capt. Lake, Capt. Pattishal, with Mr. Wiswal, in
whose hands was settled a kind of military power for those parts, were sent for
to examine the said Indians further, of whom upon Examination they saw Reason
to suspect some, if not all, whereupon they sent Messengers the second time to
the Ammoscogging Indians; and also a Letter to Mr. Walker, to send down their
Arms and Ammunition to them for their greater Security. After Mr. Wiswal was
returned home, the five Ammoscogging Indians aforesid brought in their Guns,
but with no good intent probably; for an Indian called Sown, having an Axe in
his hand, struck at one Hosea Ma^^er a French man, but was (...) from doing him
mischief, however the said Indian was presently bound and put into a Cellar.
Some of the English that used to Trade with those Indians were ready to excuse
the Indian, saying he was drunk, or that he was a distracted Fellow, but Mr.
Wiswall with the other two examinants, looked upon those as mere Excuses, and
altogether groundless, for one of them to this day affirms, that he was as
Rational and sensible as any of the rest.

The ancient Indians being asked what they thought was meet to be done in the
said Case, said, he was worthy to dye for such an affront, yet they would be
glad if his life might be spared, offering to be jointly bound in his behalf,
to pay forty Beaver Skins at the next Fall-Voyage, giving their hands in token
of their Fidelity, and also leaving their Arms in the hands of the English as a
Pledge of their faithful keeping those Articles of Peace concluded on betwixt
them. If they proved themselves honest men, they were to have their Arms
delivered them again, which was accordingly performed the last June, 1676. They
having in the mean time carried themselves peaceably toward the English. The
day after, viz. July 19. 1675. An Indian of great note amongst them, called
Robin hood with great Applause of the rest, made a dance, and sung a Song to
declare their content in what was transacted. And so they parted, setting the
Indians at liberty, that had engaged thus for their friend Sown, the Indian;
but yet to this day one Skin of Beaver was never paid to the English, as was
promised; The Indians all this time were well provided for of victuals by Capt.
Lake, with other supplies of Rhum and Tobacco, even to the disgusting of some
English then present.

But the Indians left as Hostages upon Sowens account, how Civilly soever they
were treated, ran all away at the last, trusting more to the Celerity of their
own feet, then to the Civility of their English Friends; who after they were
escaped, joined with a parcel of their Fellows soon after about twenty in all,
in robbing the house of one Mr. Purchase an ancient Planter about Pegypscot
River, and a known Trader with the Indians, what ever wrong may be pretended by
the said Indians, as done them in their Trading, (of which more may be spoken
afterward) that will no whit excuse their perfidious Treachery, and falsehood
in breaking Covenant with the English, dissembling, and seeking all Advantages
of Cruelty against their English Neighbors, of which in the following Winter
and Summer, 1676. there will be a more full and undeniable discovery. This was
done in the beginning of September, 1675. Those Indians that first assaulted
Mr. Purchase his house, did no other mischief, save plundering it of strong
Liquor, and Ammunition, also killing a Calf or two, with a few Sheep, but no
more then what they eat, and spoiling a Feather Led by ripping it open, to turn
out the Feathers, contenting themselves with the Case, which they might more
easily carry away. They offered no incivility to the Mistress of the house,
(her husband, and her Sons, being at that time from home) yet one of her Sons
approaching near the house, and finding it possessed of those new Inhabitants,
he rode away with all speed, and yet no faster then there was need; for an
Indian followed him with a Gun under his Coat, to have shot at him, if he could
by his flattery, and dissembling, have got him within the reach of his Piece.

It is said, that at the first they used fair words, and spoke of Trading, but
as they went away, told those of the house, that there were others coming after
that would deal far worse with them, which within a short time after come to
pass, for these were but the messengers of Death, which was soon after
infl^cted, and that in a most Barbarous manner upon sundry Inhabitants of the
Neighboring Plantations.

The English in those parts being much incensed hereat, Twenty five of them
soon after going up Cas^o Bay in a Sloop and two Boats to gather Indian Corn,
and to look to what they had upon the said Bay near Amocoscoggen River; when
they came near the houses, they heard a knocking, and a noise about the houses,
and presently esp^ed two or three Indians, who did not yet see them: The
English being come a good way from their Vessel, endeavored to get between the
Indians, and the woods, which when they perceived, they ran toward the water
side, but the English in pursuit killed one of them, and wounded another, who
yet escaped away in a Cano^ cross the River, a third running back toward the
woods, fled to the other Indians, and acquainted them with what was done, who
presently came down; and lay in wait to intercept the English, that thought of
no dange^, but scattered themselves all about the place to gather their Corn,
and lade the Boats therewith, but before they were ready to go away, The
Indians coming down, fired upon them, and forced them all into the Sloop; had
not some of them been better prepared then the rest; they might all have been
cut off; for some little resistance being made by them that were ready with
their Guns, it gave the rest an opportunity to get all into the Sloop; yet not
without many wounds: So with much ado, they all escaped with their lives,
leaving the two Boats almost laden with Corn for a prey ^o the Indians, who
presently bu^ned one, and plundered the other of all that was t^erein some are
ready to think that the English did imprudently to begin the Quarrel, and not
first enquire into what the Indians were about in the house, and seek Redress
according to the forementioned Agreement, made at the Court in Kennibeck. But
if this happened after what follows next to be related viz. that which was done
to Old Waterly, and his Family; (the English can be blamed for nothing, but
their negligence and Security, in that having alarmed their enemies, they stood
not better upon their guard), which is not very certain. For it is thought that
within a few days after, or the next week more horrible outrage was committed
upon the Family of an ancient man, whose Name was Waterly, an Inhabitant of
Casco Bay, who had some years before removed from Gloucester, or Cape Anne out
of some discontent, which afterward he often bewailed resolving either to have
returned back, or else to have removed to some securer place, but he was
arrested by the Sons of violenc^, before he could Effect his purpose. This old
man with his wife, his Son, and his daughter in Law (at that time great with
Child) with three grand Children were cruelly murdered by those barbarous
Salvages, at one time: another of his grand Children was taken alive, and led
into Captivity, a daughter of his was said to be carried to Narhagauset, which
shows they joined with the Southern Indians in the Rebellion; when once these
Indians had embrued their hands in English blood, they were emboldened to the
like bloody Attempts in the Adjacent places.

This Waterly lived so far from Neighbors, or else was encompassed with Creeks
or Rivers, that no Relief could presently be sent to him, however Lieut,
Ingerson of Casco the next day with a File of men, repaired to the place where
his house-stood, to see what was the Reason of the Fire they discerned the day
before, there they found the house burned to ashes, the bodies of the old man
and his wife half consumed with the fire, the young woman killed, and three of
the grand Children, having their brains dashed out, and their bodies were laid
under some Oaken Planks, not far from the house; one girl of about eleven
years old, was ^arried Captive by them, and having been carried up and down the
Country some hundreds of miles, as far as Narhaga^set Fort, was this last June
returned back to Major Walderns, by one Squando the Sagamore of Saco; A strange
mixture of mercy and Cruelty.

Soon after Capt. Bonithon's and Major Philips Dwellings were assaulted, one on
the East, the other on the West side of Saco River. It is said, they had
seasonable notice of what was intended against them, by their Barbarous
Enemies, Those Amonoscoggan Indians; viz. by an Indian of Saco, their
Neighbor, better minded then the rest of his Country men: who observing a
strange Indian coming to his Wigwam in Company with some of his acquaintance,
one of whom informed him, after the rest, (with the stranger) were gone; That
the said stranger came from the Westward, and that his business was to persuade
the Eastern Indians to fall upon the English in their dwellings here, as the
rest had done to the Westward. Captain Bonithon, either upon this Information,
or upon the knowledge of what was done a little before at Casco, had left his
house, and was retired over the River with his Family to Major Philips his
Garrison. Thus two are better then one: for otherwise, both might have been
destroyed: For upon the 18th. of September following, being the 7th. day of the
week, about eleven a Clock, they at Major Philip^ his Garrison saw Capt.
^onithon's house on fire on the East side of Saco River, which by the good
Providence of God was to them as the firing of a Beacon, giving them notice to
look to themselves, their Enemies being now come; for otherwise, they might to
their great disadvantage have been too suddenly surprised, for within half an
hour after, they were upon them, when a Sentinel placed in the Chamber gave
notice that he saw an Indian by the Fence side, near a Corn Field, Major
Philips not willing to believe till he might see with his own Eyes, ran hastily
up; another of his men, coming after, cried Mr. what mean you? do you intend to
be ki^l^d, at which words, he turned suddenly back from the window, out of
which he was looking, when presently a Bullet struck him on the shoulder,
grazing only, upon it without breaking the bone. The Indians upon the shot,
thinking he had been slain thereby, (as they heard afterward) gave a great
shout, upon which they discerned that they were surrounded by them, whereupon
they presently fired on the Enemy from all Quarters, and from the Flankers of
the Fortification, so as they wounded the Captain of the Indians, who presently
leaving the Assa^lt retired three or four miles from the place, where he soon
after dyed, as they were informed: He counseled them to leave the siege, but
they were resolved not so to quit the place; nor were those within less
resolute to defend it: one of the best men was soon after disabled from any
further Service, by a wound which he received in one of the Volleys made upon
them by the Assaylants; But that no whit daunted the rest of the Defendants,
who continuing still firing amain upon the Enemy: This Dispute lasted about an
hour, after which the Enemy despairing to take the house by Assault, thought
upon a device how to burn it.

First, firing the house of one of his Tenants, then his Saw-M^ll, after that
his Corn M^ll, hoping by that means to draw them cut of the Garcison to put out
the fire, but missing of their purpose in that, they called out, you English
Cowardly Dogs, come out and quench the Fire: They continued this sport all the
afternoon, continually almost without any Intermission firing upon them: The
besieged hoped for Relief from the Town, but none came, The Major still
encouraging his men to stand it out, which they manfully did all that night,
when they were a armd almost every half hour: and betwixt whiles they could
hear their Axes and other Instruments, knocking about the Mills till the next
day: They within the house conceived they were preparing some Engine wherewith
to burn the house, which proved accordingly, for about 4 or 5 a Clock in the
morning at the setting of the Moon, the Major was called by his men to look
out, when he saw a Cart with four Wheels, having a Barricado built in the fore
part, to keep off Shot, and filled with combustible matter, birch rindes,
straw, powder, and Poles twenty Foot long, apt to fire the house: he bid them
let them drive it within Pistol shot, before they made any shot against them;
His m^n we^e a little discouraged at the sight of this Engine: but he bid them,
be of good Courage; and use the means, putting their trust in God, who, he was
confident would deliver them: The Cart, when brought a little nearer, became
unweildy by Reason of the Barricado planted in it, and being to pass through a
small gutter, one Wheel stuck fast in the Slough, which brought the Cart
suddenly to the Left, whereby the Drivers lay all open to their right Flanker,
when presently they fired upon them out of the said Flanker, and having so fair
a shot upon them, and not being above Pistol shot from the place, they killed
six of the Enemy, and wounded fifteen, as they found afterward, which no doubt
made them too late to repent of their Resolution, not to follow their Captains
Counsel and Example in leaving the Siege; for now they presently departed: So
as at Sun rise, they within the house espied forty of them marching away, but
how many more were in the Company they could not tell.

The Indians it seemed went toward Blue poin, where it is said they killed
several persons: but those in the house fea^ed they went for more help, and
expected their Return, but it seems their Courage failed them, as to another
Att^mpt, upon an house so well garrisoned, and ^anfully defended. Major Philips
sent to the Town for help, acquainting them with what had passed, but none was
sent them, either that da^, or the next, so as having spent almost all their
Ammunition, the people that were with him, would not be persuaded to tarry
longe^, then the Monday (...): which constrained him and his Family to remove
to the Town; about a Fortnight after, the Indians hearing thereof, came and
burnt down the empty house. There were fifty persons in the said house during
the time of the Siege, and but ten able hands; they had five more that could do
something, but through Age, or minority, not able to make any notable
Resistance; yet so it pleased God, in whose hands are all men's lives and limbs,
and who is never wont to fail them, who in time of danger are ready so to
confide in his power, and goodness, as not to neglect the use of due means for
their own Preservation, so to order things, that not one person of all those
fifty, was either killed, or mortally wounded. Major Philips himself was
wounded, but not dangerously at the beginning of the Assault, his Mal's with
other Edifices were the first day burned by the Enemy, and so were all the
houses at Saco, or most of them soon after, that were above the F^sher-mens
stages. One Mrs. Hitcock being carried Captive by the Enemy from the same
place, dyed in the Winter following, by eating some poisonous Root, in stead of
a ground out, as was reported by the Indians afterward.

Much about the same time, five persons going up to the River of Saco, were all
kiiled by the same Indians.

These Tragedies being thus acted at Casco Bay, and Saco, those Barbarous
Enemies dispersed themselves in parties, intending to do all the mischief they
could to all the English, inhabiting about that side of the Country; In the
same Month of September they came down toward Pascat^qua, doing the like
Spoil upon the Inhabitants of the several Branches of that River, which they
had been doing elsewhere; In the first place they burned the two Cheslyes
houses about Oyster River, and killed two men that were passing along the River
in a Canoo; and carried away an old Irishman, with a young man taken from
about Exceter, who yet both of them soon after made an escape to a Garrison at
Salmon-Falls in Kittary by the help of an Indian better minded then the rest,
the first after seven weeks, the other after a Months Captivity.

Much about that time, one Goodman Robinson of Exceter with his Son were
traveling toward Hampton, where, as they passed along, they were waylaid by
three Indians, viz. John Samson, Cromwell, and John Linde, who shot down the old
man, whom they left dead upon the place; his Son, hearing the Guns escaped
their hands, by running into a Sw^mp, whither the Indians pursued him, but
could not overtake him, so as he got safe into Hampton about midnight, where he
declared what befell him by the way, and how narrowly he avoided the danger,
intimating like wise, that he feared his Father was killed, which was found too
true, by Lieut. Swet, who the next day with a dozen Soldiers, of the Town,
went to search those woods, where they sound the poor old man, shot through at
his back, the bullet having pierced through his body, and was stopped by the
skin on the other side: Another of Exceter, called Foulsam, was at the same
time driving a pair of Oxen in the same Road, where, soon after he heard the
Report of the Guns when Robinson was killed, he espied the th^ee Indian^
creeping upon their bellies toward him, to do as much for him as they had done
for Robinson, but leaving his Oxen, he put on his horse with all speed, and so
was delivered from the danger that the other fell into, it is reported that one
of the Indians made a shot at him; but he was either gotten out of their reach,
or else they m^ssed their aim at that time. The same Indians had a little
before met with another English man in those woods, one Charles Randlet, whom
they carried Captive, although he soon after escaped out of their hands, by the
help of another Indian called James. It is said there were four Indians of that
Company, and that the fourth was sent away with Randlet, so that there were but
three seen together at the killing, and pursuing the other forementioned. One
of the said Indians, viz. John Samson was killed by some of Capt. Hathorns
Soldiers at Casco Bay in September following 1676 when the Scouts of our
forces came upon the Indians on the sudden, and had a small brush with them;
but all the rest made a shift to get away: As for the other two, viz. Cromwell,
and Io^n Linde; one of them, it is said, is since killed, or taken and sold
away, the other is at Kennibeck, whom vengeance may also in due time overtake,
as it has done the other.

Within a few days after that barbarous Fact at Oyster River, two Indians, viz
one named Andrew, and the other Hope-hood, the Son of him called Robin Hood,
assaulted the house of one Tozer at Newechewannick, wherein were fif^^en
persons, yet all women and Children, who without all d^ubt had all of them
fallen into the merciless hands of the two cruel and barbarous Caytiffes, had
not a young maid of about Eighteen years of Age first espied them, who being
endued with more Courage then ordinarily the rest of her Sex use to be, (the
blessing of Iael light upon her) first shut to the door, whereby they were
denied Entrance, till the rest within escaped to the next house, that was
better Fo^tified; That young Ui^ago kept the door fast against them so long
till the Indians had chopped it in pieces with their Ha^chets, when entering the
house, they knocked the poor maid down with their Hatchets, and gave her many
other wounds, leaving her for dead upon the place; after which, they passed on
toward the next dwelling, in their way meeting with two Children, that had
escaped the house first broken open by them, they killed one of them, of three
years old, which could not follow fast enough, or else they that carried it,
could not convey it over a Fence soon enough to save themselves and it; And
carried away the other of seven year old, which yet was returned safe within
half a year after: The poor Maid that had ventured her own Life so far, to save
many others, was by a strange Providence enabled to recover so much strength
after they were gone, as to repair to the next Garrison, where she was soon
after healed of her wound^, and restored to perfect health again.

The next day toward night more of the Barbarous Enemies being gathered
together they made another Assault upon the neighboring dwellings.

The English, as many as could be spared out of the Garrison, (not above eight
in number) pusued after them about half a mile, but night coming on, it was
judged best to retreat, l^st otherwise they might have been Intercepted in
their return home, by any of them lying in Ambush, which is their usual way of
doing mischief. After diverse shot made on both sides, but five of the Enemies
appeared: who yet took the Advantage of Captain Wincals absence, (whose
dwelling was not far off) to burn his house and Bar^e, with another house, and
two Barns more, wherein was much English Corn; above an hundred Bushels was
supposed to be in one of them. After they had done this mischief they fled away.

The next day after, the same Indians, or others of their Fellows, came upon
the other side of the River, from whence they shot over several times, to some
that were grinding in the Mill, but after the exchanging of many shot on both
sides of the River, betwixt them, six of the Enemy showed themselves in the
Twilight, uttering several Insolent and barbarous Speeches calling our men
English dogs, etc. yet all this while out of reach of their shot, and then they
ran all away like dogs after they had done barking.

After this, those very Indians, as was supposed, burned five or six houses
about Oyster River, and killed two men, viz. one William Roberts and his Son in
Law. The Inhabitants of Dover, with some other R^solute young men, being much
provoked by these many Insolences, and injuries done by the Enemies, obtained
liberty from the Major of the Regiment, to try whether they could not meet with
some of the Indians, by secret Ambushes, and sculking amongst the Bushes and
Trees, as the Indians used to do with them, to which End about twenty divided
themselves into several small parties: soon after as they were looking after
the Enemy, a party of ours espied five of the Indians, some gathering Corn in
the Field while the rest of them were busied in beating of an Oven to bake some
of the fruit which they gathered also in the same Field.

The English were at such a distance that they could not make any sign to their
Fellows, without being discovered by the Indians in the Field; wherefore two of
them crept as near as they could to the house, at one end of the Field, where
they suddenly rushed upon two of the wretches, and knocked them down with the
Butt end of their Muskets, which was not done so silently, but the other three
in the Field took the Alarm, and fled away, who else might as easily have been
surprised as the other two.

These Outrages thus daily committed, filled all the Plantations about
Pascataqua with fear and confusion; scarce any place, where there was not
either Reason for some to complain of the loss of their Friends, or burning of
their houses; which caused most of them that lived scatteringly, at any
distance from Neighbors, either to garrison their houses, or else to desert
their own dwellings, and to repair to their next Neighbors that were better
fortified then themselves; But all the Inhabitants in those parts in general,
were Alarmed to stand upon their Guard.

On the seventh of October following, being a day of public Humiliation, a man
was sh^t down as he was riding between two garrison houses about
Newechewannick* and dyed of his wounds within two hours after; About the same
instant of time two young men were shot dead about a mile from that place;
These two had their Arms or Guns with them, which were carried away by them
that killed them, together with their upper garments; It is not said that these
three last, (though killed upon a day of Humiliation) were surprised in their
repairing to, or returning from the place of public worship, which would in a
great measure have abated the sorrow of their sad Funerals, if when they were
suddenly arrested by the Harbingers of Death, they had been found so doing.

Soon after this, they Assaulted another house at Oyster River, the which,
although it was garrisoned, yet meeting with a good old man, whose Name was
Beard without the Garrison, they killed him upon the place, and in a barbarons
manner cut off his head, and set it upon a Pole in derision, not far off about
the same time they burned another house and Barn.

Upon the sixteenth of October being Saturday, about an hundred of the Indians
were gathered together, to Assault Newechewannick; They began with one named
Tozer, half a mile from the upper Garrison, at Salmon Falls. The said Tozer was
presently killed his Son taken Captive, (but returned after some Months
Restraint) several Guns being shot at this Assault, Alarmed Lieut. Plaisted at
the next Garrison, who like a man of a public Spirit immediately sent out
seven men from the Garrison under his Command, to see what the matter was, but
being met by an Ambush laid in the way as they went, lost two or three of their
Company, the rest hardly escaping back to the place whence they came,
whereupon, the said Lieut. Plaisted immediately dispatched away a Messenger to
Major Waldern at Quechecho, which because it seems to be the last time that
ever that good and useful man set pen ^o paper, shall here be Inserted.

Salmon Falls October 16. 1675.
Mr. Richard Waldern and Lieut. Coffin, these are to inform you, that just now
the Indians are engaging us with at least one hundred men, And have slain four
of our men already, Richard Tozer, James, Barrny, Isaac Botte^, and Tozers
Son, and burnt Benon^ Hodsdans house; Sir, if ever you have any love for us,
and the Country, now she your self with men to help u^, or else we are all in
great danger to be slain, unless our God wonderf^lly appear for our
Deliverance. They that cannot fight, let them pray; Not else, but I Rest,

Yours to serve you Signed by, Roger Plaisted, George Broughton.


What Answer was returned to this importunate and pathetical Letter is not
fully known at present; most probably he that was most concerned in the
Contents of it was either absent from home, or in no Capacity to send the
Relief desired; which if it could have been had, might have prevented the sad
mischief that fell out the next day; when Lieut. Plaisted being more earne^^ly
bent to perform that last office of love to his deceased Friend, whom he could
not by all his Endeavors save from the danger of death, while they were in the
Land of the living would needs venture himself with twenty Soldiers out of his
Garrison, to fetch off the dead bodies.

To that end he ordered a pair of Oxen to be yoked to bring them to his
Garrison, in order to their Christian buryal, not considering that the Indians
lay sculking thereabouts, waiting for such opportunityes. They went first to
the furthest place, where they found To. Tozers body, and put it into their
Cart, but coming back to take up the other two bodies, which were fallen in a
little Swampe nearer to the Garrison, they were set upon by an hundred and
fifty of the Enemy, that had hid themselves in the bushes, and under a stone
wall, and Loggs in the way as they were to pass; By the sudden noise of the
guns, the Cattle being frighted ran away to the garrison with such of the dead,
as were first laid up thereon, (and possibly with one of them wounded at that
instant) leaving their Owners to fight it out with their Enemies. Lieut.
Plaisted being thus desperately Assaulted, he with his twenty men, was forced
to retreat to a place of better Advantage; but being there so hotly pursued,
they were not able to abide it long; Although they killed and mortally wounded
several of the Indians, as themselves have since confessed: but they most of
them being so much overmatched, took the opportunity of a fair Retreat, and so
got safe to their Garrison, while Lieut. Plaisted out of the height of his
Courage, disdaining either to fly from, or yield himself (for it is said) the
Indians were loath to kill him, but desirous rather to take him Prisoner) into
the hands of such cursed Caytiffes, did fight it cut desperately, till he was
slain upon the place, his Eldest Son and another man were slain in their too
late Retreat, and his other Son was sorely, wounded, so that he dyed within a
few weeks after.

The Indians were contented with this mischief for the present (and indeed if
all the English they had to deal with, had showed the like Resolution with this
Plaisted they would not have done half the mischeef, that since has been done
by them) and slunke away into the woods before the next day, when Captain Frost
came up from Sturgeon Creck, (a few miles below the River) with a party of his
friends, and buried the dead: During these onsets, the Enemy also took their
Advantage to burn three houses, and two barns before they left the place.

The latter End of the same Month they burned a Mill near the same place
belonging to Mr. Hutchinson a Merchant of Boston; from whence they came down
lower toward Sturgeon Creek, where they burned one house, and killed two men,
not far from Captain Frost's dwelling, he escaping himself very narrowly, being
shot at by the Enemy, about Ten in Number, who might easily have burned his
house, and taken all that were in it, being but three boys besides himself,
had he not used this policy, to call out to some to march this, and the other
way, to look after the Indians, as if he had had many at hand to Command, which
under God was the means of his escape; for his house was neither Fortified, nor
well manned, yet was far from Neighbors.

The next day the said Indians passed down the River on Kittary side, killed
one man, whose house they first plundered, and then set it on fire; All this
was done just over against Portsmouth, from whence out of a small Battery was
discharged a piece of Ordnance, which by a good Providence was directed to
(...) fling its shot as it ^ell very near a pa^ty of the Indians, for they were
to affrighted therewith, (if none of them were killed) that they left good part
of their plunder near the place: They were pursued by some of the English,
before they could recover their home, and by the help of the Snow that fell
about that time, were traced till they were overtaken, but being near a Swamp,
themselves escaped, for have leaving two of their Packs behind them.

Soon after they went up the River again to Quechecho, where they burned an
house, and two or three Barns. Another Party of them got over or beyond the
other branches of Pascataqua River, toward Exceter, and Lampny Eyle River,
where they killed one man: sundry of them were seen in the woods about Exceter;
and between Hampton and Exceter, where they killed one or two men in the woods
as they were traveling homewards, occasioning the people of those Towns to
stand continually upon their guard, which proved a great annoyance to the
Inhabitants.

But to look a little back to the Plantations more Eastward from Pascataqua
River, where these outrages of the Indians first began.

At Casco Bay Lieut. Ingersons Son, with another man going out a fowling about
this time, were both killed before they returned-home, his Fathers houses being
burned, with wany others also thereabouts.

At Black point, Lieut. Augur with two more were assaulted by the Indians,
where after many shot exchanged betwixt them, himself was so wounded, that he
dyed soon after, and his brother also was killed within a few days afterward,
not far from the same place.

When the rising of the Indians first began in those Eastern parts, (with us
called the County of Yorkshire) Captain Wincol of Newechewannick, with some
others, having a Sympathy for the sufferings of the Neighbors, marched up that
way with a small party of men; In his first Skirmish with the Enemy he chanced
to loose two o^ three of his Company; the rest being not above eleven in all,
as they were marching along by the Sea side were assaulted by a great number of
the Indians, judged to be an hundred and fifty: he being hard beset with so
great a number retreated to an heap of Bolts that lay near the water side, by
the shelter of which they lay safe from the Indians Guns, and so well p^yed
their few Guns, that they slew many of their Enemies, and put them all to a
kind of Route at the last: After which by the help of an old Canoo, they
recovered safe to the other side of the Bank. But nine Saco men had worse
success, who yet came with a very good Intention to help their friends, upon
the hearing of their Guns; but as they came to Rescue Captain Wincol with his
small party, they themselves fell into an Ambush of the Indians, and so were
all cut off, with two other men also, near the place where the first Skirmish
was, for the Indians from the shore side could di^scern any that were coming
toward them, when they were a great way off* and so might easily way-lay them,
before they could come up to them. Near upon seven houses were burned about
this time, and some persons killed at Black point.

Two persons likewise were killed at Wells in the beginning of the winter, one
of them were servant to Mr. William Simonds (one of the principal men in the
Town aforesaid) the Gentleman himself with his Family were removed to a
Garrison house in the middle of the Town, his servant going early in the
morning to look after some business there; ta^yed longer t^en was needful to
provide something for himself, the Ind^ans (...) themselves to breakfast with
him, making the poor Fellow pay the shot, when they had done, with the loss of
his life.

A week after one Cross was slain at Wells likewise, who was a kind of a
distracted F^llow. Also one Isaac Cousins was there killed in the beginning of
Winter, after there had been some Overtures of pea^e betwixt Major Waldern and
the Indians.

With such kind of mutual Encounters was the latter part of the year spent
betwixt the Indians and the English from Pascataqua River to Kennibeck, from
the beginning of August to the End of November, wherein many were slain on both
sides: In one place, and in another; of the English in those parts were slaiin
upward of fifty. The Enemy lost as appeared afterward by their own Confession,
above ninety, partly in the foresaid Skirmishes, and partly in their joining
with the Indians to the Westward, whither it is said, many of them were invited
to repair, to help destroy the English, in hope to enjoy their possessions
afterward; But God had otherwise determined, who did arise at last to save the
meek ones of the Earth, and plead the Cause of his People.

The Governor and Counsel of Massachusetts, had, at this time, their hands full
with the like Attempts of Philip and his Accomplices to the Westward, yet were
not unmindful of the deplorable Condition of these Eastern Plantations; having
committed the care thereof to the Ma^^rs of the Respective Regiments of the
several Co^ntyes on that side of the Country, but more especially to the care
and prudence of the Honored Major D. D^^^on, the Major General of the whole
Colony, a Gentleman, who by his great insight in, and long Experience of all
Martial Affairs, was every way accomplished for the managing that whole Affair;
He had, to ease the other side of the Country, drawn out a sufficient number of
Soldiers from the next Countyes, to have reduced all the Indians Eastward to
their obedience; but just as they were intended to march up to the head
Quarters of the Indians, to fall upon them there, viz. to Ossapy, and
Pigwauch^t, about an hundred miles up into the Country Northward.

The Winter setting in so sharp and severe in the beginning of December, and
latter end of November, It was not possible to have marched a days Iourny into
the woods, without hazarding all their lives that should venture ^p; The Snow
being found generally in those woods, four foot thick on the 10th. of December,
so as it was not possible for any to have traveled that way, unless they
carried Rackets under their feet, wherewith to walk upon the top of the Snow:
This alone Consideration forced them to lay aside their design for the
present, but soon after it was done to their hands; for the depth of the Snow,
and sharpness of the ^^ld were so extreme, that the Indians in those parts were
so pinched therewith, that being hunger sta^ved, they began to sue for peace,
making their Address first to Major Waldern on that account, by whose
mediations that whole body of Indians Eastward were brought to an hopeful
Conclusion of peace, which was mutually agreed upon, and possibly might have
remained firm enough to this day had there not been too just an occasion given,
for the breaking of the same by the wicked practice of some lewd persons, which
opened the door, and made way for the bringing in all those sad Calamities, and
mischiefs that have since fallen upon those parts of the Country; As shall
hereafter be declared.

In the latter end of June, 1676 The Indians that had made a general Conspiracy
against the English were strangely dispersed, and dispirited, so as they from
that time began to separate one from another, and every Nation of them to shift
for themselves, as has been already mentioned in the ^ormer part of this
Narrative. ^anoni^us the great Sachem of the Narrbagansets distrusting the
proffers of the English, was slain in the woods by the Mohawks, his Squaw
surrendering her self, by this means her Life was spared.

Many of those about Lancaster, and the places adjoining thereunto, did
cu^ningly endeavor to hide themselves amongst those Indians about Pasca^aqua,
that had newly made their submission to the English, by Major Walderns means
and concluded a peace, yet could neither dissemble their nature and disposition
past before from suspicion of mischief* nor yet so a^tificially conceal their
persons, but they were easily discerned by such as in former times had any
acquaintance with the Eastern Indians by way of Trade, or other Converse:
Whereupon the forces newly raised in the Massachusetts, under the Command of
Captain William Hatborne, and Captain Joseph Syll, designed for the subduing of
those Indians about the River of Mer^imack, and Pascataqua, that still stood
out in Hostility against the English, meeting with those under the Command of
Major Waldern aforesaid, and Capt. Frost of Ki^tary; It was mutually agreed
detwixt those several Commanders to s^iz: upon all those Indians that at that
time were met together about Major Walderns dwelling at Quechecho; The
Con^rivement succeeded according to expectation, and all the said Indians were
handsomely surprised, September 6th. 1676. without the loss of any persons
life, either Indian or English; to the number of near four hundred: by which
device, after our Forces had them all in their hands, they separated the
peaceable from the perfidious, that had been our E^^mies, during the late
Troubles; finding above two hundred involved in the former Rebellion, more or
less, accordingly they were sent down to the Governor and Council at Bos^on;
who adjudged seven or eight of them Immedi^tely to dy^; such as were known to
have had their hand in the blood of the English, or that had been shed by their
means, the rest, that were found only Accessaries to the late mischiefs, had
their lives spared, but were sent into other parts of the world, to try the
difference between the Friendship of their Neighbors here, and their Service
with other Masters elsewhere.

Those who had been always either peaceable and true to the English, never
intermedling in the quarrel, as Wannalancet the Sagamore of Pennicook and some
others were quietly dismissed to their own places.

Besides these that were surprised at the time aforesaid; there were several
others, who had been the chief Actors, that were taken up and down in those
woods beyond Merrimack, and so were delivered up to Justice; As John Monoco,
Sagamore Sam, old Iethro, with some others, as has been already mentioned, yet
young Ieth^o brought in forty a^ one time. It was a special favor from God, so
to order it, that the Indians aforesaid, were so surprised: for had they
continued in their former Rebellion, and had taken the opportunity to have
joined with the Eastern Indians, as some of them did a few Months before, they
would in all likelihood have utterly destroyed all the Plan^ations of the
English ^^yond Pascataqua River; As manif^stly appears by the mischief which
was lately done by the means of a few, that by too much Connivence of some in
those parts, that entertained a better opinion of them then it seems they
deserved. For whereas mention formerly was made of a small party of Indians
that on the third of May in this present year, had murdered one Thomas Ke^^bel
of Bradford, and carried away his wife and five Children Captive, yet two or
three of the Actors did, upon what Consideration is not known, retu^n the woman
and Children again within six weeks, and because of their voluntary returning
of them, (...) dealt more favorably withal; being only put into prison at
Dove: (...) a time, yet possibly conceiving that a prison was but a prep^ration
^or a worse evil, they took an opportunity ( two of the chief Actors in the
foresaid mischief, called the one Simond, the other Andrew) to convey
themselves out of the place of Restraint, and afterward going amongst the
Amo^^^scoggan and Kennibeck Indians, have joined with them in those bloody and
cruel depredations lately made in those parts, which follow in order next to be
related.

Some little Color or pretense of injury was a Headged before those Eastern
Indians began their outrage both in the former, as well as in the present year,
the chief Actor or rather the beginner of all the foresaid mischiefs Eastward,
is one Squando, the Sagamore of Saco Indians, whose Squaw a^ is said was abused
by a rude and indiscreet act of some English Seamen in the last S^mmer, 1675.
who either overset the Canoo wh^^ein the said Squaw with her Child were
swimming in a River thereabouts, or else to try whether the Children of the
Indians as they had heard, could S^imme as naturally as any other Creatures,
w^ttingly cast her Child into the water; but the Squaw immediately diving into
the water after it, fetched it up from the bottom of the River, yet it so
falling out that within a while after the said Child dyed, (which it might have
done if no such Affront had been offered) The said Squando Father of the Child
has been so provoked thereat, that he has ever since set himself to do all
the mischief he can to the English in those par^s, and was never as yet since
that time ^ruly willing to be Reconciled. Although he is said to have sent home
some that were taken Captive the last year. Surely if their hearts had not been
secretly filled with malice and Revenge before, they might have obtained
satisfaction for the wrong done, at an easier Rate More probable it is, that
this was only an occasion to vent the mischief they formerly had conceived in
their hearts.

There is an injury of an higher nature, mentioned as the ground of their
quarrel with us, who live about Pemma quid, and Kennibeck, which happened the
last Spring, viz. one ^aughton with another person or more who having obtained
under the hand of Major Waldern a warrant to seize any Indians Eastward, that
had been guilty of any Murder or spoil done to the English in those parts; did
most perfidiously and wickedly enti^e some of the Indians about Cape Sables,
who never had been in the least manner guilty of any injury done to the
English, aboard their V^ssel, or else some other way, and th^^ carried them
away to sell them for slaves; which the Indians in those parts look upon as an
injury done to themselves, and have alleged it to the Inhabitants of
Pemmaquid, as one of the principal grounds of their present quarrel: The thing
alleged is too ture as to matter of Fact, and the persons that did it were
lately committed to prison in order to their further trial. Yet all those
Indians do, or may know full well that they who did them that wrong, were
liable to due punishment, (or else their quarrel might be accounted just, and
they considered as Indians, must have the more allowance) if they could be
found, nor ever were any countenanced amongst us, that had done them any kind
of injury, nor did those that take upon them the revenging of the injury, know
that they were Inhabitants of this Country that did the wrong; nor was then
ever any orderly Complaint made thereof, but this cannot excuse their
perfidiousness and Cruelty, some other pretenses were alleged by the said
Indians that yet do bear no proportion to the mention of a wrong or i^jury,
viz. because our Traders were forbidden to fell any Amuni^ion to any Indians
whatsoever; which those Indians say they cannot live without; yet seeing
themselves, as well as the Westward Indians have so ill improved, that which
they had before, there was little Reason why they should quarrel with us, for
selling no more:

Further also it is affirmed by some persons worthy of Credit, that for diverse
years past have lived in those parts, that the Indians thereabouts, need not
have wanted powder or shot, only they wanted something wherewith to cloak their
malicious and barbarous practices of late committed against us; but there being
different opinions about this point, we shall leave it at the present.

But this being premised in Reference to the pretended ground, or occasion of
the quarrel; It remains that the Effects thereof, be now related.

Before the War with Philip was well ended to the Southward, there was a
fresh Alarm sounded again to the Eastward, for on the eleventh of August, 1676.
The very day before Philips heart (that had harbored so many misch^evous and
Treacherous devices against the English was by one of his own Company shot
through) did a party of Indians beg^n their Outrages at Casco in a most
perfidious and treacherous manner, killing and carrying away Captive to the
number of thirty persons, and burning their houses, amongst whom was the Family
of one Antony Bracket Inhabitant of Casco, who was thought to have been killed,
but he himself with his wise and one of his five Children carried away Cap^tive
with a Negro, did happily make an escape from their bloody and deceitful hands,
In November next ensuing*

The manner how Antony Bracket and his wife made their escape was very
remarkable, and therefore judged worthy to be inserted here although out of due
place, the Indians that led them Captive, having brought them to the North side
of Casco Bay: News was brought to the said Indians of the surprizal of Arowsick
house in Kennib^ck, withal the store therein, which did so rejoice them, that
they made all haste to share in the good things there to be had. Thus eager to
be gone they promised Bracket and his wife that they should have also a share
therein if they would make haste after them, bringing along a burden allotted
to each of them: The woman having a little before observed an old Burchin Canoo
lying by the water side, hoped it was an opportunity Providence offered for
their escape; whereupon she first prudently asked of the Indians to let the
Negro their own servant (as the same time carried Captive by them) help them to
carry their burdens, which was granted: then she begged of them a piece or two
of meat, which was not denied them. Thus being furnished with help and
provision, the Indians leaving them thus behind to come after with their
several burdens and a young Child; They could not but look upon it as a nutus
Divinus, to bid them, shift for themselves: the woman also found a needle and
thread in the house, where they stayed on that side of the Bay, with which having
mended the Canoo, they ventured to get away; which prosperously succeeded: for
in that old Canoo they crossed a water eight or nine miles broad, and when they
came on the South side of the Bay, they might have been in as much danger of
other indians, that had lately been about Black point, and had taken it; but
they were newly gone: So things on all sides thus concurring to help forward
their Deliverance, they came safely to the Fat at Black point, where also by
special Providence they met with a Vessel bound for Pascataqua, that came in to
that Harbor, but a few hours before they came thither, by which means they
Arrived safe in Pascataqua River, soon after, all which Circumstances are very
worthy to be noted.

Amongst those Indians that seized this Brackets Family, the chief was one
Simond, that newly or a little before had escaped out of Dover Prison, where he
was not over carefully looked to, he had had his hand in the murder of sundry
English, as himself confessed; not missing save one in the which he had
discharged his gun upon, but because he came in voluntarily, bringing in a
woman and fire Children of the English, who had been carried Captive a little
before, it was questioned, whether his last act of submission might not
balance his former transgression, and therefore was he committed to that, not
so secure a Prison, till his Case might be further considered of,. It is said
that coming to that Brackets house over night he pulled forth a counterfieted
pass, under the hands of some public Officers, or men entrusted with that
Service, making show of all Friendship, but in the morning or soon after, he
pulled off his Vizour of a friend, and discovered what he was, yet granting
Life to this person and his Family, that did not, or could not resist, which he
denied to some of the Neighbors not far off, who were many of them killed by
this bloody Villainy, and his Partners.

There are some Circumstances in the Assault of Anthony Brackets house very
considerable, which, because it was the first Outrage committed by the Indians
in this their second Insurrection, 1676. are worthy of a more particular
remembering.

This Indian forementioned called Simond, after he had escape out of Prison at
Dover, came up to Gasco, and either in the end of July, or beginning of August,
acquainted himself with this Antony Bracket, and often frequented his house: Upon
the ninth of August, some of the Indians having killed a Cow of his, the Indian
Simond coming to his house promised to bring the Indians to him that had killed
his Cow In the mean time they of the place sent two men to Major Walderns at
Dover, to complain of this injury done by the Indians; but before their return,
very ea^ly in the morning on the eleventh of August, Simond with a party of
Indians came to Antony Brackets house, and told him there were the Indians that
had killed his Cow; but as soon as they had said that, the Indians went further
into his house and took hold of all the Guns they could see, Antony Bracket
asked what was the meaning of that, Simond presently replied, that so it must
be, asking him withal, whether he had rather serve the Indians, or be slain by
them, Antony Bracket Answered, that if the Case were so, he would rather choose
to serve them, then be killed by them: Simond replied, that then they must be
bound, which presently was done. The said Bracket, his wife, and a Negro were
all bound by the Indians, his wife had a Brother, who offering to resist was
killed forthwith, the rest with five Children were (...) away Prisoners.

Two hours after one Pike that lived not far off, but knowing no thing of all
this, went up in a Canoo toward one Robert Corbins house* where he found one
Humphry Durham, and Benjamin Atwel at work about their Hay, after a little
stay, he left them intending to go up higher with his Canoo, but as soon as he
was a little part, he heard Guns shot off, which made him with another man he
had with him, presently return back; before he came beyond Corbins house he saw
an English boy running with all haste, which made him fear some mischief was in
hand, and presently a Volley of shot came against them, but the Bullets flying
over their heads, did them no hurt: presently Simond Indian appeared, and
called them to come a shore; but they liked not his Courtesy, but presently
turning their Canoo into the stream got out of the reach of their G^ns, hasting
down to his own house with all speed; when he came near to his house, he called
to the People to make have away, toward the Garrison house, and bid the rest
look to themselves, and fire upon the Indians, that were coming against them:
In the mean while, the Indians passing from Anthony Brackets to Corbins, killed
Corbin himself, with Humphry Durham, and Benjamin Atwel forementioned: Then
passing on to other houses, carried away some of them Captive, and killed
others. At one of the next houses, the women and Children got off into the
water by a Canoo; but one James Ross, his wife and Children were carried away:
Corbins wife with one of the other men's wiv^s; and the Children of another of
them, they likewise carried away.

In another side of the Town, three were as they were going to reap at Antony
Brackets, passing from an house where they left their Canoo, met with John
Mount-joy and one Wakely, to whom they told what had happened, soon after they
heard two Guns shot of, whereby it seems two men were killed, wherefore coming
back toward Thomas Brackets where they had left their Canoo, they saw him shot
down by the Indians; one of the three not so well able to run hid himself in
the bushes in h^pe to make his escape more conveniently afterward, which
accordingly he did; but in the mean time he saw the Indians carry away Thomas
Brackets wife and Children; Soon after the three men aforesaid got safe to Mr.
Mount joys Garrison, but not trusting to the Se^u^ity of that Gar^rison, they
soon after repaired to an Island in the Bay, called James Andrews Island.

One George Jews and his wife tarryed all this time in their house till the
next day, when they had oppo^tunity to get safe to the Island aforesaid,
together with the two men that were now returned from Major Wal^ern; whither
they had been sent, but too late, to make complaint of the Indian; that had
counter fie^ed his pass to travoil into those parts, and had done this mischief.

The day after one George Felt suspecting the worst by reason of a smoke, he
saw on the opposite side of the Town, took his wife and Children into a Canoo
to see what the matter wa^, but when he came near a point of Land not far off,
he found several of his Neighbors goods which made him conclude their Owners
were killed, which was a sufficient warning to him likewise to fly for his
Life, which he did to the same Island. After they had sundry of them escaped
thither, some of them remembered that they had left powder behind them in one or
two places; whereupon they resolved to venture a party of them in the night,
partly to prvent the Indians from having any Advantage thereon, and partly for
their own defense if occasion should be; Their Attempt succeeded well, for they
brought away a barrel of powder from one Wills his house, and likewise a
considerable quantity out of a Chest in a Store house, where the Indians had
been ransacking, and had taken things out of the other end of the Chest, yet
overlooked the Powder: In this surprizal of the Plantation in Casco Bay, called
Falmouth, there were thirty four persons killed and carried Captive.

That this was not a casual Attempt, but a designed plot, it will appear, in
that just about the very same time, the Indians at Kennibeck, made the like
Insurrection, whereby it is concluded, either that the Indians which escaped
from Dover, stirred them up thereunto, or else that the said Indians finding
them in a disposition tending that way, by reason of some inj^ries done them
that dwell farther Northward, they offered their Service to help forward the
design.

It is to be noted here, that the Indians about Kennibeck were persuaded to
continue their former amity with the English notwithstanding the report of
Philips rising that year before, and the Outrages committed the last Autumn,
and winter following, yet which is more, they had lately renewed their League
with the English in those parts, although they had often complained to those of
Pemmaquid, of the injury they suffered, in the withholding from them the Trade
of Powder, and shot, without which they said they cannot subsist, and for want
of which it is alleged by themselves, that some of them perished the last
Winter.

But the Quarrel of late fallen out betwixt the English, and the Indians about
Kennibeck, and Eastward thereof, being a matter of great Consequence; For the
farther satisfaction of the Reader, it shall in what follows, be more
particularly described; It being the duty of every one that publishes things
of this nature, to to do the right of an Historian to all sorts of persons, any
way concerned in what is made public; The Information was received from a
prudent person, an Eye and Ear witness of all that happened amongst the said
Indians, both the former and present year, and one that was of more public
Concernment in those Transactions then some others, therefore may the more heed
be given thereto. Mention is already made of what happened in September, 1675. to
the Company belonging to a Sloop, and two other Boats, that went up Casco Bay
to gather Indian Corn; Upon that Accident it is said, diverse Indians on the
East side of Kennibeck River repaired to their Fort at Totonnock (a place up
higher into the Country beyond Kennibeck and Shipscot River) where was an
English trading house. And the Indians Eastward of the said River, had as yet
done no harm to any of the English, yet did Captain Sylvanus Davis Agent for
Major Clarke and Captain Lake of Boston, upon these Overtures think it fit to
^etch down the Powder and Shot with other goods from the said Trading house,
telling the Indians, by the Messenger sent up, he would have them come down and
live below in that River, to take off Iealousies, and that he would then supply
rhem with what was needful.

But the Messenger told them, in Case they would not come down, and deliver np
their Arms, the English would kill them. He that se^deth a Message by the hand
of a Fool says Solomon, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage; This
Message was delivered by him that went, as was confessed by himself, who put it
into his mouth, or whether it was deviz^d in his own heart, it concerns not us
now to enquire, but the damage that side of the Country has been made to
drink thereby, is not easy to recount; for upon this Threatening Message the
Indians forsook their Fort presently, and went Eastward, and sent abroad to
John's River and to the Sea side to get all the Indians they could together to
come up Penobscot River.

A Gentleman who at that time lived at Pemmaquid, a kind of Supe^^^tendent over
the Affairs of that place, considering the sad state things were running into,
labored to obtain a Parley with the said Indians, or some of them, which after
much trouble and cost, he did accomplish: But (...) the mean time, such was the
violence used by some refractory English in those parts, that they could scarce
be restrained from offering vio^^nce to the persons he sent up as Messengers,
or others that lived quietly amongst them, and did also as violently set
themselves to oppose himself, or any others that acted with more moderation,
then the rest: protesting against them, as those who forgain supplied the
Indians with Powder and Shot, and said they would kill any Indian they met;
others at Monhiggan offered five pound for every Indian that should be brought,
yet would not these persons that were so violent against the Indians in their
discourse, be persuaded upon any Terms, then, or afterward, to go out to fight
against the Indians in an orde^ly way; as appeared both by their Security in
not standing better upon their gua^d, and by their sudden flight afterward,
running away like a Flock of Sheep, at the barking of any little dog: Things
being in this posture, what could be expected but a present war with the
Indians, although as it seems, there were few or nonel^ke to be found, willing
to undertake it, or fit to manage it in those parts. How ever, the person
aforesaid, understand^ng, the General Court at Boston had appointed a Counsel
of War at Kennibeck, applied himself to them, laying before them the desperate
state things were falling into; whereupon they issued our warrants to restrain
all manner of persons from meddling with the Indians without farther order,
which within few days should be had. In the mean time the Sachems of the
Indians meet at Pemmaquid; where, after many complaints made of the hard
dealing of the English in Kennibeck River, they came to Terms of Peace,
promising to keep true Friendsh^p with the English; and to hinder the
Amonoscoggan Indians from meddling with the English, if by any means they could,
and also to return peaceably in the Spring of the year. This Gentleman
aforesaid, having a long time waited to go to Boston; was willing to take the
opportunity of the present Winter, hoping things were now pretty well settled in
those parts betwixt the Indians and the English; ^ound soon after, that he was
cited thither to Answer some Complaints (though made without ground) for
selling Powder and Shot to the Indians contrary to Order.

But those false opinions being easily blown away by his own appearance at
Boston, and so having dispatched his occasions there, he returned before the
winter was over to Pemmaquid, where hearing of a Vessel that intended to take
Indians in those parts, and carry them away to a market, the which he had many
strong Reasons to believe, (it being no hard matter to surprise many such, that
suspecting by fraud, would easily be enticed aboard a Vessel to trade, or may
be to drink Liquor) sent both the Master and ^^mpany, if they had any such
intent to forbear, seeing those Indians were at peace with us, and likewise to
the Indians, to inform them of such a Vessel, and to beware thereof, but yet it
seems the Master and Company took several Indians Eastward, who were also at
peace with us, and to our great sorrow shipped them aboard for a market.

The winter being now over, the forenamed Agent of Pemmaquid, went to a meeting
of the Indians Eastward, to persuade them, of the Countries willingness to
continue a peace with them. They seemed very joyful thereat, and in the Spring
brought some presents to confirm the Peace, and to that en^^ also delivered up
an English Captive B^y to those of Kennibeck. But when the Summer came on, that
the said Indians had liberty to travail up and down the Country to visit their
Friends as they used to do; they missed those their Friends who had in the
winter perfidiously been carried away, and as is related, they fell into a Page
against the English, making Complaint thereof to the said Agent, Mr. Earthy,
Mr. Richard Oliver, and others: They were told means should be used for
bringing them back again, which had been so Transported, those to whom the
Complaint was made, did scarce believe it to be true, as not having heard
thereof from any other hand, and probably hoping none, especially after solemn
warning, would deal so perfidiously with Heathen^, to lay such a stumbling
block before them.

The Indians being certain of the thing done, could not be easily pacified,
being likewise incensed against the English, for withholding the Trade of
Powder and Shot the last winter, saying, they were frighted from their Corn the
last year by the People about Kennibeck, so as many of them dyed in the
following winter for want of Powder and Shot, wherewith to kill V^nison and
Foul; Adding withal, that if the English were their Friends as they pretended,
they would not suffer them to dye, for want thereof: However, the said Agent
making the best he could of a bad Cause, used all means to pacifi^ the
Complaynents, and to that end promised them, that if they could meet with any
of the Amonos^oggan Indians (who it seems all along had the bitterest Enmity
against the English he would give them a meeting to treat in order to a Peace,
Ma^^^ Waldern having already concluded a Peace with the Pasc^taqua and Cas^o
Indians, and by that means, if they could conclude the like peacewith the
Amonoscoggan men, (that could not yet be found) there would be a general Peace
with all the Indians Eastward of Pascataqua, which the Indians that were
present at this discourse, seemed very joyful at: yet still by one fatal
Accident or other, jealousies still seemed to increase in their minds, or else
the former injuries began to boil a fresh in their Spirits, as not being
easily digested, what ever had been said, or done to allay the offensiveness
thereof. Soon after comes a Post from Totonnock, to desire him to repair
thither according to his promise, where they told him he should meet with
Squando, and diverse Amonoscoggan Sachems, and that Mng was sent Post to fetch
the said Squando: This Gentleman mindful of his promise, went with the Post to
Kennibeck, and finding Captain Lake at his house in Arowsick; It was judged
meet, that Captain Sylves^er Davis should go along with him, with instructions
from the Counsel then sitting in Kennibeck, how to carry on their Trea^y. After
they had gone part of their way toward Totonnock, they came to an English
house, where they were told, what great jealousies of deceit in the Indians
were upon their Spirits, from what they had heard of Muggs and Tarumkin, an
Amonoscoggan Sachem: going farther to a place called Kedonu-Cook, they met with
Indians, who were very shye of telling them any thing, which added to the
former Intimation, greatly increased their fears: but being resolved of their
voyage, they went onward still in their way, yet falling short of the place on
purpose, that they might finish their business with them the next day: when
they came to their Fort, they were first saluted with a Volley of Shot, then
brought into a Wigwam where their Sachems were: Madockawando sat as chief, who
now styles himself their Minister: Being set in Council, they made Assiminasqua
their speaker; whose Adopted Son was the said Madochewando: He told them it was
not their Custom, if any came as Messengers to treat with them, to seize upon
their persons, as sometimes the Mohawks did with such as had been sent to them:
Captain Davis and the other Gentleman told them, therein they dealt like men:
Answer was presently made them; you did otherwise by our men, when fourteen
came to treat with you: And set a Guard over them, and took away their Guns:
And not only so, but a second time you required our Guns, and demanded us to
come down unto you, or else you would kill us, which was the Cause of our
leaving both our Fort, and our Corn to our great loss.

It was without doubt no small trouble to their minds, in a Treaty with these
Pagans, Haec dieipot uisse, and non potuisse refelli: Yet to put the best
Construction might be, on such Irregular actions, which could not well be
justified. They told them, the persons who had so done, were not within the
Limits of their Government, and therefore though they could not call them to an
account for so acting, yet they did utterly disallow thereof: Adding farther,
as soon as we understood thereof we sent for you to Pemmaquid, and Treated you
kindly, and kept you, as you know, from the violence of the English; The
Indians Replied, we do but inform you, and will Treat (...) in the Afternoon.
But when the Afternoon came, our Two Messengers told them, their business was
to Treat with the Amonoscoggan Sachems, and that they were forry, Squando was
not there: Then having confirmed their Peace with those Eastward Indians, they
intrea^ed the Amonoscoggan men to speak, who likewise urged Tarumkin, the chief
Amonoscoggan Sachem to speak, who after some pauze, said he had been to the
Westward, where he ^ad found many Indians unwilling for Peace. but says he, I
found three Sachems (whom he named, though those he spoke to knew them not)
willing to have peace; And for my own part, I am willing for peace, and gave
them his hand with Protestation of his continuing in Friendship, so did seven
or eight more of the Amonoscoggan men; whose Names they took, of whom Mug and
Robin Hoods Son were two. After this Madochewando asked them what they should
^o for Powder and Shot, when they had eaten up their Indian Corn, what they
should do for the Winter, for their hunting Voyages? asking withal, whether
they would have them die, or leave their Country, and go all over to the French.
Our Messengers told him, they would do what they could with the Governor, some
might be allowed them for Necessity: He said they had waited long already, and
therefore would have them now say yea, or nay, whether they should have powder
as formerly, or not? Our Messengers then Replied, you your selves say, many of
the Western Indians would not have Peace, And therefore if we sell you powder,
and you give it to the Western men, what do we but cut our own Throats? Adding
further, It is not in our power without leave, if you should wait ten year
more, to let you have powder, at which words they seemed much to be offended.

But yet the next day they resolved to go down with them, and to speak with the
Western men, thereby, if it might be, to stop their farther proceeding.

So going down with them the next day, they met with some Indians who had got
strong Liquor, with whom they fell a drinking: Our Messengers stayed at two
places for them, and finding that still they tarryed behind, not knowing what
farther to do, they went home, it being the sixth day of the week. But the next
night save one, news came to Kennibeck, that the Indians had killed diverse
English in Casco, although it was not yet known a^ Pemmaquid. Upon this News
Ca^^. Davis set out one Sentinel the next night. The rest, (such was their
Security) went all else to bed. And in the morning, were all like Laish
surprised, thus might it be said, Invadunt Aedem somno (si non) vinoq*
sepultaam. The particulars of the surprising of Kennibeck, and Arowsi^k house
are thus related by such as were acquainted therewith.

Upon the thirteenth of August, 1676. several Indians repaired in the Evening
to the house of one Mr. Hammond, an ancient Inhabitant, and Trader with the
Iudians up Kennibeck River, His daughter or a maid that was servant in the
house, either naturally afraid of the Natives, or else upon something she
observed in their Countenance, or Carriage, manifested so much fear, as made
her run out of the house to hide her self in some place abroad; The Indians
perceiving it, the more to dissemble their Treach^ry, ran after her, and
brought her into the house, telling her (although they could not persuade her
so to believe) that there was no Reason to be afraid of them: presently after
more of the Barbarous Villains coming into the house, she grew more afraid then
before, being now more strongly persuaded that they came on purpose to kill or
surprise those in the Family, whereupon she suddenly made an escape out of the
house, and presently passed into a Field of Indian Corn, whereby she might the
better avoid the danger of any pursuer, and so ran cross over the land that
night ten or twelve miles, to give them notice that lived at Shipscot River, It
is said that after she got out, she heard a noyze in the house, as if they were
fighting or scuffling within doors; but she did not count it wisdom to go back
to see what the matter was, knowing enough before of their V^llanye^, how well
soever her Mrs. (that was more versed in the Trade of the Indians) might think
of them. Those of Shipscot taking this warning escaped away as soon as they
could leaving their Cattle and their dwellings as a Prey to the Indians. What
besel Master Hammond and his Family is not yet certainly known: Reports pass up
and down, that some who came down the River afterward, saw some of the dead
stripped upon the Bank of the River, which makes us fear the worst, concerning
all the rest; for certainly the whole Eamily sixteen in Number, were all at
that time either killed, or carried away Captive, none save the maid aforesaid,
being known to make any other escape, to infor^^ their Friends l^ke Jobs
M^ssengers, wh^t befell the rest of the Fam^^y.

The Indians having in this manner surprised Mr. Hammonds house, they passed
down the River the same night; but going by another house, meddled not with the
people, only turned their Canoos a drist, that they might not find means
afterward to escape themselves, or help others so to do: possibly their chief
aim being at Arowsick house, they would not, for fear of being discovered, make
any Attempt upon any place near by: wherefore August the fourteenth very early
in the morning, having in the night, or before break of day passed over on to
the Island called Arowsick, several of them undiscovered lay hi under the (...)
behind a great Rock near adjoining, till the Sentinel was gone off from his
place, (who went off it seems sooner than was Reason, considering the danger)
when presently some Indians followed him in, at the Fort gate, (as some report)
while others of them immediately seized the Port holes thereof, and shot down
all they saw passing up and down within the Walls, and so in a little time be
came Masters of the Fort, and all that was within it: Captain Lake (joint Owner
with Major Clarke of the whole Island) hearing the bussle that was below,
betwixt the Indians and those that belonged to the place, was strangely
surprised, yet himself with Captain Sylvanus Davis and two more, understanding
that the Indians had seized the Fort, and killed diverse of the English,
apprehending it boot less, or rather beartless to stay, as not being able to
stand upon their guard, or make any resistance, made a shift to find some
passage out at a back door, whereby they escaped to the waterside, where they
found a Canoo, into which they all entered and made away toward another Island
near by: This was not done so secretly but the Indians discerned them before
they were gone far; four of them therefore basted after those that had escap^^
in another Canoo, and coming within shot, discharged their Guns upon them,
whereby Sylvanus Davis was sor^ly wounded; yet making have, as generally they
use to do, that fly for their lives, timor addidit alas, they got a shore
before the indians overtookthem. It is said they were strange. dispirited, or
else they might easily have defended themselves against their pursuers: But
when once men's hearts are sunk with fear, and discouragement upon a sudden
surprizal, it is hard to buoy them up, to make any competent resistance: Capt.
Davis being sadly wounded, could neither trust to his legs to fly, nor yet make
use of his hands to fight; yet was strangly preserved; Providence directing him
to go into the Cleft of a Rock hard by the place, where he first landed; The
Indians by the glittering of the Sun beams in their Eyes as they came a shore,
did not discern him; so as lying hid under the Covert of the band of
Providence, for two days, he at last crawled a little about the water side,
till he found a Ca^oo, whereby he escaped away with his Life, much ado. The
other two men, were better foot men, and parting from Captain Lake, m^de their
escape ten or a dozen mile, to the further end of the Island, and so escap^d
from the Indians, till they found means to get off. Poor Captain Lake, that a
few hours before, slept quietly in his Mansion house, surrounde^ wi^^ a strong
Fortification, defended with many Soldiers, is now forced to fly away with
none to attend him. And as the Awful hand of Divine Providence ordered things,
was as some say, parsued by such Indians as were mere strangers to the place,
that knew not the Master from the man, by one of whom he was sh^t down, as is
supposed, soon after his coming ashore; Lieut. Davis heard two Guns, by which't
was thought, and soon after was known so to be by an Indian which since has
confessed to Captain Davis that he shot him that day Arowsick was taken, which
he intended not to have done, but that he held up hi^ Pistol against him,
whereas if he had but asked qu^ ter, he should have had his Life. Captain Lake
was slain at that time, although many hopes were for some time maintained, that
he was taken alive, and kept with other Captives, amongst the Indians; And it is
said the Indians of those parts did not intend to kill him, if they could have,
helped it: But it was known, that his hat was seen upon an Indians head not
long after, which made his Friends conclude what had bef^lle^ the Owner that
good man, who might Emphatically be so termed in distinction from them that may
truly be called Just men, and no more: For it seems according to the just
Agreement betwixt himself and his part owner of Arowsick Island, it was not his
turn this year to have ^een upon the place, but such was his goodness, that he
yielded to the desire of his Friend and Partner, as in his room and stead to
take upon himself that Service in this time of danger, it is hoped his goodness
in future time will not be forgotten by such as were any way concerned therein,
or had Advantage thereby.

This island (called Arowsick from an Indian so named, that formerly possessed
it, and of whom it was purchased by one Mr. Richards who ^old it to Captain
Lak^ and Major Clarke) lies up ten miles within the mouth of Kennibeck River;
it is some miles in length, and contains many thousand Acres of very good
Land; where meadow and arable ground are in a good proportion well suited
together; within the Fort aforesaid were many convenient buildings for several
Offices, as well for wares and Trading, as habitation: six several Edifices are
said to have been there erected. The Warehouse at that time was well furnished
with all sorts of goods; besides a Mill and other Accommodations, and dwellings
within a mile of the Fort and Mansion house; some of whose Inhabitants hardly
made their escape, upon the first surp^izal of the Fort.

All which consi^ered, the loss that besel the Proprietours at the surpriz^l of
this Island seems to be very great, valued at many thousands: but those that
were the Owners with others of late times, have found in their ow^ Experience,
what Solomon said of old, Th^re is a Time to get, and a Time to loose, a Time
to keep, and a Time to cast away: A Time ^o break down, as well as a Time to
build up. The persons killed and taken at Kennibeck, both at Mr. Hommants, and
at Arowsick, are said to be fifty three.

Upon the Report of this sad disaster, all the Plantations of the English in
those parts were soon after left, and forsaken by degrees. All the rest of the
Inhabitants of Kennibeck River, Shipscot River, Sagade-ho^k, Da^anicot^ee,
fearing to be served in the same kind, fled to the Isl^nds of Cape-bonawagan
and Da^^^ils Cove.

On the second day at night be a Post was sent to Pemmaquid to inform them of
what had happened, who being but eight or ten men, were minded to go to the
Island called Monhiggon, having secured the best of their goods, but the wind
taking them short, they were forced to turn into Damarils Cove, where they
found Mr. Wiswal, and Mr. Co^^cot, there they labored two days to settle a
Garrison; But partly by the mutinousness of the People, and partly by the want
of Provision nothing could be done to secure the Island, so that it was
presently deserted: From thence they went to Monhiggon, resolving ther^ to
tarry till they heard from Boston, from whence Mr. Colicot, and Mr. Wi^wel
promised to do their utmost endeavor to send help. There they settled three
Guards, and appointed five and twenty to watch every night, not knowing but
that the Indians might come every hour. But continuing there a Fortnight, and
finding no Relief like to come; and seeing all the Country burned round about.
(For after they had gotten all that could be saved from Pemmaquid, they saw all
the other Island, Windgin^, Corbins sound, New-Harbour, Pem^aquid all on fire
in two hours time) then considering what was best to be done, they found no
Boats could be sent to sea for fear of weakening the Island, and that most of
those that were upon the Island, were Strangers, Coasters, and such as came
from the M^y^^e, and were ready to be gone upon every occasion, they laid an
Imbargoe for one weeks time, after which a Letter was received from Major
Clarke, defiring their Assistance for enquiring after Capt. Lake if alive,
saving, what could be had at Kennibeck etc. but intimating nothing of any help
l^ke to come, besides those that brought ^he Letter told them, it was in vain
to expect any help from Boston. It being questioned there, what they had to do
with those parts, upon which the Inhabitants considered, that if they should
tarry there, and spend all their Provision, and neither be able to go to Sea,
nor yet to live, or be safe a shore for want of help, it were better for them
to remove, while they had something left to live upon, and seek employment else
where; so by Consent they resolved forthwith to Transport themselves, and what
they had saved of their goods to some place of Security, so they took the first
opportunity to set sail, some for Pascataqua, some for Boston, and some for
Sale^^, at one of which three places they all safely arrived.

Having thus escaped at first as Lot out of Sodom, but not counting themselves
safe in that Zoar, where for a little while they made shift to bids their
heads, till they might escape to some surer place, there waiting for better
times, when they may with peace and quietness re^urn to their former
habitations, or seek some other else where.

When the foresaid Exploits were done by the Indians in and about Casco Bay,
several of the English removed to ^ewels Island, where they hoped to be more
secure from the Indians, but their barbarous Enemy finding so little Resistance
made against them on the main Land, a considerable party of them came with
their Canoos to destroy that Island also, about three weeks after the
forementioned mischiefs.

There was a fortifyed house upon the said Island, where the English that
either kept upon the Island, or repaired thither, hoped to have secured
themselves. But at that time when the Indians assaulted the place, many of the
English were absent, sew left in the Garrison, but women and Children; some
were gone to other places to fetch Indian Corn, others were in a Boat employed
about Fish, amongst whom was one Richard Pots with two more; The wife of the
said Pots was washing by the water sie, where she was surprised with her
Children, and carried away in sight of her husband, who was not a little
distressed with that sad Spectacle, but was not able to afford any Relief
either to wife or Children; although one of the Children espying his Father in
his boat, ran into the water, calling out for help, but an Indian ran after him
to catch him up; the poor man in a great Agony being within half shot, was
about to have fired upon the Indian, but then fearing he might ^wo^^d^ his
Child which the Villain had said hold of, he forbore, rather suffering him to
be carried away alive, then be exposed to so manifest danger of his Life, or
Limbs, by shooting at the Indian.

It is said that some of the Indians were killed by them in the Garrison: They
speak of a Lord that at one shot killed two or three of them, (...) Guns were
found afterward under the Fort, which were supposed to have belonged to some
of the Indians that were killed. Some that were abroad when the Fort was
assaulted, desperately broke in through the Indians, whereby at the last, many
of the People were preserved: some flying away from Jewels Island in a Canoo
toward Richmonds Island, met with a K^tch, to which they made known the
distress the People were in, who thereupon went to the place, and took in all
the People they found there, and carried i^hem off to a place of more safety.
Yet were there several persons said to be killed and carried away at that time
viz. three men, who were known to be killed, two women and two Children, that
are supposed to be yet alive, though in the Enemies power.

From thence they went to Spurwinks, where they assaulted one place or more,
and killed one man, wounded another, and carried another away Captive: Amongst
them that were in danger of surprizal, one that could not run, hid himself in a
garden of Cabbages so as he was not found, yet was very near them, for he over
heard several questions, they asked him they took; by which means he was the
better enabled afterward to prevent the danger two more were coming into, for
the poor Fellow that they had taken, told them, that one Shenda^ with another
man were to come that way by and by; whereupon this man that had hid himself,
meeting that She^dal and the other man gave them notice of the danger, whereby
they were delivered out of the snare, for that time; not long after one of
them, viz Mr: Shendal fell into their hands as shall be declared afterward.
Within a while after, or much about that same time, another sad Accident befell
six or seven of them that belonged to Casco. For upon the twenty third of
September some persons that belonged to a Sloop, and a S^allop, that were
pressed into the Service (one Reason of which was to prevent their ^ragling
they being persons that belonged to those parts about Casco) were over desirous
to save some of their Provision, to which end they first made their Address to
Captain Hatborne, (under whom they were ordered to serve) desiring they might
be released; the Captain told them he could not do it, but desired them to have
patience for a while, they told him, that they must and would go, else their
Families must starve at home: The Captain told them further of the danger, and
bid them not stir at their peril: However they would go, and soon after went to
Mountjoyes Island to fetch^ sheep, where they landed seven men; but the Indians
presently set upon them, they presently be took themselves to the Ruins of a
stone house, where they defended themselves as long as they could; but at last
they were all destroyed either with stones cast in upon them, or else with the
Enemies shot, except one, who, though at the first it was hoped his wounds were
not mortal, yet soon after dy^d thereof; Amongst these was one Georg^ Fell much
^am^nted, who had been more active then any man in those parts against the
Indians, but at the last he lost his own Life amongst them, in this too
desperate an Adventure.

The Indians growing more hold by these Attempts in those remote places, drew
down n^arer toward Pas^at aqua, for not long after a party of them came upon
Cape Nidduck, where they killed and carried away all the Inhabitants of a few
scattering houses, to the number of seven in all, and such was their Salvage
Cruelty exercised in this place, as is not usually heard of, for having dashed
out the brains of a poor woman thatgave suck, they nailed the young Child to
the dead body of its mother, which was found sucking in that rueful manner,
when the People came to the place. The day before a man and his wife were
killed by them at Wells, and two men more soon after. On the twelfth of October
following near an hundred of the Indians made an Assault upon Black point, all
the Inhabitants being gathered into one fortifyed place upon that point, which
a few hands might have de^ended against all the Indians on that side of the
Country. But as i^ seems, one called Mugg was the Leader of the Indians; one
that ^ad from a Child been well acquainted with the English, and had lived some
years in English Families, who though a cunning Fellow, and had prevailed much
in his Attempts, yet at this time showed more Courtesy to the English, then
according to former Outrages could be expected from any of those barbarous
miscreants; and was willing to make offer of a Treaty to Mr. Iosselin, chief of
the Garrison, to whom the said Mugg promised liberty for all that were there,
to depart with their goods upon the surrender of the place: The said Iosselin
reports, that when he came back from his treating with Mugg, that all the
People were fled away out of the Garrison, having carried away their goods by
water before his return, in so much that having none but his Household Servants
to stand by him, he was capable to make no Resistance, and so surrendered.

When People have once been frighted with Reports and Sense of danger, they are
ready to fly away like a Heart before the Hunter or his Hounds, one of the
Inhabitants of the place affirmed he saw an hundred and fifty Indians, which
was more by an hundred than any body else ever saw near the Fort. But when a
place is designed to Ruin, every thing they take in hand shall tend they way.

The loss of Black point was accompanied with another sad Accident, that fell
out about the same time at Richmonds Island. For young Mr. Friar with some
others at Pascataqua, to whom it seemed grievous that the Indians should make
all that Spoil in every place in those farther Plantations, ventured upon the
great Importunity of Mr. Shandal, with a Kotch to try what they could save of
such things that the Indians had left. But things were so ordered, that before
they had laden their Ketch, coming too near the Stage head, they presently
found themselves in danger of a surprizal, for part of their Company being a
shore, were seized by the Indians, or in danger thereof, whom they were not
willing to leave behind; and besides the wind blowing in hard upon them, they
could not get out of the Harbor, but were forced to abide the danger of an
Assault. The Indians getting many of them into the stage head annoyed them so
fast with their shot, that not a man of them was able to look above deck, but
he was in danger of being shot down, amongst the rest Mr. James Friar venturing
too much in view of the Enemy received a wound in his knee, which appeared not
dangerous at the first, but for want of better looking to, then could be found
amongst that black Regiment, into whose hands he soon after fell; It proved
Mortal unto him, within a few days after: he being by a strange Accident
brought home to his Fathers house at the great Island in Pascataqua. Mr. Friar
being thus wounded, the rest of the Company defended themselves for a while
with much C^^rage and Resolution, till they were brought to the sad choice of
falling into the hands of one of these three bad Masters, the Fire, the water,
or the Barbarous Heathen, to whom at last they thought it best to yield, in
hope of liberty afterward, at least of lengthning out their lives a little
longer, for the Indians had manned cut a Canoo with several hands to cut their
Cable, and others stood ready within the defense of the stage head to fire upon
any one that stirred in the Ketch, by which means the Vessel after the Cable
was cut soon drove a shore; and then was it threatened to be presently burned,
if they did not all yield, to which they all at last consented.

The Indians how barbarous soever in their own nature, yet civilly entreated
their Prisoners, and upon farther discourse sent one or two of them to
Pasca^aqua, to give them there an opportunity to Ranso^^^ their Friends. The
persons sent home to procure a Ransom, were ^o return with such a quantity of
goods as the Indians had desired; by such a precise time: but they that brought
the things for their Ransom, coming a day or two before the time, when those
that sent them we^e gone up the River at Black point, and not returned: Some
other Indians waiting for such an opportunity seized the goods, at least that
part which they most desired, and through mistake, killing one of the three men
that brought them, dismissed the other two, without return of the Prisoners as
was expected.

As to what happened afterward, we are yet much in the dark, and for the present
can write but by guess: for within a few days after the return of Mr. Shendal,
and the other man that went to carry the Ransom, before November 1. Mugg
himself came to Pascataqua, bringing Mr. James Friar, who soon after dyed of
his wound, one of the Prisoners along with him complain^^^ that without his
knowledge some of the Indians had seized what was sent for the Ransom of the
rest, promising upon his Faith, that he would make good his word for the
sending home all the Prisoners, and offered al^^ in the Name of the other
Indians, to confirm a new Peace with the E^glish for the future: The Major
General of the Massachusetts Colony was (...) at Pascataqua, but not willing to
Transact a matter of that nature and moment by his sole Authority, ordered the
said Mugg (supposed to be the chief Leader of the Indians) to be carried down
to Boston to the Governor and Council there, to conclude the business, with
whom he soon after agreed upon a firm Peace with the English of the
Massachusetts in the Name of Madockawando, the chief of all the Indians in the
Eastern parts about Peno^scot, engaging also to remain himself, as hostage
aboard the Vessel (in which he was sent home from Boston November the 21st.
following) until the Prisoners (which are said to be fifty or sixty that they
have still in their hands) be sent home, and the rest of the Articles
per^ormed. The Issue of which we as yet wait to hear in Gods good time, this
12th. of December following, 1676. when they there have made an end of the
reckoning, it is hoped we may have our right again.

There are two principal Actors amongst the Indians that have all along
promoted these designs amongst them, one named Squando, Sagamore of Saco, and
the forementioned Madockawando, the chief Commander of the Indians Eastward
about Pen^bscot, who are said to be, by them that know them, a strange kind of
moralized Salvages. Grave and Serious in their Speech and Carriage, and not
without some show of a kind of Religion, which no doubt but they have learned
from the Prince of darkness, (by the help of some papist in those parts) that
can Transform himself into an Angel of Light; under that shape, the better to
carry on ^he designs of his Kingdom. It is said also, they pretend to have
received some Visions and Revelations, by which they have been commanded to
worship the great God, and not to work on the Lords day. We know where that
Fountain has its Rise, that sends forth at the same place sweet and bitter
waters. And from whence their hearts are inspired, that join blessing of God,
with cursing and killing his Servants.

It is reported by some that came lately from those parts, that the Indians
there do as yet refuse to have any peace with the English, and will (...) as
(...) return any of our Captive Friends, till God speak to the foresaid
Enthusiast^, that are their Leaders, that they should no longer make war with
us, and the like.

But not to trouble our selves farther with those Ministers of Satan, or those
that are acted by the Angel of the bottoml^ss pit, (who possibly since their
delusions are but two fold more the Children of Hell then they were before.) We
know better how to understand the mind of the great Lord of Heaven and Earth
then to depend on such lying Oracles.

That God who has at present turned their hear^s to hate his People, and deal
subtly with his Servants; we hope in his time, will either turn the stream,
and cause them to deal friendly and sincerely with his People, as heretofore,
or give us an opportunity to destroy them.

In the next place it remains, that some account be given of our Forces under
Captain Hathorne, and of their several Expeditions into the Eastern parts,
since the middle of September last; first up toward Casco, by the Seaside,
then afterward through the woods directly Northward, toward Ossapy, and
Pigwauchet, in hope to have found the Enemy there at their head Quarters.

Upon the first Report of those Devastations and Spoyl^ that had been made by
Fire and Sword in those Eastern Plantations. It was judged necessary to send
some Forces that way to put a stop unto the current of those Outrages, before
the Remainders of the Southern Indians could have opportunity to join with
them: To that end about an hundred and h^rty English, with forty Indians were
dispatched away into those parts, under the Command of Captain William
Hathorne, Captain Syl, and Captain Hunting, w^o were to join with such as
could be raised in those parts, under Major Waldern, and Captain Frost: After
they had surprised the Indians that flocked into those parts, (as was Related
before) which was done upon September the 6th. 1676. Captain Hathorne who was
Commander in chief, marched the Forces by the Seaside toward Casco; For at
that time they were upon some demurre, whether to march directly toward Ossapy,
and Pigwau^het, where the head Quarters of the Enemy was supposed to be, or
else to march directly toward Casco Bay, where they heard Parties of the Enemy
were daily spoiling the Plantations of the English, At the last it was judged
most Expedient to try if they could not meet with some par yes of the Enemy
amongst those Plantations near the Seaside, by that means at least to prevent
them from doing more mischief if ^^ey c^uld not find an opportunity to fall
upon some of them, and destroy^^^^: But their time was not yet come, nor were
all the Desola^ions as yet accomplished, which G^d had a purpose to bring about
by their means. For notwithstanding there was a sfficient Force to have
suppr^ssed all the numbers of the Enemy, if they ^ad been many more than they
were; yet being emboldened and grown subtle by their former successes, they had
so dispersed themselves all about the woods in those p^rts, that when our
Forces were in one place, they would be in another, and so did much mischief
thereabouts, while our Soldiers were out after them: For after they had by
several steps in ten days time gotten to Casco, from Newechewannick (about the
eight of Septembe^) they marched to Wells, and from Wells to Winter Harbor,
and so from thence to Black point they passed by water, and then arrived at
Casco Bay, about the twentieth of September, yet about that very time, were
several of the English cut off at Mount joys Island, and that in sight of our
Forces, when they were not able to come at them, for want of Boat, the Island
lying two Leagues off in the Bay; this happened the twenty third of the same
month, as was said before, and within two days after, another party of the
Enemy were doing mischief at Wells, and Cape Nidduck, and yet escaped away,
when they had done.

Nor could our Forces in all their Expedition meet with any of them, bu^ two;
one of which soon after he was taken, was let go^, by the Treachery or
Carelessness of them that held him. For when our Forces were come within a few
miles of the hither side of Casco Bay, some of our Natick Indian Scouts going
in Company with the Indians under Blind Will, (a Saga^ore of Pascataqua, who
went in Company with eight of his men, supposed to be good Pilots for the
places more Eastward) met with some of the Enemy, and laid hold of a couple of
them; Justice was done upon one of them, the other, although he was led by two
of Blind Wills Indians, they made a shift to let go, who escaping away, got
over a River, and gave notice to the Indians who were on the other side, and
were heard but a little before threshing in a Barn that belonged to one
Anthony Bracket, (whom they had late^y surprised) Another disappointment our
Forces met withal about the same time, for when Captain Hathorne was up at
Casco Bay with his Soldiers, he never could come up with the Indians, either
through want of Skill in them that were his Scouts, or rather want of
Faithfulness in one that should have been his guide, who had got his living by
Trading with the Indians: therefore seemed unwilling to have the Brood of them
destroyed: As was known afterward. And by that means a party of the Enemy
escaped the hands of our Soldiers. Yet it pleased God at one time to bring the
F^rlorne of our Forces upon a p^ty of the En^my, who espying the English,
presently fled away into the woods, like so many wild Dea^, yet one of them,
viz. that I. Sampson who had been of the Comp^ny, that killed Robinson the year
before, was by the special hand of Divine Justice, suffered to fall, by some of
our Forces: He was a very lusty, stout man, and one that was armed with several
sorts of Weapons, but there is no Weapon shall defend them, whom death has a
Commission to destroy: There is no Ransom in that War: The rest of the Indians
that were scattered about Casco Bay, having discovered our Forces, made their
escape: But, we hope their time is short, and that God will find some way to
cut off the bloody and deceitful Enemies of his People, and not suffer them to
live out half their days.

But by one such Accident or other; our Soldiers could not meet with any of
them that had done all the mischief about those parts. And while our Forces lay
about Casco Bay; A small party of the Enemy came down upon the Borders of the
Town of Wells, where they lay in Ambush near a Garrison house, at one end of
the Town, and shot down Mr. James Gouge from his horse, September the twenty
fourth, being Lords day, as he was going home from the Meeting; and then
knocked down his wife, giving her several wounds with their Hatchets about the
head, of which she dyed within three days after.

The next day September the twenty fifth, the same party being not above seven
in number went toward York, and surprised Cape Nidduck in a barbarous manner,
killing most of the poor people belonging thereunto ^^me of their Neighbors
hearing of the Guns, came to their Res^ue: The Indians being on the further
side of a River, dared them to come over and fight with them man to man: using
several Reproachful Terms to them, making a Shot at them also, which some of
the Company not being able to bear, did very resolutely adventure through the
River after them; but they were not willing to try the valor of the English;
when they perceived they found a way to pass over the River upon them, but
returned back toward Wells; where they killed another, one George Farrow,
September the twenty seventh, as he was too carelessly venturing to his house
without any Company: These things happened while our Forces were at Casco, where
they tarryed seven or eight days. And hearing of these Outrages commit^ed in
some of those places which they left behind them; and not being able to meet
with any of them in the place where they were, they returned back toward Wells,
and York; but the Indians were escaped away into the woods after their
Companions, before they came there: Our Soldiers having thus spent much time
and pains in a fruitless Expedition toward Casco, they resolved to venture
another march after them, up toward Ossapy, supposing they mightly that time
be drawn homewards toward their Wint^r Quarters; or else, that they might
destroy what they had left behind them, to prevent their harboring there for
the future: But it seemed good to him, who by his Sovereign Power and Infinite
wisdom orders all Events and pu^poses (wherein his People or others are
concerned) to disappoint all endeavors used at that time for the suppeessing
of the Enemy, or putring any stop to their wonted Successes: For soon after onr
Forces were returned back from Casco, news was brought of the surprizal of
Black point, on the twelfth of October, as was mentioned before; which
notwithstanding; It was judged more advisable to venture and proceed on with
the Expedition toward Ossapy, (whether it was supposed by this time, the
greatest number of them were retired) rather then to return back again to
recover Black point, where was nothing to be expected but an empty Fort, and
some deserted houses, which it seems the Indians had forsaken by that time.

And besides that other Forces were about the same time ordered to repair
thither, sufficient for the repairing and securing of the place with what else
was left remaining from the hands of the Enemy; And likewise several Sou^diers
were ordered to Garrison the Towns thereabouts, to prevent them from making any
further Assault upon them However, they were so far emboldned by the ^^king of
black point, and the Ketch at Richmond Island with several Prisoners also which
were surp^ized at the same time; That a party of them came the very next week
after, toward Wells, hoping to attain that, and all the Towns, and places else
betwixt Casco Bay and Pascataqua, as they had done black point. For a party of
them under Mugg their chief Leader, brought Mr. Shendal along with them to
Wells, where they summoned the first Garrison at the Towns end To facilitate
the business, they sent the said Shendal as their Agent, or Messenger to move
them to surrender, without hazarding an onset; But the People were not so
despondent, to yield up the place upon so slight an occasion; which when the
Enemy discerned, they soon drew off, after they had done some little mischief
to the Inhabitants: For first they killed Isaac L^t^le field not far from the
Garrison, It is said, they would willingly have had him yield himself Prisoner,
but he refusing, they shot him down, yet they were so Civil, as to suffer his
Friends to fetch away his body, without offering any further act of Inhumanity
to it, or Host^^ity toward them that fetch it off. An old man called Cross, was
killed by them likewise about the same time, and another, Joseph Bigfo^d by
name, belonging to the Garrison, was sorely wounded at that time, so as he lied
^oon after: Thirteen head of neat Cattle were also killed by them, out of which
they only for haste, took the Tongues, leaving the bodies of all the rest whole
to the Owners, unless it were the Leg of one of them, which was also taken away.

This was all the mischief was done by them, after the taking of Black point:
The Inhabitants of Winter Harbor, near adjoining thereto, being alarmed with
the surprizal of the other place; fled away with their goods, for a time; till
they heard the Enemies were removed farther Eastward, and then it was said;
they returned to their place again; In this posture have things in those places
remained ever since, in those Eastern Plantations betwixt Pascataqua and Casco
Bay.

But our Forces under the Command of Captain Hathorne, and Captain Syl, having
at the last obtained all things necessary for a Winter march into the woods,
did upon the first of November following, set forth toward Ossapy, where, after
four days march of very difficult way, over many Rivers, not easy to pass at
that time of the year, they arrived; but found never an Indian; either there,
or in the way, as they marched along: The Indians belonging to those parts, had
not many years before hired some English Traders to build them a Fort, for
their security against the Mohawks, which was built very strong for that
purpose fourteen Foot high with Flankers at each corner. But at this time the
Soldiers intending to disappoint them of their Refuge, made Fuel thereof,
which at that time was very needful for out People, who had marched many miles
through deep Snow in a very cold Season, when they could hardly keep themselves
from freezing as they passed along, so early in the Winter: None of the Enemy
being to be found there in their strongest Fort; It was not counted worth the
while for all the Company to march any farther: Wherefore a small party being
sent up eighteen or twenty miles farther Northward amongst the woods, whereas
they p^ssed along they met with many vast Lakes, (supposed to be the Cause of
the sharpness of the cold, in that side of the Country) making the place scarce
habitable for any besides those Salvages that use to hunt th^reabouts, for
Moose in the Winter, and Beaver in the Summer, (a sort of Creatures, whose
Skins are of more Account than all their bodies.) But at this time it is
supposed they were all gone lower toward the Sea side, to share the Spoils of
the English Plantations, lately surprised by them; which is all the Reward they
^ave met withal, who in former years, for the sake of a little Lucre by
Traffic with them, have run themselves there into the very Iaws of
destruction, either by Irregular dealing with them; or by their too much
c^fidence in their deceitful Friendship.

November the ninth, our Forces having spent nine days in this Service,
returned safe to Newechewannick, from whence they set forth at the first,
having run more hazard of their Limbs, by the sharpness of the Frost, than of
their lives by any Assault from their Enemies.

There was great probability that the design might have had some good Effect,
if Mugg a chief Leader of them, did not much abuse those he fled unto, with a
proffer of Peace; for he told them that there were about an hundred of them
about Ossapy, not many days before: But it becomes us to look beyond second
Causes, in Events of this nature; and conclude, that God had raised up these
Barbarous Enemies to bring a like Chastisement upon the English in this side of
the Country, with that which others had endured elsewhere, in the end of the
fo^mer, and beginning of this present year.

Whereas mention was formerly made of a Peace concluded at Boston betwixt the
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, and Mugg an Eastward Indian, in the
name of Madockawando chief Sagamore of* all the Indians about Pemmaquid and
Penobscot; which said Mugg, was sent from Boston, November the 21st with two
Vessels, to receive the Prisoners there detained by the Indians, and also to
see the Ratification of the several Articles of the said peace concluded upon.
Which Articles for the better satisfaction of those that have not been
acquainted with them, are thouhgt fit here to be Inserted.

Boston, November. the 6th. 1676.
Covenants and Agreements made and concluded by, and between the GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL of the Massachusetts Colony in New England of the one part: and Mugg
Indian, in the Name and behalf of Madockawando, and Cheberrina Sachems of
Penobscot, on the other part.
Witnesses.
Impr. WHereas the said Mugg has been sent and employed by the s^id Sachems
upon a Treaty with the said GOVERNOR and COUNCIL relating to a Conclusion of
Peace, does hereby Covenant and engage for himself, and in behalf of the said
Sachems, that from henceforth they will cease all Acts of Hostility, and (...)
an entire and firm Union, and Peace with all the English of the C^lonyes in
New England.

2dly. That immediately upon the said Muggs Return, the said Sachems shall
deliver up unto such English man, or men, as s^all by order of the said
Governor and Council, be sent with him, all such English ^aptives, Vessels,
and Goods whatsoever, Arms and great Artillery belonging to the English, as are
in their Custody, or under their power, as have been taken from them during the
time of the late Hostility.

3dly. That they will use their uttermost endeavor with all possible speed to
procure pay; wherewith to make full satisfaction unto the English for all such
Injuries, Losses, and Damages, as they have sustained by them, in their
housing, Cattle, or other Estate, during the time of the late Hostility, or
else to pay such a number of Beaver Skins yearly, in order thereunto, as shall
be agreed on between the said Sachems, and such person or persons as shall be
sent unto them from the said Governor and Council for the Ratification hereof,
to be paid at such time and place as shall be then agreed upon.

4ly. That upon Condition of the English ^urnishing of them with Powder and
Ammunition for their necessary Supplies and maintenance, they do Covenant and
promise not to Trade for, or buy any Powd^r, or Ammunition, but of such persons
as shall from time to time be deputed by the Governor for that end.

5ly. That if it do appear that Walter Gendai and the men sent with him in the
Vessel from Pascat^qua (with Goods from Mr. Friar for the Redemption of the
Captives according to Agreement) or any of them are su^prized and slain by any
of their Indians, or any others whom they can bring under their power, that
they shall forth with Execute such Murderer, or Murderers, or otherwis^,
deliver the (...) up into the hands of the English.

6ly. That if the Amonos-Coggin, or any other Indians in the Eastern parts,
that are in Hostility with the English, shall not fully Con^ent unto these
Covenants and Agreements, but shall persist i^ Acts of Hostility against the
English* that then the said Sachems shall, and will hold all such Indians to be
their Enemies, and take up Arms against them, and engage them as such.

Lastly. The said Mugg as a Pledge and Assurance of his own Fidelity, and that
he is empowered by the said Sachems for the end aforesaid, and for the
performance of the aforementioned Agreements, does freely and willingly
deposite himself, and his Life in the hands of the English; to remain with them
as a Hostage until the said Captives, goods and Vessels shall be delivered up.
Boston, November. 13. 1676. Signed in the Presence of John Earthy. Richard
Oliver. Isaac Addingtan. The mark of Mugg W Indian

The said Mugg lifting up his hand to Heaven for the true performance thereof,
esteemed amongst them, a strong Obligation to perform what they promise.



Things were so ordered by the good Providence of God, that the said Vessels
arrived safely at Penobscot in the beginning of the next month, where they
found the said Madockawando, who was ready to confirm and make good the
Articles of the Peace concluded at Boston by his Agent in his Name; And was
willing also to deliver all the Prisoners that were then in his Power, or under
his Command, which were but two, who were taken in the Vessel at Richmond^
Island, the twelfth of October last. The said Mugg likewise being sensible of
the Obliga^ion he lay under, to make good his word, did venture to go up
himself to another Plantation of the Indians, where was supposed some more of
the English Prisoners were, to see whether he could obtain their Release, as
also to persuade with the rest of the Indians thereabouts to join in the
confirmation of the Peace; It appeared to the persons belonging to the Vessels,
that the said Mugg went with some Reluctance, as fearing the Indians be was
going amongst, would either kill him, or keep him Prisoner; To which end, he
ordered the Commanders belonging to the Vessels to tarry for him, about three
days, or four at the most, assuring them, that if he did not return by that
time, they might certainly conclude that either his Life or Liberty was taken
from him, However the Vessels tarried about or near a week beyond the time
limited, in expectation of his coming; But after so long stay, they neither
seeing, nor he^ring from him, were ready to fear the worst, viz. that his
Country men had made him sure from having more to do with the English^
Whereupon for fear of being shut up by the sharpness of the Winter from
returning themselves, they took the opportunity of the next fair wind of
setting Sail for Boston, (only turning in to Pemmaquid to see if they could
hear any farther News there) where they arrived with such Prisoners, as were
freely delivered by Madockawando, the twenty fifth of December following, Anno,
1676. Amongst which Prisoners, besides the two forementioned, who were fonnd at
Penobscot, there was a third, by a more remarkable Providence then ordinary,
added unto them, Mr. Thomas Cobbet, Son of that Reverend and worthy Minister of
the Gospel, Mr. Thomas Cobbet (Pastor of the Church at Ipswitch, a Town within
the Massachusetts Jurisdiction) who had all the time of his Sons Captivity
together with his friends wrestled with God in their daily Prayers for his
Release, and accordingly he was with the more joy received by his friends, as
an Answer and Return of their Prayers. The said young man had lived with Mr.
Friar, Merchant of Ports-mouth for some years before, and had been often at Sea
with Mr. James Friar the eldest Son of the said Merchant, and who had after
much Experience of his Faithfulness, dexterity, and Courage on all such
Accomp^s, borne him so much Respect, that when he was urged by his Father to go
along with Mr. Shendal, as was said before, he would not venture unless his
Friend Thomas Cobbet would go along with him; the which Service he only for his
Friends sake accepted, which proved a fatal Adventure to Mr. James Friar, and
might have done to the other also, had not God otherwise disposed of him,
having, as is hop^d, more Service for him in the Land of the living. Amongst
all the Prisoners at that time taken, the said Thomas Cobbet seemed to have had
the hardest portion: For besides the desperate dangers that he escaped, before
he was taken. First, by a b^llet, shot through his Wast-Coat. Secondly, by a
drunken Indian, who had a knife at his Throat to cut it, when his hands were
bound, when the Indians came to share the Prisoners amongst them, he fell into
the hands of one of the ruggeddest Fellows, by whom within a few days after
his surprizal, he was carried first from Black point, to Shipscot River in the
Ketch, which the Indians made them to Sail for them, into the said River, from
thence he was forced to travel with his Pateroon Four or five miles over land
to Damariscottee, where he was compelled to row or paddle in a Canoo about
fifty five miles farther to Penobscot, and there taking leave of all his
English Friends and acquaintance, at least for the Winter, he was put to paddle
a Canoo up fifty or sixty mile: farther Eastward, to an Island called Mount
Desert, where his Pateroon used to keep his winter station, and to appoint his
hunting Vo^ages; and in that Desart-like Condition was the poor young man
forced to continue nine weeks in the Service of a Salvage miscreant, who
sometimes would Tyrannize over him, because he could not understand his
Language, and for want thereof, might occasion him to miss of his Game, or the
like. What ever sickness he was obno^ious unto, by change of diet, or other
account, he could expect no other allowance than the Wigwam will aff^rd: If
Joseph be in the Prison, so long as God is with him there, he shall be
preserved, and in due time remembered.

After the end of the nine weeks, the Indian whom he was to serve, had spent
all his powder, whereupon on the s^dden he took up a Resolution to send this
young man down to Penobscot to Mounsi^re Casteen to procure more po^der to kill
Moose and Dear, which it ^eem^ is all their way of living at Mount Desert; The
Indian was certainly over ruled by Divine providence in sending his Captive
down thither, for a few days before, as it seems, after the Indians in that
place, had been powawing together, he told him, that there were two English
Vessels then come into Pemm^quid, or Penobscot, which proved so indeed: yet was
it not minded by him surely, when he sent his ^aptive thither for powder, for
it proved the means of his escape; which his Pateroon might easily have
conjectured, if it had not been hid from him As soon as he Arrived at
Penobscot, he met with Magg, who presently (...) him by the Name of Mr. Cobbet,
and taking him by the hand, told him, he had been at his Father^ house, (which
was November the first or second before, as he passed through Ipswitch to
Boston) and had promised to send him home, so soon as he returned. Maaockawando
taking notice of what Magg was speaking that way, although he were willing that
he should be released according to Agreement, (his Pateroon being one of this
Sagamores Subjects, though during the Hunting Voyage of the winter, he lived at
such a distance from him) began to demand something for sa^isfaction, in a way
of Ransom, not understanding before that his Father was, a great Preachman, as
they use to call it: Reply mas made to him, that he should have something in
lieu of a Ransom, viz a fine Coat, which they had for him aboard the Vessel;
the which the Sagamore desired to see, before he would absolutely grant his
Release: but upon sight of the said Coat, he seemed very well satisfied, and
gave him free liberty to return home. Whilst this Mr. Thomas Cobbet was a
Prisoner at Mount Desert going along with the Indians to ^unt, in an extreme
cold day; he was so overcome with the sharpness thereof, that all his Senses
were suddenly benumbed, so as he fell down upon the Snow, not being able to
stir hand or foot, and had without doubt there perished in a little time but
that the Indians he was going along with, m^ssi^g him, presently ran about the
woods to seek him, (...) when they found him, they were either so pitiful to
him, or so careful of their own good, as not to cast away a likely young man,
from whom they expected either much service, or a good Ransom, for want of a
little Car^, and pains to preserve his life; wherefore, taking him upon their
shoulders, they carried him into the next Wigwam, so as he soon after revived,
and came to himself again, without any farther mischief.

At another time, the Salvage Villain whose Prisoner he was, so long as he had
strong Liquor, for five days together was so drunk, that he was like a
furious mad Beast, so as none durst come near him, his Squaws he almost brained
in one of those drunken fits.

The said Thomas was forced to get out of his sight into the woods all that
night, for fear of being mischiefed by him. Where making a fire he kept himself
alive: The Squaws being by Gods special Providence so inclined to pity, that
they came to him daily with Victuals, by which means he was at that time also
preserved: All which put together, makes his Deliverance the more Remarkable,
as an Answer of prayer.

As for the Rest of the Prisoners, (which are said to be fifty or sixty) They
were left with them who first surprised them at Kennibeck, and Ship^cot River:
The Women are employed it seems to sew and make Garments for them; They having
plundered much English goods at Arowsick. They are so much elevated with their
late s^cc^sses, in spoiling so many of the English habitations, that they seem
not very re^^y to hearken to Terms of peace, as their Sagamore Madockawando
does desire: Nor are the English able to come near them with any of their
Forces this Winter season, in regard both of the Remoteness of the place, and
sharpness of the Cold, which uses to be extreme in those parts: How their
hearts may be inclined in the following year, or what the English may be
enabled to do against them, is known unto God only, on whom we desire to wait
for a comfortable Issue of these our Troubles. But until they have spent all
the plunder that is t^k^n, it is no doubt, but they will ^eem averse from
having peace; As others to the W^stward did, whose hearts were hardened against
all proff^r^ of that nature, t^ll they were destroyed; Possibly some Remnants
of them that escaped in those other parts, are got hither amongst these, and do
anin a^e them all they can to Hostility against us, till they make these as
miserable as themselves, and f^ forced at the last to fly their Country. Many
have been the Troubles we have met withal from these our Barbarous Neighbors
round about us, but God we trust will deliver us out of them all, as he has
promi^ed to do for the Righteous, who may in the dark^st night of Aff^iction
say, Light is sown for them, which shall spring up in the appointed Time
thereof.

No farther News came to hand concerning the English Prisoners at Kennibeck,
after the Return of Captain M^or from Penobscot, till the fifth of ^a^uary.
When one Francis Card with another young man formerly an Iahabitant of some
place about Kennibeck, or of Arowsi^l, (but then a Prisoner with the Indians,)
made an escape from the Indians, and so got over Casco Bay, and then to Black
point, from thence he was conveyed to Pascataqua soon after, and then to
Bost^n.

The manner of his escape, as he reports was this: He was employed by the
Indians to ^^resh Corn at a Barn a little lower in the River, than the p^ace
where the Indians commonly k^pt being tru^ted alone, to go and come of himself,
because there was no suspicion of any coming to carry him away, or seeming
possibility to get away without being a^scovered, he sound means to plot with
another young man, who was sent to look horses, whose flesh it seems is by
those wild Sa^^ages, preferred before the best Beef, so as having their choice
of both, they took what they liked ^est; And this being the Employment of the
young man, he had the fitter opportunity when he was in be woods to m^ke any
Contrivance to get away. Thus being resolved upon their design, they provided
necessaries accordingly, and sent such a Message home to their Masters, as
might occasion them not to expect them very soon that n^ght; Thus resolved,
they marched away, as soon as ever they perceived the Coast was clear; And
having provided a Canoo accordingly fit for the design, by the help of it they
got over the waters, by which they were to pass which were not frozen; And in
the night time turned into a Swam^e, where they might make a (...) to keep them
from starving with the Cold, without being discerned; So as within two or three
days they recovered the Fort, and Garrison at black p^^nt, from whence they
were soon conveyed to Boston.

This F^ancis Card made this Relation of matters when he came to Boston, viz.
that the Prisoners which he left behind were well, and not much misused, only
put to do the Servile work about the Indians: woe must it needs be with
Christians, when put not only to sojourne, but to serve in those Tents of
Kedar. Such of the women as were gifted at knitting, and Sewing, were improved
to make stockings, and garments for their Pateroons: So as it seems the Ware
house at Arowsick furnished them with Cloth, Stuff, and Linen, and the
Inhabitants served for Artificers to cut it out, and make it up.

He reported al^o that the Indians spoke nothing of any Peace; but rather being
heightened with their late and great Successes, were contriving how to get
possession of the other places in the hands of the English, on that side of the
Country, which God forbid should ever com^ to pass; but finding so easy work of
their former Exploits, they hope they shull accomplish their purposes with the
like facility in all other places where they come.

It seems Squando is their chief Leader, that Enthusiastio^l, or rather
Diabolical Miscreant; who yet has put on a garb of Religion, and orders his
People to do the like; performing Religious worship amongst the Indians in his
way, yet is supposed to have very f^miliar Conv^rse with the Devil, that
appears to him as an Angel of Light in some shape or other very frequently.
This Fran^is Card also affirms, that there is nothing so great a number of
the Indians as is here reported for he says, when they were going out upon
some design, while he was in their hands, he had an opportunity to count them
all, and could find but ninety eight of them, that were men: Neither could he
discern that there were any of the Western Indians, unless Simon and Andrew,
that formerly escaped out of Dover Prison: Although it was before apprehended
there were multitudes of them flocked thither.

Francis Card his Declaration of their Beginning, August the fourteenth.
The Indians came to Richard Hammonds, and there killed Richard Hamond, Samuel
Smith, Ioshuah Grant, there parting their Company, eleven men came up Kennibeck
River to my house, and there took me, and my Family. Therefore the rest of
their Company went to Arowsick, and there took the Garrison: about a Fortnight
after came down Kennibeck River, and so went down to Damaris Cove, and there
burnt houses, and killed Cattle, there coming back parted their Company, one
party went to Jewels Island, and the other party went to Saga-de-Hock, being in
number eighty one; Those that went to Saga-de-Hock took a Shallop, from thence
came to Kennibeck River, and then went to killing and destroying of Cattle and
bousing, for they had Intelligence of a Ketch and a Shall^p at Damaris Cove,
and going there they took the Shallop, and killed two men, being in number
about eighty; The next day made up their Forces, went out to Black point, being
about one ^undred fighting men, and are now in two Forts about sixty at a
place, with (...) or eight Wigwams between the two Forts.

Now the best place to land men is in Casco Bay, and in Kennibeck River, the
one place being eight miles, the other about fourteen miles from the Fort where
I was kept: And if the Army do not go now with speed, they will be gone forty
miles farther up in the Country; at the first taking of me they carried me up
to Taconet, and the men coming down they brought me and two men more down for
fear of our killing their women and Children, for they kept their Women and
Children at Taconet all the Summer. As soon as the warm weather does set in,
they do intend to go away to Taconet, and there to build two Forts, for there
is their fishing places, and planting ground. Squando does inform them that God
does speak to him, and does tell him that God has left our Nation to them to
destroy, and the Indians do take it for a Truth all that he does tell them;
because they have met with no Affront. Now Mugg the Rogue, he being come again
to the Fort, he does make his Brags and laughs at the English, and says, that
he has found the way to burn Boston, and does make Laughter at your kind
Entertainment, they make their brags how they do intend to take Vessels, and so
to go to all (...) fishing Islands; and so to drive all the Country before
them: so reckning to be a great Number in the Spring, there is a great many
Indians at Cannada that have not been out this Summer, both of Kennibeck and
Damarascoggin, therefore a great many of these Indians at K^nnibeck do intend
to go to Cannada in the Spring to them. And they do give Gifts both of
Captives, and of Goods to the Eastern Indians, to have them to go out with
them; but as yet I do not know what they will do. For Madock twando and Squando
are of several Judgments, and so have parted, and Madockawando does pretend
love to the English, they do use our English Captives as Civilly as we can
expect by such a People.

That this is Truth is declared by me Francis Card,
Ian. the 22. 1676.
By the Report which he brings it does not appear so difficult a matter to make
an Attempt to recover the place, and destroy them that hold it, as was before
apprehended: Insomuch, as that design, that was under debate before the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL a little before, and was let fall for the present, as a
matter not Feasible, has since been set a foot with a fresh Resolution: And
another thing also occured about the same time, which put new Life into the
said design, viz. an apprehension that there were several of the Narrhagansets
scattered about in these woods near Pascataqu^, who it was feared might join
with those of Kennibeck in the Spring, and so come down upon the English
Plantations, and spoil them all that are thereabouts. For soon after Francis
Card coming to Boston, some of Major Walde^ns Indians at Quecheeh^, as they
were hunting in the woods chanced to meet with three st^ange Indians, the which
had Guns, at least two of them; but those of Q^e^bec^o were without. The other
Indians began to insinuate into them, to see if they could make way for their
acceptance with the English: Those Indians that this motion was made unto, in a
most persidi^us manner gave them encouragement in the business,; And appointed
a place where to meet them the next day, saying, they would not have them now
go home with them to their Wigwams, least their Women and Children should be
frighted with the sight of their Guns; All which was spoken upon a Treacherous
Account, by that means to betray them, for they had neither Women nor Children
at their Wigwams; but not having Gun^ themselves, as the other had, they durst
not then s^iz^ upon them: The next day therefore according to Appointment,
their guests expecting a Treaty, and a Friendly Complyanc^, (yet coming apart,
as was ordered the day before to be the more easily surprised) arrived at the
place Appointed; And there presently the first being thus Treacherously brought
into the snare was dispatched out of hand. The like was also done to the
second; The third was not at such a distance, but he either^d scerned or
suspected, what became of his Fellows, and therefore made the more have to
esca^e; but his deceitful Friends were too quick for him, who shot him down
before he could get out of their reach: So as they took him alive, as is said;
but he could not live much longer by Reason of his wounds: These Quechecho
Indians cut off the Scalps of their poor Countrymen, (which is their usual
manner, when it is too far to carry the heads) which being brought to Major
Walderns Indians, they were presently discerned to be Narrhagansets by the cut
of their hair. This instance is a sufficient Evidence of the Subtilety, guile,
and Falsehood natural to all these Indians; and may satisfy any Rational
person, what l^ttle trust there is to be put in their words, promises, or
Engagements, though never so solemnly made, farther then they that make them,
see Advantage in the keeping and performing. Subtilety, malice, and Revenge,
seems to be as inseparable from them, as if it were part of their Essence.

What ever hopes may be of their Conversion to Christianity in after Time,
there is but little appearance of any Truth in their hearts at present, where
so much of the contrary is so ordinarily breathed ou^ of their mouths.

These were the m^nners of the Gentiles in former times, while they remained
Children of Disobedience, until they were renewed after another Image: Nor are
these incapable Subjects for Divine grace to work upon, yet are there some
natural vices proper to every Nation in the world as Paul speak; of the
Grecians, from the Testimony of one of their own Poets: (...), etc.

But to Return; These things so concurring, and several Gentlemen from about
Pascataqua repayring to Boston, so represe^ted the states of things Eastward
before the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, as that it was apprehended not only
necessary, but Feasible also to suppress the foresaid Indians in those parts:
Whereupon it was forthwith concluded that an Expedition should be made against
them; To which end two hundred Soldiers, whereof about sixty were of the
Natick Indians, that have given good proof of their Valor, and Faithfulness to
the English; All which were immediately dispatched away, the first week in
February by water, under the Conduct of Major Waldern as Commander in chief; A
person well approved for his Activity, as well as Fidelity and Courage in
concernments of that nature: They had to Encounter with Rough and contrary
Winds, and much cold weather the first week after their setting forth; But
having so much Experience of the favor and goodness of the Almighty, who is
wont always to be present with his Servants in like Cases, though he has
often for a time deferred for the try^^ of their Faith, and exercise of their
patience; yet us^th not to fail his people, that put their trust in him, and
diligently seek his face; A solemn time being appointed for that end; To the
which we expect a comfortable Answer: we that have sent forth our F^iends on
the public Service, being thus engaged to follow them with our Prayers, at the
present in silence wait upon the Lord of Hosts to give a blessing to the
design; Hoping our Friends in this necessary, though difficult Service, thus
called forth, have gone out with the like E^couragement, and Resolution, that
sometimes Ioa^ did; Let us be of good Courage, and play the men for our People,
and for the Cause of our God; And let the Lord do that which seems him good.

Upon the eleventh of February two Indian Squaws, that had run away from Major
Walderns in the beginning of winter, out of discontent, because the husband of
one of them, and some of the Relations of the other were sent away, came back
again with more wit, than they carried with them, though with less flesh upon
their backs: for having wandered up toward Pigwache^, till they were almost
starved there, they say, some Indians were seen by them, pretending they were
going to the head of Connecticu^ River, with ^ostile Inteats against the
English; but they going away as they did, little h^^d is given to the Star^ei
they tell upon their Return.

February the ^^neteenth following, John Abbor, the Master of Mr. Fr^ers Ketch
taken October the Twelfth, before at Black Point, came in to the Isie of
Shoales, having made a despera^e Adventure to escape; he gave a more probable
Account of things in those parts.

He says, they were first carried to Shipscot River, where the Vessel in which
they were ^^ken, was ^oored for all the Winter: In which time, the Indians
having spent all their Ammunition, and most o^ their Provision, counted it high
time now to be looking out for more: to which end, they caused the said Abbot
to fit up the Vessel, (being a Pinnace of about thirty T^^) as well as he
could, with such assistance as they could afford him; and ten of them shipped
themselves in the same, intending for Penchscot; from thence to Sail up that
River, as far as they could; and then leav^ng their V^ssel to proceed on with
their (...), as high up the River as the stream would permit, and so to pass on
to Cannada to buy powder of the Fr^nc^ there; It being at this time two and
thirty Shillings (...) pound amongst the Indians at Kennibeck. But, as
Providence ordered it, after these Mariners were launched into the deep, a
small storm with a contrary wind began to arise; of which the English Skipper
found ways in his steering to make the danger seem more than really it was. in
so much that they resolved to put in at Cape-bona-waggon, three Leagues to the
Eastward of Shipscot, where eight of them went a shore, leaving two Indians
aboard with the English Skipper: After he had got so well rid of them, he
contrived how to get shut of the other also: Therefore he persuaded them, that
the Vessel would not ride safely in that place, so as he prevailed with them to
let him go to another Harbor, called Damar is Cove, two or three Leagues more
Eastward: In the way as he Sailed, he so ordered his steering, that sometimes
the waves were ready to overrake^ the Vessel, which put his two Indians into a
fright, so as they made all the ^ast they could to get a shore, as soon as ever
they came within the Harbor, urging him to go along with them; but he
pretended a necessary Excuse to stay behind to look after the Vessel but with
intent, as soon as ever he should see them a shore, to boys^ Sail for some
English Harbor, ^^ving no body aboard with him, but a small English Child
about three ears old: It seems the Indians had a Child or two of their own dead
in the Vessel, who dying after they began their Voyage, they were the forwarder
to go a shore with them, for buryal: The said Abbot now perceiving he had
obtained his purpose; (for he often resolved on this Project before) first
^allowing the Mast with a piece of fat Pork left by the Indians, as high as he
could reac^* that he with his own hands might the more easily boyse the Sail,
so choosing rather to cast himself upon the Providence of God in the waters,
than to trust himself any longer wi^h pirfidious Salvages on the dry Land; he
came s^fe to Isle of Shoales before the Evening of the next day, February the
nineteenth.

Within a few days after John Abbot aforesaid, made his escape in the Vessel;
There came an express from Major Waldern that commanded in chief over our
Forces sent to Kennibeck to subdue the Indians in those parts, and deliver the
English Gaptives that have been detained in their hands, since August last,
which gives this Account of their proceeding.

February the seventeenth, this morning the wind North East, soon after South,
and South West, we sat Sail with (...) Vessels from Black Point, for
Portland, but on the East Side of Cape Elizabeth, we espied John Pain, (who was
sent out a Scout) who brought word the way was clear of Ice, and Indians
whereupon we steared for Mary Poin^ at the head of Casco Bay, and got there
this night, but too late to get to the Fort before morning.

February the eighteenth, we sent this morning our Scouts out by Land, who
returning about eight of the Clock brought word they espied the Tracts of three
Indians, and found a Birch Canoo at Muckq^itt about four miles off, by which we
feared we were discovered, the Companyes about four a Clock were drawn forth,
and just beginning their march, when we espied five Canoos of the Enemy about
half a mile off, they landed over against us on an Island, and (...) to us,
whereby we perceived they desired a Trea^y, hoping to gain the Captives, we
sent John Pain to them, they promised him to bring the Captives by morning, and
desired peace: Afte^ this John Pain was sent again, and stayed among the
Indians in the room of Simon, who came to the Major, he was questioned, and
Answered as follows:

Quest. How came you to know we were here?

Answ. We continually kept out our Scouts, and Yesterday our Indians left a
Canoo at Muckquitt, which this day we missed, and per^^ived the English had
taken it, and our Men that left the Canoo, espied you a a great way off at
Portland.

Quest. Why did you break your Covenant with me?

Answ. Blind W^ll stirred us up to the War here, and said, he would kill you at
Q^echecho; Simon having said this, asked the Major what his business was here?
to whom it was Answered, we came to ^etch off the Captives and make War as we
see good. Simo^ also told us that the Captives were all well, that we should
have them by morning, that Squando was there, and would give the Captives to
Major Waldern that they intended peace, had sent to Boston before now, but that
Mugg told them the English would be here shortly.

The Major upon this dismissed Simon, and sent for Squando, to which Squando
Answered, he would meet him half way if he would come alone in a B^rch Canoo.
To this the Major Answered, he would not venture himself in our Leakie Canoo,
and that if he had no more to say the Treaty was ended: To this Squando
Answered, he would be with us again at Ten a Clock, and bring the Captives.

On the Nineteenth. Wind North East, the weather thick; About Noon we
discovered a party of Indians in ^ourteen Canoos about three mile above us in
the Bay: they landed on a point of Land and burnt one English house, and
shouted to some of our m^n that were Scouts, challenging them to fight:
Immediately on the Return of our Scouts we marched against them as secretly as
we could: upon sight of us they fled; but Captain Frost came upon them with his
whole body before they were half out of Gun shot: in this Skirmish we judged,
we killed and wounded several of them without any damage, yet some of their
Bullets hit some of our men. For the Captives sake immediately after this, we
hung out a Flag of Truc^, and the Enemy did the like: John Pain was sent to
them to demand the Reason why they fired the house, and brake their Promise.

Simon met him half way, and Answered, the house was fired Accidentally without
Order from Squando: that they had sent for the Captives who were a great way
off, and the foul weather hindered their coming: He questioned John Pain also
why we sought them while we were in Trea^y.

Pain Answered they brake it themselves in not performing their promise,
challenging our Soldiers to fight; this latter Simon denied, and Answered the
other as before: Simon told him they had two men wounded, and expected
satisfaction, but also promised the Captives the next day, and so left us.

On the twentieth. The wind North East, and Snow, it was resolved to Sail for
Kennibeck the first fair wind, whether we had immediately gone upon our
knowledge, that we were discovered by the Enemy, but that the wind and weather
hindered us hitherto.

February the twenty first, this morning the wind North West, we set Sail for
Kennibeck, and arrived at the Harbors mouth at four a Clock: About Sun set we
set Sail up the River, and got to the lower end of Arowsick.

Twenty second, we set Sail this morning, but (...) ^ot get to the head of the
River for Ice, whereupon we landed our (...) about two a Clock, about twelve
miles off Aboundessit Fort, and immediately began our march, about eight a
Clock at night came to the Fort, we found no Indians, there we ^ook up our
Quarters this night.

Tw^nty third we sent out Scouts to discover the march of the Enemy, but found
so many Tracts every way, that w^ knew not what way to follow them; At a
Council of War it was resolved that Major Wa^dern should Sail for Penobscot,
with two of the Ketches, and part of the Soldiers to seek after the Captives,
and fight the Enemy if he had opportunity: the rest to build a Garrison. In the
absence of our Forces, the Vessels espied several Fires belwo the River, and
one English horse was burnt, about Sun set, the Soldiers returned to the
Vessels:

Twenty fourth this morning the Major with two Boats and a Shallop went to spy
out a place to settle a Garrison, and found one against the lower end of
Arowsick Island, and the Vessels are brought to it.

Twenty fifth. We rested here this Sabbath.

John Bakers house opposite to the lower end of Arowsick, being judged the most
convenient place for their purpo^e, as wel^ for the convenience of wa^er for
the Soldiers, as of a Cove wherein Ships might R^de, within Command thereof,
their Vessels therefore were immediately Anchored there, where they rested on
the Lords day, February, the twenty fif^h.

The next day according to the Advice of the Comma^ders, Major Waldern
embarked sixty men in two Vessels, with which he set Sail immediately for
Peno^scot, leaving the rest to be employed in making preparation for settling a
Garrison in the said place.

In their way, off from Gy-obscut Point, they espied two Indians in a C^noo*
that waved their Caps, as if they desired speech with them. John Pain and Wat.
G^endal were presently sent; they gave them I ^^elle ^gence that many Indians
were at Pemmaquid with English Captives, upon which they b^nt their Course
thither. where arriving they Anchored at four a Clock, the same day; soon after
two Indians holloed to them from Mr. Gardners Fort^ Iohn^Pain was sent a shore
to enquire who they were, and what was become of the Captiv^s: Sundry sorts of
Indians were found upon the place, with several Sagamores, the chief of ^^om,
was Mattahando, who told them he was glad to see English m^n there, and that he
desired peace, and promised to delive^ such Captives as were at Pe^ob cot, the
next morning; adding also, that he (...) to speak with Captain Davis. After
John (...) returned to the Major, he was sent back with the said Davis, and
staid a shore, till three Sagamores went a board, and signified as much to
Major Waldern, as they had said before to John Pain. While they were in
discourse, an English Captive was espied in a Canoo with his Pateroon, with
whom they desired to speak but it was not granted at that time, he being
carried farther up the River out of fight.

Soon after the Major went a shore with six men, yet carrying no Arms with
them. He found their words smoother than Oil, yet were there drawn Swords in
their hearts, of which some of their act^ons, gave no small ground of
Suspicion: for they deferred all till the next morning; nor were they willing
to let the man that was espied before in the Canoo come a board to see his
Friends without leaving an Hostage in his room, of which the Major was very
glad, that he might have an opportunity of a little discourse with one whom
they might trust. When they returned from the shore, a sign was promised to be
given for the Appearance of the Indians by the firing of three Gun^. The next
morning, February the twenty seventh, the Major with the same number as before,
went to Treat with them: They with John Pain having first holloed to them; upon
their coming a shore their persons were searched on both sides, and all Arms
laid aside. The whole Forenoon was spent in ^ Treaty, whereat they seemed much
to rejoice in expectation of a Peace with the English; yet when Major Waldern
desired a present delivery of the Captives, with Assistance of men and Canoos
to fight the Monoscoggin Indians, Enemies to them both, it was denied, though
they could no^ have had a fitter Testimony of their Fidelity.

They alleged that the Captives were givers them by Kennibeck Indians, and
they must have something for keeping them all Winter, and therefore were not
willing to let them go without Ransom; And for their Canoos, they said they
had them in present Service, being then boun^ for Penobscot. The price
demanded* viz. twelve Skins a person, was yielded to; upon which they presently
delivered William Chadburn, John Whinnick, and John Worwood, which were all
that they would own, or could be proved they had.

That part of the pay, which was to be in Liquor, was presently laid down, the
rest was promised to be sent in the Afternoon. The Command^rs debated what was
farther to be done, one or two of the old ^agamores, (who were believed) seemed
sincere about the Peace, p^osess^d that none of them had any hand in the War,
but only some of their young men, whom they could not Rule: But several of the
Company offirming they saw some of the said Indians at Casco engaged in (...)
against the English, it was resolved not to enter into any League of Peace with
them, but rather to fight them, or surprise them after they had dispatched the
business about the Captives.

This being determined, the Major with five of his men went a shore, with part
of the Ransom, the better to beget a Confidence in them; and then presently to
return a board, and fit his men for fa^ther Service; But if he had not wisely
provided against all Exigenciess a ^ore hand, he might have been prevented from
ever going aboard more; for stepping aside a Rod or two from the place, for
better Circumspection, he espied the point of a Lance from under a board, hid
there, as were other Arms near by for a Treacherous design that was in their
minds, soon after, upon the receiving the rest of the Pay, to have been put in
Execution. Whereupon Major Waldern took up the Lance, and came toward them,
cha^ging them with falsehood and Treachery, for hiding Weapons just by,
wherewith to destroy them as soon as they had delivered the goods: The Indians
discovered their guiltiness by their Countenances, some of them making toward
him, thinking to get the said Weapon out of his hands; but he bid them stand
off, threatening to kill every one that offered to touch him; And immediately
waved his Cap over his head, (which was the sign agreed upon, for the
Soldiers to come all a shore, in Case of need) upon which Token the Soldiers
all hasted away. In the mean while the English that went a shore to wait upon
the Major, were forced to bestir them, both to secure the goods from being
carried away, (...) to defend Major Waldern: Some of the Squaws with others of
the Enemy ran away, one of them catched up a Bundle of Guns that were (...)
near by, and ran away with them, Captain Frost seized and Indian calle^
Megunnaway, a Notorious Rogue, (that had been in Arms at (...) cut last June,
at the Falls, and saw that brave and Resolute (...) Turner, when he was s^ain
about green River; and helped to kill (...) Bracket at Casco, August last.) And
with the help of Lieutenans (...) according to the Majors Order carried him a
board, while (...) searching about farther found three Guns hid in a Cow-house
(...) wherewith he armed the other three men that were with him (...) time some
of the Soldiers were got a shore, and instantly (...) their Majors Command
pursued the Enemy toward their (...) the Chaso, several of the Enemies were
slain* whose bodies they (...) their Return; to the number of seven, amongst
whom was Mattahand^ the Sagamore, with an old Po^aw, to whom the Devil had
^revea^ed, as sometimes he did to Saul, that one the same day he should be with
him: for he had a little before told the Indians, that within two days, the
English would come and kill them all, which was at the very same time verified
upon himself: The body of our men overtook them before they all recovered their
Canoo^, so as without doubt, diverse others of them were slain likewise: for
they sunk a Canoo, wherein were five drowned before their Eyes: and many
others were not able to paddle: four they took Pri^oners, whom they brought
away with them There being about five and twenty of the Indians p^esent at this
Encounter.

Much more damage might have been done by our men upon the Enemy, if they had
known the ready way to their Canoos; but the Indians having prepared all things
ready for flight, in Case, as well as for fight, the more easily made their
escape. One of the Captives taken was Madockawa^do'^ Sister, who was
Entertained very Court^o^sly by the Commander in chief, and had been carried
forth with to her ^rother, in hope by her means to have gained the better
Terms for our remaining English Captives, but it was certainly known that he
was gone from home upon an Hunting Design^, and not to return in two Months.

The English took much Plunder from the Indians, about a thousand weight of
dried Beef, with other things, Megunnaway was shot to Death, the same day or
the n^xt, so as Justice is by degrees pursuing those pirfidious Villains, and
one after another they are brought under the Wheel of Destruction. Simon, that
Arch Traitor, seems as is said, by his Consumptive looks, to have received the
Sentence of Death, which may bring him into the same place or State with the
rest.

Feb. 28th. they set Sail for Shipscot, but the wind failing, they were put in
at Konnibeck, from whence Captain Fisk (with forty men were sent to the said
place to seek after Plunder, where they found between thirty and forty Bushels
of good wheat, which they brought away with them, several other things they
lighted upon here, and there, some of which were brought away; As one or two
great Guns, and some Anchors, from Saga-de-Hock, Boards from Arowsick, where
they found an hundred thousand Foot, of which they brought home, enough for the
lading of their Vessels, leaving the rest to be Transported in a more
convenient Season.

While our Soldiers were upon Arowsick, two of the Enemy chancing to come upon
the place, one of them presently received his Re^a^d, the other received his
Payment, which yet is supposed to amount to the whole; The Canoo wherein he
seemed to escape, being ^ound the next day all bloody, and spli^ asunder.

March the first, one of the Indian Squaws a Captive was sent to Taconet Fort,
with a M^ssage to the Sagamores to Treat for the rest of the Captive^^ Five
days were given her for her Return, which were not ^xpired, when Major
Waldern, with most of the Soldiers were called to return home towa^ds Boston,
where they arrived March the eleventh. 1^76. 77. having first put in at
Portsmouth Bringing along with them the bones, or rather the body of Captain
Lake, p^eserven entire and whole and free from putr^faction by the coldness of
the long winter, so as it was when found by the discretion of one that was near
him when he was slain, easily discerned to be his, by such as had known him
before.

It is hoped by those that returned, the Enemies are by this Encounter of the
English so scattered and broken, that they will not be able to rally again
suddenly, or make any after Attempt, if the present Advantage be seriously
pursued. And thus have our Enemies themselves many of them fallen into the pit,
which they have been digging for others.

This day also Letters were received from Major Pinchon of Springfield, but
without mention of any appearance of Enemies in that Quarter, whereby we are
encouraged to believe, that they have stumbled and fall^n downbackward, so as
they shall never rise any more to make farther disturbance. That which crowned
the present Service was the performing it without loss of blood; They all
returning home in safety, not any one being missed; Let them accordingly
remember to pay a suitable Tribute of Thankfulness to him, under whose Banner
they went forth, and returned in Safety; And say with Moses the Servant of the
Lord, JEHOVAH NISSI.

TO this Issue were our Troubles with the Indians brought in the end of the
year, 1676.

That which has been already said in that kind, may serve to give an Account
of the Murders, Slaughter^, Captivities of several persons of the English
Inhabitants of New England: together with the burning and spoiling of diverse of
their Villages and houses, spoiling of their Estates, by those their pe^fidious
and barbarous Enemies. That which remains, is only to satisfy the Inquisitive
Reader about some other particulars, which have a Relation unto, or dependence
upon the former: as to show what may be the principal and leading Causes Civil
or moral, of those strange Successes of the Indians, in some of their first
Encounters with the English there, what presages or other ominous Accidents
were observed aforehand, what assistance they received from other Foreign
Nations, French, or Dutch, what is since become of those Indians that were the
Authors of the foresaid mischiefs, what progres^ Christian Religion has
already made, or is like further to make amongst the rest, all which may serve
as an Epilogue to the T^agical History, foregoing.

It is no d^ubt but that (as sometimes was said of the Divisions of Re^ben)
there have been, and are great thoughts of heart amongst them that wish well to
this poor Country; for the Calamities that of late have here fallen out, every
one taking occasion to put that Construction upon what has happened, which suits
best with his own understanding and humor. Possibly those that live at a
distance have made many uncertain guesses at things which have passed here. For
those that ^^ved upon the (...) have very sad Apprehensions both concerning the
Rise and ^ssue of them. In a matter therefore of so much difficulty to give the
best account we can of the things under debate; It cannot be denied but that
things ever since the planting of these Colonies of New England, they have been
signally bl^ssed of God, and made to flourish above many other Foreign
^lantations, both for the number of Towns and Villages, Increase of Families,
growth of Trade, flourishing of Religion, probably therefore, this sudden and
unex^ected turn of Providence, may occasi^n many to think, that either there
has been some notable De^ten^ion from former Principles and ways, or else the
world has been much ab^s^d by former reports of our prosperous proceedings
here. But it should be observed that Arguments taken barely from Success, and
the Event of things, l^ke Cyph^rs standing alone and not joined with others, as
some have said, do not increase^ the number, ^he^ the whol^ Sum is to be made
^p, they will sign^fie what they were intended for; Every thing is beautiful in
its Sea^on, but in the mean tim^ sad Events should rather be improved to our
own Instruction than the condemning of others: following the dark Cloud of
Providence without the ^^ery Pillar of the Scripture, will lead into uncertain
paths. This is not the first time that Christian People have been exposed to
many Outrages, and barbarous Calamities from their Pagan Neighbors, to whom
they have been many ways Offic^^us. It is well known what happened in the
Neighbor Colony of Virginia on the twenty second of March, 1622. when by a
general Conspir^cy of the Indians three hundred and forty seven persons of the
English Planters, were barbarously massa^red; at that time when they had the
greatest hopes of Converting them to Christianity; yet need no: this any whit
discourage charitable Endeavors that way; for if it had not been for one
Converted Indian, that revealed the Plot, in all likelihood all the rest of the
English there planted, had been in like manner cut off at the same ti^^. The
Heathen in New England are situate in the same Climate, therefore cannot be
supposed to be much differing in their manners and disposition. But besides
that we are hemmed in on both sides* and almost round about, with People of
Foreign Nations, whole design is neither Religion, nor yet planting Colonyes
of Civil People, so much as present Emolument by Commerce and Traffic with the
Indians, who notwithstanding their barbarous manner of living, are yet
furnished with some rich and useful Commodities, for the obtaining of which,
those that come amongst them have not been unwilling to offer them in way of
Exchange, such Commodities as the Indians most fancy and desire, as Powder and
Ammunition, not considering how destructive the Trade thereof may prove to
others, which has made some wise m^n both fear and foretell the dangerous
Issue of Trading those things with the Indians here. It has been said the
Hollanders used so to deal with the Spaniards, at such times as they had their
fiercest Wars with them, saying, that if they did not, others would carry*
those Commodities to their Enemies, which they thought they were as good to do
themselves, that so in Case of bad Succes^ in the Wars, the gain of the Barter
might help to make amends for the loss of the Battle. The same Reason possibly
put them upon the like practice in that part of this Country called the
New-Netherlands: for which they have pre^ty well smarted themselves, as now
they have helped others to do by their Example. Some prudent Gentlemen that
governed in Virginia at the first, were aware of this mischief; wherefore it
was strictly forbidden them, upon pain of death to show a^ Indian the use of a
Gun; if the like Course had been continued here, it had scarc^ been possible
according to the Eye of Reason that so much mischief could have been done us by
our Indian Neighbors, at this time more than in former years. Their wills were
as good heretofore, but when they had nothing but Bows and Arrows to trust
unto, they were capable of no such mischief: But now by their frequent Converse
and Trading with the Dutch and French on each side of us, they are as well
^kil'd in the use of small Artillery as many other Nations.

Their young men so much delighting therein, that upon point they mind little
else, and are so proud of their Skill, that they thought they could easily deal
with, if nor over-match their Masters; that first instructed them.

It is reported by an Ancient Mariner yet living in these parts, a person of
good Credit, that above twenty years since being in the Eastern parts about
Kennibeck, he heard an old Indian tell this story, that when he was a Youth,
there was a Fort built about Saga-de-Hock (the Ruins of which were then shown
this Relater, supposed to be that called St. Georges Fort in honor of Captain
George Popham, the President of the Company sent over Anno, 1607.) And
possessed for some time by the English: But afterward upon some Quarrel that
fell out betwixt the Indians and them, the English were some of them killed by
the said Indians, and the rest all driven out of the Fort, where there was left
much of their Provision and Ammunition; amongst which there was some Barrels of
Powder, but after they had opened them, and not knowing what to do therewith,
they left the Barrels carelessly open, and scattered the Powder about, so as
accidentally it took fi^e, and blew up all that was within the Fort, burnt^ and
destroyed many of the Indians, upon which they conceived their God was Angry
with them for doing hurt to the English; It had been well these Indians never
had had any other acquaintance with the nature of that Commodity, then by such
Experimental knowledge of its Force and power. But Covetousness was and will be
the Root of all evil in every Age of the World, of which this may be reckoned
one, and not the least, that for the sake of a little Lucre, Civil and
Christian Nations have been induced to instruct a barbar^us and Salvage People
(before ever they had been reduced to good order or Civil manners, much less
Christianity, in the use of our A^tillery, and furnish them likewise with
Ammunition, to improve that Skill to the destruction of themselves, and their
Posterity. Th^mas Mar^in was said to be the first that like Epimetheus opned
this Pandora's Box but he was not the Vulcan, that forged all their G^^s, with
other weapons of, War they are found so well furnished withal.

The Commiss^^ners of our united Colonyes have for a long time carefully and
seriously endeavored the preventing this Inconveniency in every of the three
Colonyes, by strict prohibition of Trading Ammunition with the Indians; Nor has
it been given way unto, till of late years, when by the continual Solicitation
of some of our own People (that possibly since have paid dearly for their
forwardness therein) who a^leadged the Example of the French and Dutch, and of
some of our own Na^ion bo^dering upon us; The former restraint has been taken
off, and it is verily supposed that as to some of our People, that in the last
Insurrection of the Indians amongst us, have felt both^ the first and worst
part of their, Rage and Cruelty; it was Effected by the Ammunition not long
before, pu^chased of themselves, which it may be was reserved for that very end
and p^rpose. It is no small Aggravation of the misery befalling a place or
person, when it is known to be brought about, by means of their own p^ojecting;
As sometimes was said to the Tyrant s^ain by a weapon of his own forging, suo
sibi hunc jugulo* gladio.

But if Enquiry be made into the moral and procuring Causes, whereby God has
been provoked to let loose the Rage of the H^athen thus against us; It is not
hard to give an Answer. The S^ver^^gn Ruler* of the World need never pick a
Quarrel with any sort of men (the best of his Servants at all times giving him
too just occasion of Controversy with them) or be to seek of a ground why to
bring a Scourge upon them, having also other holy ends why he contends with his
People; of which he is not bound to render the world an account: It may be
Reason enough to work in them a S^mpathy for the Sufferings and Calamityes of
others: or to keep them from being exalted above measure; or to humble and
prove them, that they should not by their long Peace and Prosperity b^ ready to
look upon themselves as less sinners than others, who have drunk deep of the
Cu^ of Trembling before them: To prevent what Evil may, as well as reform what
is already grown up amongst them. Standing waters are most ap^ to corrupt, Gods
Dispensations of this nature in the world, are usuelly observed to be for
Correction of the Vices, as well as for the Trial of the Virtues found in his
Servants, And what people or person is there upon the ^^ce of the Earth, who
has not Reason to lay their hand upon their mouths, and to abhor themselves in
dust and ashes, if the Almighty should go about to enter into Judgment with
them: No doubt but after so long a time of Peace and Prosperity, as has been
enjoyed, the like Corruptions have began to (...) forth, as are usual in such a
Case, as Pride, Luxury, Inordinate Love of the World, etc. Nor need He be
instructed by men, what Instruments to make use of, in the chastning of his
People: Why may not God as well as G^deon teach the men of Suc^oth, and of
other places, by the Briers and Thorns of the Wilderness. If a more particular
Indagation of the (...) or the very original Offense in this matter be
expected; All things considered, it may be feared to spring from some
Irregularities and miscarriages in our Transactions and dealings with the
Indians themselves, according to that known Rule. In quo q^^s peccat in eo
punitur, yet must not this be understood, so as to (...) upon the People of the
United Colonyes in the Gross: Whose supreme Courts in their several
Jurisdictions, have endeavored by the sharpest and severest Laws imaginable to
prevent any miscarriage of such a nature; But it has arisen only from such
places and persons as border upon us round about, both Southward and Eastward,
yet never were, nor would be, subject to the Laws of our Iurisd^^tion, nor had
nay Reprovor in the Gate, or Magistrate to put he Offenders to shame Such as
make the Advantage they have in their heads the Rule for their Consciences to
act by; It is no wonder if they be ready to transgress the Rules both of
Sobriety and Righteousness in their deali^gs with men, as well as Piety before
God, The things that the Ind^ans are more eager to Trade for, being known to be
either strong Liquor or Powder, and Am^nition: And many have been found
Indirectly and under hand to gratify their humor therein. The one has proved
always most hur^ful to themselves, the other ^eared (and justly as it has
been proved) most destructive to our selves. The more sober and prudent of the
Indians have always most bitterly complained of the T^ading of strong Liquor
in our English, as well as in the French and Dutch, whose ordinary Custom i^
first, to make them, or suffer them to make themselves drunk with Liquors, and
then to Trade with them, when they may easily be cheated both in what they
bring to Trade, and in the Liquor it self, being one half or more nothing but
Spring water, which made one of the Amonos^oggin Indians once complain that he
had given an hundred Pound for water drawn out of Mr. P. his Well. But this is
not all the Evil that atten^s this wicked Trade of strong Liquor, for when they
are drunk therewith, they are ready to fight with their Friends, Parents,
Brethren, etc. Yea, often have murdered one another. Should I not be avenged
on such a People, or persons as these says the Lord? Good old Jacob sometimes
complained after the Villainy of his two Sons, committed upon the S^bechemite^,
that he was made to stink in the sight of the People of the Land, and that be
should be destroyed he and his house: It is well if some of our Borderer^ have
not had cause, not only to fear, but to feel the like Calamity in Reference to
themselves, or some of theirs, thus what has been gotten over the back of the
evil Fiend is lost under his belly according to the Proverb.

Besides all this, it has been observed of many of these scattering
Plantations in our Borders, that many were contented to live without, yea,
desirous to shake off all yoke of Government, both sacred and Civil, and so
Transforming themselves as much as well they could into the manners of the
Indians they lived amongst, and are some of them therefore most deservedly (as
to Divine Justice) left to be put under the yoke and power of the Indians
themselves, and hence it is that in many parts, the people void of Council and
common prudence as well as Courage, have so frightfully deserted, or Cowardly
delivered up several places of strength (though Tenable enough of themselves)
into the hands of Contemptible Enemies; and so like Ripe Figs upon the first
sh^king of the Tree, have been ready to fall into the mouth of the Eater, as
the Prophet speaks; As has been too sadly verified in some of the Southern,
and all the Eastern parts.

If it be here Objected, that the same or like Calamit^^s have befallen many of
those places and persons; where no such Evils could justly be complained of; It
may as easily be Answered, and that from the observation of Heathen themselves,
that in such public Calamities, it is not easy to distinguish between the good
and the bad, sape Diespiter, iratus incesto add^dit integrum. The Righteous
many times have an equal share with the wicked. In these Cases says Solomon,
all things come alike to all, no man knows love or ^atred by all that is
before him: The Confused Events of worldly Affairs, are often times so limited
and restrained by the holy hand and wise Providence of God, that it is hard to
find a difference; therefore concerning such places, which may be thought not
touched with the guilt of the forementioned miscarriages, yet have by the
overruling band of Providence been not withstanding made (...) suffer as deeply
as others. I judge them not, yet hope, if they have ought for which to judge
themselves before him that searches the hearts, they will take occasion hereby
to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, that in his due time they
may be Exalted to their former Tranquillity and P^ace.

When Gods Judgments are abroad in the Earth, then should the Inhabitants of
the World lea^n Righteousness. This C^^^ion is judged the more necessary here
to be added, in that it is the genera^ observation of all indiffer^^^ and
unconcerned persons about the like Troubles; That they have ordinarily either
begun, or have fallen heaviest upon t^ose places and persons that have had most
to do in the Trading with Indians.

If any such have as yet escaped their hands, to be sure they have been
Threatened, as if they had been before others, particularly looked upon by them,
as the Obj^ct of their Revenge, which makes some moderate persons fear, that
those men have either themselves offended in that kind, or else have connived
at others under them, to carry on the Traffic with the Indians, by such ways
and m^ans, that have been as well offensive to God, as injurious to those they
have Traded wi^h.

In the second place, touching the various Success we have met withal, in our
several Encounters with the Indians, Victory and Conquest did (...) a long time
seem to stand Neuter, and our Condition and Warfare not much unlike the
Conflict between Israel and Amal^k in the Wilderness, nor can it be denied ^ut
that our Enemies for a time had great Success in their Outrages, Providence as
it were seeming to offer them opportunities of doing us much mischief; when we
could find none of taking just Revenge: Things of that nature being strangely
either hid from the Eyes of the Leaders, or else the weather has so ^allen out
as that it was not possible for our men to have pursued them: Although both the
Commanders and Soldiers, sent ^orth from all the three Colonyes, have jointly
and severally pursued their Advantages, with in^Credible hazard and diligence,
and with as I^^^^cible Courage as ordinarily has been found amongst men. But
as it is said, the Battle is not always to the strong, nor the Race to the
swift, but Time and Chance has strangely Interposed to the prolonging of our
miseries, and the hardening and embold^ing of our Enemies: Much of our
disappointments, and the loss of many of our Forces engaging with them, must be
imputed in a great measure to our men's unacquaintedness with the manner of
their fighting, they doing most of their mischiefs, either by Ambushments,
sudden surprizals, or overmatching some of our small Companyes with greater
numbers, h^ving ^ad many times six or seven to one: Possibly also many of our
Overthrows have proceeded from our too much Confidence in our own weapons,
Courage and Martial Discipline Not making Allowance for the difference of
Times, when th^v before engaged us, only with Bows and A^ro^s, but now came to
fight us with our own weapons) which ^ath proved no small Advantage to our
Enemies, and disadvantage to our selves; or else to the distance of our Towns
one from the other so as ofttimes they were destroyed, or in danger the^^of,
before any notice was taken of their danger. If that be a sure Rule whereby
Valor is to be judged, plus animi est inferenii p^ricul^m quam propulsant^,
s^. that there is more Courage seen in the Assaylants, than in the Defendants;
a few of our men have frequently defended themselves against multitudes of
them, unless at such times when Provide^^e seemed as it were to trouble the
Wheels of our Motions, and fight against us, so as ordinarily our people used
not to want Courage: For at Lancaster where they seemed to have had the
greatest Cause of boasting for their Success in any Assault (although it were
since known, that they had five hundred fighting men when they Assaulted that
small Town of about fifty Familyes) yet were they able to surprise but one
garrison house, which neither was fenced round, nor were the Defendants able to
ply their shot behind it, but so as the Enemy came to the very Walls and Roof
on the back side with their Fuel, or else they had never been able to have
dispossessed the Inhabitants. The same Indians within a while after, had not
been able to have done the mischief at Groaton which they did, had not a
Garrison been unadvisedly as it were delivered into their hands. In one word
they were more beholding to their perfidious Subtlety and Falsehood, or to the
Advantage of Season, place, and Number than nay Valor or Courage in all their
Victoryes, showing only a Belluine Rage and fierceness, when they had an
opportunity in their hands to destroy or do mischief. For soon after when the
time of Vengeance was come, and God seemed to own the Cause of his People, a
small handful of our men has surprised hundreds of theirs, as has been
already declared in the Narrative. The Dispensations of the Almighty have been
very awful toward us, for a long time, not seeming to go forth with our
Armies, nor helping us in defending our selves, or defeating of our Enemies, as
if he had a purpose and design to bring a sharp Scourge upon us, by that means
to humble us, and pro^e us, and then (as we trust) to do us good in our latter
end: acting therein as wise Parents that after they have corrected their
Children, to cast the Rod into the Fire. For our Enemies to the Southward, were
in the beginning of these Troubles, possessed of many goodly Havens, many rich
and Fertile places, as at Moun^-Hope, and all along the Narrh^agansit Country.
But are by this occasion, (quarrelling with us without cause) themselves in a
manner all destroyed by the special hand of God, and their Posterity quire
rooted out, as were the P^quots before them, whereby it may be gathered a^ we
hope, that God is making way to settle a better people in their rooms, and in
their stead; when, the whole frame of Gods Counsels, and purposes are put
together, and accomplished by the Issues of his Providence, it will, not doubt,
appear a work very beautiful in its Season, not only for the glory of the
Author but for the good and benefit of his people, that are concerned therein.

As for pred^ctions, or presages of these late Troubles,

Something of that nature has been observed by some Judicious persons in
reference to the present Calamities, of which something has already been
published to the World, concerning which I have nothing to add, only that some
such things have been affirmed by credible persons, as presages of what has
lately come to pass. The noise of Guns is affirmed by many, to have heen heard
in the Air, in sundry places not many years before; Concerning which the
Judicious Reader may take what notice he pleases. Although I would not be too
forward in obtruding uncertain Reports upon the belief of the far distant
Reader, especially considering how much the world has often been abused with
false Coyn^ of the like nature.

But for other predictions of the present Calamities, some wise men have
thought it not unworthy to be communicated to Posterity what has been observed
amongst the Indians themselves, as if either God himself had left some
Impression on the minds of some of them this way, or that by some strange
Instinct or other, they had some Reason to forbode the Troubles now begun,
although not yet ^^ded, sed dabit Deus his quoque finem, in his own time.

There was within the Compass of the last seven years now current, a Sagamore
ab^ut Ki^tary, or the North-East side of Pascataqua River, called Roules, or
Rolls; who lying very sick, and bed rid, (being an old man) he expected some
of the English, that had seized upon his Land, should have shown him that
Civility, as to have given him a visit in his Aged Infirmityes, and sickness;
It matters not much, whether it was totally neglected or not; to be sure at the
last he sent for the chief of the Town, and desired a favor of them, viz. that
though he might, as he said, challenge all the Plantation for his own, where
they dwelt, that yet they would please to sell or give him a small Tract of
Land, possibly an ^^ndred or two of Acres, and withal desired it might be
Recorded in the Town Back, as a picblick Act, that to his Children which he
left behind, might not be turned out, like Vaga^onds, as destitute of ^n
habitation amongst, or near the English, adding this as the Reason; That he
knew there would shortly fail out a War between the Indians and the English all
ove^ the Country, and that the Indians at the first should prevail, and do much
mischief to the English, and kill many of them; But after the third ye^r, or
after three (...) all the Indians which so did, should be roo^ed out, and
utterly destroyed.

This Story is reported by Major Waldern, Mr. Ioshuab^ Moodey, Captain Frost,
that live upon, or near the place. And one of the three forementioned persons
was desired by the said Saga^^^^ to make a Record hereof. Valeat quantum valere
potest ^ut deb^^. Many Stories of like (...) are confid^ntly told, by such as
have been more ^o versant with the Indians, which showed that either the
Conspiracy was a long while in Cont^^ving, or else that some Impression was by
a Divine hand made upon the minds of some of them.

For the actings of our Neighbor N^tions round about us, whether they have had
actually any hand in our S^fferings, either ins^^gating of our Enemies, o^
secretly and underhand supplying them with nec^ ssaries where with to carry on
their design against us, without whose ^ssi^tance it is supposed they could
hardly thus long have ^eld out. It is no question bu^ there are those in the
world, that say A^a, (...) the Calamities of our Sion, and that like Edom in
Ierusalems day cry, Raze it, Raze it, even to the Found^tion thereof: But for
our n^a^ Ne^ghbours, whether Dutch or French, their design in their several
Planta^ions, being solely, or principally Trade, and knowing that as forme^ly
they (...), so may they still have more benefi^, and Advantage by our Commerce
and Traffic than by our Ruin; it seems therefore not so probable, that they
should promote or design such a wicked end to themselves, much less that they
should join with Pagan Infidels therein; more Charity we judge is due to them
that profess the Christian Name, whatever (...) or Superstition their Religion
or worship may be blinded with

We may well conceive that either of them would not be much unwilling to part
with any thing they have to sell for Beaver, nor would they very s^rupulously
enquire what the Indians do with their Pow^e^; provided they could get their
pay for it, no more than the Cutler did, to know (as the Tal^ goes) what the
Cutpurse did with the k^i^e he made him: But that purposely either of them have
furnish^d ^ur Enemies with m^ans to do us m^schief, we are not forward to
believe.

As for the French a^ Cannada they live at (...) great a distance, to ^a^e much
Comm^rce with (...) Enemies: And besi^es they are not t^emselv^s so secure of
the Indians they deal with as to be forwa^d to (...) others, (...) th^r^ by
they come to lea^n the way to fall upon themselves. And besides it has been
affirmed by some of their own Nation, that not long since were there, and
passed home this way, that they are more aff^aid of Attempts from hence, than
we have cause to be from them.

Other Reports possibly have been taken up concerning us, as if we were divided
in our Counsels, and were too tenacious of our goods, and readier to keep them
so our Enemies, than prudently to lay ou^ what was necessary for our own
defense and preservation: no question b^t many such Rumors as these have taken
place, in the minds of (...)* Bu^ it is hoped that such as are wise and
serious, will not give too much to sinister Report till they are rightly
informed. Greater Unity of minds in things of such a nature, has seldom been
found amongst men, that might all along have been observed here. If in any
thing propo^nded for the better carrying on the war against the Indians, there
has been some difference of apprehension either from the seeming Impossibiity
and Ardu^^sness of the A^tempt, or difficulty of the Season; it never
occasioned the least Remo^a of the Action, though in things of the greatest
moment. Nor was there ever any difficulty in the disb^rsing what was necessary
for carrying on the Affairs of the War, how chargeable soever and Expensive it
has been found. The scarcity of Coy^^ has occasioned a little Trouble in some
present E^cigent, otherwise no Reason has been given of any just complaint
this way. But it being the usual Lot of them that are most sorely afficted of
God, to be most deeply censured of men, but we must expect to pass through Evil
as well as good Report.

Possibly a^s^ some may here take notice of a very distinguishing Providence in
these our late Troubles, in that this Rod of Affliction has seemed not ^o^ly,
in an equal proportion upon the body of the people of New England; which is no
new thing to observe in Calamities of this nature; wherein it is very ordinary
for those parts of a Country that lie next boraering upon the Coast of the
common Enemy to be most obnoxicus to their Incu^sion, and to be more frequently
than other^ harness^d the^eb^; As has been the Case of us here in these paris
of the Earth, ever since the first planting thereof: The great (...) of the
Salvages being swept away by some unusual mortality in all those places, where
the body of the people that came over ^ither, (...) themselves; so as they were
not so liable to their Injuryes and Insolenci^s, as those were, who not long
after were called to plant the more remo^^r parts of the Country, where were
greater numbers of them left. Which was the occasion that the said Colony of
Connecticut was then sorely afflicted with the Pequods at their first planting,
when above (...) of them fell into the hands of those cruel miscreants, they
bordering next or near upon them, so as they had an opportunity to assault them
in their first Attempt for planting that side of the Country, as sometimes
Amalck did unto Isr^el of old. Further also it may be considered, that our
Brethren of Connecticut have had no small part of this present ^^yal, in that
they have been necessarily called to lend their assistance to the other
Colonyes, which they have upon all occasions (to their honor be it spoken)
most readily and freely done, not only by their Articles of Confederation, but
as they were of necessity constrained in common prudence for their own safety
to do -- iam proxim^^ ardet Vealegon: he that will not help to quench the fire
kindled in his Neighbors house, may justly ^ear to loose his own. It may truly
be said also, that they have had their turn in like troubles at the first band,
their Fleeces being only wetred with a like bloody shower, when the ground all
about was dry; as now the contrary has ^emed to fall out. To be sho^t we are
all but one Political body, which ought to be sensible of the Sorrows that
befell any particular members thereof: we all came over into these parts of
America, with one and the same end and aim, viz* to enjoy the libertyes of the
Gospel in purity and peace, and to advance the Kingdom of our Lord ^^sus
Christ, and b^ing in our first settling, (by the wise Providence of God) farther
dispersed upon the Sea Coasts and Rivers, then was at first intended, so that
we could not according to our desire communicate, in one Government and
Jurisdiction, and being likewise where welive, encompassed with people of
several Nations, which may prove injurious, as they have formerly committed
insolences, and Outrages upon several of our Plantations, we were necessi^ated
to enter into a Consociation amongst our selves for m^tual help and strength in
such conc^rnme^ts as have now fallen out, as is expressed in the Preface to the
Articles of Confederation, agreed upon May twenty ninth, 1643.

In the last place, upon the consideration of these late Vproars amongst the
Indians, some may be like to ecquire, what is become of the Conversion of the
Natives, so much famed abroad, and what progress the Gospet has made amongst
them, fearing (as well they may) it is like to be not a ^ittle obstr^cted
hereby. It may probably be supposed, that the pious endeavors of some to
preach the Gospel amongst several of the Indian Natives, has given the first
occasion of the Quarrel, as usually it has done in the world, But that
Opposition meeting with no better Success in the Southern parts, than the Ruin
of those that made the first ^^bellion against us, Satan has lately changed
himself into an Angel of Light, under that shape, making this his last Attempt,
to the Eas^ward* For the chief Leader of those Indians is a Sagamore called
Squando, who has (as is said by them that lately escaped from their hands
familiar Converse with the Prince of Darkness, though under the notion of a
good Deity, putting him upon a form of Religion, and forbidding any acts of
Cru^lty and murder to be used against any they oppose, if they be willing to
yield, and in that way promising great Success to his Followers, what the
Issues of his proceedings will be, God only knows, and a little time may
discover. But for those that before these troubles have professedly owned the
Christian Name, many of them have given notable proof of their sincerity, by
fighting against their, and out Enemies, and have been very successful in their
Endeavors: as well these in the upper parts of Cape-^od, commonly called Cape
Indians. as those about Natick, and Hassinameset, within the Massachuset
Jurisdiction. It is not my purpose to enlarge much on this hand, that I might
not raise the expectation of the world to greater matters than for the present
do appear.

There are about six Societies of Indians in the Country, who have professedly
owned themselves Christians; In every one of which it is supposed there are
some, that do make a serious profession of the Christian Religion. The
Salvation of whose Souls is worth far more pains and cost than ever yet was
laid out upon that work.

It is not a small thing, that in these dark places of the Earth, which in all
Ages past, since mankind had any knowledge thereof, have been full of nothing
but the habitations of Cruelty, the light of the Gospel should take so much
place, as to cause any number of those Vassa^s of Satan where he so long has
had his Throne, professedly to own the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. What
Harvest is like to be of the Bod^ of them, in the present, or in the future
time, is not for any of us to speak: neither at what hour, or under what Vial,
they shall be sent to labor in Gods Vineyard, least we should there by seem to
ent^^^ch upon the Sovereignty of the Almighty, in whose hands are the times and
Seasons of grace, as well as of nature. There are many Nations in the world, to
this day, lying out from the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, who were never yet
known professedly to own his Scepter, although probably the Gospel has at
some time or other been preached unto them, or sent amongst them; It may be,
only to be a Testimony unto them, and so to leave them without excuse another
day.

Whether any farther end in Reference to these amongst our selves is aimed at,
in the wise and unsearchable Counsels of the great God, is known only to
himself, and may be thought more convenient for him that writes, and them that
read the present Narrative, to leave to the after determination of future
Events, rather than to intrude our selves into that which is out of our Line,
or beyond our Sphere. Thus much without offense may be affirmed, that in all
the habitable places of the Earth, wherever God has, or ever had a People
calling upon his Name, never any notable work of Religion was known to take
much place, where some kind of Civility, and Culture of good manners, had not
gone before.

Add quod ingenuas, didiciss^ Fideliter Arts: Emollit mores, nec sinit esse
feros. God in his natural Providence, has taught the Husbandman to plough the
ground, to break and open the Clods thereof, before he casts in the Seed: In
the dispensation of his grace ^e usually observes the same method; to break up
the fallow grounds of the Nations of the world, and not to sow among Thorns.
When he that sits upon the white horse, with his Bow and his Crown, and went
sorth conquering and to conquer, it was amongst the Civil, and not amongst the
Barbarous and Salvage Nations of the World: They that preach the Gospel else
will have a double Task, (the least of which has been found hand enough for
the best of men, who is sufficient for these things, says St. Paul) the great
Apostle of the Gentiles to convert men, First, from Salvage Paganism, then to
Christianity. It is commonly said that the Turks will not admit a Jew to become
a Mohammedan, till he has first turned Christian^ To be sure we rarely find any
Gentill Nation turned Christian before they became Humane. Divine Providence
has improved the Roman Sword to make way for the Scepter of the Gospel of
Peace. That Civility that is found amongst the Natives of this Country; has
hitherto been carried on and obtained, only by the gentle means of Courtesy,
Familiarity, and such like civil behavior, which in other places was never yet
attended with any eminent Success that way. It seems some Religious Gentlemen
in Virginia, had great hopes of the Conversion of the (...) to Christianity, a
lit^^e before the Massac^e there; The means p^incipally used by them was
Familiarity and ^^^dness: One Mr. Thorps well re^uted for Religion, and in
Command one of the principal in Virginia, did so truly affect the Conversion of
the Indians there, that whosoever under him did them the least displeasure,
were punished severely. He thought nothing too dear for them* And to content
them in all things, he c^^sed many English Mastives to be killed, and would
have (...) a Course to ^ave sufficiently tamed the rest. He conferred often
with their great Sachem about Religion, and made him confess that the English
man's God was better than the Indians: This Gentle man out of his good meaning
was so full of Confidence and void of Suspicion, that he would never believe
an^ hurt of them, till he (...) their cruel hands imbrued in his own blood;
they barbarously murdering him amongst the rest. Mr. Stockain a serious and
Judicious Minister in Virginia, and Pious also, for ought is here of his Life
at that ^ime when all things were so prosperous there, and the Salvages were
thought to be at the point of Conversion, against the Opinions of all others,
^oth Governors and Council, wrote his mind to the Council and Company in
England about this point in these words.

For the Conversion of the Salvages, I wonder you use not the means: I confess
you say well to have them converted by fair means; but they scorn to
acknowledge it; As for the gifts bestowed on them, they devour them, and so
they would the givers if they could. Many have endeavored by kindness to
convert them, yet find nothing from them, but derision and Ridiculous Answers:
We have sent Boys among them to learn their Language, but they return worse
than they went: But I am no States man, nor love I to meddle with any thing but
my Books; But I can find no probability, by this Course to draw them to
good^ess: And I am persuaded if Mars and Minerva go hand in hand, they will
effect more good in an hour than those Verbal Mercurians in their lives: Adding
that the^e will be no op^ of their Conversion till their Priests (possi^ly he
meant their Powaws) be removed from them. The natural barbarousn^ss and
perfidiousness of their disposition may in part be gathered by this Story

When some of Pocasse^ Indians in Plymouth Jurisdiction had professed their
Service to Captain Church; as they were in pursuit of the Indians our Enemies,
one of the said Indians from the top of an hill discerned a Company of Wigwams,
where those they went to seek, had taken up their Stations, he called to his
Captain, and pointing to one of (...) ^u^ermost Wigwams, told him that was his
Father^ Wigwa^, and asked if he must now go and kill his Father; No says
Cap^ai^ ^ourch, do b^t show me where he is and I will deal with him, do you
fall upon some others: to which the said Indian only replied in broken English;
That very good speak; whereby their natural Persidiousness even to their
nearest Relations may be observed, which makes their Treachery toward us their
F^r^eign Neighbors, the less to be wondered at. And therefore till (...) be
reduced to more Civi^ity, some wise men are ready to (...) Religion will not
take much place amongst the body of them.

Likewise when Philip was k^pt in the Swamp at Pocosset, it is certainly
^ffirmed that several of their young Chi^^ar^n were ki^^^d by themselves, that
they might (...) be betrayed by their crying, or be ^indred with them in their
(...) they made their escape.

The generality of the Indians in New England are in their (...) and na^ural
disp^s^^ion, not much unlike those in Virginia living much in the same Climate;
who have likewise made an Insurrection, much about the same time this year, as
our Indians did with us: But God who is able to graft in again the unbelieving
Jews, is able also of these stones to raise up Children unto A^ra^am: And if it
be the pleasure of the So^e^ereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, to impart the
Salvation of the Gospel to any of these, far be it from any of us to repine at
his grace, or neglect any due means lying in our Capacity or reach to help
forward that blessed work, who knows what tendency the present troubles may
have to such an End. For though a great number that are implacable and
imbittered against us in their Spirits, may be for the sake of our Religion
found ^ardned to their own destruction, yet a Re^nans may be reserved, and
afterward called forth, by the power of the Gospel, to give glory, (...) the
God of all the Earth.

Errata.
PAge 2. l. 20. for to r. at. l. 36. r. Arowsick. page 3. l. 1. Magazine. page
5. l. 5. for in r. is. l 1^. for which r. within. l. 19. for. and r. are. l.
26, r. Spurwinke. l. 29. for promotor r. Propri^tour. page 6. l. 5. r. real. p.
8 l. 30. for writes r. Suits. p. 9. l. 12 for Soil r. Seat. l. 17. for off r.
that of late. l. 22 for 29. r. 39. l. 34. (...) Tho. Iupe. p. 13. l. 1. Vipers
a full point. l. ult. r. Mallet. p. 16. l. 5. for Waterly. r. Wakely. and so
else where. p. 19. l. ^^leave out so. p. 18. l. 38. (...) Tuesday. p 45. r
Ghendal. p. 56. l. 12. r. 11. p. 30. pass before. r. pass free. p. 67 l. 8.
your for ^^rs. p 71. l. 36. for Payments r. in part. p. 76. l. 29. leave out
things. p. 76. l. 2. for Martin r. Morton. p. 77. l. 2^. for head r. hand. l.
28. leave out best. p. 82. l 27. for blinded r. blena^d. p. 83. 1. 24: leave
out but. l. 31. for harnass^d r. harrassed. p. 87. l 4 for Stockain r. Stockam.

FINIS.

