Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the first SESSIONS of the GENERAL COURT for
ELECTIONS Held at Boston in New England May. 23d. 1677 Printed and Published by
their Order, By Edward Rawson Secr't.
THIS COURT being desirous to prevent all occasions of Complaint referring to
the Profanation of the SABBATH; And as an Addition to former LAWS;

DO ORDER and Enact, that all the Laws for Sanctification of the Sabbath,
Order to prevent (...) of the Sabbath.
and preventing the profaning thereof, be twice in the year, viz. in March and
September publicly Read by the Minister or Ministers on the Lords days in
their several respective Assemblies within this Jurisdiction; and all people by
him Cautioned to take heed to the observance thereof. And the Select men are
hereby Ordered to see to it that there be one man appointed to inspect the ten
Families of their Neighbors, which Tithing man or men shall and hereby have
power in the absence of the Constable to apprehend all Sabbath Breakers;
disorderly Tiplers, or such as keep Licensed Houses, or others that shall
suffer any disorder in their Houses on the Sabbath Day or evening after, or at
any other time, and to carry them before a Magistrate or other Authority, or
commit to Prison, as any Constable may do; to be proceeded with according to
Law.

And for the better putting a restraint and securing Offenders that shall any
way transgress against the Laws (...) Sabbath, either in the Meeting House, by
any abusive Carriage, or misbehaviour, by making any noise, or otherwise, A
Cage to be Erected.
or during the day time, being laid held on by any of the Inhabitants, shall by
the said person appointed to inspect this Law, be forthwith carried forth and
put into a Cage in Boston which is appointed to be forthwith by the Select Men
set up in the Market place, and in such other Towns as the County Courts shall
appoint, there to remain till Authority shall examine the person offending, and
give order for his punishment, as the matter may require according to the Laws
relating to the Sabbath.

QUAKERS-MEETINGS.
AS an Addition to the last Law relating to Quakers meetings,

The Constables of every Town, are hereby Required to make diligent Search in
their respective Towns, especially on the Lords day, in all suspected places
and houses, and where they know, or may be informed that any Quakers are meet
to Celebrate their Irregular and prohibited worship, and are hereby Empowered to
break open the door where they are denied peaceable entrance, Addition to the
Laws against Quakers meeting
and such persons as shall be found at such meetings, shall be apprehended and
proceeded with and punished as the Law provides in that case; and every
Constable neglecting his duty herein, and being Legally convicted thereof,
shall forfeit the sum of forty shillings to the use of the County:) And for
all such persons that shall be presented or complained of for absenting
themselves from the public allowed worship of God on the Lords days, and will
not so much as affirm they were there, or necessarily absent by the providence
of God, it shall be adjudged a conviction of the breach of the Law, and
punished accordingly.

ADMINISTRATIONS.
IT is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That when any person
Dies Intestate, Administrations to be (...) to the estate of persons dying
whose Estate is Insolvent, and not sufficient to satisfy the several
Creditors, and upon information thereof given to the Court of that County, the
said Court shall grant Administration as the Law directs, and Empower
Commissioners to receive and examine the Claims of the several Creditors, and
give notice by posting up a Paper in the most public place in Boston, and in
the Town where the person lived, and in the three next adjacent Towns, that all
persons concerned may come and make their Claims, and prove their Debts within
twelve Months after publication at farthest (unless upon occasion the County
Court see cause to give further time) before the said Commissioners, and such
as they shall find clear and unquestionable Debts, to receive and allow them,
and so the said Court shall make a just and equal division to all the Creditors
according to their several proportions so far as the said Estate will extend
unto And whatsoever Creditor shall not come in within the time limited as
aforesaid to challenge and prove his Debt, he shall be debarred from any part of
his or her said Debt, How to be divided
unless such person afterward can find some other Estate of the Deceased not
found out before, and put into the Inventory: And any Estate of like nature now
depending, and not fully issued by an equal Division among all the Creditors,
according to their proportions, shall be settled according as this order
directs, any proceedings or actings in any Courts or otherwise to the contrary
notwithstanding.

In-keepers Liberty.
FOR the advancement of the Countries Commodities;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Inkeepers liberty to
retail Beer at 2 pence, 3 pence 4 pence a quart on condition
that all Retailers of Strong Beer, being Licensed thereto, shall have liberty
to sell strong Beer above two pence per quart, provided they put in of Barley
Malt proportionable, viz Beer at three pence per quart three bushels of Malt to
a Barrel; at four pence per quart four bushels to a Barrel, any Law, Usage or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Musketeers to provide Snapsacks.
AS an Addition to the Law tit. Military Sect. 7. requiring Pikemen to provide
Snapsacks, Musketeers to provide with Snapsacks
and being wholly silent as concerning Musketeers;

This Court do Declare that Musketeers are alike required to provide Snapsacks
with their other Ammunition that Law expresses.

Indians to be settled in four Plantations.
WHereas after this time of Trouble and War with the Indians, the well-ordering
and settlement of those that remain, and are under Command, is a matter of
great concernment to the peace and security of the Country, Order to settle our
Neighbor Indians in (...) Plantations
and the welfare, civilizing, and good education of the said Indians and their
Children;

It is hereby Ordered and Enacted, that all such Indian Children or Youths that
are settled or disposed by order of Authority, or with their Parents (...)
Relations consent to any of the English Inhabitants within this Jurisdiction,
shall so remain with them as Servants; and to be taught and instructed in the
Christian Religion, until each of them at^^^^ to the age of twenty four years;
except by special contract it be otherwise provided: And for such Indian
Children Youths or Girls, whose Parents have been in Hostility with us, or have
lived among our Enemies in the time of the War, and were brought in by force,
and given or sold to any of the Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, such shall be
at the disposal of their Masters or their Assigns. Provided they be instructed
in Civility and Christian Religion; And for all other Indians that are admitted
to live within this Jurisdiction, as well such as are called Praying Indians as
well as others, they shall be reduced to Inhabit in four places for the
present, Nauck, Punckepaug, Hassanemisit and Wamesit, and within the limits of
those Townships, as they are granted to them by the General Court, where they
may be continually inspected, and from time to time ordered and governed by
such as this Court or Council shall appoint: And when they are once settled as
aforesaid, a List to be taken of all the Men, Women and Children of the several
Companies once a year at least, and kept upon Record with a strict charge and
prohibition upon the penalty of the displeasure of this Court, not to receive
or entertain any stranger or foreign Indian or Indians into their society
without the knowledge or approbation of Authority; Law to (...) our Indians out
of (...)
and that the Indians about Pascataqua, shall be settled about Quechecho as
shall be further Ordered by the Council; and all other Laws and Orders relating
to the Indians and made since the War began, as to their confinement to this or
that place, or giving liberty to any to take or kill any of them found without
the limits appointed are hereby repealed and declared void.

Indians Liberty.
FOR the prevention of all inconveniences that may fall out by the setting of
the Indians at liberty, to be freed from any fears of being shot, found out of
their limits;

It is hereby Ordered, that all Neighbor Indians and Friends though at liberty
to hunt, Order to prevent inconveniences by Indians liberty to travail the
woods with their Guns.
etc. yet carrying their Guns with them into the woods and not easily
discovered whether friends or not, shall and hereby are enjoined on the sight
of any English person, or being called unto, shall immediately lay down his Gun
and leaving it, repair to the said English person, and make it out by his
certificate from some person in Authority of his name, and place of aboade, and
liberty, as aforesaid, or otherwise, shall be liable to have his Gun took from
him, and to be looked at as an Enemy; Not to go without certificates
nor shall any Indian on this side Merrimack River have liberty to travail the
woods with their Guns without a Certificate from Major General Daniel Denison,
or Major Daniel Garkin, or on the other side of Merrimack without like
Certificate from Major Richard Waldern.

Book-Debts.
IN Answer to the Petition of sundry the Inhabitants of Boston, humbly desiring
that the Law respecting Book-Debts be repealed, Law about Book-Debts suspended
for 3 years
etc.

It is Ordered, that the Law respecting Book-Debts shall be and hereby is
suspended for three years longer from this time.

Double Custom for all Wines, Brandy and Rum.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, Double Custom for all wines,
Brandy and Rum
that the Custom of al Wines, Brandy and Rum Imported into this Jurisdiction
shall be doubled from henceforth to what has been paid.

Prises of Horses to the Country Rate.
WHereas it is manifest that the prises of Horses is much fallen to what they
formerly were, and yet by Law are to be Rated at five pounds per Horse;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that
henceforth all Horses and Mares from three years old and upwards, Prises of
horses to the Country rate
shall be Rated at three pounds in a single Country Rate; between two and three
years old at forty shillings; and between one and two years old at twenty
shillings; any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Prises for Disbursements
THis Court does Order, That all disbursements (since the first of May 1676
relating to the Indian War) according to their several species, shall be
reduced to the prises or valuation hereafter expressed viz. that the prises and
payments of all things referring to the premises to be at the Country Rate
price.

To Billeting of Soldiers, viz. one man per week, five shillings four pence.

To provision for Soldiers out, i. e. one man per week, five shillings four
pence.

The Soldiers Billeting or provision out, as aforesaid from the date of these
presents, per week, five shillings.

To Billeting Soldiers by the meal, not exceeding two days, after two meals
a day, sixpenee per meal.

To loss and damage of Arms and furniture as the Committees of militia in the
several Towns shall value, at a just and equal price.

To a Horse at grass a day and a night, not exceeding two days at a time,
Stated prises for all disbursements about the War*
four-pence.

To a Horse at grass one week, one shil. six-pen

To a Horse at dry meat a day and night, not exceeding two days at a time,
sixpence

To one Horse a week at dry meat, two shill.

To a Horse hire by the week, two shillings.

To a Horse hire for a day or two, not exceeding four days, sixpence per day.

To Horses Impressed as Dragoons, to be paid as Troopers horses.

To Posts as the Law directs.

To Provisions of all sorts, as Bread per hundred: Beef, Pork, by the barrel
etc. at the current prizes they are sold at the time they are taken up, to be
paid in money.

To Horses lost as the Law directs.

To carting, four oxen and a man, five shil. p. d.

To a man with three Horses and a cart at five shillings per day, and so
prportionable.

To Ammunition, powder two shillings p. pound musket bullets eight pence per
score, and small shot proportionable.

To Ferriage of Soldiers and horses half pri.

To Oats according to two shil. per bushel.

Provided the Billets of Soldiers in particular places, be allowed by the
Committee for the War: and that the allowances for Ferriage concerning some
few particular persons, be suspended to further Consideration.

And that all Bills Signed and allowed by the Committee of Militia of the
respective Towns according to these Rates, shall be accepted and paid by the
Treasurer.

FINIS.

