Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT. Held at Boston for ELECTION
the 3d. of May 1676 And Printed by their Order, Edward Rawson Secr.
Whereas the present War necessarily calls forth sundry men into the Country
Service, whose Employment and Livelihood Consists in Husbandry, the promoting
whereof in our Respective Towns for the Raising of Corn and Provisions, it of
great Necessity for our Subsistence.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That the Select men of the Respective
Towns do take Effectual Care, Order Impowring the Select men to hire such as
shall manage the Husbandry of these in the Service.
and are hereby Empowered to Impress men for the management and Carrying on of
the Husbandry of such persons as are called off from the same into the Service,
who have not sufficient help of their own left at home to manage the same, who
shall be allowed Eighteen Pence a day for their said work, Eighteen Pence (...)
their (...)
to be paid by the Respective persons for whom they work. Provided it do not
appear that any persons Employed have been unfaithful in their Labor, in which
Case the Select men shall have Power to deduct from their wages such Proportion
as they shall see meet.

THis Court taking into Consideration the great Disappointment the Country has
suffered by Reason of Nonappearance of Soldiers Impressed for several
Expeditions. Soldiers refusing to make Appearance, and serve the Country Foot
Soldiers to pay four Pound. Troopers six Pound.


Do Judge meet that every person Impressed as a Soldier for the Service of the
Country, and neglecting to make his Appearance according to Order, every such
Foot Soldier shall pay the Sum of four Pounds, and every Trooper shall pay
the Sum of Six Pounds, and if their neglect or refusal be Accompanied with
Refractoriness, Refaction, or Contempt upon Authority, such person shall be
punished with Death, or some other grievous punishment.

And the Committee of Militia in the several Towns where the Offense is
Committed, are hereby Empowered and Required to call before them all such as
shall be Delinquents as is above expressed, and on Conviction of there neglect
to give Warrant to the Constable to Levy the said Fines, which said Fines shall
be Improved to purchase Arms for the Towns use: Provided it shall be in the
power of the Council upon Petition of any Person agrieved, and just Reason
Alleged and proved to make Abatement of the said Fines as in their wisdom
and Discretion they shall Judge meet;

And it is hereby Ordered that the Return of all Neglects and Defects in the
Cases aforesaid be sent to the Committee of Militia in the several Towns, who
are hereby required to take Care for the strict Execution hereof.

THis Court being Informed that sundry persons who through the Calamity of the
War are forced to remove to other places, do Account themselves free from Duty
in these places.

Do Order that all such persons so Removing shall stand in Respect of Charges
and Duty to the public in the same Capacity with the proper Inhabitants
amongst whom they make their Abode or Residence. (...) as Remove to be the same
with the Inhabitants.


WHereas it appears in the Bills of Disbursements stated by the Militia of the
several Towns, and Transmitted to the Treasurer, there is a great Disproportion
between Town and Town in the Prices set for the Hire of Horses in the Countries
Service, for the preventing the like Inconvenience for the Future.

It is Ordered; Stated price for Horse Hire in their Service Eighteen Pence per
Weak.
That the stated price for the Hire of a Horse for the Countries use shall be
one Shilling six pence in money per Week throughout this Jurisdiction.

For the Preservation of the Frontier Towns.
IT is Ordered; That each of the said Towns be by the Committee of Militia
divided into so many parts as a meet Number, may each day by Turns be sent
forth upon the Scout, with whom a party of (...) at the Charge of the Country
shall be joined, that the said (...) be Constantly managed by a suitable
Commander in each of said Towns Appointed by (...) Committee, (...)
who shall be paid his wages by the Country, and for the Encouragement of said
Towns, and more Effectual Carrying on of this work, that the Soldiers abroad
in Service appertaining to (...) Towns be returned (...), and they freed from
the Impress during their Attendance to the Service abovesaid, for their own,
and the Countries Defense. And that the Frontier Towns be Accounted Meadfield,
(...) Chelmsford, Andover, Hoverd, Exiter, and for their further (...).

It is hereby Declared to be the Duty of every chief Commander or Officer
present in any Town upon notice given him of (...), or Distress of any
Neighbor Town to send forthwith what (...) can be (...) with Safety at home
for the Security of the Distressed.

THe Court being Informed of the Difficulty the Town of Salem (...) withal, to
find persons that will serve to the Constables (...) by Reason of the smalness
of the Fine Imposed by Law on such as do refuse. Town of (...)


It is Ordered by this Court that it shall be Lawful for the said Town
henceforth to Impose a Fine of Ten Pounds upon such as do refuse to serve in
the Office of a Constable there, any Law to the Contrary notwithstanding.

IN Answer to the Petition of John Beaudon a wounded Soldier for relief, their
being many in like nature, that stands in like need.

The Court Judges it meet to Appoint Mr. Edward Ting, Mr. Joseph Dudley, Capt.
Hugh Mason, (...)
and Mr. William Parkes to be a standing Committee to Consider of Petitions of
this Nature, and make their Report of what they Judge meet to be done therein
to this Court, and this Committee to Continue till the Court take further Order.

WHereas by the late Law prohibiting Trading (...) and Trading with the Indians
except in open (...) and Towns where Goods are sold unto the English, Advantage
is given to persons by that Exception to Carry on a Voluntary Trade with the
Indians, which may prove of dangerous Consequence to the public Weal.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, (...)
That all Trade with the Indians be prohibited and for the Future, it is hereby
prohibited that no person whatsoever within this Jurisdiction, presume to Trade
with any Indian, or Indians, directly, or Indirectly, by themselves or others;
Any Commodity whatsoever upon Penalty of Forfeiture of their whole Estates for
each Offense, being Convicted thereof before lawful Authority, one third to the
Informer, and the Remainder to the County; Provided that this Law do no way
prohibit the necessary supply and Relief to such Indians and their Families as
are by Order Employed in the Countries Service, or as are otherwise under the
special Care and Inspection of Authority; So that such Supply and Relief to
these Indians be made as the Court or Council shall allow, or if no Estate,
then to be banished upon pain of Death. And that by such as are under the
special Care and Inspection of Authority, (...) meant such as being peaceably
disposed do come in, (and being Appointed the place) do live within the view,
and under the Eye, and Protection of the English.

WHereas there are distracted persons in some Towns that are Unruly, whereby
not only the Families wherein they are, but other suffer much Damage by them.

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That the Select men in
all Towns where such persons are, Select men (...) the Distracted
are hereby Empowered and Enjoined to take Care of all such persons that they do
not Damnifie others. And also to take Care and Order the Management of their
Estates in the Times of their Distemperature, so as may be for the good of
themselves and Families depending on them; And the Charge to be paid out of the
Estates of all such persons where it may be had, otherwise at the public
Charge of the Town such persons belong unto.

THis Court Considering the great Inconveniency that will Ensue if persons be
left at Liberty to withdraw from the Frontier Towns that are yet standing out,
thereby Enfeebling the Remote parts of the Country, and tending to the Damage
of the whole.

Do therefore Order; That it shall not be in the Liberty of any person
whatsoever, Committees of (...) power in each Town
who is by law Enjoined to Train, Watch, Ward, or Secur, to leave the Town he
is an Inhabitant of, upon any pretense whatsoever, without Liberty first
obtained from the Committee of Militia in the Town to which (...) by the
Council of the Commonwealth; upon the Penalty of Twenty Pounds, except within
one week after they be required by the Committees of Militia to return to their
Station, they shall accordingly Return, which Sum of Twenty Pounds upon
Certificate from the Committees of Militia, to the Country Court of that Shire,
or to any two Magistrates, shall by their warrant be forthwith Levied upon the
Estates, or for want thereof upon the persons of such Delinquents to be
disposed of, either to such as will Come unto the said Town, to strengthen
them, or toward the bearing the Charge of the War; Or otherwise, as those
that stand it out shall see meet.

And it is further Ordered; That no person capable to Assist in securing the
Garrison he belongs to, shall absent himself by going out of Town without
acquainting of, and Liberty obtained from the Commander of said Garrison, upon
Penalty of five shillings for each Offense in that kind, that so the danger to
which the Garrisons in the Respective Towns are exposed too by frequent absence
of such as are for the Defense of them may be prevented.

FINIS.

