Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT. Holden at Boston the twenty
seventh of May 1674 And Printed by their Order, Edward Rawson Secret.
Judgments frustrated by Persons.
WHERE AS in the Levying of Executions, there have fallen out many Difficultyes
whereby the Judgments obtained, Judgments frustrated by persons.
have been made frustrate; For the prevention whereof;

The Court does Order and Declare; Tendering goods, Lands and. not their own,
how, to be made good.
Where any Execution shall be Levied on any Houses, Lands and Goods, and
delivered to the Parties for whom the Judgment was granted, and the said
Execution returned according to Law; if it shall appear the Person whose Lands,
Goods or Houses were levied by Execution, have affirmed, or delivered, or
tendered the said Goods, Lands or Houses as his own, which in reality were not
his own proper Estate, and in the same condition of Estate as he did tender
them either to the Officer or Parties for whom the Execution is levied such
person so endeavoring by such Action to delude the Law and defraud the
Creditor, shall be liable to pay double damages to the party grieved, and Pay
such fine as the County Court shall see cause to impose.

And if any party that has obtained an Execution, shall adventure to levy the
same upon Lands, Houses or Goods, commonly accounted the Houses Lands or Goods
of the person against whom the Judgment was granted, and the Execution be
returned according to Law, County Co etc. to renew Executions in Case etc
if it afterward appear, the said Houses Lands or Goods were not the Houses,
Lands or Goods of the said Parties against whom the Judgment was given, the
party that was so mistaken making the same to appear to the Court that granted
the Judgment, the said Court shall Order a new Execution for the satisfying of
the Judgment notwithstanding the former Execution returned.

WHereas it is of great moment in the Administration of Justice, that all
matters of Records, should be faithfully Entered and kept, and as occasion is,
given forth;

It is Ordered and Enacted by the Authority of this Court: Clerk of Courts etc
Recorders to be Sworn.
That from henceforth the several Clerks or Recorders of the public Courts of
Justice, and the Recorders of the several Counties in this Jurisdiction shall
be Sworn by the Courts to which they belong, unto the faithful discharge of
their Office in all respects, and that the form of the Oath be as follows:

Whereas you A. B. Their Oath.
are appointed Clerk of the County Court of C. You do Swear by the Everliving
God, that you will faithfully and uprightly demean your self in the said
Office: you shall truly and fairly Enter and Record all Acts and Judgments of
the said Court, and whatever you shall receive Order and direction from the
said Court to do, you shall safely and faithfully keep and preserve the said
Records, and deliver Executions, Decrees or Orders to Persons concerned as in
duty you ought, and true Copies of such Records give forth when regularly
called so to do, and in all things you shall be faithful and true to the Court:
So help you God, etc.

THe Law having Provided for Holding of County Courts, where Magistrates are
wanting, by such persons of worth (styled Associates) as the Freemen of such
Counties should Nominate, being allowed and appointed by the General Court; And
there having been too great a neglect of certifying the General Court, the
Names of the persons so nominated, for their confirmation and appointing such
Persons the Associates for that County.

This Court does hereby remit former neglects herein; And do Declare, That
notwithstanding such Omissions, all former Acts of County Courts shall be
accounted good and valid: Associates of Courts (...) to be chosen and when to
be Sworn etc.
And for time to come, do further Declare and Order, That in all Counties where
Associates are to be appointed, the Freemen shall make their Nomination of such
Associates at the same time yearly when they give in their Nominations for
Magistrates, which Votes for Nomination of Associates shall be carried also by
the same Commissioners of the several Towns, sealed up to their Shire meeting,
there to be opened, and those four persons that shall have the most Votes shall
be certified under the hands of three of the said Commissioners, the Shire
Commissioner being one, to the Court of Election yearly: For the confirmation
and Approbation of the said Associates, which being obtained, the Secretary
shall certify the Clerk of the County Court thereof, who shall give notice to
such Associates to appear at their next County Court there to take their
respective Oaths.

THis Court accounting it their Duty by all due means to prevent appearance of
sin and wickedness in any kind:

Do order; That henceforth it shall not be lawful for any single Woman or Wife
in the absence of her Husband, to entertain or lodge any In-mate or Sojourner
with the dislike of the Select men of the Town, or Magistrate, or
Commissioners, who may have cognizance thereof, on penalth of five pounds per
week on conviction thereof before any Court or Magistrate, or be corporally
punished, not exceeding ten stripes; And all Constables are to take cognizance
hereof for information in such cases.

FINIS.

