THE BOOK OF THE GENERAL LAWS For the People within the JVRISDICTION of
CONECTICUT: Collected out of the RECORDS of the GENERAL COURT, Lately Revised,
and with some Emendations and Additions Established and Published by the
Authority of the GENERAL COURT of Conecticut, holden at Hartford in October,
1672.

ROMANS 13.1, 2. Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers: for there is
no Power but of God, the Powers that be are Ordained of God.

Whosoever therefore resists the power resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green. 1673.

To our Beloved Brethren and Neighbors, the Inhabitants of the COLONY of
Conecticut, The GENERAL COURT of that Colony Wish Grace and Peace in our Lord
JESUS.
THE Serious Consideration of the Necessity of the Establishment of wholesome
LAWS, for the Regulating of each Body Politic; Has inclined us mainly in
Obedience unto JEHOVAH the Great Law giver: Who hat^ been pleased to set down a
Divine Platform, not only of the Moral, but also of Judicial Laws, suitable
for the people of Israel. As also in Conformity to the manifest Pleasure of our
Sovereign Lord the King, in his Majesty's Gracious Charter, requiring and
Granting Liberty thereby of making of Laws and Constitutions suiting our State
and Condition, for the Safety and Welfare of ^he people of the Colony of
Conecticut. We say the sense of these Weighty Indu^^ments has moved us,
notwitstanding the exceeding great difficulties of the Work. Looking up to God
for wisdom and strength to engage in this solemn Service, To Exhibit and take
care concerning the suffi^i^nt Promulgation of such needful Laws, that a more
full and plain way may be set for execution of, and judgment thereby.

VVher^fore although in our former Initial times (while this Colony was deemed
distinct in Jurisdiction from that of New Haven,) We contented our selves with
keeping our Laws in Manuscripts, and in the Promulgation of them by writt^n
Copies sent unto th^se Towns, who then acknowledge themselves to be settled
within our Limits. But since by Divine Providence We and New haven have agreed,
according to his Majesty's Pleasure manifested in our Patent, to Unite as one
Body Poltick: From whence and from other increasings of Plantations and
Persons, together with the addition of more Laws and Orders, an occasion is
given to think it convenient if not necessary for further or fuller
Publication, that so as well Foreigners occasionally coming hither; as the
more settled Inhabitants may have ready means informing how to demean
themselves and observe.

From hence and such like Considerations urging, This Court have seen cause to
put these our Laws in Print, so far as they are at present prepared; Being
willing that all concerned by this Impression, may know what they may expect at
our hands as Justice, in the Administra^ion of our Government here. We have
endeavored not only to Ground our Capital Laws upon the Word of God, but also
all our other Laws upon the Justice and Equity held forth in that Word which
is a most perfect Rule.

Now in these our LAWS, although we may seem to vary or differ, yet (...) our
Purpose to Repugn the Statute Laws of England, so far as we understand them;
professing our selves always ready and willing to receive Light for
^^mendation or (...) as we may have opportunity: Our whole (...) being to P^ease
and Christ God, to approve our selves Loyal Subjects to our Sovereign* and to
(...) the (...) of this People in all Godliness and Honesty, in Peace, which
will be the more Establishing to his Majesty's Crown and Dignity, and best
Answer his Religious Direction to us in our Cha^ter: And that pure Religion and
undefiled before God, according to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus may be
maintained amongst us, which was the end of the first Planters, who settled
these Foundations; and ought to be the endeavour^ of th^se that shall succeed
to Uphold (...) Encourage unto all Ge^erations.

We need no other Inducement to lay before you, to bespeak your Obedience to
what folows, but that of ^he Apostle, 1 Pet. 2 13.17 Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc. Love the Brotherhood, Fear
God, Honor the King.

By Order of the General Court, ^ohn Alli^. Secrt.

THE GENERAL LAWS And LIBERTIES Of CONECTICVT COLONIE: Revised and Published by
Order of the GENERAL COURT Held at Hartford, in October 1672.
FOrasmuch as the free Fruition of such Liberties, as Humanity, Civility and
Christianity call for, as due to every man, in his place and proportion,
without Impeachment and Infringement has ever been, and ever will be the
Tranquillity and Stability of Churches and Common wealths; and the denial or
deprival thereof, the disturbance, if not ruin of both:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That no man's
life shall be taken away, no man's honor or good Name, The Subjects Priv^ledg
that his person and estate is secured to him according to Law.
shall be stained, no man's person shall be Arrested, Restrained, Banished,
Dismembered, nor any ways punished; no man shall be deprived of his Wife or
Children; no man's Goods or Estate shall be taken away from him, nor any ways
indamaged under color of Law, or countenance of Authority, unless it be by the
virtue or equity of some express Law of this Colony warranting the same,
established by the General Court, and sufficiently published; or in case of the
defects of a Law in any particular case by some clear and plain Rule of the
word of God, in which the whole Court shall concur.

ABILITY.
Ability to dispose or estates
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all persons of the age of
Twenty one years, and of right understanding and memory, whether excomunicated
or other, Condemned person estates to be disposed of by the Court, etc.
shall have full power and liberty to make their Wills and Testaments, and
other lawful Alienations of their Lands and Estates; always provided, that
such persons who are condemned to Death, the disposal of their Estates, after
the charges of their Prosecution and Imprisonment is answered, shall be left to
the Court to be disposed according to Rules of Righteousness and Equity.

ACTIONS.
TO prevent inconveniences, and that those who shall be called to make answer
in such suits as shall be Comm^nced against them (in any the Civil Courts of
Judicature in this Colony) may have due time to prepare themselves for their
Answer;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That from
henceforth no person shall be requireable to appear in any Court, Five days
warning to answer any Action
to make Answer to any Action of Debt, Trespass, Defamation, Slander, Account,
or of the Case, except the Summons have been served upon him at least five
days before the Court.

It is (...) Ordered* That if any person who has entered an Action to be tried
in any of our Courts, Plaintiffs not appe^ring to prosecute when called 3 times
to be Nonsuited etc
be called three times (after the first half days sitting of the Court) and
not appear by himself or his Attorney to prosecute his Action, he may be
Nonsuited, and pay all costs and charges, as if his Action had been prosecuted
in the said Court.

Liberty of process at adiourned Courts
And it is Ordered; That there shall be free liberty of Process granted in all
Civil Actions according to Law, at any Adjourned County Court, as well as at
the set County Courts.

Plaintiffs liberty to (...) or Nonsuit himself etc
It is further Ordered by this Court; that in all Actions brought to any Court,
the Plaintiff shall have liberty to withdraw his Action, or to Nonsuit
himself before the Jury have given in their Verdict, in which case he shall
always pay full costs and charges to the Defendant, and may afterward (...)
his suit at another Court, the former Non suit being first Recorded.

It is also Ordered; That for all such Actions as shall be tried by a Jury in
any of our Courts, (...) charge what
there shall be paid by the Plaintiff Twelve shillings, six shillings to the
Treasury and six shillings to the Jury. And for all such Actions as shall be
tried by the Bench, there shall be paid by the Plaintiff two shillings to the
Treasury, besides the Secretary or Clarks fees.

Upon non-payment of cost of Court, the Court (...) to hea^ the case
It is further Ordered; That if any person Commence an action in any of our
Courts, either for the Bench or Jury, and do not pay down the charges thereof
according to Order, both to the Treasury, Secretary, Recorder and ^ury in good
and current Country pay, to the Courts satisfaction, it shall be in the power
of the Court to refuse to hear such Actions.

ADVLTERY.
Adultery how punished
IT is Ordered By this Court and the Authority thereof; That whosoever shall
commit Adultery with a Married Woman, or one betrothed to another man, both of
them shall be severely punished by whipping on the naked Body, and Stigmatized
or Burnt on the Forehead with the Letter A. on a hot Iron, and he or she shall
wear a Halter about his or her neck on the outside of their Garments, during
his or her abode in this Colony, so as it may be visible; and as often as he or
she shall be found without their Halters worn as aforesaid, they shall upon
information and proof of the same made before any Assistant or Commissioner, be
by them ordered to be whipped.

Adventurers in Discovering Commodities of public Concernment.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person or persons
shall set themselves on work to discover any Commodities, Adventurers (...)
discovering Commodities of use, etc to be encouraged
that may be of use for the Country, for the bringing in a supply of Goods from
foreign parts, that is not as yet of use amongst us, he that discovers it
shall have due encouragement granted to him, and the Adventurers therein.

AGE.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; F^ll age, and age of discretion
That the age for passing away of Lands or such kind of Hereditaments, or for
giving of Vote, Verdicts or Sentence in any Civil Courts or Causes, shall not
be under twenty one years of age: But in case of choosing Guardians, fourteen
years.

ALARMS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That when there is an Alarm in
any Plantation, In Alarms the Soldiers to repair to their quarters, penalty 5.
l.
the Soldiers shall repair to the several Squadrons or places in which their
chief-Officers has appointed them to meet in; and any person that shall
neglect or refuse to attend his duty herein, he shall be punished, by a fine of
five pounds, or imprisoned, or other corporal punishment; proviso
always provided, such delinquency be complained of, and prosecuted within six
months, and the Delinquent do not give a satisfying reason to the Court of his
disability to attend this Order.

False Alarms.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person or persons in
this Colony, without just and necessary occasion so to do, False Alarms
shall cause any Alarm, by firing any Gun or Guns, or otherwise, in any of our
Plantations, at any time between the shutting in of the Evening or break of the
Day (such practices being very prejudicial to the comfort and safety of the
Plantations) the person or persons that are discovered, and convicted to be
guilty herein, penalty 5. l.
shall pay five pounds a piece to the public Treasury, or suffer two months
Imprisonment, or other Corporal punishment; provided, proviso
the Delinquency be complained of, and prosecuted within six months after the
same is committed. Alarms, see Constables Charge to the Watch.

APPEALS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person shall be
agrieved with the sentence of any inferior Court, Assistant or Commissioner he
may remove his case to the next County Court in that County where his case was
first heard; Liberty of appeal from one Assist. or Commission. etc to the Count.
Co
Provided he give in good security to prosecute his case at the said County
Court.

It is also Ordered; That if any person or persons be agrieved with the issue,
sentence, Liberty of appeal from a Coun. Co. to the Court of Assistants Proviso
in which case execution is to be respited
or determination of any County Court, he or they shall have liberty to Appeal
to the next Court of Assistants, provided, he give in good security to
prosecute his Appeal, and pay all Costs: In which case Execution shall be
respited till the issue of the case; and for every Appeal to the Court of
Assistants, there shall be paid twenty shillings to the Public Treasury.

Liberty to remove the case from the Cour^ of Assist. to the General Court
proviso
It is also further Ordered; That if any person or persons shall be dissatisfied
with the conclusion of any Court of Assistants, he may remove his case to the
General Court, provided, he do it before Execution be granted, and give in good
security to prosecute his case at the next Session of the General Court, and
pay all costs, and abide by and fulfill the issue of the said Court in the case:
And for every case thus brought to the General Court, there shall be paid forty
shillings to the public Treasury.

ARRESTS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person shall be Arrested
or Imprisoned for any Debt or Fine, No person to be Arrested, Imprisoned etc
if the Law can find any competent means of satisfaction otherwise from his
Estate, and if not, his person may be Arrested and Imprisoned, where he shall
be kept at his own charge, not the Plaintiffs, Debtors imprisoned to lie at
their own charge
till satisfaction be made; unless the Court that has cognizance of the cause,
or some Superior Court shall otherwise determine: Provided nevertheless,
proviso
no man's person shall be kept in Prison for Debt, but when there appears some
Estate which he will not produce: in which case any Court, Assistant or
Commissioner may administer an Oath to the party, If no estate appear the Dr.
to answer his debt by service etc
or any others suspected to be privy in concealing his Estate: And if no Estate
appear, he shall satisfy his Debt by service, if the Creditor require it, in
which case, he shall not be disposed of in service to any but of the English
Nation.

ATTACHMENTS.
Ordnary process (...)
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the ordinary Summons or
Process for the present within this Colony, until other provision be made to
the contrary, shall be a Warrant fairly written under some Magistrate or
Magistrates, Commissioner or Clark of the Courts hand or hands, mentioning the
time and place of appearance, together with the substance of the Action, and if
the said party or parties do not appear according to the said Summons or
Warrant, upon affadavit first made, that the Warrant was read to the said
person or persons, how to be served
within his hearing, or left at the place of his usual abode; the Court shall
order an Attachment to be granted against the person or persons Delinquent, to
Arrest or Apprehend the said person or persons, for his or their wilful
contempt; Attachments for Contempt ^
and in case no sufficient Security or Bail be rendered to imprison the said
party or parties returnable, the next Court that is capable to take cognizance
of the business in question, and upon return of the said Attachment, the said
Court to do therein according to the Laws and Order^ (...) the Jurisdiction;
and in that case also, the party Delinquent shall bear his own charges.

To prevent inconveniences, and that Creditors may be satisfied, in a suitable
way, according to the nature of their Contracts and Bargains.

It is Ordered by this Court; That it shall be lawful for such Creditors that
have Debts owing to them in Money, Corn, Provision, or other special pay, upon
the refu^al or non payment of such Debts when they are due, Attachments for
special pay
to take out an Attachment, and to lay it (if it can be found) upon such Estate
as is engaged, or any other Estate of the Debtors, such as the Creditor likes,
provided it be not prohibited by Law, and to secure the Estate so seized unto a
Trial at the next Court appointed for that end, and what ever Estate thus
Attached, Court to appoint Prizet^
upon a Judgment comes to Appizement, the said Court that Issues the case
shall also appoint them that shall apprize the Estate; the valuation whereof
shall be regulated according to the nature and worth of the pay contracted for
in present pay.

It is also Ordered, that Attachments to Seize upon any man's Lands or Estates,
Attachments to be granted aga^n forreigner^ and fraudulent conve^ors away of
their Estates
they may be Granted for or against such goods as are Foreigners, and do not
dwell or Inhabit within this Jurisdiction; or in case upon credible
Information, it appears that any Inhabitant that is indebted or ^ngaged, goes
about to convey away his Estate to defraud his Creditours, or to convey away
his Person out of this Jurisdiction, so as the Process thereof may not be served
upon his person: In that or any other just Cases, there may be Attachment or
Attacments granted. Pr^viso
Provided that in all cases of Attachments, all or any of the Creditors have
liberty to declare upon the said Attachment, if he come in at the Return of the
said Attachment* Always provided, That he that first secures an Estate by an
Attachment shall first be paid.

It is further Ordered by this Court, That whosoever takes out an Attachment
against any man's Person, Goods, Chattels, Lands or Hereditaments, Where
Attachments are granted* security must be given to prosecute
sufficient Security and Caution shall be given by him to prosecute his Action
in the next Court, and so from Court to Court till it shall receive an issue,
and to answer the Defendant such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded to him
by the Court. And in all Attachments of Goods or Lands, legal notice shall be
given thereof unto the party, or left in writing at his House or place of usual
abode if he live within this Jurisdiction, otherwise his Suit shall not proceed.

AVDITORS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Auditors to be appointed yearly
etc
That meet Persons shall by this Court be appointed yearly to Audite the
Accounts of the Jurisdiction.

BALLAST.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, Ballast not to be taken without
leave of Townsmen
That no Ballast shall be taken from any Sh^ar in any Town within this Colony
by any person whatsoever, without allowance under the bands of those men that
are to order the affairs in each Town, upon the penalty of twenty shillings for
every load so taken. Penalty
It is also Ordered, that no ship nor other vessel, shall cast out any Ballast
in the, Ballast not to be cast into the Channel penalty fines to go to the Town
Treas. etc
Channel, or other place inconvenient in any Harbor within this Jurisdiction
upon the penalty of ten pounds: all fines for the Breaches of this Law, to be
and belong to the Town Treasury where the offense is committed.

BARRATRY.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any man be proved and
adjudged a common Barrater, vexing others with unjust, Barratry etc. case to be
rejected etc
frequent and needless suits; it shall be in the power of any Court both to
reject his Cause, and punish him for his Barratry.

BASTARDY.
THere being as yet no stated Rule by this Court Ordered touching the reputed
Father of a Bastard, for legal conviction:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That where any man is legally convicted
to be the Father of a Bastard child, he shall be at the care and charge to
bring up the same, Bastardy by whom to be brought ^o etc.
by such assistance of the Mother as nature requires, and as the Court from
time to time according to circumstances shall see meet to order: And in case
the Father of a Bastard by confession, or other manifest proof upon trial of
the case, do not appear to the Courts satisfaction, then the man charged by the
Woman to be the Father, she holding constant in it (espe^cially being put upon
the real discovery of the truth of it in the time of her travel) shall be the
reputed Father, and accordingly be liable to the charge of maintenance as
aforesaid (though not to other punishment) notwithstanding his denial; unless
the circumstances of the case and pleas be such on the behalf of the man
charged, as that the Court that have the cognizance thereof shall see reason to
acquit him, and otherwise dispose of the Child and education thereof; Provided
always in case there be no person accused in the time of her Travel, it shall
not be available to abate the conviction of a reputed Father.

BILLS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That any Debt or Debts due upon
Bills or other specialties to another, Bills Assigned good Debts to the Assignee
shall be as good a Debt and Estate to the Assignee as it was ^o the Assigner
at the time of its Assignation; and that it shall be lawful for the said
Assignee to sue for and recover the said Debt due upon Bill, and so assigned as
fully as the original Creditor might have done; always provided, the said
Assignment be made in writing, and subscribed with the Assigners own hand,
Proviso
and witnessed by two witnesses.

Bounds of Towns and particular Lands.
FOrasmuch as the Bounds of Towns, and of the Lands of particular Persons are
carefully to be maintained, and not without great danger to be removed by any,
which notwithstanding by deficiency and decay of marks may at unaware^ be done,
whereby great jealousies of persons trouble in Towns and encumbrances in Courts
do often arise, which by due care and means might be prevented;

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That every Town shall
procure their Bounds to be set out within twelve Months after their Bounds are
granted, Every to^n once a year to run their Bounds
and when their Bounds are set out once in the year, two or more persons in
each Town appointed by the Select men shall appoint with the adjacent Towns, to
go the Bounds betwixt their said Towns, and reuiew their marks; which marks
shall be a great heap of Stones or a Trench of six foot long, marks for bounds
and two foot broad. The most ancient Town (which for the River is determined
to be Wether^field) to give notice of the time and place for this
Perambulation, Time of going bounds neglect penal. 5. l
which time shall be in the first or second Month, upon pain of five pounds
fine for every Town that shall neglect the same; Provided the persons appointed
for this perambulation shall go in their several quarters by order of the
Select men, and at the charge of the several To^^^. And it is further Ordered;
That if any particular Proprietor, of Lan^^ lying in common with others,
Particular perambulation to be attended
shall refuse to go by himself or his ass^^e, the (...) betwixt his Land and
those whose Land lie next him once a year in the first or second Month being
requested thereunto, upon one week^ warning, he shall forfeit for every day so
neglecting ten shillings, penalty for neglect
half to the party moving thereto, the other half to the Town Trea^ury;
Provided all breaches of this Law be complained of, and prosecuted within six
months after the (...) is committed And the Owners of all impropriated
Grounds, shall bound every particular parcel thereof with sufficient
Mear-stones, Impropriated Grounds bounded with Mear-stones penalty
and shall preserve and keep them so, upon the penalty of forfeiting ten
shillings per month.

Brand for Horses.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That each Town in this Colony,
shall have a Town Brand, Every Plantation to have a Brand for their Horses etc.
to Brand their Horses with a several letter as is hereby directed, and (...)
in each Town, shall by the Inhabitants of each Town be chosen to Brand them,
who shall make an Entry of all Horses so Branded, with their natural and
artificial marks in a Book kept by him for that purpose, who shall have six
pence for every Horse, Mare or Colt so Branded and Entered.

The Letters for the several Plantations are, Hartford A. Middletown B.
Simsbury C. Saybrook D. Greenwich E. Fairfield F. Gilford G. New haven H.
Windsor I. Stonington K. New London L. Milford M. Norwich N. Norwalk O. Lime Q.
Rye R. Stanford S. Branford T. Kelinworth V. Wethersfield W. The several Towns
Brands
Farmington X. Wallingford Y. Haddum Z. Stratford ^.


The Brand to be set on the near or left Shoulder.

BRIDGES.
THis Court considering the great danger that persons Horses and Teams are
exposed unto, by reason of defective Bridges, and Country Highways in this
Jurisdiction;

Do Order; Loss of life etc* through defect in highways or Bridges
That if any person at any time loose his his life through defect or
insufficiency of such Bridges, in passing any such Bridge or Highway after due
warning given unto any of the Select men of the Town in which such defect is,
in writing under the hand of two witnesses, or upon presentment to the County
Court of such defective Ways or Bridges, Penalty
that then the County or Town which ought to secure such ways or Bridges,
shall pay a fine of one Hundred pounds to the Parents, Husband, Wife, or
Children, to be paid to the next of Kin etc.
or next of Kin to the party deceased. And if any person loose a Limb, break a
Bone, For hurt to persons etc doub^^ damage to be paid
or receive any other Bruise, or breach in any part of his body through such
defect aforesaid, the County or Town through whose neglect such hurt is done
shall pay to the party so hurt double damage; the like satisfaction shall be
made for any Team, Cart or Cartage Horse or other Beast, or Loading
proportionable to the damage sustained aforesaid.

It is also Ordered; Every Town to keep their Highways in sufficient repair
That the several Townships within this Colony shall keep in sufficient repair
all the Highways and Bridges within their Townships.

And for the prevention of danger which may come by the insufficiency of
Bridges and Passages, which lie upon Town-High ways, the care whereof does
belong either to the Town or to particular persons to repair, who many times
cannot procure Workmen to do the same;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; Any one Assist. or Commission. may
grant warrants to impress men to repair defective ways and bridges
That upon the complaint of any such Town or Person to any one Assistant or
Commissioner, he is hereby empowered to issue out Warrants to the Constable to
impress such Workmen in their Township, as shall be needful to secure and
repair the same, who shall be paid for their work, either by the Town, or
Persons to whom such Bridges and Passages do belong.

Burglary and Theft.
FOrasmuch as many Persons are apt to be injurious to the Goods and Lives of
others, notwithstanding all care and means to prevent and punish the same;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That if any
person shall commit Burglary, Burglary to be punished 1st. offen^^
by breaking up any Dwelling House, or shall Rob any person in the Field or
High ways, such a person so offending, for the first offense, shall be Br^nded
on the Forehead with the letter ^^. if he shall offend in the same kind the
second time, 2d. offen^^
he shall be Branded as before, and also be severely whipped, 3d. offense
and if he shall fall into the same offense the third time, he shall be put to
death as being incorrigible.

If committed on the Lords day to lo^^ an ear etc
And if any person shall commit such Burglary, or Rob in the Fields or House on
the Lords day, besides the former punishment, he shall for the first offense
have one of his Ears cut off, and for the second offense in the same kind, he
shall lose his other ear in the same manner, and if he fall into the same
offense the third time; he shall be put to death as aforesaid.

For the prevention of Pilfring and Theft.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That if any person whether
Children or Servants, Robbers of Orchard^* Gardens etc
or others, shall be taken or known to Rob any Orchard or Garden, that shall
hurt or steal away any Grafts or Fruit Trees, Fruits, Linen or Woollen, or any
other Goods left out in Orchards, Gardens* ^a^k-sides, or any other place in
House or Fields, or shall steal any Wood, Timber, or other Goods from the Water
side, from (...) Doors, Lots, or Yards, he shall forfeit treble damage to the
Owners thereof, To pay treble damage^ etc
and such fine or corporal punishment as the C^u^t shall ^hick meet.

It is also Ordered by this Court* That whosoever shall conceal any Theft, or
receive any stolen Goods, Conceale^^ of Theft liable to the same punishment as
the thief
knowing them to be such (except the Fact be private, or committed by some
Member of his own Family) every such person or persons shall be adjudged liable
to such punishment as he that committed the Theft.

And forasmuch money times i^ so fa^^s out that small Thefts and other Offenses
of a Criminal (...) are committed* both by English and Indians in Towns remote
from any prison^ and other (...) p^ace to which such Malefactors may be
committed and secured to the next Court,

One Magistrate may ^ear and (...) small Thefts
It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That any Magistrate upon complaint made
to him, may ^ear, and upon due proof determine (...) offenses of the aforesaid
nature, according to the Laws here estab^ished, and give warrant to the
Constable of that Town where the offender lives, to levy the same; Provided the
damage or fine exceed not fo^ty shillings: proviso


Liberty to remove the case to the County Co.
Provided also, it shall be lawful for either party to remove his case to the
nex^ Court in that County, giving sufficient caution to prosecute the same at
the said Court to effect; fines to be returned
in which case Execution shall be r^^pited till the matter be issued. And every
Magistrate shall make return yearly to the Court of that County where he
lives, Where no estate to satisfy (...) then to be ^ecured in prison till
fine paid Servants and workmen imbezeling their Masters Goods to make
restitution
of what cases he has so ended; and also the Constables are to return all such
fines as they have received to the County Treasurer: And where the Offender
has nothing to satisfy such Magistrate may punish by Stocks, or secure him in
Prison till his fire be paid.

It is also Ordered by this Court; That all Servants or Workmen imbezeling the
Goods of their Masters, or such as set them on work, shall make restitution and
be li^be to all Laws and penalties as others.

Capital Laws.
IF any Man or Woman after legal conviction shall Have or Worship any other God
but the Lord God, he shall be put to death. Idolatry.
Deu. 13.6.17, 21. Ex* 22.2

2. If any person within this Colony shall Blaspheme the Name of God the
Father, Son or Holy Ghost, with direct, express, Blasphemy.
presumptuous o^ high handed Blasphemy, or shall Curse in the like manner, he
shall be put to death, Levit. 24.15, 16.

3. If any Man or Woman be a Witch, that is, has or consulteth with a Familiar
Spirit, they shall be put to death, Exo. 22.1^. Lev. 20.27. Deu* (...). Witch
craft.


4. If any person shall commit any wilful Murder* committed upon Malice,
Hatred or Cruelty, not in a man's ^ust and necessary defense, Murder.
nor by casualty against his will, he shall be put to death, Exodus 21.12, 13,
14. Numb. 35.30, 3^.

5. If any person shall slay another through guile, either by Poisoning, Murder
through guil.
or other such Devilish practices, he shall be put to death, Exodus 21.14.

6. If any Man or Woman shall lie with any Beast or Bruit Creature by carnal
Copulation, they shall surely be put to death, Beastiality.
and the Beast shall be slain and buried, Lev. 20.15, 16.

7. If any man lies with Man^kinde as he lies with a Woman, both of them have
committed abomination, they both shall surely be put to death, Sodomy.
except it appear that one of the par^ies were forced, or under fifteen years
of age, Levit. 20.13.

8. If any Man shall lie with his Mother, or Fathers Wife, or Wives Mother, his
Daughter or Daughter in Law, having Carnal Copulation with them, Incest.
both ^f them have committed abomination, they both shall be put to death,
except it appear that the Woman was forced, or under fourteen years of age,
Levit* 20.11, 12, 14. and 18, 7.8, etc.

9. If any Man shall forcibly and without consent Ravish any Maid or Woman, by
committing Carnal Copulation with her against her consent, Rape.
he shall be put to death, provided prosecution and complaint be made forthwith
upon the Rape, Deuteronomy. 22.25.

10. If any Man steals a Man or Mankind, and sells him, or if he be found
in his hand, he shall be put to death, Exodus 21.16. Man stealing.


11. If any person rise up by False Witness wittingly and of purpose to take
away any man's life, he or she shall be put to death, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 18, 19.
False-witnes


12. If any person shall conspire or attempt any Invasion, Insurrection or
public Rebellion against this Colony, Conspiracy.
or shall Treacherously and Perfidiously attempt the Alteration and Subversion
of our Frame of Government Fundamentally Established by His Majesty's Gracious
Charter Granted to this Colony, by endeavoring the betraying of the same into
the hands of any foreign power, he shall be put to death.

13. If any person of the age of sixteen years and upward, shall wilfully and
of purpose fire any Dwelling House, Barn or out House, ^
he shall be put to death, or suffer such other severe punishment as the Court
of Assistants shall determine; if no prejudice or hazard to the life of any
person (...) thereby, and also satisfy all damages to the wronged or agrieved
party.

14. If any Child or Children above sixteen year^ old, and of sufficient
understanding, shall Curse or Smite their natural Father or Mother, Ch^ldren
curse (...)
he or they shall be put to death, unless it can be sufficiently testified,
that the Parents have been very unchristianly negligent in the education of
such Children, or so provoked them by extreme and cruel correction, that they
have been forced thereunto to preserve themselves from death or maiming, Exodus
21.17. Levit. 10.^. Exodus, 21.15.

15. If any man have a stubborn or rebellious Son, of sufficient understanding
and years, viz sixteen years of age, which will not obey the voice of his
Father, or the voice of his Mother, and that when they have chastened him, he
will not hearken unto them; then nay his Father or Mother, being his natural
Parents lay hold on him, and bring him to the Magistrates assembled in Court,
and testify unto them, Rebellious ^o^n
that their Son is Stubborn and Rebellious, and will not obey their voice and
chastisement, but lives in sundry notorious Crimes, such a Son shall be put to
death, Deuteronomy. 21.20.21.

Candle-wood.
WHereas there is an Order of Court amongst us, which prohibits all particular
persons from buying Lands within this Colony of the Indians, either directly or
indirectly, Timber and candle Wood, or Trees not to be purchased of Indians
without leave obtained of the Court.
under any pretense whatsoever:

It is now further Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no particular
person whatsoever, shall buy of the Indians, either directly or indirectly, any
Timber, Candle-wood or Trees of any sort or kind within this Colony, thereby
to impropriate them to themselves without leave from this Court, though it be
without the bounds of the several Towns.

Cask and Cooper.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That Cask used for Tar or other
Commodities to be put to sale, Half Hogshead o^ Gallons.
shall be Assized as follows, viz. every Cask commonly called Barrels or half
Hogsheads, shall contain twenty eight Gallons Wine measure, and other Vessels
proportionable* and all Pork and Beef Barrels shall contain thirty one Gallons
and a half, Pork Barrels 3^ Gallons and a half. ^ager^ Their (...)
and that fit persons shall be appointed from time to time in all places
needful to Gage all such Vessels or Cask, and such as shall be found of due
Assize, according to this Order shall be marked with the Gagers mark and no
other, who shall have for his pains four pence for every T^^, Coopers Brand.
(...).
and so proportionably. And it is also Ordered, that every Cooper shall have a
distinct Brand-mark on his own Cask, upon pain of forfeiture of twenty
shillings for every defect.

Cattle, Cornfieldsd,
FOrasmuch as disordered Persons are very apt to take other men's Horses,
sometimes upon the Commons, sometimes out of their own Grounds, Common-Fields
and Enclosures, and ride them at their pleasure, without any lia^e or privity
of their Owners; It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That whosoever
shall take any other man's Horse, Mare or drawing Beast out of his Enclosure,
Riding or working men's Cattle without leave treble damage^ or 10. ^. Fine
upon any Common, out of any Common field or elsewhere, except such be taken
damage seizant, and disposed of according to Law, without leave of the Owners,
and shall ride or use the same, he shall pay to the party wronged treble
damages; or if the Complainant shall desire it, then to pay only ten shillings,
or otherwise punished
and such as have not to make satisfaction, shall by service make payment
thereof; any one Assistant or Commissioner may hear and determine the same: all
offenses or breaches of this Order to be prosecuted within six months, all
after prosecution to be void and of no effect.

For the prevention of differences that may arise in the owning of Cattle that
be lost or stray away: It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof,
That the Owners of any Cattle within this Jurisdiction shall Ear-mark or Brand
all their Cattle and Swine that are above half a year old, Cattle to be (...)
marked
(except Horses) and that they cause their several Marks to be Registered in the
Town-book, and whatsoever Cattle shall be found un-marked, Ear marked to be
recorded Penalty 5 ^
shall forfeit five shillings a head, whereof two shillings six pence shall be
to the Complainer, and the other to the County Treasury.

Common-Fields and Fences.
WHereas the condition of these Plantations in these beginnings wherein we are,
in such, that necessity constrains to improve much of the ground belonging to
the several Towns in a Common way, and whereas the public and general good
(which ought to be attended in all such Improvements as are most proper to
them, and may best advance the same) may receive much prejudice through want of
a prudent ordering and disposing of those several Common Lands, so as it may
best effect the same. It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Select men
to be annually chosen
That each Town in this Colony, shall from time to time yearly choose Three,
Four, or Seven of their discreet men to be their Select men, Their power
concerning the ordering the improvement of common Lands
to Order the prudential affairs of their Town; who by this Order are empowered
and required seriously to consider and determine according to their best skill,
in what way the said Common Lands in their several and respective Plantations
may be best improved for the Common Good, and whatsoever is so determined by
the said Select men, or the Major part of them in each Town concerning the way
of Improvement of any such Lands, shall be attended by all such persons that
have any propriety or Interest in any such Lands so judged by the Select men.

And whereas much damage may arise not only from the unruliness of some kind of
Cattle, but also from the weakness and insufficiency of many Fen^es, whereby
much difference and variance may arise, which if not prevented, may prove
prejudicial to the Public Peace.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That the Select men, Select-men to
(...) Fence viewers to (...) Fines on ^^^^ctive Fence
or the major part of them, shall appoint what Fences shall be made in any
common Grounds, and after they are made to cause the same to be viewed by the
Fence-viewers, who are to set such fines as they judge meet upon any as shall
neglect or not duly attend the aforesaid Order of the Select-men, in the
setting down of their Fence, or repairing of the same; when F^nces are
sufficient Cattle and Swine to pay damage liberty of particular enclosures
And when Fences are made and judged sufficient by the Fence-viewers, and so
maintained, whatsoever damage shall be done by Hogs, or any other Cattle within
those said Lands, shall be paid by the Owners of the Swine or Cattle; it being
provided that any particular man or men shall have liberty to enclose any of
their particular Grounds, and improve them according to their own discretion
her mutual agreement notwithstanding this Order. It is also further Ordered by
this Court; (...) that Improves is to Fence
That what Lands lie in Common unfenced, if one shall improve his Land by
Fencing in several, and another shall not, he who shall so improve shall secure
his Land against other men's Cattle, After improvement
and shall not compel such as join upon him to make any Fence with him, except
he shall also improve in several as the other does, and where one man shall
improve before his Neighbor, and so make the whole Fence, none to lay open
without three months warning
if after his said Neighbor shall improve also, he shall then satisfy for
half the others Fence against him, according to the present value; and shall
maintain the same. And if either of them shall after, Fencing Homelots
lay open his said Field (which none shall do without three months warning) he
shall have liberty to buy the dividend Fence, paying according to the present
valuation, to be set by two men chosen by either party one; Insufficient fence
not (...) except by Swine etc
The like Order shall be attended where any man shall improve Land against any
Town^common, Provided this Order shall not include House-lots, for in such, if
one shall improve, his Neighbor shall be compellable to make and maintain one
half of the Fence between them, whether he improve or not; Provided also, that
no man shall be liable to satisfy for damage done in any such Ground not
sufficiently Fenced, except it shall be for damage done by Swine under a year
old, Cattle damage (...) be pounded.
or unruly Cattle which will not be restrained by ordinary Fences, or where any
man shall put his Cattle or otherwise voluntarily trespass upon his Neighbors
Ground: And if the party damnified find the Cattle damage ^eizant, he may
Impound them, or otherwise dispose of them according to Law.

Caveats Entered
WHereas it appears, that diverse to defeat and defraud their Creditors, may
secretly and underhand make Bargains and Contra^^s of their Lands, Lotts, and
Accomodations, by means whereof, when the Creditor thinks he has a means in
due Order of Law to declare against the said Lands, Lotts and Accomodations,
and so recover satisfaction for his Debt, he is wholly deluded and frustrated,
which is contrary to a righteous Rule, that every man shall pay his debt with
his Estate, be it what it will be, either real or personal;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That if any
Creditor for the future do suspect his Debtor, Against Debtors non solvant
that he may prove non solvant in his personal Estate, he may repair to the
Register or Recorder of the Plantation where the Lands, Caveat enter and for
recording i^
Lots or Accomodations lies, and enter a Caveat against the Lands Lots or
accomodations of the said Debtor, and shall give the said Register or Recorder
four pence for the Entry thereof; Caveat to be prose^uted (...) County Court
And the said Creditor or Creditors shall take out Summons against the said
Debtor, and in due form of Law the next County Court in that County where the
said Lands, Lots and accomodations lies, declare against the said Lands, Lots
and Accomodations. And if the Creditor recover, he may enter a judgment upon
the said Lots, Lands and Accomodations* Judgment entered
and take out an extent against the said Lands, Lots and Accomodations, (...)
may be taken
directed to a known Officer, who may take two honest and sufficient then or
the Neighbors to apprize the said Lands, Lots and Accomodations either to be
sold out right, Lands (...) to be sold (...)
if the Debt so require, or set a reasonable Rent upon the same until the Debt
be paid, and deliver the possession thereof either to the Creditor or
Creditors, or their Assign or Assigns, and what Sale or Sales, Lease or
Leases the said Officer makes, being Recorded according to the order for
Recording of Lands, Sales or Leases to be (...) Recorded (...) Law proviso
shall be as legal and binding to all intents, constructions and purposes, as
though the Debtor himself had done the same; Provided if the said Debtor can
then presently procure a Chapman or Tenant that can give to the Creditor or
Creditors satisfaction, to his or their content, he shall have the first
refusal thereof.

Al^o it is hereby Ordered; That he which first enters Caveats as aforesaid,
and his Debt being due at his Entering the said Caveat shall be first paid,
Caveat first entered, (...) paid*
and so every Creditor as he enters his Caveat, and his Debt become due, shall
be orderly satisfied, unless it appears at the next Court, the Debtors Lands,
Lots and Accomodations prove insufficient to pay all his Creditors, Back
Creditor ^o receive^ a^cording to his entry
in which case every Creditor shall have a suitable proportion to his (...) out
of the same, and yet notwithstanding every man to receive his part according to
the Entry of his Cav^at, this seclude^ not other ways
yet this is not to seclude any Creditor from recovering other satisfaction*
either upon the person or estate of the said Debtor, according to the Law and
Custom of the Colony.

Sales after the 1st caveat entered made by the Debtor void
As also it is further Ordered; That what sale or bargain soever the Debtor
shall make concerning the said Lots, Lands and Accomodations, after the Entering
the Caveat shall be void as to de^faud the said Creditors.

It is also further Explained and Declared; That if the said Debtor be known to
be a non solvant man, before the first Caveat was Entered against the said
Lands, Lots and Accommodations, and the same appear at the next County Court,
An Explanation
then the said Court shall have power to call in all the Creditors in a short
time, and set an equal and indifferent way how the Creditors shall be paid out
of the said Lands, Lots and Accomodations; otherwise if the said Debtor prove
insolvant after the first Caveat Entered, then this Order to be duly observed
according to the premises, and true intent and meaning thereof.

It is also further Explained and Declared; That the said Recorder or Register
of the said Caveat shall the next County Court as aforesaid return the said
Caveats that are with him, Caveats to (...) in the next Co^^^y Co*
at which time and Court, the Enterers of the said Caveats shall be called
forth to prosecute the same at the said Court, and if the Enterer of the said
Caveats fail to prosecute according to this Order, if not prosecuted
the Register or Recorder of the said Caveat or Caveats shall put a Vacat upon
the (...) Caveat or Caveats, A Vacat to be entered
which shall be invalid or void to charge the said (...) Lots and Accomodations
aforesaid.

Causes, Small Causes.
FOr the benefit of the Inhabitants of this Colony, and that our Courts may be
eased of the trouble of small Causes;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Any one Assist may issue any
case under 40. s
That any one of our Assistants shall have power to hear and determine, by his
discretion (not by a Jury) according to the Laws here established, all Causes
arising in tha^ County where he lives, wherein the Debt, Trespass or Damage,
and grant execution thereupon
does not in ^he Judgment of the Plaintiff exceed forty shillings, who may
also grant Summons to require the parties concerned and Witnesses to appear
before him, and Execution upon the issue of the case, directed to the
Constable, who is hereby required faithfully to execute the same.

And it is further Ordered; one Commis. etc Select-men may issue a case of 40
shillings
That in such Town where no Assistant dwells the Commissioner of that Town,
with two of the Select men have like power with an Assistant to hear and
determine by their good discretion not by Jury, all such Causes aforesaid,
according to the Laws here established, who may also grant Summons to require
parties and Witnesses to appear before them, Grant summons, (...) and ex^cution
which the Constable. must serve
and administer Oaths to the Testimonies as need shall require, and Execution
upon the issue of the Case directed to the Constable, who is hereby required to
Execute the same: Always provided, provided liberty of review to the nex^
County Co.
any person that finds himself agrieved with any Issue or Judgment that shall
pass upon his case, he has hereby liberty to review his Suit to the next
County Court in that County, and in every such case Execution shall be respited
till the Issue of the case.

And there shall be paid by the Plaintiff two shillings for the Entry of every
such case as aforesaid, and two shillings for the Trial thereof; Fee^ for entry
(...) for Trial (...) provided records be (...) kept of such issues*
Provided also that the Assistant or Commissioner, with the Select men, shall
keep a true Record of all their proceedings and determinations as aforesaid.

CHILDREN.
FOrasmuch as the good Education of Children is of singular behoof and benefit
to any Colony, and whereas many Parents and Masters are too indulgent and
negligent of their duty in that kind;

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Select men to take
care that all child^ be taught to read
That the Select-men of every Town in this Jurisdiction, in their several
precincts and quarters shall have a vigilant eye over their Brethren and
Neighbors, to see that none of them shall suffer so much Barbarism in any of
their Families, as not to endeavor by themselves, or others, to teach their
Children and Apprentices so much learning as may enable them perfectly to read
the English Tongue, and knowledge of the Capital Laws, upon penalty of twenty
shillings neglect therein: Also that all Masters of Families do once a week at
least, and Catechized
Catechize their Children and Servants in the Grounds and Principles of
Religion; and if any be unable to do so much, (...) then at the least they
procure such Children and Apprentices to learn some short Orthodox Catechism
without book, that they may be able to answer to the Questions that shall be
propounded to them out of such Catechism, by their Parents or Masters, or any
of the Select-men, when they shall call them to an account of what they have
learned in that kind. And further, Children to be brought up in some calling
that all Parents and Masters do breed and bring up their Children and
Apprentices in some honest and lawful calling, labor or employment, profitable
for themselves and the Colony; if they will not or cannot train them up in
learning to fit them for higher employments; and if any of the Select-men after
Admonition by them given to such Masters of Families, shall find them still
negligent of their duties in the particulars aforementioned, unruly chil to be
placed out etc
whereby Children and Servants grow rude, stubborn, and unruly, the said
Select-men, with the help of two Magistrates, shall take such Children and
Apprentices from them, and place them with some Masters for years, Boys till
they come to twenty one, and Girls eighteen years of age complete, which will
more strictly look unto, Boys till 2^. y. and Girls 18 years of age
and force them to submit unto Government according to the Rules of this Order,
if by fair means and former instructions they will not be drawn to it.

Rebellious Children and Servants.
IT is also Ordered by this Court; That whatsoever Child or Servant within
this Colony, Rebellious chil. or Servants to be sent to the house of Correction
upon complaint, shall be convicted of any Stubborn or Rebellious carriage
against their Parents or Governors, the Governor or any two Assistants have
liberty and power from this Court to commit such person or persons to the House
of Correction, there to remain under hand labor and severe punishment, so long
as the Court or Assistants shall judge meet.

CIDER.
THis Court being desirous what in them lies, to prevent the increase of that
great sin of Drunkenness, both amongst the English and Indians;

No Cider to be sold to the Indians penalty 20. s. a pint
Do therefore Order; That if any person in this Colony, shall sell, barter or
give, either directly or indirectly any Cider to Indian or Indians, he or she
shall forfeit for each pint twenty shillings, and so proportionably for other
quantities, a third part whereof shall be to him that discovers the offense,
the rest shall be paid to the County Treasury.

No Cider to be sold to the English by retail without a license etc. penalty 5.
s. a qt.
It is also further Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person
or persons for the future, shall retail any Cider to the English without a
particular license for the same, and suffer it to be drunk in his house, he
shall forfeit five shillings for every quart so sold, and suffered to be drunk
in his house, and so proportionable for all greater and lesser quantities, the
one half of which fine to be to the complainer, the rest to the County Treasury.

Commons to be cleared.
FOr the encouragement of raising Sheep in the Plantations, etc.

One day in each year the inhabit. to cut brush
It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, that every Male person in the
several Plantations from fourteen years old to seventy fit for labor, that is
not a public Officer, viz. an Assistant, Commissioner, Minister of the Gospel,
or Ruling Elder in the Church, Physicians, or School masters, shall work one
day in the year, Select-men to (...) appoint the day
by themselves or some meet person, sometime in June yearly, in cutting down
and clearing the under-wood, and the Select men in the several Towns are to
appoint the days for this work, and the places where they shall work in, the
Highways, or Commons, or other places agreed upon by the Town; penalty
And if the Townsmen neglect their duty therein, they shall forfeit for every
default five pounds to their Town Treasury, and every person that neglects to
attend the aforesaid work the days appointed, being warned, shall forfeit five
shillings to their Town Treasury for every default.

CONSTABLES.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the Constables in each Town
shall be yearly chosen before the first of January, Constable. to be chosen the 1st
of January yearly
and sworn to that Office the next Court following or by some Magistrate or
Magistrates.

Offenders to be conveyed from Constable. to Constab
It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That any person tendered to any
Constable of this Jurisdiction by any Constable or other Officer belonging to
any of our Neighbor Colonies, or by Warrant from any their Authority, such
shall presently be received, and conveyed forthwith from Constable to Constable
until they shall be brought unto the place to which they are sent, or before
some Magistrate of this Jurisdiction, who shall dispose of him or them as the
justice of the case shall require, and that all Hue and Cries shall be duly
received, and diligently pursued to full effect.

It is also Ordered; constab. where no Magist. is to make Hue and Cries etc.
For murderers etc to apprehend without warrant Drunkards etc
That every Constable within our Jurisdiction shall henceforth have full power
to make, sign, and put forth Pursuits, or Hue and Cries after Murderers,
Malefactors, Peace-breakers, Thieves, Robbers, Burglaters and other Capital
Offenders where no Magistrate is near hand, also to Apprehend without Warrant
such as are overtaken with Drink, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Slighting of the
Ordinances, Lying, Vagrant persons, Night-walkers, or any others that shall
offend in any of these; also to make search for them Apprehend and secure
provided they be taken in the manner, either by sight of the Constable or by
present information from some other, as also to make search for all such
persons either on the Sabbath day or other, when there shall be occasion in all
Houses licensed either to sell Beer or Wine, or in any other suspected or
disordered places, and those to apprehend and keep in safe custody, till
opportunity serves to bring them before one of the next Magistrates for further
examination; Provided, that when any Constable is employed by any of the
Magistrates for apprehending of any person, he shall not do it without a
Warrant in writing; Constables to be assisted
and if any person shall refuse to assist any Constable in the execution of his
Office, in any of the things beforementioned, being by him required thereunto,
they shall pay for neglect thereof ten shillings to the use of the Country, on
penalty of 10. s.
to be levied by Warrant from any Magistrate before whom any such Offender
shall be brought, and if it appear that any shall wilfully, obstinately or
contemptuously refuse or neglect to assist any Constable as is before
expressed, he shall pay to the use of the Country forty shillings: and if any
Constable, wilful neglect 40. s
or any other upon urgent occasion shall refuse to do their best endeavor in
raising and prosecuting Hue and Cries by foot, Constables etc neglect to
prosecute hue and cries 40. s penalty
and if need be by horse after such as have committed Capital Crimes, they
shall forfeit to the use aforesaid, for every such offense forty shillings.

It is also Ordered; Constab to make search for offenders
That all Constables may and shall from time to time duly make search
throughout the limits of their Town upon Lords days and Lecture days in time
of exercise, and also at all other times, so often as they shall see cause, for
all such Offenders as shall lie Tippling in any Inn or House of entertainment,
or private house excessively or unseasonably; Constable. neglecting
and if upon due information, any Constable shall refuse or neglect to make
search as aforesaid, or shall not to their power perform all other things
belonging to their place or office of Constableship, then upon complaint,
Penalty 10 ^^*
and due proof before any one Assistant or Commissioner within three months
next after such refusal or neglect, they shall be fined for every such offense
ten shillings, any one Assist or Commis. to determine such a case the Marshal
to levy the fine etc
to be levied by the Marshal as in other cases, by Warrant from such Magistrate
or Commissioner before whom they are convicted, or Warrant from the Treasurer
upon notice from such Magistrate or Commissioner.

It i^ also Ordered by this Court; Consta: to return their accounts upon demand
to the Treasurer
That the Constables in the respective Plantations shall at all times, when the
Treasurer shall call or require them, deliver their Accounts to him under their
hand or hands, both of what they have received upon the County account, and how
they have paid it, which account shall also be signed and approved by an
Assistant or Commissioner if any such inhabit there, if not under the hands of
two of the Select-men of that Town*

It is further Ordered by this Court; That the Constables for the future, in
the respective Plantations, shall gather their proportion: or the Country Rate*
Constab: to make p^ym. by the ^^ ^une yearly the (...) Penalty 40 ^
and make payment thereof according to order by the tenth of June in each year,
upon penalty of forty shillings fine for every defect herein; And they are also
Ordered to make up their Accounts with the Treasurer by the second thursday in
October yearly, to make up their accounts by the 2d (...) in October yearly
p^nalty 40 s etc
upon penalty of forty shillings fine for every defect herein; and the
Treasurer is hereby Authorized to send forth his Warrant to distrain the
Estates of the respective Constables for the payment of such forfeitures as
shall be due from them for the breach of this Order.

It is further Ordered by this Court; That the Constables in the several
Plantations are hereby empowered to charge the Watch and Ward in his Majesty's
Name (or in the Name of the Authority here established by his Majesty) duly
and faithfully to attend their Watch and Ward, Co^stables charge to the Watch
and Ward
by walking or standing in such places where they may best discover danger by
the approach of an Enemy, or by Fire, or otherwise, which if they discover,
they are to give notice thereof by firing their Guns, and crying Fire, Fire, or
Arm, Arm; they are also to command them to examine all such persons as they
shall meet within the streets unseasonably, and if they cannot give a good
account of their occasions, they are to return them to the Constable, who shall
secure them to be conveyed before some Assistant or Commissioner to give an
account of their unseasonableness.

(...) to have the power of Water-baylies
It is also Ordered by this Court; That the Constables in the several
Plantations, shall have the power of Water Baylies in their respective
Plantations where there is occasion for the same.

Conveyance fraudulent.
Fraudulent Conveyances invalid
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That all deceitful or fraudulent
Alienations or Conveyances of Lands, Tenements, or any Hereditaments, shall be
of no validity to defeat any man from due Debts or Legacies, or from any just
Title, Claim or Possession of that which is so fraudulently conveyed; And any
Deed, Promise etc obtained by illegal violence
and that no Conveyance, Deed or Promise whatsoever, shall be of validity* if
it be gotten by illegal violence, imprisonment, threatening, or any kind of
forcible compulsion.

Counties stated.
The Bounds of Hartford County
THis Court Orders; that the Towns on the River of Conecticut from the North
bounds of Windsor (with Farmington and Simsbury) to the South bounds of Haddum,
shall be, and remain to be one County, which shall be called the County of
Hartford.

the bounds of New London County
This Court Orders; That from the East part of Stonington bounds (with Norwich)
to the West bounds of Kelinworth Plantation; shall be and remain one County,
which shall be called the County of New London.

the bounds of New Haven County
This Court Orders; That from the East bounds of Gilford to the West bounds of
Milford (with Wallingford) shall be, and remain one County, which shall be
called the Counth of New Haven.

the ^ounds of Fairfield County
This Court Orders; That from the East bounds of Stratford, to the West bounds
of Rye, shall be, and remain one County, which shall be called the County of
Fairfield.

County Privileges.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person who is settled in
any of the Counties in this Colony, No settled Inhabitant to be summoned in one
county to answer to a^ action in an other county etc
shall be requirable by virtue of a ^ummons served on him in that County where
he lives, to Answer a Case in another County Court; And if the Plaintiff and
Defendant live in the same County, the Trial of the case betwixt such persons
shall be first in the County where they both live, except by mutual consent
they agree otherwise; And in such case where the Plaintiff and Defendant do
not live in the same County, it shall be in the power of the Plaintiff to
begin his Action or Suit in which County Court he pleases; Provided, he serves
his Process in that County where his case shall first be heard.

COURTS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That there shall be yearly two
General Courts or Assemblies, the one the second thursday in May, Two Genesis
Courts annually to be held in Hartford
the other the second thursday in October, both which shall be holden at
Hartford at all times, unless it be upon occasion of Epidemical diseases,
Sickness or the like: the first shall be called the Court of Election, The 1st.
the 2d thursday in May to be called the Court of ^lection etc
wherein shall be chosen from time to time yearly, one Governor, one Deputy
Governor, and twelve Assistants, with a Treasurer and Secretary for this
Colony, and two Commissioners for the United Colonies.

Which said General Courts shall consist of the Governor, the number and who
are to constitute a General Court
or Deputy Governor and six Assistants at the least, with those of the
Deputies from the several Plantations in this Colony, that shall be present and
attend the said Courts. In which General Court shall consist the power of this
Colony or Corporation, and they only shall have power to make Laws and Repeal
them, to grant Levies, to admit of Freemen, to dispose of Land undisposed of to
particular Towns or persons. the power of the General Court
And also shall have power to set up such Officers and Judicatories as they
shall see necessary for the good G^vernment of the People of this Colony; And
also shall have power to call either Court or Magistrate, Particulari^ed
o^ any other person whatsoever to an account for any Misdemeanour or male
Administration, and may for just cause displace them, or deal otherwise, as the
nature of the case shall require; and also may deal in any other matter that
concerns the good of this Colony, except the Election of Governor, ^estrained
Deputy Governor, Assistants, Treasurer and Secretary, which shall be done by
the Freemen at the yearly Court of Election; Provided, if there be want of
Assistants by reason of Death or otherwise, after the Election, such* want
shall or may be supplied and made up by the General Courts Election or
appointing some suitable person or persons to supply such want according to
Charter.

It is further Ordered; General C^urt^ power to pardon Malefactors
That the said General Court shall only have power upon good grounds to them
satisfying to grant Suspention, Release and Jayl-delivery, upon Reprieve in
Criminal and Capital cases unto any person or persons, that have been sentenced
in any other Court whatsoever; any thing in any Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

It is also Ordered; Genesis Court not ^o be dissolved or adjourned w^^h^ou^
consent etc
That any of our General Courts shall not be dissolved or proroged without the
consent of the major part thereof.

It is also Ordered by this Court; That the Governor, or in his absence the
Deputy Governor, shall by themselves or the Secretary, Gov: or Dep. Gov by
themselves or Secret. to call the Genesis Cou. etc
send out their Summons for the two standing General Courts, one Month at
least before their several Sessions, also upon any special and imergent
occasion the Governor or Deputy Governor, with the advice of one or more of
the Assistants may call a General Court upon fourteen days warning, or less if
they see occasion, they giving an account thereof to the Assembly when they
shall be met together.

For the furtherance of the Administration of Justice, it is necessary that the
Times and Places where it shall be dispensed may be publicly known;

It is therefore Ordered, and by this Court Declared; That there shall be two
Courts of Assistants yearly held at Hartford, Two Courts of Assistants
by the Governor or Deputy Governor and six of the Assistants at the least;
the first on the last tuesday in May, the second on the first thursday in
October. the 1st. in May 2d in October
Which said Courts shall have power to hear and determine by a Jury of twelve
men, or otherwise according to Law all such Appeals as shall be brought before
them from any of our County Courts, both of Civil and Criminal Cases, The Court
of Assist: power to hear all Appeals and capitals, etc
and also all Trials for Life, ^imb, Banishment and Divorce.

It is also Ordered; That it shall be in the power of the Court of Assistants,
their power to adjourn Govern: or (...) power to call a special Court of
Assistan^
upon necessary occasion to adjourn the said Court.

It is further Ordered; That the Governor or Deputy Governor have hereby
power granted them to call a special Court of Assistants upon any extraordinary
occasion.

Hartford ^ounty Courts are in the 1st thursday of March, 1st thursday of
September:
It is also Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That there shall be two
County Courts yearly held in Hartford, the one the first thursday in March, the
other the first thursday in September, by any three or more of the Assistants,
to hear and determine by a Jury, or otherwise according to Law all Causes civil
and criminal, not extending to Life, Limb or Banishment; the Juries for this
Court to be summoned out of the neighbor Towns, and the Marshal to give his
attendance there.

New haven county courts arch^^d on the 2d wednesday in June and 2d wednesday
in November
It is likewise Ordered; That there shall be two County Courts annually held in
New Haven, the first, the second Wednesday in June, the other the second
Wednesday in November, to hear and determine by a Jury, or otherwise according
to Law, all Causes civil and Criminal, not extending to Life, Limb, or
Banishment, the Juries for this Court to be summoned out of the Neighbor Towns.

It is further Ordered; That there shall be two County Courts yearly held in
New London, New London county Courts are held on the 1st tuesday in ^une and 3d
tuesday in September
the one, the first tuesday in June, the other the third tuesday in September,
to hear and determine by a Jury, or otherwise according to Law, all Causes
civil and c^iminal not extending to Life, Limb or Banishment, the Juries for
this Court to be summoned out of the several Plantations in the County.

Fairfield County Co. are held on the 2d. tuesday in March and 1st tuesday in
November
It is also Ordered; That there shall be two County Courts yearly held in
Fairfield, the second tuesday in March, and the first tuesday in November to
hear and determine by a Jury, or otherwise according to Law, all Causes civil
and criminal not extending to Life, Limb or Banishment, the Juries for this
Court to be summoned out of the several Plantations of that County.

In each Court to be 3 Judges
It is Ordered; That every County Court shall consist of three Assistants, and
where there are not so many Assistants, one Assistant and two Commissioners at
least to be Judges of every such (...).

It is also Ordered; That the Moderator of the County Court (who is hereby
declared to be the most ancient Assistant present in such Courts) with the
consent of the rest of the Judges, County Co. may be adjournd upon necessary
occasion
upon any necessary occasion, may adjourn the said County Courts as they see
cause.

^pecial County Co. may be called upon extraordinary occasion
It is further Ordered; That the Assistants in their respective Counties, may
call a special County Court in their Counties upon extraordinare occasion,
provided no charge arise thereby to the County.

County Co to appoint their Cler. Treas and Marshal for their County
It is also Ordered; That the County Courts in the respective Counties, have
hereby liberty and power granted them to nominate and appoint their own Clerks,
and a Treasurer and Marshal for their County.

It is further Ordered; That the Clerks of the several County Courts in this
Colony shall have full power, County Co. Cler. power to grant summons and
attachments and executions
and are hereby fully empowered to grant Attachments and Summons according to
Law, as also to grant Execution upon Judgments granted in the said County
Courts, except in cases of Review, and when Appeals be entered in any of the
said Courts for trial at the Court of Assistants.

It is Ordered by this Court; That whatsoever Member of the General Court,
shall reveal any secret, which the Court enjoins to be kept secret, or shall
make known to any person what any one Member of the Court speaks concerning any
person or business that may come in agitation in the Court, Court secrets not
to be revealed penalty 10 li
he shall for every such offense forfeit ten pounds to the public Treasury;
And the Secretary is hereby appointed as the beginning of every Session of the
General Court to read this Order.

CRVELTY.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no man shall exercise any
Cruelty toward any Bruit Creature, Cruelty to be punished etc
which are usually kept for the use of man, upon pain of such punishment as in
the judgment of the Court the nature of the offense shall deserve.

Damages Pretended.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, Damage pretended
That no man in any Suit or Action against another, shall falsely pretend great
Damages, or Debts to vex his Adversary; and if it shall appear any does so, the
Court shall have Power to set a suitable Fine on him.

Death Untimely.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, Death untimely to be inquired in
to by a Jury etc
That whenever any Person shall come to any very sudden, untimely or
un-natural Death; The next Magistrate, or the Constable of that Town shall
forthwith Summon a Jury of Twelve discreet men, to enquire of the Cause and
manner of his Death; who shall present a true Verdict thereof unto some near
Magistrate upon their (...)

Delinquents.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, Delnquents to bear their own
charge and to the prison keeper 6 s 8 d
That all persons hereafter Committed upon Delinquency, shall bear the Charges
the Country shall be at in the Prosecution of them, and shall pay to the Master
of the Prison, or house of Correction, six shillings eight pence, before he be
freed there from.

IT is also Ordered, That what person or persons soever, Delinquents to have no
advocates
shall take that boldness to him or themselves, to Plead in the behalf of any
person that is upon Examination or Trial for Delinquency (except he speak
directly to matter of Law, and with Leave from Authority present) he shall pay
ten shillings to the Public Treasury as a Fine, or fit in the Stocks one hour,
for every such offense.

THis Court taking notice of the Insolent and Contemptuous carriages of some
Delinquents, when they (...) called to make answer for their Delinquency before
Authority; which willing to prevent, Do Order,

And it is hereby Ordered by this Court, Disorderly delinquents upon examination
That the several Officers and Ministers of Justice in this Colony, upon their
examination or trial of any person or persons brought before them for
Delinquency, if any such persons shall in their words or actions carry
contemptuously or disorderly, to be punished by imprisonment
it shall be in the Power of the aforesaid ministers of Justice to inflict such
punishment upon them as they shall judge most suitable to the nature of their
Offense. Provided, that no particular Minister of Justice shall inflict any
other punishment upon such person or persons then Imprisonment, binding to good
behavior ^tocks or fine not exce^ding 30 s
binding them to the Peace or good Behavior, till the next County Court in
that County, Committing them to the Stocks, there to sit not above two hours
or a fine not exceeding thirty shillings.

Debts, Book-debts when to determine. etc.
IT is by this Court Ordered, that all such Debts as are now standing out, or
that hereafter shall be made, Book debts to be accounted for within 3 years
after made etc or else not pleadable after the time specified in the order
and that shall not within three years after the first of June 1673. Or within
three years after such Debt as hereafter shall be made, be accounted for, or
Balanced with the original debtor or his Attorney, Agent, Assign, or other
Lawful Successor or Substitute, and an account or balance thereof, assured by
Specialty given for it, or witnessed by subscribing the Debtor or other
Accomptants name to the Creditors Book, or the Subscription of the Witnesses to
such Account, shall not be pleadable in any Court, unless such Book debt shall
within the time before limited be prosecuted or proved in such Court as has
proper cognizance thereof by competent evidence approved by the Court, and the
evidence there Recorded, and the Record thereof shall secure the Creditor, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, unless the Debtor or his Assign shall
disapprove the same within one year after such proof made or recovery of the
said Debt: If such Debtor, his or her Agent, Attourny, Assign, Substitute,
Executor Administrator, or other lawful Successor, be or shall be within this
Jurisdiction, o^ elsewhere, and have due notice from the Creditor thereof.

Deputies for the General Court
^
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That every Town in this Colony
shall have liberty to send one or two Deputies to every Session of the General
Court, which Deputies shall always be chosen by the Freemen of the several
Plantations. ^eputies to have the full power and (...) of the free (...) in all
things (...) etc
And that such persons as shall be hereafter so deputed by the Freemen of their
Plantations to deal in their behalf in the public affairs of the Colony, shall
have the full power and voices of all the said Freemen deputed to them for the
making and establishing of Laws, and Repealing them, Granting of Lands, and
Levies, and all other the affairs of this Colony in the General Assembly
wherein Freemen have to do, the Election of Assistants and other public
Officers only excepted, at the usual time of Election, wherein every Freeman is
to give his own voice.

It is also Ordered; That when the Deputies of the General Court are met
together before, Deputies power (...) about their Election
or at any General Court, it shall be lawful for them, or the major part of
them present, to examine, hear and determine any difference that may arise
about the Election of any of their Members.

It is further hereby Declared; That the Deputies of the several Plantations
before they proceed to Judgment in any case, civil or criminal, shall take
this following Oath;

I do Swear by the most Great and Dreadful Name of the Ever-living God, that in
all cases wherein I am to deliver my Vote or Sentence against any Criminal
Offense, Deputies to take this Oath etc
or between Parties in any civil Case, I will deal uprightly and justly
according to my best Judgment, without respect of Persons, and I will
according to my skill and ability assist in all other public affairs of this
Court faithfully and truly according to the duty of my place, when I shall be
present to attend the same.

The Deputies of the Gen Co to be Freemen, and chosen by the Freemen
It is also Ordered; That no person shall be accepted a Deputy in the General
Court that is not (known to be a Freeman of this Corporation, and) orderly
chosen thereunto by the Freemen of that Plantation for whom he serves.

Deputi^^ allow to be continued
It is further Ordered; That the allowance by this Court formerly granted to the
Deputies, both from the Country, and the Plantations for whom they serve shall
still be continued, till this Court order otherwise.

Deputies departing the Co without (...) to forfeit their allowance g^anted
them from the Country
It is also Ordered; That if any of the Deputies of the General Court, shall
totally depart without leave from the General Court, before the Court be
issued, he or they that shall so do, shall forfeit that allowance that the
Country allows for the defraying his charge of attendance in the Court.

Distilling Corn and Malt.
(...) and Malt (...) to be disti^ld without license (...) Court to (...)
License
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no Corn or Malt what ever
shall be distilled into Liquors in any Plantation or Peculiar in this Colony
without a particular license for the same from the County Court of that County
where the Distiller lives.

DISTRESS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no Man's Corn or Hay that is
in the field, or upon the Cart, nor his Garden stuff, nor any other thing
subject to present decay shall be taken in any Distress, unless he that takes
it does presently bestow it where it may not be imbezeled, nor suffer spoil or
decay, or give security to satisfy the worth thereof if it comes to any harm.

DOWRIES.
THat there may be some Provision made for the certain maintenance of Widows
after the decease of their Husbands;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That every Married Woman (living
with her Husband in this Colony, o^ other where absent from him with his
consent, or through his mere default, or inevitable providence, widows to have
the thirds of the real estate of their husbands during life
or in case of Divorce, where she is the innocent party) that shall not before
Marriage be Estated by way of jointure in some Houses Lands, Tenements or other
Hereditaments for term of her life, shall immediately after the death of her
Husband have right and interest by way of dower in and to one third part of the
real estate of her said husband that he stood of at the time of his decease in
Houses and Lands, to be to her only during her natural life: widows to keep
houses and fences to leave them in sufficient ^epai^ that are laid out for
their thirds
And that every such Widow so endowed as aforesaid, shall maintain all such
Houses, Fences and Enclosures as shall be assigned her for her Dowry, Rest of
estate to be disposed according to will
and shall leave the same in good and sufficient reparation; the remainder of
the Estate to be disposed according to the Will of the deceased, or in defect
thereof according to the distribution the Court shall make thereof.

Drunkenness.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person be found
Drunk in any private Family or House, Drunkenness in private houses penalty 20.
s and the owner of the house to pay 10
he shall forfeit twenty shillings to the public Treasury, and the Owner of
the house where (...) found and proved to be made drank, shall pay ten
shillings to the public Treasury.

ECCLESIASTICAL.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Embodying into Church estate to
be with consent of Genesis Court etc neighbor churches
That no persons within this Colony shall in any wise imbody themselves into
Church Estate without consent of the General Court^ and approbation of
Neighbor Churches.

It is also Ordered by this Court; That there shall be no Ministry or Church
Administration entertained or attended by the Inhabitants of any Plantation in
this Colony distinct and separate from, what ministry (...) church
administration is appro^ved etc
and in opposition to that which is openly and publicly observed and dispensed
by the approved Minister of the place, except it be by approbation of this
Court and Neighbor Churches, upon penalty of the forfeiture of five pounds for
every breach of this Order; Provided also, Proviso
that this Order shall not hinder any private meetings o^ godly persons, to
attend any duties that Christianity and Religion calls for, as Fasts, and
Consciences, etc. nor take place upon any that are hindered by just impediments
on the Sabbath from the public Assembly by weather or water.

This Court having seriously considered the great Divisions that arise amongst
us about matters of Church Government, for the Honor of God, welfare of the
Churches, and preservation of the public peace so greatly hazarded;

Do Declare; That whereas the Congregational Churches in these parts for the
general of their Profession and practice have hitherto been approved* A
Congregation^al way approved
we can do no less then approve and countenance the same to be without
disturbance until better ^ight in an orderly way does appear. But yet forasmuch
as sundry persons of worth for prudence and piety amongst us are otherwise
persuaded (whose welfare and peaceable satisfaction we desire to accomodate)
This Court does Declare; That all such persons, with liberty to those of
different persuasion etc
being so approved according to Law, as Orthodox and Sound in the Fundamentals
of Christian Religion, may have allowance in their persuasion and Profession in
Church ways or Assemblies without disturbance.

Forasmuch as the open Contempt of Gods Word and Messengers thereof is the
desolating sin of Civil States and Churches, and the Preaching of the Word by
those whom God does send is the chief ordinary means ordained by God for the
converting, edifying and saving the Souls of the Elect, through the Presence
and power of the Holy Ghost thereunto promised, and that the Ministry of the
Word it set up by God in his Churches for those holy ends, and according to the
respect or contempt of the same, and of those whom God has set apart for his
own work and employment, the Weal or Woe of all Christian states is much
furthered and promoted;

Contemptuous behavior
It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That if any Christian
so called, within this Colony, shall Contemptuously behave himself toward the
Word preached, o^ the messengers thereof, called to Dispense the same in any
Congregation, when he does Faithfully execute his service and Office therein
according to the Will and Word of God; penalty
either by Interrupting him in his Preaching, or by charging him falsely with an
Error, which he has not taught, 1st offense to be reproved and bound to good
beaviour
in the open face of the Church; or like a Son of Korah cast upon his true
Doctrine o^ himself, any reproach to the dishonor of the Lord Jesus who has
sent him, and to the disparagement of that his holy Ordinance and mal^^ing Gods
ways contemptible and rediculous: That every such person or persons
(whatsoever Censure the Church may pass) shall for the first scandal be
convented and reproved openly by the Magistrate in some public Assembly, 2d
offense 5 li.
and bound to their good behavior. And if a Second time they break forth into
the like contemptuous carriages, they shall either pay five pounds to the
public, or stand two hours openly upon a block or stool four foot high upon a
public meeting day, or stand upon a black a^ some public meeting
with a paper fixed on his Breast written with Capital Letters, AN OPEN AND
OBSTINATE CONTEMNER OF GODS HOLY ORDINANCES, that others may fear and be
ashamed of breaking out into the like wickedness.

The word preached to be attended etc
It is further Ordered; That wheresoever the Ministry of the Word is established
according to the order of the Gospel throughout this Colony, every person shall
duly resort and attend thereunto respectively upon the Lords day, and upon
such public Fast days, and days of thanksgiving as are to be generally kept
by the appointment of Authority. And if any person within this Jurisdiction,
Penalty 5. s. provided it be prosecuted within one month
shall without just and necessary cause, withdraw himself from hearing the
public Ministry of the Word, after due means of conviction used, he shall
forfeit for his absence from every such meeting five shillings; all such
offenses to be heard and determined by any one Magistrate or more from time to
time; provided all breaches of this Law be complained of, and prosecuted to
effect within one month after the same.

Forasmuch as the peace and prosperity of the Churches, and the Members
thereof, the civil power to see the peace and ordinances of Christ be observed

No Church censure to degrade of civil dignity


as well as civil Rights and Liberties are carefully to be maintained:

It is Ordered by this Court; That the Civil Authority here established has
power and liberty to see the Peace, Ordinances and Rules of Christ be observed
in every Church according to his Word; as also to deal with any Churchmember
in a way of civil justice notwithstanding any Church-relation, Office or
Interest, so it be done in a Civil and not in an Ecclesiastical way, nor shall
any Church censure degrade or depose any man from any civil Dignity, Office or
Authority he shall have in the Colony.

ELECTIONS.
THis Court being sensible of the great charge, difficulty and expense of time
the Freemen of this Colony have been at in their personal attendance the
Election at Hartford, and considering the many inconveniences that otherwise
may arise upon the yearly day of Election, and that the work of that day may be
the more orderly, easily and speedily issued;

Do Order; That henceforth all the Freemen of this Colony, without any other
summons from year to year shall or may upon the second thursday in May yearly,
The Freemen in person (...) proxy to ^ttend the Elect^o^ ^^ver etc the 2d.
thursday in may annually
either in Person or Proxy at Hartford attend and consummate the Election of
Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants, and such other public Officers,
as shall be appointed them to be chosen.

(...) the E^ection by Proxies may be so managed that there be no fraud or
deceit used therein;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; the Secr. to send forth the
names of all th^se nominated for elect.
That the Secretary for the time being, shall with the Orders of October Court
yearly, send a Copy of the names of all those who by the said General Court in
Octob^r, shall be appointed to stand in Nomination for Election the May
following, which the Constables in eac^ Town shall publish to the Freemen;
Const^b. to ^ar^ all the Freemen to meet and to read the La^^
And all the Freemen in the respective Towns shall be warned by the Constable
or one deputed by him, to meet where he shall appoint upon the last tuesday in
March or April annually, where they shall have read to them the Freemans Oath,
and a Law which puts a penalty upon disorderly Voting, and the names of those
appointed to stand for Nom^nation, out of which number the Freemen may bring in
to the said Constable the name of him who they would have for Governor for the
year ensuing fairly written upon a piece of paper, which the said Constable
shall receive, and in the presence of the F^eemen, Votes for the ^^vernour
sealed up etc
put them up in a piece of Paper and seal them up, and write upon the ou^side
of the paper the name of the Town, and these Words, the Votes for the
Governor: In like manner they shall bring in their Votes for the Deputy
Governor, Treasurer and Secretary, Deputy Govern Treas and Sec^^^
which shall be received sealed up and writ upon as aforesaid what they are:
They shall likewise bring in their Votes for all those that are Nominated to
stand for Election, which Votes shall be a Paper with some writing, for
Election, and a white paper with no writing on it for a Blanck, papers with
some writing on the^^ votes, (...) p^^pers blanks
and they shall begin with him that first stands in the Nomination, and bring
in their Votes for him, which shall be received sealed up, and written upon as
aforesaid, and so they shall proceed till they have past through the whole
Nomination, all that ar^ nominated (...)
and the Constables that receives the Votes, and seals them up as aforesaid,
shall by himself or one of the Deputies of the Court, convey the said Proxi^s
to Hartford, and deliver them at the Election, as they shall be appointed to
them who are ordered to receive and sort the said Votes. And at the time of
Election, those that stand for Nomination shall be put to Election in the same
order they are propounded, until the number required by Charter are Elected,
Assistants to be ^^^lected in the same order (...) stand nominated (...) names
of ^he voters to be sent with the proxies
and then they shall cease And the Constable of each Town shall take an account
of the names of all those that shall vote in their several Plantations, and
send them with their Proxies.

ES^^EATS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; where no heir is estates to be
secured to the public Treasury
That where no Heir or Owner of Houses, Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels can
be found, they shall be secured to the public Treasury till such Heir^ or
Owners shall make due claim thereunto, unto whom they shall be restored upon
just and reasonable (...).

English not to live with Indians.
TO prevent any of our people going from us and taking up their abode in a
profane course amongst the Indian Natives of this Country;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; No English to live with Indians
That whatsoever person or persons that now inhabits, or shall hereafter
inhabit within this Jurisdiction, Penalty
shall depart from us and settle or join with the Indians, they shall suffer
one years Imprisonment at the least in the House of Correction.

EXECVTIONS.
WHereas by reason of the great scarcity of Money, Executions being taken of
several persons Goods that have been sold at very cheap rates to the extreme
damage of the Debtor;

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That after publication
hereof, How persons are to be chosen that are to be apprizers
whatsoever Execution shall be granted for any Debts after Judgment, the
Creditor shall make choice of one party, the Debtor of a second, and the
Officer of a third, who shall prize the Goods so taken upon execution, All
apprizers to be upon Oath
which the Officer shall deliver to the Creditor; this course to be taken
except in such cases where the Court does appoint Apprizers, and all Apprizers
shall be upon their Oath.

Execution upon Delinquents.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the Constable or Marshal,
Who have power to call forth meet persons to do execution upon delinquents
by Order from the Governor or Deputy Governor, or any of the Assistants,
shall have liberty and power to call forth any meet person to do execution upon
any person or persons by whipping or otherwise, who shall have some allowance
for the same from the Delinquent, as the Magistrate shall determine.

FARMS.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That those who live in several companies, in
Farms ^emote from the Towns, Farms remote have liberty to keep (...) from
training every training day
they shall have liberty to keep one in each quarter at home upon every
Training day, who is of age to bear Arms; Provided one man (where more then one
man is) shall keep home but one Training day, before the rest of that place
have taken their turns; and also those that shall so stay, Proviso
shall keep and maintain sufficient Arms for themselves according to Law: And
where any one Farm is six miles distant from any Town, in every such Farm one
in like manner may remain at home for the safety of the place.

FENCES.
All particular enclosures to be sufficiently fenced or else damage not to be
recovered Proviso
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all the Inhabitants of this
Jurisdiction, shall make and maintain sufficient Fence or Fences to secure
their particular fields and Enclosures against all sorts of Cattle (unruly
Cattle only excepted) and whatever damage is done by Cattle through the
insufficiency of Fence in such Enclosures (except before excepted) it shall not
be recoverable by Law.

For the prevention of differences that may arise in making or setting down of
Fences, as well in Meadows a^ Vpland:

The liberty of (...) that Fence in setting down their fences in meadows and
uplands
It is Ordered by this Court; That in the setting of Posts and Rails in the
Meadows and Homelots, there shall be a liberty of either party of twelve Inches
from the dividend line for breaking of the ground to set the Posts on, and for
the laying on of the Hedge, but the Stakes and Posts are to be set in the
dividend line, and in upland there is a liberty of four foot allowed for a Ditch
from the dividend line for either of the bordering parties where the proportion
of Fences belongs to them.

Fence viewers.
IN regard it is found by experience, that there is a necessity that meet
persons be appointed to view Common-Fences, etc.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That in each Town in this Colony, there
shall be yearly chosen two men, Fence viewers to be annually chosen and sworn
who shall be sworn to a due Execution of that work aforesaid, who are hereby
empowered to fine neglects in making or repairing Fences according to the nature
of the defects, and to levy the the fines, and to deliver it to the Towns^men
for the use of the Town; and if any person chosen to this work shall refuse or
neglect to attend the same, he shall forfeit twenty shillings to the Town
Treasury where he inhabits, the penalty of refusing to accept the office 20. s
unless he can make it appear that he is oppressed by his choice, and that
others are unjustly exempted.

FERRIES.
IT is Ordered by this Court; Magist. and Depot Ferry free
That the Magistrates at all times (and such as are or from time to time shall
be Deputies of the General Court while they are upon the Countries occasions)
themselves and necessary attendance, viz. a Man and a Horse, shall be passage
free in all Ferries throughout this Colony.

FINES.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; fines to be paid in current pay
That all fines and penalties put upon any for Misdemeanour and breach of Law,
shall be paid in good and current pay, viz. Wheat, Peace and Indian Corn, a
third of each, or Pork, or in that which is equivolent thereunto, to be sold at
an Outcry to procure such pay.

It is also Enacted by this Court; That the estraits for the levying of fines*
Fines to be levied once a year
(both such as belong to the Colony, and such as belong to the several
Counties) shall be at least once a year sent forth, and that in each County,
the County Marshal be appointed to levy and receive the same for the said
Counties use, as the Country Marshal does for the Colony.

It is also Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all that is due for
Actions to the public Treasury, together with all such fines as shall be
imposed upon persons for delinquency according to Law by the respective County
Court (not disposed by Law to particular persons) together with what shall be
raised by the Impost laid upon Wine and Liquors, and Strayes, Fines, Imposts
and Strayes to defray Coun. co-charges or otherwise to be disposed for best
advantage
shall belong to the County Courts to defray their charge, and what remains
shall otherwise be disposed by the said Courts for the best advantage of their
Counties.

FIRE.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That whosoever shall kindle any
fire in Woods or Grounds lying in Common or Enclosed, so as the same shall run
into such Common Grounds or Enclosures before the first of March, Fire not to
be set in woods etc before the 1st of march nor after the last of May
or after the last of May, or on the last day of the week, or on the Lords day,
shall pay all damages as come thereby, and half so much for a fine; and if he
be not able to pay a fine then to be corporally punished by warrant from one
Magistrate or more, as the offense shall deserve, not exceeding twenty stripes
for one offense; Provided any man may kindle fire upon his own ground at any
time so as no damage come thereby, proviso for witting (...) burning of hewn or
sawn Timber etc double damages
either to the Country or any particular persons. And whosoever shall wittingly
and willingly burn or destroy any Frame, Timber, Hewn, Sawn or Riven heaps of
Wood, Charcoal, Corn, Hay, Straw, Hemp, Flax, Fence, Pitch or Tar, or any other
Estate, he shall pay double damages.

FORGERY.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Forgery to b^ punished
by the p^lory and paying double damages to the wronged party
That if any person shall Forge any Deed or Conveyance, Testament, Bond, Bill,
Release Acquittance, Letter of Attorney, or any other writing to prevent Equity
and Justice, he shall stand in the Pillory three several Lecture days or
public meetings, and render double damages to the parties or party wronged
thereby, and also be disenabled to give any evidence or verdict in any Court,
or before any Magistrate.

FORNICATION.
Fornication how to be punished
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any man shall commit
Fornication with any single Woman, they shall be punished, either by enjoining
to Marriage, or fine, or Corporal punishment, or all, or any of these, as the
Court or Magistrates shall judge most agreeable to the Word of God.

Foreigners not to Trade with Indians.
WHereas the French and Dutch do ordinarily Trade Guns, Powder and Shot with
the Natives, to our great prejudice, and to the strengthening and animating of
them against us, as by daily experience we find; and whereas the aforesaid
French and Dutch do prohibit us all Trade with the Indians within their
respective Jurisdict^ons under penalty of Confiscation:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That after publication hereof, it shall
not be lawful for any Fren^hman, No Foreigners to trade with any Indian in
this Jurisdiction
Dutchman, or person of any other foreign Nation, or English living among
them, or under the Government of them, or any of them to Trade with any Indian
or Indians within the limits of this Colony, penalty confiscation
either directly or indirectly, by themselves or others, under penalty of
confiscation of all such Goods and Vessels as shall be found so Traded, or the
due value thereof, upon just proofs made of any Goods or any Vessel so Trading
or Traded; and it shall be lawful for any person or persons Inhabiting within
this Jurisdiction, to make seizure of any such Goods or Vessels Trading with
the Indians as by this Law is prohibited, ^
the one half whereof shall be to the proper use and benefit of the party
seizing and the other to the public.

FREEMEN.
Freemens certificates
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That for the future, such as
shall desire to be admitted Freemen of this Corporation shall present
themselves with a certificate under the hands of the major part of the
Select-men where they dwell, Qualifications
that they are persons of an honest, peaceable and civil conversation,
according to what is willed by our Royal Sovereign, and that they have
accomplished the age of twenty one years, and have twenty pound Estate in
Housing or Land, ^^ceptation
beside their personal Estate in the common List, and that such person so
qualified to the Courts approbation shall be presented one General Court, and
admitted the following Court.

It is also Ordered; That in case any Freeman shall walk scandalously or commit
any scandalous offense, Scandalous Freemen may be disfranchized and upon good
behavior restored to their freedom
it shall be in the power of any of our Courts of Assistants to Disfranchize
such Freemen, who shall stand Disfranchized till by his good behavior the
Court of Assistants shall see cause to restore him to his Freedom again.

It is also further Ordered by this Court; That such persons as are approved to
be Freemen of this Colony, they shall take the Oath that is already established
upon Record to be administered to the respective Freemen; And further, that all
such persons as shall refuse to take the said Oath, All Freemen to take the
freemens Oath
though otherwise they are approved persons, yet they shall not partake of the
privileges of the Freemen of this Colony until the said Oath be administered to
them.

GAMING.
UPon complaint of great disorder by the use of the Game called Shuffle board,
in Houses of Common-entertainment, whereby much precious time is spent
unfruitfully, and much waste of Wine and Beer occasioned;

Shuffle board prohibited
It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person shall
henceforth use the said Game of Shuffle-board, or any other Game in any such
House, nor in any other House used as common for such purpose, upon the penalty
for every keeper of such house to forfeit for every such Offense twenty
shillings, Pen^lty
and for every person playing at the said Game in any such house, to forfeit
for every such offense five shillings.

Whereas the Court has not so fully as may be needful Declared what Games they
disapprove and proh^bit the use of:

This Court do therefore now Order; Cards, Di^e and Tables not to (...) played
(...)
That if any person or persons in this Colony of what rank or quality soever,
shall after the publication of this order, play at Cards, Dice or Tables, the
persons playing, or that shall play more or less at any of the aforesaid Games,
penal^y 20. s.
shall pay for every offense twenty shillings a piece to the public Treasury,
and the head of that Family where any such Game is used, with his privity or
consent, a third to the Informer
shall pay in like manner twenty shillings for each time any such Game is
played in his house, one third part of the fine shall be to the party or
parties that discover the offense, the remainder to the Treasury.

Gates, and Bars, and Fences.
WHereas it is found by experience, that some there are who are injurious to
their Neighbors, by throwing down the Fences and Bars, and leaving open the
Gates of Corn fields and Meadows, whereby much damage does or may acc^ue to the
Proprietors of such field^ or meadows, For ^he prevention whereof:

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; persons leaving open Gates, bars
f^nces of com^mon fields penalty 10 s. 5 s. to Informer Any one Assist. or
Commis. to hear, and issue any such case
That whosoever shall throw down, or leave open any Gate, Bars or Fences of any
Corn-field or Meadow, he shall pay as a fine for every such default ten
shillings, five shillings to the person complaining and proving the same, the
rest to the Proprietors of the said Fields, and answer all damages that shall
come thereby, any one Assistant or Commissioner to hear and determine any such
case.

Grand jury.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the Clerks of the several
County Courts, shall by their Warrant require one or more honest, able,
Grand Jury men to be summoned and sworn
and judicious man or men of every Plantation in their County, to appear at
their County Court to serve on the Grand jury, who are by the said Court (or by
one of the Assistants or Commissioners as the Court shall appoint) be sworn to
a faithful attendance on that work of making presentment of such breaches of
Law or other Misdemeanors as shall come to their cognizance; ^f they appear
not etc
and if any Grand-jury-men so warned, shall neglect to appear according to
warrant, or refuse to take his Oath, he shall forfeit twenty shillings to the
County Treasury. penalty 20. s.


Guards at Meeting, etc.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Guards to attend public times
of worship

where there are ^ 100 soldiers the guard to be 20


That there shall be a Guard appointed in every Plantation to attend on the
Sabbath and other days of public Worship complete in their Arms, with Powder
and Bullets (at least ^^ve charges) and in every Plantation where there are one
hundred Soldiers, there shall be twenty to serve on the Guard, and in no
Plantation shall there be less then eight Soldiers and a Sergeant: and in no
Town less t^en ten allowance of powder

Milit^ry officers to appoint the Guard


And every Soldier that is of the guard shall have allowed them half a pound
of Powder a piece by the Town annually And it is further Ordered; That the
chief Military Officers in every Plantation, shall call forth so many of their
Train-band as by order are required to serve on the Guard to attend that
service; Provided that no person shall be compelled to attend that service two
years together; Serg. to see the guard complete in arms and in ammunition
and the Sergeants of the Guard are to take care that their respective
companies attend the Guard with their Arms well fixed, and with Powder and
Bullets according to Law.

GOVERNOR
IT is Ordered by this Court; That the Governor, or Deputy Governor, wh^ have
power to reprieve a condemned malefact.
or any three Assistants concurring, shall have power to Reprieve a condemned
Malefactor to the next General Court.

It is also Ordered; That the Governor, and in his absence the Deputy
Governor shall have a casting voice whenever an equi-vote shall fall out in
the Court of Assistants or General Court, the Gov. and Presid to have a casting
vote etc
so shall the President or Moderator have in all civil Courts or Assemblies.

HERETICS.
THis Court being sensible of the danger persons are in of being poisoned in
their Judgments and Principles by Heretic, whether Quakers, Ranters,
Adamites, or such like:

quakers, Ranters Adamites not to be entertained unnecessarily penalty 5. l
Do see cause to Order; That no persons in this Colony shall give any
unnecessary entertainment unto any Quaker, Ranter, Adamite, or other notorious
Heretic, upon penalty of five pounds for every such persons entertainment, to
be paid by him that shall so entertain them: And five pounds per Week shall be
paid by each Town that shall suffer their entertainment as aforesaid.

Such Heretics to be committed to p^is^n or sent away. Unnecessary discourse
with them penal. 20. s
It is also Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That it shall be in the
power of the Governor, Deputy Governor or Assistants to order, that all such
Heretics as aforesaid be committed to Prison, or sent out of this Colony; and
no person shall unnecessarily fall into discourse with any such Heretic, upon
the penalty of twenty shillings.

Quakers Books not to be kept but by Magist. and Teaching Elders penalty 10. s
And it is further Ordered; That no person within this Colony shall keep any
Quakers-books or Manuscripts containing their Errors (except the Governor,
Magistrates and Elders) upon penalty of ten shillings per time for every person
that shall keep any such Books after the publication hereof, and shall not
deliver such Books to the Magistrate or Minister.

It is also Ordered; That all such Books when, and wheresoever they are found,
Such books to be suppressed by the County Courts
except before excepted, shall by the Constable be seized and delivered to the
Assistants or Commissioners, to be kept by them till the next County Court in
that County, and then the said County Court shall take care and full order that
all such Books as aforesaid be utterly suppressed.

It is also Ordered; That no Master of any Vessel shall land such Heretics in
this Colony, No Master of vessel to land such Heretics if they do they are to
transport them hence penal. 20. l
if they do, they shall be compellable to transport them again out of this
Colony by any one Ass^stant or Commiss^oner at their first setting sail from
the Port where they landed them, upon penalty of twenty pound to be paid by the
said Master as shall not transport them as aforesaid.

Highways.
WHereas the maintaining of Highways in a fit posture for passage, according
to the several occasions that occur, is not only necessary for the comfort and
safety of man and beast but tends to the profit and advantage of any people in
the issue:

It is therefore thought fit and Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That
each Town within this Colony, Surveyors to be chosen in each Town
shall every year choose one or two of their Inhabitants to be Surveyors, to
take care of and oversee the mending and repairing of the Highways within
their several Towns respectively, who have hereby power allowed them to call
out the several persons or Teams fit for labor within their Town-ship
(Magistrates, their powers who exempted from labor every person compellable to
work to work 2 days at least per year
Commiss^oners, Ministers, Ruling Elders, Physicians and Schoolmasters
excepted) two days at least in each year, and so many more as in his or their
judgment shall be found necessary for the attaining of the aforementioned end,
to be directed in their works by the said Surveyor or Surveyors: and it is left
to his or their liberties either to require the labor of the several persons
in any Family or of a Team and one person where such are, ^ days notice to be
given
as he finds most advantageous to the public occasions, he or they giving at
least three days notice or warning before hand of such ^mployment, and if any
refuse or neglect to attend the service in any manner aforesaid, he shall
forfeit for every days neglect of a man's work three shillings, and of a Team
six shillings, which said fines shall be employed by the Surveyors, to hire
others to work in the said ways: penalty every persons negl^^t* 3. s. (...)
And the Surveyors shall within four days after the several days appointed
for work, deliver into some Magistrate a true presentment of all such as have
been defective, with their several neglects, who are immediately to grant a
Distress to the Marshal or Constable for the levying of the incurred
forfeiture, Surveyors to present neglects
by them to be delivered to the Surveyors for the use aforesaid; Penalties to
be levied and how employed.
And if the Surveyor neglect to perform the service hereby committed to him,
either in not calling out all the Inhabitants in their several proportions as
before, or shall not return the names of those that are deficient, he shall
incur the same penalty as those whom he passes by are liable to, Surveyors
negl^ct to be (...).
by virtue of this order, which shall be employed to the use aforesaid, and to
be levied also by distress upon information and proof before any one
Magistrate. and fines levy*


Hides and Tallow not to be Transported.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That after the publication of
this Order, Raw hides and Tallow not to (...) transported.
if any person in this Colony shall endeavovr to transport or send away any raw
hide or hides, or tallow out of this Colony, by shipping them aboard any vessel
for that end, Upon penalty of forfeiture.
he shall forfeit the said Hides and Tallow so shipped, or the value thereof,
one third part thereof shall be to him tha^ discovers the transgression, and
complains thereof, the other part to the public Treasury:

It is also Ordered; That no Master of any ship or other vessel, No Master or
Ships etc 10 receive (...).
shall receive any such Hides or Tallow as aforesaid, aboard his ship or
vessel, to be so transported upon the like penalty; Provided that any person,
stranger or other may transport any Hides or skins brought from beyond seas by
way of Merchandise, or the skins of Beaver, Moose or Otter.

Home Lotts.
WHereas there has been a great abuse in several Towns and Plantations in this
Colony, of buying and purchasing Home lots, and laying them together, by means
whereof great depopulation may follow, for the prevention whereof:

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all dwelling or mansion
houses, Mansion house to be upheld
that are or shall be allowed in any Plantation or Town within this
Jurisdiction, shall be upheld, repaired and maintained sufficiently in a comely
way, as also, whosoever shall possess and enjoy any Home-lots within any such
Plantation or Town that is not yet built upon, he shall within twelve months
after the publication hereof, home lotts to be built upon, (...) penalty of 20
s p. year.
erect and build a house there fit for an Inhabitant to dwell in, if his Lot be
one Acre and half unless the Court upon knowledge of the case, find cause to
abate or give longer time for building, upon the penalty of twenty shillings
per year, for every breach of this order, to be paid to the Town Treasury.

HORSES
FOr the upholding of a good breed of Horses in this Colony:

It is Ordered by this Court; That no Stone Horse above two years old shall be
suffered in Commons and Woods at liberty, ^
unless he be of comely proportion, and sufficient stature, not less then
thirteen hands high, reckoning four inches to a hand, and be viewed and allowed
by the major part of the Select men of the Town where the owner lives; and if
any person or persons turn any Stone Horse upon the Commons, or at liberty, or
in the Woods, being not viewed and allowed as before, he or they shall forfeit
twenty shillings a month for every Stone horse running at liberty after he is
two years old, which penalty the Select men are to order the levying thereof,
and employ it to the Town use: And if the Select-men neglect their duty herein,
they shall forfeit twent^ shillings for every defect to the County Treasury.

It is also Ordered; That no person in this Colony shall sell any Horse or
mare, Horses not to be sold to Indians penalty 5 li
great or small, to any Indian or Indians, upon the penalty of forfeiting five
pounds, one third part to the complainer, the rest to the public Treasury.

It is also further Ordered; That every person or persons, that shall sell
barter, Sales and exchanges of horses to be cutted in the Brand book
give or exchange any Horse or Horses, or shall convey or transport them out of
the Colony, not to return them again, be or they shall enter every such Sale,
Barter, gift or exchange, or transportation, (within ten days next after the
said Sale, 6 d to be paid for entering 40 s fine for breach of this law
etc.) in the Brand-book in the Town where the beast so sold, Bartered given,
or exchanged was taken up and did belong, with the natural and artificial
marks, color and age of the said Horse or Horses; paying sixpence for the
entry of every Horse as aforesaid, to the keeper of the Brand book, or shall
forfeit for every default herein forty shillings, one third part to the
complainer, the rest to the public Treasury.

Houses and Lands to be tendered to the Town before sold.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no inhabitant in this
Colony, Houses and l^nds to be sold (...) none but inhabitants of the town
(...) it is (...) without consent of the town
shall have power to make sale of his accomodations of House or Lands to any
but the Inhabitants of the Town, wherein the said House and Land is situate,
without the consent of the Town, or unless he have first propounded the sale
thereof to the Town where it is Situate, and they refuse the sale tendered or
to give so much as another chapman will.

Houses and Lands to be secured for Heirs.
THis Court taking into serious consideration the great inconvenience that may
ensue to Orphans, whose Parents deceasing intestate, that in their life time
were possessed of a real Estate of Housing and Lands, such as may be appointed
to administer to the estate, may through inconsiderateness, make Alienations of
such Lands and Housing whereby the proper Heirs may come to be disinherited of
that Estate, which ought to be reserved for them;

Sales of houses and lands belonging to heirs under age to be void in law
except (...) by the General Court
Do therefore order; That after the publication hereof, all sales or
alienations of housing or lands of persons deceased by Administrators, where is
surviving any proper heir to the estate of the person deceased shall be void
and of none effect, unless it be rattifyed and established by the approbation
of the General Assembly, and whatsoever distribution of estate is ordered by
any civil Court in this Corporation to Legatees or proper heirs: If it be in
housing or lands the Execution or payment thereof, by the person or persons
therein concerned, or thereunto appointed shall be at the same value it was
Inventoried.

It is also Ordered; That when any persons dye intestate, the eldest Son shall
have a double portion of his whole Estate, Eldest son to have a double portion
etc
real and personal, except he has formerly received it, in whole or in part,
unless the County Court or Court of Ass^stants, upon just cause shall order
otherwise.

Housing to be kept in repair for Legatees.
Houses belonging to heirs to be kept in repair and so to be delivered to them
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all such Housing as
appertains to the Estate of the deceased, shall be kept in Tenantable repair
out of the revenue of the Land, and so to be delivered to the Legatees, at the
time appointed in the distribution extraordinary casualties excepted.

Husbands and Wives not to live separate.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That no Man or Woman that has a Wife or Husband
in foreign parts, shall abide in the Colony so separate above two years, nor
shall any that have been three years already separated, Husbands and wives not
to (...) separate above 2 years penalty 40 s per month
abide in this Colony, to separate above one year without liberty from this
Court upon penalty of forty shillings, per month for each transgression of
this order, one third part whereof shall be to the informer, the other part to
the public Treasury.

IDLENESS
IT is ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person, Idle persons to
be presented to the next Magistrate. etc
householder or other, shall spend his time idly or unprofitably under pain of
such punishment, as the Court shall think meet to infl^ct; and for this end, it
is Ordered that the Constable of every place, and Grand Jury shall use special
care and diligence to take knowledge of offenders in this kind, and present
them to the next Magistrate who have hereby power granted to hear and determine
the ease according to his discretion, or transfer it to the next Court.

IMPOST
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Wine and Liquors to be entered
with Custom Masters every Butt of wine to pay 13 s 4 d Every Anchor of Liquors
3 s 4 d
That whatever wine or liquors are brought in and landed in any part or port in
this Colony, except such as is landed for Transportation, shall pay for every
Butte of Wine Thirteen Shillings and four pence, And for every Anchor of
Liquors Three Shillings and four pence, and so proportionably for all greater
or lesser Casks or Quantities, all which Wines or Liquors shall be entered in
such place appointed by the Court as may be most convenient and nearest to
repair unto. This Order to be duly observed upon the penalty of forfeiting all
such wine and liquors as are discovered, and proved to be omitted or neglected
to be entered before they were landed. Cen* or County Courts to appoint
Custom-Masters There Fees for Entry 2 s a Butt of Wine 1 s and Anchor Liquors


And this Court or the County Courts are to appoint Custom Masters from time to
time in the respective plantations, which said Custom Masters shall be paid for
the entry of every Butt of Wine Two shillings, and for every Anchor of Liquors
One Shilling, and so proportionable for all greater or lesser Quantities.

And the Merchant or owner of such wine or liquors as is landed shall deliver
and pay unto the Custom-Master, The owner of Wines and Liquors to pay the
custom thereof in current pay or in wine and Liquors apprized according to this
order
what is due for Custom by this Order in Country pay, or in wine or liquors,
according as the Officer and Owner can agree, to the contentment and
satisfaction of the said Officer, or else the owner and Officer to nominate a
third man, who shall put a final price between them in point of valuation of
the wines or liquors for Custom; but if they cannot agree upon notice from the
Officer, the County Treasurer for the time being shall determine the price
thereof, and being so Ordered the Officer and Merchant shall accept thereof.

And it is further Ordered; The Officers power to seize wine and Liquors not
en^^red or where the Custom is not p^^d
That the Officer who is to enter the said wine and Liquors, and to receive the
Customs, has hereby power; and is required to go into all houses or Cellars
where he knows or suspecteth any wine or liquors to be, and from time to time
he shall seize upon all such wine and liquors as is not entered according to
law, and also seize upon and take possession of so much Wine or Liquors as to
make payment of what Custom is due according to entries made, and is refused
or neglected to be paid in due manner according to this Order; And all
Constables and other Officers are hereby required to assist and aid the Officer
in the discharge of his duty, Constables and other Officers to lend him their
Assistants
and helping to break open such Houses or Cellars, If the owners of such wine
or Liquors shall refuse to open their doors or deliver their keys in a
peaceable manner, and whatsoever Officer or other person shall refuse or
neglect to give their Assistance as aforesaid, Wines and liquors so seized to
be one half to the public the rest to the (...)
and in seizing and Transporting such Wine and Liquors for the use of the
public, shall forfeit Ten Shillings to the public Treasury, and all
Forfeitures upon this Order shall go one half to the Custom Master, and the
other half to the Treasury.

Customs to remain to the (...) use
It is also Ordered; That the Custom of Wine and Liquors shall be and remain to
thy use of that County in which those Goods are landed.

IMPRESSES.
IT is ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no man shall be compelled
to do any work or service for the public, Impresses to be (...) warrant from
Authority
unless it be by warrant from Authority, and have reasonable allowance
therefore, Nor shall any man's cattle or Goods of what kind soever be pressed
or taken for any public use or service unless it be by virtue of warrant from
Authority, And for reasonable allowance for their service
nor without such reasonable prizes and hire as the ordinary rates of the
Country do afford; and if the Cattle or Goods perish, If damage come to them to
be recompensed.
or suffer damage in such service, the Owner shall be duly recompensed.

IMPRISONMENT.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no man's person shall be
Restrained or Imprisoned by any Authority whatsoever, before the Law has
sentenced him thereunto if he can put in sufficient security, bayl or
main-prize for his appearance and good behavior in the mean time, unless it be
in Crimes Capital, and Contempt in open Court, or in such cases where some
express Law does allow it.

INDIANS.
THis Court judging it meet that some means should be used to convey the
knowledge of God and of his Word to the Indians and Natives amongst us:

Do Order; That one or more of the Teaching Elders of the Churches in this
Jurisdiction, with the help of an able Interpreter, shall be desired as often
as he may in every year, Indians to be taught the knowledge of God. etc
to go amongst the neighboring Indians, and endeavor to make known to them
the counsels of the Lord, thereby to draw and stir them up to direct and order
all their ways and conversations according to the rule of his word; and the
Governor, and Deputy Governor, and other Magistrates are desired to t^ke care
to s^e the thing attended, and with their own presence, so far a^ may be
convenient, to encourage the same.

It is also Ordered by th^s Court; That where any company of Indians do sit
down near any Town or English Plantation, they shall declare who is their
Sachim or Chief, Indian sachems to pay the Trespasses of Indians under them
and that the said Sachim or Chief shall pay to the English such Trespasses as
shall be committed by any Indian in the said Plantation adjoining, either by
spoiling or killing of Cattle or Swine, either with Traps, Dogs, or Arrows, or
other means, and they are not to plead it was done by Strangers, unless they
can produce the party, and deliver him or his goods into the custody of the
English, and they shall pay double damage if it were done voluntarily: The like
engagement this Court also makes to them, The Courts engagement to the Indians
in case of wrong or injury done to them by the English, which shall be paid to
the party by whom it was done, if it can be made to appear, or otherwise by the
Town in whose limits such facts are committed.

This Court seriously considering the many wilful wrongs and hostile practices
of the Indians against the English, together with their entertaining,
protecting and rescuing of Offenders, as late our experience shows; which if
suffered the peace of the English cannot be secured:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; (according to the conclusions of the
Commissioners of the United Colonies at New Haven, Indians that offend to be
seized
Anno. 1646.) That in such cases the Magistrates may at the charge of the
Plaintiff, send some convenient strength of English, and according to the
nature and value of the offense and damage, seize and bring away any of that
Plantation of Indians that shall entertain, with those that protect them,
protect or rescue the offender, though it should be in another Jurisdiction,
when through distance of place, commission or direction cannot be had from them
after notice and due warning given them as abbettors, or at least accessory to
the Injury and damage done to the English. Women and children to be s^aringly
seized
Only women and children to be sparingly seized, unless known to be some way
guilty; and because it will be chargeable keeping Indians in prison, and if
they should escape, they are like to prove more Insolent and dangerous after;
It is thought fit that upon ^uch seizure the delinquent or satisfaction be
again demanded of the Sagamore or plantation of Indians guilty or accessory as
before, Indians seized to be delive^^^ to the party (...)
and if it be denied, that then the Magistrates deliver up the Indian seized to
the party or parties endamaged either to serve or to be otherwise disposed of
in way of Merchandise as the case will justly bear; And though we foresee that
such severe though just proceedings may provoke the Indians to an unjust
seizing of some of ours, The en^uing Declaration to be published
yet they could not at present find any better means to preserve the public
peace, all the aforementioned outrages and Insolences tending to an open war;
only it is Ordered, that before any such seizure be made in any plantation of
Indians the ensuing Declaration of the Commissioners be published, and a copy
thereof given to the particular Sagamore.

The Commissioners for the United Colonies considering how peace and
righteousness may be preserved betwixt all the English and the several
Plantations of the Indians: Thought fit to Declare and Publish, Commissioners
D^clar^tion
That as they will do no injury to them, so if any Indion or Indians of what
Plantation soever, do any wilful damage to any of the English Colonies, upon
proof, they will in a peaceable way require just satisfaction according to the
nature of the offense and damage, but if any Sagamore or Plantation of Indians,
after notice and warning, entertain, hide, protect, keep, convey away, or
further the escape of any such offender or offenders, the English will demand
satisfaction of such Indian, and Sagamore, or Indian Plantation, and if they
deny it they will right themselves as they may upon such as so maintain them
that do the wrong, keeping peace and all terms of Amity and Agreement with all
other Indians.

It is also Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no Indian or Indians
shall be suffered to make any hostile attempts upon any Indian or Indians in
any English Town or House in this Jurisdiction, Indians not to march through
any Town in a hostile manner without l^ave
neither shall they march through any Town in a Hostile manner without leave
from the Authority of the place.

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no Indian or Negro servant
shall be required to Train, Watch or Ward in this Colony. nor train nor watch
or ward


It is also Ordered; That for all Lands whatsoever granted by this Court to
particular Towns or Persons within this Colony wherein any Indians have right
and interest, Indian rights to be (...) for by the gr^nt^
the Grantee shall agree with the Native Proprietors respecting their rights to
prevent further inconveniences that might ensue or arise through neglect
hereof, and this the Court does judge requisite to be attended in all former
Graunts; although it has not been imposed or incerted in the said Grant.

This Court being sensible of the inconveniences that may come by the Indians
coming into our Towns in the night season, and taking that opportunity to
supply themselves with L^quors and prohibited goods;

Do therefore Order; That whatsoever Indian or Indians shall be found passing
or repassing in any Town in this Colony after the shutting in of the evening,
except he can give sufficient reason for the same, Indians no^ ^^^pass in our
towns after evening shut pen. 20. ^. or 6 stripes
he shall forfe^t twenty shillings, fifteen shillings to the Treasury and five
shillings to the Comp^ainer, or be whipped six stripes, any one Assistant or
Commissioner has power to hear and issue any such complaint.

And the said Assistant or Commissioner before whom any such complaint shall
come, ^
has hereby power granted him to secure such Indian or Indians by committing
them to Prison, or setting a Watch upon them till they may have opportunity to
hear and issue such complaints; This order to be published to the Indians in
or about each plantation in this Colony.

For the prevention of the breach of the Sabbath by the Indians within this
Colony:

It is Ordered by this Court; That whatever Indian or Indians shall labor or
play on the Sabbath within the English limits, Profanation of the Sab. by
Indians etc penalty 5 s. or ^it in stocks an hour
and on the English Lands, he shall pay five shillings as a fine, half to the
Treasury, and the other half to the Complainer, or sit in the Stocks one hour;
any one Ass^stant or Commissioner to hear and determine any such complaint: The
Constables in each Town are required to publish this Order to the Indians
inhabiting within their respective limits.

Powawing forbidden pen. 5 li person^ of 21 years of age countenancing the same
penalty 20 s
It is also Ordered; That no Indian shall at any time Powaw or perform outward
worship to false Gods, or to the Devil within this Jurisdiction, upon the
penalty of the forfeiture of five poun^s, to be paid to the public Treasury by
every such Powaw, and twenty shillings by every person of the age of twenty one
years that shall countenance the same by his presence.

Whereas it is too manifest that the Natives about us, notwithstanding all
Counsel and Advice (to the contrary) given them by the Authority here, have,
and still do proceed to commit Murder, and kill one another within the English
Plantations, and upon the English Land, and take no course that such justice be
executed upon such Malefactors as may take off the guilt of Blood from the
Land; For the prevention whereof:

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That for the future, whatever
Indian or Indians shall wilfully and violently ^all upon any Indian or Indians
within this Colony, Indian Murderers to be put to death
and upon the English Land (except it be such that they are at open war with)
and murder him (if it be legally proved) he shall be put to death; And if the
Indians do not Execution upon such Murderers or Murderer, forthwith the next
civil Officer upon information thereof shall forthwith cause him or them to be
Apprehended, and without Bail or Main prize commit him or them to the Common
Goal, there to be secured for a Trial at the next Court of Assistants, and
secured for a Trial
and the Constables in the several Plantations are hereby required to take sure
course that this Order be duly published to the Indians within their
respective limits.

INDICTMENTS.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That no person shall be
Indicted, Complaints or Presentiments to be made within 1 year
Presented, Inforr^ed against, Complained of to any Court or Magistrate within
this Colony, for the breach of any penal Law or any other Misdemeanour, the
forfeiture whereof belongs to the Country, unless the said Indictment or
Complaint be made and exhibited within one year after the offense be committed;
and if any such Indictment, Presentment, Information or Complaint be not made
within the time limited, then the same shall be void and of none effect;
provided always this Law shall not extend to any Capital offense, nor any
Crimes that may concern loss of Member or Banishment, or to any Treachery
against the Colony, nor to any Fellonies above ten shillings, nor shall it
hinder any person grieved by any wrong done to him or his Wife, Children or
Servants, or Estate real or personal, but that every such person shall have
remedies as formerly he might or ought to have.

IN-KEEPERS.
FOrasmuch as there is a necessary use of Houses of Common Entertainment in
every Jurisaiction, and of such as retail Beer, and Wine, and Victuals, yet
because there are so many abuses of that lawful liberty, both by persons
entertaining, and persons entertained, there is also need of strict Laws and
Rules to regulate such an employment;

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person or
persons licensed for Common entertainment, shall suffer any to be Drunken,
Inkeepers to suffer (...) to be Drunk or ^ipple unseasonably
or drink excessively, viz. above half pint of Wine for one person at one
time, or to continue tippling above half an hour, or at unseasonable times, or
after nine of clock in the night, in or about any of their Houses, on penalty
of five shillings for every such offense, and every person found Drunken,
Drunkenness described
so that he be thereby bereaved or disinabled in the use of his understanding,
appearing in his speech or gesture in any of the said Houses or elsewhere, he
shall forfeit ten shillings to the public Treasury, penalty 10 s
and for excessive Drinking three shillings and four pence, Excessive drinking
^ 4 d and for tippling etc 2 6 d unseasonable tippling 5 s for want of ^^y to be
imprisoned or set in stocks etc
and for continuing Tippling above half an hour two shillings and sixpence, and
for Tippling at unseasonable times after nine of clock at night five shillings
for every offense in these particulars, being lawfully convicted thereof, and
for want of payment, such shall be imprisoned till they pay, or sit in the
Stocks one hour or more in some open place as the weather will permit, not
exceeding three hours o^ one time; Provided notwithstanding, such licensed
persons may entertain Seafaring men, or Land Travelers in the night season
when they come first on shore, provise
or from their journey for their necessary refreshment, or when they prepare
for their Voyage or Journey the next day early, so as there be no disorder
among them, and also Strangers, Lodgers and other persons in an orderly way may
continue in such Houses of Common Entertainment during Meal-times, and upon
lawful business what time their occasions shall require.

And it is also Ordered; That if any person offend in drunkenness, For second
offense double fines third offense treble or punish by whip
excessive or long drinking the second time they shall pay double fines, and if
they fall into the same offense the third time, they shall pay treble fines,
and if the parties be not able to pay their fines, then he that is sound drunk
shall be punished by whipping to the number of ten stripes, fourth offense to
be imprisoned till sufficient sureties for the good behavior be brought
and he that offends by excessive or long drinking, shall be put into the
Stocks for three hours when the weather will not hazard his life or limbs; and
if they offend the fourth time, they shall be imprisoned till they put in two
sufficient Sureties for their good Behavior.

And it is further Ordered; That the several Towns within this Jurisdiction
shall provide amongst themselves in each Town one sufficient Inhabitant to keep
an ordinary for Provision and Lodging in some comfortable manner, Every Town to
have an ordinary upon the penalty of 40 s per Month
that Passengers and Strangers may know where to resort; And such Inhabitants
as shall be chosen by the several Towns for that service, shall be presented to
the next County Court in that County, or to the two next Magistrates to be
approved and licensed to attend that employment; and every Town that shall not
attend this Order, shall forfeit for their neglect therein forty shillings a
month (for every month they shall be defective therein) to the public
Treasury.

It is also Ordered; That every person licensed for Common Entertainment shall
have some suitable Sign set up in the view of all Passengers for the direction
of Strangers where to go, where they may have entertainment; Every Ordinary to
have a sign per the first of September 1673 upon pen of forfeiting 20 s etc
and such as shall have no such Sign by the first of September 1673. shall pay
a fine of twenty shillings to the Public Treasury, and so twenty shillings
every quarter of a year till they have effected the same.

And it is also Ordered; That every In-keeper or Victualler shall provide for
Entertainment of Strangers Horses, viz. one or more Enclosures for Summer,
In-keepers duty
and Hay and Provender for Winter, with convenient Stable room and attendance,
under penalty of two shillings six pence for every days default, pen 2 s 6 d
per diem
and double damage to the party thereby wronged, except it be by inevitable
accident.

It is also further Ordered; That no In-keeper, Victualler, Wine drawer, or
other, shall deliver any Wine or Liquors, or suffer any to be delivered out of
his House to any which come for it, Wine or Liquors drawers to require a note
of what they delivered out of th^^r house etc
unless they bring a note under the hand of some one Master of a Family and
allowed Inhabitant of that Town, and with such moderation for quantity as they
may have reason to conceive it may not be abused, and shall be ready to give an
account of their doings herein when they are called thereto under censure of
the Court in case of delinquency.

What Inhabitants to be received.
persons to be received inhabitants must be of honest conversation
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person shall be received
a^ Inhabitant into any Town in this Colony (but such as are known to be of an
honest conversation and) accepted by the major part of the Town.

INVENTORIES.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That after the death and decease
of any person possessed of an Estate, Inventories to be made and exhibited in
court proved and recorded
be if more or less, and who makes a written or nuncupative Will, those men
which are appointed to order the affairs of the Town where any such person
deceaseth, shall within one month after the same at farthest, cause a true
Inventory to be taken of the said Estate in writing, as also take a copy of the
said Will or Testament, and enter it into a Book, or keep the Copy in safe
custody, as also enter the names upon Record of the Children and Legatees of
the Testator or deceased Person, and the said Select-men are to see every such
Will and Inventory to be exhibited in to the next County Court in that County,
where the same is to be proved and Registered; Select-men to see the Estate
preserved
and the said Select-men are to do their best endeavors in seeing that the
Estate of the Testator be not wasted nor spoiled, but be improved for the best
advantage of the Children or Legatees according to the mind of the Testator
for their and every of their use: but when any person dies intestate, the said
Select-men shall cause an Inventory to be taken and exhibited into the next
County Court in that County, If no Kindred be heard of the Court to administer
which Court shall grant the Administration of the Goods and Chattels to the
next of Kin, jointly or severally, and divide the Estate to Wife (if any be)
and Children, or Kindred according to Law, and for want of Law, All charges
about securing of (...) estate to be paid ^ut of the estate
according to rules of Righteousness and Equity: And if no Kindred be found,
the Court to Administer for the public good of the Colony, provided there be
an Inventory Registered, that if any of the Kindred in future time appear, they
may have justice and equity done unto them; and all charges that the Public,
Court or Select-men are at, about the trust committed to them either for
writing or otherwise, person unsatisfied with the distr^b^ti^n (...)
is to be paid out of the Estate. And if any person concerned in the Estate,
shall conceive that the distribution made by the County Court, be not either
according to Rules of Justice or Equity, there is liberty hereby granted for
the agrieved party to apply himself to the Court of Assistants for relief.

And it is also further Ordered; That the Clerks of the County Courts, shall
Record all Wills and Inventories that are exhibited in the County Courts and
approved, Wills and Inventories to be recorded and filed
and file the Original of them, and grant copies of them to such as shall
desire and pay for them.

Whereas also it was recommended by the Commissioners of the United Colonies,
Wills proved in one Colony to be accepted in the rest
that for the more speedy and free passage of Justice in each Jurisdiction to
all the Confederates; if the last Will and Testament of any person be duly
proved in, and certified from any one of the Colonies, it be without delay
accepted and allowed in the rest of the Colonies, unless some just exception be
made against such Will or the proving of it, which exception to be forthwith
duly certified back to the Colony where the said Will was proved, that some
just course may be taken to gather in and dispose the Estate without delay or
damage.

(...) that Colony in which he belongs
And also, that if any known Planters or settled Inhabitants dye intestate,
Administration to be granted by that Colony unto which the deceased did belong,
though dying in another Colony: And the Administration being duly certified,
to be of force for the gathering in of the Estate in the rest of the Colonies,
as in the case of Wills proved where there is no just exception returned. But
if any Person possessed of an Estate who is neither Planter nor settled
Inhabitant in any of the Colonies dye intestate, unsettled person, dying
intestate administrati^n to be granted by the Colony he dies in,
the Administration (If just cause besound to give Administration) be granted
by that Colony where the person shall dye and depart this Life, and that care
be taken by that Government to gather in and secure the Estate until it be
demanded, and may be delivered according to Rules of Justice: which upon due
consideration was confirmed by this Court in behalf of this Colony and Ordered
to be attended in all such occasions for the future; Provided the General
Courts of the other Colonies yield the like assent thereunto.

Juries and Jurors.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; that all Cases which are entered
for trial in any County Court under forty Shillings, Cases entered under (...)
to be Tried by the Bench.
the Suit shall be left to be tried by the Bench, as they shall judge most
agreeable to Law, Rules of Righteousness and Equity.

And all Cases, where the d^bt or damage shall exceed forty Sh^llings, they
shall be tried by a Jury of twelve men, All Cases above 40* s: to b^ Tried b^ a
Jury Twelve men
which men shall be impanalled and sworn truly to try betwixt party and party
who shall find the matter of Fact with the damages and costs according to Law
and their evidence, and the Judges shall declare the Sentence, or direct the
Jury to find according to the Law. Jury to find the matter of Fact Judges to
declare the sentence

The Bench to determin^ matter of Equity Every ^ury to give a non liquot or
special verdict

when is a special verdict jurors if they c^nnot find the main Issue as much as
they can:




And if there be any matter of apparent Equity as upon the Forfeiture of a
Bond, or obligation, or breach of Covenant without damage or the like, The
Bench shall determine such matter of Equity.

And in all cases wherein evidence is so obscure or defective, that the Jury
cannot clearly and safely give a positive verdict (whether it be Grand or Petty
Jury) they shall have liberty to give a non liquot or a Special Verdict, viz.
If the Law be so in such a point, we find for the Plaint^ff: but if the Law be
otherwise we find for the Defendant, in which Case the deter^^nation does
properly belong to the Bench. And all Jurors shall and hereby have liberty
granted them in matters of Fact, If they cannot find the main issue, yet to
find and present in their Verdict so much as they can.

It is also Ordered that the Judges of the Court shall have Liberty, if they do
not find in their Judgments the Jury to have attended the evidence given in,
and true Issue of the Case in their Verdict, The power of the Bench concerning
to cause them to return to a second consideration of the Case, and If they
shall still persist in their former opinion to the dissatisfaction of the
Court, it shall be in the power of the Court to Impannel an other Jury, and
commit the consideration of the Case to them. juries and their Verdicts
And it is also left in the power of the Bench to vary and alter the damages
given in by any Jury as they shall judge most equal and righteous; provided
that what alteration shall at any time be made in that kind, it be done in open
Court, before the Plaintiff^ and Defendant be released their attendance upon
the Court.

It is also Ordered that there shall not any Trial pass upon any person or
persons for Life or Banishment, Trials for life to be always by Twelve men
but by a Special Jury summoned for that purpose consisting of Twelve able and
Judicious men, and in every such Case there shall be no Verdict accepted by the
Judges of any Court, but such wherein the whole Jury shall agree

JUSTICE.
IT is Ordered by this Court, that all persons within this Colony, whether they
be Inhabitants or Foreigners shall enjoy the same Justice and Law that is
general for this Colony in all Cases proper to our Cognizance without
partiality or delay. Equal justice to Strangers and Foreigners


Lascivious Carriages.
FOr the prosecution of lascivious carriages and practices amongst us, which in
regard of the variety of Circumstances, particular and express Laws cannot
suddenly be suited.

Lascivious carriages to be punished according to the discreti^n of the Bench
etc.
It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That it shall be in the
power of the County Courts to proceed against such offenders either by fine,
committing to the house of Correction or other corporal punishment according to
their discretion, desiring such seasonable and exemplary executions may be done
upon offenders in that kind that others may hear and fear.

Lands the tenor of our Lands.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; that whatsoever Lands have or
shall be granted by the Court to the respective Townships, The Tenor of our
Lands.
or to any particular persons either by the Court or particular Town ships,
shall be held to them, their Heirs, Successors and Ass^gnes for ever, according
to the most free Tenor of East Green-Witch in the County of Kent in the Realm
of England, according to our Charter Grant.

Lands not to be purchased by particular persons of the Indians.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, That no person in this Colony
whether Inhabitant or other shall buy, (...) not to be purchased (...) of the
^^neral Court
hire, or receive as a gift, or mortgage any parcel of Land or Lands of any
Indian or Indians for the future, except he do buy or receive the same for the
use of the Colony or for some Plantation or Village with the allowance of the
general Court.

LEATHER
THis Court taking into cons^deration the several deceits and abuses which in
some (...) have been practiced by Tanners, Curriers, and workers of Leather, as
also the abuse and Inconveniences which accrue to the several members of this
Colony by Leather not sufficiently tanne^ and wrought; which is occasioned by
the careless^ess and unskilfulness of these several Tradesmen, which before it
is in the hands of the Tanner may be much bettered or Impaire^, for prevention
whereof;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; that no ^^tcher by himself or
any other person gash or cut any hide of Ox, But^her not to (...) or gash any
(...)
St^re or Cow, in fle^^ng thereof, whereby the same shall be Impaired under the
penalty of Twelve pence for every gash in any hide or skin. p^n. 12. d.


Nor shall any person or persons using, or which shall use the mystery of
Tanning at any time hereafter, ^
offer or put to Sale any kind of Leather which is Insuffiiently or not
thoroughly Tanned, or which shall not then have been after the Tanning thereof
well and thoroughly dried, upon pain of forfeiting so much of his or their
Leather as by any Searcher or Searchers of Leathers lawful^y appointed, shall
be found insufficiently or not thoroughly dried as aforesaid.

Nor shall any person using or occupying the mystery of Tanning at any time
hereafter set down any of their Fats in Tan Hills or other places where the
Woozes or Leather put into Tan in, ^
the same shall, or may take any unkind heats, nor shall put any Leather into
hot or warm Woozes whatsoever, upon penalty of forfeiting Twenty pound for
every such offense. penalty twenty p^^nd


Nor shall any person using, occupying the Art or mystery of Currying, burn or
seal any ^ide or Leather in the currying, but shall work the same in all
respects with good sufficient liquor, both for quality and quantity, suitable
to the condition of the Leather d^^st by him or them, ^
on penalty of forfeiture for every such offense or act done, ^
contrary to the true meaning of this Order, the full value of every such Hide
marred by his evil workman-ship or handling, which shall be judged by two or
more sufficient and skilful persons Curriours, ^
or others, and their Oath given them for that end by one Assistant or
Comissioner:

And every Town* where need is shall choose one or two persons honest and
skilful within their Township, Searcher^ (...) be chosen and sworn
and present them unto the County Court or Magistrate, who shall appoint and
swear the said persons, by their discretion to make search and view within the
Limits of their Township as often as they shall think meet and need may be, their
duty
who shall have a ma^k or Seal prepared by each Town for that purpose, and the
said Searchers, or one of them shall keep the same, and therewith shall Seal
such Leather as they shall find in all (...) sufficient, and no other.

And if the said Searchers or any of them shall find any Leather sold, or
offered to be Sold, which shall be Tanned, wrought, converted or used contrary
to the true Intent and meaning of this Order, it shall be lawful for the said
Searchers or any of them to seize all such Leather, defective leathe^ to be
seized
and retain the same in their Custody until such time as it be try^d by such
Tryers, and in such manner as in this Order is appointed, viz upon the
forfeiture of any Leather, the officer to seizing the same, shall within three
days call to him four or six men honest and skilful in such wa^e to view the
same in the presence of the party, (who shall have timely notice thereof) or
without him, who shall certify upon their oaths unto the next County Court in
that County, or unto one of the Assistants, the defect of the same Leather,
except the parties shall before submit to their judgment.

And if any Searcher or Sealer of Leather, shall neglect or refuse to take his
Oath, or with convenient speed to Seal any Leather sufficiently Tanned,
Searcher defec^ting
wrought and used, according to the true meaning of this Order, having timely
notice thereof, or shall Seal that which shall be insufficient, penalty twenty
shillings
then every such Searcher and Sealer of Leather shall forfeit for every such
offense twenty shillings.

It is also Ordered; T^nners not to suffer leather to be wrought up that (...)
sealed penalty five pound
That if any Tanner shall suffer any Shoo-maker in his house or else where to
work up any Leather into Shoos or Boots, that is not sealed; he shall forfeit
five pounds: To the public Treasury the one half, the other to the Complainer.

It is further Ordered, No Leather to be Sold before it is Sealed
that there shall be no Leather Sold or offered to be Sold before it is Sealed
in the Town where it was Tanned.

This Court also Orders, that the Leather Sealers in this Colony shall have
allowed unto them for each Dicker of Leather they Seal, eighteen pence, Leather
Sealers Fees
for half a Dicker twelve pence, and four pence p. hide, for single hides.

It is further Ordered by this Court; that the several Fines and Forfeitures
mentioned in these Orders, shall be equally divided into three parts, How Fines
are to be distributed
and distributed as follows, viz. one part to the County Treasury, another
third part to the Town Treasury, wherein the offense is committed, and the
other third part to the Seizer or Seizers of such Leather as is insufficiently
Tanned or Curried from time to time.

THis Court being informed that there is much detriment like to ensue to this
Colony by the sending out Tanned Leather that are fit for upper or Sole Leather
for Shoos.

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; that for future,
Leather unwrought (...) the Colony (...)
none shall transport or send away out of this Colony any such Tanned Hides or
Leather, upon penalty of Forfeiting such Hides or Leather, or the value
thereof. One third part whereof shall be to the Complainer, the rest to the
County Treasury where the offense is committed.

LEVIES
FOrasmuch as the Marshal and other Officers have complained to this Court,
that they are oftentimes in great doubt how to demean themselves in the
execution of their Office.

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; ^
That in case of Fines and Assessments to be levied, and Execution in civil
actions, the Officer shall demand the same of the party, or at his house or
place of usual abode, and upon refusal or non payment be shall have power
(calling the Constable, if he see cause for his Assistance) to break open the
door of any House, Ch^st, or place where he shall have notice that any Goods
liable to such Levy or Execution shall be; and if he be to take the person he
may do the like, if upon demand he shall refuse (...) ^ender himself, and
whatsoever charges the Officer shall necessarily be put (...) upon any such
occasion, he shall have power to Levy the same, as he does the debt, Fine, or
Execution, and when the Officer shall Levy any such Goods upon Execution, as
cannot be conveyed to the place where the party dwells, necessary (...) to be
Levied with the Execu^ion
for whom such Execution shall be Levied without considerable charge; he shall
Levy the said charge with the Execution. The like Order shall be observed in
Levying of Fines; Provided it shall not be lawful for such Officer to Levy any
man's necessary bedding, Necessaries for the upholding of life (...) to be
Levied etc
apparel, tools, or arms, neither Implements of Hous-hold, which are for the
necessary upholding of his Life; but in such cases he shall Levy his land, or
person according to Law, and in no case shall the Officer be put to seek out
any man's Estate, Officers how far to seek out m^ns Estates
Farther then his place of abode; But if the party will not discover his Goods
or Lands, the Officer may take his person.

And it is also Ordered, that if any Officer shall do any injury to any by
color of his Office in these or in any other Cases, Officers doing injury to
make (...)
he shall be liable upon complaint made of the party wronged by action or
information, to make full restitution.

LYING.
WHereas truth in words as well as in actions is required of all men,
especially of Christians, who are the prof^ssed Servants of the God of Truth,
and whereas lying is contrary to Truth, and some sorts of Lies are not only
sinful as all Lies are, but also pernicious to the public Weal, and injurious
to particular persons.

persons of the age of Fourteen years lying
It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That every person of
the age of discretion, which is accounted Fourteen years, who shall wittingly
and willingly make, or publish any Lie, which may be pernicious to the public
Weal, or tending to the damage or injury of any particular person to deceive
and abuse the people with false News or reports, and the same duly proved in
any Court or before any one Magistrate, who has hereby power granted to hear
and determine all offenses against this Law; Such persons shall be Fined for
the first Offense Ten Shillings, penalty First Offense 10 s etc
or if the party be unable to pay the same, then to sit in the Stocks so long
as the said Court or Magistrate shall appoint, in some open place not exceeding
Three Hours, for the second Offense in that kind whereof any shall be legally
convicted, Second Offense 20 s etc
the Sum of Twenty Shillings, or be whipped on the naked body not excee^ing
Ten Stripes: And for the third Offense that way Forty Shillings, Third Offense
4^ ^ etc
or if the party be unable to pay, then to be whipped with more stripes, not
exceeding Thirty: And if yet any shall offend in like kind, Fourth Offense 50 s.
and be legally convicted thereof, such person. Male or Female, shall be Fined
Ten Shillings a time more then formerly, or if the party offending be unable to
pay, Those under age to be co^^ected by the^r Parents (...) Governors,
then to be whipped with five or six stripes more then formerly, not exceeding
Thirty at any time; and for all such as being under age of discretion that
shall offend in lying, their Parents or Masters shall give them due correction,
and that in the presence of some Officer, if any Magistrate shall so appoint: ^
Provided also, that no person shall be barred of his just action of Slander,
or otherwise by any proceeding upon this Order.

Licenses and Liquors.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That it shall be in the power of this Court, and
in the power of the County Courts (within their respective Countyes) to grant
Licenses to particular persons to Retail, Wine, Liquors, Genesis Co. and County Co
to gr^nt Licenses None to sell Liquors, Wine Cider by retail without license
pen. 5 s. p. quart
Cider or strong Beer, and none else but such as are Licensed by this Court, or
a County Court (without a Ticket from the Magistrate of the place where they
dwell, menti^ning the quantity sent for) shall have liberty to sell any Wine,
Liquors, Cider or strong Beer by Retail, upon the penalty of ^ive shillings for
every quart so sold.

It is also Ordered by this Court; Secr and Clerks dues for a license is 2 s 6
d.
That for every License that is taken out from the General Court or County
Courts, there shall be allowed to the Secretary or Clerk of the Court two
shillings and six pence for the same, to be paid by him that has or takes out
^he License.

This Court considering and being deeply sensible of the sad effects and
consequents that attend Indians being supplied and furnished with Liquors or
strong Waters, whereby they have been acquainted with, and exposed unto the
commission of a grievous sin, to the great dishonor of God, and abuse of
themselves, and great haz^rd of the lives and peace of others:

Do therefore Order; That it shall not be lawful for any person whatsoever, No
person to sell w^ne or l^quors to the Indi^ns on pen of (...) and 20 ^ the least
quantity
Male or Female within this Jurisd^ction, directly or indirectly, to Sell,
Barter, Lend, Give or any other way under any color or pretense whatsoever,
convey to any Indian or Indians, small or great, any st^ong-waters or Liquors,
Sack or any other sort of Wine of any kind upon penalty of five pounds for a
pint, for every Pint of either Wine or Liquors aforesaid, and twenty shillings
for the least quantity (except it be in extraord^nary cases by allowance from
Authority, one third part of the penalty to be and belong to those that shall
inform and prove the delinquency, the rest to the public Treasury.

This Court considering the great Inconveniences that do follow the Indians
being supplied with strong Drink, etc. notwithstanding all former Orders and
Endeavors to prevent the same:

Do Order; That the Accusation, Ind. Test. to be sufficient except the person
will by his Oath clear himself
Information or Testimony of any Indian or Indians (if the said Indians be
found Drunk, or have any Liquors, Wine, Cyd^r or strong Drink unlawfully by
them) may be accounted sufficient conviction of any English person whom they
shall accuse, inform or testify against, that they have Sold, Given, Bartered
or Conveyed Liquors unto, The Court power upon such conviction to impose the
fine the (...) requires
unless such English shall clear themselves by their Oath from any such act of
direct or indirect Selling, Trucking or ^en^^ng of Wine, Cider or Liquors, or
other strong Drink to any such Indian or Indians; And it shall be in the power
of the Court to impose such fines upon any such Offender as the Law Orders for
such Transgression.

MAGISTRATES.
THis Court being sensible of the great disorder growing in this Country
through the Contempt cast upon the Civil Authority, which willing to prevent.

Do Order, That whosoever shall defame any Court of Justice, (...) of the civil
power to be punished per (...) imprisonment etc
or the Sentences and proceedings of the same, or any of the Magistrates or
Judges of any such Court, in respect of any Act or Sentence therein passed, and
being thereof lawfully convicted in any Court of Assistants or general Court;
he shall be punished for the same by Fine, Imprisonment, Disfranchizement or
Banishment, as the quality and measure of the offense shall deserve.

It is also Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Members of Co. for
unbe^eeming speeches (...) Co. to be reproved etc
That if any Member of any Court shall use Reproachful or Unbeseeming speeches
or Behavior toward any Magistrate, Judge or Member of the Court in the face
of the Court, he shall be sharply Reproved by the Governor, or other Principal
Judge of the said Court for the time being; And if the person so Reproved shall
Reply again without leave, he shall be bound over to the next Superior Court
to make answer for the same.

And for preventing all occasions of Partial and Undue Proceedings in Courts of
justice, and avoiding of jealousies which may be taken up against ^udges in
that kind;

It is further Ordered; That in every case of a Civil nature between Party and
Party, In what cases a Judge must have no power to vote in Court but may give
advice etc.
where there shall fall out so near relation between any Judge and any of the
Parties, as between Father and Son, either by Nature or Marriage, Brother and
Brother, in like kind Uncle and Nephew, Landlord and Tenant, such Judge though
he may have liberty to be present in the Court at the time of Trial, and give
reasonable advice in the case, yet he shall have no power to Vote or give
Sentence therein, neither shall he sit as Judge, nor upon the Bench when he
gives advice as aforesaid.

MAN-SLAVGHTER.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person in the just
and necessary defense of his life, (...) in a man's just and necessary defense
blameless
or the life of any other, shall kill any person attempting to Rob or Murder
in the Field or Highway, or to break into any Dwelling House, if he conceive
he cannot with safety of his own person otherwise take the Fellon or Assailant,
or bring him to Trial, he shall be holden blameless.

Maritime Affairs.
WHereas through the Blessing of God upon this Jurisdiction, the Navigation and
Maritime Affair^ thereof, is grown to be a considerable Interest, the well
management (...) of great concernment to the public Weal; For the better
Ordering the same for the future, and that there may be known Laws and Rules
for (...) sorts of Persons employed therein, according to their several
stations and (...), and that there may be one Rule for the (...) of all Courts
in their (...) Justice;

This Court does Order, and be it Ordered by the Authority thereof:

SECT. I.
That whereas there is many times differences between Owners of Ships, Ke^ches,
Barques and other Vessels, in setting forth their several parts, whereby damage
does accrue to the particular concernment o^ Owners, Minor part owners to be
concluded by the major part
and if not prevented, may be a great obstruction of Trade* where their are
several Owners concerned, as Owners (...) ship, Ke^ch, Ba^que or other Vessel
whatsoever, used for Traff^ck, Commerce, ^^st^ng, ^ogge, Board* Wood or S^one,
Carriage upon Salt or Fresh Water; all such Owners of lesser part, shall be
concluded for the setting forth of his part, by the major part of the whole
concerned, such Owners so concluded, having notice given them of the meeting
for such conclusion, if they be (...); and in case of any Owner refusing, or by
reason of neglect or absence, or not able to provide for the setting forth his
part, the Master of such Ship or Ves^el may take up upon the Bottom, for the
^etting forth of the said part, the which being defrayed, the remainder of the
income of such part to be paid by the Master to the said Owner.

SECT. II.
Owners refusing to sign Charter party to make public protest etc
And in case of Fraightment, where any Owner shall refuse to assent to the
letting out of Ship or Vessel, where he is interested, such Dissenter shall
manifest it by some public act of Protest, before the signing of Charter
Party, except the Master or the rest of the Owners, or both conceal from him or
them their actings, then his or their Protest after Charter Party signed by
themselves or Agents, shall be taken for legal L^sting, yet not to hinder the
proceed of the Ship or Vessel, but that these (...) shall be liable to respond
his part upon ensurance according to the custom of Merchants, which ensurance
is to be de^a^^ked out of that part of hire, due for such Owners which
dissented.

SECT. III.
Whereas Masters of Ships or other Vessels, have their Owners live part in one
Country and part in another, whereby they have in themselves not only
opportunity; and some have made use thereof in their own persons, to represent
the major part of the Owners in the place where he comes;

It is therefore Ordered; That such Master shall not be taken to have Vote in
the ordering of such Vessel further then his own Interest, Masters to have but
single vot^^
except he make it appear to the rest of the Owners where he is, that he is
Author^z^d under the hands of such Owners absent, and then he is to have Votes
according to the proportion of parts be so stands for, and the majority of
parts are to carry it as before; nevertheless it is to be understood, that any
Owner has power to make sale of his part, either to the rest of the Owners, or
others, as may be most to his own advantage; and if any Master shall presume to
act contrary hereunto, what damage shall be sustained by the rest of the
Owners, the Master shall be liable to make good, it being duly proved against
him.

SECT. IV.
All Masters taking charge, as Masters of Ships or other Vessels, and not being
sufficient to discharge his place, or that through negl^gence, or otherwise,
Penalty of Masters and Mariners non a^tendance on board
shall imbezel the Owners or Imployers Stock, or Time* or that shall suffer his
men to neglect their due attendance on board, both by d^y and night, e^pecially
when or whilst Merchants Goods are on board, and that Himself or Mate be not
on board every n^ght, to see good Orders kept, upon defect therein, such Master
shall be liable to pay the damage that shall accrue by such neglect, it being
duly proved against him.

SECT. V.
For the Masters better securing their men to them, and to prevent all Coven,
they shall make clear agreements with their Mariners and Officers for their
Wages, and those Agreements enter into a book, Masters to make p^rticular
agreement with Seamen
and take the several men's hands thereto, a Copy whereof, the Master as a
Portlige ^^ll, shall leave with the Owners if required of them, before their
setting sail upon the Voyage, and all such Agreements, the Master shall make
good to the Sea men, and such Ship or Vessel as they sail in shall be liable
for to make good the same.

SECT. VI.
All Masters of greater or lesser Vessels, shall make due and meet Provisions
of Victuals and Drink for their Seamen, or Passengers, Masters to make due
provisions etc.
according to the laudable custom of our English Nation, as the Custom and
capacity of the places they sail from will admit, upon penalty of paying
Damages sustained for neglect thereof.

SECT. VII.
That no Master shall Ship any Sea man or Mariner that is shipped before by
another Master or Imployer upon a Voyage, No M^sters to entertain Seamen not
discharged

Nor Seamen to enter themse^ves till cleared etc


nor shall any Seaman ship himself to any other man, until he be discharged
from him that shipped him first, upon penalty of him that entertains him, to pay
one months pay that such Seaman agrees for, as also of such Seaman shipping
himself, to pay one months pay that he agrees for; the half thereof to be paid
to the use of the poor of the Town or place where the offense is committed, the
other half to the Complainer or Informer.

SECT. VIII.
No Master of Ship or Vessel shall sail into any Haven or Port, except
necessitated thereunto by Wind or Weather, or for want of Provision, or for
Security from Pirates, but such Port as by Charter Party, o^ his Bill of ^ading
he is bound unto, Masters (...) bound to
until he has delivered his Goods according to his engagement and in case any
Master shall take in Goods for more Ports and Places then one, he shall declare
himself so to do to those that ^^^ight upon him* and in case he shall
voluntarily go to any other Port or Harbor then he is obliged to as above; if
damage to the Merchants Goods happen thereby, such Master shall make good the
same, it being duly proved against him.

SECT. IX.
Masters may (...) their voyages (...)
Any Master hired out or employed by his Owners upon any Voyage, receiving
Advice from his Imployers, that the alteration of the Voyage when they are
abroad, may be much for their security and advantage, by going to some other
Port, Seam^n contract to ^ound good
the Master seeing meet to close with that advice, the Mariners shall not
hinder his proceed, unless where any of the Seamen shall have made a particular
contract with the Master to the contrary, Provided that they be not carried to
stay out above one year, nor be carried to any place where they may be liable
to be pressed into a service they are not willing unto.

SECT. X.
Masters shall see that their Officers and Mariners be duly paid their Wages
according to agreement made with them, Masters to pay wages (...) to agreement
upon the finishing of their Voyage, without delay or trouble, upon penalty of
paying damages for neglect, and all costs that the Seamen shall be at for
recovering the same.

SECT. XI.
Whereas many times Masters take in Merchants Goods on board their Ships or
Vessels upon Freight, when yet they are not merely fitt^d with suitable
^ackling and Seamen for the security of such Ships or Vessels, and Goods,

Masters, Ships and Seamen to (...) dammned by their (...) of Ground tacle
It is Ordered; That in case any Master of Ship or Vessel, after he has Laden
upon his Ship or Vessel any Merchants Goods to be transported, shall for want
of sufficient Ground tacle ((...) to be had) or because of want of sufficient
men being on board, come a shore to the damage of such Merchants or Fraighters
liable to make good in their Goods, the Ship shall be such damages; and in case
the defect appear to be in the Master and Men both, or either, the Owners shall
recover such damage from them.

SECT. XII.
Where any Ship Master has Mored his Ship or Vessel, none other shall come so
near to him first Mored as to do him damage, ^amage upon Good^ (...)!
or receive damage by him, upon the penalty of him so coming, to make good all
the damage, and to be farther punished if wilfulness or perverseness in the
Action be proved against him.

SECT. XIII.
In case any Master of Ship or Vessel under sail, shall run on board any other
Ship or Vessel at an Anchor, Masters running on board any (...) at Anchor, (...)
and damnifie him, the party offending shall pay the damage: and such Ship or
Vessel as he saile^ in shall be liable to Arrest for the making good the
damage, the damage to be judged by indifferent man appointed by the Judges
thereof, unless the par^^es agree among themselves.

SECT. XIV.
In case of loss of Goods, by reason of throwing some overboard to ease the
Vessel to save the rest, ^
the Goods thrown over board, shall not be done without the Master and major
part of the Companies consent, or at least of the Officers with the Master*
which Goods shall be brought into an Average, and the whole less to be born by
Ship, and Goods, and Wages in proportion that are saved* the l^ke course shall
be for cutting of Masts, and loss thereof, or Boats, Cables or Anchors, as also
of Riggin and Sails for the safety of the whole, the Merchant* Good are to
bear a part of the loss,

SECT. XV.
In case a Ship or Vessel, at setting forth proves deficient, Damage by an
insufficient botome
and gives over the Voyage, the Charges the Merchant has sustained in Shipping
and Landing his Goods, shall be born by the Master and Owners of such Vessel
that presumes to take Goods into an insufficient Bottom.

SECT. XVI.
Any Ship or Vessel at Sea, Damage at Sea
receiving damage by the Masters or Mariners negligence, yet brings the
Merchants Goods home, and delivers them according to Bills of Lading, he
shall receive his Freight, but if the Goods be damnified, the Master or
Mariners shall make good the damage.

SECT. XVII.
If any Ship or Vessel in Storm, shall break loose and fall upon another,
Damage by ships breaking loose
and do her damage for want of Ground tackle, the Ship breaking loose shall
make good the damage; but if it appear the Master, or Mariners, or both are
negligent of freshing their Hoase, or clearing their Cables, they shall pay the
damage for such neglect.

SECT. XVIII.
All Mariners being shipped upon a Voyage, and in pay, Mariners absent without
leave
they shall duly attend the service of the Masters Ship or Vessel for the
Voyage, and not absent themselves day or night without leave from the Master,
upon forfeit for every offense five shillings.

SECT. XIX.
No Officers or Mariners shall be disorderly or unruly, Officers or Mariners
unruline^
to occasion disturbance in the Ship or other Vessel he is shipped upon, to
hinder or damnifie the Voyage, to be proved by the Master or other Mariners,
or both, upon penalty of paying the damage if able; and in case of inability to
pay, to suffer Corporal Punishment, as the nature of the offense may appear to
the Judges, and in case Master or Mariners shall conceal the offenses of such,
and refuse to give in evidences therein, they shall be amerced or imprisoned,
as the Judges shall see meet.

SECT. XX.
If any shall undertake the charge of Pilot, Boat swain, Gunner, or any other
Office, in Ship or other Vessel, and not be able to discharge the duty of the
place, Ignorant Pilot^ or Officers
such shall lose their Wages in part or in whole, and be further punished for
their presumption, as the Judges shall see meet.

SECT. XXI.
All Mariners shall keep true Watch at Sea or in Harbor, as the Master shall
appoint, upon pain of forfeit of twelve pence for every default, Watch to be
kept
to be defaulked out of their Wages.

SECT. XXII.
Any Mariner that has entered upon a Voyage, and shall depart and leave the
Voyage, shall forfeit all his wages, one half to the poor, Mariners deserting
the Voyage
the other half to the Master and Owners, and be further punished by
imprisonment or otherwise, as the case may be circumstanced, to be judged by
the Magistrate or Magistrates they are complained to, except such Seaman shall
show just cause for his so leaving the Voyage, and shall procure an order
therefore from Authority.

SECT. XXIII.
If any Mariner shall have receved any considerable part of his wages, Runaway
Mariners
and shall run away from the Ship or Vessel he belongs to, and decline the
service of the Master in the prosecution of the Voyage, he shall be pursued as
a disobedient Runaway servant, and proceeded with as such a one.

SECT. XXIV.
If any Mariner shall entertain any Person or Persons on Board the Ship or
Vessel he sails in, Mariners entertaining without Maste^s leave.
without the Masters leave, or Masters or Mariners, shall do it at
unseasonable times, he or they shall forfeit twenty shillings, one half to the
Poor, the other half to the Owners.

SECT. XXV.
No Seaman, or Seamen, or Officer shall commit any outrage upon the Master of
any Ship or Vessel, but those so offending shall be severely punished, by (...)
or other Corporal punishment, Outrage upon the M^ster.
as the fact shall appear to be circumstanced to the Judges that shall hear it,
and as they shall judge meet; If any Officer or Mariners shall combine against
the Master, whereby the Voyage shall be diverted or hindered, or that damage
thereby shall accrue to the Ship and Goods, they shall be punished with loss of
wages, or otherwise as Mutineers, as the case may require.

SECT. XXVI.
In case any Ship or Vessel be in distress at Sea, by Tempest or other
accident, the Mariners shall do their utmost endeavor to ass^st the Master in
saving Ship and Goods, Shi^s i^ distress out to be left.
and not desert him without apparent h^zard appear, that by their staying they
may lose their lives.

SECT. XXVII.
And in case of suffering Shipwreck, the Mariners are without dispute upon
their getting on Shore, to do their utm^st endeavor to save the Ship or
Vessel, Tackle and Apparel, Mariners to do t^eir utmost in Sh^pwr^ck to save
their Goods.
as also the Merchants Goods as much as may; out of which they shall have a
mere compensation for their hazard and pains; and upon conviction of negligence
herein shall be punished.

MARRIAGE.
FOr the preventing all unlawful Marriages;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That after the publication
hereof, no persons shall be joined in Marriage before the intentions of the
parties proceedings therein has been published sufficiently at some public
Lecture or Town meeting in the Towns where the parties or either of them do
ordinarily reside, ^
or be set up in Writing fairly written upon some post of their Meeting House
Door in public view, there to stand so as it may be read eight days before
such Marriage.

And whereas the power of disposal of Children in Marriage does reside in the
hands of Parents, and to prevent irregular proceeding^ herein;

It is Ordered by this Court; That whatsoever person from henceforth shall
directly or indirectly endeavor to draw away the Affections of any Maid in
this Colony, ^
upon pretense of Marri^ge, before he has ob^ained liberty and allowance from
her Parents, Governors or Guardians, he shall forfeit for the first offense
f^ve pou^ds, for the second offense toward the same party ten pounds, and for
the th^^d ^ffence, upon information or complaint by such Parents or Governors
to any Magistrate, giving Bond to prosecute the party, he shall be committed to
Prison, and upon hearing and conviction, by the next County Court, he shall be
adjudged to continue in Prison until the Court of Assistants shall see cause to
release him.

And as the Ordinance of Marriage is honorable amongst all, so it is meet it
should be accordingly solemnized;

It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no person
whatsoever in this Jurisdiction, ^
shall join any persons together in Marriage, but the Magistrates, or such
other as the General Court or Court of Assistants shall Authorize in such
places where no Magistrate is near, nor shall any Magistrate or other person as
aforesaid, join any persons together in Marriage before the parties to be
Married have been published according to Law.

MARSHAL.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the Marshals in the several
Counties, as well as the Colony Marshal shall be allowed for every Execution he
serves under the sum of five pounds, two shillings six pence, Marshals (...)
and four pence for every Mile he goes to serve the said Execution out of the
Town he lives; and for every Execution he serves of or above the sum of five
pound, For serving Executions* and Attachments.
and under the sum of ten pounds, he shall be allowed three shillings four
pence, and four pence for every Mile he goes as before; and for every
Execution he serves of or above the sum of ten pound^, he shall be allowed five
shilling^, and four pence for every Mile he goes as before: And it is also
Ordered; That the Marshal shall be allowed for every Attachment he serves, half
so much as is before allowed him for Executions, only he is to have for every
Mile he goes to serve the Attachment as before.

It is further Ordered by this Court; That every person that shall at any time
be fined for the breach of any penal Law, or other just cause, Persons breaking
a^y penal Law to be fined.
such person or persons so fined, shall forthwith pay his or their fine or
penalty, or give in sufficient Security speedily to do it, or shall be
imprisoned, or kept to work till it be paid, that so no loss may come to the
Colony: And what other Debts or Fines shall be due either to the Colony or any
County Treasury within this Colony, the Marshal for the Colony, Marshals to
levy Fines:
or the respective County Marshals upon Warrant from the Colony or County
Treasurer according to his Oath, shall be faithful in doing the duty of his
place in levying and returning of the same, pen. (...)
upon penalty of forfeiting two shillings of his own Estate for every Pound not
returned, or else such fine as any Court of Assistants or County Court shall
impose upon him for his neglect.

Master, Servants and Sojourners.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no Master of a Family shall
give entertainment or habitation to any single reason to sojourn in his Family,
but by the allowance of the Select men of the Town where he dwells, Sojourners
(...) to be entertained without consent of the Select men pen ^0 s per week
(...) persons not to kee^ house
under the penalty of twenty shillings per week for every weeks entertainment.

And it is also Ordered; That no man that is neither Married, nor has any
Servant, nor is a public Officer shall keep house of himself without consent
of the Town where he lives, under the penalty of twenty shillings per week.

It is also Ordered by this Court; Persons under Guardians incapable to make
Contracts without allowance
That no person under the Government of Parents, Masters or Guardians, shall be
capable to make any Contract or Bargain that in Law shall be accounted valid,
unless the said person be authorized or allowed so to Contract or Bargain by
his Parent, Master or Guardian.

It is also Ordered; That no Servant man or maid, shall either give, Servants
not to trade without License. pe^
sell o^ change any Commodity whatsoever, without license from their Master,
during the time of their service, under pain of fine or Corporal punishment, as
the offense shall deserve by the judgment of the Court.

And whereas some stubborn, refractory and discontented Servants and
Apprentices withdraw themselves from their Masters services:

It is Ordered by this Court; That whatsoever Servants or Apprentices of
fifteen years of age or upwards, shall offend in that kind, before their
Covenants or Term of service are expired, Servants (...) their time penalt^
they shall serve their Masters the treble term or threefold time of their
absence in such kind.

It is also Ordered; That when any Servants shall run from their Masters, or
any other Inhabitants shall privately go away with suspicion of ill intentions,
it shall be lawful for the next Assistant or Commissioner, Servants running
away to (...)
or Constable and two of the chiefest Inhabitants where is no Assistant or
Commissioner to press Men and Boats or Pinnaces (if occasion be at the public
charge to pursue such persons by Sea or Land, and bring them back by force.

It is also Ordered by this Court; That if any Servant shall flee from the
Tyranny or Cruelty of his or her Master to the House of any Inhabitant of the
same Town, Servan^s (...) Matters cruelty to be relieved
they shall there be protected and sustained till due Order be taken for their
relief; Provided due notice thereof be speedily given to their Master from whom
they fled, and to the next Magistrate or Constable where the party so fled is
harbored.

It is also Ordered; That no Apprentice Bound for the learning of a Trade,
shall be put off for above a year to any other, neither in the life time of
their Master, nor after their death by their Executors or Administrators,
unless it be by consent of Authority assembled in some Court, or two
Assistants, otherwise all and every such Assignment to be void in Law.

Measure and Weights.
TO the end Measures and Weights may be the same throughout this Colony, and
thereby Righteousness and justice may be maintained in our Commerce and
dealings each with other.

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That each County in
this Colony shall at their own proper charge, Every County to (...) weights and
meas^res
within the space of six months next ensueing, procure sufficient Weights and
Measures for their County; approved and tried by the Colony standards at
Hartford, to be preserved and kept in the several and respective County Towns,
as Standards for the said Counties; Every Town to provide Town-Standard for
weight^ and measures
and within nine months, each Town are to procure from the County Standards,
Standard^ for themselves both of Weights and Measures. And all Weights and
Measures that are improved by particular persons, shall be tried by the Town
Standards where they dwell, within ten Months; and whosoever shall after the
first of September, No weights or (...) to be improved by particular persons
(...)
1671. make use of any Weights and Measures which are not proved and tried by
the Standards in their respective Towns, shall forfeit five shillings for every
such default to the Treasury of the Cou^^y wherein that offense is committed.

^
It is also Ordered; That each Town shall choose one able and discreet Inhabitant
to be a Sealer of Measures and Weights for their Town, who shall by the next
Magistrate or Commissioner be sworn to a faithful attendance of the same; who
is to have two pence for every Weight or Measure he Seals, and no Weight or
Measure is to be accounted authentic that is not Sealed or Approved by the
Clerk.

^
It is also Ordered; That the Sealers of Weights and Measures in the respective
Towns, shall once a year Seal the several Weights and Measures that are used
in their Town, for which service they shall have a penny for every Weight or
Measure Sealed by them, to be paid by the Owners thereof after the first
S^aling; and all such Weights and Measures as cannot be brought to the just
Standard, they are to deface or destroy.

It is further Ordered; That it shall be in the power of the Sealer, sometime
in April yearly, (...) time when they will (...) the we^ghts (...) penalty (...)
to appoint the time and place where he will try the Weights and Measures, and
give public notice thereof to the Inhabitants of their respective Towns to
bring in their Measures and Weights to be tried; and whatsoever person shall
neglect to bring his Weights and Measures to be tried the time prefixed by the
Clerk, he shall forfeit t^ree shillings, the one half part whereof shall be to
the Sealer, ^
the other to the public Treasury, which the Sealer shall have power to levy
by Distress from time to time; and every Sealer that shall neglect his Duty
required in this Order, he shall forfeit forty shillings (...) every such
default to the County Treasury.

Military Affairs.
THat the Militia may be so managed as may best advantage the Public Weal and
Safety of this Colony;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That all Male persons
of the age from sixteen years of age, to the age of sixty (except Magistrates,
Who shall bear Arms.
Church officers, allowed Physicians and Chyrurgeons, Schoolmasters, Millers,
constant Herds-men, and Mariners, Who to provide Arms.
who make it their constant business to go to Sea) shall bear Arms, unless they
upon just occasion have exemption granted them by the Court; and every Male
person within this Jurisdiction above the age of sixteen years, shall have in
continual readiness, a good Musket, Carbine or other Gun (not less then
Bastard Musket or Coliver Boar) fit for service, allowed by the chief
Military Officer, with six Flints to every Fire-lock, and three Fathom of
Match to every Match-lock, with a Sword and Bandileers, or other serviceable
Provision according to Law in the room thereof where such cannot be had; as
also such other Ammunition as the Law requires, both of Powder and Bullets, upon
penalty of five shillings for every defect. penalty 5. s for every defect


And if any Person who is to provide Arms or Ammunition, cannot purchase them by
such Means as he has* he shall bring to the Clerk so much Corn or other
Merchantable Goods, as by App^^^^ment of the Clerk, and two of the Company
(whereof one to be chosen be the Clerk, Provision for those that want Arms
and the other by the party) as shall be judged of a greater value by a fifth
part then such Arms and Ammunition is of, he shall be excused for the penalty of
want of Arms (but not for want of Appearance) until he be provided for: And the
Clerk shall endeavor to furnish him with Arms and Ammunition as soon as may be,
by sale of such Goods so deposited, rendering the over plus to the party; But if
any person be not able to provide himself Arms or Ammunition, through his mere
poverty, if he be single, he shall be put to Service by any one Assistant or
Commissioner to procure him Estate to purchase Arms with, and his Master shall
find him Arms during his time of Service.

And it is also Ordered; That all the Soldiers within this Jurisdiction shall
be Trained at least six times within the year, in the Months of March, April,
Six days Training in a year Chief Officer to appoint the days Company to meet
by 8 Clock in the morning
May, September, October, and November; by, and according to the appointment of
the Captain or other chief Officer of the several Train Bands in the respective
Plantations: and the times of their Meetings together shall be at eight of the
Clock in the morning.

It is also Ordered; Train Band to choose their Clark

He that refuses to accept and take Oath being chosen

Fined 40 s The Clarke to have a 4th part of all Fines


That every Train Band shall choose some suitable person of their Company to be
Clerk of the said Company, who shall be Sworn to a faithful discharge of his
place and office; and whosoever being chosen as aforesaid, shall refuse to
accept of the said Office of Clerk, and taking the said Clerks Oath, he shall
pay as a fine for the same forty shillings to the use of the Company; and all
that refuse the said Place or Oath as before, shall pay forty shillings a piece
(as before) till one does accept the place, and he that does hold the place
shall have a fourth part of all fines for his labor.

And it is also Ordered; Clarks to attend days of exercise and to view Arms and
to present all defects once a year at least
That the chief Officer of every Train-Band shall cause the Arms and Ammunition
of all under his command, to be viewed at least once in every year, by
appointing them to bring forth their Arms and Ammunition at some time and place
as he shall appoint, or by sending the Clerk from house to house to view them:
And the Clerk shall every Training day give his attendance in the Field (except
he has special leave from his Captain or other chief Officer) to call over the
Rolls of the Soldiers, and to take notice of their defects by their absence or
otherwise, Magistrates to punish defects
and he shall present to the next Assistant or Commissioner all Defects in Arms
or Ammunition, at least once in every year, and oftener if it be required, and
the several Magistrates (and Commissioners in their respective Plantations) are
hereby empowered to punish all Defects in that kind according to the nature of
the offense, wherein due care is to be had that wilful neglects in any do not
pass without Sensure according to Law.

And whosoever shall be absent any of the days appointed for Training after
the honor appointed, or shall not continue the whole time, shall forfeit two
shillings and six pence for every default in Corn or Money, except within
fourteen days he bring a certificate to the Clerk, ^ines for neglect of
training 26 ^ day to be paid in corn or money within 14 days or else 5 sh. half
to the Company and half to the Clerk.
from two of the chief Officers of that Company to which he does belong to free
him; And if he neither bring a Certificate, nor his fine, being demanded, then
the Clerk of the Band has hereby power to distrain five shillings in Corn, or
some Pay equivolent for every such default, two shillings six pence whereof
shall be to himself, and two shillings six pence to the Company, for the
maintenance of Drumms and Colors, etc. And if the Clerk shall neglect his duty
in gathering the fines, at least once a year, Clerks neglect, penalty double:
he shall forfeit to the use of the Company double the fines so neglected to be
gathered by him.

And whereas it is convenient that the several Soldiers of the Trained Bands
in the respectiv^ Towns within thi^ Colony have some Powder allowed them to
practice and exercise in their several firings upon their Training days;

It is therefore Ordered; That there shall be allowed to the several Soldiers
of the Trained Bands in the respective Towns, a Pound of Powder a piece every
year, Allowance of powder to each Soldier to improve in firings on days of
(...)
to be provided by, and at the proper Costs and Charges of the Masters of each
Family unto which the said Soldiers do belong, to be called forth, improved
and d^sposed of, at the discretion of the Captain or other principal Leaders in
each Trained Bands.

This Court considering the state and condition of this Colony, by reason of
Indians, and otherwise are desirous to use all due means for the preservation
and safety of the same, and in order thereunto.

Do now Order; That the Treasurer for the time being, and at all times
hereafter, A public Magazeen of powder and shot to be provided and maintained.
shall at the public charge of the Colony, procure, keep and maintain a
Magaziene of Powder and Shot, to be ready for the use of the Colony, as
occasion may call for the same, and for the quantity thereof, he is to take his
direction from time to time of the Governor and Council.

It is also Ordered; That every Soldier and Person required to provide Arms,
every Soldiers p^rticular stock of Ammunition every defect 5. s.
shall always have in readiness by them one pound of Powder, and four pound of
Bullet^, upon penalty of five shill^ngs for every defect.

It is further Ordered; That every Town shall keep and maintain always in
readiness, Towns sto^k of Ammunition
so much Powder and Bullets as may make with every particular man's provision
required by Law, so much Powder and Bullets as may make three pounds of Powder,
and tw^lve pounds of Bullets or Lead for every person required to provide Arms
within their limits, pen. 10* pound
upon the penalty of ten pounds forfeiture, to be paid to the Public Treasury,
for every neglect and breach of this Order.

It is also Ordered; That the General Court only from time to time shall have
power to establish and confirm all Commission Officers, The General Court to
confirm Commission Offiers.
both of the Horse and Foot, and none but such as the General Court does
confirm, shall be deemed Commission Officers: It is also left in the power of
the County Courts from time to time, as need requires, to establish Sergeants
for the Foot, and Corporals for the Horse for the respective Companies and
Troops within their Counties, The County Court to confirm other Officers.

The Companies to nominate their Officers. Every Regiment to (...) a Serg.
(...).


but the several Companies are to Nominate their Officers to the Court for
their Approbation and Confirmation.

It is also Ordered; That there shall be appointed in each County in this
Colony, a Sergeant Major (by the General Court) who shall have the Command of
all the Regiment of Soldiers within his County, and be Installed in his Office
by one appointed by the General Court

A General Muster in e^ch County once in four years.
Which Major shall have power once in four years to draw forth his Regi^ment
into one convenient place, and there to put every Captain and Officer of their
Companies in their places, and to instruct them in their Duties ^^cording to
the Rules of Military Discipline, and to exercise his Regiment both of Horse
and foot according to his best skill as if he were to lead them forth against
an Enemy.

And further, it shall be in the power of the Sergeant Major: and he is hereby
Ordered once a year to call all the Commission officers of his Regiment to meet
at such a time and place as he shall appoint, Serg. Majors power to call all
Commission Officers to meet him once a year, etc
there to consult and consider together of the best way of managing their
Military Affairs for the public Advantage, and the said Major is to require
an account of the several officers of his Regiment how their Companies are
provided with Arms and Ammunition, and communicate to them such Orders and
Instructions as he shall receive from the General Court from time to time.

And it is by this Court Declared; The Governor the General of al our Military
Forces
That the Governor for the time being is the General of all the Military
Forces within this Colony, but when we shall have occasion to send forth an
Army against an Enemy: The General Court may appoint some Commander in chief
for that service until the Forces (...) shall be dis banded.

Whereas it is left in the power of the chief Military Officers of the
respective Companies within this Colony to appoint the days of Training: three
days warning for trainings
It is now Ordered, that they shall give three days warning at least for the
same in some public meeting, or by some other way agreed upon by the
respective Companies.

It is als^ Ordered; That the Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, (...) Officers
freedom
Cornets and Quarte^ Masters, shall be freed from Watching and Warding, and the
Sergeants on Foot, and Corporals of the Horse from Warding and half their Watch.

It is also Ordered; That any three chief Officers of each Company, Officers
power to punish offenders; Offenders liberty to appeal
shall have power to punish such Inferior Officers or Soldiers as shall
commit any Disorder or Contempt upon any day or time of Military Exercise, by
any usual Military punishment, or by fine, not exceeding twenty shillings,
except they enter an Appeal from such Sentence to the next County Court, which
they have hereby liberty to do.

It is also Ordered, That in case there fall out any sudden Exigent in any
Plantation in this Colony, by Assault of Indians or any other Enemy, Officers
power in sudden exigents by assault of an Enemy
to the disturbance and hazard of the Public peace; in every such Case, it
shall be Lawful and in the Power of the Military Officers of the place so
disturbed, to Require and call forth all the Soldiers under their Command, and
to Marshal, Order and dispose them as the present Occasion shall require, to
Defend the place assaulted, and to quit the Enemy: And in case need so require,
to Assist a Neighbor Plantation in any extremity as aforesaid; but in every
such case (if it can with safety be obtained) they shall advise with the next
Magistrate, what way to act for releif of their Neighbors; and this course to
be taken upon all occasions from time to time till the Court shall Order
otherwise.

It is also Ordered, That in every Train Band, wherein is Sixty four Soldiers
besides Officers, they shall have Liberty to have Captain, What Officers every
Company is to have
Lieutenant and Ensign and four Sergeants, and where there are Thirty two
Soldiers, they shall have a Lieutenant and Ensign, and two Sergants, and
where there are but twenty four Soldiers, they shall have but two Sergants.

It is also Ordered, That every Commission Officer, shall take forth his
Commission from the General Court, Signed by the Governor, Every Commission
Officer to take out his Commission
with the Seal of the Colony affixed to it.

Mills and Millers.
IT is Ordered by this Court, That each Miller in this Colony, or owners of
Mills, shall be allowed for the grinding of each bushel of Indian corn, Mile
to be allowed a 12th part of Indian and a 16th part of all other graine^.
a Twelfth part, and for other grains, a Sixteenth part, Provided that this
Order shall no ways prejudice or nullify any former agreement made in any
Town respecting grinding at their Mills.

It is also Ordered, All Mills to be provided with Sealed Tole D^^shes.
That there shall be provided for every Mill within this Colony, Tole dishes,
one of a Pint, one of a Quart, one of two Quarts, all Seal^d measures, with an
Instument to strike the dishes when Tole is taken.

Ministers Maintenance.
THis Court for the due encouragement and maintenance of the Ministry in all
Societies and Congregations within this Colony,

Do Order; That all those who are or ought to be taught in the Word in the
several Plantations, The Inhabitants to be called together once a year to
consider what to allow their Minister* what the Major part determine, that to
stand.
shall be respectively called together once in each year, to consider what may
be a meet maintenance for the Ministry of that Society to which they belong,
and (...) same; and whatsoever Sum shall be agreed upon by the Major part of
the Society, the particular Sums assessed upon each person by a just Rate,
shall be Collected and Levied as other Town Rates; Provided, where there are
more then one Assembly in a Town, they shall severally meet to Consider and
Determine as aforesaid, Proviso. If a suitable maintenance be not allowed, the
County Court upon Complaint made hereof are to appoint the same.
and all persons shall Contribute to one or both of those Societies within
their Township: And in case any Society shall fail of allowing a suitable
maintenance to the Minister or Ministry of their Society, upon Information or
Complaint made thereof to the next County Court in that County, they are hereby
Ordered to appoint what maintenance shall be allowed to the Minister, and shall
Order the Select men to Assess the Inhabitants, which Assessment shall be
levied by some Officer appointed thereto, as other Rates, and in Wheat, Peace
and Indian Corn a third of each; Always (...) an Honorable allowance be made
to the Ministry

If any Town be grieved at the County Courts Issue upon Complaint to the
General Court it will be considered.


^^^ayes Provided, that an Honorable allowance be made to every Minister,
according to the ability of the place or people, and if any Town shall find
themselves burdened by the Assessment of the County Court, they shall have
liberty to complain to the General Court, which will be ready to hear such
Complaints.

Mines and Minerals.
FOr the encouragement of such as will lay out themselves upon the discovery of
Mines or Minerals for the public good:

Discoverers of Mines to be rewarded
It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That whosoever shall expend their
Time or Estate upon such Discoveries, and purchase them for the Country, he
shall be honorably rewarded (out of what he does discover) for the same.

MONOPOLIES.
IT is Ordered; That there shall be no Monopolies granted or allowed amongst
us, Monopolies to be only of profitable Inventions and for such time as the
General Court shall judge meet
but of such new Inventions as shall be judged profitable for the Country, and
that for such time as the General Court shall judge meet.

Night-Walkers.
FOr the preventing of unseasonable Night-walking;

It Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That if any persons young
or old within this Colony that are under Parents or Masters Government,
Uns^^sonable night-walkers to pay.
shall convene or meet together, or be entertained in any House without the
consent or approbation of their Parents or Governors, after the shutting in of
the Evening, any longer then to discharge they are sent about; or if any
persons shall be discovered to meet together, 20. s. Fine and those that
entertain them 10. s.
and to associate themselves with their Companions abroad in the Streets or
Fields after the time aforesaid, unseasonably, the persons that are lawfully
convicted to be guilty hereof, shall pay Ten Shillings p. person, for every
such transgression, and the head of that Family that entertains them, or
tolerates them in their house, shall forfeit Ten Shillings. Whereof, Or sit in
the Stocks one hour at the lea^t.
Two Shillings and Six pence shall be to the Complainer out of each Fine, the
rest to the public Treasury. This Order extends to Sojourners and Boarders,
Constables to search for such offenders.
or any that make their aboade in this Colony above one Month and in case any
be unable to pay their Fine, The Constable is hereby required to set such in
the Stocks, there to continue one hour at least, and the Constable is also
required as there shall be occasion to make search after such persons as shall
transgress this Law.

OATHS.
I A. B. being by the Providence of God an Inhabitant within the Colony of
Connecticut do freely and sincerely acknowledge my self to be subject to the
Government thereof, The Oath of Fidelity
and do Swear by the great and Dreadful Name of the Ever living God, that I
will be true and faithful unto the same, and will accordingly as in duty I am
bound yield Assistance thereunto with my person and estate and also will truly
endeavor to maintain and preserve all the liberties and Privileges thereof,
submitting my self to the wholesome Orders and Laws made and established by
lawful Authority, and further, that I will not plott or practice any evil
against it, or consent to any that shall so do but will timely discover the
same to lawful Authority here established, for the speedy preventing hereof: So
help me God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

You A. B. being by the Providence of God an Inhabitant within the Jurisdiction
of Conecticut being now to be made free, The Freemans Oath
do acknowledge your self to be subject to the Government thereof, and do Swear
by the great and fearful Name of the Ever-living God, to be true and faithful
unto the same, and do submit both your person and estate thereunto, according
to all the wholesome Laws and Orders that there are or hereafter shall be there
made and established by lawful Authority, according to the tenor of the Charter
granted to this Colony; and that you will neither Plot nor Practice any evil
against the same, nor consent to any that shall so do, but will timely discover
the same to lawful Authority here established; and that you will as in duty you
are bound maintain the honor of the same, and of the lawful Magistrates
thereof promoteing the public good of it whilst you shall so continue an
Inhabitant there, and whenever you shall give your Vote or Suffrage touching
any matter which concerns this Colony being called thereunto, you will give it
as in your Conscience you shall judge may conduce to the best good of the same,
without respect of persons or favor of any man; So help you God in our Lord
Jesus Christ.

I J. W. now chosen to be Governor over this Colony of Conecticut for this
year ensuing, and until a new be Chosen and Sworn; Do Swear by the Great and
Dreadful Name of the Everlasting God to promote the public Good and Peace of
the same, according to the best of my skill; The Governors Oath
as also I will maintain the lawful Privileges of this Colony, as also that
all wholesome Laws and Orders that are or shall be made by lawful Authority here
established consonant to our Charter be duly executed, and will further the
Execution of Justice for the time aforesaid, according to the Rules of Gods
Word, and the Laws of this Colony; So help me God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

I W. L. now chosen to be Deputy Governor over this Colony of Conecticut for
this year ensuing, and until a new be Chosen and Sworn; The Deputy Governors
Oath
Do Swear as in the Governors Oath Mutatis Mutandis.

You S. W. being chosen an Assistant over this Jurisdiction for the year
ensuing; Do Swear by the Great and Dreadful Name of the Ever-living God, to
promote the public Good and Peace of the same, The Assistants Oath
according to the best of my skill, and that I will maintain all the lawful
Privileges thereof according to my understanding; as also Assist in the
Execution of all such wholesome Laws and Orders as are or shall be made by
lawful Authority here established Consonant to our Charter; and will further
the Execution of Justice for the time aforesaid, according to the Righteous
Rules of Gods Word, and the Laws of this Colony; So help me God in our Lord
Jesus Christ.

You J. T. being Chosen Treasurer for the Colony of Conecticut, for the year
ensuing, and until a new be Chosen, The Treasure^^ Oath
Do Swear by the Great Name of God, that you will according to the best of your
skill attend the place and Office^ of a Treasurer for this Colony, in sending
out your Warrants for Collecting all such Sums of Money as are due to the
Colony by Fines, Rates or otherwise, and that you will pay out the same in such
Sums, and in such manner as you shall be appointed to by the Court, as you
shall have it in the Common Treasury, and that you will according to Law see
the Constables make up their Accounts with you, or Fine them according to Law
for their neglect, and that you will render a true Account of all things
concerning your Office, when you are called thereunto by the General Court; So
help you God, etc.

You I. A. Being chosen Secretary for the Colony of Conecticut for the year
ensuing, The Secretaries Oath.
and until a new be chosen. Do Swear by the Great Name of God, that you shall
keep the Secrets of the Court, and carefully execute the place and Office of a
Secretary according to the best of your skill, and shall truly and Faithfully
record all Acts and Orders of the Court, and shall deliver true Copies and
Certificates, when they shall be necessarily required of you; So help you God,
etc.

You B N. Being chosen a Commissioner by the plantation of W, For the year
en^uing, The Commissioners Oath.
do Swear, that you will do equal right and Justice in all cases that shall
come before you, after your best skill according to the extent of your
Commission; So help you God, etc.

You I. G. Being appointed Marshal for the Colony of Conecticut; Do Swear by
the Great and Living God, that you will with all Faithfulness and Diligence
serve all such Attachments as shall be directed unto you, (and come into your
hand,) by lawful Authority, and return them to the Court where they are
returnable, as also that you will serve all such Executions granted by the
Secretary, Treasurer, or other Clerk Authorized thereunto, delivered into your
hands, The Marshals Oath.
and Collect or Levy the Goods you are directed to according to the said
Execution, whether it be for the public Treasury, or particular persons; And
that you will with convenient speed deliver such Goods as you shall Levy as
aforesaid, into the hands of the Treasurer or other particular person or
persons to whom they do belong; And that you will do and Execute all such
lawful Commands, Directions and Warrants as you shall receive from the
Governor, or any Magistrate or Magistrates, Court or Courts according to your
Office, and thus during the whole time you shall continue in your Office you
will demean your self without respect of persons, or favor of any man; But in
case you meet with any difficulty which you cannot resolve, In such case you
may suspend till you may have Advice therein from the Authority; So help you in
our Lo^d Jesus Christ.

The Grand Juries Oath.
You do Swear by the Great Name of the Ever Living God, that you will with all
due Care and Faithfulness make presentment according to Order at the next
County Court in this County, such misdemeanors and Transgressions of the Laws
and Orders of this Colony as shall come to your Cognizance and Knowledge
(unless some necessary and rel^gious tie of Conscience surely bottomed upon the
Word of God bind you to Secrecy) as also all such things as you shall find out
which are contrary to Religion and peace; And whatsoever shall be legally
committed to your judgment by the Court, you shall return a True and just
Verdict thereof according to the evidences given you, and the Laws here
established; So help you God etc.

You do Swear by the Great Name of A^mighty God, that you without respect of
person or favor of any man well and truly Try, The Jury of Life and Death
their Oath.
and true deliverance make of such Prisoners at the Bar, as you shall have in
Charge according to the evidence given you in Court, and the Laws of this
Colony; So help you God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

You do Swear by the Living God, that you will duly try the Causes now to be
given you in charge between the Plaintiff and Defendant, The Petty Iuries Oath.
or Plaintiffs and Defendants, according to the Evidence given you in Court and
the Laws of this Colony, and accordingly a true Verdict give, your own counsels
and your Fellows you shall duly observe and keep, you shall speak nothing to
any one of the Business and Matters you have in hand* but among your selves,
nor shall you suffer any to speak unto you about the same but in Court, and
when you are agreed of any Verdict you shall keep it secret till you deliver it
up in Court; So help you God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

You Swear by the Living God, that the Evidence you shall give to this Court
concerning the case now in question shall be the Truth, Witnesses Oath
the whole Truth and nothing but the Truth; So help you God in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

You C. D. Do Swear by the Great and Dreadful Name of God, that for the year
ensueing, and until new be Chosen and Sworn, Constables Oath
you will faithfully execute the Place and Office of a Constable for, and
within the Plantation of H. and the limits thereof, and that you will endeavor
to preserve the public peace of the said Place and Colony, and will do your
best endeavor to see all Watches and Wards executed and duly attended, and to
obey and execute all lawfal Commands or Warrants that come from any Magistrate
or Magistrates or Court, and execute all such Orders of Court as are committed
to your care, according to your best skill; So help you God in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

You N. W. Being appointed to be Clerk of the Train Band of H. Do Swear truly
to perform the Office of a Clerk of Trained Band to the utmost of your ability
or endeavors, Clerk of Trained Band his Oath
according to the particulars specified (and peculiar to your Office) in the
Military Laws; So help you God, etc.

Whereas you H. R. are Chosen a Searcher and Sealer of Leather for the Town of
Hartford for this Year ensuing, and until a new be Chosen and Sworn, Leather
Sealer his Oath
You do Swear by the Living God, you will faithfully and carefully attend the
execution of your Office for the public good according to the true intent of
the Laws and Orders in such case provided, So help you God, etc.

You R. S. being Chosen a Fence viewer for the Town of H. for the year
ensueing, and until a new be Chosen and Sworn; Do Swear by the living God,
Fence viewers their Oath
that you will duly and faithfully attend the Office of a Fence Viewer
according to the best of your skill, not only in viewing the Fences, but also
in moderately fining all defects in Fences, and gathering the same according to
Law, or returning the Names of those you fine for Defects in their Fences with
their fines to the next Magistrate, that so Execution may be granted and
levied; So help you God, etc.

Whereas you J. G. and D. P. are appointed to Apprize such Lands or Goods as
are now to be presented to you; Apprizers Oath.
You do Swear by the Great and Dreadful Name of the Ever^living God, that all
Partiality, Prejudice, and other sinister respects laid aside, you will Apprize
the same, and every part thereof according to the true and just value thereof
at this present by common account, by your best Judgment and Conscience; So
help you God, etc.

It is Ordered by this Court; No Oath to be Urged but such as the Gen^^al Court
Order and (...) long they ^ind.
That no Man shall be urged to take any Oath but such as the General Court has
considered, allowed and required: And that no Oath of any Magistrate,
Councellor or any other Officer shall bind him any farther or longer then he is
resident or reputed an Inhabitant in this Jurisdiction.

OPPRESSION.
WHereas Oppression is a mischievous Evil the Nature of man is prone unto, and
that men may not Oppress and Wrong their Neighbors by taking excessive Wages
for Work, or unreasonable Prizes for such necessary Merchandise or Commodities
as shall pass from Man to Man;

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; Oppression to be Punished.
That if any person or persons shall offend in any of the said Cases, he shall
be punished by Fine or Imprisonment according to the quality of the Offense, as
the Court to which he is presented upon lawful Trial and Conviction shall
determine.

Peace breakers to be punished.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That whosoever shall disturb the Peace by
Tumultuous and Offensive Carriages, Traducing, Quarrelling, Challenging,
Assaulting, Beating, Striking any other person, he shall be liable to pay to
the party hurt or stricken, just damages, together with such fine to the
Public Treasury, as on consideration of the party smiting or being smit, and
with what Instrument, danger more or less, time, place, provocation, etc. shall
be judged just and reasonable to the merit of the offense, according to the
judgment of the Judges.

PETITION.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That for each Petition that is
presented to the General Court in any Session thereof, there shall be paid the
sum of ten shillings by the Petitioner or he that presents it before it be
read, 10. s: to be paid (...) every (...)
and the Secretary is to take care to see it paid as aforesaid; and for his
pains therein he is allowed the one half of the ten shillings.

PIPE-STAVES.
FOr the Regulating of Pipe-staves that are to be transported into any parts of
Spain, Portugal, or either of their Dominions, or elsewhere to be used for the
making of tight Cask:

It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That all Pipe-staves that are to
be transported as aforesaid, shall be four foot and six inches in length, and
three inches and a half in breadth, ^ize of Pipe-staves
without Sap, and in thickness at least half an inch, and not above five worm
holes in one Stave, well and even hewed sufficient for that use.

And it is Ordered* That the Townsmen in each Plantation where such Goods or
Staves are used to be shipped, Searchers to be oppointed and Sworn
shall from time to time appoint two men, Inhabitants of their Town, skilful in
that Commodity to be Viewers of Pipe-staves, who shall by the next assistant or
Commissioner be Sworn to a faithful discharge of this trust, as also to cast by
all such Staves as they shall judge not Merchantable according to this Order,
and they shall keep by them a Record of the number of all such Staves as they
judge Merchantable, To keep a Record of what staves they approve
and whose they were when viewed.

And if any Man shall Ship or Deliver on Board any Vessel any Pipe-staves to be
transported into Spain or Portugal, Staves not approved if shipped to be forfeit
except such as are Searched and Approved by the Searcher as aforesaid, or such
as are shipped for Dry Cask, they shall forfeit the said parcel or the value
thereof; and the said Searcher shall be allowed two shillings for every
Thousand of Pipe-staves which they shall search, ^earche^^ does ^. s. a 1000
as well the Refuge as the Merchatable, to be paid by him that sets him a work.

Masters of ships receivi^g unlawful staves to be fined 5. l.
And if any Master or other Officer of any Ship or other Vessel shall receive
into such Ship or other Vessels any parcel of Pipe staves to be transported
unto any of the said Dominions, which shall not be Searched and allowed as
Merchantable, and so certified by a Note under the hands of the said Viewers,
or one of them, every such Master shall forfeit for every Thousand of such Pipe
staves so unduely received five Pounds, to the Public Treasury two thirds, and
one third part of such fine shall be to him that discovers and prosecutes the
same: Staves for dry Cask may be transported
Provided, Cask staves, or other Red Oak Staves may be transported into those
parts which are good to make Dry Cask for that end.

POSSESSION.
THis Court being sensible of the great Trouble and Contention that does and
may arise in this Colony, by reason of the great Defects that are (...)*
Records and Alienations of Houses and Lands, that due form of Law not being
lawfully attended which is requisite in such Affairs; For the prevention
whereof, and that future trouble may be avoided, and that Righteousness and
Justice may be mainta^ned;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That what person or
persons soever, that has either Himself, his Grantees or Assigns, stood
possessed in his or their own proper right in Fee simple of any Houses or Lands
within this Colony, without being interrupted by any person or persons laying
claim thereunto, and prosecuting their claim in due form of Law, sometime
betwixt the Publication hereof and the last of November, One Thousand six
Hundred and sixty eight, such Person or persons so possessed of any Houses,
parcel or parcels of Land as aforesaid, have power to Enter and Record the same
to him or themselves, and his or their Heirs and Assigns for ever, in the Book
of Records of that Town where the said Houses and Lands lies, paying a meet
recompense to the Recorder for his pains; and a Record under the Recorders
hand, and one of the Select men of that Town, and a Commissioner or Assistant,
shall be a sufficient and legal evidence to all and every person or persons
that shall have the same to all intents, ends and purposes for the holding of
the same firm to him or them, his or their Heirs and Assigns for ever;
Provided this Law includes not Orphans under age, and Proprietors in foreign
parts, who possibly may be incapacitated to make good their claims within the
forementioned limited time.

POOR.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That every Town within this
Colony, shall maintain their own poor: and if any that have Relief from any
Town, do not employ their children as they ought, Every Town to provide for
their own poor.
toward the getting of a lively hold, or if there be any Family that cannot or
do not provide Competently for their Children, Select men's power to dipo^e
(...) ^hildren in case.
whereby they are exposed to want and extremity, it shall be in the power of
the Select men of each Town with advice of the next Magistrate, to place out
such Children, into good Families where they may be better brought up and
Provided for.

It is also Ordered; That if any person come to live in any Town in this
Government, and be there received and entertained three months, if by sickness,
lameness or the like, he comes to want relief; He that abides (...) in a town
without being warned out shall be their proper charge.
he shall be provided for by that Town wherein he was so long entertained, and
shall be reputed their proper charge, unless such person have within the said
three months been warned by the Constable, or some one or more of the Select
men of that Town, not there to abide without leave first obtained of the Town,
and certify the same to the next Court of Assistants, who shall otherwise
Order the charge arising about him according to Justice.

Pound, and Pound breach.
FOr prevention and due Recompense of Damage in Corn fields, and other
Enclosures done by Swine and Cattle;

It is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof, Every Town and Village
to provid a Pound.
That there shall be one sufficient Pound or more made and maintained in every
Town and village within this Jurisdiction, for the Impounding of all such Swine
and Cattle as shall be found in any corn-field or other enclosure: Owners of
Cattle and Swine impounded to have notice
And whosoever pounds any Swine or Cattle, shall give present notice to the
Owners if they be known, or otherwise they shall be cried at the two next
Public Meetings; and if Swine or Cattle escape out of the Pound, I^ no owners
appear then (...) Cried
the Owner if known shall pay all damages according to Law.

It is also Ordered; That all Cattle and Swine that are taken Damage Fei^^nt,
and Impounded, shall pay eight pence a head, ^
six pence to him or them that drive them to Pound, and two pence ^ head to him
that keeps the Key, except Sheep, (...) sheep who shall Pay 1 penny p. head
for which there shall be paid one penny a head, a fourth (...) of which shall
be to him that keeps the Key, the other part to him that drives them.

And whereas Impound^ng of Cattle in case of Trespass has been always found
needful, and all the breaches about the same very offensive and injurious:

(...) 40. s pound breach 5 l
It is therefore Ordered; That if any person shall resist or rescue any Cattle
or Swine going to the Pound, or shall by any way or means convey them out of
Pound or Custody of the Law, whereby the party wronged may lose his Damage, and
the Law be deluded in case of mere Rescues, the party offending shall forfeit
to the Public Treasury forty shillings, and in case of Pound breach five
pounds, and damages to be paid, if not able (...) service ^^
and shall also pay all damages to the party wronged; And if in the Rescue any
bodily harms be done to person or otherwise, they shall have remedy against the
Rescuers: And if either be done of any not of ability to answer the Damage and
forfeit aforesaid, they shall be whipped by Warrant from any Assistant before
whom the Offender is convicted, in the Town where the Offense is committed,
(...) part (...) to go to the complain^^
not exceeding fifteen stripes for the mere Rescue or Pound-breach, and for all
damages to the parties, they shall be satisfied by the Offender in Service; and
if it appear there were any procurement of the Owners of the Cattle, or that
they were abettors, they shall all pay forfeitures and damages, ^
as if themselves had done it, one fourth part of all fines for the breach of
this Order shall be to him that prosecutes the same to effect; Provided that
the Complaint be Prosecuted within nine months, otherwise it shall not be
heard.

Profane Swearing.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That if any person within this Colony shall Swear
rashly and vainly, ^
either by the Holy Name of God, or any other Oath; or shall sinfully and
wickedly Curse any, he shall forfeit to the Treasury for every such several
Offense ten shillings, and it shall be in the power of any Assistant or
Commissioner by Warrant to the Constable, to call such person or persons before
him, and upon just proof, to pass Sentence according to Law, and Levy the said
penalty according to the usual order of justice; (...) not less than one hour
and if such persons be not able or shall utterly refuse to pay the aforesaid
fine, he shall be committed to the Stocks, there to continue, not exceeding
three hours, and not less then one hour.

Profanation of the Sabbath.
WHereas the Sanctification of the Sabbath is a matter of great concernment to
the Weal of a People, and the Profanation thereof is that as brings down the
judgments of God upon that Place or People that suffer the same;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court; That if any person shall Profane the
Sabbath, Proph^nation of the Sabbath by labor or play (...)
by unnecessary Travail, or Playing thereon in the time of public Worship, or
before or after, or shall keep out of the Meeting house during the time of
public Worship unnecessarily, there being convenient room in the House, he
shall Pay five shillings for every such offense, or sit in the Stocks one hour,
any one Assistant or Commissioner to hear and determine any such case* And the
Constables in the several Plantations are hereby required to make search after
all Offenders against this Law, and to make return of those they shall find
transgressing to the next Assistant or Commissioner.

PUNISHMENT.
^
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court, that no Person shall be twice
sentenced by Civil Justice for one and the same Crime, Trespass or Offense, for
bodily punishment, none shall be inflicted that are Inhumane, Barbarous or
Cruel.

RATES.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That every Inhabirant shall
^henceforth contribute to all Charges both in Church and Colony whereof he does
or may receive benefit, and every such Inhabitant, All persons (...) pay to
common Charges.
who shall not voluntarily contribute proportionably to his ability, with the
rest of the same Town to all Charges both Civil and Ecclesiastical, shall be
compelled thereunto by assessment and distress, to be levied by the Constable
or other Officer of the Town, as in other cases, Lands to be levied where they
lie and persons where they dwell
and that the Lands and Estates of all men wherever they dwell shall be Rated
for all Town-charges, both Civil and Ecclesiastical as aforesaid, the Lands and
Estates where they shall lie, and their Persons where they dwell.

For a more equal and ready way of raising means for defraying of Public
Charges in time to come;

It is Ordered by this Court; That the Treasurer for the time being, shall from
year to year, in the first Month, without expecting any other Order, Treasurer
once a year to send forth his warrants, each Town to choose 3 or 4 Listers.
send forth his Warrant to the Constables of every Town within this
Jurisdiction, requiring the Constable to call the Inhabitants of the Town
together (who being so assembled) shall choose three or four of their able
Inhabitants, who shall some time or times in the sixth Month then next, make a
List of all the Male persons in the same Town, from sixteen years old and
upwards, (except Assistants, Commissioners, Ministers of the Gospel, What
persons exempted the List.
Physicians and Scoole Masters,) And a true estimation of all personal and
real estate, being (or reputed to be) the estate of all and every the persons
in the same Town, or otherwise under their Custody or managing, according to
the just valuation; and to what persons the same belong, whether in their own
Town or other where, so near as they can by all Lawful ways and means which
they may use viz. of Warehouses, Shops, Workhouses, What Cattle exempted the
List.
Lands of all sorts as well unbroken as other (except such as does or shall ly
common for free feed of Cattle, to the use of the Inhabitants in general)
whether belonging to Towns or particular persons, but not to be kept or hearded
upon to the damage of the Proprieters, Mills, Ships, and all Vessels off the
stocks, Merchantable goods, Cranes, Wharfes, and all sorts of Cattle (except
Sheep, Bulls and Boars) and all other known Estate whatsoever, either at Sea or
on Shore, What Estate to be Rated.
all which Persons and Estates are by the said three or four men to be Assessed
and valued as hereafter follows, every person aforesaid at eighteen pound a
head, and for a more certain Rule of rateing of Cattle, every Cow of four years
old and upward, shall be valued at four pounds, persons va^ued at 18 pound
every Ox of five years old and upward five pounds, every Steer of four year
old four pounds, every Steer or Heifer of thre^ year old three pounds, Pri^^^
of Cattle in the (...).
every Steer or Heifer of two years old two pounds, every Steer or Heifer of
one year old one pound; all Horses and Mares of four years old and upwards four
pounds, all Horse kind of three years old three pounds, all Horse kind of two
years old two pounds, and all Horse kind of one year old one pound; every Goat
above one year old eight shillings, every Swine above one year old twenty
shillings; and all Cattle of all sorts, under a year old are hereby exempted,
(...) Cattle (...) year old (...) Corn and Hay exempted the (...).
as also all Hay and Corn in the Husband man's hand. Because all Meadows Eatable
Ground and Cattle are rateable as aforesaid, and for all such persons as by the
advantage of their Arts and Trades (...) more able to help bear the public
Charge then common Laborers and Workmen, as Butchers, Bakers, Brewers,
Victuallers, Smiths, Carpenters, Artificers and Handicrafts men to be Rated
according to their returns. Proviso.
Tailors, Shoomakers, Joyners, Barbers, Millers, Masons, with all other manual
persons and Artists. Such shall be Rated for their Returns and gain^
proportionable to other men, for the produce of their Estates. Provided that in
the Rate by the Po^^, such persons as are dismabled by sickness, lameness, or
other infirmities shall be exempted, and for such Servants and Children as take
not wages their (...) and Masters shall pay for them, but such as take wages
shall pay for the^ selves.

And it is further Ordered; That one of the Deputies in each Plantation
throughout this Jurisdiction, Dep^ to meet (...) the 2d thursday in Octo^^^
shall yearly meet at Hartford, upon the first day of the sitting of the
General Court the second Thursday in October, and bring with them fairly
written the just number of Males listed as aforesaid, and the Assessments of
Estates made in their several Towns according to the Rules and directions in
this present Order expressed. To examine and transmit the ^^sts to the Gener Co
And the said Deputies being so assembled, and the Gen: Co to grant (...) Rates
shall duly and carefully Examine all the said Lists and assessments of the
several Towns, and shall Correct and perfect the same according to the true
intent of this Order; and the same so perfected, they shall Transmit under
their hands to the General Court then in being, who shall Grant from time to
time such Rates as shall be necessary, and give directions to the Treasurer for
the gathering of the same, Lands and Estates to be rated where they lie
and every one shall pay his Rates to the Constable of the Town where it is
assessed; Nor shall any Land or Estate be Rated in any Town but where the same
shall lie, is or was improved to the owners, reputed owners, or other
proprietors use or behoof, if it be within this Jurisdiction; and for all
peculiars, viz. Such places as are not yet laid within the bounds of any Town,
peculiars to be Rated with the next Town
the same lands with the persons and estates thereupon, shall be assessed by
the Rates of the Town next unto it, the measure or estimation shall be by the
distances of the meeting houses.

And if any of the said Listers, or of the said Deputies shall fail or neglect
to perform the trust committed to them by this Order, in not making,
correcting, List^^^ and Deput: neglect pen 40 s
perfecting or transmitting any of the said Lists or Assessments according to
the intent of this Order, every such Offender shall be fined forty shillings
for every such Offense, provided they be (...)
or so much as the Country shall be damnified thereby, so it exceeds not forty
shillings for one offense; Provided that such Offense or Offenses be complained
of and prosecuted in due course of Law within six months after the same is
committed.

What the Officer (...)
And is also Ordered; upon all Distresses to be taken for any of the Rates and
Assessments aforesaid, the Officer shall Distrain Goods and Cattle if they may
be had, and if no Goods or Cattle, then Lands or Houses, and if no Goods,
Cattle or Lands can be had within the Town where such Dist^esses are to be
taken, then upon such returns to the Treasurer, he shall give Warrant to Attach
the body of such persons to be carried to Prison, there to be kept till the
Court, except they put in Security for their appearance there, or that payment
be made in the mean time.

Rates in what to be paid, and the (...), how to be appointed
It is also Ordered; That all Rates shall be paid in Wheat, Peace and Indian
Core, by an equal proportion of each, or Pork; the prizes of each shall be
appointed by the General Court from time to time; And in default thereof, they
shall be paid at the common price with the Merchant.

Rate^ to be made by one rule
It is further Ordered; That all Town and Ministers Rates shall be made after
the same manner, and by the same rule the Country Rate is made.

Whereas wrong has been done to the Colony by the Constables neglect in
gathering such Levies as they have received Warrants from the Treasurer for,
during their Office;

(...) neglecting Treas^^^ distrein the Constable
It is therefore Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any Constable
shall not have gathered the Levy committed to his charge by the Treasurer then
being, during the time of his Office, that he shall notwithstanding the
expiration of his Office, Treas. neglecting to be answerable to the Country
have power to Levy by Distress all such Rates and Levies; and if he bring them
not in to the old Treasurer according to his Warrants, the Treasurer shall
Distrein such Constables Goods for the same; and if the Treasurer shall not so
Distrein the Constable, he shall be answerable to the Country for the same; And
if the Constable be not able to make payment, it shall be lawful for the
Treasurer, Treas. power to (...)
old or new respectively, to Distrein any man or men of that Town where the
Constables are unable for all Arrearages of Levies, ^
and that man or men upon Petition to the General Court, shall have Order to
collect the same again equally of the Town, with his just Damages for the same.

And it is further Ordered by this Court; That if any person in this Colony
shall refuse or neglect to give in a true account under his ^and of his Cattle
to the List makers or their Agents, Cattle left out of the list to be forfeited
within six days after demanded in their respective Towns, or shall leave out
any of them; he shall forfeit for every such default the estate left out, the
one half to the Public Treasury, and the other half to the persons discovering
the same and prosecuting it to effect.

It is further Ordered by this Court; Collectors of r^^^s their duty
That all Collectors and gatherers of Rates, shall appoint a day and place,
Rates not paid pen 2 d upon a shilling forfeit
and give reasonable warning to the Inhabitants to bring in their proportions,
upon which every man so warned, shall duly attend to bring in his Rate, or
upon neglect thereof, shall forfeit two pence in the shilling for what he falls
short, and the said Collectors shall have Authority hereby to distreine the
delinquents, or be accountable themselves for the Rates and penaltyes so
neglected by them.

It is also Ordered; Estate levied for (...) not to be attached or replevied
That no Attachment or Replevin shall be Granted upon any Estate that shall
have been taken by distress for Town or Country Levies for Civil or
Ecclesiastical respects; Provided if any person account himself wronged by such
distress, he shall have liberty of the Civil Law, thereby to procure his right
by ordinary Profess or complaint.

It is further Ordered; The County (...) pay for chamber hire for their ra^es
That what shall be justly due for the hire of a Chamber for the keeping of the
Country Rate in the several Plantations, from the gathering of it till it be
paid out, it shall be allowed and paid by the Country.

It is also Ordered; what allowance for transportation of Country Rates
That what Corn for the Country Rate is transported out of the Town where it is
gathered by the Treasurers Order, there shall be allowed reasonable
satisfaction for the same, viz. from Windsor to Hartford two pence per bushel,
from Farmington to Hartford three pence per bushel, from Stonington to
Newlondon two shillings in the Pound.

RECORDS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the Town Clerk, or Register
in the several Towns of this Jurisdiction shall record all births and deaths of
persons in their Towns; And that all Parents, Masters, of Servants, Town clerks
(...) Record Births Deaths and Marriages
Executors and Administrators respectively, shall bring into the Register of
their several Towns, the names of such Persons belonging to them, Person^
concerned to bring a note to the Clerk
or any of them, as either shall be born or dye, as also that every new married
man shall likewise bring a Certificate of his Marriage under the hand of the
Magistrate or Commissioner that married them, to the said Register, and for
each neglect, the Person neglecting shall forfeit as follows, viz. If any
person shall neglect to bring in a note or Certificate as aforesaid, Clerks dues
together with Three pence a name to the said Register for all births and
deaths, and Six pence for each Marriage to be recorded more then one Month
after such birth, death, or Marriage, penalty (...)
shall forfeit for every default five shillings, and the penalty to be further
increased upon longer neglect according to the judgment of the Court. penalty
to be increased
And the Register of each Town shall yearly convey to the Clerk of the County
Court of their County, a true transcript of the births, deaths, Clerks duty in
(...) with a ^ of (...)

Neglect 40 s.


and Marriages given under the hands with a third part of the before mentioned
dues under the penalty of Forty Shillings for every such neglect, all which
forfeitures shall be returned into the Treasury, also the Grand Jurors may
present the breaches of this Order.

It is also Ordered; That the several Towns in this Jurisdiction shall provide
a Ledger Book, with an Index, or Alphabet, unto the same, (...) Town to p^ovide
a Ledger (...)
also shall choose one who shall be a Town Clerk, or Register, who shall record
every man's house and Lands granted and measured out to him, with the Bounds and
Quantities of the same, Recorders to (...)
and whosoever shall neglect three months to bring into the said Town Clerk a
Note of his House and Lands, with the bounds and quantity of the same by the
nearest estimation, shall forfeit ten shilling, and so ten shillings a month
for every month he shall so neglect; the like to be done for all Lands
hereafter granted and measured

And if any Graunter being required by the Grauntee, his Heirs or Assigns to
make an acknowledgement of any Grant, Sale, Mortgage or Bargain by him made,
shall refuse so to do, the Grantee may enter caution with the Recorder upon
such Housing and Lands as are to him Granted Bargained, If Granters will not
acknowledge Grants caution may be entered
Sold or Mortgaged, which caution shall secure the interest of the Grauntee
until a legal trial has passed unto a final issue, upon which issue according
to Law, the judgment of the Court being delivered to the Recorder under the
Clerk of the Courts hand where the case was tried shall be his Warrant to
Record the said Grant, A Court Judgment (...) the Recorders warrant to record
a Grant
although the Graunter shall refuse to acknowledge the same.

And it is also Ordered; That the Recorder shall receive six pence for every
parcel of Land he Records, delivering the Owner a Copy of the same under his
hand, whereof four pence shall be to himself, and two pence for the Clerk of
the County, Recorders dues
and the said Register shall every County Court deliver into the (...)
Transcript fairly written, of all such Graunts, Bargains or Engagements by him
Recorded in the Town book, and the Clerk shall Record it in a Book fairly
written for that purpose, and shall file the Copy brought in under the hand of
the Town Clerk; For every search 1 d, every copy 2 d
also the said Clerk shall have for every Search of a parcel, one penny, and
every Copy of the same under the hands of the said Register or Town Clerk, and
one of the Townsmen, and one of the Assistants or Commissioners, shall be a
sufficient and legal evidence to all and every person or persons that shall
have the same to all intents, ends and purposes for the holding of the same
firm to Him, What is a sufficient evidence for Lands
his Heirs and Assigns for ever: Always provided, no Register shall Record
any Lands to any person, except he holds the same upon his own Right, and make
it appear to the Clerk or Register, he has clear R^ght to those Lands by
sufficient Testimony, Recorders duty to see etc
quiet Possession, Deed of Gift, (...) ^^knowledgement of the Graunter before
the said Register.

To prevent inconveniences and unnecessary trouble that may ensue by unwritten
Graunts, Bargains, Sales or Mortgages:

What Deeds of houses and lands are valid
It is Ordered by this Court; That after the first of May 1661. all Graunts
Bargains, Sal^^ and Mortgages made of Houses and Lands, shall be in Writing and
Subscribed by the Graunter with his own Hand or Mark, unto which Mark his Name
shall be annexed and likewise attested by two Witnesses, with their own Hands
or Marks, Deeds to be acknowledged before an A^sistant
unto which Marks their Names shall be annexed; and after the first of
September 1673. all Graunts and Deeds made of Houses and Lands shall be
acknowledged before an Assistant or Commissioner; and that no Grant after the
time aforesaid shall be accounted completed according to Law but such as are
Written, (...) be recorded
Subscribed, Witnessed and Acknowledged as aforesaid. It is also Ordered; That
all such Graunts be Recorded according to Law.

REPLEVY.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That every man shall
have liberty to Replevy his Cattle or Goods Impounded, Distreined, Seized or
Extended (unless it be upon Execution after Judgment, and in payment of Fines
and Rates) Provided he put in good Security to prosecute his Replevy to effect,
Good caution must be given
and satisfy such Damages, Demands and Dues as his Adversary shall recover
against him by Law.

SCHOOLS.
IT being one chief Project of Satan to keep men from the knowledge of the
Scriptures, as in former times, keeping them in an unknown Tongue, so in these
latter times, by persuading them from the use of Tongues, so that at least the
true sense and meaning of the Original might be clouded with false Glosses of
Saint seeming deceivers; and that Learning might not be buried in the Graves of
our forefathers in Church and Colony, the Lord assisting our endeavors:

It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That every
Township within this Jurisdiction, Every Town where are 50 families to proved a
Schoolmaster to teach to write and read, proviso
after the Lord has increased them to the number of Fifty Householders shall
then forthwith appoint one within their Town to teach all such Children as
shall resort to him, to Write and Read, whose Wages shall be paid either by
the Parents or Masters of such Children, or by the Inhabitants in General by
way of supply, as the major part of those who Order the Prudentials of the Town
shall appoint; Provided that those who send their Children, be not oppressed by
paying much more then they can have them taught for in other Towns.

And it is further Ordered; That in every County Town, there shall be set up
and kept a Grammar School, for the use of the County, In every County Town a
Lattin School to be kept
the Master thereof being able to instruct Youths so far as they may be fitted
for the College.

SECRETARY.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That within twenty days after
the Session of every General Court, the Secretary thereof shall send forth
Copies of such Laws and Orders as are or shall be made at either of them,
Secret. duty
which are of general concernment for the Government of this Colony, to the
Constables of each Town within this Jurisdiction, for them to publish within
fourteen days more, at some public Meeting in their several Towns, and cause
them to be written into a Book, and kept for the use of the Town, Constable, to
publish the Laws
and once in every year the Constables in each Town shall read or cause to be
read in some public Meeting all the Capital Laws, Secret. dues for Court Orders
and give notice to all the Inhabitants where they may at any time see the rest
of the Laws and Orders, and acquaint themselves therewith. And it is Ordered;
That the Secretary shall be paid for the Orders of Public Concernment that are
sent forth into the several Plantations two shillings for every Copy, and
recording them
to be paid out of the public Treasury, and twelve pence for every Order that
is of Public Concernment Recorded by the Secretary in the Country Book. It is
also Ordered; That the Secrerary shall Record all such Wills and Inventories as
are exhibited in the Court of Assistants proved and ordered to be Recorded, For
wills and inventories
and file the Original of them, and grant true Copies of them when they shall
be desired, for which he shall be allowed for every Will and Inventory, or
both, under five pounds, three shillings and four pence, and for every one
above five pounds not exceeding one hundred pounds, six shillings and eight
pence; and for every one above a hundred, six pence for every hundred pounds
beyond the first hundred pounds; and for the Copies of every Will and
Inventory, half so much as by this Order is allowed for Recording the
Originals. It is also Ordered; That the Secretary shall be allowed for every
Action Entered; by the taking out of a Warrant respecting the same, either from
himself or any other Magistrate under forty shillings, For actions and warrants
the sum of eighteen pence, and six pence for the Warrant; and for every Action
as before, above the sum of forty shillings, two shillings and six pence for
the Warrant. It is also further Ordered; For Attachments
That the Secretary shall have for every Attachment or Replevin, Bond and
Action belonging thereunto five shillings, For Executions
and for every Execution under fifty shillings, two shillings and six pence;
and for every Execution above fifty shillings, five shillings; For Testimonie^
and other writings
and for the filing of every individual Testimony two pence, and for the Copy
of every Testimony six pence. And whatsoever other Writings any Town or
particular person shall desire and receive of the Secretary, he shall pay unto
him without delay, due recompense to his rational content. Clerk of the County
Court^ dues
The like dues for Recording of Wills and Inventotories, granting of Warrants
and Attachments, Replevins and Entries of Actions, granting Executions is by
this Court allowed to the several Clerks of the County Courts.

This Court also appoints the Secretary to be keeper of the Seal of the Colony,
and to affix it to such Commissions, The Secretary keeper of the Seal
Instruments and Certificates as he is Ordered by Law to do or shall be desired
to by particular persons that have special occasion for the same, For affixing
the Seal 3. s: allowed
for which he shall be allowed besides his writing three shillings for affixing
the Seal to any Instrument or Writing as aforesaid.

SECRECY.
Private offenses when they may be kept secret
IT is Ordered by this Court; That no Magistrate, Juror, Officer or other man
shall be bound to Inform, Present or Reveal any private Crime or Offense,
wherein there is no peril or danger to this Colony, or any Member thereof, when
any necessary tie of Conscience grounded on the Word of God binds him to
secrecy, unless it be in case of Testimony lawfully required.

STRAYES.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That whosoever shall
take up any Stray Beast, Strayes and lost Goods to be cried at 3 public
meetings
or find any Lost Goods, whereof the Owner is not known, he shall give notice
thereof to the Constable of the same Town within (...) days, who shall enter
the same in a Book, and take order that it be Cried at their next Lecture day
or public Meeting three several days; and if it be above twenty shillings
value, at the next Market or public Meeting three several days; penalty for
default
and if it be above twenty shillings value, at the next Market or Public Town
meeting in the several Towns in that County where the Goods or lost Beast is
found, upon penalty that the party so finding, and the said Constable having
such notice, and failing to do as by this Order he is appointed, to forfeit
either of them for such default, one third part of the value of such Straies or
lost Goods.

^inders pen^lty
And if the finder shall not give notice as aforesaid, within one Month, or if
he keep it more then three Months, and shall not Apprize it by sufficient men,
and also Record it with the Register of the Town where it is found, he shall
then forfeit the full value thereof; and if the Owner appear within one twelve
month and a day after such publication, Owners appear within one year to have
restitution
he shall have restitution of the same, or the value thereof, he paying all
necessary charges, and to the Constable for his care and pains, as one of the
next Magistrates shall adjudge: And if no Owner appear within the time
prefixed, the said Stray or Lost Goods shall be thus divided, one fourth part
thereof with his reasonable charge to the finder, one fifth part thereof or ten
shillings to the Constable, Strayes to be (...) divided
at the choice of the Court, the rest to that Counties Treasury in which the
said lost Goods or Stray was taken up in; if marked
Provided, if it be a Stray there be three strokes clipped in the Hair of the
near Buttock, When Horses may be taken up as Strayes
six inches long, that they may be known, provided, also no Horse or Horses
shall be taken up as Strayes out of the Woods at any time, unless they be found
in a perishing condition, or the case be so circumstanced that it is probable
they have broke away from the Owner.

SVMMONS.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That no Summons, pleading Judgment, or any kind
of proceedings in Court or course of Justice, Circumstantial errors in Summons
not to stop proceedings
shall be abated, suspend^d or reversed, upon any kind of circumstantial
Errors or Mistakes, if the person and the cause be rightly understood and
intended by the Court.

Suits Vexatious Suits.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That in all cases where it legally appears to the
Court, that the Plaintiff has wittingly and willingly done wrong to the
Defendant, in commencing and prosecuting any Action, Suit, Complaint or
Indictment in his own Name or in the Name of others, he shall pay treble
dama^ges to the party grieved, and be fined forty shillings to the common
Treasury; and for the third Offense in that kind, he shall be judged and
proceeded against as a common Barrater.

SWINE.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That after the publication
hereof, Swine taken with (...)
what Swine shall go without Rings or Yoaks at any time in the year that go out
of men's own yards, or within four Miles of the Center of the Town plot, those
that shall Pound any such Swine shall have six pence a piece, and the
Pound-keeper two pence a piece and just damages. This Court does also refer it
to the several Towns to appoint some that may attend to put this Order in
execution, and this Order to take place against any Swine that are above a
quarter of a year old; and within 3 miles (...)
Provided also that if any Swine at Windsor be found on the Commons within
three miles of Conecticut River without Rings or Yoaks, they shall be liable to
be Pounded as aforesaid.

It is also Ordered; That if any person, ^
either English or Indian within this Colony, shall under pretense of killing
wild swine in the Commons, kill and destroy any Swine great, or small,
belonging to any other person, he, or they, so doing, shall forfeit five pounds
to the public Treasury, India is not to be impl^ted pen 5. ^
and pay adjust damages to the Owner of such Swine. And it is also Ordered;
That no person shall employ any Indians to kill Swine in the Woods upon the
aforesaid penalty of five pounds.

TESTIMONIES.
IT is Ordered by this Court; Tes^imonies to be wr^tten and used
That whatever Testimonies are improved in any Court of Justice in this
Jurisdiction, in any Action or case to be tried, shall be presented in Writing,
and so kept by the Secretary or Clerk of the said Court on file, which
Testimony shall be written in the Witnesses own words, Bu^ not written by (...)
and by some indifferent persons, not the Plaintiff or Defendant; Provided
notwithstanding, it shall be in the power of the Court or any Magistrate
strictly to examine any Witness upon his Testimony written as aforesaid,
Testimony notw^thstanding may be examined
that so the truth may clearly appear.

TIMBER.
FOr the preserving of Timber; It is by this Court Ordered, That whosoever
shall fell any Timber Tree within this Colony, and not improve it within three
months after he has fell^d it (unless he be prevented by sickness or otherwise
inevitably) he shall forfeit ten shillings, five shillings to the public
Treasury, and five shillings to the Complainer.

TORTVRE.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no man shall be forced by
Torture to confess any Crime against himself, and that no man shall be beaten
with above thirty stripes for one Fact, at one time; nor shall any person be
punished with whipping except the Law so determine, or he have no ^ther way to
answer the Law, unless the Crime be very shameful, and his course of life
vicious and profane.

Town-ships.
IT is by this Court Granted, that the settled and approved Inhabitants of
every Township, shall have power to make such Orders and Constitutions as may
concern the welfare of their Town, Provided they be not of a Criminal, ^
but only of a P^udential nature, and that their penalties exceed not twenty
shillings for one Offen^e, and that they be not repugnant to the Laws and
Orders of this Colony: An^ if any Inhabitant shall neglect or refuse to observe
them, they shall have power to levy the appointed penalties by Distress.

It is also Ordered; That the settled and approved Inhabitants of each Township
shall have power to choose yearly within each Township, To choose ^elect men
convenient number of fit men to order the Prudential Occasions of the Town,
provided nothing be done by them contrary to the public Laws and Orders of
this Colony; Proviso
Provided also, that the number of such Select persons be not above seven in
one Township.

Further (...) Ordered by the Authority of thi^ Court* That the Select men in
each Township from time to time when need shall require, Select men's power
shall have full power to Order and Dispose of all single Persons and Inmates
within their Town^ (who live an Idle or Riotous life) to Service or otherwise:
And if any person be agrieved at their order and dispose, they have liberty to
apply themselves to the next County Court for relief.

Town-Officers.
WHereas it is found by experience, that there is not due Provision in the Law
for to constrain such as are chosen Town-Officers (viz. Select-men, Constables,
Listers, Collectors of Rates, Surveyors of the High ways, Sealers, Packers,
Chimny-viewers, Haywards) to accept of their respective Offices and places.
Town Officers refusing to accept their places forfeit 40. s.


It is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any person chosen to any
of the aforesaid Offices, by the Inhabitants of the Town where he lives, shall
refuse or neglect to accept of any of the said Offices to which he is chosen,
they shall forfeit forty shillings a piece to the Town Treasury where they
dwell, except they can make it appear that they are oppressed by such choice,
Proviso
and others unjustly exempted, any one Assistant or Commissioner is empowered to
hear and determine any such case.

Trade, Free Trade.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That all Merchants not by Law prohibited, which
come for Trading only into these parts, shall have free liberty to Trade with
us, Free trade allowed
and shall have free access with their Ships or other Vessels into any of our
Harbors, and quiet Riding there, and free liberty to depart without any
molestation by us, provided they observe the Laws and Orders of the Colony,
during their abode here.

TREASVRE.
Treasure by what order to be expended
IT is Ordered by this Court; That the General or Public Treasure, or any part
thereof, shall never be expended but by the appointment of the Governor, or
Assistants, or General Court; nor any County Treasury but by the appointment of
the Assistants or Commissioners of that County, nor any Town Treasure but by
the appointment of the Select men or the Inhabitants of the Town.

TREASVRER.
His duty not to part with the public Treasure but with Order and according to
Order
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That the Treasurer shall deliver
no Money out of his hands to any person without Order under the hands of two
Assistants or Commissioners, if the Sum be above twenty shillings, if it be
under, then the Treasurer may accept of Order under the hands of one Assistant
or Commissioner; Always provided that the Assistants or Commissioners that
Grant Bills as aforesaid, shall insert for what they grant such Bills as they
shall sign; but if it be for the payment of some Bills to be allowed, which
are referred to a Committee to consider of whether they ought to be allowed or
not, such Bills as they accept, and set their hands unto, the Treasurer shall
accept and give satisfaction; also he shall pay such sums as the General Court
shall appoint him from time to time, Treasurers power
so far as he has under his command of the public Treasury to do it.

It is also Ordered; That it shall be in the power of the Treasurer at all
times as cause requires, to issue forth his Warrants to the Marshal or
Constable for the levying all fines and forfeitures as shall be due from any
person or persons to the public Treasury.

TRESPASS.
IT is Ordered by this Court; What is not a Trespass
That in all Trespasses or Damage done to any man or men, if it can be proved
to be done by the mere default of him or them to whom the Trespass is done, it
shall be judged no Trespass, nor any damage given for it.

TRESPASSES.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That if any Horse or other Beast
trespass in Corn or other Enclosure, being Fenced in such s^rt as secures
against Cows, Oxen, small Calves, and such like Cattle, Trespasses how prized
the party or parties trespassed shall procure two able men of good report and
credit to view and adjudge the harms, which the Owner of the Beast shall
satisfy when known, upon reasonable demand, whether the Beast were Impounded
or not; but if the Owner be known, and near residing, as in the same Town or
the like, notice shall be left at the usual place of his abode of the Trespass,
before an Estimation be made thereof, to the end he or any others appointed by
him may be present when the judgment is made; the like notice also shall be
left for him of the damage charged upon him, that if he approve not thereof he
may repair to the Select men or some of them, who shall in such lease, nominate
and appoint two able and indifferent men to review and adjudge the said Harms,
which being forthwith discharged, together with the charge of the notice former
and latter view and determination of damages, the first judgment to be void,
if not to stand in Law.

TRIALS.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That in all Actions of Law, it
shall be the liberty of Plaintiff and Defendant, by mutual consent, to choose
whether they will be tried by the Bench or Jury, unless it be where the Law
upon just reason has otherwise determined; the like liberty shall be granted
to all persons in any Criminal Cases. Also it shall be in the liberty of
Plaintiff and Defendant, and likewise every Delinquent to be judged by a Jury,
to challenge any of the Jurors, and if the challenge be found just and
reasonable by the Bench, or the rest of the Jury, as the challenger shall
choose, it shall be allowed, and so many other suitable persons impannelled in
their room.

VERDICTS.
THat Peace with Truth and Righteousness may continue and flourish in the
Confederate Colonies;

It was upon the recommendation of the Commissioners Ordered by this Court;
That any Verdict or Sentence of any Court within the Colonies presented under
Authentic Testimony, shall have a due respect in the several Courts of this
Jurisdiction, where there may be occasion to make use thereof, and shall be
accounted good evidence for the party until better evidence or just cause
appear to alter or make the same void, and that in such case the issuing of the
Cause in question be respited for some convenient time, that the Court may be
advised with where the Verdict or Sentence first passed; Provided also, that
this Order shall be accounted valid and improved only for the advantage of such
only as live within some of the United or Confederate Colonies, wh^^e the
Verdicts in the Courts of this Colony may receive a reciprocal respect by a
like Order established by the General Court of that Colony.

VESSELS.
WHereas it is observed, that some Seamen weigh Anchor in the Harbors of the
several Plantations within this Jurisdiction, and pass out on the Lords day, to
the great grief and essence of the beholders, for the preventi^g whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court; That no Vessel shall depart out of any Harbor
within this Jurisdiction upon the Sabbath, without he has upon some emergent
occasion special Order from some Magistrate or Commissioner under his hand so
to do, otherwise they shall forfeit to the public Treasury forty shillings, a
fourth part of which fine shall be to the ^omplainer.

VOTES.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That if any person that is not a Freeman of this
Colony, so acknowledged by the General Assembly, shall presume to Vote in the
Election of any of the Members of the General Assembly; or if any person that
is a Freeman shall put in above one Vote at a time, he shall pay five pounds as
a fine to the public Treasury for each transgression herein;

VSVRY.
IT is Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That no man shall be adjudged
for the mere forbearance of any Debt above six pounds in the Hundred for one
year, and not above that rate proportionably for all sums whatsoever, Bills of
Exchange only accepted; neither shall this be a color or countenance to allow
any Usury amongst us contrary to the Law of God.

WATCHES.
A sufficient watch maintained in every town
IT is Ordered by this Court; That there shall be a sufficient Watch maintained
in every Town within this Colony, and that the Constable of each Town shall
cause the same to be duly warned by the Watchmen, and see that the Inhabitants
do severally in their turns observe the same, according as the Inhabitants
shall agree: And it is Ordered, that whosoever is liable to Watch, and shall
take a journey out of the Town wherein he lives, after he has had timely
notice and warning to Watch, he shall provide a Watchman for that turn though
himself be absent; and if any man that takes a journey, or goes out or the
Town wherein he lives, shall return within a week after the Watch is past his
house, he shall be ordered and appointed to Watch that turn past a week before;

And for the better keeping Watches and Wards by the Constables in time of
peace:

Constables to present neglects
It is Ordered by this Court; That every Constable shall Present to the next
Magistrate or Commissioner the Name of every Person, who shall upon lawful
warning refuse or neglect to Watch or Ward, either in person or by some other
fit for that service; Penalty
and if being convented, he cannot give a (...) ^xcuse, he shall by the said
Assistant or Commissioner be adjudged to pay five shillings for every such
default, which by Warrant from the Assistant or Commissioner, shall be levied
by the Constable, and be employed for the use of the Watch of that Town: And it
is the intent of the Law, that every person of able body (not exempted by Law)
or of Estate to hire another, shall be liable to Watch and Ward, or to supply
it by some other when they shall be thereunto required; and if there be in the
same house diverse such persons, whether Sons, Servants or Sojourners, they
shall all be compellable to Watch as aforesaid; provided all such as keep
Families at their Farms, being remote from any Town, shall be exempted.

It is also Ordered; That the Watchman shall duly attend to receive their
charge at the Constables house in the Evening, The time of taking their charg
by the shutting in of the Daylight, and they are not to leave their Watch
before the Daylight again, and whosoever shall be convicted of the breach of
this Order shall forfeit two shillings six pence for every default; the one
half to the Constable, the other to the benefit of the Watch.

WITNESSES.
IT is Ordered by this Court; No sufficient testimony without there be two
That no person for any Fact committed shall be put to death without the
Testimony of two or three Witnesses, or that which is equivolent thereunto.

And it is also Ordered; That any one Assistant or Commissioner may take the
Testimony of any person of sixteen years of age, or above, of sound
understanding and reputation, in any case, Civil or Criminal* Provided,
Testimonies may be taken before one Magist^^^^
that where any such Witnesses shall have his abode in that County where the
Case is to be heard, and not disinabled by sickness or other infirmity, the
said Testimony so taken before the sitting of the Court, shall not be received
or made use of in Court, except the Witness be also present to be further
examined about it; Provided also, in all Capital Cases, all Witnesses shall be
present wheresoever they dwell.

And it is also Ordered; That any person Summoned to appear as a Witness in any
Civil Court, between party and Party, shall not be compellable to travel to any
Court or Place where he is to give in his Testimony, except he who shall so
Summon him shall lay down or give him satisfaction for his travel and expense
outward and homeward, and for such time as he shall spend in attendance when he
is at such Court or Place, the Court shall award due recompense. And it is
Ordered, that two shillings a day shall be accounted due satisfaction for any
Witness for his Travel and Expenses, and for such Witnesses as do not travel
out of the Town where they dwell, there shall be allowed but one shilling six
pence per Day: And if any Witness after such payment or satisfaction shall fail
to appear to give in their Testimony, he shall be liable to pay the parties
damages upon an Action of the case. And all Witnesses upon Criminal Cases shall
have their necessary Expenses born and paid out of the County Treasury where
the case is tried in the County Courts, and such Witnesses that attend the
Court of Assistants in Criminal and Capital cases, shall have their necessary
Expenses born by the Colony Treasury.

WOLVES.
WHereas great Loss and Damage does befall this Colony by reason of Wolves,
which destroy great numbers of our Cattle, therefore for the encouragement of
such as shall labor to destroy them;

It is Ordered by this Court; That any person that shall kill any Wolf or
Wolves, within six miles of any Plantation in this Colony, shall have for every
Wolf by him or them so killed eight shillings out of the Public Treasury of
the Colony. And every English man shall have eight shillings more paid him out
of that Towns Treasury within whose bounds the Wolf was killed; Provided that
due proof be made thereof, and also that they bring a certificate under some
Magistrates hand, or Constable of that place unto the Treasurer; Provided also,
that this Order intend only such plantations as do contribute with us to
public charges, they shall make payment upon their own charge.

It is also Ordered by the Authority of this Court; That what person soever
English or Indian, shall take any Wolf out of any Pit made by another man to
ketch Wolves in, whereby they would defraud the right owner of their due from
the Colony or Town, every such Offender shall pay to the owner of the (...)
twenty shillings, or be whipped on the naked body not exceeding six stripes.

Wrecks of the Sea.
IT is Ordered by this Court; That if any Ships or other Vessels, be it Friend
or Enemy, shall suffer Shipwreck upon our Coasts, there shall be no violence or
wrong offered to their persons or goods, but their persons shall be harbored
and relieved, and their goods preserved in safety till Authority may be
certified, and shall take further order therein.

Forms and Presidents to be used so far as there is occasion, and they may be
useful
TO A. B. of H. these are in his Majesty's Name, to Will and Require you to
appear at the next County Court to be holden at H. on the (...) day of the
(...) Month next ensuing, Summons.
to answer C. D. of W. in an Action of Debt, for money due to him for a Horse,
with damages, to the value of (...) of an Action of the case, for damage by
your Cattle done to his Corn, or Trespass, or Slander for saying so and so, or
Battery, etc. hereof you may not fail: Dated in H. the (...) day of the (...)
Month, 1672.

To the Marshal, or either of the Constables of ^.
THese are in his Majesty's Name, to Will and Require you to Attach the Estate
of T. F. of N. to the value of (...) and for want of Estate his person,
Attachment
with sufficient Surety or Sureties for his appearance at the Court to be
holden at H. on the (...) day of the (...) Month next ensuing, to answer W. P.
of M. in an Action of Debt, with Damages, to the value of (...) and what Estate
you Attach, o^ Security you receive, you are to secure it in your hands, that
it may be ^esponsible to answer the aforesaid Action, and the Judgment of the
Court therein; the Plaintiff having given sufficient caution to prosecute his
Action to effect, and answer all Damages in case he make not his plea good; You
are also to m^ke return of the serving hereof to the said Court, or to the
Clerk before the Court, hereof fall not: Dated in H. the (...) day of the (...)
Month, 1672.

WE D. E. and F. G. acknowledge our selves Bound to the Public Treasury of
the Colony of Conecticut in a Recognizance of (...) that W. P. of M. shall
Pro^ecute the Attachment ^e has now taken out against T. F. of N. at the Court
to be holden at H. on the (...) d^y of the (...) Month next, Bond for
prosecution
to full effect, and answer al^ Damages in case he make not his plea good:
Dated in H. the (...) day of the (...) Month, 1672. Acknowledged before me

J C. Clerk.

To the Constables of H. or either of them.
THese are in his Majesty's Name to Will and R^quire you forthwith to Repreive
three Swine, or two Oxen Impounded or Distreined by A. B. of H. and deliver
them to C. D. of S. he hav^ng given Bond to the value of (...) to prosecute his
Replevin at the next Court to be holden at H. and so from Court to Court till
the case be issued, Replevin
and to pay such costs and damages to the said C. D. as he shall by Law recover
against him; and you are to make a true return hereof under your hand, hereof
you may not fail. Dated in H. the (...) day of the (...) Month. 1672.

Summons for witnesses
YOu whose Names are under written, are in his Majesty's Name required to appear
at the (...) to be holden at Hartford the (...) day of the (...) Month next
en^uing, ^o give^ your Testimony in a case depending between C. C. of H. and
(...) of W. hereof fail not. To A. B. and C. D. of W. H. the (...) day of
(...), 1672.

To the Constable of M. L.
THese are in His Majesty's Name to Will and Require you, to Warn all the
Freemen who are Inhabitants of your Town, to meet at a time and place by you
appointed; Summons for choice of Deputies
To Elect one or two Able and Judicious Freemen, to attend the General Court to
be holden at Hartford, the Second thursday in October next, as your Deputies,
to Assist in the management of the Public Affairs of this Colony, and you are
to return the Name or Names of him or them you shall Elect, endorced on this
Warrant under your hand, to the said Court or to the Secretary before the
Court. Hereof Fail you not. Dated in H. the (...) day of the (...) Month, 1672.

By Order from the Governor Signed By me J. A. Secret.

THis may certify, A Certificate for our Commi^s^oner^ for the United Colonies
That the General Court of Conecticut Assembled in H. this (...) day of (...)
1672. have made choice of S. VV. and N. G. Esquires. Commissioners for this
Colony, for a full and complete Year, as any occasion and exigency may require,
and particularly for the next meeting at New Plymouth, And do Invest them with
full Power to Treat and Conclude of all things according to the Tenor and true
meaning of the Articles of Confederation of the United Colonies, concluded at
Plymouth, the (...) day of September 1672.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table, Showing the General Titles and Heads of this Book of
LAWS.
A
ABility. Page. 2 Actions.
Five days warning to be given. Plaintiffs not answering three calls to be
Nonsuited Liberty of Process at Adjourned Courts. Plaintiffs liberty to
withdraw or Nonsuit himself. ibid Actions their charge. In what case Courts
may refuse to hear Actions.
Adultery how Punished. Page. 2 Adventurers in discovering Commodities to be
encouraged. Page. 3 Age, full Age ibid Alarms* false Alarms. ibid Appeals,
their Order and Cost. ibid Arrests. Page. 4 Attachments.
When they may be granted, against whom Page. 4 Sufficient Security for
Prosecution to begin ^
Auditors for the Jurisdiction Accounts. Page. 5 Assistants, See Indians, See
Military Affairs, See Poor.
B.
BAllast, Page. 5 Barratry. ibid Bastardy. Page. 6 Bills Assigned. ibid Bounds
of Towns and particular Lands. ibid Brand^ for Horses, and every Town Letter
Page. 7 Bridges, how to be Repaired. ibid Burglary and Theft how punished* ibid
C.
Capital Laws. Page. 9 Candle-wood Page. 10 Cask and Cooper. ibid Cattle and
Corn fields ibid Common Fields and Fences. ibid Caveats Entered Page. 11 Causes,
small Causes Page. 1^ Children how to be Educated ibid Rebellious Children and
Servants to be sent to the House of Correction Page. 14 Cider not to be sold to
the Indians nor English without license ibid Commons to be cleared ibid
Constables, when to be chosen, ibid Their work and power
Constables, See Elections, Heretics, Profanation of the Sabbath, Indians,
In-kiepers, Night-walkers, Rates, Secretary, Watches. Conveyances Fraudulent
Page. 16 Counties stated ibid County privileges ibid Courts.
General Courts when and where to be held Page. 17 Their constitution and power
Courts of Assistants, and their power County Courts when to be held at
Hartford, New haven, New London, and Fairfield. County Courts Constitution and
power
Courts, see Jury, Election Cruelty. Page. 18
D
DAmages pretended Page. 19 Death untimely ibid Delinquents.
To bear their own charge ibid To have no Advocates To be punished for contempt
Debt, Book Debts when to determine ibid Deputies,
Not more then two from a Town Page. 20 Their Power Their Oath Their Allowance
Their Penalty, etc.
Deputies, See Rates. Distilling Corn and Malt prohibited ibid Distress ibid
Dowries Page. 21 Drunk^nness ibid Drunkenness, See I^keepers
E
Ecclesiastical.
EMbodying into Church Estate how attended. Page. 21 What Ministry approved A
Congregational way approved Further liberty granted Contemptuous carriages
toward the Word and Minister how punished The Word Preached to be attended The
Civil Power to see the Ordinances of Christ observed Church Censures not to
degrade of civil dignity.
Election.
The Freemen in person or proxy to attend the Election of Governor, Deputy
Governor and Assistants, etc. Page. 22 What Laws to be read before Election
Who to Nominate the persons to be Elected The way of Election, and the time
when.
Escheats Page. 23 English not to live with Indians ibid Execution upon
Judgments ibid Execution upon Delinquents, Page. 24
F
FArms remote to keep a man to guard them Training days Page. 24 Fences.
Enclosures to be sufficiently Fenced ibid The liberty allowed in setting down
Fences
Fence-viewers.
To be annually chosen ibid Penalty for Non-acceptance
Ferries Page. 25 Fines.
To be paid in current pay ibid To be levied once a year And how to be disposed
Fire ibid Forgery ibid Fornication Page. 26 Foreigners not to trade with
Indians ibid Freemen.
Their Certificates ibid Qualification Acceptance and Oath Scandalous Freemen
Disfranchized

G
Gaming.
SHuffle board where prohibited penalty Page. 26 Gards and Dice prohibited, and
penalty
Gates and Bars Page. 27 Grand Jury ibid Guards at public Meetings ibid
Governor his power and Privilege ibid
H
Heretics.
NOt to be entertained unnecessarily Penalty Page. 28 To be committed to Prison
How to be transported Their Books by whom they may be kept And how they shall
be suppressed.
High ways.
Surveyors to be chosen Page. 28 Their Power Work and Penalty Hides and Tallow
not to be transported Page. 29
Home Lots*
To be built upon Page. 29 Mansion Houses to be upheld
Horses.
Stone Horses their height ibid Proportion Not to be sold to Indians Sales and
Exchanges to be Entered Cost of Entry, penalty for neglect
Houses.
To be tendered to the Town before sold Page. 30 To be secured for Heirs Heirs
to have ^ double Portion Housing to be kept in Repair for Legatees Husband and
Wives not to live separate ibid

I.
IDleness Page. 31 Impost.
Wine and Liquors to be Entered Charge for Entry and Custom Who to appoint
Custom Masters ibid The Owner to pay Custom The Custom Masters power and
dues. Liquors and Wine forfeited, how disposed
Impresses. Page. 32 Imprisonment ibid Indians.
To be taught the Knowledge of God Page. 32 Sachems to pay Trespass, etc. Those
that offend to be seized with those that protect them. Women and Children to be
sparingly seized When seized to be delivered to the party damnified A
declaration to be published to them Not to March through our Towns in a hostile
manner Not to Train, Watch or Ward Their Rights to be compounded for Not to
pass through our Towns in the night Profanation of^ the Sabbath fined Powawing
fined Murderers to be punished with death
Indians see Liquors. Indictments Page. 34 In keepers.
Every Town to have an Ordinary ibid Every Ordinary to have a Sign Their duty,
their penalties
Inhabitants, how to be received Page. 36 Inventories.
To be made ibid Exhibited in Court Proved, Recorded and Filed The Estate
secured The charge how to be defrayed If no Kindred appear, the Court to
Administer Wills proved in other Colony to be here accepted Who to grant
Administration
Juries and Jurors.
All Cases above 40. s. to be tried by a Jury Page. 37 Their number and work
Juries, see Grand Jury Justice. Page. 37
L.
LAscivious carriages how punished Page. 37 Land the tenor of our Lands Page.
38 Lands, see Records Lands not to be purchased of Indian without License ibid
Leather.
The Tanners duty and penalty for neglects Page. 38 The Curriers duty and
penalty for neg^^c^^ How forfeitures upon this order are to (...) divided
Unwrought Leather transported forfeited
Levies Page. 39 Lying Page. 41 Liquors.
Who to grant Licenses ibid Liquors not to be sold to the Indians, penalty
Indian Testimonies how far accepted

M.
Magistrates.
DEfamers of Magistrates, how punished Page. 41 In what case they are exempted
from voting
Man slaughter Page. 42 Maritime Affairs Page. 42 Marriage.
How to be published Page. 46 Motions to be made with consent of Parents How to
be consummated
Ma^shal, his dues and duty see Levies. Page. 47 Penalty for neglect
Masters, Servants and Sojourners Page. 47 Measures and Weights.
How to be provided, and when Page. 48 Every County and Town to have Standards
and Sealers Once a year to be Sealed Sealers power and penalty for neglect
Military affairs.
Who shall bear Arms Page. 49 Who provide Arms P^nal^ies f^^d ^ects Provision
for such as want Arms Sou^diers to Train six days in each year Chie^ Officers
to appoint the days Eig^t a clock in the morni^g the time of Meeting Every
Train Band to have a Clerk Cl^rk duty, his dues, his penalties Penalty for non
appearance Allowance of Powder to each Soldier Magaz^ens of Powder and Shot to
be provided in the Colony, and every Town. Each So^^diers proportion of
Ammunition Defects how fined What Offi^ers each Company is to have Every
Company to nominate their Officers. The General Court to confirm Commission
Officers County Court to confirm Sergeants of the Foot, and Corporals of the
Horse Every County to be a Regiment Every Regiment to have a Sergeant Major A
general Muster in each County once in four years* Sergeant Majors power The
Governor to be General of all our Forces Military Officers freedom, power.
and ^mmis.
Military, see Farms. Mills and Millers their allowance and duty Page. 51
Ministers maintenance how to be granted* Page. 5^ To be suitable and
honorable.
Mines and Minerals ibid
N.
NIght walkers. Page. 52
O.
Oaths.
OF Fidelity, of Freemen Page. 53 Of Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants
Of Treasurer, Secretary and Commiss^oner Of Marshal, Juries, Witnesses and
Constables. Of Clerks of the ^^nd, Leather Sealers Of Force viewers and
Apprizers No Oath to be urged but such as is approved by the General Court.
Oppression Page. 55
P.
PEace-breakers Page. 56 Petition ibid Pipe-^^eves.
Their size ibid Searchers to be appointed Their duty and ^ues. Possession.
ibid
Poor.
Every Town to provide for its own Poor. Page. 57 Select men's power to dispose
of poor ibid. When they shall be the Towns charge.
Pounds, and Pound breach.
Every Town and Village to provide a pound. ib Each Beast impounded 8 d. a head
ibid. Except Sheep which pay only 1 d. Re^e^es and pound breach their penalty.
And the dispose of the same.
Profane Swearing and Cursing. Page. 58 Profanation of the Sabbath. ibid.
Punishment. ibid
Q.
Quakers see Heretics.
R
Rates.
ALl persons to pay to common charge. Page. 59 Lands to be Rated where they ly.
Persons where they dwell. Listers to be chosen once a year. What persons
exempted the List. What cattle exempted the List. Deputies Annually the 2
thursday in October to meet in Hartford to examine and transmit the Lists to
the General Court. Penalty for neglect. ibid General Court to Grant necessary
Rates. In what to be paid. The price how to be appointed. What the Officer is
to distreine. Treasurers power to punish Constables negl. Collectors o^ Rates
their duty and power. Estates levied for Rates, not be attached or reprieved.
The Country to pay for chamber room and Transportation of Country Rates.
Records.
Every Town to choose a Register. Page. 61 Town Clerk^ their dues, duty and
penalty. Each Town to provide a Ledger Book. Lands therein to be Recorded, the
Bounds and quantities of them. All Grants to be Reco^d^d within 3 months.
Penalty for neglect. A Courts Judgment is a Recorders sufficient warrant* to
Record a Grant. His dues for Records, for Copies, for search. What is a
sufficient evedence for Lands What deeds of houses and lands are valid. Deeds
to be acknowledged before ^ Magistrate and Recorded.
Replivins. Page. 6^
S.
SChools. Page. 62 Secretary.
His Duty. Page. 63 His Dues, ibid
Secretary, see Election, Inventories, Lycenses, Petitions. Select men, see
Horses, ^^ventories, Poor, Townships. Secrecy. ^4 Strayes. ib^d. Summons. ibid
Suits, Vexations suits. ibid Swine.
To be Ringed or yoaked. Page. 65 Or kept in men's yards Or 3 miles off the
Center of the Town. Swine, wild Swine. ibid

T
TEstimonies to be written, but not by Plantiff or Defendant. Page. 65 Timber.
ibid. Torture. ibid. Townships.
Their Power to make O^ders. ibid. Anex Penalties. To choose Select men. Select
men's Power.
Town Officers not accepting their places penalty. Page. 6^ Trade^, free Trade.
ibid. Treasure. ibid. Treasurer his duty and power. ibid. Treasur^r, see Rates.
Trespass. ^7 Trespasses. ibid. Trials. ibid.
V
VErdicts. ^^ Vessell^. ib^d Votes. Page. 68 Usury. ibid.
W
WAtches. Page. 68 Witnesses. Page. 69 Wolves. ibid Wrecks of the Sea. ibid.
FINIS.

