THE SPOUSE OF CHRIST Coming out of affliction, leaning upon Her BELOVED: OR, A
SERMON PREACHED BY Mr. JOHN ALLIN. The late Reverend Pastor to the Church of
Christ at Dedham, At the Administration of the Lords Supper. August 6. 1671.
And may be useful to any Church of Christ, or true Believer in a state of
affliction.

1 Samuel 30. 6. And David was greatly distressed, for the People spoke of
Stoning him, because the Soul of the People was grieved, every man for his
Sons, and for his Daughters, but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
Cambridge: Printed by Samuel Green: And are to be sold by John Tappin of
Boston. 1672.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
T He Great God, whose all Creatures are, and in whose counsels all their
changes, in all their Generations are formed, has according to the good
pleasure of his own Will reserved us to this our Generation, to an acceptable
year, to a day of Salvation, and assigned to us this place of which we may say,
the lines are fallen to us in pleasant places, we have a goodly Heritage, even
in the clear Sun-light of Gospel truths: he has planted (in N. E.) a Vineyard
in a very fruitful Hill, which he has fenced about with a Christian and Godly
Government, and gathered out the Stones, and built a Tower in the midst of it,
and made a Wine press, and be did plant it with the choicest plants, and did
send forth many faithful and skilful Laborers thereunto, so to dress the Vine
that it might want nothing that might make it fruitful: and Oh that it could be
said, it brought forth no wild Grapes: but of late times the Great Lord of the
Vineyard has called home so many of those his Laborers, that it makes many
observant hearts trembling to say, what is God about to do with this Vineyard.
And amongst others of those his choice ones, he has lately called home the
Reverend Author of these two ensueing Sermons. and ordered him to enter into
his Masters joy; who was a man that needs not our Testimony for his
commendation, his Works shall praise him in the Gate: A man, so well approved
in the Churches of Christ, that he was known to be a faithful labourer in the
House of the Lord, a wise Builder in his House, He was a burning and a shining
Light, and we that were of his Flock a long season rejoiced in his light, even
from the first gathering of the Church of Christ in Dedham, which was Anno
1638. until this present year 1671. wherein August 26. after, about ten days
moderate sickness, he entered interest, in the 75. year of his age: in all which
time, he was a very constant, faithful and diligent Steward in the House of
God; a man of peace and truth, we were lead forth by the still waters in green
Pastures, our Table was fully furnished, and our Cup did flow over, and
sometimes drop upon others; some he did Plant, and some he did Water, and some
increase God did give, so that he in some measure, had wherein to rejoice
amongst us.

But now Alas, Alas! we that were full are become empty, and even as sheep
without a Shepard, are left to beg our bread, the ways of our little Sion
mourn because we want our solemn Feasts, the joy of our heart is ceased, our
dance is turned into mourning, the Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us
that we have sinned, we cannot but say, Oh that it were with us as in times
past, as in the days wherein God preserved us, when his Candle shined upon our
Head, and when by his light we walked through darkness The memory of those
sweet distilling Dews, that did formerly, drop upon us are not yet so forgotten
but that we desire to recall some of them, and most especially the two last
Sermons our Dear and Reverend Pastor did Preach amongst us: being Texts that he
came to in his ordinary course, and not chosen purposely; yet being by
providence fitted as for his farewell, and for our present state of affliction
and emptiness though then un-seen both to himself and us; The considiration
whereof has moved the Church here by Vote, to order the endeavoring of
there-collecting of these Sermons, and the fitting them for public use, and to
be kept amongst them for the Edification of themselves and theirs; and for the
better keeping alive the memory of him whom we so much loved and honored, and
have committed the care of effecting the same to some few of the Brethren. But
Alas! we that are so entrusted, know our selves altogether below such a work,
and after some time travailing betwixt sense of our own weakness, and desire
the work might be accomplished; we at length by perusing our Pastors own Notes
found in his Study, and comparing the Notes of several Hearers taken in
public, according to our weakness have Collected the ensuing lines, knowing
that if it had been done by we Author himself they were like to be incomparably
better, yet we have endeavored to keep to his own Words, Matter and Method,
and (...) know our God requires not of us according to what we have not, but
according to what we have, and we hope and beg, that all such as may have the
perusal of the following Lines, to pass by such our weaknesses as they may
there find, and cover them with the Garment of love.

We hope we have in no sort wronged the Author, whom we so much loved and
reverenced, but have as truly and heartily as we are able, rendered his own,
and presented the truth: And so we commit the whole to that God that is able to
give a Blessing, and to make his strength known in weakness; By some of the
Hearers of the ensuing Sermons.

Anagr. JOHN ALLIN IN HONI ALL.

Cant. 8. 5. part of the Verse. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness,
^^aning upon her Beloved?
SOme understand this of the Shulamite spoken of before Others of some other
Spouse or Church of Christ, to arise after her, according to that promise of
the waters that run from under the Threshold of the Temple, toward the East,
leading toward Arabia, Syria and Egypt, Ezekiel. 47. but when we consider what
went before, and the other like places, that charge, ver. 4. seems to be the
occasion of this Question, namely, I charge you Oh Daughters of Jerusalem that
you stir not up, nor awake my Love until he please, which words gives occasion
of this Question, parallel to this you may see, chap. 3. 5,6. and chap. 5. 8,9.
and chap. 6. 1. Whether is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among Women, etc.
as in those places the Daughters of Jerusalem are brought in, enquiring after
Christ the Beloved of the Spouse, so in the Text they are brought in admiring
and inquiring concerning the Spouse of Christ, saying, Who is this that comes
thus up out of the wilderness, etc. the Question is put in the Feminine Gender,
as if they should say, what Woman is this? and indeed they that should behold
the coming of the Shulamite, viz. the Return of the Jews, it will be a Question
worth the inquiring with Admiration, and saying, who is this? and hence I
conceive the Question is concerning that Spouse, that gave such a charge in
ver. 4. unto which Christ gives Answer in the words following, I raised thee up
under the Apple Tree, etc. although some take that Answer, to be the Churches,
to stir up Christ by Prayer: which seems not so suitable, but my purpose is at
present to speak only to the former part of the verse, who is this that comes
up, etc.

For the meaning of the Words, Who is this? it argues something extraordinary
which is matter of special observation and worthy of enquiry, (...) 3. 6. Who
is this that comes out of the Wilderness like Pillars of Smoke perfumed with
Mirrh, chap. 5. 9. what is thy Beloved more then (...) other Beloved, etc chap
6. 1. whether is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among Women, etc. it is one
thing that shall be inquired into at the return of this Church of the Jews,
whence they come:

That comes up out of the Wilderness, a Wilderness is a desolate place, a Land
not Ploughed nor Sowed, so it was to Israel when they came out of Egypt, then
God proved them to see what was in their hearts, the Wilderness is a Land of
Drought, and the shadow of Death, a Land of (...) Serpents and Scorpions, a
terrible Wilderness God led his People through, as Deuteronomy. 8. what can we expect
to find in a Wilderness, Mat. 11. 7. What went you into the Wilderness to see,
a Wilderness is a state of affliction and temptation, Mat. 4. 1. then was Jesus
led aside into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, now the return of
this Shulamite to their own Land is prophesied of, as a People brought out of
the Wilderness of the People and Nations, Ezekiel. 20. 34,35,36. and I will bring
you out from the people, and will gather you out of the Countries wherein ye
are scattered with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out Arm, and with fury
poured out, and I will bring you into the Wilderness of the people, and there
will I plead with you face to face, like as I pleaded with your Fathers in the
Wilderness of the Land of Egypt, so will I plead with you says the Lord God,
He will bring them through great afflictions and temptations to discover the
rebels and to cut them off, ver. 37. 38. and the rest shall be accepted, ver.
40. 41. with this agrees the Prophecy of Dan. 12. 1. And at that time shall
Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for the Children of thy
people, and there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was
a Nation even to that same time, and at that time thy people shall be
delivered, every one that shall be found written in the Book, Isai. 65. 9. And
I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my
mountain, and mine Elect shall inherit it, ver. 11. But ye are they that
forsake the Lord, therefore I will number you to the Sword: In all these
afflictions, trials and miseries, wherein that people had formerly been, as in
a vast howling Wilderness, and in all those sad things that shall befall them,
such as never was since at was a Nation, this Spouse shall come up from this
Wilderness to the admiration of such as shall behold her, Isai.63. 13,14. That
led them through the deep as an Horse in the Wilderness, that they should not
stumble, as a Beast gooth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused
him to rest, so did thou lead thy People, to make thy self a glorious name.

Leaning upon her Beloved, What is the excellency of this Spouse? She is
leaning upon her Beloved: The word ( leaning) is derived from the Arabian
tongue, from which word some conjecture that it should speak of a Church from
thence: it may be Translated leaning, or cleaving to, adjoining, associating
her self; the Greek Translate it, confirming or strengthening her self in her
Beloved, any of these words do well express her Faith in Christ her Beloved,
being sensible of her distresses and wilderness temptations; she dare not trust
to any thing but her Beloved, as faith the Apostle, We despaired in our selves,
that we might trust in the living God, being sensible of her own weakness, she
leans upon him, she adjoyns and associates her self to him that can and will
guide her through all difficulties. 1 Pet. 5. 10. that he will make you perfect,
strengthen, stablish, settle you, herein the Spouse comforts her self, leaning
upon her Beloved. For the understanding the Description of this her Beloved
upon whom she thus leans, Consider,

1. Who is it but Jesus Christ, the Head and Husband of his Church, who is able
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. who is that
firm Rock of Ages, that precious Corner Stone, that whosoever believes on him
shall never be confounded, 1 Pet. 3. 6.

2. Her Beloved, that is he that has infinitely and most freely loved his
Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. and given himself for it to purify and cleanse it, Rev.
1. 5. Unto him that have loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, Gal. 2 20. Who has loved me, and given himself for me, these two, the
alsufficiency of Christ, and his great and infinite love to her is ground
sufficient to lean upon him in all conditions, as the Apostle says, I know in
whom I have believed, in him that is able to preserve whatsoever I have
committed to him; In Christ are all things that make up a fullness of Faith, his
Omniscience that knows all our needs and dangers, and how and when to supply,
and his Omnipotency whereby he is able to do it.

3. Faithfulness in his promises, he is the Amen, the true and faithful
witness, as Sarah who believed for she judged him faithful that had promised.

4. Compassion, or bowels of infinite compassions, his Spouse is as the apple
of his eye, therefore the Lord Jesus must needs be in every respect the most
suitable object of Faith, being so all-sufficient, faithful, compassionate and
loving, now then this is the beloved of the S pouse, she came leaning upon this
her Beloved, whose first love did draw her heart to love him again with a most
ardent love, as ver. 7. Many waters cannot quench* love, neither can the floods
drown it, Psalm. 119. 132. Look thou upon me and be merciful unto me, as thou
usest to do to them that love thy name, and ver. 1. 59. Consider how I love thy
Precepts, quicken me Oh Lord according to thy loving kindness; So that there is
a further encouragement for the Spouse to cleave to Christ Jesus, because she
finds this love in her to be a fruit of his everlasting love to her, now Faith
finding such an Object, not only is persuaded that he is allsufficient and
willing to save, but the will chooses him for it is portion, cleaves to him and
rests upon him for all safety and good, as it is all in all, and gives up it
self to be guided, ordered and disposed of in all conditions, as most safe and
happy in his hands and dispose, Faith counts it self most safe in the Arms of
Christ, this is one effect of Faith, for the Soul to give up it self to Christ,
to do as he will with it, he may give what he will, and take what he will; the
Soul is willing to part with any thing at the command of Christ, willing to
part with it is dearest sins and lusts for Christ Jesus, so that a Spouse of
Christ, seeing the Wisdom, Faithfulness, Power and Love of the Lord Jesus does
choose him for her portion, and give up her self to Christ, willing to be at his
disposing, and willing to part with any thing for Christ; here is her leaning
upon her Beloved; and so she fears not for any evil tidings.

Doct. It is a matter of much Observation and Admiration, to see a Spouse of
Christ coming out of a Wilderness condition, and leaning by Faith firmly upon
Christ as her beloved;

Proof, That the excellency of the Spouse of Christ is in leaning upon her
Beloved, Heh. 11. gives a Cloud of Witnesses, Abraham left his Country by
Faith, offered up Isaac by Faith; Noah prepares an Arc by Faith, others
endured cruel mocking by Faith; Oh the virtue and admirable effects of Faith!
you see in the Wilderness, how highly God approved of Caleb, who followed God
fully, when others spoke evil of the good Land, says Caleb* they shall be meat
for us, we are well able to overcome them; My servant Caleb faith the Lord, he
shall go in, his Seed shall possess it, how highly the Lord approves of Faith,
you may see in the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 8,9,10. he finds no fault
with them, but highly commends them for keeping the word of his patience, and
promises most safe protection when the hour of temptation overspreads the
World; the Centurion who had such Faith as to say, Speak but the word and my
Servant shall be healed, Christ highly commends that Faith, as not having found
such, no not in Israel; So the Woman of Canaan, her Faith Christ commends, and
says, be it to thee even as thou will.

Reas. 1. It is so, not only from the excellency of Faith it self, but from the
excellency of a tried Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. That the trial of your Faith, being
much more precious then of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire,
might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Christ
Jesus, Psalm. 12. 6. The Words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a
Furnace of Earth, purified seven times, as the word is pure and precious, so is
Faith under Wilderness trials.

Reas. 2. Because this leaning upon Christ in such a state is an evidence of
great love to Christ; this the Lord takes great notice of, Ier. ^. ^. I
remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thy Espousals when thou wentest
after me in the wilderness, etc.

Reas. 3. Because its a glorious thing to behold the love of God, and Jesus
Christ, to lead up such a Spouse out of a Wilderness, it causes that glory as
is ascribed to God, of old, as that one act at the Red Sea did, Exodus 15,16.
Who is like unto thee O Lord, glorious in Holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders, Deuteronomy. 32. 10,11. He found them in a desert Land, and in the wast
bowling Wilderness, he lea him about, he instucted him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye, etc.

Use 1. Instruction: Here we may observe, and see the manner of Gods dealing
even with his most precious Churches and People, even with this Shulamite, he
brings her out of the Wilderness, so the Lord did of old, when he brought his
people out of Egypt; He brought them into the Wilderness, and the Lord saw the
mixed multitude amongst them, and that Generation must be all worn out before
he brought them into the promised Land: In the Wilderness the Lord showed his
wonderful works, feeding them with Manna, and giving them water out of the
Rock; there God proved them, to know what was in their hearts, and he found
abundance of sin, and pride, and rebellion in them, and yet all was to do them
good in the latter end: So when he brought them out of Babylon to Jerusalem, we
read in Ezra and Nehemiah what afflictions and oppositions they met withal, of
Blastings and Mildews, and disappointments in their Labors they were exercised
withal, as may be seen in the Prophecy of Hagga^ and so it will be with this
Shulamite, the Church of the Jews at their return; the Lord will bring them out
of the Wilderness of the People through many temptations and afflictions, and
that Wilderness condition may seem to continue for a long time; if we compare
Dan. 12. 11,12. it appears to be forty five years, and so it has been with
the reformed Churches that are come out of spiritual Babylon, in Scotland,
Holland and Geneva, and the rest, what bloody wars? what persecutions and
trials of various kinds? nay, what Soul is it that the Lord has brought home
to himself, but that they are brought out of a Wilderness of trials,
afflictions and temptations, spiritual or outward, to purge them, and make them
white, Dan. 12. to bring them out of all confidence in themselves; therefore
wonder not at the persecutions and troubles that befall the Churches and Saints
this day in the world: God no doubt is doing some great work for his People,
the Lord Jesus has his Pan in his hand, and will thoroughly purge his Floor,
burn up the Chafe, and gather his Wheat into his Garner: Let us not promise
our selves a peaceable condition, we may fear that the Lord has further
wilderness trials to bring us through, that he may purge out the Rebels, and
those that transgress, we may fear that we are a people ripe for judgment,
when there is such great sins breaking out amongst us, when there is so much
Devision, Worldliness, etc. Let us not be secure, the Lord may justly carry us
through a wilderness of sore trials, to purge his Churches of the Chafe, and
to take us off from the World, and confidence in his Ordinances, which we are
too apt to lean upon.

Use 2. Instruction: We may here observe what it is that makes a Spouse of
Christ, or any Soul, an object of enquiry and admiration: Her leaning on her
Beloved by Faith and love, this is the Glory, Beauty, and Excellency of any
Church, or Spouse of Christ, or Soul, to be much in the exercise of Faith and
Love* Faith is that which gives Glory to God; Abraham gave Glory to God by
Believing, Rom 4. 20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief,
but was strong in Faith giving Glory to God, That is therefore the eminency of
any Church or Soul, to give Glory to God by Believing; thus Job under all his
afflictions and temptations, could believe that his Redeemer did live, and that
he should see him at the last day upon the Earth, which was an eminency in him;
it is therefore I say, the eminency of any Church or Soul, to be strong in
Faith, it is a great dishonor to God, and to Jesus Christ, when Disciples that
have been long in the School of Christ, yet have but little Faith, how often did
the Lord Jesus upbraid his Disciples with this, Oh ye of little Faith, and
sometimes, how is it that you have no Faith? this is an eminency in a
Christian, when he can give much Glory to God by Believing, Christ delights
in this, and admires the Faith of the Centurion, Mat. 8. 10. When Jesus heard
it he marvelled, and said, to them that followed; verily I say unto you, I have
not found so great Faith no not in Israel, ver. 13. And Jesus said unto the
Centurion, go thy way, and as thou have believed so be it done unto thee, and
his Servant was healed in the self same hour; In this life of Faith, the
Apostle Paul was very eminent, when he said, the life that I now live, I live
by* Faith in the Son of God, Psalm. 27. 1,2,3. the strength of his Faith was
such, that he said, though an Host should encamp against me my heart should not
fail, though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident; Faith
gives God the Glory of his Power, faithfulness, mercy and grace, to lean and
venture the whole Interest of the Soul for Eternity upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding so many Sins, Corruptions and Temptations, this is a great and
glorious work, this is our victory over the world, even our Faith, and this
Faith is that which draws virtue from Jesus Christ, which causes the Soul to
be in love with the Lord Jesus, as we may see in the Spouse, she leaned upon
her Beloved, upon his love to her, and the more because she felt his love to
her; Oh the eminency of Faith and love, as the Apostle highly commends the
Church of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2,3. We give thanks to God always for
your work of Faith, and labor of love, so Chap. 5. 8. He calls Faith and Love
the Breast Plate, 1 Timothy 1. 14. the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant
with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, where ye see much Faith and
Love, you may say, there is abundance of Grace in that Soul, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom
having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory; This Love causes the Soul to
love the Holy God, his Holy Law, and also to love all the Saints of God, and
this is far above nature, it argues a purified heart to love the Saints, as 1
Pet. 1. 22. S eing ye have purified your Souls in obeying the Truth through the
Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren; see that you love one another with
a pure heart fervently: Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and Faith works by
love, these two Graces will be the glory of the Shulamite, the new Jerusalem
that is to come down from Heaven, and it is the beauty and glory of any
Christian; the want or defects in these graces is a great blemish in any Spouse
of Christ, or Christian; let us therefore I say acknowledge the eminency of
that Church or Soul that is much in the exercise of Faith and Love.

Use 3. Instruction: Here we may observe and see the safety of any Soul or
Church of Christ, to lean and stay it self upon Jesus Christ in Wilderness
Trials and Afflictions: So Caleb and Joshua, so long as they trusted in God and
cleaved to him, the Lord was with them, and brought them into the promised
Land, what can any Soul have to lean upon in an evil day of trial, trust not in
Princes, or any Son of man, his breath is in his nostrils, by strength shall no
man prevail: Confidence in Church Privileges, if men trust to them or
Ordinances, yea if they cry the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, see
what the Lord speaks to this very largely, Ier. 10. and Isai. 48. 1,2. they
call themselves the Holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel, but
not in Truth, all such props as these will deceive them that lean upon them;
but now for a Soul to lean upon Christ as her Beloved, in the enjoyment of all
his Ordinances, such a Soul may find comfort herein, as Holy David, Psalm. 27.
4,5 One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to enquire in his Holy Temple. For in the time of trouble he
shall hide me in his Pavillion, in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide
me, he shall set me upon a Rock.

Use 4. Trial: But would you be safe in times of Trial and Affliction: 1.
Consider what interest you have in Jesus Christ; can you lean and stay upon him
alone, and say, he is my (...), my only Refuge; have you chosen him as your
Portion? your all in all? are all things dung and dross in comparison of him?
can you suffer the loss of all for him? this is a true leaning upon Christ as
your Beloved; but when the Soul wants an interest in Christ Jesus, and has not
him to lean upon, whether will such a Soul flee for help in times of trial,
trouble and distresses? there is then none but Christ, none but Christ that
will suit the Soul, in this respect you may venture to lean upon him, he is
able and willing to bear all the weight that is laid upon him; it does
therefore nearly concern every Soul to consider what interest he has in Jesus
Christ, what persuasion have you had of the alsufficiency, and grace, and mercy
of the Lord Jesus Christ, have you tried his alsufficiency? can you be
persuaded of the alsufficiency of one that you never tried? but especially
consider whether God has drawn your heart to choose Jesus Christ for your
portion, for your stay and support, for your all and in all, and that you have
laid the whole weight of your Souls, upon him, have you given up your selves to
Christ to be at his dispose? have you chosen and taken him for your Lord and
Christ, and are you at his command? can you part with your dearest Lust and sin
as his command engages your Souls to do, and suffer any thing that he requires?

2. Consider, is he your Beloved? do you lean upon Jesus Christ as your
Beloved, as he whom your Soul loves* as he that is altogether beautiful and
desirable? is your greatest delight in communion with God, so that if Christ
should ask you the Question he asked Peter, Ioh. 21. 17. Simon love thou me
more then these? can you then Answer, in truth Lord thou know all things,
thou know that I love thee, do you love to be in the company of Jesus
Christ? do you love the lineage of Christ wherever you see it? are you glad to
do him any service? do you love all that is Christ's, his Ordinances, Word, Law,
his Ministers, Saints, if you take delight in these things, it is a sign Christ
has loved you, and that you will lean upon Christ in the evil days; and
blessed and happy is that Soul that can thus lean upon Christ her Beloved, when
wilderness trials, troubles and afflictions comes upon them, all such have
Christ for their Head, and Husband, and Savior, and are safe in his arms;
where this is wanting consider what we have, Isai. 10. 3. And what will ye do
in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far, to
whom will ye flee for help, and where will you leave your glory?

Use 5. Exhortation: 1. To them that yet have no part in Christ; Labor for
that Faith in, and Love to the Lord Jesus Christ, that Christ may not shake you
off in an evil day; what interest have you in the World that can reach your
Souls to save them? what is there in Heaven or Earth that can save the Soul but
only the Lord Jesus Christ? He is able to save to the utmost all that come to
God by him, Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and
he that believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him, Oh think often of this Scripture, and consider of the means of grace God
has so long afforded you, and how often he has been calling upon you, and
knocking at the doors of your hearts: Oh take the season while it lasts! Oh to
day, to day, while it is called to day, harden not your hearts, least God Swear
in his wrath that you shall never enter into his rest, Christ bad them walk in
the light while they had the light, and immediately he withdrew himself from
them; Oh do but forsake your sin, all your sins, and accept of the Lord Jesus
upon his own terms, and then you may venture to lean upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, he is able to bear the weight of all your Souls.

2. Branch, To the Spouse of Christ: Be much in the exercise of Faith and Love:
First, Be much in the exercise of Faith, lean upon Christ as your Beloved, stay
on him, rest upon him, cast all your burden and care upon him, strengthen your
selves in him, you will need a strong Faith in wilderness trials that may befall
us; consider how weak we are without Faith in Christ, which will shield us
against our potent enemies: Satan and all the World, all other props are but
as a broken Reed, whereon will you lean else; you have no righteousness, no
goodness, no wisdom in your selves, where will you lean then if not upon
Christ? what is there in the Creature that you may lean upon, all the things of
the World are Vanity of vanities; therefore cast your care and your burden
upon the Lord Jesus who is able to stablish, strengthen and settle you, he is
able to bear all the weight that is laid upon him; do your sins and corruptions
trouble you, you may lay the weight of them upon the Lord Jesus, he is able to
bear them, you may cast the care of your Souls upon him, ye may cast the care
of your Families, the care of your Children, you may cast all upon him, he is
able to bear the weight of all, he is the Rock of ages: Consider who your
Beloved is, the Lord Jesus Christ, the God of Glory, the Redeemer and Savior
of his People, that Redeemeth Israel from all their Iniquities, If any man sin
we have an Advocate, 1 John 2. 1: He has all Power in Heaven and Earth, he is
the Sovereign Lord of all, you can be in no danger, but he is able to save, and
he knows how to do it, for he is only wise, and he is faithful in all his
promises, and he is very loving, he has loved his with an everlasting love,
and from thence he has given himself for us, and will not lose (...) that come
to him; whom he loves he loves to the end, believe much and you shall receive
much, Christ says to thee, be it as thou will, a Faith, that will not be
beaten off that hangs upon Christ for a blessing; and as Jacob will not let go
without a blessing, shall surely have it, what can any believing Soul find in
Christ, that may not encourage him to lean upon him, he is the Savior, the
Head and Husband of his Church that takes care of them and that continually; he
is the Redeemer of his People, that redeems them, not only from all their
adversities but from all their iniquities; Oh then venture upon Jesus Christ,
and let Faith overcome all your doubts, this Christ will accept of; consider
what encouragements a Believer has to venture all upon Christ, we have
encouragement from the Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel. 36. 25,26. Then will I sprinkle
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness and from
all your Idols will I cleanse you, a new heart also will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my way, and I will write my Law in your inward
parts, and I will put my fear into your hearts, and you shall not depart from
me, and I will forgive your sins, and remember them no more; and consider how
God has confirmed this covenant even by his Oath, he has Sworn by himself,
that we might have strong consolation; and he has confirmed it also by the
Seals of the Covenant, the Lord has given us two Seals, he has set the Seal
of Baptism to it, whereby God has owned us for his, We are Baptized into the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, besides he has given us the blessed
Supper of the Lord; Oh what a blessed Seal is that wher^^^ the Lord offers a
crucified Christ to us, with all his merits, he offers Christ with all the
benefits and privileges thereunto belonging; when Christ is offered, all his
offered; this Ordinance it signifies that spiritual nourishment your Souls may
have by a crucified Christ, when the Lord said, This is my Body which was
broken for you, and this is my Blood which was shed for you, shall we be
unbelieving notwithstanding all this, and weak in the Faith, like Thomas, God
forbid.

Lastly, Be much in love to Jesus Christ, that you may say, you lean upon you
Beloved, is there not great cause that we should love Christ dearly, that has
given himself to death for us; what love is due to him that dyed for us, where
is there such love to be found in the World? Oh what ardent love should then be
to the Lord Jesus, therefore let us (...) our love to him, and let our love be
enflamed to him, let us be (...) to dye for him that has dyed for us, let us
love him with all our (...) and souls, and all our might, that has so greatly
loved us.

THE Lord Jesus his LEGACY of PEACE, To Arm his Disciples against Trouble and
Fear: OR, A SERMON PREACHED BY Mr. JOHN ALLIN [The late Reverend Pastor of the
Church of Christ in Dedham, August 13. 1671. Being the last that he Preached
before his Death, which was August 26. 1671.

Glory to God in the highest, on Earth peace, toward men good will, Luke 2.
14. Cambridge: Printed in the Year 1672.

John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you, not as the
World gives, give I unto you; let not your heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid.
AFter so many Consolations and Promises of the Comforter, as the Lord Jesus
had armed his Disciples with against his departure; in these words he takes his
leave or farewell of them, leaving this his Legacy with them, namely, The
blessing of peace, telling them what peace, saying, My peace I give unto you,
not as the World gives, and the fruit of Christ peace, was to stay their
hearts against all trouble and fear, as ver. 1. Let not your Hearts be
troubled, but my peace I leave with you as my blessing, as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 6. 23, Peace be to the Brethren, and love with Faith from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5. 14. Peace be with all that are in
Christ Jesus Amen; and it is a frequent Farewell in the Scripture, as also in
Salutations; the scope of our Savior (...) words or valediction, is the same
he began withal, ver. (...) stay (...) hearts against all fear and trouble; it
was no doubt a great trouble (...) trial to the hearts of the Disciples of
Jesus Christ, to loose such a Master and Teacher as he was, and that by so
painful and shameful a death, as the death of the Cross; and so it was
notwithstanding all that he had spoken to them, therefore he leaves peace with
them, My peace I give unto you.

To open the words, My peace I leave with you, as if our Savior had said, I am
now about to part with you, I must leave you, but I will leave this Legacy, My
peace, and that not an ordinary peace, but my peace, and that I give unto you,
you shall have; peace is usually taken for, or inplies protection from all
evil, and the enjoyment of all good: but that they may know what peace this is,
he tells them, it is my peace, Christ is the Prince of peace, the Atonement,
the God of peace, all peace comes, from him, he it is that gives all manner of
peace.

First, He gives peace with God, you will say what manner of peace is that; the
Apostle tells us, Phil 4. 7. The peace of God that passes all understanding,
unspeakable and unutterable, such a peace that even those that have it cannot
conceive the excellency of it, much less can they express it; God is an Enemy
against sin, and sinners and they are at enmity with God, and for a sinner that
has offended, and provoked God, and that therefore has no hope in God, now
for such a sinner to be at peace with God, who can conceive what it is, you may
see the excellency of it if you consider the persons that are now at peace, for
a poor, wretched, miserable, condemned sinner to be at peace with God, and that
this should flow from the love of God, in pardoning all his sins, and to
account him righteous in his sight; that he that was an enemy to the Great and
Holy God, even in his mind by evil works, and had God himself, the Holy Just
God an enemy to him, that will avenge himself on his enemies by Eternal
punishment, yet now to be at peace with God, and that God will own him as a
Friend, forgiving all his sins, accepting him as just and righteous to eternal
life, and take him into his high savor, as a Son and Heir of Heaven, and all
this through the Blood of his own Son, yea, by the blood of his Cross is this
peace made, so justifying his Law and Justice, a great price must be paid to
purchase it, and the terms is free grace, in a covenant of grace to all that
believe, it is free grace in God to accept of a satisfaction in Christ, he
might have exacted it of the sinner himself, and the terms of this free grace
are only to believe and accept of it; the new Covenant is established upon
better promises then the old, wherein God has promised to take away a hard and
stony heart, and to give a heart of flesh; now for a sinner to be at peace with
God, through the merit and righteousness of Christ, and upon the terms of the
covenant of grace, and what follows, God now takes them into the state of Sons,
ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, faith the Lord God Almighty, and they are
made Heirs of the Glory of Christ, for a sinner thus to be at peace with God, I
say who can tell what it is to be Heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ,
this is Christ's peace which he gives to his Disciples.

Secondly, This peace is the inward peace of a good Conscience, the sense of
that peace which a Soul has with God, through Jesus Christ, being sprinkled
from an evil Conscience, we have boldness, and access with assurance of Faith
unto the holiest of all, and confidence toward God, 1 John 3. God sending his
Spirit the Comforter, to witness that we are at peace with God, yea, he sends
his Spirit to seal up this peace with God, and this breeds joy unspeakable and
full of glory, it fills the Soul with all joy in Believing, Romans 15 13. Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound
in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, so that we may boldly go to the
Throne of grace, yea even to the holiest of all with confidence toward God,
and have liberty before him, this is a singular part of this peace, to be
persuaded that we are at peace with God, and that we are the Children of God,
and that we are partakers of all the privileges of Sons of God.

Thirdly, Christ's peace is a peace with men, and so usually taken in Scripture,
and especially with the Saints, Ephesians 12 14. For he is our peace who has made
both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us, that we
may be all one in Jesus Christ, both? Ws and Gentiles.

Fourthly, This peace comprehends peace with the Creature, even with the Beasts
of the field, ob 5 23 For thou shall be in league with the Stones of the field,
and the Beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee: If we be at peace with
the King, we are at peace with all his people, if we be at peace with the
Commander of the field, we are at peace with all the Army; all creatures are at
peace with the Saints, and serve all for their guard, yea this peace of Christ
is protection from all evil, 2 Timothy 4 18 And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work; and preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom, Rom 8. 28. And we
know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them that
are the (...), according to his purpose.

And this peace Christ promises, and this peace he gives, but not as the World
gives give I unto you, some may say, way? wherein is the difference? I shall
briefly note the difference in two or three particulars.

1. The peace which the World gives, is more in words then in realities, it is
often times only in words, Psalm. 28. 3. Draw me not away with the wicked, and
with the workers of Iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbor, but
mischief is in their heart, as we may see in the Example of Joah and Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 27. If the Lord speaks peace, who shall speak trouble, and if the Lord
speaks peace he speaks from the very heart to the heart, and not in words of
course or complement as the Would use to do.

2. The peace which the world gives, is peace outward to the outward man, they
may give outward peace, and fill you with the good things of the world, but it
reaches not the principal part of the man, it reaches not the heart, but the
peace which Christ gives, it reaches the heart, it reaches the soul, and the
peace that reaches the Soul reaches the Body also; but the peace of the world
reaches the Body, but not the Soul; Christ's peace secureth the Soul and inward
man, it guards the heart, Phil. 4. 7. And the peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Jesus Christ, or as it
is in the Original, shall guard your hearts.

3. The peace of the World is very uncertain, and short, when they say peace,
peace, then often sudden destruction comes upon them, as the Example of Haman in
his great Honor and sudden downfall does prove, Esth. 5. 11. 12. And Haman
told his friends, of his great and singular favor with the King and Queen, but
the next day, Chap. 7. 10. He was hanged upon the Gallows he had prepared for
Mordecai; and the strongest league of friendship amongst men of the World, is
soon broken, when men's own interests suit another way, but the peace which
Christ gives, in a firm, lasting, everlasting peace, Isai.9. 7. Of the increase
of his Government and peace, there shall be no end; once at peace with God and
ever at peace, God and that Soul will never fall out any more.

This being the fruit and effect of this peace, their hearts ought not to be
troubled, let not your hearts be disquiet, let them not sink in any affliction
that can befall you in this world; here is that peace that may bear up your
hearts under any trouble or trial that at any time you may meet withal, nor
need they be afraid what ever tidings they hear, or whatever dangers approach
as Christ had told his Disciples of many troubles, as wars and rumors of wars,
yet says Christ, be not afraid with such a fear as stands not with Faith and
hope in God,: this peace that I leave with you, it is enough to defend your
hearts from fear of any troubles whatsoever, as the Psalmist speaks, I will not
be afraid though the mountains be removed and cast into the Sea, and therefore
though others fear, yet be not you afraid, as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 8.
12,13. neither fear you therefore, nor be afraid, Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear and dread, as if Christ should say, I give
you that true peace that may quiet your hearts under any trouble or distress,
or whatsoever you may meet withal in this World.

The Doctrine from these words is, that

Doct. That that peace which Jesus Christ has purchased, and given to his true
Disciples, is such as may strengthen them against all distracting troubles and
fears in this world.

The truth of this appears, Psalm. 37. 11. But the meek shall inherit the Earth,
and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace, and ver. 37. Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. Psalm.
119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend
them, they do not stumble at any thing as other men do, Psalm. 125. 1. They that
trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides
for ever. ver: 2. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about his people, from henceforth even for ever. Psalm. 112. 7,8. Surely
he shall not be moved for ever, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his
heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, his heart is established, be shall not be
afraid: Romans 8. 1. There is therefore no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, etc. they are out of all fear of Condemnation, Joh. 16. 33. These
things have I spoken to you, that in me ye may have peace, in the World you
shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer I have overcome the World, Romans 5.
1,2,3. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by Faith to this grace wherein
we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God: and not only so, but we
glory in tribulations also, Phil 4. 7. And the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, shall keep or guard your bearts and minds through Jesus Christ.
Psalm. 43. 5. Why art thou cast down Oh my Soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me, hope in God for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countinance and my God; the like see in Paul and Silas, Act. 16,24,25. who sang
praises unto God in Prison and in the Stocks.

Reas. 1. From the unspeakable, unconceivable and excellent worth of this
peace, it will out bid all other things in the world; Oh how this helps a man
in all straits, what need he fear what man can do, what need he fear what
devils can do; as David when in great trouble and disquiet Psalm. 43. 5. It by
art thou cast down on my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me, hope in
God for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my (...) and my God, this
made him confident, he chides himself because he was now disquieted, so Psalm.
42. 5. 11. as also elsewhere, The Lord is my light and my salvation, of whom
then shall I be afraid; if an Host should compass me about, in the Name of the
Lord I will destroy them, this peace with God takes away not only all fears and
dangers of condemnation, as Romans 8. 1. but also the sting of sin and death, 1
Cor. 15. 55. Oh 'Death where is thy sting, Oh Grave where is thy Victory?

Reas. 2. Because this peace is in the hand of Christ, who paid a great price
for it, and he will maintain it, that although we sin yet he is our Advocate,
and preserves our peace with God; this peace is the peace of Christ, he has
purchased it with his Blood, he freely gives it, therefore surely he will
maintain it, he will not take it away, as the World gives peace one day, and
takes it away another; this peace is an everlasting peace.

Reas. 3. Because this peace does not only set the Soul free from fear of
wrath, but it makes every thing easy, and it takes away the poison and venom
of sin, and also the sting of death and hell is taken away, sin is a poison in
every cup and poisons every thing, but this peace takes all away, and does
assure a Believer, that whatever he meets withal in this World, shall be to his
advantage, it makes prosperity to be safe and sweet to them, and makes all
afflictions to work for their good.

Reas. 4. Because all troubles and dangers shall not but this peace, but shall
work together to the furtherance of their everlasting peace, for this peace is
so far above all evils and fears that can befall such as have it that in
comparison there of they are all light and momentany, not worthy to be compared
with that glory to be revealed, their great hopes swallow up all their fears,
Joh 19.25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the Earth.

Quest. 1. But here some may ask a Question; If Christ gives, such peace, how
then comes it to pass that many a gracious Soul meet with so much trouble, and
that not only trouble in the World, but trouble in spirit, that the Soul has
lost his peace and sense of the favor of God?

Ans. This Legacy was given more especially to the Apostles that were called
to so great a work, and were to out face all the Tyrants in the World, and
endure so great afflictions and persecutions, so that we may conceive it was
always constant and full with them; but ordinary Christians have not so full
and constant peace in themselves their peace may be interrupted for a time,
through sin, or through temptations, yet their peace does hold, though they may
loose the sense of it for a (...), but they may be sure of this, that peace
will return again to them, God has not forgot to be gracious.

Ans. 2. Their peace with God is everlasting, and never fails; this peace is
the peace of God, and in the conclusion will never (...) but the wicked man's
peace will fail, and never come again, but the righteous and merciful man shall
enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, as Isai. 57. 27.

Ans. 3. Their dissertions and temptations are always turned to their good,
and their peace returned with advantage of greater peace and joy, their end is
always peace, though they should and may go out of the World in the want of
the sense of it, yet God does often return to the Soul at death.

Use. 1. Instruction: Hence take notice of the wonderful care and love of the
Lord Jesus to his Disciples, to establish their hearts against all the
troubles, afflictions and fears that might befall them in this world, and
therefore he faith, let not your heart be troubled, this was the farewell speech
of Jesus Christ, my peace I leave with you, he delights in the prosperity of
his people, as we may see Heb. 5. 17, 18 wherein God willing more abundantly to
show to the Heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by
an Oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, you might have a strong consolation, who are fled for refuge, to lay hold
upon the hope set before us, also the Lord said unto the Prophet, Isai. 40. 1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says my God, speak you comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, and that her
Iniquity is pardoned; I speak this to this end, because there are some good
Souls that thinks assurance of Gods love, and strong consolations and joy in
the Holy Ghost is too high a favor for them, being such sinners as they are,
to attain to, but let all such consider, that God gives as a God, he gives as
becomes such a great God as he is, he gives according to his greatness, and
not according to your sinfulness and unworthiness; this peace is the gift of
Jesus Christ, and he has purchased it, therefore if the Soul be never so un
worthy, yet Jesus Christ is most willing to bestow this precious everlasting
peace upon you, to magnify the (...) riches of his grace, refuse not the
consolations of the Almighty, dishonor not grieve not the Lord Jesus Christ by
your unbelief; when Christ freely gives his peace, it is your duty thankfully
to embrace it, with all acceptance.

Use 2. Conviction: We may hence be convinced of the great folly of all such
poor Souls as do rest in such a poor peace as the World gives, and look not
after that true, most excellent and everlasting peace which the Lord Jesus
Christ does freely offer and give; Alas how many Souls are there that rest
themselves in that peace which the world can give, carnal peace, carnal mirth,
it is a poor peace you can have from the world, you may have the worlds peace,
and yet have a sad heart and conscience, that will tell you for all this you
must come to Judgment, the very best peace the world can give, will leave the
Soul in miserable fear and distress, in fear of the wrath of God, which will
come upon the Sons of disobedience; in the midst of laughter the heart will be
sad, all you that thus content your selves, do not your Consciences often tell
you of your great and many sins, and woeful state to Eternity? when Paul
preached of righteousness, temporance and judgment to come, Felix trembled,
Act. 24. 25. that is a poor peace that the world gives, that is only an
outward peace but gives no inward peace and comfort to the Soul, when
Belshazzar was in his greatest jollity, when he was drinking in his Cups, his
mirth and joy was soon gone, and the Handwriting upon the wall caused his knees
to smite one against another, as Dan. 5. 5,6. in that peace that the world
gives, Conscience sometimes will fly in the face, and tells them of those
things, sins that they are guilty of, and that God is angry with sinners every
day, and that there is a Hell prepared for sinners; Oh the fearful expectation
of wrath, and fiery indignation that often seizes upon the heart of such as are
in the greatest peace and prosperity that the world can give; but now where the
peace of Christ is, there is no fear of Hell, for there is no condemnation to
such a Soul now: Again this peace that the world does give, how short and
uncertain is it? it is but a short peace that the world gives Solomon says,
if a sinner live an hundred years, and his days be prolonged, yet I know it
shall go well with those that fear God, yea, that is the thing to know how it
shall be with the Soul, Haman may go home and boast of his greatness, and of
the favor he was in with the King, and that the Queen also suffered none but
him to come in with the King to the Banquet; but poor man! he could not foresee
that the next day he must be hanged upon the Gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai; and so it is many times, a man in favor to day, and utterly out of
favor to norrow; although the peace of the world be but a slighty peace, yet a
man is not sure of it one day, when the world says peace peace, then sudden
destruction comes upon them as a Whirlwind, were this well considered, would
any man rest contented with that peace which the world can give; one would
think they should not be contented without that true durable peace which Christ
gives, and not with that poor peace which the world gives, which is so short
and uncertain that lasts not, but those comforts they are gone as a Whirlwind,
and their places know them no more, as Solomon says, and will any rest in such
a peace.

Use 3. Trial: This may put every one of us upon the trial, how nearly does it
concern every Soul to consider and examine whether his peace be the peace of
Christ, or of the world, truly, if the peace you have be the peace the world
gives, it is not worth a rush; we are a secure people, and live in peace, but
consider what true peace you have for your Soul to depend upon, and to this end
consider:

1. It is a certain truth, That there is no peace to the wicked says my God,
Isai 57. 21. what peace can a Soul have that lives in a course of sin and
enmity against God? as Iehu says to King Ioram, what peace so long as the
Whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel and her Witchcrafts are so many? so long as the
Soul goes on in the ways of any sin, loves it, and favors himself in it, it
is impossible to have any peace with God, that infinitely hates all sin and
iniquity; the wicked must forsake his ways and thoughts, repent and turn to
the Lord, before he can be at peace with God; but now, that Soul that can
truly say, that he has turned from every known sin, and he mourns for sin,
it is his grief and burden, it is a good sign that that Soul is at peace with
God, but when we live in any way of sin, in a way of lying, or any other known
sin, it is impossible that he should be at peace with God.

2. This peace is the gift of Christ, he only can make peace between God and
sinners, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the
Son of God has not life; therefore make out your interest in Jesus Christ by
Faith, without which you can have no true peace, but if you take up comfort and
expect peace from any duties of your own, or any thing of your own, yea, if you
take up comfort from the mercy of God, or from the promise, without Christ in
the promise, if you take not hold of Christ in the promise, your comfort will
not hold, because you lay hold of peace without true right to it, is Christ
most precious and sin most hateful.

3. Where Christ gives peace he gives grace; grace, mercy and peace goes
together, Christ Jesus never justifies but he also sanctifies that Soul, as
Romans 8. 1. There is now no condemnation to those that are in Jesus Christ, but
who are they? those that walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, as also
ver. 13. For if ye live after the flesh you shall dye, but if through the
Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: Oh where is your
mortifying and purging out of sin by the Spirit? where is your delight in the
ways of Holiness and Sanctification? 1 Cor. ^. 30. Jesus Christ is made (not
only) wisdom and righteousness, but Sanctification and Redemption; consider
what power of Grace you have received, to mortify the deeds of the flesh by
the spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God; If you can make it out that it is thus, then you
have this peace, otherwise you have none of it.

4. I might add also, that this peace that Christ gives, disposes the heart to
a peacable disposition, he will love to be at peace with others, as Isai. 11.
6,7. the Kingdom of Christ is thus discribed, the Wolf also shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the
young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them, the
wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peacable, and easy to be
entreated; consider what love there is in you to peace, do you not delight, do
you not love to be at distance from any of the Saints of God? but love-peace,
seek peace and ensue it.

Use 4. Exhortation: 1. To every Soul that yet has not this peace which Christ
gives, breathe after it, labor for it; Oh consider and look about you, and
think whether it be not needful to get this peace which Christ gives; consider
these following particulars.

1. The poor uncertain peace that you now have in the World, that the World can
give, you have heard what it is, now will you content your selves with the
Worlds peace? can you go from day to day with this peace? will you rise and go
about your business with this peace? will you with the Drunkard sleep upon the
top of a Mast? Oh awake, awake, and consider what a peace all your worldly
peace is.

2. Consider what a dreadful Enemy you have, whiles you have only that peace
that the World can give, you have God for your Enemy, the great and dreadful
God, that will certainly be avenged of his Enemies, it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, Nahum 1. 2. God is jealous, and the Lord
revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance on
his Adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his Enemies; Ye would tremble to
fall into the hand of a cruel Enemy, much more into the hand of God, whom you
have justly provoked to be your Enemy, what cannot he do, he has prepared
instruments of death; yea, Isai. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for
the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is
fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does
kindle it:

Oh Consider what God is, and what a state and condition every sinner is in
that is an Enemy to God, and it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God; if you were ready to fall into the hands of a cruel Nation, Oh
what fear would there be! what care and endeavor to escape it, God is not
cruel, but he is a just revenging God.

3. Consider, how willing God is to be at peace, see how the Lord expresses
himself, Isai. 27. 5. Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace
with me, and he shall make peace with me:

Many a poor Soul questions whether God be willing, they think it is in vain
for them to go about to make peace with God; why do you say so? you hear the
Lord here by the Prophet say, if he will make peace he shall make peace; the
question therefore is not whether God be willing to be at peace with you, but
whether you be willing to be at peace with him; the Lord has given his Son to
make peace, and sends the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 20^ Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech-you by us, we pray you in
Christ stead be reconciled to God.

Oh what evedent Demonstrations are there, that God is willing to be at peace
with poor sinners; would God ever have given his Son, and the Son have given
himself, if he had not been willing to be at peace, surely no; and also as was
before alleged, he has sent Ambassadors to beseech and entreat you to be
reconciled, our peace and all good is ready in Christ, but here is the misery,
men will not be at peace, Christ complains, you will not come to me that you
might have life, who is it that is now at peace with God, that was not once in
the same estate with your Selves, therefore you may be at peace only delay not,
but as Christ advises agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the
way with him; if you delay you will dye in your sins, therefore if ever you
intend to make your peace with God at all, do it now, really, speedily, and
without delay.

4. Lastly, Lay down your enmity, if Rebels will be at peace with their King,
they must lay down their weapons, Isai. 55. 7,8,9. Let the Wicked forsok his
way, and the Unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon,
for my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my wares; for as
the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my ways higher then your ways,
and my thoughts then your thoughts; there is joy in Heaven at the conversion of
a sinner, if you would but come in and accept of peace, there is a way of peace
yet for that sinner that has lived in the peace of the World all this while,
if you will turn from all your sins unto God, and submit to the Government of
the Lord Jesus.

2. Exhortation: To such as have received this great and wonderful gift of
Christ, this our blessed peace; Oh prize it highly, be exceeding thankful for
it, and labor by all means to cherish, preserve, and increase the assurance
thereof, think what a singular mercy it is to be at peace with God by Jesus
Christ, how unspeakable and full of glory it is, this peace is a continual
peace, as Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have access by Faith into this grace
wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God; this I say, that
those that have this peace, should labor so to walk, as that they may
persevere in it, and to this end consider what the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 85.
8. I will bear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints, but let not them turn again to folly; have a care
you break not your peace, remember David's broken bones, beware of sin, and see
that you walk humbly before God; you have sin and corruption, and you may meet
with temptations, Satan is your Enemy, and he cannot abide you should have this
peace, therefore be watchful, and be humble, Isai. 57. 15. For thus says the
High and Lofty one, that inhabit the Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in
the High and Holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones; these are the Souls that shall have peace, but take heed of an evil and
unbelieving heart, in departing from the living God, take heed you dote not
upon the peace of the World, and grow secure by it.

3. Exhortation: Make use of this peace, as it is intended by Christ, Let not
your heart be troubled, Psalm. 125. 1,2. they that trust in the Lord, shall be
as Mount-Sion that cannot be removed, but abides for ever, as the Mountains
are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from
henceforth even for ever, Psalm. 27. 1,2,3. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid, when the wicked even my enemies and my foes came upon me to
eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell, though an Host should encamp against
me, my heart shall not fear, though War should rise against me, in this will I
be confident, Psalm. 46. 1,2. God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble, therefore will not we fear, though the Earth he removed, and
though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, why should such a
Soul fear, for any evil tidings; ye have that peace that the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against: Oh show your peace by your boldness in God, by
your glorying in tribulation; do you meet with outward losses, what need that
trouble you when you have such a God as you have? do you meet with painful
afflictions? you may well bare them patiently, so long as the Soul enjoys
Christ's peace, do you meet with ill Neighbors, or disquiet in your Families?
all these are but light afflictions, not worthy to be compared to the Glory
that shall be revealed; nay, does Death look you in the face? you may triumph
over it, for the sting of Death is taken away, thanks be to God that has given
us the victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and therefore let the peace of
God guard your hearts against what ever you may meet withal: If you consider
the reasons of the point.

1. The glorious excellency of this peace.

2. That it is the gift and purchase of Christ, and kept in his hand.

3. Because this peace do not only set the Soul free from fear of wrath, but
takes away the poison and venom of sin, and also the sting of Death and Hell is
taken away.

4. Because all troubles and dangers shall not hurt this peace, but all shall
work together to the furtherance of their everlasting peace; this peace will
guard your hearts against all evil whatsoever, you have cause to be quiet,
therefore let nothing dismay or disquiet the hearts of those that Christ has
given this peace unto, whatever you hear of in the World; we hear of many
troubles and disquiets abroad in the World, and the cause of God suffers much,
we should lay it to heart, but not to be troubled, disquieted or dismayed in
the soarest troubles; in a word, Faint not, for we look not at things present
which are temporary, but at things to come which are Eternal.

FINIS.

