A PLATFORM OF Church Discipline Gathered out of the WORD OF GOD; And Agreed
upon By the Elders and Messengers of the Churches Assembled in the SYNOD At
Cambridge in N.E.

To be presented to the Churches and General Court for their Consideration and
Acceptance in the Lord, the 8th Month, Anno 1649.

Psalm. 84.1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? Psalm. 26.8.
Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells. Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will
seek after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. Cambridge:
Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1671.

THE PREFACE.
THe setting forth of the Public Confession of the Faith of Churches has a
double end, and both tending to Public Edification: First, the maintenance of
the Faith entire within it self: Secondly, the holding forth of Unity and
Harmony, both amongst, and with other Churches. Our Churches here, as (by the
grace of Christ) we believe and profess the same Doctrine of the Truth of the
Gospel, which generally is received in all the Reformed Churches of Christ in
Europe: so especially we desire not to vary from the Doctrine of Faith and
Truth held forth by the Churches of our Native Country. For though it be not
one Native Country that can breed us all of one mind; nor ought we for to have
the glorious faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of persons; yet as Paul who
was himself a Jew, professed to hold forth the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, and of the resurrection of the dead, according as he knew his godly
Countrymen did, who were Jews by nature (Gal. 2.15. Acts 26.6, 7.) so we, who
are by nature Englishmen, do desire to hold forth the same Doctrine of
Religion (especially in Fundamentals) which we see and know to be held by the
Churches of England, according to the truth of the Gospel.

The more we discern (that which we do, and have cause to do with incessant
mourning and trembling) the unkind, and unbrotherly, and unchristian
Contentions of our godly Brethren and Countrymen, in matters of
Church Government; the more earnestly do we desire to see them joined together
in one common Faith, and our selves with them. For this end, having perused the
public Confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, and finding the sum and substance thereof (in matters of Doctrine)
to express not their own judgments only, but ours also: and being likewise
called upon by our godly Magistrates, to draw up a public Confession of that
Faith which is constantly taught, and generally professed amongst us; We
thought good to present unto them, and with them to our Churches, and with them
to all the Churches of Christ abroad, our professed and hearty Assent and
Attestation to the whole Confession of Faith (for substance of Doctrine) which
the Reverend Assembly presented to the Religious and Honorable Parliament of
England: Excepting only some Sections in the 25, 30, and 31 Chapters of their
Confession, which concern Points of Controversy in Church Discipline; touching
which, we refer our selves to the d^aught of Church Discipline in the ensuing
Treatise.

The truth of what we here declare, may appear by the unanimous vote of the
Synod of the Elders and Messengers of our Churches assembled at Cambridge, the
l^st of the sixth Month, 1648. which jointly passed in these words: This Synod
having perused and considered (with much gladness of heart, and thankfulness to
God) the Confession of Faith published of late by the Reverend Assembly in
England, do judge it to be very holy, orthodox, and judicious in all matters of
Faith: and do therefore freely and fully consent thereunto, for the substance
thereof. Only in those things which have respect to Church Government and
Discipline, we refer our selves to the Platform of Church Discipline, agreed
upon by this present Assembly; and do therefore think it meet, that this
Confession of Faith should be commended to the Churches of Christ amongst us,
and to the Honored Court, as worthy of their due consideration and acceptance.
Howbeit, we may not conceal, that the doctrine of Vocation expressed in Chap.
10. Sect. 1. and summarily repeated Chap. 13. Sect. 1. passed not without some
debate. Yet considering that the term of Vocation, and others by which it is
described, are capable of a large, or more strict sense and use, and that it is
not intended to bind apprehensions precisely in point of order or method,
there has been a general condescendency thereunto.

Now by this our prof^ssed consent and free concurrence with them in all the
doctrinals of Religion, we hope it may appear to the world, that as we are a
remnant of the people of the same Nation with them; so we are professors of the
same common Faith, and fellow heirs of the same common Salvation. Yea moreover,
as this our profession of the same Faith with them, will exempt us (even in
their judgments) from suspicion of Heresy; so (we trust) it may exempt us in
the like sort from suspicion of Schism: that though we are forced to dissent
from them in matters of Church Discipline, yet our dissent is not taken up out
of arrogance of spirit in our selves (whom they see willingly condescend to
learn of them) neither is it carried with uncharitable censoriousness toward
them, (both which are the proper and essential characters of Schism) but in
meekness of wisdom, as we walk along with them, and follow them as they follow
Christ: so where we conceive a different apprehension of the mind of Christ
(as it falls out in some few points touching Church Order) we still reserve
due reverence to them (whom we judge to be, through Christ, the glorious Lights
of both Nations) and only crave leave (as in spirit we are bound) to follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and (after the Apostles example) as we
believe, so we speak.

And if the example of such poor Outcasts as our selves might prevail, if not
with all (for that were too great a blessing to hope for) yet with some or
other of our Brethren in England, so far as they are come to mind and speak
the same thing with such as dissent from them, we hope in Christ it would not
only moderate the harsh judging and condemning of one another in such
differences of judgment as may be found in the choicest Saints; but also
prevent (by the mercy of Christ) the peril of the distraction and destruction
of all the Churches in both Kingdoms. Otherwise, if Brethren shall go on to
bite and devour one another, the Apostle feared (as we also with sadness of
heart do) it will tend to the consuming of them, and us all: which the Lord
prevent.

We are not ignorant, that (besides these aspersions of Heresy and Schism)
other Exceptions also are taken at our Way of Church Government, but (as we
conceive) upon as little grounds. As,

1. That by admitting none into the fellowship of our Church but Saints by
calling, we rob many Parish Churches of their best Members, to make up one of
our Congregations; which is not only to gather Churches out of Churches (a
thing unheard of in Scripture) but also to weaken the hearts and hands of the
best Ministers in the Parishes, by despoiling them of their best hearers.

2. That we provide no course for the gaining, and calling in of ignorant, and
erroneous, and scandalous persons, whom we refuse to receive into our Churches,
and so exclude from the wholesome Remedy of Church D^scipline.

3. That in our Way, we sow seeds of division, and hindrance of edification in
every family: whilst admitting into our Churches only voluntaries, the Husband
will be of one Church, the Wife of another; the Parents of one Church, the
Children of another; the Master of one Church, the Servants of another. And so
the Parents and Masters being of different Churches from their Children and
Servants, they cannot take a just account of their profiting by what they hear:
yea, by this means the Husbands, Parents, and Masters, shall be chargeable to
the maintenance of many other Churches and Church Officers, besides their own:
which will prove a charge and burden unsupportable.

But for Answer. As to the first: For gathering Churches out of Churches, we
cannot say that it is a thing unheard of in Scripture. The first Christian
Church was gathered out of the Jewish Church, and out of many Synagogues in
that Church, and consisted partly of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, partly of
the Galileans: who though they kept some communion in some parts of public
Worship with the Temple, yet neither did they frequent the Sacrifices, nor
repair to the S^nhedrim for the determining of their Church-causes, but kept
entire and constant communion with the Apostles Church in all the Ordinances of
the Gospel. And for the first Christian Church of the Gentiles at Antioch, it
appears to have been gathered and constituted partly of the dispersed
Brethren of the Church at Jerusalem (whereof some were men of Cyprus and
Cyrene) and partly of the believing Gentiles, Acts 11.20, 21.

If it be said, The first Christian Church at Jerusalem, and that at Antioch,
were gathered not out of any Christian Church, but out of the Jewish Temple and
Synagogues, which were shortly after to be abolished: and their gathering to
Antioch, was upon occasion of dispersion in time of Persecution.

We desire it may be considered, 1. That the members of the Jewish Church were
more strongly and straightly tied by express holy covenant, to keep fellowship
with the Jewish Church till it was abolished, then any members of Christian
Parish churches are wont to be tied to keep fellowship with their
Parish-churches. The Episcopal Canons, which bind them to attend on their
Parish Church, it is likely they are now abolished with the Episcopacy. The
Common Law of the Land is satisfied (as we conceive) if they attend upon the
Worship of God in any other Church, though not within their own Parish. But no
such like covenant of God, nor any other Religious tie lies upon them to
attend the Worship of God in their own Parish Church, as did lie upon the Jews
to attend upon the Worship of God in their Temple and Synagogues.

2. Though the Jewish Temple-church at Jerusalem was to be abolished, yet that
does not make the desertion of it by the members to be lawful, till it was
abolished. Future abolition is no warrant for present desertion, unless it be
lawful in some case whilst the Church is yet in present standing to desert it;
to wit, either for avoiding of present pollutions, or for hope of greater
edification, and so for better satisfaction to conscience in either. Future
events (or foresight of them) do not dissolve present Relations: else wives,
children servants, might desert their husbands, parents, masters, when they be
mortally sick.

3. What the Members of the Jewish Church did, in joining to the Church at
Antioch in time of Persecution, it may well be conceived the (...)bers of any
Christian Church may do the like for satisfaction of conscie^^e. Peace of
conscience is more desirable then the peace of the outward man; and freedom
from scruples of conscience is more comfortable to a sincere heart, then
freedom from Persecution.

If it be said, These Members of the Christian Church at Jerusalem that joined
to the Church at Antioch, removed their Habitations together with their
Relations: which if the Brethren of the Congregational Way would do, it would
much abate the grievance of their departure from their Presbyterial Churches.

We verily could wish them so to do, as well approving the like removal of
habitation, in case of changing Church-Relations (provided that it may be done
without too much detriment to their outward estates) and we for our parts have
done the same. But to put a necessity of removal of habitation in such a case,
it is to foment and cherish a corrupt principle of making civil cohabitation,
if not a formal cause, yet at least a proper adjunct of Church-Relation: which
the truth of the Gospel does not acknowledge. Now to foment an error to the
prejudice of the truth of the Gospel, is not to walk with a right foot
according to the truth of the Gospel, as Paul judges, Gal. 2.14.

4. We do not think it meet or safe, for a Member of a Presbyterial Church
forthwith to desert his Relation to his Church, betake himself to the
fellowship of a Congregational Church, though he may discern some defect in the
estate or government of his own. For,

1. Faithfulness of brotherly-love in Church-Relation, requires that the
Members of the Church should first convince their Brethren of their sinful
defects, and duly wait for their reformation, before they depart from them.
For if we must take such a course for the healing of a private Brother, in a
way of brotherly love, with much meekness and patience; how much more ought we
so to walk with like tenderness toward a whole Church.

Again, 2. By the hasty departure of sound Members from a defective Church,
Reformation is not promoted, but many times retarded, and corruption increased.
Whereas on the contrary, while sincere Members breathing after purity of
Reformation abide together, they may (by the blessing of God upon their
faithful endeavors) prevail much with their Elders and Neighbors toward a
Reformation; it may be, so much as that their Elders in their own Church shall
receive none to the Seals but visible Saints; and in the Classis shall put
forth no authoritative act (but consultative only) touching the Members of
other Churches; nor touching their own, but with the consent (silent consent at
least) of their own Church: Which two things, if they can obtain with any
humble, meek, holy, faithful endeavors, we conceive they might (by the grace
of Christ) find liberty of conscience to continue their Relation with their
own Presbyterial Church, without scruple.

5. But to add a word further, touching the gathering of Churches out of
Churches; what if there were no express example of such a thing extant in the
Scriptures? that which we are wont to answer the Antipaedobaptists, may suffice
here, It is enough if any evidence thereof may be gathered from just
consequence of Scripture Light. Doctor Ames his judgment concerning this case,
passes (for ought we know) without exception, which he gave in his 4th Book of
Conscience, in Answ. to 2 Qu. Chap. 14. Number. 16. If any (says he) wronged with
unjust vexation, or providing for his own edification, or in testimony against
sin, depart from a Church where some evils are tolerated, and join himself to
another more pure, yet without condemning of the Church he leaves, he is not
therefore to be held as a Schismatic, or as guilty of any other sin. Where the
tripartite disjunction which the judicious Doctor puts, declares the
lawfulness of the departure of a Churchmember from his Church, when either
through weariness of unjust vexation, or in way of provision for his own
edification, or in testimony against sin, he joyneth himself to another
Congregation more Reformed. Any one of these, he judges a just and lawful
cause of departure, though all of them do not concur together. Neither will
such a practice despoil the best Ministers of the Parishes of their best
hearers. For,

1. Sometimes the Ministers themselves are willing to join with their better
sort of Hearers in this way of Reformation; and then they and their Hearers
continue still their Church-Relation together, yea and confirm it more straightly
and strongly, by an express renewed Covenant, though the Ministers may still
continue their wonted Preaching to the whole Parish.

2. If the Ministers do dislike the way of those whom they otherwise count
their best Members, and so refuse to join with them therein; yet if those
Members can procure some other Ministers to join with them in their own Way,
and still continue their dwelling together in the same Town, they may easily
order the times of the public Assembly, as to attend constantly upon the
Ministry of their former Church; and either after or before the public
Assembly of the Parish, take an opportunity to gather together for the
Administration of Sacraments, and Censures, and other Church-Ordinances amongst
themselves. The first Apostolic Church assembled to hear the Word with the
Jewish Church in the open Courts of the Temple; but afterward gathered
together for breaking of Bread, and other acts of Church Order, from house to
house.

3. Suppose Presbyterial Churches should communicate some of their best gifted
Members toward the erecting and gathering of another Church, it would not
forthwith be their detriment, but may be their enlargement. It is the most
noble and perfect work of a living creature (^oth in Nature and Grace) to
propagate, and multiply his kind: and it is the honor of the faithful Spouse
of Christ, to set forward the work of Christ as well abroad as at home. The
Church in Cant. 8.8. to help forward her little Sister-Church, was willing to
part with her choice Materials, even Beams of Cedar, and such precious living
stones as were fit to build a Silver Palace. In the same Book, the Church is
compared sometime to a Garden, sometime to an Orchard, Cant. 4.12, 13. No man
planteth a garden, or orchard, but seeks to get the choicest Herbs and Plants
of his Neighbors, and they freely impart them: nor do they account it a spoil
to their garden and orchard, but rather a glory. Nevertheless we go not so far;
we neither seek nor ask the choice Members of the Parishes, but accept them
being offered.

If it be said, They are not offered by the Ministers, nor by the
Parish-churches, (who have most right in them) but only by themselves.

It may justly be demanded what right, or what power have either the Ministers
or Parish Church over them? Not by solemn Church Covenant; for that, though it
be the firmest engagement, is not owned, but rejected. If it be by their
joining with the Parish, in the calling and election of a Minister to such a
Congregation at his first coming, there is indeed just weight in such an
engagement: nor do we judge it safe for such to remove from such a Minister,
unless it be upon such grounds as may justly give him due satisfaction. But if
the union of such Members to a Parish Church, and to the Ministry thereof, be
only by cohabitation within the Precincts of the Parish, that union, as it was
founded upon Humane Law, so by Humane Law it may easily be released. Or
otherwise, if a man remove his Habitation, he removes also the bond of his
Relation, and the ground of offense.

4. It need not be feared, that all the best Hearers of the best Ministers, no
nor the most of them, will depart from them upon point of Church Government.
Those who have found the presence and power of the Spirit of Christ breathing
in their Ministers, either to their conversion, or edification, will be slow to
change such a Ministry of Faith and Holiness, for the liberty of Church Order.
Upon which ground, and sundry other such like, there be doubtless sundry godly
and judicious Hearers in many Parishes in England, that do and will prefer
their relation to their Ministers (though in a Presbyterial way) above the
Congregational Confederation.

5. But if all, or the most part of the best Hearers of the best Ministers of
Parishes should depart from them, as preferring in their judgments the
Congregational Way; yet in case the Congregational Way should prove to be of
Christ, it will never grieve the holy hearts of godly Ministers, that their
Hearers should follow Christ: yea many of themselves (upon due deliberation)
will be ready to go along with them. It never grieved nor troubled John
Baptist, that his Disciples departed from him to follow after Christ, Joh 3.
But if the Congregational Way should prove to be, not the Institution of Christ
(as we take i^) but the Invention of men; then doubtless the Presbyterial Form
(if it be of God) will swallow up the other, as Moses Rod devoured the Rods of
the Egyptians. Nor will this put a necessity upon both the opposite Parties to
shift for themselves, and to seek to supplant one another, but only it will
call upon them (...), to seek and to follow the truth in love, to attend in
faithfulness each unto his own Flock, and to administer to them all the holy
things of God, and their portion of food in due season: and as for others,
quietly to forbear them, and yet to instruct them with meekness that are
contrary minded, leaving it to Christ (in the use of all good means) to reveal
his own truth in his own time, and meanwhile endeavoring to keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace, Phil. 3.15, 16. Eph^s. 4.3.

To the second Exception, That we take no course for the gaining, and healing,
and calling in of ignorant and erroneous persons, whom we refuse to receive
into our Churches, and so exclude them from the Remedy of Church Discipline.

We conceive the receiving of them into our Churches would rather lose and
corrupt our Churches, then gain and heal them. A little Leaven laid in a lump
of dough, will sooner leaven the whole lump, then the whole lump will sweeten
it. We therefore find it safer to square rough and unhewn stones before they
be laid into the building, rather then to hammer and hew them when they lie
unevenly in the building. And accordingly, two means we use to gain and call in
such as are ignorant and scandalous:

1. The public Ministry of the Word, upon which they are invited by counsel,
and required by wholesome Laws. And the Word it is, which is the power of God to
salvation, to the calling and winning of Souls.

2. Private Conference, and conviction by the Elders, and other able Brethren
of the Church: whom they do the more respectively hearken unto, when they see
no hope of enjoying Church fellowship, or participation in the Sacraments for
themselves or their children, till they approve their judgments to be sound
and orthodox, and their lives subdued to some hope of a godly conversation.
What can Classical Discipline, or Excommunication it self do more in this case?

The third Exception wrappeth up in it a threefold domestical inconvenience,
and each of them meet to be eschewed, 1. Disunion in families between each
Relation. 2. Disappointment of edification, for want of opportunity in the
governors of families to take account of things heard by their children and
servants. 3. Disbursements of chargeable maintenance to the several Churches,
whereto the several persons of their families are joined.

All which Inconveniences either do not fall out in Congregational Churches, or
are easily redressed. For, none are orderly admitted into Congregational
Churches, but such as are well approved by good testimony to be duly observant
of Family-relations: or if any otherwise disposed should creep in, they are
either orderly healed, or duly removed in a way of Christ. Nor are they
admitted, unless they can give some good account of their profiting by
Ordinances, before the Elders and Brethren of the Church, and much more to
their Parents and Masters. Godly Tutors in the University can take an account
of their Pupils; and godly Householders in the City can take account of their
Children and servants, how they profit by the Word they have heard in several
Churches, and that to the greater edification of the whole Family, by the
variety of such Administrations. Bees may bring the more Honey and Wax into the
Hive, when they are not limited to one Garden of flowers, but may fly abroad to
many.

Nor is any charge expected from Wives, Children or Servants to the maintenance
of Congregational Churches, further then they be furnished with personal
Estates, or Livings, which may enable them to contribute of such things as they
have, and not of such as they have not. God accepts not Robbery for a
sacrifice. And though a godly Householder may justly take himself bound in
conscience to contribute to any such Church, whereto his wife, or children, or
servants do stand in Relation; yet that will not aggravate the burden of his
charge, no more then if they were received Members of the same Church whereto
himself is related.

But why do we stand thus long to plead exemptions from Exceptions? The Lord
help all his faithful Servants (whether Presbyterial, or Congregational) to
judge and shame our selves before the Lord, for all our former compliances to
greater Enormities in Church Government, then are to be found either in the
Congregational or Presbyterial Way: and then surely either the Lord will clear
up his own will to us, and so frame and subdue us all to one mind, and one
way, (Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.) or else we shall learn to bear one another burdens in
a spirit of meekness. It will then doubtless be far from us, so to attest the
Discipline of Christ, as to detest the Disciples of Christ; so to contend for
the seamless Coat of Christ, as to crucify the living Members of Christ; so to
divide our selves about Church communion, as through breaches to open a wide
gap for a deluge of Antichristian and profane malignity to swallow up both
Church and Civil State.

What shall we say more? Is difference about Church Order become the inlet of
all the disorders in the Kingdom? Has the Lord indeed left us to such
hardness of heart, that Church Government shall become a snare to Zion, (as
sometimes Moses was to Egypt, Exodus 10.7) that we cannot leave contesting and
contending about it, till the Kingdom be destroyed? Did not the Lord Jesus,
when he dedicated his sufferings for his Church, and his also unto his Father,
make it his earnest and only prayer for us in this world, that we all might be
one in him? Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23. And is it p^ssible that he (whom the Father
heard always Joh. 11.42.) should not have this last most solemn Prayer heard
and granted? or shall it be granted for all the Saints elsewhere, and not for
the Saints in England; so that amongst them disunion shall grow even about
Church-Vnion and Communion? If it be possible for a little faith (so much as a
grain of mustard seed) to remove a mountain, is it not possible for so much
strength of faith as is to be found in all the godly in the Kingdom, to remove
those Images of Jealousy, and to cast those stumbling blocks out of the way,
which may hinder the free passage of brotherly love amongst Brethren? It is
true indeed, the National Covenant does justly engage both Parties faithfully
to endeavor the utter extirpation of the Antichristian Hierarchy, and much
more of all Blasphemies, Heresies, and Errors. Certainly, if Congregational
Discipline be Independent from the inventions of men, is it not much more
Independent from the delusions of Satan? What fellowship has Christ with
Belial? light with darkness? Truth with Error? The faithful Jews needed not
the help of the Samaritans to re-edifie the Temple of God; yea they rejected
their help when it was offered, Ezra 4.1, 2, 3. And if the Congregational Way
be a way of truth, (as we believe) and if the Brethren that walk in it be
zealous of the Truth, and hate every false way (as by the Rule of their holy
Discipline they are instructed, 2 John 10, 11. then verily there is no Branch
in the National Covenant, that engages the Covenanters to abhor either the
Congregational Churches, or their Way: which being duly administered, do no
less effectually extirpate the Antichristian Hierarchy, and all Blasphemies,
Heresies, and pernicious Errors, then the other way of Discipline does, which
is more generally and publicly received and ratified.

But the Lord Jesus commune with all our hearts in secret: and He who is the
King of his Church, let him be pleased to exercise his Kingly Power in our
spirits, that so his Kingdom may come into our Churches in Purity and Peace.
Amen. Amen.

CHAP. I. Of the Form of Church Government; and that it is one, immutable, and
prescribed in the Word.
ECclesiastical Polity, or Church Government or Discipline, Ezekiel 43.11. Col.
2.5. 1 Timothy 3.15.
is nothing else but that Form and Order that is to be observed in the Church
of Christ upon earth, both for the Constitution of it, and all the
Administrations that therein are to be performed.

2. Church Government is considered in a double respect; either in regard of
the parts of Government themselves, or necessary circumstances thereof. The
parts of Government are prescribed in the Word, because the Lord Jesus Christ,
Heb. 3 5, 6.
the King and Lawgiver of his Church, is no less faithful in the House of God
then was Moses, Exodus 25.40.
who from the Lord delivered a Form and Pattern of Government to the children of
Israel in the Old Testament: and the holy Scriptures are now also so perfect, 2 Timothy 3.16.
as they are able to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto
every good work; and therefore doubtless to the well ordering of the House of
God.

3. The parts of Church Government are all of them exactly described in the
Word of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Chronicles. 15.13 Exodus 20 4. 1 Timothy 6 13 16. Heb. 12.27,
28. 1 Cor. 15.24. Deuteronomy. 12 32. Ezekiel. 43 8. 1 Kings 12 31, 32 33.
being parts or means of instituted Worship according to the second
Commandment* and therefore to continue one and the same unto the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, until he shall
deliver it up unto God even the Father. So that it is not left in the power of
men, Officers, Churches, or any state in the world to add, or diminish, or
alter any thing in the least measure therein.

4. The necessary Circumstances, as time and place, 2 Kings 12. Exodus 20 19.
Isa. 28.13. Col. 1.22, 23. Acts 15.28. Mat 15 9. 1 Cor. 11.23. and 8.34.
etc. belonging unto order and decency, are not so left unto men, as that under
pretense of them, they may thrust their own Inventions upon the Churches, being
circumscribed in the Word with many general limitations, where they are
determined in respect of the matter to be neither Worship it self, nor
Circumstances separable from Worship. In respect of their End* they must be
done unto edification; 1 Cor. 14* 26. and 14 40 and 11.14 and 11.16 and 14 12,
19. Acts 15.28.
in respect of the Manner, decently and in order, according to the nature of
the things themselves, and Civil and Church-custome. Does not even nature it
self teach you? yea, they are in some sort determined particularly, namely,
that they be done in such a manner, as all circumstances considered, is most
expedient for edification: so, as if there be no error of man concerning their
determination, the determining of them is to be accounted as if it were divine.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of the Catholic Church in general, and in special of
a particular Visible Church.
THe Catholic Church, is the whole Company of those that are elected, Ephesians.
1.22, 23. and 5.25, 26, 30. Her. 12.23.
redeemed, and in time effectually called from the state of sin and death, unto
a state of grace and salvation in Jesus Christ.

Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12. and 4 8. Ephesians. 6.12, 13.
2. This Church is either Triumphant, or Militant. Triumphant, the number of
them who are glorified in Heaven: Militant, the number of them who are
conflicting with their enemies upon earth.

2 Timothy 2 19. Rev. 2.17. 1 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 3 17. Romans 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. Isa.
2.2. 1 Timothy 6.12.
3. This Militant Church is to be considered as Invisible, and Visible.
Invisible, in respect of their relation wherein they stand to Christ, as a Body
unto the Head, being united unto him by the Spirit of God, and faith in their
hearts: Visible, in respect of the profession of their faith, in their persons,
and in particular Churches. And so there may be acknowledged an Universal
Visible Church.

4. The Members of the Militant Visible Church, considered either as not yet in
Church Order, Acts 19 1. Col. 2 5. M^t 18 17^ 1 Cor. 5 12.
or as walking according to the Church Order of the Gospel. In Order, and so
besides the spiritual union and communion common to all Believers, they enjoy
moreover an union and communion Ecclesiastical-Political. So we deny an
Universal Visible Church.

5. The state of the Members of the Militant Visible Church walking in order,
was either before the Law, Oeconomical, Genesis 18 19. Exodus 19.6.
that is in Families; or under the Law, National; or since the coming of
Christ, only Congregational: (the term Independent we approve not) Therefore
neither National, Provincial, nor Classical.

6. A Congregational Church is by the Institution of Christ a part of the
Militant Visible Church, 1 Cor. 14 23, 36. and 1.2. and 12.27. Exodus 19 5, 6.
Deuteronomy. 29.1. and 9 to 15 Acts 2 42. 1 Cor. 14.26.
consisting of a Company of Saints by calling, united into one Body, by a holy
Covenant, for the public Worship of God, and the mutual edification one of
another, in the fellowship of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. III. Of the Matter of the Visible Church, both in respect of Quality and
Quantity.
THe Matter of a Visible Church are Saints by calling. 1 Cor 1 2. Ephesians. 1.1.


2. By Saints, we understand, 1. Such as have not only attained the knowledge
of the Principles of Religion, Heb. 6.1. 1 Cor. 1.5. Romans 15 14. Psa. 50.16,
17. Acts 8.37. Mat. 3 6. Rom 6.17. 1 Cor. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1 2. Ephesians 1.1.
1 Cor. 5 2, 13. Rev. 2.14.15, 20 Ezekiel 44 7, 9. and 23 38.39. Number. 19 20. H^g 2
13, 14. 1 Cor 11 27, 29. Psalm. 37.21. 1 Cor. 5.6. 1 Cor. 7 14.
and are free from gross and open scandals, but also do together with the
profession of their Faith and Repentance, walk in blameless obedience to the
Word, so as that in charitable discretion they may be accounted Saints by
calling (though perhaps some or more of them be unsound, and hypocrites
inwardly;) because the Members of such particular Churches are commonly by the
holy Ghost called Saints, and Faithful Brethren in Christ: and sundry Churches
have been reproved for receiving and suffering such persons to continue in
fellowship amongst them, as have been offensive and scandalous; the Name of God
also by this means is blasphemed, and the holy things of God defiled and
profaned, the hearts of the godly grieved, and the wicked themselves hardened,
and helped forward to damnation. The example of such does endanger the sanctity
of others: A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 2. The Children of such,
who are also holy.

3. The Members of Churches though orderly constituted, may in time degenerate,
and grow corrupt and scandalous, which though they ought not to be tolerated in
the Church, Jer. 2 21. 1 Cor. 5.12. Jer. 2 4. Gal. 5 4. 2 C^r 12.21. Rev 2.14,
15. and 21.21.
yet their continuance therein, through the defect of the execution of
Discipline and just Censures, does not immediately dissolve the Being of the
Church, as appears in the Church of Israel, and the Churches of Galatia and
Corinth, Pergamus and Thyatira.

4. The Matter of the Church in respect of its Quantity, ought not to be of
greater number then may ordinarily meet together conveniently in one place; 1
Cor. 14 21. Mat. 18.17.
nor ordinarily fewer, then may conveniently carry on Church-work. Hence when
the holy Scripture makes mention of the Saints combined into a Church Estate,
in a Town or City where was but one Congregation, it usually calls those
Saints [ The Church] in the singular number; Romans 16 1. 1 Thessalonians 1.1. Rev. 28.
and 37
as, The Church of the Thessalonians, The Church of Smyrna, Philadelphia, and
the like: But when it speaks of the Saints in a Nation or Province, wherein
there were sundry Congregations, it frequently and usually calls them by the
name of Churches, 1 Cor. 16.1, 19 Gal. 1.2. 2 Cor. 8.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14.
in the plural number; as the [ Churches] of Asia, Galatia, Macedonia, and the
like: which is further confirmed by what is written of sundry of those Churches
in particular, how they were assembled and met together the whole Church in one
place, Acts 2.46. and 5.12 and 6.2. and 14.27. and 15.38. 1 Cor. 5 4 and 14.23.
Romans 16.1
as the Church at Jerusalem, the Church at Antioch, the Church at Corinth, and
Cenchrea, though it were more near to Corinth, it being the Port thereof, and
answerable to a Village, yet being a distinct Congregation from Corinth, it had
a Church of its own as well as Corinth had.

5. Nor can it with reason be thought, but that every Church appointed and
ordained by Christ, had a Ministry ordained and appointed for the same; and yet
plain it is, that there were no ordinary Officers appointed by Christ for any
other then Congregational Churches; Elders being appointed to feed, not all
flocks, Acts 20 28.
but that particular flock of God over which the holy Ghost had made them
Overseers, and that flock they must attend, even the whole flock; and one
Congregation being as much as any ordinary Elders can attend, therefore there
is no greater Church then a Congregation, which may ordinarily meet in one
place.

CHAP. IV. Of the Form of a Visible Church, and of Church Covenant.
SAints by calling, 1 Cor. 12 27. 1 Timothy 3 15.
must have a Visible Political Union amongst themselves, or else they are not
yet a particular Church; as those Similitudes hold forth which the Scripture
makes use of to show the nature of particular Churches: as a Body, Ephesians. 2.22. 1
Cor. 12 15, 16, 17.
a Building, or House, Hands, Eyes, Feet, and other members must be united, or
else (remaining separate) are not a Body. Stones, Timber, though squared, hewn
and polished, are not an House, until they are compacted and united: so Saints
or Believers, in judgment of charity, are not a Church, unless orderly knit
together.

2. Particular Churches cannot be distinguished one from another, but by their
Forms. Ephesus is not Smyrna, Rev. 1.
nor Pergamus Thyatira; but each one a distinct Society of it self, having
Officers of their own, which had not the charge of others; Vi^tues of their
own, for which others are not praised; Corruptions of their own, for which
others are not blamed.

3. This Form is the Visible Cov^nant, Agreement or Consent, Ex^d 19.5, 8.
Deuteronomy. 29 12, 13. Zech 11.14. and 9 11.
whereby they give up themselves unto the Lord, to the observing of the
Ordinances of Christ together in the same Society, which is usually called the
Church Covenant: for we see not otherwise how Members can have Church Power one
over another mutually. Ephesians 2.19. 2 Cor 11.2.
The comparing of each particular Church unto a City, and unto a Spouse,
seems to conclude not only a Form, but that that Form is by way of Covenant.
The Covenant, Genesis 17 7. Deuteronomy 29.12, 13 Ephesians. 2 12, 19.
as it was that which made the Family of Abraham and children of Israel to be a
Church and people unto God, so is it that which now makes the several Societies
of Gentile-believers to be Churches in these days.

4. This voluntary Agreement, Consent, or Covenant (for all these are here
taken for the same) although the more express and plain it is, the more fully
it puts us in mind of our mutual duty, and stirs us up to it, and leaves
less room for the questioning of the truth of the Church Estate of a company of
Professors, and the truth of Membership of particular persons; yet we conceive
the substance of it is kept, where there is a real Agreement and consent of a
company of faithful persons to meet constantly together in one Congregation,
for the public Worship of God, and their mutual edification: which real
Agreement and consent they do express by their constant practice in coming
together for the public Worship of God, and by their religious subjection unto
the Ordinances of God there: Exodus 19 5 and 20.8 and 24 3, 17 Josh. 24.18 to 24.
Psalm 50 5. Neh. 9* 38. and 10 1. Genesis 17. Deuteronomy 29.
the rather, if we do consider how Scripture-covenants have been entered into,
not only expressly by word of mouth, but by Sacrifice, by Hand writing, and
Seal; and also sometimes by silent consent, without any writing, or expression
of words at all.

5. This Form then being by mutual Covenant, it follows, it is not faith in
the heart, nor the profession of that faith, nor cohabitation, nor Baptism. 1.
Not Faith in the heart; because that is invisible: 2. Not a bare Profession;
because that declares them no more to be Members of one Church then of
another: 3. Not cohabitation; Atheists or Infidels may dwell together with
Believers: 4. Not Baptism; because it presupposes a Church Estate, as
circumcision in the Old Testament, which gave no Being unto the Church, the
Church being before it, and in the Wilderness without it. Seals presuppose a
covenant already in being. One person is a complete subject of Baptism, but one
person is incapable of being a Church.

6. All Believers ought, as God gives them opportunity thereunto, Acts 2.^7.
and 9 26 M^^. 3 13, 14, 15. and 28 19 20. Psa 133 2, 3. and 87 7. Man 18 20. 1
John 1 3.
to endeavor to join themselves unto a particular Church, and that in respect
of the honor of Jesus Christ, in his Example and Institution, by the professed
acknowledgement of, and subjection unto the Order and Ordinances of the Gospel:
as also in respect of their good of communion founded upon their visible union,
and contained in the Promises of Christ's special presence in the Church; whence
they have fellowship with him, Psalm. 119.176. 1 Pet. 2 25. Ephesians 4 16 I^h. 22 24,
25. Mat. 18.15, ^6, ^7
and in him one with another: also for the keeping of them in the way of Gods
commandments, and recovering of them in case of wandering, (which all Christ's
sheep are subject to in this life) being unable to return of themselves:
together with the benefit of their mutual edification, and of their posterity,
that they may not be cut off from the Privileges of the Covenant. Otherwise,
if a Believer offends, he remains destitute of the remedy provided in that
behalf. And should all Believers neglect this duty of joining to all particular
Congregations, it might follow thereupon, that Christ should have no visible
Political Churches upon earth.

CHAP. V. Of the first Subject of Church Power; or, To whom Church Power does
first belong.
THe first Subject of Church Power is either Supreme, Mat 18.18. Rev. 3.7. Isa.
9.6. John 20 21, 23 1 Cor. 14.32. Titus 1 5. 1 Cor. 5.12.
or Subordinate and Ministerial. The Supreme (by way of gift from the Father)
is the Lord Jesus Christ: the Ministerial is either extraordinary, as the
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists; or ordinary, as every particular
Congregational Church.

2. Ordinary Church Power, is either the Power of Office, that is, such as is
proper to the Eldership; or Power of Privilege, such as belongs unto the
Brotherhood. The latter, is in the Brethren formal^y, and immediately from
Christ, that is, so as it may be acted or exercised immediately by themselves;
Romans 12.4, 8. Acts 1 23. and 6 3.4. and 14 23 1 Cor. 10.29, 30
the former is not in them formally or immediately, and therefore cannot be
acted or exercised immediately by them, but is said to be in them, in that they
design the persons unto Office, who only are to act, or to exercise this Power.

CHAP. VI. Of the Officers of the Church, and especially of Pastors and
Teachers.
A Church being a company of people combined together by Covenant for the
Worship of God, it appears thereby, that there may be the Essence and Being
of a Church without any Officers, seeing there is both the Form and Matter of a
Church; Acts 14 23.
which is implied, when it is said, The Apostles ordained Elders in every
Church.

Romans 10 17. Jer. 3 15. 1 Cor. 12 28. Ephesians 4 11. Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
2. Nevertheless, though Officers be not absolutely necessary to the simple
Being of Churches, when they be called; yet ordinarily to their Calling they
are, and to their well being: and therefore the Lord Jesus out of his tender
compassion, has appointed and ordained Officers, which he would not have done,
if they had not been useful and needful for the Church; yea, being ascended
into Heaven, Ephesians 4 12, 13.
he received gifts for men, and gave gifts to men, whereof Officers for the
Church are justly accounted no small parts, they being to continue to the end
of the world, and for the perfecting of all the Saints.

1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians 4.11. Acts 8.6.16, 19 and 11 28. Romans 11.13 1 Cor. 4.9.
3. These Officers were either extraordinary, or ordinary: Extraordinary, as
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists; Ordinary, as Elders and Deacons. The Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, as they were called extraordinarily by Christ, so
their Office ended with themselves. Whence it is that Paul directing Timothy
how to carry along Church-Administrations, gives no direction about the choice
or course of Apostles, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 8, to 13 Tim^ 1.5. Acts 20.17.28. 1 Pet
5.1, 2 3.
Prophets, or Evangelists, but only of Elders and Deacons. And when Paul was
to take his last leave of the Church of Ephesus, he committed the care of
feeding the Church to no other, but unto the Elders of that Church. The like
charge does Peter commit to the Elders.

1 Timothy 2 3. Phil. 1 1. Acts 20 17 28. 1 Timothy 5 17.
4. Of Elders (who are also in Scripture called Bishops) some attend chiefly to
the Ministry of the Word, as the Pastors and Teachers; others attend especially
unto Rule, who are therefore called Ruling Elders.

Ephesians 4 11. Romans 12.7.8. 1 Cor. 12 8.
5. The Office of Pastor and Teacher, appears to be distinct. The Pastors
special work is, to attend to Exhortation; and therein to administer a word of
Wisdom: the Teacher is to attend to Doctrine, and therein to administer a word
of Knowledge: and either of them to administer the Seals of that Covenant, unto
the dispensation whereof they are alike called; as also to execute the
Censures, 2 Timothy 4 1, 2. Titus 1.9.
being but a kind of Application of the Word: the Preaching of which, together
with the Application thereof they are alike charged withal.

6 And forasmuch as both Pastors and Teachers are given by Christ for the
perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and 1 22, 23.
and edifying of his Body; which Saints and Body of Christ is his Church:
therefore we account Pastors and Teachers to be both of them Church Officers,
and not the Pastor for the Church, and the Teacher only for the Schools:
though this we gladly acknowledge, that Schools are both lawful, profitable, 1 Samuel 10.12, 19 20. 2 Kin. 2.3, 15.
and necessary for the training up of such in good Literature or Learning, as
may afterward be called forth unto Office of Pastor or Teacher in the Church.

CHAP. VII. Of Ruling Elders and Deacons.
THe Ruling Elders Office is distinct from the Office of Pastor and Teacher.
The Ruling Elders are not so called, Romans 12.7, 8, 9. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Heb. 13 17. 1 Timothy 5 17.
to exclude the Pastors and Teachers from Ruling, because Ruling and Governing
is common to these with the other; whereas attending to Teach and Preach the
Word is peculiar unto the former.

2. The Ruling Elders work is to join with the Pastor and Teacher in those acts
of Spiritual Rule which are distinct from the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments committed to them. 1 Timothy 5 17. 2 Chro. 23.19. Rev. 21 12. 1 Timothy 4
14. Mat. 18.17. 2 Cor. 2 7, 8. Acts 2 6.
Of which sort, these be as follows: 1. To open and shut the doors of Gods
House, by the Admission of Members approved by the Church; by Ordination of
Officers chosen by the Church; and by Excommunication of notorious and
obstinate offenders renounced by the Church; and by restoring of penitents
forgiven by the Church. 2. To call the Church together when there is occasion,
Acts 21.18 22 23^
and seasonably to dismiss them again. 3. To prepare matters in private, that
in public they may be carried an end with less trouble, Acts 6 2.3 and 13 15.
2 Cor 8.19. Heb 13.7 17. 2 Thessalonians. 2 10, 11, 12.
and more speedy dispatch. 4. To moderate the carriage of all matters in the
Church assembled; as, To propound matters to the Church; to order the season of
speech and silence; and to pronounce sentence according to the mind of Christ,
with the consent of the Church. 5. To be Guides and Leaders to the Church, in
all matters whatsoever pertaining to Church-Administrations and Actions. Acts
20 28, 32. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Iam. 5.14. Acts 20 20.
6. To see that none in the Church live inordinately, out of rank and place,
without a calling, or idly in their calling. 7. To prevent and heal such
offenses in life or in doctrine, as might corrupt the Church. 8. To feed the
flock of God with a word of Admonition. 9. And as they shall be sent for, to
visit and to pray over their sick Brethren: 10. And at other times as
opportunity shall serve thereunto.

Act 6 3 6. Phil. 1.1 1 Timothy 3 8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 3 8 9.
3. The office of a Deacon is instituted in the Church by the Lord Jesus:
sometime they are called Helps. The Scripture tells us how they should be
qualified; Grave, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not given to
filthy lucre. They must first be proved, and then use the office of a Deacon,
being found blameless. Acts 4 35. and 6 2, 3.
The office and work of the Deacon, is to receive the offerings of the Church,
gifts given to the Church, and to keep the Treasury of the Church, and
therewith to serve the Tables which the Church is to provide for; as the Lords
Table, Romans 12 8.
the Table of the Ministers, and of such as are in necessity, to whom they are
to distribute in simplicity.

4. The office therefore being limited unto the care of the temporal good
things of the Church, 1 Cor. 7 17.
it extends not unto the attendance upon, and administration of the Spiritual
things thereof, as the Word and Sacraments, or the like.

5. The ordinance of the Apostle, and practice of the Church, commends the
Lord's Day as a fit time for the Contributions of the Saints. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2, 3


1 Cor. 12 28. Ephesians 4 8.11. Acts 20.28.
6. The instituting of all these Officers in the Church, is the work of God
himself, of the Lord Jesus Christ, of the holy Ghost: and therefore such
Officers as he has not appointed, are altogether unlawful either to be placed
in the Church, or to be retained therein, and are to be looked at as humane
creatures, mere Inventions and Appointments of man, to the great dishonor of
Christ Jesus, the Lord of his House, the King of his Church, whether Popes,
Patriarks, Cardinals, Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Arch deacons, Officials,
Commissaries, and the like. These, and the rest of that Hierarchy and Retinue,
not being plants of the Lords planting, shall all be certainly rooted out, Mat
15.13.
and cast forth.

7 The Lord has appointed ancient Widows (where they may be had) to minister
in the Church, 1 Timothy 5 9, 10.
in giving attendance to the sick, and to give succor unto them, and others in
the like necessities.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Election of Church Officers.
NO man may take the honor of a Church Officer unto himself, but he that was
called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4.


2. Calling unto Office is either immediate, by Christ himself, such was the
call of the Apostles and Prophets; Gal. 1.1. Acts 14.23. and 6 3.
this manner of calling ended with them, as has been said: or mediate, by the
Church.

3. It is meet, that before any be ordained or chosen officers, 1 Timothy 5.22.
and 7.10. Acts 16 2. and 6.3.
they should first be tried and proved; because hands are not suddenly to be
laid upon any, and both Elders and Deacons must be of honest and good report.

4. The things in respect of which they are to be tried, are those gifts and
virtues which the Scripture requires in men that are to be elected into such
places; viz. that Elders must be blameless, sober, apt to teach, and endued
with such other qualifica^ions as are laid down, 1 Timothy 3.2. Titus 1.6, to 9.
Deacons to be fitted as is directed, Acts 6.3. 1 Timothy 3 8, to 11.

5 Officers are to be called by such Churches whereunto they are to minister.
Acts 14 23. and 1 23 and 6.3 4, 5
Of such moment is the preservation of this Power, that the Churches exercised
it in the presence of the Apostles.

6. A Church being free, cannot become subject to any, but by a free election;
Gal. 5 13. Heb. 13.17.
yet when such a people do choose any to be over them in the Lord, then do they
become subject, and most willingly submit to their Ministry in the Lord, whom
they have so chosen.

7. And if the Church have power to choose their Officers Romans 16 17.
and Ministers, then in case of manifest unworthiness and delinquency, they
have power also to depose them: for, to open and shut, to choose and refuse, to
constitute in office, and remove from office, are acts belonging unto the same
power.

Cant 8 8, 9.
8. We judge it much conducing to the well-being and communion of Churches, that
where it may conveniently be done, Neighbour-Churches be advised withal, and
their help made use of in the trial of Church Officers, in order to their
choice.

9. The choice of such Church Officers belongs not to the Civil Magistrates
as such, or Diocesan Bishops, or Patrons: for of these, or any such like, the
Scripture is wholly silent, as having any power therein.

CHAP. IX. Of Ordination, and Imposition of Hands.
Acts 13.3. and 14 23. 1 Timothy 5 22.
Church Officers are not only to be chosen by the Church, but also to be
ordained by Imposition of hands, and prayer; with which at the ordination of
Elders, Fasting also is to be joined.

Numb. 8 10. Acts 6 5, 6. and 13 2, 3.
2. This Ordination we account nothing else, but the solemn putting of a man
into his Place and office in the Church, whereunto he had right before by
Election: being like the installing of a Magistrate in the Commonwealth.
Ordination therefore is not to go before, Acts 6 5, 6 and 14.23.
but to follow Election. The essence and substance of the outward calling of an
ordinary officer in the Church, does not consist in his ordination, but in his
voluntary and free Election by the Church, and in his accepting of that
Election: whereupon is founded that relation between Pastor and Flock, between
such a Minister, and such a People. Ordination does not constitute an officer,
nor give him the essentials of his office. The Apostles were Elders, without
Imposition of hands by men: Paul and Barnabas were officers, before that
Imposition of hands, Acts 13.3. The posterity of Levi were Priests and Levites,
before hands were laid on them by the children of Israel.

3. In such Churches where there are Elders, 1 Timothy 4 14. Acts 13 3. 1 Timothy
5.22.
Imposition of Hands in ordination is to be performed by those Elders.

4. In such Churches where there are no Elders, Imposition of Hands may be
performed by some of the Brethren orderly chosen by the Church thereunto. Numb.
8.10.
For if the people may elect officers, which is the greater, and wherein the
substance of the office consists, they may much more (occasion and need so
requiring) impose hands in ordination, which is less, and but the
accomplishment of the other.

5. Nevertheless, in such Churches where there are no Elders, and the Church so
desire, we see not why Imposition of Hands may not be performed by the Elders
of other Churches. Ordinary officers laid hands upon the officers of many
Churches: The Presbytery at Ephesus laid hands upon Timothy an Evangelist; 1 Timothy 4 14. Acts 13.3.
the Presbytery at Antioch laid hands upon Paul and Barnabas

6 Church Officers are officers to one Church, 1 Pet. 5.2. Acts 20 28.
even that particula^ ^ver which the holy Ghost has made them overseers.
Insomuch as Elders are commanded to feed, not all flocks, but that flock which
is committed to their faith and trust, and depends upon them. Nor can
constant residence at one Congregation be necessary for a Minister, no nor yet
lawful, if he be not a Minister to one Congregation only, but to the Church
Universal, Acts 20 28.
because he may not attend one part only of the Church whereto he is a
Minister, but he is called to attend unto all the flock.

7. He that is clearly loosed from his Office-relation unto that Church whereof
he was a Minister, cannot be looked at as an Officer, nor perform any act of
office in any other Church, unless he be again orderly called unto Office:
which when it shall be, we know nothing to hinder, but Imposition of Hands also
in his Ordination ought to be used toward him again. For so Paul the Apostle
received Imposition of Hands twice at least from Ananias, Acts 9.17. and 13.3.

CHAP. X. Of the Power of the Church, and its Presbytery.
Psalm. 2 6. Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Isa. 9 6. Mat. 28 18.
SUpreme and Lordly Power over all the Churches upon earth does only belong
unto Jesus Christ, who is King of the Church, and the Head thereof. He has the
Government upon his shoulders, and has all power given to him, both in Heaven
and Earth.

2. A Company of professed Believers Ecclesiastically Confederate, Acts 1.23.
and 14.23. and 6.3, 4. Man 18.17. 1^ Cor. 5.4.5.
as they are a Church before they have Officers, and without them; so even in
that estate, Subordinate Church Power under Christ, delegated to them by him,
does belong to them, in such a manner as is before expressed, Chap. 5. Sect. 2.
and as flowing from the very Nature and Essence of a Church: It being natural
to all Bodies, and so unto a Church Body, to be furnished with sufficient Power
for its own preservation and subsistence.

3. This Government of the Church is a mixed Government (and so has been
acknowledged long before the term of Independency was heard of:) In respect of
Christ, the Head and King of the Church, Rev. 3 7.
and the Sovereign Power residing in him, and exercised by him, it is a
Monarchy; in respect of the Body or Brotherhood of the Church, 1 Cor* 5.12.
and power from Christ granted unto them, it resembles a Democracy; in respect
of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 5.17.
and power committed unto them, it is an Aristocracy.

4. The Sovereign Power which is peculiar unto Christ, is exercised 1. In
calling the Church out of the world unto holy fellowship with himself. Gal. 1
4. Rev 5 8, 9. Mat. 28 20. Ephesians 4 8, 11. Jam. 4.12. Isa* 33 22. 1^ Tim. 3 15. 2
Cor. 10 4 5. Isa. 32 2. Luke 1.71.
2. In instituting the Ordinances of his Worship, and appointing his Ministers
and Officers for the dispensing of them. 3. In giving Laws for the ordering of
all our ways, and the ways of his House. 4. In giving power and life to all
his Institutions, and to his people by them. 5. In protecting and delivering
his Church against and from all the enemies of their peace.

5. The Power granted by Christ unto the Body of the Church and Brotherhood, is
a Prerogative or Privilege which the Church does exercise, 1. In Choosing
their own officers, whether Elders or Deacons. 2. In Admission of their own
Members; Acts 6.3, 5. and 14.23. and 9.26.
and therefore there is great reason they should have power to remove any from
their fellowship again. Hence in case of offense, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.
any Brother has power to convince and admonish an offending Brother; and in
case of not hearing him, to take one or two more to set on the Admonition; and
in case of not hearing them, to proceed to tell the Church: and as his offense
may require, the whole Church has power to proceed to the public Censure of
him, whether by Admonition, Titus 3.10. Col 4 17. Mat. 18 17: 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
or Excommunication: and upon his Repentance to restore him again unto his
former communion.

6. In case an Elder offend incorrigibly, the matter so requiring, as the
Church had power to call him to office, so they have power according to order
(the counsel of other Churches, where it may be had, Col. 4*17. Romans 16 17. Mat
18 17.
directing thereto) to remove him from his office: and being now but a Member,
in case he add contumacy to his sin, the Church that had power to receive him
into their fellowship, has also the same power to cast him out, that they have
concerning any other Member.

7. Church Government, or Rule, 1 Timothy 5 17. Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5 12.
is placed by Christ in the officers of the Church, who are therefore called
Rulers, while they rule with God: yet in case of Mal-Administration, they are
subject to the power of the Church, as has been said before. The holy Ghost
frequently, yea always, Romans 12 8. 1 Timothy 5 17. 1 Cor. 12 28, 29 Heb. 13 7, 17
where it mentions Church-Rule, and Church Government, ascribes it to
Elders: whereas the work and duty of the people is expressed in the phrase of
obeying their Elders, and submitting themselves unto them in the Lord. So as it
is manifest, that an organick or complete Church is a Body Politic, consisting
of some that are Governors, and some that are governed in the Lord.

8. The power which Christ has committed to the Elders, Acts 20 28. and 6 2
Numb 16 12. Ezekiel. 46 10. Acts 13.15.
is to feed and rule the Church of God, and accordingly to call the Church
together upon any weighty occasion: when the Members so called, without just
cause, may not refuse to come, nor when they are come, depart before they are
dismissed; nor speak in the Church, before they have leave from the Elders;
Hos. 4 4.
nor continue so doing, when they require silence: nor may they oppose nor
contradict the judgment or sentence of the Elders, without sufficient and
weighty cause, because such practices are manifestly contrary unto Order and
Government, and inlets of disturbance, and tend to confusion.

9. It belongs also unto the Elders to examine any Officers or Members, Rev 2
2. 1 Timothy 5.19. Acts 21.18, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
before they be received of the Church; to receive the Accusations brought to
the Church, and to prepare them for the Churches hearing. In handling of
offenses and other matters before the Church, they have power to declare and
publish the counsel and will of God touching the same, and to pronounce
Sentence with consent of the Church. Lastly they have power, Numb. 6.23, to 26.
when they dismiss the people, to bless them in the Name of the Lord.

10. This power of Government in the Elders, does not any wise prejudice the
power of Privilege in the Brotherhood; as neither the power of Privilege in
the Brethren, does prejudice the power of Government in the Elders, but they
may sweetly agree together: as we may see in the example of the Apostles,
furnished with the greatest Church Power, who took in the concurrence and
consent of the Brethren in Church-Administrations. Acts 14.15, 23. and 6.2. 1
Cor. 5 4. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.
Also that Scripture, 2 Cor. 2.9. and 10.6. do declare, that what the Churches
were to act and do in these matters, they were to do in a way of obedience, and
that not only to the direction of the Apostles, Heb. 13 17.
but also of their ordinary Elders.

11. From the premises, namely, That the ordinary power of Government belonging
only to the Elders, Power of Privilege remains with the Brotherhood, (as
power of judgment in matters of Censure, and power of liberty in matters of
liberty:) It follows, That in an Organick Church, and right Administration,
all Church-acts proceed after the manner of a mixed Administration, so as no
Church-act can be consummated or perfected without the consent of both.

CHAP. XI. Of the Maintenance of Church Officers.
THe Apostle concludes, 1 Cor 9 14 15. Man. 9 38. and 10.10. 1 Timothy 5.18.
that necessary and sufficient Maintenance is due unto the Ministers of the
Word, from the Law of Nature and Nations, from the Law of Moses, the Equity
thereof, as also the Rule of common Reason. Moreover, the Scripture does not
only call Elders Laborers, and Workmen, but also speaking of them, does say,
Gal 6 6.
that the Labourer is worthy of his hire: and requires that he which is taught
in the Word, should communicate to him in all good things; 1 Cor 9.9.14. 1 Timothy
5 18.
and mentions it as an ordinance of the Lord, That they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel; and forbids the muzling of the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn.

2. The Scriptures alleged requiring this Maintenance as a bounden duty and
due debt, and not as a matter of Alms and free gift, therefore people are not
at liberty to do or not to do, what and when they please in this matter, no
more then in any other commanded duty, and ordinance of the Lord; but ought of
duty to minister of their carnal things, Rom 15.27. 1 Cor. 9 21.
to them that labor amongst them in the Word and Doctrine, as well as they
ought to pay any other workmen their wages, and to discharge and satisfy their
other debts, or to submit themselves to observe any other ordinance of the Lord.

3. The Apostle ( Gal. 6.6.) enjoining, Gal 6.6.
that he which is taught communicate to him that teaches in all good things,
does not leave it arbitrary, what or how much a man shall give, or in what
proportion, but even the latter, as well as the former, 1 Cor. 16.2.
is prescribed and appointed by the Lord.

4. Not only Members of Churches, Gal. 6.6.
but all that are taught in the word, are to contribute unto him that teaches,
in all good things. In case that Congregations are defective in their
Contributions, the Deacons are to call upon them to do their duty: Acts 6.3, 4.
If their call suffices not, the Church by her power is to require it of their
Members; and where Church Power, through the corruption of men, does not, or
cannot attain the end, the Magistrate is to see the Ministry be duly provided
for, as appears from the commended Example of Nehemiah. Neh. 13.11.
The Magistrates are Nursing-fathers, Isa. 49 23.
and Nursing-mothers, and stand charged with the custody of both Tables;
because it is better to prevent a scandal that it may not come, and easier
also, then to remove it when it is given. 2 Cor. 8.13, 14.
Its most suitable to Rule, that by the Churches care each man should know his
proportion according to Rule, what he should do, before he do it, that so his
judgment and heart may be satisfied in what he does, and just offense
prevented in what is done.

CHAP. XII. Of Admission of Members into the Church.
2 Chro. 23.19. Mat 13 25. and 22.12.
THe doors of the Churches of Christ upon earth, do not by Gods appointment
stand so wide open, that all sorts of people, good or bad, may freely enter
therein at their pleasure; but such as are admitted thereto as Members, ought
to be examined and tried first, whether they be fit and meet to be received
into Church-society, or not. The Eunuch of Ethiopia, before his admission, Acts
8.37.
was examined by Philip, whether he did believe on Jesus Christ with all his
heart. The Angel of the Church at Ephesus is commended, Rev. 2.2.
for trying such as said they were Apostles, and were not. There is like reason
for trying of them that profess themselves to be Believers. Acts 9 26.
The Officers are charged with the keeping of the doors of the Church, and
therefore are in a special manner to make trial of the fitness of such who
enter. Rev. 21.12. 2 Chro. 2^.19.
Twelve Angels are set at the gates of the Temple, lest such as were
Ceremonially unclean should enter thereinto.

2. The things which are requisite to be found in all Church Members, are
Repentance from sin, and Faith in Jesus Christ: and therefore these are the
things whereof men are to be examined at their admission into the Church, Acts
2.38, to 42. and 8 37.
and which then they must profess and hold forth in such sort, as may satisfy
rational charity that the things are there indeed. Mat. 3 6.
John Baptist admitted men to Baptism, confessing and bewailing their sins: and
of other it is said, that they came, and confessed, Acts 19.18.
and showed their deeds.

3. The weakest measure of faith is to be accepted in those that desire to be
admitted into the Church; because weak Christians, if sincere, have the
substance of that Faith, Romans 14.1.
Repentance and Holiness which is required in Church Members; and such have
most need of the Ordinances for their confirmation and growth in grace. Mat.
12.20. Isa. 40.11.
The Lord Jesus would not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed,
but gather the tender lambs in his arms, and carry them gently in his bosom.
Such charity and tenderness is to be used, as the weakest Christian, if
sincere, may not be excluded nor discouraged. Severity of examination is to be
avoided.

4. In case any through excessive fear, or other infirmity, he unable to make
their personal Relation of their spiritual estate in public, it is sufficient
that the Elders having received private satisfaction, make relation thereof in
public before the Church, they testifying their assents thereunto: this being
the way that tends most to edification. But whereas persons are of greater
Abilities, there it is most expedient that they make their Relations and
Confessions personally with their own mouth, Psalm 66 16.
as David professes of himself.

5. A personal and public Confession, and declaring of Gods manner of working
upon the soul, is both lawful, expedient, and useful, in sundry respects, and
upon sundry grounds. Those three thousand, Acts 2.37, 41. before they were
admitted by the Apostles, did manifest that they were pricked in their hearts
at Peter's Sermon, together with earnest desire to be delivered from their sins,
which now wounded their consciences, and their ready receiving of the word of
Promise and Exhortation. 1 Pet. 3.15.
We are to be ready to render a reason of the hope that is in us, to every one
that asks us; therefore we must be able and ready upon any occasion to
declare and show our Repentance for sin, Faith unfeigned, and effectual
Calling, Heb. 11.1. Ephesians. 1.18.
because these are the reason of a well-grounded hope. I have not hidden thy
righteousness from the great congregation, Psalm. 40.10.

6. This profession of Faith and Repentance, as it must be made by such at
their Admission, that were never in Church-society before; so nothing hinders,
but the same way also be performed by such as have formerly been Members of
some other Church, and the Church to which they now join themselves as Members,
may lawfully require the same. Those three thousand, Acts 2. which made their
Confession, were Members of the Church of the Jews before, Mat. 3 5 6. Gal.
2.4. 1 Timothy 5.24.
so were they that were baptized by John. Churches may err in their admission;
and persons regularly admitted, may fall into offense. Otherwise, if Churches
might obtrude their Members, or if Church Members might obtrude themselves upon
other Churches without due trial, the matter so requiring, both the liberty of
Churches would hereby be infringed, in that they might not examine those,
concerning whose fitness for communion they were unsatisfied: and besides the
infringing of their liberty, the Churches themselves would unavoidably be
corrupted, and the Ordinances defiled, whilst they might not refuse, but must
receive the unworthy: which is contrary unto the Scripture, teaching that all
Churches are Sisters, Cant 8.8.
and therefore equal.

7. The like trial is to be required from such Members of the Church as were
born in the same, or received their Membership, and were baptized in their
Infancy, or minority, by virtue of the Covenant of their Parents, when being
grown up unto years of discretion, they shall desire to be made partakers of
the Lords Supper: unto which, because holy things must not be given unto the
unworthy, Mat. 7*6. 1 Cor. 11 27.
therefore it is requisite, that these as well as others should come to their
trial and examination, and manifest their Faith and Repentance by an open
Profession thereof, before they are received to the Lords Supper; and otherwise
not to be admitted thereunto. Yet these Church Members that were so born, or
received in their Childhood, before they are capable of being made partakers of
full Communion, have many Privileges which others (not Church Members) have
not: they are in Covenant with God, have the Seal thereof upon them, viz.
Baptism; and so if not regenerated, yet are in a more hopeful way of attaining
regenerating grace, and all the spiritual blessings both of the Covenant and
Seal; they are also under Church-watch, and consequently subject to the
Reprehensions, Admonitions, and Censures thereof, for their healing and
amendment, as need shall require.

CHAP. XIII. Of Church Members their Removal from one Church to another, and of
Recommendation, and Dismission.
Church Members may not remove or depart from the Church, and so one from
another as they please, nor without just and weighty cause, but ought to live
and dwell together; forasmuch as they are commanded, Heb. 10 25.
not to forsake the assembling of themselves together. Such departure tends to
the dissolution and ruin of the Body; as the pulling of stones and pieces of
timber from the Building, and of members from the Natural Body, tend to the
destruction of the whole.

2. It is therefore the duty of Church Members, in such times and places where
counsel may be had, to consult with the Church whereof they are Members, about
their Removal, Prove. 11.16.
that accordingly they having their approbation, may be encouraged, or
otherwise desist. They who are joined with consent, should not depart without
consent, except forced thereunto.

3. If a Members departure be manifestly unsafe and sinful, Romans 14.23. 1 Timothy
5.22. Acts 21 14.
the Church may not consent thereunto; for in so doing, they should not act in
faith, and should partake with him in his sin. If the case be doubtful, and the
person not to be persuaded, it seems best to leave the matter unto God, and
not forcibly to detain him.

4. Just Reasons for a Members Removal of himself from the Church, are, Ephesians.
5.11. Act* 9 25, 29, 30 and 8 1.
1. If a man cannot continue without partaking in sin. 2. In case of personal
Persecution: so Paul departed from the Disciples at Damascus. Also in case of
general Persecution, when all are scattered. 3. In case of real, and not only
pretended want of competent Subsistence, Neh. 13.20.
a door being opened for better supply in another place, together with the
means of Spiritual edification. In these, or like cases, a Member may lawfully
remove, and the Church cannot lawfully detain him.

5. To separate from a Church, either out of contempt of their holy fellowship,
2 Timothy 4 10.
or out of covetousness, or for greater enlargements, with just grief to the
Church; or out of Schism, or want of love, Romans 16.17. Jude v. 19. Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Col. 3 13. Gal. 6.1, 2.
and out of a spirit of contention in respect of some unkindness, or some evil
only conceived, or indeed, in the Church, which might and should be tolerated
and healed with a spirit of meekness, and of which evil the Church is not yet
convinced (though perhaps himself be) nor admonished: for these or like Reasons
to withdraw from public communion, in Word, or Seals, or Censures, is unlawful
and sinful.

Isa. 56.8. Act^ 9 26.
6. Such Members as have orderly removed their Habi^ation, ought to join
themselves unto the Church in order where they do inhabit, if it may be:
otherwise, they can neither perform the duties, nor receive the privileges of
Members. Such an example tolerated in some, is apt to corrupt others; which if
many should follow, 1 Cor. 14.33.
would threaten the dissolution and confusion of Churches, contrary to the
Scripture.

Acts 18 27.
7. Order requires, that a Member thus removing, have Letters Testimonial, and
of Dismission from the Church whereof he yet is, unto the Church whereunto he
desires to be joined, lest the Church should be deluded; that the Church may
receive him in faith, and not be corrupted by receiving deceivers, and false
Brethren. Until the person dismissed be received into another Church, he
cease not by his Letters of Dismission to be a Member of the Church whereof
he was. The Church cannot make a Member no Member, but by Excommunication.

Rom 16.^, 2. 2* Cor. 3.1.
8. If a Member be called to remove only for a time where a Church is, Letters
of Recommendation are requisite, and sufficient for communion with that Church,
in the Ordinances, and in their watch; as Phoebe, a servant of the Church at
Cenchrea, had Letters written for her to the Church at Rome, that she might be
received as becomes Saints.

9. Such Letters of Recommendation and Dismission, were written for Apollos;
for Marcus to the Colossians; Acts 18 27. Col. 4 10. Romans 16.1. 2 Cor 3 1.
for Phoebe to the Romans; for sundry others to other Churches. And the Apostle
tells us, that some persons, not sufficiently known otherwise, have special
need of such Letters, though he for his part had no need thereof. The use of
them is to be a benefit and help to the party for whom they are written, and
for the furthering of his receiving amongst the Saints in the place whereto he
goes, and the due satisfaction of them in their receiving of him.

CHAP. XIV. Of Excommunication, and other Censures.
THe Censures of the Church are appointed by Christ for the preventing,
removing, 1 Timothy 5 20. Deuteronomy 17 12, 13. Jude v. 29. Deuteronomy 13 11. 1 Co^ 5 6. Romans 2
24. R^v 2 14, 15, 16, 20.
and healing of offenses in the Church; for the reclaiming and gaining of
offending Brethren; for the deterring of others from the like offenses; for
purging out the leaven which may infect the whole lump; for vindicating the
honor of Christ, and of his Church, and the holy Pro^ession of the Gospel; and
for preventing of the wrath of God, that may justly fall upon the Church, if
they should suffer his Covenant, and the Seals thereof, to be profaned by
notorious and obstinate offenders.

2. If an offense be private, Mat. 5.23, 24. Luke 17.3, 4.
(one Brother offending another) the offender is to go and acknowledge his
Repentance for it unto his offending Brother, who is then to forgive him; but
if the offender neglect or refuse to do it, the Brother offended is to go, and
convince and admonish him of it, Mat. 18.15.
between themselves privately: if thereupon the offender be brought to repent
of his offense, the admonisher has won his Brother; but if the offender hear
not his Brother, Ver. 16.
the Brother offended is to take with him one or two more, that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses, every word may be established, (whether the word of
Admonition, if the offender receive it; or the word of Complaint, if he refuse
it:) for if he refuse it, Ver. 17.
the offended Brother is by the mouth of the Elders to tell the Church; and if
he hear the Church, and declare the same by penitent Confession, he is
recovered and gained: and if the Church discern him to be willing to hear, Tit.
3.10.
yet not fully convinced of his offense, as in case of Heresy, they are to
dispense to him a public Admonition; which declaring the offender to lie under
the public offense of the Church, does thereby withhold or suspend him from
the holy fellowship of the Lords Supper, Mat. 18.17.
till his offense be removed by penitent Confession. If he still continue
obstinate, they are to cast him out by Excommunication.

1 Cor. 5.4 5, 11
3. But if the offense be more public at first, and of a more heinous and
criminal nature, to wit, such as are condemned by the light of Nature; then the
Church, without such gradual proceeding, is to cast out the offender from their
holy communion, for the further mortifying of his sin, and the healing of his
Soul in the day of the Lord Jesus.

4. In dealing with an offender, great care is to be taken that we be neither
over-strict or rigorous, nor too indulgent or remiss: Gal 6 1.
our proceeding herein ought to be with a spirit of meekness, considering our
selves lest we also be tempted; and that the best of us have need of much
forgiveness from the Lord. Mat 18.34, 35. Ezekiel. 13 10.
Yet the winning and healing of the offenders soul, being the end of these
endeavors, we must not dawb with untempered mortar, nor heal the wounds of our
Brethren slightly. On some have compassion, others save with fear.

Mat. 18 17. 1 Cor 5 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3 6, 14
5. While the offender remains excommunicate, the Church is to refrain from all
Member-like communion with him in spiritual things, and also from all familiar
communion with him in civil things, further then the necessity of natural, or
domestical, or civil Relations do require; and are therefore to forbear to eat
and drink with him, that he may be ashamed.

6. Excommunication being a Spiritual Punishment, it does not prejudice the
Excommunicate in, nor deprive him of his Civil Rights, and therefore touches
not Princes, or other Magistrates, in point of their Civil Dignity or
Authority: and, the Excommunicate being but as a Publican and a Heathen, 1 Cor.
14.24, 25*
Heathens being lawfully permitted to come to hear the Word in
Church Assemblies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
we acknowledge therefore the like liberty of hearing the Word, may be
permitted to persons excommunicate, that is permitted unto Heathen. And because
we are not without hope of his recovery, we are not to account him as an enemy,
but to admonish him as a Brother.

7. If the Lord sanctify the Censure to the offender, so as by the grace of
Christ he does testify his Repentance, with humble confession of his sin, and
judging of himself, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
giving glory unto God; the Church is then to forgive him, and to comfort him,
and to restore him to the wonted brotherly communion, which formerly he enjoyed
with them.

8. The suffering of profane or scandalous livers to continue in fellowship,
and partake in the Sacraments, Rev. 2.14, 15, 20.
is doubtless a great sin in those that have power in their hand to redress it,
and do it not. Nevertheless, Mat 23* 3. Acts 3.1.
inasmuch as Christ and his Apostles in their times, and the Prophets and other
godly in theirs, did lawfully partake of the Lords commanded Ordinances in the
Jewish Church, and neither taught nor practiced separation from the same,
though unworthy ones were permitted therein; and inasmuch as the faithful in
the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 6. and 15.12.
wherein were many unworthy persons and practices, are never commanded to
absent themselves from the Sacraments, because of the same: therefore the godly
in like cases are not presently to separate.

9. As separation from such a Church wherein profane and scandalous persons are
tolerated, is not presently necessary; so for the Members thereof, otherwise
unworthy, hereupon to abstain from communicating with such a Church in the
participation of the Sacraments, is unlawful. For as it were unreasonable for
an innocent person to be punished for the faults of other, wherein he has no
hand, 2 Chro. 30.18. Genesis 18.25.
and whereunto he gave no consent: so is it more unreasonable, that a godly man
should neglect duty, and punish himself, in not coming for his portion in the
blessing of the Seals, as he ought, because others are suffered to come that
ought not: especially, considering that himself does neither consent to their
sin, nor to their approaching to the Ordinance in their sin, nor to the neglect
of others who should put them away, and do not; but on the contrary does
heartily mourn for these things, Ezekiel 9 4.
modestly and seasonably stir up others to do their duty. If the Church cannot
be reformed, they may use their liberty, as is specified, Chap. 13. Sect. 4.
But this all the godly are bound unto, even every one to do his endeavor,
according to his power and place, that the unworthy may be duly proceeded
against, by the Church to whom this matter does appertain.

CHAP. XV. Of the Communion of Churches one with another.
Rev 1 4. Cant 8 8. Romans 16 16. 1 C^r. 16* 19. Acts 15.23. Rev. 2.1.
ALthough Churches be distinct, and therefore may not be confounded one with
another; and equal, and therefore have not dominion one over another: yet all
^he Churches ought to preserve Church Communion one with another* because they
are all united unto Christ, not only as a Mystical, but as a Political Head;
whence is derived a Communion sui^able thereunto.

2. The Communion of Churches is exercised* sundry ways. 1. By way of mutual
Care, Cant. 8 8.
in taking thought for one another welfare. 2. By way of Consultation one with
another, when we have occasion to require the judgment and counsel of other
Churches, touching any person or cause wherewi^h they may be better acquainted
then our selves. As the Church of Antioch consulted with the Apostles and
Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 15.2
about the question of Circumcision of the Gentiles, and about the false
Teachers that broached that Doctrine. In which case, when any Church wants
light or peace amongst themselves, Acts 15 6.
it is a way of Communion of Churches (according to the Word) to meet together
by their Elders and other Messengers in a Synod, Ver. 22, 23.
to consider and argue the Points in doubt or difference; and having found out
the way of Truth and Peace, to commend the same by their Letters and Messengers
to the Churches whom the same may concern. But if a Church be rent with
Divisions amongst themselves, or lie under any open scandal, and yet refuse to
consult with other Churches, for healing or removing of the same; it is matter
of just offense both to the Lord Jesus, and to other Churches, as bewraying too
much want of mercy and faithfulness, not to seek to bind up the breaches and
wounds of the Church and Brethren: Ez^k 34 4.
and therefore the state of such a Church calls aloud upon other Churches, to
exercise a fuller act of brotherly communion, to wit, by way of Admonition. 3.
A third way then of Communion of Churches, is by way of Admonition; to wit, in
case any public offense be found in a Church, which they either discern not,
or are slow in proceeding to use the means for the removing and healing of.
Paul had no authority over Peter, Gal 2.11, to 14.
yet when he saw Peter not walking with a right foot, he publicly rebuked him
before the Church. Though Churches have no more authority one over another,
then one Apostle had over another, yet as one Apostle might admonish another,
so may one Church admonish another, and yet without usurpation. In which case,
if the Church that lies under offense, Man. 18.15, 16, 17. by proportion.
do not hearken to the Church which does admonish her, the Church is to
acquaint other Neighbour-Churches with that offense which the offending Church
still lies under, together with their neglect of the Brotherly Admonition
given unto them: whereupon those other Churches are to join in seconding the
Admonition formerly given; and if still the offending Church continue in
obstinacy and impenitency, they may forbear Communion with them, and are to
proceed to make use of the help of a Synod, or Council of Neighbour-Churches
walking orderly (if a greater cannot conveniently be had) for their convict^on.
If they hear not the Synod, the Synod having declared them to be obstinate,
particular Churches approving and accepting the judgment of the Synod, are to
declare the Sentence of Non commu^ion respectively concerning them: and
thereupon, out of a religious care to keep their own Communion pure, they may
justly withdraw themselves from participation with them at the Lords Table, and
from such other acts of holy communion, as the Communion of Churches does
otherwise allow and require. Nevertheless, if any Members of such a Church as
lives under public offense, do not consent to the offense of the Church, but
do in due sort bear witness against it, they are still to be received to wonted
communion; Genesis 18* 25.
for it is not equal, that the innocent should suffer with the offensive. Yea
furthermore, if such innocent Members, after due waiting in the use of all good
means for the healing of the offense of their own Church, shall at last (with
the allowance of the counsel of Neighbour-Churches) withdraw from the
fellowship of their own Church, and offer themselves to the fellowship of
another, we judge it lawful for the other Church to receive them (being
otherwise fit) as if they had been orderly dismissed to them from their own
Church. 4. A fourth way of Communion of Churches, is by way of Participation.
The Members of one Church occasionally coming unto another, we willingly admit
them to partake with us at the Lords Table, it being the Seal of our communion
not only with Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13.
nor only with the Members of our own Church, but also of all the Churches of
the Saints: in which regard, we refuse not to baptize their Children presented
to us, if either their own Minister be absent, or such a fruit of holy
fellowship be desired with us. In like case such Churches as are furnished with
more Ministers then one, do willingly afford one of their own Ministers to
supply the place of an absent or sick Minister of another Church for a needful
season. 5. A fifth way of Church Communion, Romans 16.1.
is by way of Recommendation, when the Member of one Church has occasion to
reside in another Church; if but for a season, we commend him to their watchful
fellowship by Letters of Recommendation; but if he be called to settle his
abode there, we commit him according to his desire, Acts 18 27.
to the fellowship of their Covenant, by Letters of Dismission. 6. A sixth way
of Church Communion, Acts 11.22.
is in case of Need to minister relief and succor one unto another, Ver. 29.
either of able Members, to furnish them with Officers; or of outward support,
to the necessities of poorer Churches, Romans 13.26, 27
as did the Churches of the Gentiles contribute liberally to the poor Saints at
Jerusalem.

3. When a Company of Believers purpose to gather into Church Fellowship, it is
requisite for their safer proceeding, and the maintaining of the Communion of
Churches, that they signify their intent unto the Neighbour-Churches, walking
according unto the Order of the Gospel, Gal 2.1, 2, and 9. by proportion.
and desire their presence, and help, and right hand of fellowship, which they
ought readily to give unto them, when there is no just cause to except against
their proceedings.

4. Besides these several ways of Communion, there is also a way of
Propagation of Churches: when a Church shall grow too numerous, it is a way,
and fit season, Isa 40.20. Cant. 8 8, 9.
to propagate one Church out of another, by sending forth such of their Members
as are willing to remove, and to procure some Officers to them, as may enter
with them into Church estate amongst themselves. As Bees, when the Hive is too
full, issue forth by Swarms, and are gathered into other Hives; so the Churches
of Christ may do the same upon like necessity; and therein hold forth to them
the right hand of fellowship, both in their gathering into a Church, and in the
Ordination of their Officers.

CHAP. XVI. Of Synods.
SYnods orderly assembled, and rightly proceeding according to the Pattern, Acts
15 2, to 15.
Acts 15. we acknowledge as the Ordinance of Christ: and though not absolutely
necessary to the Being, yet many times, through the iniquity of men, and
perverseness of times, necessary to the well-being of Churches, for the
establishment of Truth and Peace therein.

2. Synods being Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Assemblies, are therefore made up
of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Causes. The next Efficient Cause of them under
Christ, is the Power of the Churches, sending forth their Elders and other
Messengers, Acts 15.2, 3.
who being met together in the Name of Christ, are the Matter of a Synod; and
they in Arguing, Debating, Ver 6.
and Determining Matters of Religion according to the Word, Ver. 7, to 23.
and publishing the same to the Churches it concerns, do put forth the proper
and Formal Acts of a Synod, Ver. 31.
to the conviction of Errors and Heresies, Acts 16.4, 15.
and the establishment of Truth and Peace in the Churches, which is the end of
a Synod.

3. Magistrates have power to call a Synod, by calling to the Churches to send
forth their Elders and other Messengers, 2 Chronicles. 29 4, 5, to 11.
to counsel and assist them in Matters of Religion; but yet the constituting of
a Synod, is a Church-act, and may be transacted by the Churches, Acts 15.
even when Civil Magistrates may be enemies to Churches, and to
Church Assemblies.

Acts 15.1.2 6 7 1 Chronicles. 15.13 2 Chr. 29 6, 7. Act 15 24, 28, 29
4. It belongs unto Synods and Councils, to debate and determine Controversies
of Faith, and Cases of Conscience; to clear from the Word holy directions for
the holy Worship of God, and good Government of the Church; to bear witness
against Mal-Administration and Corruption in Doctrine or Manners in any
particular Church; and to give directions for the Reformation thereof: Not to
exercise Church Censures in way of Discipline, nor any other act of Church
authority or jurisdiction; which that Presidential Synod did forbear.

5. The Synods Directions and Determinations, so far as consonant to the Word
of God, are to be received with reverence and submission; not only for their
agreement therewith (which is the principal ground thereof, and without which
they bind not at all) but also secondarily for the Power whereby they are
made, Acts 1^.
as being an Ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his Word.

6. Because it is difficult, if not impossible, for many Churches to come
together in one place, in all their Members universally; therefore they may
assemble by their Delegates or Messengers, Acts 1^.2
as the Church of Antioch went not all to Jerusalem, but some select men for
that purpose. Because none are or should be more fit to know the state of the
Churches, nor to advise of ways for the good thereof* then Elders; therefore
it is fit that in the choice of the Messengers for such Assemblies, they have
special respect unto such: yet inasmuch as not only Paul and Barnabas, Act 15
2, 22, 23.
but certain others also were sent to Jerusalem from Antioch, Acts 15. and when
they were come to Jerusalem, not only the Apostles and Elders, but other
Brethren also do assemble, and meet about the matter; therefore Synods are to
consist both of Elders, and other Church Members, endued with gifts, and sent
by the Churches, not excluding the presence of any Brethren in the Churches.

CHAP. XI. Of the Civil Magistrates Power in Matters Ecclesiastical.
IT is lawful, profitable and necessary for Christians to gather themselves
into Church Estate, and therein to exercise all the Ordinances of Christ
according unto the Word, Acts 2.41, 47. and 4.1, 2, 3.
although the consent of the Magistrate could not be had thereunto; because the
Apostles and Christians in their time did frequently thus practice, when the
Magistrates being all of them Jewish or Pagan, and most persecuting Enemies,
would give no countenance or consent to such matters.

2. Church Government stands in no opposition to Civil Government of
Commonwealths, John 18.36. Acts 25.8.
nor any way intrencheth upon the Authority of Civil Magistrates in their
Jurisdictions; nor any whit weakeneth their hands in governing, but rather
strengthens them, and furthereth the people in yielding more hearty and
conscionable obedience unto them, whatsoever some ill-affected persons to the
ways of Christ have suggested, to alienate the affections of Kings and Princes
from the Ordinances of Christ; as if the Kingdom of Christ in his Church could
not rise and stand, without the falling and weakening of their Government,
which is also of Christ: Isa 49 23.
whereas the contrary is most true, that they may both stand together and
flourish, the one being helpful unto the other, in their distinct and due
Administrations.

3. The Power and Authority of Magistrates is not for the restraining of
Churches, or any other good works, Rom 13 4. 1 Timothy 2 2.
but for helping in and furthering thereof; and therefore the consent and
countenance of Magistrates, when it may be had, is not to be slighted, or
lightly esteemed: but on the contrary, it is part of that honor due to
Christian Magistrates, to desire and crave their consent and approbation
therein: which being obtained, the Churches may then proceed in their way with
much more encouragement and comfort.

4. It is not in the power of Magistrates to compel their Subjects to become
Church Members, and to partake at the Lords Table; Zek. 44 7, 9.
for the Priests are reproved that brought unworthy ones into the Sanctuary:
then, as it was unlawful for the Priests, so it is as unlawful to be done by
Civil Magistrates. Cor. 5 11.
Those whom the Church is to cast out if they were in, the Magistrate ought not
to thrust them into the Church, nor to hold them therein.

5. As it is unlawful for Church Officers to meddle with the Sword of the
Magistrate, Mat. 2 25, 26.
so is it unlawful for the Magistrate to meddle with the work proper to
Church Officers. The acts of Moses and David, who were not only Princes, but
Prophets, were extraordinary, therefore not imitable. Against such usurpation
the Lord witnessed, 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17.
by smiting Vzziah with leprosy, for presuming to offer Incense.

6. It is the duty of the Magistrate to take care of matters of Religion, and
to improve his Civil Authority for the observing of the duties commanded in the
first, as well as for observing of the duties commanded in the second Table.
They are called Gods. Psalm. 82.2.
The end of the Magistrates Office, is not only the quiet and peaceable life
of the Subject in matters of Righteousness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
but also in matters of godliness, yea of all godliness. Moses, Joshua, David,
Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, 1 Kings 15.14. and 22.43. 2 Kings 12 3.
and 14 4 and 15.35. 1 Kings 20.42. Job 29 25. and 3^.26, 28. Neh. 13. Jonah
3.7. Ezra 7. Dan. 3 29.
Josiah, are much commended by the holy Ghost, for the putting forth their
Authority in matters of Religion: on the contrary, such Kings as have been
failing this way, are frequently taxed and reproved by the Lord. And not only
the Kings of Judah, but also Job, Nehemiah, the King of Nineveh, Darius,
Artaxerxes, Nebuchadnezzar, whom none looked at as Types of Christ, (though
were it so, there were no place for any just objection) are commended in the
Book of God, for exercising their Authority this way.

7. The object of the Power of the Magistrate are not things merely inward, and
so not subject to his cognizance and view, as Unbelief, Hardness of Heart,
Erroneous Opinions not vented; but only such things as are acted by the outward
man: neither is their power to be exercised in commanding such acts of the
outward man, and punishing the neglect thereof, as are but mere inventions, and
devices of men; but about such acts as are commanded and forbidden in the Word:
yea, 1 Kings 20.28, 42.
such as the Word does clearly determine, though not always clearly to the
judgment of the Magistrate or others, yet clearly in it self. In these he of
right ought to put forth his Authority, though oft-times actually he does it
not.

8. Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, Deuteronomy. 13. 1 Kin. 20.28, 42 Dan. 3.29. Zech.
13.3. Neh. 13 31. 1 Timothy 2 2. Romans 13 4.
venting corrupt and pernicious Opinions that destroy the Foundation, open
contempt of the Word Preached, Profana^ion of the Lord's Day, disturbing the
peaceable Administration and Exercise of the Worship and holy things of God,
and the like, are to be restrained and punished by Civil Authority.

9. If any Church, one or more, shall grow Schismatical, rending it self from
the Communion of other Churches, or shall walk incorrigibly or obstinately in
any corrupt way of their own, contrary to the Rule of the Word; in such case
the Magistrate is to put forth his Coercive Power, as the matter shall require.
Josh. 22.
The Tribes on this side Jordan intended to make war against the other Tribes,
for building the Altar of Witness, whom they suspected to have turned away
therein from following of the Lord.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters in this Platform of Church Discipline.
CHAP. I. OF the Form of Church Government in general, and that it is one,
immutable, and prescribed in the Word of God. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Nature of
the Catholic Church in general, and in special of a particular Visible
Chlerch. Page 2 CHAP. III. Of the Matter of the Visible Church, both in respect
of Quality and Quantity. Page 3 CHAP. IV. Of the Form of a Visible Church, and
of Church Covenant. Page 5 CHAP. V. Of the first Subject of Church Power; or,
To whom Church Power does first belong. Page 7 CHAP. VI. Of the Officers of the
Church, and especially of Pastors and Teachers. ibid. CHAP. VII. Of Ruling
Elders, and Deacons. Page 9 CHAP. VIII. Of Election of Officers. Page 11 CHAP.
IX. Of Ordination, and Imposition of Hands. Page 12 CHAP. X. Of the Power of
the Church, and its Presbytery. Page 14 CHAP. XI. Of the Maintenance of
Church Officers. Page 17 CHAP. XII. Of Admission of Members into the Church.
Page 18 CHAP. XIII. Of Church Members their Removal from one Church to another,
and of Letters of Recommendation and Dismission. Page 21 CHAP. XIV. Of
Excommunication, and other Church Censures. Page 23 CHAP. XV. Of the Communion
of Churches one with another. Page 26 CHAP. XVI. Of Synods. Page 29 CHAP. XVII.
Of the Civil Magistrates Power in matters Ecclesiastical. Page 31
THE END.

