SEVERAL POEMS Compiled with great variety of Wit and Learning, full of
Delight; Wherein especially is contained a complete Discourse, and Description
of The Four ELEMENTS CONSTITUTIONS, AGES of Man, SEASONS of the Year.


Together with an exact Epitome of the three first Monarchies Viz. The
ASSYRIAN, PERSIAN, GRECIAN.


And beginning of the Roman Commonwealth to the end of their last King: With
diverse other pleasant and serious Poems; By a Gentlewoman in New England.

The second Edition, Corrected by the Author, and enlarged by an Addition of
several other Poems found amongst her Papers after her Death.

Boston, Printed by John Foster, 1678.

Kind Reader:
HAd I opportunity but to borrow some of the Authors wit, it is possible I might
so trim this curious work with such quaint expressions, as that the Preface
might bespeak thy further Pe^usal; but I fear 'twill be a shame for a Man that
can speak so little, To be seen in the title page of this Woman's Booklest by
comparing the one with the other, the Reader should pass his sentence that it
is the gift of women not only to speak most but to speak best; I shall leave
therefore to commend that, which with any ingenious Reader will too much
commend the Author, unless men turn more peevish then women, to envy the
excellency of the inferior Sex. I doubt not but the Reader will quickly find
more then I can say, and the worst effect of his reading will be unbelief,
which will make him question whether it be a woman's work, and askc, Is is
possible? If any do, take this as an answer from him that dares avow it; It is
the Work of a Woman, honored, and esteemed where she lives, for her gracious
demeanor, her eminent parts, her pious conversation, her courteous
disposition, her exact diligence in her place, and discreet managing of her
Family occasions, and more then so, these Poems are the fruit but of some few
hours, curtailed from her sleep and other refreshments. I dare add little
lest I keep thee too long; if thou will not believe the worth of these things
(in their kind) when a man says it* yet believe it from a woman when thou
see it. This only I shall a^nex, I fear the displeasure of no person in the
publishing of these Poems but the Author, without whose knowledge, and contrary
to her expectation, I have presumed to bring to public view, what she resolved
in such a manner should never see the Sun; but I found that diverse had gotten
some scattered Papers, affected them ^ell, were likely to have sent forth
broken pieces, to the Authors prejudice, which I thought to prevent, as well as
to pleasure those that earnestly desired the view of the whole.

MErcur^ showed Apollo, Bartas Book,
Minerva this, an^ wished him well to look,
And tell uprightly, which did which excel,
He viewed and viewed, and vow d he could not tell*
They bid him Hemisphear his moldy nose,
With His cracked leering glasses, for it would pose
The best brains he had in's old pudding-pan.
Sex weighed, which best the Woman, or the Man?
He peer'd, and por'd, and glar'd, and said for wore,
I Am even as wise now, as I was before:
They both 'gan laugh, and said, it was no mar'l
The Auth'ress was a right Du Bartas Girl.
Good sooth quoth the old Don, tell ye me so,
I muse whither at length these Girls will go;
It half revives my chil frost-bitten blood,
To see a Woman once, do ought that is good;
And chode by Chaucers Boots, and Homers Furrs,
Let Men look to it, least Women wear the Spur^s.
N. War^.

To my dear Sister, the Author of these Poems.
THough most that know me, dare (I (...)) of ^im
I never was born to do a Poet harm,
Yet when I read your pleasant witty strains,
It wrought so strongly on my addle brains;
That though my verse be not so finely spun,
And so (like yours) cannot so neatly run,
Yet am I willing* with upright intent,
To show my love without a complement.
There needs no painting to that comely face,
That in its native beauty has such grace;
What I (poor s^lly I) prefix therefore,
Can but do this, make yours admired the more;
And if but only this, I do attain
Content, that my disgrace may be your gain.
If women, I with women may compare,
Your works are solid, others weak as Air;
Some Books of Women I have heard of late,
Perused some, so witless* intricate,
So void of sense, and truth, as if to err
Were only wished (acting above their sphere)
And all to get, what (silly Souls) they lack,
Esteem to be the wisest of the pack;
Though (for your sake) to some this be permitted,
To print, yet wish I many better witted;
Their vanity make this to be enquired,
If Women are with wit and sense inspired:
Yet when your Works shall come to public view,
'Twill be affirmed, 'twill be confirmed by you:
And I, when seriously I had revolved
What you had done, I presently resolved,
Theirs was the Persons, not the Sexes failing,
And therefore did be-speak a modest vailing.
You have acutely in Eliza's ditty,
Acquitted Women, else I might with pity,
Have wished them all to women's Works to look,
And never more to meddle with their book.
What you have done, the Sun shall witness bear,
That for a woman's Work it is very rare;
And if the Nine, vouchsafe the Tenth a place,
I think they rightly may yield you that grace.
But least I should exceed, and too much love,
Should too too much endeared affection move,
To super-adde in praises, I shall cease,
Least while I please my self I should displease
The longing Reader, who may chance complain,
And so requite my love with deep disdain;
That I your silly Servant, stand in the Porch,
Lighting your Sun-light, with my blinking Torch;
Hindering his minds content, his sweet repose,
Which your delightful Poems do disclose.
When once the Caskets opened; yet to you
Let this be added, then I Will bid adieu,
If you shall think, it will be t^ your shame
To be in prin^, (...) I must bear the blame:
If It be a fault, it is mine, it is shame that might
Deny so fair an Infant of its right,
To look abroad; I know your modest mind,
How you will blush* complain, it is too unkind:
To force a woman's birth* provoke her pain,
Expose her labors to the Worlds disdain.
I know you will say, you do defy that mint,
That stamped you thus, to be a fool in print.
It Is true it does not now so neatly stand,
As if 'twere pollisht with your own sweet hand*
It Is not so richly decked, so trimly tired,
Yet it is such as justly is admired.
If it be folly, it is of both, or neither,
Both you and I, we will both be fools together;
And he that says, it is foolish, (if my word
May sway) by my consent shall make the third,
I dare outface the worlds disdain for both,
If you alone profess you are not wroth;
Yet if you are, a Woman's wrath is little,
When thousands else admire you in each Tittle.
I. W.

Upon the Author; by a known Friend.
NOw I believe T^adition, which does call
The Muses, Virtues, Graces, Females all*
Only they are not nine, eleven nor three;
Our Auth'ress proves them but one unity.
Mankind take up some blushes on the score;
Monopolize perfection no more;
In your own Arts, confess your selv^^ outdone,
The Moon has totally eclipsed the Sun,
Not with her sable Mantle muffling him;
But her bright silver makes his gold look dim:
Just as his beams force our pale lamps to wink,
And earthly Fires, within their ashes shrink.
B. W.

I cannot wonder at Apollo now,
That he with Female Laurel crowned his brow,
That made him witty: had I leave to chose,
My Verse should be a page unto your Muse
C. B.

In praise of the Author, Mistress Anne Bradstreet, Virtues true and lively
Pattern, Wife of the Worshipful Simon Bradstreet Esquire
At present residing in the Occidental parts of the World in America, Alias
NOV-ANGLIA.
What golden splendent STAR is this so bright,
One thousand Miles twice told, both day and night,
(From the Orient first sprung) now from the West
That shines; swift-winged Phoebus, and the rest
Of all Jove's fiery flames surmounting faer
As does each Planet, every falling Star;
By whose divine and lucid light most clear
Natures dark secret mysteryes appear;
Heavens, Earths, admired wonders, noble acts
Of Kings and Princes most heroic facts,
And what e'^e else in darkness seemed to dye,
Revives all things so obvious now to the eye,
That h^ who these its glittering rays views over,
Shall see what is done in all the world before.
N. H.

Upon the Author.
'TWere extreme folly should I dare attempt,
To praise this Authors worth with complement;
None but her self must dare commend her parts,
Whose sublime brain's the Synopsis of Arts.
Nature and skill here both in one agree,
To frame this Masterpiece of Poetry:
False Fame, belie their Sex no more, it can
Surpass, or parallel, the best of Man.
C. B.

Another to Mrs. Anne Bradstreet, Author of this Poem.
I Have read your Poem (Lady) and admire,
Your Sex to such a pitch should e're aspire;
Go on to write, continue to relate,
New Historyes, of Monarchy and State:
And what the Romans to their Poets gave,
Be sure such honor, and esteem you will have.
H. S.

An Anagram.
Anna Bradestreate Deer neat An Bartas.
So Bartas like thy fine spun Poems been,
That Bartas name will prove an Epicene.
Another.
Anne Bradstreate Arts bred neat An.
UPON Mrs. Anne Bradstreet Her Poems, etc.
MADAM, twice through the Muses Grove I walked,
Under your blissfull bowres, I shr^wding there,
It seemed with Nymphs of ^elicon I talked.
For there those sweet-lip'd Sisters sporting were,
Apollo with his sacred Lute sat by,
On high they made their heavenly Sonnets fly,
Posies around they strow'd, of sweetest Poesy.
2
Twice have I drunk the Nectar of your lines,
Which high sublimed my mean born fantasy,
Flusht with these streams of your Maron^an wines
Above my self rapt to an ecstasy:
Methought I was upon mount Hiblas top,
There where I might those fragrant flowers lop,
Whence did sweet odors flow, and honey spangles drop.
3
To Venus shrine no Altars raised are,
Nor venomed shafts from painted quiver fly,
Nor wanton Doves of Aphrodites Carr,
Or fluttering there* nor here f^rlornly li^,
Lorne Paramours* not chatting birds tell news
How sage Apollo* Daphne hot pursues,
Or stately Jove himself is wont to haunt the stews.
4
Nor barking Satyrs breath, nor driery clouds
Exhaled from Styx, their dismal drops distill
Within these Fairy, flowery fields, nor shrouds
The screeching night Raven, with his shady quill:
But Lyrick str^ngs here Orpheus nimbly hitts,
Orion on his sadled Dolphin sits,
Chanting as every humor, age and season fits.
5
Here silver swans, with Nightingales set spells,
Which sweetly charm the Traveller, and raise
Earths earthed Monarchs, from their hidden Cells,
And to appearance summons lapsed days,
There heavenly air, becalms the swelling frayes,
And fury fell of Elements allayes.
By paying every one due tribute of his praise.
6
This seemed the Site of all those verdant vales,
And purled springs, whereat the Nymphs do play,
With lofty hills, where Poets rear their tale^,
To heavenly vaults, which heavenly sound repay
By ec^hoes sweet rebound, here Ladies kiss,
Circling nor songs, nor dances circle miss;
But whilst those Sirens sung, I sunk in sea of bliss.
7
Thus weltring in delight* my virgin mind
Admits a rape; truth still lies undiscri'd,
Its singular, that plural seemed, I find,
'^was Fancies glass alone that multiplied;
Nature with Art* so closely did combine,
I thought I saw the Muses trebble trine,
Which proved your lonely Muse, superior to the nine.
8
Your only hand those Poesies did compose,
Your head the source, whence all those springs did flow,
Your voice whence changes sweetest notes arose,
Your feet that kept the dance alone, I trow:
Then vail your bonnets, Poetasters all,
Strike, lower amain, and at these humbly fall,
And deem your selves advanced to be her Pedestal.
9
Should all with lowly Congies Laurels bring,
Waste Floraes Magazine to find a wreathe;
Or Pineus Banks 'twere too mean offering,
Your Muse a fairer Garland does bequeath
To guard your fairer front; here it is your name
Shall stand immarbled; this your little frame
Shall great Colossus be, to your eternal fame.
I Will please my self* though ^ my self disgrace,
What errors here be found, are in Errataes place.
J. Rogers.

To her most Honored Father Thomas Dudley Esquire these humbly presented.
DEar Sir of late delighted with the sight
Of your four Sisters clothed in black and white, T. D. On the four parts of
the world.

Of fairer Dames the Sun* never saw the face;
Though made a pedestal for Adams Race;
Their worth so shines in these rich lines you show
Their paralels to find I scarcely know
To climb their Climes, I have nor strength nor skill
To mount so high requires an Eagles quill;
Yet view thereof did cause my thoughts to soar*
My lowly pen might wait upon these four
I bring my four times four, now meanly clad
To do their homage, unto yours, full glad:
Who for their Age, their worth and quality
Might seem of yours to claim precedence:
But by my humble hand, thus ^udely penned
They are, your bounden handmaids to attend
These same are they* from whom we being have
These are of all, the Life the Nurse, the Grave,
These are the hot, the cold, the moist, the dry,
That sink, that swim, that sill, that upwards fly,
Of these consists our bodies, Clothes and Food,
The World, the useful, hurtful, and the good,
Sweet harmony they keep, yet jar often times
Their discord does appear, by these harsh rimes
Yours did contest for wealth, for Arts, for Age,
My first do show their good, and then their rage.
My other foures do intermixed tell
Each others faults, and where themselves excel,
How hot and dry contend with moist and cold,
How Air and Earth no correspondence hold,
And yet in equal tempers, how they 'gree
How diverse natures make one Unity
Something of all (though mean) I did intend
But feared you would judge Du Bartas was my friend
I honor him, but dare not wear his wealth
My goods are true (though poor) I love no stealth
But if I did I durst not send them you
Who must reward a Thief, but with his due.
I shall not need, mine innocence to clear
These ragged lines, will do it, when they appear:
On what they are, your mild aspect I crave
Accept my best, my worst vouchsafe a Grave.
From her that to your self, more duty owes
Then water in the boundess Ocean flows.
March 20. 1642. ANNE BRADSTREET

THE PROLOGUE.
1.
TO sing of Wars, of Captains and of Kings,
Of Cities founded, Commonwealths begun,
For my mean pen are too superior things:
Or how they all, or each their dates have run
Let Poets and Historians set these forth,
My obscure Lines shall not so dim their worth*
2.
But when my wondering eyes and envious heart
Great Bartas sugared lines, do but read over
Fool I do grudg the Muses did not part
'Twixt him and me that overfluent store,
A B^rtas can, do what a Bartas will
But simple I according to my ^^ll.
3.
From school-boyes tongue no rhet'rick we expect
Nor yet a sweet Consort from broken strings,
Nor perfect beauty, where is a main defect:
My foolish, broken* blemished Muse so sings
And this to mend, alas, no Art is able,
'Cause nature, made it so irreparable.
4.
Nor can I, like that fluent sweet tongued Greek,
Who lisp'd at first* in future times speak plain
By Art he gladly found what he did seek
A full requital of his, striving pa^n
Art can do much, but this maxime's most sure
A weak or wounded brain admits no cure.
5^
I am obnoxious to each carping tongue
Who says my hand a needle better fits.
A Poets pen all scorn I should thus wrong,
For such despite they cast on Female wits:
If what I do prove well, it will not advance,
They Will say it is stolen, or else it was by chance.
6.
But sure the Antique Greeks were far more mild
Else of our Sex, why feigned they those Nine
And poesy made, Callio^'s own Child;
So amongst the rest they placed the Arts Divine*
But this weak knot, they will full soon untie,
The Greeks did naught, but play the fools and lie.
7.
Let Gree^s be G^eeks, and women what they are
Men have precedence and still excel,
It is bu^ vain unjustly to wage war;
Men can do best, and women know it well
Pre-eminence in all and each is yours;
Yet grant some small acknowledgement of ours.
8.
And oh ye high flown quills that soar the Skies,
And ever with your prey still catch your praise,
If e're you ^aigne these lowly lines your eyes
Give Thyme or Parsley wreath, I ask no bays,
This mean and unrefined ure of mine
Will make you glistring gold, but more to shine:
The Four Elements
THe Fire, Air, Earth and water did (...)
Which ^^s the strongest, noblest and the best,
Who was of greatest use and might'est force*
In placide ^erms they thought now to discourse,
That in due order each her turn should speak,
But enmity this amity did break
All would be chief* and all scorned to be under
whence issued winds and rains, lightning and thunder
The quaking earth did groan, the Sky looked black
The Fire, the forced Air, in sunder crack;
The sea did threat the heavens, the heaven's the earth.
All looked like a Chaos or new birth:
Fire broyled Earth, and scorched Earth it choake^
Both by their darings, water so provoked
That roaring in it came, and with its source
Soon made the Combatants abate their force
The rumbling ^issing; puffing was so great
The worlds confusion, it did seem to threat
Till gentle Air, Contention so abated
That betwi^t ho^ and cold, she arbritrate^
The others difference, being less did cease
All storms now laid, and they in perfect peace
That Fire should f^rst begin, the rest consent,
The noblest and most active Element.
Fire.
What is my worth (both ye) and all men know,
In little time I can but little (...),
But what I am, let learned Grecians say
What I can do well skilled Mecha^icks may:
The benefit all living by me find,
All sorts of Artists, here declare your mind.
What tool was ever framed but by my might?
Ye Martilists, what weapons for your fight
To try your valor by, but it must feel
My force? your sword, and Gun, your Lance of steel
Your Cannon's bootless and your powder too
Without mine aid, (alas) wha^ can they do:
The adverse walls not shak'd, the Mines not blown
And in despite the City keeps her own;
But I with one Granado or Petard
Set open those gates, that'fore so strong were barred
Ye Husbandmen, your Coulters made by me
Your Hooes your Mattocks, and what e're you see
Subdue the Earth, and fit it for your Grain
That so it might in time requite your pain:
Though strong limbed Vulcan forged it by his skill
I made it flexible unto his will;
Ye Cooks, your Kitchen implements I frame
Your Spits, Pots, Jacks, what else I need not name
Your daily food I wholesome make, I warm
Your shrinking Limbs, which winter's cold does harm
Ye Parac^^s^an^ too in vain's your skill
In Chemistry* unless I help you Still.
And you Philosophers, if e're you made
A transmutation it was through mine aid.
Ye silver Smiths your Ure I do refine
What mingled lay with Earth I cause to shine;
But let me leave ^hese things, my flame aspires
To match on high with the Celestial fires;
The Sun an Orb of fire was held of old,
Our Sages new another tale have told:
But ^e he what they will yet his aspect
A burning fiery heat we find reflect,
And of the self same nature is with mine
Cold sister Earth, no witness needs but thine:
How does his warmth, refresh thy frozen back
And trim thee brave, in green, after thy black:
Both man and beast rejoice at his approach,
And birds do sing, to see hi^ glittering Coach
And though naught, but Salmanders live in fire
And fly Pyr^ufta called, all else ^xpire,
Yet men and beast Astronomers will tell
Fixed in heavenly Constellations dwell,
My Planets of both Sexes whose degree
Poor Heathen judged worthy a Diety:
There Is Orion armed attended by his dog*
The Th^^an stout Alcides with his Club;
The valiant Perseus, who Medusa slew,
The horse that killed Belerophon, then ^lew.
My Crab, my Scorpion, fishes you may see
The Maid with balance, wain with horses three,
The Ram, the Bull, the Lion, and the Beagle,
The Bear, the Goat, the Raven, and the ^agle,
The Crown the Whale, the Archer Bernice Hare
The Hidra, Dolphin, Boys that water bear,
Nay more, then these, Rivers amongst stars are ^ound
Eridanu^, where Phaeton was drowned.
Their magnitude, and height* should I recount
My story to a volume would amount;
Out of a multitude these few I touch,
Your wisdom out of little gather much.
I Will here let pass my choler, cause of wars
and influence of diverse of those stars
When in Conjunction with the Sun do more
Augment his heat, which was too hot before.
The Summer ripening season I do claim
And man from thirty unto fifty frame.
Of old when Sacrifices were Divine,
I of acceptance was the h^ly sign*
Among all my wonders which I might recount,
There Is none more strange the^ Aetna's Sulphry mount
The choking flames, that from Vesuvius flew
The over curious second Pliny slew,
And with the Ashes that it sometimes shed
Apulia's 'jacent parts were c^vered.
And though I be a servant to each man
Yet by my force, master, my masters can.
What famous Towns, to Cinders have I turned?
What lasting forts my kindled wrath has burned?
The stately Seats of mighty Kings by me
In confused heaps, or ashes may you see.
Where Is Ninus great walled Town, and Troy of old
Carthage, and hundred more in stories told
Which when they could not be overcome by foes
The Army, through my help victorious rose
And stately London, (our great Britain's glory)
My raging flame did make a mournful story,
But maugre all, that I, or foes could do
That Phoenix from her Bed, is risen New.
Old sacred Zion, I demolished thee.
Lo great Diana's Temple was by me,
And more then brutish Sodom, for her lust
With neighboring Towns, I did consume to dust
What shall I say of Lightning and of Thunder
Which Kings and mighty ones amaze with wonder,
Which made a Caesar, (Romes) the worlds proud head,
Foolish Caligula creep under's bed.
Of Meteors, ignis fatuus and the rest,
But to leave those to th'wise, I judge it best.
The rich I often make poor, the strong I maime,
Not sparing Life when I can take the same;
And in a word, the world I shall consume
And all therein, at that great day of Doom;
Not before then, shall cease my raging ire
And then because no matter more for fire
Now Sisters pray proceed each in your Course
As I, impart your usefulness and force.
Earth.
The next in place Earth judged to be her due,
Sister quoth she) I come not short of you,
In wealth and use I do surpass you all,
An^ another earth of old men did me call:
Such is my fruitfulness, an Epithet,
Which none ere gave* or y^u could claim of right
Among my praises this I count not least,
I am the original o^ man and beast.
To tell what sun^ry fru^^s my fat soil yields
In Vineyards Gardens, Orchards and Cornfieldsd,
Their kinds their tastes, their colors and their smells
Would so pass time I could say nothing else:
The rich the poor, wise, fool, and every sort
Of these so common things can make report.
To tell you of my countries and my Regions,
Soon would they pass not hundreds but legions:
My cities famous, rich and populous,
Whose numbers now are grown i^numerous.
I ^ave not time to think of every part,
Yet let me name my Grecia, it is my heart*
For learning arms and arts I love it well,
Bu^ chiefly 'cause the Muses there did dwell.
I Will here skip ore my mountai^s reaching skies,
Whether ^^enean, or the Alps, both lies
On either side the country of the Ga^^es
Strong forts, from Spanish and Italian brawles.
And huge great Taurus* longer then the rest,
Dividing great Armenia from the least;
And Hemus whose steep sides none foot upon,
But farewell all for dear mount H^licon.
And wondrous high Olimpus, of such fame,
That heaven it self was often called by that name.
^arnassus sweet, I dote too much on thee,
Unless thou prove a better friend to me:
But I Will leap ore these hills, not touch a dale,
Nor will I stay, no not in Tempe Vale,
I Will here let go my Lions of Numedia,
My Panthers and my Leopards of Libia,
The Behemoth and rare found Unicorn,
Poisons sure antidote lies in his horn,
And my Hiaena (imitates man's voice)
Out of great numbers I might pick my choice*
Thousands in woods and plains both wild and tame,
But here or there, I list now none to name:
No, though the fawning Dog did urge me sore,
In his behalf to speak a word the more,
Whose trust and valor I might here commend;
But time's too short and precious so to spend.
But hark you wealthy merchants, who for prize
Send forth your well-man'd ships where sun does rise,
After three years when men and ^eat is spent,
My rich Commodityes pay double rent.
Ye Galenists, my Drugs that come from thence,
Do cure your Pati^nts, fill your purse with pence;
Besides the use of roots, of herbs and pla^ts,
That with less cost near home supply your wants.
But Mariners where got you ships and Sails,
And Oars to row, when both my Sisters fails
Your Tackling, Anchor, compass too is mine,
which guids when sun nor moon nor stars do shine
Ye mighty Kings, who for your lasting fames
Built Cities; Monuments, called by your names,
Were those compiled heaps of massy stones
That your ambition laid, ought but my bones?
Ye greedy misers, who do dig for gold
For gemms, for silver, Treasures which I hold,
Will not my goodly face your rage suffice
But you will see, what in my bowels lies?
And ye Artificers, all Trades and sorts
My bounty calls you forth to make reports,
If ought you have, to use, to wear, to eat,
But what I freely yield* upon your sweat?
And Choleric Sister, thou for all thine ire
Well knows^ my fuel must maintain thy fire*
As I ingenuously with thanks confess,
My cold thy fruitful heat does crave no less:
But how my cold dry temper works upon
The melancholy Constitution;
How the autumnal season I do sway,
And how I force the grey-head to obey,
I should here make a short yet true Narration,
But that thy method is mine imitation.
No^ must I show mine adverse quality,
And how I often work man's mortality:
He sometimes finds, maugre ^is toiling pain
Thistles and thorns where he expected grain.
My sap to plants and trees I must not grant,
The vine, the olive, and the figtree want:
The Corn and Hay do fall before the're mown*
And buds from fruitful^ trees as soon as blown;
Then dearth prevails, that nature to suffice
The Mother on her tender i^fant flies;
The husband knows no wife, nor father sons,
But to all outrages their hunger runs:
Dreadful examples soon I might produce,
But to such Auditors 'twere of no use*
Again when Delvers dare in hope of gold
To open those veins of Mine audacious bold:
While they thus in mine entrails love to dive,
Before they know, they are interred alive.
Y'affrighted wights appal'd, how do ye shake,
When once you feel me your foundation quake?
Because in the Abbysse of my dark womb
Your citi^s and your selves I often intomb:
O dreadful Sepu^cher! that this is true
Dathan and all his company well knew,
So did that Roman, far more stout then wise,
^ur'ing himself alive for honors p^ize.
And since fair Italy full sadly knows
What she has lost by these remed'l^ss woes.
Again what veins of poison in melye,
Some kill outright* and some do stupifye:
Nay into herbs and plants it sometimes creeps,
In heats and colds and gripes and drowzy sleeps:
Thus I occasion death to man and beast
When food they seek, and harm mistrust the least.
Much might I say of the hot L^bian sand
Which rise like tumbling Billows on the Land
Wherein Cambyses Army was overthrown
(but windy Sister, 'twas when you have blow^)
I Will say no more but this thing add I must
Remember Sons, your mould is of my dust
And after death whether interred or burned
As Earth at first so into Earth (...).
Water.
ScarceEarth had done* but the angry water moved
Sister (quoth she) it had full well behooved
Among your boastings to have praised me
Cause of your fruitfulness as you shall see*
This your neglect shows your ingratitude
And how your subtilty, would men delude
Not one of us (all knows) that is like to thee
Ever in craving, from the other three;
But thou art bound to me, above the rest
Who am thy ^rink, thy blood, thy sap and best:
If I withhold what art thou? dead dry lump
Thou bearst nor grass or plant nor tree nor stump
Thy extreme thirst is moistened by my love
With springs below* and showers from above
Or else thy Sunburned face* and gaping chops
Complain to the heavens* if I withhold my drop^
Thy Bear* thy Tiger, and thy Lion stout,
When I am gone, their fiercenes none needs doub^
Thy Camel has n^ strength thy Bull no force
Nor mettal's found, in the courageous Horse
Hinds leave their calves, the Ele^hant the Fens
The wolves and savage beasts, forsake their Dens
The lofty Eagle; and the Stork fly low,
The Peacock and the Ostrich, share in woe*
The Pine, the Cedar, yea, and Daphne's Tree
Do cease to flourish in this misery,
Man wants his bread and wine* and pleasant fruits
He knows, such sweets, lies not in Earths dry roots
Then seeks me out, in river and in well
His deadly malady I might expel:
If I supply, his heart and veins rejoice,
If not, soon ends his life, as did his vo^ce;
That this is true; Earth thou can not deny
I call thine Egypt, this to verify,
Which by my fatting Nile, does yield such store
That she can spare when nations round are poor
When I run low, and not overflow her brinks
To meet with want* each woeful man be-thinks.
And such I am, in Rivers, showrs and springs
But what is the wealth, that my rich Ocean brings
Fishes so numberless, I there do hold
If thou should buy, it would exhaust thy gold:
There lives the oyl^ Whale, whom all men know
Such wealth but not such lik^, Earth thou may show
The Dolphin loving music, Arians friend
The witty B^rbel, whose craft does her com^end
With thousands more, which now I list not name
Thy silence of thy Beasts does cause the same
My pearls that dangle at thy Darlings ears.
Not thou, but shel-fish yield* as Pliny clears.
Was ever gem so rich found in thy trunk,
As Egypts wanton, Cleopatra drunk?
Or have thou any color can come nigh
The Roman purple double ^irian Dye?
Which Caesar's Consuls, Tribunes all adorn,
For it to search my waves they thought no scorn.
Thy gallant rich perfuming Amber greece
I lightly cast ashore as frothy fleece:
With rolling grains of purest massy gold,
Which Spains Americans do gladly hold.
Earth thou have not more countries v^les and mounds
Then I have fountains, rivers lakes and pond^.
My sundry seas, black, white and Adriatiqu^,
Ionian, Baltique and the vast Atlantique,
Aegean, Caspian, golden Rivers five,
Asp^altis lake where naught remains alive:
But I should go beyond thee in my boasts.
If I should name more seas then thou have Coasts.
And be thy mountains n'^r so high and steep,
I soon can match them with my seas as deep*
To speak of kinds of waters I neglect,
My diverse fountains and their strange effect:
My wholesome ba^hes, together with their cure^*
My water Sirens with their guilefull lures.
The Uncertain cause of certain ebbs and flows,
Which wondering Aristotle's wit never knows.
Nor will I speak of wat^rs made by art,
Which can to life restore a fainting heart.
Nor fruitful dews, nor drops distilled from eyes,
Which pity move* and often deceive the wise:
Nor yet of salt and sugar* sweet and smart,
Both when we list to water we convert.
Alas thy ships and oars could do no good
Did they but want my Ocean and my flood.
The wary merchant on his weary beast
Transfers his goods from south to north and ^ast,
Unless I ease his toil, and do transport
The wealthy freight unto his wished port:
These be my benefits, which may s^ffice:
I now must show what ill there in me lies.
The flegmy Constitution I uphold,
All humors, tumors which are bred of cold:
Over childhood* and ore winter I bear sway,
And Luna for my Regent I obey.
As I with showers often times refresh the earth,
So often in my excess I cause a de^rth,
And with abundant wet so cool the ground,
By adding cold to cold no fruit proves ^ound.
The Farmer and the Grasier do complain
Of rotten sheep, l^an kine, and mildew'd grain.
And with my wasting floods and roaring torrent,
Their cattle hay and corn I sweep down current.
Nay many times my Ocean breaks his bounds,
And with astonishment the world confounds,
And swallows Countries up, never seen again,
And that an island makes which once was Main^
Thus Britain fair (it is thought) was cut from France
Scicily from Italy by the like chance,
And but one land was Africa and Spain
Until proud Gibraltar did make them twain.
Some say I swallowed up (sure it is a notion)
A mighty country in the Atlantique Ocean.
I need not say much of my hail and snow,
My ice and extreme cold, which all men know,
Whereof the first so ominous I rained,
That Isreal's enemies therewith were brained:
And of my chilling snows such plenty be,
That Caucasus high mounts are seldom free.
Mine ice does glaze Europes great rivers over,
Till sun release, their ships can sail no more.
All know that inundations I have made,
Wherein not men, but mountains seemed to wade,
As when Achaia, all under water stood,
That for two hundred years it never proved good.
Deucalions great Deluge with many more,
But these are trifles to the flood of Noe,
Then wholly perished Earths ignoble race,
And to this day impairs her beauteous face,
That after times shall never feel like woe,
Her confirmed sons behold my colored bow.
Much might I say of wracks, but that I Will spare,
And now give place unto our Sister Air,
A^r.
Content (quoth Air) to speak the last of you,
Yet am not ignorant first was my due:
I do suppose you will yield without control
I am the breath of every living soul.
Mortals, what one of you that loves not me
Abundantly more then my Sisters three?
And though you love Fire, Earth and Water well
Yet Air beyond all these you know t'excell.
I ask the man condemned, that is near his death,
How gladly should his gold purchase his breath,
And all the wealth that ever earth did give,
How freely should it go so he might live:
No earth, thy witching trash were all but vain,
If my pure air thy sons did not sustain.
The famished thirsty man that craves supply,
His moving reason is, give least I dye,
So loath he is to go though nature's spent
To bid adieu to his dear Element.
Nay what are words which do reveal the mind,
Speak who or what they will they are but wind.
Your drums your trumpets and your organs sound,
What is it but forced air which does rebound,
And such are echoes and report ofth' gun
That tells afar th'exploit which it has done.
Your Songs and pleasant tunes they are the same,
And so's the notes which Nightingales do frame.
Ye forging Smiths, if ^ellows once were gone
Your red hot work mo^e coldly would go on.
Ye Mariners, it is I that f^ll your sails.
And speed you to your port with wished gales*
When burning heat does (...) you faint, I cool,
And when I smile, your ocean's like a pool.
I help to ripe the corn, I turn the mill,
And with my self I every Vacuum fill*
The ruddy sweet sanguine is like to air,
And youth and spring, Sages to me compare,
My moist hot nature is so purely thin,
No place so subti^ly made, but I get in.
I grow more pure and pure as I mount higher,
And when I Am thoroughly rarifi'd turn fire:
So when I am condensed* I turn to water,
Which may be done by holding down my vapor*
Thus I another body can assume,
And in a trice my own nature resume.
Some for this cause of late have been so bold
Me for no Element longer to hold*
Let such suspe^d their thoughts, and silent be,
For all Philosophers make one of me:
And what those Sages either spoke or writ
Is more authentic then our modern wit.
Next of my fowls such multitudes there are*
Earths beasts and waters fish scarce can compare.
Th'Ostrich with her plumes, The Eagle with her eyn
The Phaenix too (if any be) are mine,
The stork, the crane, the partridg, and the phesant
The Thrush, the wren, the lark a prev to'th' pesant.
With thousands more which now I may omit
Without impeachment to my tale or wit.
As my fresh air preserves all things in life,
So when corrupt, mortality is rife:
Then Fevers, Purples, Pox and Pestilence,
With diverse more work deadly consequence:
Whereof such multitudes have di'd and fled,
The living scarce had power to bury dead;
Yea so contagious countries have we known
That birds have not 'scapt ^eath as they have flown
Of murr^in, ca^tle numberless did fall,
Men feared destruction epidemical.
Then of my tempests felt at sea and land,
Which neither ships nor houses could withstand*
W^^^ woeful wracks I Have made may well appear,
If naught were known but that before Algere,
Where famous Charles the fifth more loss sustaind
Then in his long hot war which Millain gained.
Again what furious storms and Hurricanoes
Know western Isles, as Christophers, Barbados,
Where neither houses, trees nor plants I spare;
But some fall down, and some fly up with air.
Earthquakes so hurt^ull, and so feared of all,
Imprisoned I* am the original.
Then what prodigious sights I sometimes show,
As battles pitched in the air, as countries know,
Their joining fighting, forcing and retreat,
That earth appears in heaven, O wonder great!
Sometimes red flaming swords and blazing stars,
Portentous signs of famines, plagues and wars.
Which make the mighty Monarchs fear their fates
By death or great mutation of their States.
I have said less then did my Sisters three*
But what is their wrath or force, the same's in me.
To add to all I Have said was my intent,
But dare not go beyond my Element.
Of the four Humors in Man's Constitution.
THe former four now ending their discourse,
Ceasing to vaunt their good, or threat their force,
Lo other four step up, crave leave to show
The native qualityes that from them flow:
But first they wisely showed their high descent,
Each eldest daughter to each Element.
Choler was owned by fire, and Blood by air,
Earth knew her black swarth child, water her fair:
All having made obeisance to each Mother,
Had leave to speak, succeeding one the other:
But amongst themselves they were at variance,
Which of the four should have predominance.
Choler first ^^dy claimed right by her mother,
Who had precedence of all the other:
But Sanguine did disdain what she required,
Pleading her self was most of all desired.
Proud Melancholy more envious then the rest,
The second, third or last could not digest.
She was the silentest of all the four,
Her wis^om spa^e not much, but thought the more
Mild Phlegm did not contest for chie est place,
Only she craved to have a vacant space.
Well, thus they parl^ and chide; but to be brief,
Or will they, nill they, Cho^er will be chief.
They seeing her impetuosity
At present yielded to ^ecessity.
Choler.
To show my high descent and pedigree,
Your selves would judge but vain prolixity*
It is acknowledged from whence I came,
It shall suffice to show you what I am*
My self and mother one* as you shall see,
But she in greater, I in less degree.
We both once Masculines, the world does know,
Now Feminines awhile, for love we owe
Unto your Sisterhood, which makes us render
Our noble selves in a less noble gender.
Though under Fire we comprehend a^l heat,
Yet man for Choler is the proper seat:
I in his heart erect my regal throne,
Where Monarch like I play and sway alone.
Yet many times unto my great disgrace
One of your selves are my Compeers in place,
Where if your rule prove once predominant,
The man proves boyish, sottish, ignorant:
But if you yield subservience unto me,
I make a man, a man in th'high^st degree.
Be he a soldier, I more sense his heart
Then iron Corslet against a sword or dart.
What makes him face his foe without appal,
To storm a breach* or scale a city wall,
In dangers to account himself more sure
Then timorous Hares whom Castles do immure?
Have you not heard of worthyes, Demigods?
Twixt them and others what is it makes the odds
But valor? whence comes that? from none of you,
Nay milksops at such brunts you look bu^ blew.
Here Is sister ruddy, worth the other two,
Who much will talk, but little dares she do,
Unless to Court and claw, to dice and drink,
And there she will out-bid us all, I think,
She loves a fiddle better then a drum,
A Chamber well, in field she dares not come,
She Will ride a horse as bravely as the best,
And break a staff, provided 'be in jest;
But shuns to look on wounds, and blood that is spilt,
She loves her sword only because its gilt.
Then here is our sad (...) Sister, worse then you.
She Will neither say she will, nor will she do;
But peevish Malecontent, musing sits,
And b^ misprissions like to loose her wits:
If great persuasions cause her meet her foe,
In her dull resolution she is so slow,
To march her pace to some is greater pain
Then by a quick encounter to be slain.
But be she beaten, she will not run away,
She Will first advise if it be not best to stay.
Now let us give cold white sister phlegm her right,
So loving unto all she scorns to fight:
If any threaten her, she will in a trice
Convert from water to congealed ice:
Her teeth will chatter* dead and wan's her face,
And before she be assaulted, quits the place.
She dares not challeng, if I ^peak amiss,
Nor has she wit or heat to blush at this.
Here Is three of you all see now what you are,
Then yield to me pre-eminence in war.
Again who fits for learning, science, arts?
Who rarifies the intellectual parts:
From whence fine spirits flow and witty notions:
But it is not from our dull, slow sisters mo^ions:
Nor s^ster sanguine, from thy moderate heat,
Poor sp^rits the Liver breeds, which is thy seat.
What comes from thence, my heart refines the same
And through the arteries sends it over the frame:
The vital spirits they are called* and well they may
For when they fail, man turns unto his clay.
The animal I claim as well as these,
The nerves, should I not warm, soon would they freeze
But phlegm her self is now provoked at this
She thinks I never (...) so far amiss.
The brain she challenges, the head s her seat;
But know'ts a foolish brain that wants heat.
My absence proves it plain, her wit then flies
Out at her nose, or melts at her eyes.
Oh who would miss this influence of thine
To be distilled, a drop on every Line?
Alas thou have no Spirits thy Company
Will feed a dropsy, or a Tympany,
The Palsy, Gout, or Cramp, or some such dolor.
Thou wast not made, for Soldier or for Scholar;
O^ greazy paunch, and bloated cheeks go vaunt,
But a good head from these are dissonant.
But Melancholy, would have this glory thine,
Thou say thy wits are staid, subtle and fine;
It Is true, when I am Midwife to thy birth
Thy self's as dull, as is thy mother Earth:
Thou can not claim the liver, head nor heart
Yet have the Seat assigned, a goodly part
The sink of all us three, the hateful Spleen
Of that black Region, nature made thee Queen;
Where pain and sore obstruction thou do work,
Where envy, malice, thy Companions lurk.
If once you are great, what follows thereupon
But bodies wasting, and destruction?
So base thou art, that baser cannot be,
The excrement adustion of me.
But I am weary to dilate your shame,
Nor is it my pleasure thus to blur your name,
Only to raise my honor to the Skies,
As objects best appear by contraries.
But Arms, and Arts I claim, and higher things,
The princely qualities befitting Kings,
Whose profound heads I line with policies,
They Are held for Oracles, they are so wise,
Their wrathful looks are death their words are laws
Their Courage it foe, friend, and Subject awes;
But one of you, would make a worthy King
Like our sixth Henry (that same virtuous thing)
That when a Varlet struck him over the side,
Forsooth you are to blame, he grave replied.
Take Choler from a Prince, what is he more
Then a dead Lion, by Beasts triumphed over.
Again you know, how I act every part
By the influence, I still send from the heart:
It Is nor your Muscles, nerves, nor this nor that
Does ought without my lively heat, that is flat:
Nay the stomach magazine to all the rest
Without my boiling heat cannot digest:
And yet to make my greatness, still more great
What differences, the Sex? but only heat.
And one thing more, to close up my narration
Of all that lives, I cause the propagation.
I have been sparings what I might have said
I love no boasting that is but Childrens trade.
To what you now shall say I will at^end,
And to your weakness gently condescend.
Blood.
Good Sisters* give me leave* as is my place
To vent my grief, and wipe off my disgrace:
Your selves may plead your wrongs are no whit less
Your patience more then mine, I must confess
Did ever sober tongue such language speak,
Or honesty such ties unfriendly break?
Do know thy self so well us so amiss?
Is It arrogance or folly causes this?
I Will only show the wrong thou'st done to me,
Then let my sisters right their injury.
To pay with railings is not mine intent,
But to evince the truth by Argument:
I will analyze this thy proud relation
So full of boasting and prevarication,
Thy foolish incongruityes I Will show,
So walk thee till you are cold, then let thee go.
There is no Soldier but thy self (thou say,)
No valor upon Earth, but what thou have
Thy silly provocations I despise,
And leave't to all to judge, where valor lies
No pattern, nor no pattron will I bring
But David* Iu^ah's most heroic King,
Whose glorious deeds in Arms the world can tell,
A rosy cheek Musician thou know well;
He knew well how to handle Sword and Harp,
And how to strike full sweet, as well as sharp,
Thou laugh'st at me for loving merriment,
And scorn'st all Knightly sports at Turnament.
Thou say ^ love my Sword, because it is gilt,
But know, I love the Blade* more then the Hill;
Yet do abhor such temerarious deeds,
As thy unbridled barbarous Choler breeds:
Thy rudeness counts good manners vanity,
And real Complements base flattery.
For drink, which of us twain like it the best,
I Will go no further then thy nose for test.
Thy other scoffs* not worthy of reply
Shall vanish as of no validity:
Of thy black Calumnies this is bu^ part,
But now I Will show what soldier thou art.
And though thou'st used me with opprobrious spite
My ingenuity must give thee right.
Thy choler is but rage when it is most pure,
But useful when a mixture can endure;
As with thy mother fire* so it is with thee,
The best of all the four when they agree:
But let her leave the rest, then I presume
Both them and all things else she would consume.
Whilst us for thine associates thou take,
A Soldier most complete in all points make:
But when thou scorn'st to take the help we ^end,
Thou art a Fury or infernal Fiend.
Witness the execrable deeds thou^st done,
Nor sparing Sex nor Age, nor Sire nor Son;
To satisfy thy pride and cruelty,
Thou often have broke bounds of Humanity,
Nay should I tell, thou would count me no blab,
How often for the lie* thou'st given the stab.
To take the wall's a sin of so high rate,
That naught but death the same may expiate,
To cross thy will* a challenge does deserve
So she^'st that blood, you are bounden to preserve
Will thou this valor, Courage, Manhood call:
No, know it is pride most diabolibal.
If murders be thy glory* it is no less,
I Will not envy thy feats, nor happiness:
But if in fitting time and place against foe^
For countries good thy life thou dare expose,
Be dangers never so high, and courage great,
I Will praise that prowess, fury, Choler, heat:
But such thou never art when all alone,
Yet such when we all four are joined in one.
And when such thou art, even such are we,
The friendly Coadjutors still of thee
Nextly the Spirits thou do wholly claim,
Which natural, vital, animal we name:
To play Philosopher I have no list,
Nor yet Physician, nor Anatomist,
For acting these, I have no will nor Art,
Yet shall ^ith Equity, give thee thy part
For natural, thou do not much contest;
For there is none (thou say) if some not best;
That there are some, and best, I dare aver
Of greatest use, if reason do not err:
What is there living, which do'nt first derive
His Life now Animal* from vegetive:
If thou giv'st life, I give the nourishment,
Thine without mine* is not, it is evident:
But I without thy help, can give a growth
As plants trees and small Embryon know'th
And if vital Spirits, do flow from thee
I am as sure, the natural, from me:
Be thine the nobler, which I grant, yet mine
Shall justly claim priority of thine*
I am the fountain ^^ich thy Cistern fills
Through warm blew Conduits of my venial rills:
What has the heart but what is sent from the liver
If you are the taker, I must be the giver.
Then never boast of what thou do receive:
For of such glory I shall thee bereave.
But why the he art should be usurped by thee,
I must confess seems something strange to me:
The spirits through thy heat made perfect are,
But the Materials none of thi^e, that is clear:
Their wondrous mixture is of blood and air,
The first my self, second my mother fair.
But I Will not force retorts nor do thee wrong,
Thy fi'ry yellow froth is mixed among,
Challeng not all, 'cause part we do allow;
Thou know I Have there to do as well as thou:
But thou will say I deal unequally,
Their lives the irascible faculty,
Which without all dispute, is Cholers own;
Besi^es the vehement heat, only there known
Can be imputed, unto none but Fire
Which is the self, thy Mother and thy Sire
That this is true, I easily can assent
If still you take along my Aliment;
And let me be your partner which is due,
So shall give the dignity to you*
Again, Stomachs Concoction thou do claim,
Bu^ by what right, nor do, nor can thou name
Unles^ as heat, it be thy faculty*
And so thou challengest her property.
The help she needs, the loving liver lends,
Who the benefit of the whole ever intends
To meddle further I shall be but shent,
The Rest to our Sisters is more pertinent;
Your slanders thus refuted takes no place,
Nor what you have said, does argue my disgrace,
Now through your leaves, some little time I Will spend
My worth in humble manner to commend
This, hot, moist nutritive humor of mine
When it is untaint, pure, and most genuine
Shall chiefly take the place, as is my due
Without the least indignity to you.
Of all your qualities I do partake,
And what you single are, ^he whole I make
Your hot* moist, cold, dry natures are but four,
I moderately am all, what need I more;
As thus* if hot then dry, if moist, then cold,
If this you cannot disprove, then all I hold
My virtues hid, I Have let you dimly see
My sweet Complexion proves the verity.
This Scarlet die's a badge of what is within
One touch thereof, so beauti^ies the skin:
Nay, could I be, from all your tangs but pure
Man's life to boundless Time might still endure.
But here one thrusts her heat, wher'ts not required
So suddenly, the body all is fired,
And of the calm sweet temper quite bereft,
Which makes the Mansion, by the Soul soon lest.
So Melancholy seizes on a man*
With her unchearful visage, swarth and wan,
The body dryes, the mind sublime does smother,
And turns him to the womb of's earthy mother:
And phlegm likewise can show her cruel art,
With cold distempers to pain every part:
The lungs she rots, the body wears away,
As if she would leave no flesh to turn to clay,
Her languishing diseases, though not quick
At length demolishes the Faberick,
All to prevent, this curious care I take,
In the last concoction segregation make
Of all the perverse humors from mine own,
The bitter choler most malignant known
I turn into his Cell close by my side
The Melancholy to the Spleen to abide:
Likewise the whey, some use I in the veins,
The overplus I send unto the reins:
But yet for all my toil, my care and skill,
Its doomed by an irrevocable will
That my intents should meet with interruption,
That mortal man might turn to his corruption.
I might here show the nobleness of mind
Of such as to the sanguine are inclined,
They Are liberal, pleasant, kind and courteous,
And like the Liver all benignious.
For arts and sciences they are the fittest,
And maugre Choler still they are the wittiest:
With an ingenious working Fantasy,
A most voluminous large Memory,
And nothing wanting but Solidity.
^ut why alas, thus tedious should I be,
Thousand examples you may daily see.
If time I have transgreft, and been too long,
Yet could not be more brief without much wrong*
I Have scarce wiped off the spots proud choler cast,
Such venom lies in words, though but a blast:
No braggs i have used, to you I dare appeal,
If modesty my worth do not conceal.
I Have used no bittererss* nor taxt your name,
As I to you, to me do ye the same.
Melancholy.
He that with two Assailants has to do,
Had need be armed well and active too.
Especially when friendship is pretended,
That blow's most deadly where it is intended.
Though choler rage and rail, I Will not do so,
The tongue's no wea^on to assault a foe:
But ^^th we fight with words, we might be kind
To spare our selves and beat the whistl^ng wind,
Fair rosy sister, so might thou escape free;
I Will flatter for a time as thou did me:
But when the first offender I have laid,
Thy soothing girds shall fully be ^^paid.
But Choler be thou cool d or chafed, I Will venture,
And in contentions lists now justly enter.
What moved thee thus to vilify my name,
Not past all reason, but in truth all shame:
Thy fiery spirit shall bear away this prize,
To play such furious pranks I am too wise:
If in a Soldier rashness be so precious,
Know in a General it is most pernicious.
Nature does teach to shield the head from harm,
The blow that is aimed thereat is latcht by th'arm.
When in Batalia my foes I face
I then command proud Choler stand thy place,
To use thy sword, thy courage and thy art
There to defend my self, thy better part.
This wariness count not for cowardice,
He is not truly valiant that is not wise.
It Is no less glory to defend a town,
Then by a ssault to gain one not our o^^;
And if Marcellus bold be called Romes sword,
Wise Fabius is her buckler all accord:
And if thy have my slowness should not temper,
'Twere but a mad irregular distemper;
Enough of that by our sisters heretofore,
I Will come to that which wounds me somewhat more
Of learning, policy thou would bereave me,
But's not thine ignorance shall thus deceive me:
What greater Clark or Politician lives,
Then he whose brain a touc^ my humor gives?
What is too hot my coldness does abate,
What Is diffluent I do consolidate.
If I be partial judged or thought to err,
The melancholy sn^ke shall it aver,
Whose cold dry head more subtilty does yield,
Th^^ all the huge beasts of the fertile field^
Again thou do confine me to the spleen,
^s of that only part I were the Queen
Let me as well make thy precincts the Gall,
So prison thee within that bladder small:
Reduce the man to's principles, then see
If I have not more part then all you three:
What is within, without, of theirs or thine,
Yet time and age shall soon declare it mine.
When death does seize the man your stock is lost,
When you poor ba^krupts prove then have I most.
You Will say here none shall e're disturb my right,
You high born from that lump then take your flight
Then who is man's friend, when life and all forsakes?
His Mother mine, him to her womb retakes:
Thus he is ours, his portion is the grave,
But while he lives, I Will show what part I have:
And first the firm dry bones I justly claim,
The strong foundation of the stately frame:
Likewise the useful Slpeen, though not the best,
Yet is a bowel called well as the rest:
The Liver, Stomach, owe their thanks of right,
The first it drains, of th'last quicks appetite.
Laughter (tho thou say malice) flows from hence,
These two in one cannot have residence.
But thou most grossly do mistake to think
The Spleen for all you three was made a sink,
Of all the rest thou'st nothing there to do,
But if thou have, that malice is from you.
^gain you often touch my swarthy hue,
That black is black, and I am black it is true;
But yet more comely far I dare avow,
Then is thy torrid nose or brazen brow.
But that which shows how high your spite is bent
Is charging me to be thy excrement:
Thy loathsome imputation I defy,
So plain a slander needs no reply.
When by thy heat thou'st baked thy self to crust,
And so art called black Choler or adust,
Thou witless think that I am thy excretion,
So mean thou art in Art as in discretion:
But by your leave I Will let your greatnes^ see
What Officer thou art to us all three,
The Kitchen Drudge, the cleanser of the sinks
That casts out all that man e're eats or drinks:
If any doubt the truth whence this should come,
Show them thy passage to the Duodenum;
Thy biting quality still irritates,
Till filth and thee nature exonerates:
If there you are stopped, to the Liver thou turn'st in,
And thence with jaundies saffrons all the skin.
No further time I Will spend in confutation,
I true ^ I Have cleared your slanderous imputati^^*
I now speak unto all, no more to one,
Pray bear, admire and learn instruction.
My virtues yours surpass without compare,
The first my constancy that jewel rare:
Choler's too rash this golden gift to hold,
And Sanguine is more fickle manifold,
Here, there her restless thoughts do ever fly,
Constant in nothing but unconstancy.
and what Phlegm is, we know like to her mother,
Unstable is the one, and so the other;
With me is noble patience also found,
Impatient Choler loves not the sound,
What sanguine is, she does not heed nor care,
Now up, now down, transported like the Air:
Flegme's patient because her nature's tame*
But I, by virtue do acquire the same.
My Temperance, Chastity is eminent,
But these with you, are seldom resident;
Now could I stain my ruddy Sisters face
With deeper red, to show you he^ dsgrace,
But rather I with silence veil her shame
Then cause her blush, while I relate the some.
Nor are ye free from this inormity,
Although she bear the greatest obloquie,
My prudence, judgment, I might now reveal
But wisdom it is my wisdom to conceal.
Unto diseases not inclined as you,
Nor cold, nor hot, Aguc nor Plurisie,
Nor Cough, nor Quinsey, nor the burning Fever,
I rarely feel to a^t his fierce endeavor;
My sickness in conceit chiefly does lie,
What I imagine that is my malady.
Chymeraes strange are in my phantasy,
And things that never were, nor shall I see
I love not talk, Reason lies not in length,
Nor multitude of words argues our strength;
I Have done pray sister Phlegm proceed in Course,
We shall expect much sound, but little force.
Phlegm.
Patient I am, patient i would need to be,
To bear with the injurious taunts of three,
Though wit I want, and anger I have less,
Enough of both, my wrongs now to express
I Have not forgo^, how bitter Choler spoke
Nor how her gaul on me she causeless brake;
Nor wonder 'twas for hatred there is not small,
Where opposition is Diametrical.
To what is Truth I freely will assent,
Althoug^ my Name do suffer detriment,
What Is slanderous repel, doubtful dispute,
And when I Have nothing left to say be mute.
Valors I want no Soldier am it is true,
I Will leave that manly Property to you;
I love no thundering guns* nor bloody wars,
My polished Skin was not ordained for Skarrs*
But though the pitched field I Have ever fled,
^^^home the Conquerours ^ave conquered.
Nay, I could tell you what is more true then meet,
That Kings have laid their Scepters at my feet;
When Sister sanguine paints my Ivory face:
The Monarchs bend and sue, but for my grace
My lilly white when joined with her red,
Princes has slav'd, and Captains captived.
Country with Country, Greece with Asia fights
Sixty nine Princes, all stout Hero Knights.
Under Troys walls ten years will wear away,
Rather then loose one beauteous Helena.
But 'twere as vain, to prove this truth of mine
As at noon day, to tell the Sun does shine.
Next difference* that 'twixt us twain does ly^
Who does poss^ss the brain, or thou or I?
Shame forced the say, the matter that was mine,
But the Spirits by which it acts are thine:
Thou speak Truth, and I can say no less,
Thy heat does much, I heartily confess;
Yet without ostentation I ma y say,
I do as much for thee another way:
And though I grant, thou art my helper here,
No debtor I bec^^se it is paid else where.
With all your flourishes, now Sisters three
Who is it that dare* or can, compare with me,
My excellencies are so great, so many,
I am confounded; fore I speak of any:
The brain's the noblest member all allow,
Its form and Situation will avow,
Its Ventricles, Membranes and wondrous net,
Galen, Hippocrates drive to a set;
That Divi^e Offspring the immortal Soul
Though it in all, and every part be whole,
Within this stately place of eminence,
Does doubtless keep its mighty residence.
And surely, the Soul sensitive here lives,
Which life and motion to each creature (...),
The Conjugation of the parts, to the brain
Does show, hence flow the powers which they retain
Within this high Built Cittad^l, does lie
The ^eason, fancy, and the memory;
The fac^lty of speech does here abide,
The Spirits animal, from hence do slide:
The five most noble Senses here do dwell;
Of three it is hard to say, which does excel.
This point now to discuss, 'longs not to me,
I Will touch the sight great'st wonder of the three;
The optic Nerve, Coats, humors all are mine,
The watery, glassie, and the Chrystaline;
O mixture strange! O color colorless,
Thy perfect temperament who can express:
He was no fool who thought the soul lay there,
Whence her affections passions speak so clear.
O good, O bad, O true, O traitorous eyes
What wonderm^nts within your Balls there lies,
Of all the ^enses sight shall be the Queen;
Yet some may (...), O had mine eyes never seen.
Mine, likewise is the marrow, of the back,
Which runs throu^^ all the Spondles of the rack,
It is the substitute o'th royal brain,
All Nerves, except seven pair, to it retain.
And the strong Ligaments from henc^ arise,
Which joint to joint, the entire bo^y ^y^s.
Some other parts there issue from the B^ain,
Whose worth and use to tell, I must refrain:
Some curious learned Cro^ke, may these reveal
But modesty, has charged me to conceal
Here Is my Epitome of excellence:
For what is the Brains is ^ine by Consequence.
A foolish brain (quoth Choler) wanting heat
But a mad one say I, where it is too great,
Phrensie's worse then folly, one would more glad
With a tame fool converse then with a mad;
For learning then my brain is not the fittest,
Nor will I yield that Choler is the wittiest.
Thy judge meant is unsafe, thy fancy little,
For memory the sand is not more brittle;
Again, none's fit for Kingly state ^ut thou,
I^ Tyrants be the best, I Will it allow:
But if love be as requisite as fear,
Then thou and I must make a mixture here*
Well to be brief, I hope now Cholers laid,
And I Will pass by what Sister sanguine said.
To Melancholy I Will make no reply,
T^^ worst she said was instability*
And too much talk, both which I here confess
A warning good, hereafter I Will say less.
Let Us now be friends; its time (...) spent,
Lest we too late this rashness do repent,
Such premises will force a sad conclusion,
Unless we agree, all falls into confu^^on.
Let Sangine with her hot hand Choler hold,
To take her moist my moisture will be bold:
My cold, cold melancholy hand shall clasp;
Her dry, dry Cholers other hand shall grasp.
Two hot, two moist, two cold, two dry here be,
A golden Ring, the Posey UNITY.
Nor jarrs nor scoffs, let none hereafter see,
But all admire our perfect Amity
Nor be discerned, here is water, earth, air, fire,
But here so compact body, whole entire.
This loving counsel pleased them all so well
That phlegm was judged for kindness to excel.
Of the four Ages of Man.
LO now four other act upon the stage,
Childhood and Youth the Manly and Old age;
The first son unto phlegm, Grandchild to water,
Unstable, supple, cold and moist's his nature.
The second frolic, claims his pedigree
From blood and air, for hot and moist is he.
The third of fire and Choler is compos d
Vindicative and quarrelsome disposed.
The last of earth, and heavy melancholy,
Solid, hating all lightness and all folly.
Childhood was clothed in white and green to show
His spring was intermixed with some snow:
Upon his head nature a Garland set
Of Primrose, Daizy or the Violet.
Suc^ co^d mean ^owrs the spring puts forth betim^
Before the sun has thoroughly heat the clime.
His Hobby striding did not ride but run,
And in his hand an hourglass new begun,
In danger every moment of a fall,
And when it is broke then ends his life and all
But if he hold till it have run its last,
Then may he live out threescore years or pa^^.
Next Youth came up in gorgeous at^ire,
(As that fond age does most of all desire)
Hi^ Suit of Crimson and his scarf of green,
His pride in's countenance was quickly seen,
Garland of roses, pinks and gilli-flowers
Seemed on's head to grow bedewed with showers*
His face as fresh as is Aurora fair,
When blushing she first ' s to light the air.
No wooden horse* but one of metal tried,
He seems to fly or swim and not to ride.
Then prancing on the stage, about he wheels,
But as he went death waited ^t his heels.
The next came up in a much graver sort,
As one that cared for a good report,
His sword by 's side, and choler in his eye^,
But neither used as yet, for he was wise:
Of Autumns fruits a basket on his arm,
His golden God in's purse, which was his char^.
And last of all to act upon this stage
Leaning upon his staff came up Old Age,
Under his arm a sheaf of wheat he bore,
An harvest of the best, what needs he more?
In's other hand a glass even almost run,
Thus writ about This out then am I done.
His hoary hairs, and grave aspect made way,
And all gave ear to what he had to say.
These being met each in his equipage
Intend to speak according to their age:
But wise Old age did with all gravity
To childish Childhood give precedence,
And to the rest his reason mildly told,
That he was young before he grew so old.
To do as he each one full soon assents,
Their method was that of the Elements,
That each should tell what of himself he knew,
Both good and bad, but yet no more then is true.
With heed now stood three ages of frail man,
^o hear the child, who crying thus began:
Childhood.
Ah me I conceived in sin and born with sorrow,
A nothing, here to day and gone to morrow,
Whose mean beginning blushing cannot reveal,
But night and darkness must with shame conceal.
My mothers breeding sickness I will spare,
Her nine months weary burden not declare.
To show her bearing pains, I should do wrong,
To tell those pangs which cannot be told by tongue:
With tears into the world I did arrive,
My mother still did waste as I did thrive,
Who yet with love and all alacrity,
Spending, was willing to be spent for me.
With wayward cries I did disturb her rest,
Who sought still to appease me with the breast:
With weary arms she danced and By By sung*
When wretched I ingrate had done the wrong.
When infancy was past, my childishness
Did act all folly that it could express,
My silliness did only take delight
In that which ^iper age did scorn and slight.
In Rattles, Baubles and such toyish stuff,
My then ambitious thoughts were low enough:
My highborn soul so straightly was confined,
That its own worth it did not know nor mind:
This little house of flesh did spacious count,
Through ignorance all troubles did surmount;
Yet this advantage had mine ignorance
Freedom from envy and from arrogance.
How to be rich or great I did not cark,
A Baron or a Duke never made my mark,
Nor studious was Kings favors how to buy,
With costly presence or base flattery:
No office coveted wherein I might
Make strong my self and turn aside weak right.
No malice bare to this or that great Peer,
Nor unto buzzing whisperers gave ear:
I gave no hand nor vote for death or life,
I Would naught to do 'twixt King and people^ strife.
No Sta^ist I, nor Martilist in'th field,
Where ere I went mine innocence was shield.
My quarr^ls not for Diadems did rise,
But for an apple, plum or some such prize:
My strokes did cause no blood no wounds or skars,
My little wrath did end soon as my Wars:
My Duel was no challeng nor did seek
My foe should weltring in his bowels reek.
I had no suits at law neighbors to vex,
Nor evidence for lands did me perplex.
I feared no storms, nor all the wind that blows,
I had no ships at sea; nor fraights to loose*
I feared no drought nor wet. I had no crop,
Nor yet on future things did set my hope.
This was mine innocence, but ah! the seeds
Lay raked up of all the cursed weeds
Which sprouted forth in mine ensuing age,
As he can tell that next comes on the stage:
But yet let me relate before I go
The sins and dangers I am subject to,
Stained from birth with Adams sinful fact,
Thence I began to sin as soon as act:
A perverse will, a love to what is forbid,
A serpents sting in pleasing face lay hid:
A lying ^ongue as soon as it could speak,
And fi^th C^mmandment do daily break.
Often stubbo^n, peevish, sullen, pout and cry.
Then ^ought can please, and yet I know not why.
As man^ are my sins, so dangers too;
For sin brings sorrow, sickness death and woe:
And though I miss the tossings of the mind,
Yet griefs in my frail flesh I still do find.
What gripes of wind mine infancy did pai^,
What tortures I in breeding teeth sustain?
What crudityes my stomach cold has bred,
Whence vomits, flux and worms have issued?
What breaches, knocks and falls I daily have,
And some perhaps I carry to my grave.
Sometimes in fire, sometimes in water fall,
Strangly presev'd, yet mind it not at all:
At home, abroad my dangers manifold,
That wonder it is, my glass till now does hold.
I Have done; unto my elders give way,
For it is but little that a child can say.
Youth.
My goodly clothing, and my beauteous skin
Declare some greater riches are within:
But what is best I Will first present to view,
And then the worst in a more ugly hue:
For thus to do we on this stage assemble
Then let not him that has most craft dissemble.
My education and my learning such,
As might my self and others profit much;
With nurture trained up in virtues schools
Of science, arts and tongues I know the rules,
The manners of the court I also know,
And so likewise what they in'th Country do.
The brave attempts of valiant knights I prize,
That dare scale walls and forts reared to the skies.
The snorting Horse, the trumpet, Drum I like,
The glittering sword* the Pistol and the Pike:
I cannot lie entrenched before a town,
Nor wait till good success our hopes does crown:
I scorn the heavy Corslet, musket-proof;
I fly to catch the bullet that's aloof.
Though thus in field, at home to all most kind,
So a^fable, that I can suit each mind.
I can insinuate into the breast,
And by my mirth can raise the heart deprest:
Swe^t music raps my brave harmonious soul,
My high thoughts elevate beyond the pole:
My wit my bounty, and my courtesy,
Make all to place their future hopes on me.
This is my best, but Youth is known, Alas!
To be as wild as is the snuffing Ass:
As vain as froth* or vanity can be,
That who would see vain man, may look on me,
My gifts abus d, my education lost,
My woeful Parents longing hopes are crossed,
My wit evaporates in merriment,
My valor in some beastly quarrell's spent:
M^ lust does hurry me to all that is ill:
I know no law nor reason but my will.
Sometimes lay wait to take a wealthy purse*
Or stab the man in's own defense (that is wor^^)
Sometimes I cheat (un^ind) a female heir
Of all at once, who not so wise as fair
Trusts my loving looks and glozing (...),
Until her friends, treasure and honor ^ gone.
Sometimes I sit carousing others health,
Until mine own be gone, my wit and wealth.
From pipe to pot, from pot to words and blows,
For ^e that* loves wine, wants no woes.
Whole nights with Ruffins, Roarers Fiddlers spend,
To all obscenity mine ears I lend:
All Counsel hate, which tends to make me wise*
And dearest friends count for mine enemies.
If any care I take it is to be fine,
For sure my suit more then my virtues shine
If time from lewd Companions I can spare,
It Is spent to curle and pounce my new-bought hair.
Some new Adonis I do strive to be;
Sardanapalus now survives in me.
Cards, Dice, and Oaths concomitant I love,
To plays, to masks, to Taverns still I move*
And in a word, if what I am you would hear,
Seek out a British brutish Cavaleer:
Such wretch, such Monster am I, but yet more,
I have no heart at all this to deplore,
Remembering not the dreadful day of doom,
Nor yet that heavy reckoning soon to come.
Though dangers do attend me every hour,
And ghastly Death often threats me with his power,
Sometimes by wounds in idle Combats taken,
Sometimes with Agues all my body shaken:
Sometimes by fevers, all my moisture drinking*
My heart lies frying, and mine eyes are sinking,
Sometimes the Quinsey, painful Pleuri^ie,
With sad affrighrs of death does men^ce me:
Sometimes the two sold Pox me sore be^marrs
With outward marks, and inward loathsome scarrs,
Sometimes the Phrenzy strangly mads my brain,
That often for it in Bedlam I remain.
Too many my diseases to recite,
That wonder it is, I yet behold the light,
That yet my bed in darkness is not made,
And I in black oblivions Den now laid.
Of aches full my bones, of woe my heart,
Clapped in that prison, never thence to start.
Thus I have said, and what I Have been, you see
Childhood and Youth are vain ye vanity.
Middle Age.
Childhood and Youth (forgot) I Have sometimes seen
And now am grown more staid who have bin green
What they have done, the same was done by me,
As was their praise or shame, so mine must be.
Now age is more* more good you may expect,
But more mine age, the more is my defect.
When my wild oats were sown and ripe and mown
I then received an harvest of mine own.
My reason then bad judge how little hope
My empty seed should yield a better crop:
Then with both hands I graspt the world togethe^
Thus out of on^ extreme into another:
But yet lai^ hold on virtue seemingly,
Who ^limbs without hol^ climb^ dangerou^^y*
Be my condition mean, I then take pains
My Family to keep but not for gains.
A Father I, for children must provide;
But if none* then for kindred near allied.
If rich, I Am urg^d then to gather ^ore,
To bear a port in the world, an^ feed the poor.
If noble, then mine honor o maintain,
If not, riches nobility ca^ gain.
For time, for place, likewise for each Relation
I wanted not, my ready allegation.
Yet all my powers for self ends are not spent,
For hundreds bless me for my bounty lent.
Whose backs I Have clothed, an^ bellyes l^ave ^e^
With mine own fleece, and with my hou^hold bread,
Yea, justice have I done, was I in place,
To cheer the good, and wicked to deface.
The pro^d I crush't, the oppressed I set free,
The liars curbed, but nourisht verity.
Was I a Pastor, I my Flock did feed*
And gently lead the Lambs as they had need.
A Captain I, with Skill I trained my Band,
And showed them how in face of Foes to stand.
A Soldier I, with speed I did obey
As readily, as could my leader say.
Was I a labourer, I wrought all day
As cheerfully as e're I took my pay.
Thus hat^ mine Age in all so^etimes done well.
Sometime^ again, mine Age been worse then Hell.
In meanness, greatness, riches, poverty,
I ^id toil, did broyle, oppressed, did steal and lie.
Was I as (...)
Then basen (...).
Such scu^ as hedg^s an^ highways ^o yield,
As n^ithe^ sow, nor rea^, nor ^lant, nor build,
If to A^^^culture I was or^a^n'd,
Great labors, sorrows, Crosses I sustained.
The early Cock did summon but in vain
My ^akeful thoughts up to my painful gain:
M^ weary Beast rest from his toil can find,
But if I rest the more distressed my mind.
If happiness my ^ordidness has found,
'Twas in the Crop of my manured ground.
My thriving ^attle and my now-milch-Cow,
My fleeced Sheep, and fruitful farrowing Sow:
To greater things I never did aspire*
My dunghill thoughts or hopes could reach no high^r.
If to be rich or great it was my fate,
How was I broyl'd with envy and with hate?
Greater then was the great'st was my desire,
And thirst for honor, set my heart on fire:
And by Ambition's sails I was so carried,
That over Flats and sands* and Rocks I hurried,
Oppressed and sunk, and sta^'d all in my way
That did oppose me, to my longed Bay*
My thirst was higher then nobility,
I often longed sore to taste on Royalty:
Then Kings must be deposed or put to flight,
I might possess that Throne which was their right,
Ther^ set, I rid my self straight out of hand
(...) Competitors, as might in time wi^hstand.
Then thought my state firm founded sure to last,
But in a trice it is ruined by a blast,
Though cemented with more t^en noble blood,
The bottom naught, and so no longer stood.
Sometimes vain glory is the only bait
Whereby my empty Soul is lured and caught*
Be I of wit* of learning, and of parts,
I judge I should have room in all men's hearts.
And envy gnaws if any do surmount,
I hate, not to be held in highest account.
If Bias like I Am stripped unto my skin,
I glory in my wealth I have within.
Thus good and bad* and what I am you see*
Now in a word, what my diseases be.
The vexing stone in bladder and in reins,
The Strangury torments me with s^re pains.
The windy Cholick often my bowels rend,
To break the darksome prison where it is penned*
The Cramp and Gout does sadly torture me,
And the restraining, lame Sciatica.
The Astma, Megrim, Palsy* Lethargy,
The quartan Ague, dropsy, Lunacy:
Subject to all distempers (that is the truth)
Though some more incident, to Age or Youth.
And to conclude, I may not tedious be,
Man at his best estate is vanity.
Old Age.
that you have been, even such have I before
And all you say, say I, and somewhat more.
Babes innocence, youths wildness I have seen,
And in perplex^d middle Age have been:
Sickness, dangers, and a^xieties have p^st,
And on this stage am come to act my last.
I have been young and strong and wise as you:
But now Bis pue^i^^nes, is too true.
In every Age I Have found much vanity,
An end of all perfection now I see.
It Is not my valor, honor, nor my gold,
My ruined house now falling can uphold.
It Is not my learning Rhetoric wit so large,
Has now the power, death's warfare to discharge.
It Is not my goodly state, nor bed of down
That can refresh, or ease, if Conscience frown.
Nor from Alliance can I now have hope,
But what I have done well, that is my pro p*
He that in youth is godly, wise and sage,
Provides a staff then to support his Age.
Mutations great, some joyful and some sad,
In this short pilgrimage I often have had.
Sometimes the He^vens with plenty smiled on me
Sometime again rained all Adversity.
Sometimes in honor, sometimes in disgrace,
Sometime an Abject, then again in place.
Such private changes often mine eyes have seen,
In various times of state I Have also been.
I Have seen a Kingdom flourish like a tree,
When it was ruled by that Celestial she;
And like a Cedar, others so surmount:
that but for shrubs they did themselves acco^^t.
Then saw I France and Holland, saved Cales w^n,
And Philip and Albertus half undone.
I saw all peace at home, ^error to foes,
But ah, I saw at last those eyes to close,
And then methought the day at noon grew dark
When it had lost that radiant Sun-like Spark:
In midst of griefs I saw our hopes revive,
(^or 'twas our hopes then kept our hearts alive)
We changed our queen for king under whose rays
We joy'd in many blessed and prosperous days.
I Have seen a Prince, the glory of our land
In prime of youth seized by heavens angry hand,
Which fi^'d our hearts with fears, with tears our eyes,
Wailing his fate and our own destinies.
I^^e seen form Rome an execrable thing,
A Plot to blow up Nobles and their King,
But saw their horrid fact soon disappointed,
And Land and Nobles saved with their anointed*
I Have Princes s^en to live on others lands;
A royal one by gifts from strangers hands
Admired for their magnanimity,
Who lost a Prince-dome and a Monarchy.
I Have seen designs for R^e and Rochel crossed,
And poor Palatinate for ever lost.
I Have seen unworthy men advanced high,
(And better ones suffer extremity)
But neither favor, riches, title* State,
Could length their days or once reverse their fate
I Have seen one stabbed, and some to loose their heads
And others fly, struck both with gilt and dread.
I Have seen and so have you* for it is but late,
The desolation of a goodly State,
Plotted and acted so that none can tell,
Who gave the counsel, but the Prince of hell,
Three hundred thousand slaughtered innocents,
By bloody Popish, hellish miscreants:
Oh may you live, and so you will I trust
To see them swill in blood until they burst.
I Have seen a King by force thrust from his throne,
And an Usurper subt'ly mount thereon.
I Have seen a state unmoulded, r^nt in twain,
But ye may live to see'^ made up again.
I Have seen it plundered, taxt and soaked in blood,
But out of evil you may see much good.
What are my thoughts, this is no time to say.
Men may more freely speak another day.
These are no old-wives tales* but thi^ is truth,
We old men love to tell what is done in youth*
But I return from whence I stepped awry,
My memory is bad, my brain is dry:
Mine Almond tree, gray hairs, do flourish now,
And back once straight, apace begins to bow:
My grinders now are few, my sight does fail,
My skin is wrinkled, and my cheeks are pale,
No more rejoice at musicks pleasing noise,
But waking glad to hear the cocks shrill voice*
I cannot scent savours of pleasant meat,
Nor sapors find in what I drink or eat:
My a^ms and hands once strong have lost their might
I cannot labor, much less can I fight.
My comely legs as nimble as the Roe
Now stiff and numb, can hardly creep or go,
My heart sometimes as fierce as Lion bold,
Now trembling is, all fearful sa^ and cold;
My golden Bowl and silver Cord e're long
Shall both be broke, by racking death so strong*
Then shall I go whence I shall come no more,
Sons, Nephews, leave my farewell to deplore.
In pleasures and in labors I have found
That Earth can give no consolation sound;
To great to rich, to poor, to young to old,
To mean to noble, fearful ^r to bold:
From King to beggar* all degrees shall find
But vanity vexation of the mind.
Yea knowing much* the pleasants life of all,
H^th yet among those swee^s some bitter gall;
Th^ugh rea^ing others works does much refresh,
Y^^ studying much brings weariness to the flesh:
M^ stu^ies, labors* readings all are done,
and ^y last period now even almost run.
Corruption my Father I do call
M^^her and Sisters both the worms that crawl^
In ra^ ^ark house suc^ kindred I have store,
Where I shall rest till heavens shall be no more*
And when this flesh shall rot and be consumed,
This body by this Soul shall be assumed:
And I shall see with these same very eyes,
My strong Redeemer coming in the Skies.
Triumph I shall over sin, over death, over Hell,
And in that hope I bid you all farewell.
The four Seasons of the Year.
Spring.
ANother four I Have left yet to bring on,
Of four times four the last Quaternio^,
The Winter, Summer, Autumn and the Spring,
In season all these Seasons I shall bring:
Sweet Spring like man in his Minority,
At present claimed, and had priority.
With smiling face and garments somewhat green,
She trimmed her locks, which late had frosted ^een,
Nor hot nor cold* she spoke, but with a breath,
Fit to revive, the nummed earth from death
Three months (quoth she) are 'lotted to my share
March, April, May of all the rest most fair.
Tenth of the first, Sol into Aries enters,
And bids defiance to all tedious winters,
Crosses the Line, and equals night and day,
(Still adds to the last til after pleasant May)
And now makes glad the darkened northern wights
Who for some months have seen but starry lights.
Now goes the Plowman to his merry toil,
He might unloose his winter loc^^d soil:
The Seeds-man too* does lavish out hi^ grain,
In hope the more h^ ^asts, the more ^o gain:
The Gardner now superfluous bran^hes lops,
And poles erects for his young clambring hops.
Now digs then sowes his herbs, his flowers and roots
And carefully manures his trees of fruits.
The Plei^des their influence now give,
and all that seemed as dead afresh does live.
The croaking frogs, whom nipping winter killed
L^^e birds now chirp, and hop about the field,
The Nigh^ingale* the blackbird and the Thrush
Now tune their lays, on sprayes of every bush.
The ^anton frisking Kid, and soft-fleec'd Lambs
Do ^ump and play before their feeding Dams*
The tender tops of budding grass they crop,
They jo^ i^ what they have, but more in hope:
For th^ugh the frost has lost his binding power,
Yet many a^fleece of snow and stormy shower
Does darken S^^'s bright eye, mak^s us remember
The pinching N^rth-west wind of cold Decemb^r.
My secon^ month is A^ril* green and fair,
Of longer daye^, and a more temperate A^^:
The Sun i^ Tax^us keeps his residence,
And ^ith ^is warmer beams glanceth from thenc^
This is the mon^^ whose fruitful showrs produce^
All set and sown ^or all delights and uses:
The Pear the Plu^, and Apple Tree now flourish
The grass grows long the hungry be^st to nourish*
The Pri^rose pale, and azure violet
Among the vir^uous grass has nature set.
That when the Sun on's Love (the earth) does shine
These might as l^ce set o^t her g^rment fine
The fearful bird his little house now builds
In trees and walls, in Cities and in fields.
The outside strong, the inside warm and neat;
A natural Artificer complete.
The clocking hen her chirping chickins leads
With wings and beak defends them from the gleads
My next and last is fruitful pleas^nt May,
Wherein the earth is clad i^ rich array,
The Sun n^^ enters loving Gemini,
And heats us with the glances of his eye,
Our thicker raiment makes us lay aside
Le^t by his fervor we be torrifi'd.
All flowers the Sun now with his beams discloses,
Except the doub^e pinks and matchless Roses.
Now swarms the busy, witty, honey-Bee,
Whose praise deserves a page from more then me
The cleanly Huswifes Dary's now in the prime,
Her shelves and firkins filled for winter time.
^he meads with Cowslips, Honey-suckles dight,
One hangs his head, the other stands upright:
But both rejoice at the heavens clear smiling face,
More at her showers, which water them a space.
For fruits my Season yields the early Cherry,
The hasty Peace, and wholesome cool Strawberry.
More solid fruits require a longer time,
^ach Season has his fruit so has each Clime.
^ach man his own peculiar excellence,
But none in all that ha^h pre-eminence.
Sweet fr^grant ^pring* with thy short pittan^esly
(...) ^^scribe thee better then can I.
Yet above all this privilege is thine,
Thy days still lengthen without least decline:
Summer.
When Spring had done, the Summer did begi^,
With melted tauny face, and garments thin,
Resembling Fire, Choler, and Middle age,
As Spring did A^r, Blood, Youth in's equipage.
Wiping the sweat from of her face that ran,
With hair all wet she puffing thus began;
Bright Iun^, July and August hot are mine,
In'th first Sol dot^ in c^abbed Cancer shine.
His progress to the North now is fully do^e,
Then retrograde must be my burning Sun,
Who to his southward Tropic still is bent,
Yet does his parching heat but more augmen^
Though he decline, because his flames so fair,
Have thoroughly dried the earth, and heat the ai^
Like as an Oven that long time has been heat,
Whose vehemence at length does grow so great,
That if you do withdtaw her burning store,
It Is for a time as fervent as before.
Now go those frolic Swains* the Sheperd Lads
To wash the thick clothed flocks wi^h pipes full glad
In the cool stream^ they labor with delight
Rub^ing th^i^ dirty co^ts till they loo^ white:
Whose flee^e when ^inely spun an^ de^ply died
With Ro^es thereof King^ have been dignified.
Blessed rustic Swains, your pleas^^t quiet life,
Has envy bred in Kings that were at strife,
Careless of worldly wealth you sing and pipe.
^hilst they are imbroyl'd in wars and troubles rife:
Which made great Bajaze^ cry out in's woes,
Oh happy shepherd which has not to lose.
Orthobuius* nor yet Sebastia great,
But whist'leth to thy flock in cold and heat.
Viewing the Sun by day, the Moon by night
Endimions, Di^naes dear delight,
Upon the grass resting your healthy limbs,
By purling Brooks looking how ^^shes swims.
If pride within your lowly Cells ere haunt,
Of him that was Shepherd then King go vaunt.
This month the Roses are distilled in glasses,
Whose fragrant smell all made perfumes surpasses
The Cherry* Gooseberry are now in the prime,
And for all sorts of Pease, this is the time.
July my next, the hott'st in all the year,
The sun through Leo now takes his Career,
Whose f^aming breath does melt us from afar,
Increased by the star Canicular.
This Month from Julius Caesar took its name,
By Romans celebrated to his fame.
Now go the Mowe^^ to their flashing toil,
The Meadows of their riches to dispo^le,
With weary strokes, they take all in their way,
Bearing the burning ^eat of the long day.
The forks and Rakes do follow them amain,
Which ma^e^ the ^g^d fields look young again.
The groaning Carts do bear away this prize.
To Stacks and Barns where it for Fodder lies*
My next and last is August fiery hot
(For much the Southward Sun a bateth not)
This Month he keeps with Virgo for a space,
The dried Earth is parched with his face.
August of great Augustus took its name,
Romes second Emperor of lasting fame,
With sickles now the ben^ing Reapers go
The russling tress of terra down to mow;
And bundles up in sheaves, the weighty wheat,
Which after Manchet makes for Kings to eat:
The Barley, Rye and Pease should first had place,
Although their bread have not so white a face.
The Carter leads all home with whistling voice,
He plowed with pain, but reaping does rejoice;
His sweat, his toil, his careful wa^eful nights,
His fruitful Crop abun^antly requites.
Now Is ripe the Pear, Pear-plumb, and Apricoc^,
The prince of plumbs, whose stone's as hard as Rock
The Summer seems but short, the Autumn hasts
To shake his fruits, of most delicious tastes
Like good old Age, whose younger juicy Roots
Has still ascended, to bear goodly fruits.
Until his head be gray, and strength be gone.
Yet then appears the worthy deeds he 'th done:
To feed his boughs exhausted has his ^ap,
Then drops his fruits into the ^^ters lap.
Autumn.
Of Autumn months September is the prime,
Now day and night are equal in each Clime,
The twelfth of this Sol rises in the Line,
And does in poizing Libra this month shine.
The vintage now is ripe, the grapes are pressed,
Whose lively liquor often is cursed and blessed:
For naught so good, but it may be abused,
But its a precious juice when well its used.
The raisins now in clusters dried be,
The Orange, Lemon dangle on the tree:
The Pomegranate, the Fig are ripe also.
And Apples now their yellow sides do s^ow.
Of Almonds, Quinces, Wardens, and of Peach,
The season's now at hand of all and each.
Sure at this time, time first of all began,
And in this month was made apostate Man*
For then in Eden was not only seen*
Boughs full of leaves* or fruits unripe or green,
Or withered stocks, which were all dry and dead,
But trees with goodly fruits replenished;
Which shows nor Summer* Winter nor the Spring
Our Grand-Sire was of Paradise made King:
Nor could that temperate Clime* such differenc^ make,
If s^ited as the most Judicious take.
Octob^^ is my next we ^ear in this
The Northern ^inter-blasts begin to hiss.
In Scorpio resideth now the Sun,
And his declining heat is almost done.
The fruitless Trees all withered now do stand,
Whose sapless yellow leaves by winds are fan'd,
Which notes when youth and strength have past their prime
Decrepit age must also have its time.
The Sap does s^^ly creep towa^^s the E^rth
There rests, until the Sun give it a birth.
So does old Age still tend unto his grave,
Where also he his winter time must have;
But when the Sun of righteousness draw^ ^igh,
His dead old stock, shall mount again on high.
N^vem^er is my last, for Time does haste,
We now of win^ers sharpness* 'gins to taste*
This month the Sun's in Sagit^^ius,
So far remote, his glances warm not us.
A^most at shortest is the ^or^en'^ ^ay,
The No^^h^rn p^le behol^eth not one ray.
No^ Gr^^nl^^, ^roanlan^, Finland, Lapland, see
No Sun, to lighten their obscurity:
Poor wretches that in total ^arkness lie,
With minds more dark then is the dar^'ned Sky.
Beaf, Brawn and Pork are now in great request,
And solid meats our stomachs ^an digest.
This time warm clothes full diet and good fires,
Our pinched flesh, and hungry mawes requires:
Old, cold, dry Age and Earth Autumn resembles,
And Melancholy which most of all dissembles.
I must be short* and shorts, the short'ned day,
What winter h^th to tell, now let ^^m say.
Winter*
Cold, moist, young flegmy winter now does lie
In swa^ling Clouts, like new born Infancy
Bound up with frosts, and furred with hail and snows,
And like an Infant, st^ll it taller grows;
Dec^^ber is my first, and now the Sun
To the Southward Tr^pick, his swift race does run:
This month he is housed in horned Capricorn,
From thence he 'gins to length the shortened morn,
Through Christendom with great Feastivity,
Now Is held, (but ghest) for blessed Nativity.
Cold frozen January next comes in,
Chilling the blood and shrinking up the skin;
In ^quarius now keeps the long wished Sun,
And Northward his unwearied Course does run*
The day much longer then it was before,
The cold not lessened, but augmented more.
Now Toes and Ears, and Fingers often freeze.
And Travelers their noses sometimes leese.
Moist snowie ^^bruary is my last,
I care not how the winter time does haste.
In (...) now the golden Sun does shine,
And Northward still approaches to the Line,
The Rivers 'gin to open* the snows to melt,
And some warm gl^nces from his face are felt*
Which is incr^^sed by the lengthened day,
Until by's hea^, he drive all cold away,
And thus the year in Circle runs round:
Where first it did begin, in the end its found,
My Subjects bare, my Brain is bad,
Or better Lines you should have ^ad:
The first fell in so nat'rally,
I knew not how to pass it by;
The last, though bad I could not mend,
Accept therefore of what is penned,
And all the faults that you shall spy
Shall at your feet for pardon cry.
The four Monarchies, the Assyrian being the first, beginning under Nimrod,
131. Years after the Flood,
WHen time was young, and World in In^ancy,
Man ^id not proudly strive for Sovereignty:
But each one thought his petty Rule was high,
If of his house he held the Monarchy.
This was the golden Age* but after came
The boisterous son of Chus, Grandchild to Ham,
That mighty Hunter, who in his strong toils
Both Beasts and Men subjected to his spoils:
The strong foundation of proud Babel laid,
Ere^^, Accad, and Culneh also made.
These were his first, all stood in S^inar land,
From thence he went Assyria to command,
And mighty Niniveh, he there begun,
Not finished till he his race had run.
Res^n, Cal^h, and Rehoboth likewise
^y him to Cities eminent did rise*
Of Saturn, he was the Original.
Whom the succeeding times a God did call,
When thus with rule, he had been dignified,
One hundred fourteen years he after died.
Belus.
Great Nimrod dead B^lus the next his Son
Confirms the rule, his Father had begun;
Whose act^ and power is not for certainty
Left to the world, by any History.
But yet this blot for ever on him lies,
He taught the people first to Idolize:
Titles Divine he to himself did take,
Alive and dead, a God they did him make.
This is that Bell the Chala^es worshipped,
Whose Priests in Stories often are mentioned;
This is that Baal to whom the Israelites
So often profanely offered sacred Rites:
This is Bee^zebub God of Ekronites,
Likewise Baalpeor of the Mohabites,
His reign was short, for as I calculate,
At twenty five ended his Regal date.
Ninus.
His Father dead, Ni^u^ begins his reign,
Transfers his seat to the Assyrian plain;
And mighty Nineveh more mighty made,
Whose Foundation was by his Grand-sire laid:
Four hundred forty Furlongs walled about,
O^ which stood fifteen hund^ed Towers stout.
The walls one hundred sixty foot upright,
So broad three Cha^iots run abrest ^here might*
Upon the pleasant ban^s of Tygris flood
This stately Seat of warlike Ninus stood:
This Ninus for a God his Father canonized,
To whom the sottish people sacrificed.
This Tyrant did his Neighbors all oppress,
Where e're he warred he had too good success.
Barzanes the great Armeni^n (...)
By force and fraud did under Tribute bring.
The Me^ian Country he did also gain,
T^er^us their King he caused to be slain;
An Army of three millions he led out
Against the Bactrians (but that I doubt)
Zo^^^ster their King he likewise slew,
And all the greater Asia did subdue.
Semiramis from Menon did he take
Then drowned himself, did Menon for her sake.
Fifty two years he reigned, (as we are told)
The world then was two thousand nineteen old.
Semiramis.
This great oppressing ^i^us, dead and gone,
His wife Semiramis usurped the Throne;
She ^ike a brave Vi^ago played the Rex
And was both shame and glory of her Sex:
Her birth place was Philistines Ascolan,
Her mother Dorceta a Curtizan.
Others report she was a vestal Nun,
Adjudged ^o be drowned for th crime she' d done.
Transformed into a Fish by Venus will,
Her beauteo^^ face, (they seign) reteining still.
Sure from this Fiction Dagon first began,
Changing the woman's face into a man:
But all agree that from no lawful bed,
This great renowned Empress issued:
For which she was obscurely nourished,
Whence rose that Fable, she by birds was fed.
This gallant Dame unto the Bactrian war,
Accompanying her husband Menon far,
Taking a town, such valor she did show,
That Ninus amorous of her soon did grow,
And thought her fit to make a Monarchs wife,
Which was the cause poor Menon lost his life:
She flourishing with Ninus long did reign,
Till her Ambition caused him to be slain.
That having no Compeer, she might rule all,
Or else she sought revenge for Menon's fall.
Some think the Greeks this slander on her cast,
As on her life Licen^ious, and unchaste,
That undeserved, they blur'd her name and fame
By their aspersions, cast upon the same:
But were her virtues more or less, or none,
She for her potency must go alone.
Her wealth she showed in building Babylon,
Admired of all, but equaliz'd of none;
The Walls so strong, and curiously was wrought,
That after Ages, Skill by them was taught:
With Towers and Bulwarks made of costly stone,
Q^adrangle was the form it stood upon*
Each Square was fifteen thousand paces long,
An hundred gates it had of me^tal strong:
Three hun^red s^xty foot the walls in height,
Almost incredible, ^hey were in brea^th
Some writers say, six Chariots might affront
With great facility, march safe upon it:
About the Wall a ditch so deep and wide,
That like a River long it did abi^e.
Three hundr^d thousand men here day by day
Bestowed their labor, and receiv'^ their pay.
And that which did all cost and ^rt e^cel^*
The wondrous Temple was she r^ar'^ to ^^ll:
Which in the midst of this brave Town was placed,
Continuing till Xerxe^ it defaced:
Whose stately top above the Clouds did rise,
From whence Astrologers often viewed the S^ies.
This to deseribe in each particular,
A structure rare I should but rudely mar.
Her Gardens, Bridges, Arches* mounts and spires
All eyes that saw, or Ears that hear a^mires,
In Sh^nar plain on the ^uphratian flood
This wonder of the world, this B^b^l stood.
An expedition to the East she ma^e
St^arobates, his Country to inva^e*
Her Army of four millions di^ consist,
Each may believe it as his fancy (...).
Her Camels Chariots Gallyes in such number,
As puzzles best Historians to remember;
But this is w^n^erful, of all those men
They say, but twenty e're came back ag^n.
The River Judas swept them half away,
The rest Staurobates in fight did slay;
This was last progress of this mighty Queen,
Who in her Country ^ever mo^e was seen.
The Poets feigned her turned into a Dove,
Leaving the world to Venus soa^'d above:
Which ma^e the Ass^yrian^ many a day,
A Dove within their Ensigns to display:
Forty two years she reigned, and then she di'd
But by what means we are not certifi'd.
Nin^as o^ Zamies.
His Mother dead N^^ias obtains his right,
A Pr nce wedded to ease and to ^elight,
Or else was his obe^ience very great,
To sit thus l^ng (obscure) robbed of his Seat.
Some write his Mother put his habit on,
Which made the people think they served her Son.
But much it is, in more then forty ye^rs*
This fraud in war nor peace at all appears:
More like it is his lust with pleasures fed,
He sought no rule till she was gone and dead.
What then he did of worth can no man tell,
But is supposed to be that A^raphel
Who warred with Sodom and Gomorrahs King,
Against whom* his trained ban^s A^ram did bring,
But this is far unlike, he being Son
Unto a Father* that all Countries won
So sud^^nly should loose so great a state*
With petty Kings to join Confe^erate.
Nor can those Reasons which wise Raileih finds,
Well satisfy the most considerate minds:
We may with learned V^^er better say,
He many Ages lived after that day.
And that Semiramis then flourished
When famous Troy was so beleaguered:
What e're he was, or did, or how it fell,
We may suggest our thoughts but cannot tell.
For Nimas and all his race are left
In deep oblivion of acts bereft:
And many hundred years in silence sit,
Save a few Names a new B rosu^ writ.
And such as care not what befalls their fames,
May feign as many acts as he did Names;
It may suffice, if all be true that is past.
TO Sardanapalas next, we will make haste.
Sardanapalas
Sardanapalas, Son to Ocraza^es,
Who wallowed in all voluptuousness,
That palliardizing sot that out o^ doors,
Never showed his face but revell'd with his whores
Did wear their garbs, their gestures imitate,
And in their kind, t excel did emula^e.
His baseness knowing, and the peoples hate
Kept close, fearing his well deserved fa^e,
It chanced A^bac^s brave unwarily,
His Master like a Strumpet cla^ did spy.
His manly heart disdained (in the least)
Longer to serve this Metamorphos'd Beast;
Unto Belosus then, he brake his mind,
Who sick of his disease, he soon did find
These two, ruled Media and Bab^lon
Both for their King, held their Dominion;
Belosus promised Arbaces aid,
Arbaces him fully to be repayd.
The last The Medes and Persians do invite
Against their monstrous King to use their might.
B^losus, the Chaldeans does require
And the Arabians, to further his desire:
These all agree, and forty thousand make
The Rule, from their unworthy Prince to take:
These Forces mustered and in array
Sar^anap^lus leaves his Apish play.
And though of wars, he did abhor the sight;
Fear of his diadem did force him fight:
And either by his valor* or his fate,
Arbaces Courage he did so abate;
That in despair, he left the Field and fled,
But with fresh hopes Belosus succored,
From Bactria, an Army was at hand
Pressed for this Service by the Kings Command:
These with celerity Arbaces meet,
And with all Terms of amity them greet.
With promises their necks now to unyoke,
And their Taxations sore all to revoke;
T infranchise them, t^ grant what they could crave,
No privilege to want, Subjects should have,
Only entreats them, to join their Force with his,
And win the Crown, which was the way to bliss.
Won by his loving looks, more by his speech,
TO accept of what they could, they all beseech:
Both sides their hearts their hands, and bands unite,
And set upon their Princes Camp that night;
Who revelling in Cups, sung care away,
For victory obtained the other day:
And now surprised* by this unlookt for fright,
Bereft of wits, were slaughtered down right.
The King his brother leaves, all to sustain,
And speeds himself to Niniveh amain.
But Salmeneus slain the Army falls,
The King's pursued unto the City Walls,
But he once in, pursuers came to late,
The Walls and Gates their have did terminate,
There with all store he was so well provided:
That what Arbaces did, was but derided:
Who there encamped, two years for little end,
But in the third, the River proved his friend,
For by the rain, was Tygris so o'reflown,
Part of that stately Wall was overthrown.
Arbaces marches in the Town he takes,
For few or none (it seems) resistance makes:
And now they saw fulfilled a Prophesy,
That when the River proved their Enemy,
Their strong wal'd Town should suddenly be taken
By this accomplishment, their hearts were shaken.
Sardanapalas did not seek to fly,
This his inevitable destiny;
But all his wealth and friends together gets,
Then on himself, and them a fire he sets.
This was last Monarch of great Ninus race
That for twelve hundred years had held the place;
Twenty he reigned same time, as Stories tell,
That A^^zia^ was King of Israel.
His Father was then King (as we suppose)
When Jonah for their sins denounced those woes.
He did repent, the threatening was not done,
But now accomplished in his wicked Son.
Ar^aces thus o all becoming Lord,
Ingeniously with all did ^eep his word.
Of B^bylon (...) he ma^e King.
With overplus of all the wealth therein.
To Bactrians h^ gave their liberty,
Of Ninivit^s he caused none to dye.
But suffered with their goods, to go else where,
Not granting them now to inhabit there:
For he demolished that City great,
And unto Media transferred his Seat.
Such was his promise which he firmly made,
To M^des and Persians when he c^av'd their aid:
A while he and his race aside must stand,
Not p^rtinent to what we have in hand;
And (...) in's progeny purs^e,
Who did this Monarchy begin anew.
Be^osus or Belochus.
Belosus settled in his new old Seat,
Not so content but aiming to be great,
Incroaching still upon the bordering lands,
Till Mesopotamia he got in's hands.
And either by compound or else by strength,
Assyria he gained also at length;
Then did rebuild, destroyed Nin^veh,
A costly work which none could do but he,
Who owned the Treasures o^ proud B^bylon,
And those that seemed with (...) gone;
For though his Palace ^id in a shes lie,
The fire those Me^als could not damnifie;
From these with ^i^igence he rakes,
Arbac^s suffers all, and all he ta^es,
He thus inricht by this new tried gold.
Raises a Phaenix new, from grave of the old;
And from this heap did after Ages see
As fair a Town, as the first Niniveh.
When this was built, and matters all in peace
Molests poor Israe^, his wealth to increase.
A thousand ^alents of Men^^em had,
(Who to be rid of such a guest was glad;)
In sacrid writ he is known by name of Pull.
Which makes the world of difference so full.
That he and Belochus could not one be,
But Circumstance does prove the verity*
And times of both computed so fall out*
That these two made but one* we ne^d not doubt:
What else he did, his Empire to advance,
To rest content we must, in ignorance.
Forty eight years he re^g^'d, his race then run,
He left his new got King^ome to his Son.
Tiglath Pulassar.
Belosus dead, Tigla^h his warlike Son.
Next treads those steps, by which his Father won;
Damasc^^ ancient Seat, of famous Ki^gs
Under subjection, by his Sword he brings.
Resin their valiant King he also slew,
And Syria to obedience did subdue.
I^^as ^ad King occasioned this war,
When Resins force his Borders sore did mar,
And diverse Cities by strong hand did seize:
To Tiglath then, does Ahaz send for ease,
The Temple robs, so to fulfill his ends,
And to Assyria's King a present sends.
I am thy Servant and thy Son, (quoth he)
From Resin, and from Pekah set me free,
Gladly does Tiglath this advantage take,
And succors Ahaz* yet for Ti^lath's sake.
Then R^sin slain, his Army overthrown,
He Syri^ ma^es a Province of his own.
Unto Damascus then comes Judah's King,
His humble thankfulness (in haste) to bring,
Acknowledging the ^ssyrians high desert,
To whom he ought all loyalty o^ heart.
But ^^glath ha ving gained his wished end,
^roves unto Ah^z but a feigned friend;
All Is^aels lands beyond Jordan he takes,
In ^al^l^^ he woeful havoc makes.
Through Syri^ now he marched none stopped his, way
And Ahaz open at his mercy lay;
Who still implored his love, but was distressed*
This was that Ahaz, who so high tra^s grest:
Thus Tiglath reigned, and warred twenty seven years
Then by his death released was Isreal's fears.
Salmanassar or Nabanassar.
Tiglath deceased, Salmanassar was next,
He Israelites, more ^hen his Father vexed*
Hoshea their last King he did invade,
And him six years his Tributary made;
But wear^ of his servitude, he sought
^o Egypts King, which did avail him naught;
For Salmanassar with a mighty Host,
Besieged his Regal Town, and spoiled his Coast,
And did the people, nobles, and their King,
Into perpetual thraldom that time bring;
Those that from Joshuah's time had been a state, ^0 years.
Did Justice now by him eradicate:
This was that strange, degenerated brood,
On whom* nor threats, nor mercies could do good;
Laden with honor, prisoners* and with spoil,
Returns triumphant Victor to his ^oyle;
He placed Isra^l there, where he thought best,
Then sent his Colonies* theirs to invest;
Thus Jacobs Sons in Exile must remain,
An^ pleasant Cana^n never saw again:
Where now those ten Tribe^ are, can no man tell,
Or how they sare, rich, poor, or ill* or well;
Whether the I^di^ns of the F^st, or West,
Or wild Tartarian^, as yet never blessed,
Or else those ^^inoes rare, whose wealth and arts
Has bred more wonder then belief in hearts:
But what, or where they are; yet know we this,
They shall return, and Zion see with bliss.
Senacherib.
Senacherib Salmanassar succeeds,
Whose haughty heart is shown in words and deeds
His wars none better then himself can boast,
On Hena^, A^pa^, and on I^^^s coast,
On Hevah and on Shepharvaim^ gods,
'Twixt them and Isreal's he knew no odds,
Until the thundering hand of heaven he felt,
Which made his Army into nothing melt:
With shame then turned to Niniv^ again,
And by his sons in's Idols house was slain.
Essarhadon.
His Son, weak Essarhaddon reigned in's place,
The fifth, and last of great B^llosus race.
Brave Merodach* the Son of Baladan,
In Babylon Lieftenant to this man
Of opportunity advantage takes,
And on his Masters ruins his house makes,
As Be^^^us his Sovereign did onthrone,
So he is now styled the King of Babylon.
After twelve years did Essarhaddon dye,
And Merodach assume the Monarchy.
Merodach B^lladan.
All yield to him, but Niniveh kept free,
Until his Grandchild made her bow the knee,
Ambassadors to Hezekiah sent,
His health congratulates with complement.
Ben Merodach.
Ben Merodach Successor to this King,
Of whom is little said in any thing,
But by conjecture this* and none but he
Led King Ma^asseh to Captivity.
Nebulassar.
Brave Nebulassar to this King was so^*
The famous Niniveh by him was won,
For fifty years, or more, it had been free,
Now yields her neck unto captivity:
A Viceroy from her foe she is glad to accept,
By whom in firm obedience she is kept.
This King's less famed for all the acts he is done*
Then being Father to so great a Son.
Nebuchadnezzar, or Nebopolassar*
The famous acts of this heroic King
Did neither Hom^^, Hesiod, Virgil sing*
Nor of his Wars have we the certainty
From some Thuc^di^es grave history,
Nor's Metamorpho^is from Ovids boo^,
Nor his restoriag from old Legends ^oo^.
But by the Prophets, Penmen most divine,
This prince in's magn^^ude does ever shine*
This was of Monarchies that head of gold,
The richest and the dread fullest to behold:
This was that tree whose branches filled the earth,
Under whose shadow birds and beasts had birth:
This was that king of kings* did what he pleas'^,
Killed, saved pulled down, set up, or pained or eas'^*
And this was he, who when he feared the least
Was changed from a King into a beast.
This Prince the last year of his fathers reign
Against Iehojakim marched with his train,
Iudahs poor King besieged and succourless
Yields to his mercy, and the present (...);
His Vassal is, gives pledges for his truth,
Children of royal blood, unblemished youth:
Wise Daniel and his fellows, among the rest,
By the victorious king to Babel's pressed:
The Temple of rich ornaments defaced,
And in his Idols house the vessels placed.
The next year he with unresisted hand
Quite vanquish d Pharaoh Necho with his band*
By great Euphrates did his army fall,
Which was the loss of Sy^ia withal.
Then into Egypt Necho did retire,
Which in few years proves the Assirians hire.
A mighty army next he does prepa^e,
And unto wealthy Tire in have repai^*
Such was the situation of this place,
A^ might not him, b^t all the world outface,
(...) in her pride she knew not which to boast
Whether her wealth, or yet her strength was most
How in all merchandise she did excel,
None but the true Ez^ki^l need to tell.
And for her streng^h how hard she was to gain,
Can Babels tired s^u^^iers tell with pain.
Within an Island had this city seat,
Divided from the Main by channel great*
Of costly ships and Gallyes she had store,
And Mariners to handle sail and oar:
But the Chaldeans had nor ships nor skill,
Their shoulders must their Masters mind fulfill*
Fetched rubbish from the opposite old town,
And in the channel threw each burden down;
Where after many essays, they made at last
The sea firm land, whereon the Army past,
And took the wealthy town; but all the gain,
Requited not the loss, the toil and pai^.
Full thirteen years in this strange work he spent
Before he could accomplish his intent:
And though a Victor home his Army leads,
With peeled shoulders, and with balded heads.
When in the Tyrian war this King was hot,
I^hojakim his oath had clean forgot,
Thinks this the fittest time to break his bands
Whilst Babels King thus deep engaged stands:
But he whose fortunes all were in the ebb,
Had all his hopes like to a spiders web;
For this great King withdraws part of his force,
To Judah mar^hes with a speedy course,
And unexpected finds the feeble Prince
Whom he chastis'd thus for his proud offense,
Fast bound* intends to Babel him to send,
But changed his mind, and caused his life there end,
Then cast-him out like to a naked Ass,
For this is he for whom none said alas.
His son he suffered three months to reign,
Then from his throne he plucked him down again,
Whom with his mother he to Babel led,
And seven and thirty years in prison fed:
His Uncle he established in his place
(Who was last King of holy David's race)
But he as perjured as Iehojakim,
They lost more now then e're they lost by him.
Seven years he kept his faith, and safe he dwells;
But in the eighth against his Prince rebels:
The ninth came Nebuchadnezzar with power,
Besieged his city, temple, Zions tower,
And after eighteen months he took them all:
The Walls so strong, that stood so long, now fall.
The c^rsed King by flight could no wise fly
His well deserved and foretold misery:
But being caught to Babels wrathful King
With children, wives and Nobles all they bring,
Where to the sword all but himself were put,
And with that woeful sight his eyes close shut.
Ah! hapless man, whose darksome contemplation
Was nothing but such ghastly meditation.
In midst of Babel now till death he lies;
Yet as was told never saw it with his eyes.
The Temple^s burnt the vessels had away.
The towers and palaces brought to ^ecay:
Where late of harp and Lute were heard the noise
N^w Z m and (...) lift up their scrieching voice.
All now of worth are Captive led with tears,
And sit bewailing Zio^ seventy ye^rs.
With all these ^onquests, Ba^^ls King rests not,
No not when ^oa^, Edom he had got,
K^dar and H^zar, the Arabian^ too,
All Vassals at his han^s for Grace must sue.
A total conquest o^ rich Egyp^ makes,
All rule he from the ancient Ph^aoh^s takes,
Who had for sixteen hundred years born sway,
To B^bilon^ proud King now yields the day.
The^ Put and Lud do at ^is mercy stand.
VV^ere e're he goes, he con^uers every land.
His sumptuous buildings passes all conceit,
Which wealth and strong am^ition ma^e so great.
His ^mage Iu^ah^. Captives worship not,
Although the Furnace be seven times more hot.
His dreams wise Da^iel does expound full well,
And his unhappy chang with grief foretell.
Strange melancholy humors on him lay,
Which for seven years his reason took away,
Which from no natural causes did proceed.
But for his pride so had the heavens decreed.
The time expired, brutish remains no more,
But Government resumes as heretofore:
In splendour, and in Majesty he sits,
Contemplating those times he lost his wits.
And if by words we may ghess at the ^eart,
This king among the righteous had a part:
Forty four years he reigned, which being run,
He left his wealth and conquests to his son.
Evilmerodach
Babels great Monarch now laid in the dust,
His son possesses wealth and rule as just:
And in the first year of his Royalty
Eases Iehojakims Captivity:
Poor forlorn Prince, who had all state forgot
In seven and thirty years had seen no jot.
Among the conquered Kings that there did ly
Is Judah's King now lifted up on high:
But yet in Babel he must still remain,
And native Canaan never see again:
Unlike his Father Evilme^odach,
Prudence and magnanimity did lack;
Fair Egypt is by his remisness lo^t,
Arabia, and all the bordering coast.
Wars wi^h the Medes unhappily he waged
(Within which broils rich Croesus was engaged)
His Army routed, and himself the^e slain:
His Kingdom to Belshaz^ar did remain.
Belshazzar.
Unworthy Belshazzar next wears the crown,
Whose acts profane a sacred Pen sets down,
His lust and crueltyes in stories find,
A royal State rul d by a brutish mind.
His life so base and dissolute invites
The noble Persian to invade his rights:
Who with his own, and Uncles power anon,
Lays siedge to's Regal Seat, proud Babylon,
The coward King, whose strength lay in his walls,
To banqueting and revelling now falls,
To show his little dread, but greater store,
To cheer his friends, and scorn his foes the more.
The holy vessels thither brought long since,
They carrows'd in, and sacrilegious prince
Did praise his Gods of metal, wood, and stone,
Protectors of his Crown, and Babylon,
But he above, his doings did deride,
And with a hand soon dashed all this pride.
The King upon the wall casting his eye,
The fingers of a hand writing did spy,
Which horrid sight he fears must needs portend
Destruction to his Crown, to's Person end.
With quaking knees, and heart appalled he cries,
For the Soothsayers, and Magicians wise;
This language strange to read, and to unfold;
With gifts of Scarlet robe, and Chain of gold,
And highest dignity, next to the King,
To him that could interpret, clear this thing:
But dumb the gazing Astrologers stand,
Amazed at the writing, and the hand.
None answers the affrighted Kings intent,
Who still expects some fearful sad event;
As dead, alive he sits, as one undone:
In comes the Queen, to cheer her heartless Son.
Of Daniel tells, who in his grand sires days
Was held in more accoun^ then now he was.
Daniel in haste is brought before the King,
Who does not flatter, nor once cloak the thing;
Remin^s him of his Grand-Sires h^ight and fall,
And o^ his own notorious sins witball:
His Drunkenness, and his prof^ness high,
His pride an^ sottish gross Idolatry.
The guilty King with color pale and dead
Then hears his Men^ an^ his Tekel read.
And one thing did worthy a King (though late)
Per^orm'd his word to him that told his ^ate.
That night victorious Cyrus took the town,
Who soon did terminate his life and crown;
With him did end the race of Baladan:
And now the Persian Monarchy began.
The End of the Assyrian Monarchy.
The Second Monarchy, being the Persian, began under Cyrus, Darius being his
Uncle and Father-in-law reigned with him about two years.
CYrus C^mbyses Son of Persia King,
Whom Lady Mandana did to him bring,
She daughter unto great Astiages,
He in descent the seventh from Arbaces.
Cambyses was of Achemenes race,
Who had in Persia the Lieftenants place
When Sardanapalus was overthrown,
And from that time had held it as h s own.
Cyrus, Darius Da^ghter took to wife,
And so unites two King^omes without strife.
Darius unto Man^ana was brother*
Adopts her son for his h^ving no other.
This is of Cyrus the true pedigree,
Whose Ancestors were royal in degree:
His Mothers dream* and Grand-Sires cruelty,
His preservation, in his misery,
His nourishment afforded by a Bitch,
Are fit for such, whose ears for Fables itch^
He in his younger day^s an Army led,
Against great Cressus then of Lidia head;
Who overcurious of wars event,
For information to Apollo went:
And the ambiguous Oracle did trust,
So overthrown by Cyrus, as was just;
Who him puasues to Sardis, takes the Town,
Where all that dare resist, are slaughtered down;
Di^guised Cressus hoped to escape in the throng,
Who had no might to (...) from wrong,
But as he past, his Son who was born dumb,
With pressing grief and sorrow overcome:
Among the tumult, bloodshed, and the strife*
Brake his long silence, cried, spare Cressus life:
Cressus thus known, it ^as great Cyrus doom,
(A hard decree) to ashes he consume;
Then on a wood-pile set, where all might eye,
He Solon, Solon, Solon, thrice did cry.
The Reason of those words Cyrus demands,
Who Solon was? to whom he lifts his hands;
Then to the King he makes this true report,
That Solon sometimes at his stately Court,
His Treasures, pleasures pomp and power d^d fee,
And viewing all, at all naught mo^^d was he:
That Cressus angry, urged him to express,
If ever King equaled his happiness.
(Quoth he) that man for happy we commend,
Whose happy life attains an happy end.
Cyrus with pity moved knowing Kings stand,
Now up and down, as fortune turns her hand,
Weighing the Age, and greatness of the Prince,
(His Mothers Uncle) stories do evince:
Gave him his life, and took him for a friend,
Did to him still his chief designs commend.
Next war the restless Cyrus thought upon,
Was conquest of the stately Babil^^.
Now treble walled, and moated so about,
That all the world they need not fear nor doubt;
To drain this ditch he many Sluices cut,
But till convenient time their heads kept shut;
That night Be^shazzar feasted all his rout,
He cut those banks, and let the River out,
And to the walls securely marches on,
Not finding a defendant thereupon;
Enters the ^own, the sottish King he slayes,
Upon Earths richest spoils his Soldiers preys;
Here twenty years provision good he found,
Forty five mi^es this City scarce could round;
This head of Kingdoms Chaldees excellence,
For Owls and Satyrs made a residence,
Yet wondrous monuments this stately Queen,
A thousand years had after to be seen.
Cyrus does now the Jewish Captives free*
An Edict made, the Temple builded be,
He with his Uncle Daniel sets on high,
And caused his foes in Lions Den to dye.
Long after this he against the Scythians goes,
And Tomris Son and Army overthrows;
Which to revenge ^he hir^s a mighty power,
And sets on Cyrus, in a fatal hour;
There routs his Host, himself she prisoner takes,
And at one blow (worlds head) she headless makes
The which she bathed, within a But of blood,
Using such taunting words, as she thought good.
But X n^phon reports he di'd in's bed,
In honor, peace and wealth, with a gray head;
And in his Town of Passagardes lies,
VVheresome long after sought in vain for prize,
But in his Tomb was only to be found
Two Scythian boys, a Sword and Target round:
And Al^xand^r coming to the same,
With honors great, did celebrate his fame.
Three daughters and two Sons he left behind,
^nnobled more by birth then by their mind;
Thirty two years in all this Prince did reign,
But eight whilst Baby^^n, he did retain:
And though his conquests made the earth to groan,
Now quiet lies un^er one marble stone.
And with an Epita^h, himself did ma^e,
To show how little Land he then should take.
Cambys^s.
Cambyses no ways like his noble Sire,
Yet to enlarge his State ^ad some desire,
His reign with blood and incest first begins,
Then sends to ^in a Law, for these his sins;
That Kings with S^sters match, no Law they find,
But that the P^rsi^n King may act his mind:
He wages war the fifth year of his reign*
'Gain^t Egypts King, who there by him was slain.
And all of Royal Blood* that came to hand,
He seized first of Life and then of Land,
(But little Narus escaped that cruel ^ate,
Who grown a man, resumed again his Stat^.)
He next to Cyprus sen^s his bloody Host.
Who landing soon upon that fruitful Coast,
Made ^velthon their King with bended k^ee,
To hold his own, of his ^ree Courtesy.
Their ^emple he destroys, not for his Zeal,
For he would be professed, God of their weal;
Yea in his pride he ventured so far,
To spoil the Temple of great Jupiter:
But as they marched over those desert sands,
The stormed dust o^rewhe^m'd his daring bands;
But scorning thus, by Jove to be outbrav'd,
A second Army he had almost engraved,
But vain he found to fight with Elements,
So left his sacrilegious bold intents
The Egyptian Api^ then he likewise slew,
Laughing to scorn, that ^ottish Calvish Crew:
If all this heat had been for pious end,
Cambyses to the Clouds we might commend.
But he that before the Gods himself prefers,
Is more profane then gross Idolaters;
He after this, upon suspicion vain,
Unjustly caused his brother to be slain.
Praxaspes into Persia then is sent,
To act in secret, this his lewd intent:
His Sister (whom Incestuously he wed,)
Hearing her harmless brother thus was dead.
His woeful death with tears did so bemoan,
That by her husbands charge, she caught her own,
She with her fruit at once were both undone
Who would have born a Nephew and a son.
Oh hellesh husband, brother, uncle, Sire,
Thy cruelty all ages will admire.
This strange severity he sometimes used
Upon a Judge, for taking bribes accused,
^lay'd him alive, hung up his stuffed skin
Over his seat, then placed his son therein,
To whom he gave this in remembrance,
Like fault must look for the like recompense.
His cruelty was come unto that height,
He spared nor foe, nor friend, nor favorite.
'Twould be no pleasure, but a tedious thing
To tell the facts of this most bloody King,
Feared of all, but loved of few or none,
All wished his short reign past before 'twas done*
At l^st two of his Officers he hears
Had set one Smerdis up, of the same years,
And like in feature to his brother dead,
Ruling* as they thought best under this head.
The people ignorant of what was done,
Obedience yielded as to Cyrus son.
Touched with this news to Persia he makes*
But in the way his sword just vengeance takes,
Unshea^hes, as he his horse mounted on high,
And with a mortal thrust wounds him in the thigh,
Which ends before begun his homebred war:
So yields to death, that dre^dfull Conqueror.
Grief for his brothers death he did express,
And more, because he died Issueless.
The male line of great Cyrus now had end,
The Female to many Ages did extend.
A Babylon in Egypt did he make,
And Mero^ built for his fair Sisters sake.
Eight years he reigned, a short, yet too long time
Cut off in's wickedness in's strength and prime.
The inter regnum between Cambyses And Darius Histaspes.
Childless Cambyses on the sudden dead,
(The Princes meet, to choose one in his stead,
Of which the chief was seven, called Satrapes,
Who like to Kings, ruled Kingdoms as they please,
Descended all of Achemenes blood,
And Kinsmen in a^count to the King they stood.
And first these noble Magi 'gree upon.
To thrust the imposter Smerdis out of Throne:
Then Forces instantly they raise, and rout
This King with his Conspirators so stout,
But yet '^ore this was done much blood was shed*
And two of these great Peers in Field lay dead.
Some write that sorely hur^ they escaped away,
But so, or no, sure it is they won the day.
All things in peace, and Rebels thoroughly quelled,
A Co^sultation by those States was held,
What form of government now to erect
The old, or new, which best, in what respect.
The greater part declined a Monar^hy
So late cr^sht by their Princes tyranny,
And thought the people would more happy be
If governed by an Aristocracy:
But others thought (none of the dullest brain)
That better one then many ^yrants reign.
What Arguments they used* I know not well,
Too politic, its like, for me to tell,
But in conclusion they all agree*
Out of the seve^ a Monarch chosen be.
All envy to avoid, this was thought on
Upon a green to meet by rising sun,
And he whose horse before the rest should neigh,
Of all the Peers should have precedence.
They all attend on the appointed hour,
Praying to fortune for a kingly power.
Then mounting on their snorting coursers proud,
Darius lusty Stallion neigh'd full loud.
The Nobles all alight, bow to their King,
And joyful acclamations shrill they ring*
A thousand times, long live the King they ^ry,
Let Tyranny with dead Cambises dye:
Then all attend him to his royal room:
Thanks for all this to's crafty stable groom*
Darius Hystaspes.
Darius by election made a King,
His title to make strong, omits no thing:
He two of Cyrus daughters then does wed,
Two of his Neeces takes to Nuptial bed,
By which he cuts their hopes for future time,
That by such steps to Kingdoms often clime.
And now a King ^y marriage choice and blood:
Three strin^s to's bow, the least of which is good;
Yet firmly more, the peoples hearts to bind.
Made wholesome, gentle laws which pleased each mind.
His courtesy and affability.
Much gained the hearts of his nobility.
Yet notwithstanding all he ^id so well,
The Babylonians against their prince rebel.
An host he raised the city to reduce;
But men against those walls were of no use.
Then brave Zopirus for his masters good,
His manly face disfigures, spares no blood:
With his own hands cutts off his ears and nose,
And with a faithful fraud to the town he goes,
tells them how harshly the proud king had dealt,
That for their sakes his cruelty he felt,
Desiring of the Prince to raise the siege,
This violence was done him by his Liege.
This told, for entrance he stood ^ot long;
For they believed his nose more then his tongue*
With all the city's strength they him betrust,
If he command, obey the greatest must.
When opportunity he saw was fit
D^livers up the town, and all in it.
To loose a nose, to win a town's no shame;
But who dares venture such a stake for the game.
Then thy disgrace, thine h^nour's manifold,
Who does deserve a statue made of gold.
Nor can Dariu^ in his Monarchy,
Scarce find enough to thank thy loyalty:
Yet over thy glory we must cast this vail,
Thy craft more then thy valor did ^revail*
Dari^^ in the second of his reign
An Edict for the Jews publish d again,
The Temple to rebuild, for that did rest
Since Cyrus time, Cambises did molest.
He like a King now grants a Charter large,
Out of his own revennues bears the charge,
Gives Sacrifices, wheat, wine, oil and salt,
Threats punishm^nt to him that through default
Shall let the work, or keep back any thing
Of what is freely granted by the King:
And on all Kings he poures out Execrations
That shall once dare to raze those firm foundations
They thus backed by the King, in spite of foes
Built on and prosper'd till their house they close.
And in the sixth year of his friendly reign,
Set up a Temple (though a less) again*
Darius on the S^ythians made a war,
Entering that larg and barren Country far:
A Bridge he made, which served for boat and barge
Over Ister fair, with labor and with charge.
But in that desert, amongst his barbarous foes
Sharp wants, not swords, his valor did oppose,
His Army fought with hunger and with cold,
Which to assail his royal Camp was bold.
By these alone his host was pincht so sore,
He warred defensive, not offensive more.
The Salvages did laugh at his distress,
Their minds by Hiroglyphicks they express,
A Frog a Mouse, a bird, an arrow sent,
The King will needs interpret their intent,
Possession of water, earth and air,
But ^ise Gobrias reads not half so fair:
(Quoth he) like frogs in water we must dive,
Or like to mice under the earth must live,
Or ^y like birds in unknown ways full quick,
Or ^cythian arrows in our sides must stick.
The King seeing his men and victual spent,
This fruitless war began late to repent,
Returned with little honor, and less gain.
His enemies scarce seen, then much less slain.
He after this intends Greece to invade,
But troubles in lels Asia him staid,
Which hushed, he straight so orders his affairs,
For Attaea an army he prepares;
But as before, so now with ill success
Returned with wondrous loss, and honourless.
Athens perceiving now their desperate state
Armed all they could, which eleven thousand made
By brave Miltiades their chief being l^d:
Darius multitudes before them fled.
At Maratho^ this bloody field was fought,
Where Grecians proved themselves right soldiers stout
The Persians to their galleys post with speed
Where an Athenian showed a valiant deed,
Pursues his flying foes then on the sand,
He stays a lanching gally with his hand,
Which soon cut off, enraged, he with his left,
Renews his ^old, and when of that bereft,
His whetted teeth he claps in the firm wood,
Off flies his head, down showers his frolic blood,
Go Persians* carry home that angry piece,
As the best Trophe which ye won in Gr^ece,
Darius light* yet heavy home returns,
And for revenge, his heart stil^ restless burns,
His Queen Atossa Author of this stir*
For Grecian maids ('it is said) to wait on her.
She lost her aim, her Husband he lost more,
His men his coin, his honor, and his store;
And the ensuing year ended his Life,
(It Is thought) through grief of this successless strife
Thirty six years this noble Prince did reign,
Then to his second Son did all remain.
Xerxes,
Xerxes. Darius, and Atossa's Son,
Grand child to Cyrus, now sits on the Throne:
(His eldest brother put beside the place,
Because this was first born of Cyrus race.)
His Father not so ful^ of lenity,
As was his Son of pride and cruelty;
He with his Crown receives a double war,
The Egyptians to reduce, and Greece to mar,
The first begun, and finished in such haste,
None write by whom, nor how, 'twas over past.
B^t for the last, he made such preparation,
As if to dust, he meant, to grind that nation;
Yet all his men, and Instruments of slaughter,
Produced but derision and la^ghter,
Sage Artabanus Counsel had he taken,
And's Cousen young Mardonius forsaken,
His Soldiers credit, wealth at home had staid,
And Greece such wondrous triumphs never had made,
The first dehorts and lays before his eyes
His Fathers ill success, in's enterprise*
Against the Scythians and Grecians too,
What Infamy to's honor did accrue.
Flattering Mardonius on the other side,
With conquest of all Europe, feeds his pride*
Vain Xerxes thinks his counsel has most wi^*
That his ambitious humor best can fit;
And by this choice unwarily posts on,
To present loss, future subversion.
Although he hasted, yet four years was spent
In great provisions, for this great intent:
His Army of all Nations was compounded,
That the vast Persian government surrounded.
His Foot was seventeen hundred thousand strong,
Eight hundred thousand horse, to these belong
His Camels, beasts for carriage numberless,
For Truths ashamed, how many to express;
The charge of all, he severally commended
To Princes, of the Persian blood descended:
But the command of these commanders all,
Unto Mardonius made their General;
(He was the Son of the fore named Gobrius,
Who married the Sister of Darius.)
Such his land Forces were, then next a fleet,
Of two and twenty thousand Galleys meet
Manned with Phenicians and Pamphylians
Cipriots, Dorians and Cilicians,
Lycians, Carians and Ionians,
Eolians and the Helespontines
Besides the vessels for his transportation,
Which to three thousand came (by best relation)
Brave Artemisia, Hallicarnassus Queen
In person present for his aid was seen,
Whose Gallyes all the rest in neatness pass,
Save the Zidonians, where Xerxes was:
But hers she kept still separate from the rest,
For to command alone, she judged was best.
O noble Queen, thy valor I commend;
But pity 'twas thine aid thou here did lend.
At Sardis in Lydia, all these do meet,
Whether rich Pythias comes Xerxes to greet,
Feasts all this multitude of his own charge,
Then gives the King a king-like gift full large,
Three thousand talents of the purest gold,
Which mighty sum all wondered to behold:
Then humbly to the king he makes request,
One of his five sons there might be released,
To be to's age a comfort and a stay,
The other four he freely gave away.
The king calls for the youth, who being brought,
Cuts him in twain for whom his Sire besought,
Then laid his parts on both sides of the way,
'Twixt which his soldiers marched in good array.
For his great love is this thy recompense?
Is this to do like Xerx^s or a Prince?
Thou shame of kings, of men the detestation,
I Rhetoric want to pour out execration.
First thing he did that is worthy of re^^unt,
A Sea passage cut behind A^ho^ mount.
Next over the Helespont a bridge he made
Of Boats together coupled, and there laid:
But winds and waves those iron bands did break*
To cross the sea such strength he found too weak,
Then whips the sea, and with a mind most vain
He fetters cast therein the same to chain.
The workmen put to death the bridge that made,
Because they wanted skill the same to have staid.
S^ven thousand Gallyes chain^d by Tyrians skill,
Firmly at last accomplished his will.
Seven days and nights, his host without least stay
Was marching over this new devised way.
Then in Abidus plai^s mustring his forces,
He gloryes in his squadrons and his horses,
Long viewing them thought it great happiness,
One king so many subjects should possess:
But yet this sig^t from him produced tears,
That none of those could live an hundred years.
What a^^er did ensue had he foreseen,
Of so long time his thoughts had never been.
Of Artubanus he again demands
How of this enterprise his thoughts now stands,
His answer was, both sea and land he feared,
Which was not vain as after soon appeared.
But Xerxes resolute to Thrace goes first,
His Host all L^ssus drinks, to quench their t^irst*
And for his Cattle, all Pissyrus Lake
Was scarce enough, for each a draught to take:
Then marc^ing on to the straight Thermopyle,
The Spa^tan m^ets him brave Leonade;
This 'twixt the mountains lies (half Acre wide)
That pleasant Thessaly from Greece divide
Two days and nights, a fight they there maintain,
Till twenty thousand Persians fell down ^lain;
And all that Army then dismayed, had fled,
But that a Fugitive discovered.
How some might over the mountains go about,
And wound the backs of those brave warriors stout
They thus behem'd with multitude of Foes,
Laid on more fiercely their deep mortal blows.
None cries for quarter nor yet seeks to run;
But on their groun^ they die each Mothers S^n.
O noble Greeks, how now degenerate,
Where is the valor of your ancient State?
When as one thousand could a million daunt,
Alas! it is Leonades you want.
This shameful victory cost Xerxes dear,
Among the rest, two brothers he lost there;
And as at Land, so he a^ Sea was crossed,
Four hundred stately Ships by storms was ^ost;
O^ Vessels ^mall almo^t innumerable,
The H^rbours to conta^n them was not able,
Yet thin^ing to out match his Foes at Sea,
En^los'd their Fleet in the straight of Eubea:
But they as fortunate at Sea as Land,
In this straight as the other firmly stand.
And Xerxes mighty Gallyes battered so,
That their split sides witness d his overthrow;
Then in the straight of Salamu he tried*
If that small number his great force could 'bide:
But he in daring of his forward Foe,
Received there a shameful overthrow.
Twice beaten thus at Sea he warr^^ no more,
But then the Phocians Country wasted sore;
They no way able to withstand his force,
That brave T^emistocles takes this wise course,
In secret manner word to Xerxes sends,
That Greeks to break his Bridge shortly intend^^
And as a friend warns him what e're he do
For his Retreat, to have an eye thereto
He hearing this, his thoughts and course home bended
Much fearing that which never was inten^ed.
Yet '^ore he went to help out his expense.
Part of his Host to Delphos sent from thence,
To rob the wealthy Temple of Apoll^,
But mischief sacrilege does ever follo^.
Two mighty Rocks brake from P arn^ssus hill,
And many thousands of those men did kill;
Which accident the rest affrighted so,
With empty hands they to their Master go:
He finding all, to tend to his decay,
Fearing his Bridge, no longer there would stay.
Three hundred thousand yet he left behind,
With his Mardonius Index of his mind;
Who for his sake he knew would venture far,
(Chief instigator of this hapless war.)
He instantly to Athens sends for peace,
That all Hostility from thence forth cease;
And that with Xerxes they would be at one,
So should all favor to their State be shown*
The Spartans fearing Athens would agree,
As had Macedon, Thebes, and Thessaly,
And leave them out, this Shock now to sustain,
By their Ambassador they thus complain,
That Xerxes quarrel was against Athens State,
And they had helped them as Confederate;
If in their need they should forsake their friends,
Their infamy would last till all things ends:
But the Athenians this peace detest,
And thus replied unto Mardon's request.
That whilst the Sun did run his endless Course
Against the Persians, they would bend their force;
Nor could the brave Ambassador he sent,
With Rhetoric gain better Complement:
A Macedonian born, and great Commander,
No less then grand-Sire to great Alexander
Mardonius proud h^aring this Answer stout,
To add more to his numbers lays about;
And of those Greeks which by his Skill he would won,
He fifty thousand jo^ns unto his own:
The other Greeks which were Confederate
In all one hundred and ten thousand made.
The Athenians could but forty thousand Ar^e*
The rest had weapons would do little harm*
But that which helped defects, and made them bold,
Was victory by Oracle foretold.
Then for one battle shortly all provide,
Where both their Controversies they will decide;
Ten days these Armies did each other face,
Mardonius finding victuals wast apace,
No longer dared, but bravely onset gave,
The other not a hand ^or Sword would wave,
Ti^l in the Intrails of their Sacrifice
The signal of their victory did rise,
Which found like Greeks they fight, the Persians fly,
And troublesome Mardonius now must dye.
All Is lost, and of three hundred thousand men,
Three thousand only can run home again.
For pity let those few to Xerxes go,
To certify his final overthrow:
Same day the small remainder of his Fleet,
The Grecians at Mycale in Asia meet*
And there so utterly they wrackt the same,
Scarce one was left to carry home the Fame;
Thus did the Greeks consume, destroy, disperse
That Army, which did fright the Universe.
Scorned Xerxes hated for his cruelty,
^et ceases not to act his villainy.
His brothers wife solicites to his will,
The ch^st and beauteous Dame refused still;
Some years by him in this vain suit was spent,
Nor p^ayers* nor gifts could win him least content;
Nor matching of her daughter to his Son,
But she was still as when he first begun:
When jealous Queen Amestris of this knew,
She Harpy like upon the Lady flew,
Cut off her breasts* her lips* her nose and ears,
And leaves her thus besmeared in blood and tears.
Straight comes her Lord, and finds his wife thus ly,
The sorrow of his heart did close his Eye*
He dying to behold that wounding sight,
Where he had sometime gazed with great delight,
To see that face where rose, and Lillyes stood,
O'reflown with Torrent of her guiltless blood,
To see those breasts where Chastity did dwell,
Thus cut and mangled by a ^ag of Hell:
With laden heart unto the King he goes,
Tells as he could his unexpressed woes;
But for his deep complaints and showers of tears,
His brothers recompense was naught but jears:
The grieved prince finding nor right, nor love,
To Bactria his household did remove.
His brother sent soon after him a crew,
With him and his most barbarously there slew:
Unto such height did grow his cruelty,
Of life no man had least security.
At last his Uncle did his death conspire,
And for that end his Eunuch he did hire;
Who privately him smothered in his bed,
But yet by search he was found murdered*
Then Artahanus hirer of this deed,
That from suspicion he might be fre'd:
Accused Darius Xerxes eldest Son,
To be the Author of the crime was done.
And by his craft ordered the matter so,
That the Prince innocent to death did go:
But in short time this wickedness was known,
For which he died, and not he alone,
But all his Family was likewise slain:
Such Justice in the Persian Court did reign.
The eldest son thus immaturely dead,
The second was enthroned in's fathers stead.
Artaxerxes Longimanus.
Amongst the Monarchs, next this prince had place
The best that ever sprung of Cyrus race.
He first war with revolted Egypt made,
To whom the perjured Grecians lent their aid:
Although to Xerxes they not long before
A league of amity had firmly swore,
Which had they kept, Greece had more nobly done
Then when the world they after overrun.
Greeks and Egyptians both he overthrows,
And pays them both according as he owes,
Which done, a sumptuous feast makes like a king
Where ninescore days are spent in banqueting.
His Princes, Nobles and his Captains calls,
To be partakers of these Festivals:
His hangings white and green, and purple dye,
With gold and silver beds, most gorgeously.
The royal wine in golden cups did pass,
To drink more th^^ he list, none bidden wa^
Queen Vasth^ also l^^sts, but before (...) ended,
She Is from her Royalty (alas) suspe^ded,
And one more worthy placed in her room,
By Memucans advice so was the doom.
What Esther was and did, the story read,
And how her Country men from spoil she freed,
Of Hamans fall, and Mordicaes great Rise,
The might of the prince, the tribute of the Isles.
Good Ezra in the seventh year of his reign,
Did for the Jews commission large obtain,
With gold and silver, and what ere they need:
His bounty did Darius far exceed.
And Nehemiah in his twentieth year,
Went to Jerusalem his city dear,
Rebuilt those walls which long in rubbish lay,
And over his opposites still got the day,
Unto this King Themistocles did fly,
When under Ostracisme he did lie:
For such ingratitude did Athens show,
(This valiant Knight whom they so much did owe)
Such royal bounty from his prince he found,
That in his loyalty his heart was bound.
The king not little joyful of this chance,
Thinking his Gresian wars now to advance,
And for that end great preparation made
Fair Attica a third time to invade.
His grand-Sires old disgrace did vex him sore,
His Father Xerxes loss and shame much more.
For punishment their breach of oath did call
This noble Greek, now fit for General.
Provisions then and season being fit,
To Themistocles this war he does commit,
Who for his wrong he could not choose but deem
His Country nor his Friends would much esteem*
But he all injury had soon forg^t,
And to his native land could bear no hate,
Nor yet disloyal to his ^rince would prove,
By whom obliged by bounty, and by love;
Either to wrong, did wound his heart so sore,
To wrong himself by death he chose before:
In this sad conflict marching on his ways,
Strong poison took, so put an end to's days.
The King this noble Captain having lost,
Dispersed again his newly levied host:
Rest of his time in peace he did remain,
And di'd the two and forti'th of his reign.
Darius Nothus.
Three sons great Artaxerxes left behind;
The eldest to succeed, that was his mind:
His second Brother with him fell at strife,
Still making war, till first had lost his life:
Then the Surviver is by Nothus slain,
Who now sole Monarch does of all remain.
The two first sons (are by Historians thought)
By fair Queen Esther to her husband brought:
If so they were, the greater was her moan,
That for such graceless wretches she did groan.
Revolting Egypt against this King rebels,
His Garrisons drives out that amongst them dwells;
Joins with the Greeks, and so maintain their right
For sixty years, maugre the Persians might.
A second trouble after this succeeds,
Which from remissness in Less Asia breeds.
Amorges, whom for Viceroy he ordained,
R^volts, treasure and people having gained,
Plunders the Country, and ^uch mischie^ wrought
Before things could to quietness be brought
TheKing was glad with Sparta to make peace,
That so he might those troubles soon appease:
But they in Asia must first restore
All towns held by his Ance^tors before.
The King much profit reaped by this league,
Regains his own, then does the Rebel break
Whose strength by Gr^cians help was overthrown
And so each man again possessed his own.
This King Cambises like his sister wed*
To which his pride, more then his lust him led:
For Persian Kings then deemed themselves so goo^
No match was high enough but their ^wn blood.
Two sons she bore, the youngest Cyrus named,
A Prince whose worth by Xenophon is famed:
His Father would no notice of that take
Prefers his brother for his birthrights sake.
But Cyrus scorns his brothers feeble wit,
And takes more on him then was judged fit.
The King provoked sends for him to the Court,
Meaning to chastise him in sharpest sort,
But in his slow approach, e're he come there
His Father di'd, so put an end to's fear.
'Bout nineteen years this Nothus reigned, which run,
His large Dominions left to's eldest Son.
Artaxerxes Mnemon.
Mnemon now set upon his Fathers Throne,
Yet fears all he enjoys, is not his own:
Still on his Brother casts a jealous eye,
Judging his a^tions tends to's injury.
Cyr^s on the other side weighs in his mind,
What help in's enterprise he is like to find;
His Interest in the Kingdom now next heir,
More dear to's Mother then his brother far:
His brothers little love like to be gone,
Held by his Mothers Intercession.
These and like motives hurry him amain,
To win by force, what right could not obtain;
And thought it best now in his Mothers time,
By lower steps toward the top to climb:
If in his enterprise he should fall short,
She to the King would make a fair report,
He hoped if fraud nor force* the Crown would gain
Her prevalence, a pardon might obtain.
From the Lieutenant first he takes away
Some Towns, commodious in less Asia,
Pretending still the profit of the King,
Whose Rents and Customs duly he sent in;
The King finding Revenues now amended,
For what was done seemed no whit offended.
Then next he takes the Spartans i^to pay,
One Greek could make (...) run away.
Great care was his pre^e^^e those Soldiers stout,
The Rovers in Pisidia should driv^ out;
But lest some blacker news should fly to Court,
Prepares himself to carry the report:
And for that end five hundred Horse he chose;
With posting speed on toward the king he goes:
But fame more quick, arrives ere he comes there,
And fills the Court with tumult, and with fear.
The old Queen and the young at bitter jarrs,
The last accused the first for these sad wars,
The wife against the mother still does cry
To be the Author of conspiracy.
The King dismayed, a mighty host does raise,
Which Cyrus hears, and so foreslows his pace:
But as he goes his forces still augments,
Seven hundred G^e^ks repair for his int^nts,
And others to be ^arm'd by this new sun
In numbers from h^s broth^r d^yly run.
The fearful King ^t last ^usters his forces,
And counts nine hun^red thousand Foo^ and horses.
Three hundred thousand be to (...) sent
To keep those streights his brother to prevent*
Their Captain hearing but of Cyrus name,
Forsook his charge to his eternal shame.
This place so made by nature and by art,
Few might have kept it had they had a heart.
Cyrus dispair'd a passage there to gain.
So hired a fleet to waft him over the Main:
The (...) King was then about to fly
To Bactria a^^ for a time there lie,
Had not his Captains sore against his will
By reason and by force detained him still,
Up then with speed a mighty trench he throws
For his security against his ^oes.
Six yards the depth and forty miles in length,
Some fifty or else sixty foot in breadth;
Yet for his brothers coming durst not stay,
He safest was when farthest out of the way.
Cyrus finding his camp and no man there,
Was not a little jocund at his fear.
On this he an^ his soldiers careless grow,
And here and there in carts their arms they throw
When suddenly their scouts come in and cry,
Arm, Arm, the King with all his host is nigh.
In this confusion each man as he might
Gets on his arms, arrayes himself for fight,
And ranged stood by great Euphrates side
The brunt of that huge multitude to 'bide,
Of whose great numbers their intelligence
Was gathered by the dust that rose from thence,
Which like a mighty cloud darkened the sky,
And black and blacker grew, as they drew nigh:
But when their order and their silence saw,
That, more then multitudes their hearts did awe;
For tumult and confusion they expected,
And all good discipline to be neglected.
But long under their fears they did not stay,
For at first charge the Persians ran away,
Which did such courage to the Grecians bring,
They all adored Cyrus for their King:
So had he been, and got the victory,
Had not his too much valor put him by.
He with six hundred on a Squadron set,
Of thousands six wherein the King was yet,
And brought his Soldiers on so gallantly,
They ready were to leave their King and fly;
Whom Cyrus spies cries loud, I see the man,
And with a full carreer at him he ran:
And in his speed a dart him hit in the eye,
Down Cyrus falls, and yields to destiny:
HisHost in chase knows not of this disaster,
But treads down all, so to advance their master;
But when his head they spy upon a Lance,
Who knows the sudden change made by this chance
Senseless and mute they stand, yet breath out groans
Nor Gorgons head like this transformed to stones.
After this trance, reveng^ new Spirits blew,
And now more eagerly their Foes pursue;
And ^eaps on heaps such multitudes they laid,
Their Arms grew weary by their slaughters made
The King unto a Country Village flies,
And for a while unkingly there he lies.
At last displays his Ensign on a Hill,
Hoping by that to make the Greeks stand still;
But was deceived to him they run amain,
The King upon the spur runs back again:
But they too faint still to pursue their game,
Being Victors often, now to their Camp they came.
nor lackt they any of their number small,
Nor wound received, but one among them all:
The King with his dispersed, also encamped,
With Infa^y upon each F^rehead stamped.
His hurried thoughts he after recollec^^.
Of this days Cowardice he fears the effects.
If Gree^s in their own Country should declare*
What dastards in the Field the Persia^s are,
They in ^^ort time might place one in his Throne*
And rob him both of Scepter and of Crown;
To hinder their return by craft or force,
He judged his wisest and his safest Course*
Then sends, that to his ^ent, they straight address,
And there all wait, his mercy weaponless;
The Greeks with scorn reject his proud Commands
Asking no favor, where they feared no bands:
The troubled King his (...) sends ag^in*
And sues for peace, that they his friends remain,
The smiling Greeks reply, they first must bait,
They were too hungry to Capitulate;
The King great store of all p^ovision sends,
And Courtesy to the utmost he pretends,
^uch terror on the ' Persians then did fall,
They quaked to hear them to each other call*
The King perplexed, there dares not let them stay*
And fears as much, to let them march away,
But Kings never want such as can serve their will,
Fit Instruments to accomplish what is ill.
As Tyssaphernes knowing his masters mind,
Their chief Commanders feasts and yet more kind,
With all the Oaths and deepest Flattery,
Gets them to treat with him in priva^y,
But violates his honor and his word,
And Villain like there puts them all to the Sword.
The Greeks seeing their valiant Captains slain,
Chose X^nop^on to lead them home again:
But ^^^^a^hernes what he could devise,
Did stop the way in this their enterprise.
But when through difficulties all they brake,
The Country burnt, they no relief might take.
But on they march through hunger and through cold
Over mou^tains* rocks and hills as lions bold,
Nor Rivers course, nor Persians force could stay,
But on to Trabesond they kept their way:
There was of Greeks settled a Colony,
Who after all received them joyfully.
Thus finishing their travail, danger, pain,
In peace they saw their native soil again.
The Greeks now (as the Persian king suspects)
The Asiaticks cowardice detects,
The many victoryes themselves did gain,
The many thousand Persian^ they had slain,
And how their nation with facillity,
Might gain the universal Monarchy.
They then Dercilladus send with an host,
Who with the Spartans on the Asian coast,
Town after town with small resistance take,
Which rumor makes great Artaxerxes quake,
The Greeks by this success encouraged so,
Their King Agesilaus does over go,
By Tissaphernes is encountered,
Lieftenant to the King, but soon he fled.
Which overthrow incensed the King so sore,
That Tissaphern must be Viceroy no more.
Tythraustes then is placed in his stead,
Commission has to take the others head:
Of that perjurious wretch this was the fate,
Whom the old Queen did bear a mortal hate.
Tythraustes trusts more to his wit then Arms,
And hopes by craft to quit his Masters harms;
He knows that many Towns in Greece envyes
The Spartan State, which now so fast did rise;
To them he thirty thousand Tallents sent
With suit, their Arms against their Foes be bent;
They to their discontent receiving hire,
With broils and quarrels sets all Greece on fire:
Agesilaus is called home with speed,
To defend, more then offend, there was need,
Their winnings lost* and peace their glad to take
On such conditions as the King will make.
Dissension in Greece continued so long,
Till many a Captain fell, both wise and strong,
Whose courage naught but death could ever tame
Amongst these Epimanondas wants no fame,
Who had (as noble Raileigh does evince)
All the peculiar virtues of a Prince;
But let us leave these Greeks to discord bent,
And turn to Persia, as is pertinent.
The King from foreign parts now well at ease,
His homebred troubles sought how to appease;
The two Queens by his means seem to abate,
Their former envy and inveterate hate:
But the old Queen implacable in strife,
By poison caused, the young one lose her life.
The King highly enraged does hereupon
From Court exile her unto Babylon:
But shortly calls her home, her counsels prize,
(A Lady very wicked* but yet wise)
Then in voluptuousness he leads his life,
And weds his daughter for a second wife.
But long in ease and pleasure did not lie,
His sons sore vexed him by disloyalty.
Such as would know at large his wars and reig^,
What troubles in his house he did sustain,
His match incestuous cruelties of the Queen,
His life may read in Plutarch t^ be seen.
Forty three years he ruled, then turned to dust,
A King nor good, nor valiant, wise nor just.
Dorius Ochus.
Ochus a wicked and Rebellious son
Succeeds in the throne his father being gone.
Two of his brothers in his Fathers days
(To ^is great grief) most subtly he slayes:
And being King commands those that remain,
Of brethren and of kindred to be slain.
Then raises forces, conquers Egyp^ land*
Which in rebellion sixty years did stand:
And in the twenty third of's cruel reign
Was by his Eunuch the proud Bago^s slain.
A^sames or Arses,
Arsames placed now in his fathers stead,
By him that late his father murdered.
Some write that Arsames was Ochus brother,
Enthroned by Bagoas in the room of the other:
But why his brother before his son succeeds
I can no reason give, 'cause none I read.
His brother, as it is said, long ^ince was slain,
And scarce a Nephew left that no^ might reign:
What acts he did time has not now left penned,
But most suppose in him did Cyrus end,
Whose race long time had worn the diadem,
But now'^ divolved to another stem.
Three y^^^s he reigned, then drank of 's fat^ers cu^
By the same Eunuch who first set him up.
Darius Codomanus.
Darius by this Bagoas set in throne.
(Complotter with him in the murder done)
And was no sooner settled in his reign,
But Bagoas falls to's practices again,
And the same sauce had served him no doubt,
But that his treason timely was found out.
And so this wretch (a punishment too small)
Lost but his life for horrid treasons all.
This Codomanus now upon the stage
Was to his Predecessors Chamber page.
Some write great Cyrus line was not yet run.
But from some daughter this new king was sprung
If so, or not, we cannot tell, but find
That several men will have their several mind;
Yet in such differences we may be bold,
Wit^ learned and ^udicious still to hold;
And this amongst all is no Controverred thing,
That this Dariu^, was last Persian King,
Whose Wars, and losses we may better tell,
In Alexander's reign who did him quell,
How from the top of worlds felicity,
He fell to depth of greatest misery.
Whose honors, treasures, pleasures had short stay*
One deluge came and swept them all away.
And in the sixth year of his haples^ reign,
Of all did scarce his winding Sheet retain*
And last a sad Catastrophe to end,
Him to the grave did Traitor B^ssus send.
The End of the Persian Monar^hy*
The Third Monarchy, being the Grecian, beginning under Alexander the Great in
the 112. Olympiad.
GReat Alexander was wise Philips son,
He to Amyntas, Kings of Macedon;
The cruel proud Olympias was his Mother,
She to Epirus warlike King was daughter.
This Prince (his father by Pausanias slain)
The twenty first of 's age began to reign.
Great were the Gifts of nature which he had,
His education much to those did add:
By art and nature both he was made fit,
To 'complish that which long before was writ.
The very day of his Nativity
To ground was burnt Dianaes Temple high:
An Omen to their near approaching woe,
Whose glory to the earth this king did throw.
His Rule to Greece he scorned should be confined,
The Universe scarce bound his proud vast mind.
This is the He-Goat which from Grecia came,
That ran in Choler on the Persian Ram,
That brake his horns, that threw him on the ground
To save him from his might no man was found:
Philip on this great Conquest had an eye,
But death did ter^inate those thoughts so high.
The Greeks had chose him Captain General,
Which honor to his So^ did now befall.
(For as Worlds Monarch now we speak not o^,
But as the King of little Macedon)
Restless both day and night his heart then was,
His high resolves which way to bring to pass;
Yet for a while in Greece is forced to stay,
Which makes each moment seem more then a day.
Thebes and stiff Athens both against him rebel,
Their mutinies by valor does he quell.
This done against both right and natures Laws,
His kinsmen pu^ to death, who gave no cause;
That no rebellion in i^ his absence be,
Nor making Ti^le unto Sovereignty.
And all whom he suspects or fears will climb,
Now tast^ of death least they deserved in time,
Nor won^er is t if he in b^ood begin,
For Cruelty was his parental ^in,
Thus eased now of troubles an^ of fears,
N^^t spring his course to Asi^ he steers,
Leav^ S^^e Antipater, at home to sway,
And through the Hellispont his Ships mad^ way.
Coming to La^d, his dart on shore he throws,
Then with alacrity he after goes;
And with a bount'ous heart and courage brave,
His little weal^h among his Soldiers gave.
And being asked what for himself was left,
Replied* enough, since only hope he kept.
Thirty two thousand made up his Foot force,
To which were joined five thousand goodly horse.
Then on he marched, in's way he viewed old Troy,
And on Achilles tomb with wondrous joy
He offered, and for good success did pray
To him, his Mothers Ancestors, (men say)
When news of Alexander came to Court,
To scorn at him Darius had good sport;
Sends him a frothy and contemptuous Letter,
Styles him disloyal servant, and no better;
Reproves him for his proud audacity
To lift his hand against such a Monarchy.
Then to's Lieftenant he in Asia sends,
That h^ be taken alive, for he intends
To whip him well with rods, and so to bring
That boy so mallipert before the King.
Ah! fond vain man, whose pen ere while
In lower terms was taught a higher style.
To River Granick Alexander hyes
Which in Phrygia near Propontike lye^.
The P^rsians ready for encounter stand,
And strive to keep his men from off the land;
Those banks so steep the Greeks yet scramble up,
And beat the coward Persians from the top,
And twenty thous^nd of their lives bereave,
Who in their backs did all their wounds receive.
This v^ctory did Alexander gain,
With loss of thirty four of his there slain;
Then Sardis he, and Ephesus did gain,
Where stood of late, Diana's wondrous Phane,
And by Parmenio (of renowned Fame,)
Miletus and Pamphilia overcame.
Hallicarnassus and Pisidia
He for his Master takes with Lycia.
Next Alexander marched toward the black Sea,
And easily takes old Gordium in his way;
Of Ass eared Midas, once the Regal Seat,
Whose touch turned all to gold, yea even his meat
Where the Prophetic knot he cuts in twain,
Which who so does, must Lord of all remain.
Now news of Memnon's death (the Kings Viceroy)
To Alexanders heart's no little joy,
For in that Peer, more valor did abide,
Then in Darius multitude beside:
In's stead, was Arses placed, but durst not stay,
Yet set one in his room, and ran away;
His substitute as fearful as his master,
Runs after two, and leaves all to Disaster.
Then Alexander all Cilicia takes,
No stroke for it he struck, their hearts so quakes.
To Greece he thirty thousand talents sends;
To raise more Force to further his intends;
Then over he goes Darius now to meet,
Who came with thousand thousands at his feet.
Though some there be (perhaps) more likely write
He but four hundred thousand had to fight,
The rest Attendants, which made up no less,
Both Sexes there was almost numberless.
For this wife King had brought to see the sport,
With him the greatest Ladies of the Court,
His mother, his beauteous Queen and daughters,
It seems to see the Macedonian slaughters.
Its much beyond my time and little art,
To show how great Dariu^ played his part;
The splendour and the pomp he marched in,
For since the world was no such Pageant seen.
Sure it was a goodly sight there to behold,
The Persians clad in silk, and glistering gold,
The stately horses trapt, the lances gilt,
As if addressed now all to run a tilt.
The holy fire was borne before the host,
(For Sun and Fire the P^rsians worship most)
The Priests in their strange habit follow after,
An object, not so much of fear as ^aughter.
The King sat in a chariot made of gold,
With crown and Robes most glorious to behold,
And over his head his golden Gods on high,
Support a party colored Canopy.
A number of spare horses next were led,
Lest he should need them in his Chariots stead,
But those that saw him in this state to lie,
Supposed he neither meant to fight nor fly.
He fifteen hundred had like women dressed;
For thus to fright the Greeks he judged was best.
Their golden ornaments how to set forth,
Would ask more time then was their bodies worth
Great Sysigambis she brought up the Rear,
Then such a world of wagons did appear,
Like several houses moving upon wheels,
As if she would drawn whole Shushan at her heels*
This brave Virago to the King was mother,
And as much good she did as any other.
Now lest this gold, and all this goodly stuff
Had not been spoil and booty rich enough
A thousand mules and Camels ready wait
Laden with gold, with je^els and with plate:
For sure Darius thought at the ^^rst sight,
The Greek^ would all adore* but none would fight
But when both Armies met, he might behold
That valor was more worth then pearls or gold,
And that his wealth served but for baits to 'lure
To make his overthrow more fierce and sure.
The Greeks came on and with a gallant grace
Let fly their arrows in the Persi^ns face.
The cowards feeling this sharp stinging charge
Most basely ran, and left their king at large:
Who from his golden coach is glad to 'light,
And cast away his crown for swifter flight:
Of late like some immovable he lay,
Now finds both legs and horse to run away.
Two hundred thousand men that day were slai^,
And forty thousand prisoners also taken,
Besides the Queens and Ladies of the court,
If Curtius be true in his report.
The Regal Ornaments were lost, the treasure
Divided at the Macedonians pleasure;
Yet all this grief, this loss, this overthrow,
Was but beginning of his future woe.
The royal Captives brought to Alexander
T'ward them demeaned himself like a Comm^nder
For though their beauties were unparaled,
Conquered himself now he had conquered,
Preserved their honor, used them bounteously,
Commands no man should do them injury:
And this to Alexander is more fame
Then that the Persian King he overcame.
Two hundred eig^ty Gree^s he lost in fight,
By too much heat, not wounds (as authors write)
No sooner had this Victor won the field,
But all Phenicia to his pleasure yield,
Of which the Government he does commit
Unto Parme^io, of all most fit.
Darius now less lofty then before,
To Alexander writes he would restore
Those mournful Ladies from Captivity,
For whom he offers him a ransom high*
But down his haughty stomach could not bring,
To give this Conqueror the Style of King.
This Letter Alexander does disdain,
And in short terms sends this reply again,
A King he was, and that not only so,
But of Darius King, as he should know.
Next Alexander unto Tire does go,
His valor and his victoryes they know:
To gain his love the Tyrians intend,
Therefore a crown and great Provision send,
Their present he receives with thankfullness,
Desires to offer unto Hercules.
Protector of their town, by whom defended,
And from whom he lineally descended.
But they accept not this in any wise,
Lest he intend more fraud then sacrifice,
Sent word that Hercules his temple stood
In the old town (which then lay like a wood)
With this reply he was so deep enraged,
To win the town his honor he engaged:
And now as Babels King did once before,
He leaves not till he made the sea firm shore,
But far less time and cost he did expend,
The former Ruins forwarded his end:
Moreover had a Navy at command,
The other by his men fetched all by land.
In seven months time he took that we^lthy town,
Whose glory now a second time's brought down.
Two thousand of the chief he crucified,
Eight thousand by the sword then also di'd,
And thirteen thousand Gally slaves he made,
And thus the Tyrians for mistrust were paid.
The rule of this he to ^hilotas gave
Who was the son of that Parm^nio brave.
Cilicia to Socrates does give,
For now is the time Captains like Kings may live.
Zidon he on Ephestion bestows,
(For that which freely comes, as freely goes)
He scorns to have one worse then had the other,
So gives his little Lordship to another.
Ephestion having chief command of the Fleet,
At Gaza now must Alexander meet.
Darius finding troubles still increase,
By his Ambassadors now sues for peace,
And lays before great Al^xanders eyes
The dangers difficultyes like to rise,
First at Euphrates what he is like to 'bide,
And then at Ty^ris and Araxis side,
These he may escape* and if he so desire,
A league of friendship make firm and entire.
His eldest daughter he in marriage profers,
And a most princely dowry with her offers.
All those rich Kingdoms large that do abide
Betwixt the Hellispont and Halys side.
But he with scorn his courtesy rejects,
And the distressed King no whit respects,
Tells him, these proffers great, in truth were none
For all he offers now was but his own.
But quoth Parmenio that brave Commander,
Was I as great, as is great Alexander,
Darius offers I would not reject,
But the kingdoms and the Lady soon accept.
To which proud Alexander made reply,
And so if I Parmenio was, would I.
He now to Gaza goes and there does meet,
His Favorite Ephestion with his Fleet,
Where valiant Betis stoutly keeps the town,
(A loyal Subject to Darius Crown)
For more repulse the Grecians here abide
Then in the Persian Monarchy beside;
And by these walls so many men were slain,
That Greece was forced to yield supply again.
But yet this well defended Town was taken.
For 'twas decreed, that Empire should be shaken;
Thus Betis taken had holes bored through his feet*
And by command was drawn through every street
To imitate Achilles in his shame,
Who did the like to Hector (of more fame)
What have thou lost thy ^agnimity,
Can Alexander deal thus cruelly?
Since valor with Heroick^ is renowned,
Though in an Enemy it should be found;
If of thy future fame thou had regard,
Why did not heap up honors and reward?
From Gaza to Jerusalem he goes,
^^t in no hostile way, (as I suppose)
Him in his Priestly Robes high Iaddus ^eets,
Whom with great reverence Alexander greets;
The Priest shows him good Dani^l's Prophesy,
How he should overthrow this Monarchy,
By which he was so much encouraged,
No future dangers ^e did ever dread.
From thence to fruitful Egypt marched with speed,
Where happily in's wars he did succeed;
To see how fast he gained was no small wonder,
For in few days he brought thatKingdome under.
Then to the Phane of Jupiter he went,
To be installed a God, was his ^ntent.
The Pagan Priest through hire, or else mistake,
The Son of Jupiter did straight him make:
He Diobolical must needs remain,
that his humanity will not retain.
Thence back to Egypt goes, and in few days;
Fair Al^^andria from the ground does raise*
Then settling all things in less Asia,
In Syria, Egypt, and Phenicia,
Unto Euphrate^ marched and overgoes,
For no man's there his Army to oppose;
Had Betis now been there but with his band,
Great Alexander had been kept from Land.
But as the King, so is the multitude,
And now of valor both are destitute.
Yet he (poor prince) another Host does muster,
Of Persians, ^cythians, ^ndians in a cluster;
Men but in shape and name, of valor none
Most fit, to blunt the Swords of Macedon.
Two hundred fifty thousand by account,
Of Horse and Foot his Army did amount;
For in his multitudes his trust still lay,
But on their fortitude he had small stay;
Yet had some hope that on the spacious plain,
His numbers might the victory obtain.
About this time Dari^^ beau^ious Queen*
Who had sore travail and much sorrow seen,
Now bids the world adue, with pain being spent,
Whose death her Lord full sadly did laraent.
Great Alexander mourns as well as he,
The more because not set at liberty;
When this sad news (at first Darius hears,
Some injury was offered he fears:
But when informed how royally the King,
Had used her, and hers, in every thing,
He prays the immortal Gods they would reward
Great Alexander for this good regard;
And if they down his Monarchy will throw,
Let them on him this dignity bestow
And now for peace he sues as once before,
And offers all he did and Kingdoms more;
His eldest daughter for his princely bride,
(Nor was such match in all the world beside)
And all those Countries which (betwixt) did lie
Phanisian Sea, and great Euphrates high:
With fertile Egypt and rich Syria.
And all those Kingdoms in less Asia.
With thirty thousand Talents to be paid,
For the Queen Mother, and the royal maid;
And till all this be well performed, and sure,
Ochus his Son for Hostage should endure.
To this stout Alexander gives no ear,
No though Parmenio plead, yet will not hear;
Which had he done (perhaps) his fame he would kept,
Nor Infamy had waked, when he had slept,
For his unlimited prosperity
Him boundless made in vice and Cruelty.
Thus to Darius he writes back again,
The Firmament, two Suns cannot contain.
Two Monarchies on Earth cannot abide,
Nor yet two Monarchs in one world reside;
The afflicted King finding him set to ^ar,
Prepares against to morrow, for the war,
Parmenio, Alexander, wished that night,
To force his Camp, so vanquish them by flight.
For tumult in the night does cause most dread,
And weakness o^ a Foe is covered,
But he disdained to steal a victory:
The Sun should witness of his valor be,
And careless in his bed, next morn he lies,
By Captains twice is called before he will rise,
The Armies joined a while, the Persians ^^ght*
And spilt the Greeks some blood before their ^light
But long they stood not e're they are forced to run,
So made an end, As soon as well begun.
Forty five thousand Alexander had,
But is not known what slaughter here was made,
Some write the other had a million, some more,
But Quintus Curtius as before.
At Arbela this victory was gained,
Together with the Town also obtained;
Darius stripped of all, to Media came*
Accompan'ed with sorrow, fear* and shame,
At Arbela left his Ornaments and Treasure,
Which Alexander deals as suits his pleasure.
This conqueror to Babylon then goes.
Is entertained with joy and pompous shows,
With showrs of flours the streets along ^re strown,
And incense burnt the silver Altars on.
The glory of the Castle he admires,
The strong Foundation and the lofty Spires,
In this, a world of gold and Treasure lay,
Which in few hours was carried all away.
With greedy eyes he views this City round,
Whose fame throughout the world was so r^nown^
And to possess he counts no little bliss
The towers and bowres of proud S^miramis,
Though worn by time, and rac'd by foes full sore,
Yet old foundations showed and somewhat more.
With all the pleasures that on earth are found,
This city did abundantly abound,
Where ^our and thirty days he now did stay,
And gave himself to banqueting and play:
He and his soldiers wax ef^eminate,
An^ former discipline begin to hate.
Whilst revelling at Babylon he lies,
Antipater from Greece sends fresh supplies.
He then to Shushan goes with his new bands,
But needs no force, it is rendered to his hands.
He likewise here a world of treasure found;
For 'twas the seat of Persian Kings renown^d.
Here stood the royal Houses of delight,
Where Kings have shown their glory wealth and might
The sumptuous palace of Queen Esther here,
And of good Mordicai, her kinsman dear,
Those pur^le hangings, mixed with green and white
Those beds of gold and couches of delight.
And furniture the richest in all lands,
Now fall into the Macedonians hands.
From Shushan to Persi^olis he goes,
Which news does still augment D^riu^ woes
In his approach the governor sends word,
For his receipt with joy they all accord,
With open gates the wealthy town did stand,
And all in it was at his high command.
Of all the Cities that on earth was fou^^,
None like to this in riches did abound:
Though Baby^on was rich* and Shushan too
Yet to compare with this they might not do:
Here lay the bulk of all those preciou^ things
That did pertain unto the Persian Kings:
For when the soldiers rifled had their pleasure,
And taken money plate and golden treasure,
Statues some gold, and silver numberless,
Yet after all, as stories do express
The share of Alexander did amount
To an hundred thousand talents by account.
Here of his own he sets a Garrison,
(As first at Shushan and at B^bylon)
On their old Governors titles he laid,
But on their faithfulness he never staid,
Their place gave to his Captains (as was just)
For such revolters false, what King can trust?
The riches and the pleasures of this town
Now makes this King his virtues all to drown,
That wallowing in all licentiousness,
In pride and cruelty to high excess.
Being inflamed with wine upon a season,
Filled with madness, and quite void of reason,
He at a bold proud strumpets lewd desire,
Commands to set this goodly town on fire.
Parmenio wise entreats him to desist.
And lays before his eyes if he persi^t
His fames dishonor, l^ss unto his state,
And just procuring of the Persian^ hate:
But deaf to reason, bent to have his will,
Those stately streets with raging flame did fill*
Then to Darius he directs his way,
W^o was retired as far as Media,
And there with sorrows, fears and cares surrounde^
Had now his army fourth and last compounded,
Which forty thousand made, but his intent
Was these in Bactria soon to augment:
Bu^ hearing Al^xan^er was so near,
Thought now this once to try his fortunes here,
And rather chose an honorable death,
Then still with infamy to draw his breath:
But B^ssus false, who was his chief Commander
Persuades him not to fight with Alexander.
With sage advice he sets before his eyes
The little hope of profit like to rise:
If when he would multitudes the day he lost,
Then with so few, how likely to be crossed.
This counsel for his safety he pretended,
But to deliver ^im to's foe intended.
Next ^ay this tr^ason to Da^ius known
T^anspor^ed sore with grief and passion,
Grin^ing his teeth, an^ plucking off his hair,
Sat overwhelmed with sorrow and despair:
Then bids his servant Artabasus tr^e,
Look to himself, and leave him to that crew,
Who was of hopes and comforts quite bereft,
And by his guard and Servitors all left.
Straight Bessus comes, and with his traitorous hands
Lays hold on's Lord, and binding him with bands
Throws him into a Cart, covered with hides,
Who wanting means to resist these wrongs abides,
Then draws the cart along with chains of gold,
In more despite the thraled prince to hold,
And thus t'ward Alexand^r on he goes,
Great recompense for this, he did propose:
But some detesting this his wicked fact,
To Alexander flies and tells this act,
Who doubling of his march, posts on amain,
Darius from that traitors hands to gain.
B^ssus gets knowledge his disloyalty
Had Alexanders wrath incensed high,
Whose army now was almost within sight,
His hopes being dashed prepares himself for flight:
Unto Darius fi^^^ he brings a horse,
And bids him save himself by speedy course:
The woeful King his courtesy refuses,
Whom thus the execrable wretch abuses,
By throwing darts gave him his mortal wound*
Then slew his Servants that were faithful found,
Yea wounds the beasts that drew him unto death,
And leaves him thus to gasp out his last breath.
Bessus his partner in this tragedy,
Was the false Governor of Media.
This done, they with their h^st soon speed away,
To hide themselves remote in Bactria.
Darius bathed in blood, sends out his groans,
Invokes the heavens and earth* to hear his moans
His lost felicity did grieve him sore,
But this unheard of treachery much more:
But above all, that neither Ear nor Eye
Should hear nor see his dying misery;
As thus he lay, Polistrates a Greek,
Wearied with his long march, did water seek,
So chanced these bloody Horses to espy,
Whose wounds had made their skins of purple dy^
To them repairs then looki^g in the Cart,
Finds poor Da^ius pierced to the heart,
Who not a little cheered to have some eye,
The witness of this horrid Tragedy;
Prays him to Alexander to commend
The just revenge of this his woeful end:
And not to pardon such disloyalty,
Of Treason, M^r^h^r* and base Cruelty.
If not, because Darius thus did pray,
Yet that succeeding Kings in safety may
Their lives enjoy, their Crowns and dignity,
And not by Traitors hands untimely dye.
He also sends his humble thankfulness,
For all the Kingly grace he did express;
To's Mother, Children dear, and wife now gone*
Which made their long restraint seem to be none:
Praying the immortal Gods, that Sea and Land
Might be subjected to his royal hand,
And that his Rule as far extended be,
As men the rising se^ting Sun shall see,
This said* the Greek for ^ater does entreat,
^o quench his thirst, and ^o allay his heat:
Of all good things (quoth he) once in my power,
I Have nothing left, at this my dying hou^;
Thy service and compassion to reward,
But Al^xander will, for this regard.
This said, his fainting breath did fleet away,
And though a Monarch late, now lies like clay;
And thus must every Son of Adam lie,
Though Gods on Earth like Sons of men they dye.
Now to the East, great Al^xander goes,
To see if any dare his might oppose,
For scarce the world or any bounds thereon,
Could bound his boundless fond* Ambition;
Such as submits again he does restore
Their riches, and their honors he makes more,
On Artabac^s more then all bestowed,
For his fidelity to's Master showed.
Thalestris Queen ofth' Amazons now brought
Her Train to Alexand^r, (as it is thought*)
Though most of reading best and soundest mind,
Such Country there, nor yet such people find.
The^ tell her errand, we had better spare
To the ignorant, her title will declare:
As Alexander in his greatness grows,
So daily of his virtues does he lose.
He baseness counts, his former Clemency,
And not beseeming such a dignity;
His past sobriety does also bate,
As most incompatible to his State;
His temperance is but a sordid thing,
No ways becoming such a mighty King;
His greatness now he takes to represe^t
His fa^cy'd Gods above the Firmament.
And such as showed but reverence before,
Now are commanded strictly to adore;
With Persian Robes himself does dignifie,
Charging the ^ame on his nobility,
His manners* habit, gestures, all did fashion
After that conquered and luxurious Nation.
His Captains that were virtuously inclined,
Grieved at t^is change of manners and of mind.
The ruder sort did openly deride,
His feigned Diety and foolish pride;
The certain^y of both comes to his Ears,
But yet no notice takes of what he hears:
With those of worth he still desires esteem,
So heaps up gifts his credit to redeem
And for the rest new wars and travails finds,
That other matters might take up their minds,
And heari^g Bessus, makes himself a King,
Intends that Traitor to his end to bring.
Now that his Host from luggage might be free,
And with his burden no man burdened be,
Comman^s forthwith each man his fardle bring,
Into the market place before the King;
Which done sets fire upon those goodly spoils,
The rec^mpence of travails wars and toils.
And thus unwisely in a mading fume,
The we^lth of many Kingdoms did consume,
But ma^vell it is that without mutiny,
The Soldiers should let pass this injury;
Nor won^er less to Readers may it bring,
Here to observe the rashness of the King.
Now with his Army does he post away
False Bessus to find out in Bactria*
But much distressed for water in their march,
The drought and heat their bodies sore did parch.
At length they came to the river O^eus brink,
Where so immoderately these thirsty drink,
Which more mortality to them did bring,
Then all their wars against the Persian King.
Here Alexander's almost at a stand,
To pass the River to the other land.
For b^ats here is none, nor near it any wood,
To make them Rafts to wast them over the flood:
But he that was resolved in his mind,
Would without means some transportation find.
Then from the Carriages the hides he takes,
And s^uffing them with straw, he bundles makes.
On these together ti'd, in six days space,
They all pass over to the other place.
Had Bessus had but valor to his will,
With little pain there might have kept them still*
But Coward durst not fight, nor could he ^ly,
Hated of all for's former treachery,
Is by his own now bound in iron chains,
A Collar of the same, his neck contains.
And in this sort they rather drag then bring
This Malefactor vile before the King,
Who to Darius broth^r gives the wretch,
With racks and tortures every limb to stretch.
Here was of Greeks a town in Bactria,
Whom Xerxes from their Country led away,
These not a little joy'd, this day to see,
Wherein their own had got the sov'raignty
And now revived, with hopes held up their head
From bondage long to be Enfranchised.
But Al^xand^r puts them to the sword
Without least cause from them in deed or word;
Nor Sex, nor age, nor one, nor other spared,
But in his cruelty alike they shared:
Nor reason could he give for this great wrong,
But that they had forgot their mother tongue.
While thus some time he spent in Bactria,
And in his camp strong and securely lay,
Down from the mountains twenty thousand came
And there most fiercely set upon the ^ame:
Repelling these, two marks of honor got
Imprinted in his leg, by arrows shot.
The Bactrians against him now rebel;
But he their stubborness in time does quell.
From hence he to Iaxartis River goes*
Where ^^ythians rude his army does oppose,
And with their outcryes in an hideous sort
Bese^ his camp, or military court,
Of darts and arrows, made so little spare,
They flew so thick, they seemed to dark the air:
But soon his soldiers forced them to a flight,
The^r nakedness could not endure their might.
Upon this rivers bank in seventee^ days
A goodly City does completely raise,
Which Alexandria he does likewise name,
And sixty furlongs could but round the same.
A third Supply Antipat^r now sent,
Which did his former forces much augment;
An^ being one hundred twenty thousand strong;
He enters then the Indian Kings among:
Those that submit* he gives them rule again,
Such as ^o no^ both them and theirs are slain.
His wars with sundry nations I Will omit,
And also of the M^llians what is writ.
His Fights, his dangers* and the hurts he had,
How to su^mit their necks at last they are glad.
To N^s^ goes by Bacchus built long since,
Whose feasts are celebrated by this prince;
Nor had that drunken god one who would take
His Liquors more devoutly for his fake*
When thus ten days his brain with wine he would soak^.
And with delicious meats his palate choakt:
To the River Inaus next ^is course he bends,
Boats to prepare ^phestion first he sends,
Who coming thither long before his Lord*
Had to his mind made all things to accord,
The vessels ready were at his command,
And Omp^is King of that ^art of the land,
Through his persuasion Alexander meets,
And as his ^ov'raign Lord him humbly greets
Fifty six Elephants he brings to's hand,
And tenders him the strength of all his land*
Presents himself first with a golden crown,
Then eighty talents to his captains down:
But Ale^and^^ made him to be^old
He glory sought, no silver nor no gold;
His presents all with thanks he did restore,
And of his own a thousand talents more.
Thus all the Indian Kings to him submit,
But Porus stout, who will not yield as yet:
To him does Alexander thus declare,
His pleasure is that forthwith he repair
Unto his Kingdoms borders* and as due,
His homage to himself as Sovereign do:
But kingly Porus this brave answer sent,
That to attend him there was his intent,
And come as well provided as he could,
But for the rest, his sword a^vise him should.
Great Alexander vexed at this reply.
Did more his valor then his crown envy,
Is now resolved to pass Hydaspes flood,
And there by force his sovereignty make good.
Stout Porus on the banks does ready stand
To give him welcome when he comes to land*
A potent army with him like a King,
And ninety Elephants for war did bring:
Had Alexander such resistance seen
On Tygris side, here now he had not been.
Within this spacious River deep and wide
Did here and the^e Isles full of trees abide.
His army Alexander does divi^e
With Ptolemy sends part to the other side;
Porus encounters them and thinks all is there,
When covertly the rest get over else where,
And whilst the first he valiantly assailed,
The last set on his back, and so prevailed.
Yet work enough here Al^xander found,
For to the last stout Porus kept his ground:
Nor was it ^ishonour at the length to yield,
When Alexander strives to win the field.
The kingly Captive '^ore the Victor's brought,
In loo^s or gesture not abased ought,
But him a Prince of an undaunted mind
Did Alexande^ by his answers find:
His fortitude his royal foe commends,
Restores him and his bounds farther extends.
Now eastward Alexander would go still,
But so to do his soldiers had no will,
Long with excessive travails wearied,
Could by no means be farther drawn or led,
Yet that his fame might to posterity
Be had in everlasting memory*
Does for his Camp a greater circuit take,
And for his soldiers larger Cabbins make.
His mangers he erected up so high
As never horse his Provender could eye.
Huge bridles made, whi^^ here and there he left,
Which might be found, and for great wonders kept
Twelve altars then for monuments he rears,
Wher^on his acts and travels long appears.
But doubting wearing time might these decay,
And so his memory would fade away,
He on the fair Hydaspes pleasant side,
Two Cities built, his name mig^t there abide,
First Nicea, the next Bucephal^n,
Where he entombed his stately Stalion.
His fourth and last supply was hither sent,
Then down Hy^aspes with his F^eet he went;
Some time he after spent upon that shore,
Whether Ambassadors* ninety or more*
Came with submission from the Indian Kings,
Bringing their presents rare and precious t^ings,
These all he feasts in state on beds of gold,
His Furniture most sumptuous to behold;
His meat and drink, attendants, every thing,
To the utmost showed the glory of a King.
With rich rewards he sent them home again,
Acknowledged their Masters sovereign;
Then sailing South, and coming to that shore,
Those obscure Nations yielded as before:
A City here he built* called by his Name,
Which could not sound too often with too much fame
Then sailing by the mouth of Indus flood*
His Gallyes stuck upon the flats an^ mud;
Which the stout Macedonians amazed sore,
Deprived at once the use of Sail and Oar:
Observing well the nature of the Tide,
In those their fears they did not long abide.
Passing fair Indus mouth his course he steered
To the coast which by Euphrates mouth appeared;
Whose inlets near unto, he winter spent,
Unto his starved Soldiers small content,
By hunger and by cold so many slain,
That of them all the fourth did scarce remain.
Thus winter Soldiers and provisions spent,
From hence he then unto Gedrosia went.
And thence he marched into Carma^ia,
And so at length drew near to Persia,
Now through these goodly Countries as he past,
Much time in feasts and ryoting did waste;
Then visits Cyrus Sepulchr^ in's way,
Who now obscure ^t Passa^ardis lay*
Upon his Monument his Robe he spread,
And set his Crown on his supposed head.
From hence to Babylon, some time there spent,
He at the last, to royal Sh^shan went;
A wedding Feast to's Nobles then he makes,
And St^^yra, Darius daughter takes,
Her Sister gives to his Ephestian dear,
That by this match he might be yet more ^ear;
He fourscore Persian Ladies also gave,
At this sam^ time unto his Captains brave:
Six thous^nd guests unto this Feast invites,
Whose Senses all were glutted with delights.
It far exceeds my mean abilities
To shadow forth these short felicities,
Spectators here could scarce relate the story,
They were so rapt with this external glory:
If an Ideal Paradise a man would frame,
He might this Feast imagine by the same;
To every guess a cup of gold he sends,
So after many days the B^nquet ends.
Now Alexanders conquests all are do^e,
And his long Travails p^s^ and overgone*
His virtues dead, buried, and quite forgot,
But vice remains to his Eternal blot.
Amongst those that of his cruelty did taste,
Philot^s was not least, nor yet the last,
Accused because he did not certify
The King of treason and conspiracy:
Upon suspicion being apprehended,
Nothing was proved wherein he had offended
But silence, which was of such consequence,
He was judged guilty of the same offense,
But for his fathers great deserts the King
His royal pardon gave for this foul thing.
Yet is Phy^otas unto judgment brought,
Must suffer, not for what is proved, but thought.
His master is accuser, judge and King,
Who to the height does aggravate each thing*
Inveighs against his father now absent,
And's brethren who for him their lives had spent.
But Philotas his unpardonable crime,
No merit could obliterate, or time:
He did the Oracle of Jove deride,
By which his Majesty was diefi'd.
Philot^^ thus o'recharg'd with wrong and grief
Sunk in despair without hope of Relief,
Fain would have spoke and made his own defense,
The King would give no ear but went from thence
To his malicious Foes delivers him,
To wreak their spite and hate on every limb.
Philot^^ after him sends out this cry,
O Alexander, thy free clemency
My ^oes exceeds in malice, and their hate
Thy kingly word can easily terminate.
Such torments great as wit could worst invent,
Or flesh and life could bear, till both were spent
Were now inflicted on Parmenio's son
He might accuse himself, as they had done,
At last he did, so they were justified,
And told the world* that for his guilt he di'd.
But how these Captains should, or yet their mas^er
Look on Parmenio, after this disaster
They knew not, wh^^efore best now to be done,
Was to dispatch the father as the son.
This sound advice at heart pleased Alexander,
Who was so much engaged to this Commander,
As he would never confess, nor yet reward,
Nor could his Captains bear so great regard:
Wherefore at once, all these to satisfy,
It was decreed Pa^menio should dye:
Polidamus, who seemed Parmenio's friend
To do this deed they into Media send:
He walking in his garden to and fro.
Fearing no harm, because he none did do,
Most wickedly was slain without least crime,
(The most renowned captain of his time)
This is Parmenio who so much had done
For Philip dead* and his surviving son,
Who from a petty King of Mac^don
By him was set upon the Persian throne,
This that Pa^menio who still overcame,
Yet gave his Master the immortal fame,
Who for his prudence, valor, care and trust
Had this reward, most cruel and unjust.
The next, who in untimely death had part,
Was one of more esteem, but less desert;
Clitus beloved next to Eph^stian,
And in his cups his chief companion;
When both were drunk* Clitus was wont to jeer,
Alexander to rage, to kill, and swear;
Nothing more pleasing to mad Clitus tongue,
Then Is Masters Godhead to defy and wrong;
Nothing touched Alexander to the quick,
Like this against his Diety to kick:
Both at a Feast when they had tippled well*
Upon this dangerous Theme fond Clitus fell;
From jest to earnest, and at last so bold,
That of Parmenio's death him plainly told.
Which Alexanders wrath incensed so high,
Naught but his life for this could satisfy;
From one stood by he snatched a partizan,
And in a rag^ ^^m through the body ran,
Next day he tore his face for what he would done,
And would have slain himself for Clitus gone:
This pot Companion he did more bemoan,
Then all the wrongs to brave Parmenio done.
The next of worth that suffered after these,
Was learned, virtuous, wise Calisthenes,
Who loved his Master more then did the rest,
As did appear, in flattering him the least;
In his esteem a God he could not be,
Nor would adore him for a Diety:
F^r this alone, and for no other cause,
Against his Sovereign, or against his Laws,
He on the Rack his Limbs in pieces rent,
Thus was he tortured till his life was spent.
Of this unkingly act does Seneca
This censu^* pass, and not unwis^ly say,
Of Alexand^r this th eternal crime,
Which shall not be obliterate by time.
Which virtues fame can never redeem by far,
Nor all felicity o^ his in war*
When e're it is said he thousand thousands slew,
Yea, and Calisthenes to death he drew.
The mighty Persian King he overcame,
Yea, and he killed Calistth^nes of fame.
All Countries Kingdoms* Provinces, he wan
From He^irspont* to the farthest Oce^n.
All this he did, who ^nows' not to be true?
^ut yet withal, Cat^sth^n^s he slew.
From Macedon, his Empire did extend
Unto the utmost bounds of the orient:
All this he did* yea, and much more it is true,
But yet withal, Catisth^n^^ he slew.
Now ^l^x^nder goes to Me^ia,
Finds there the want of wise Parmeni^;
Here his chief favorite Ep^estian dies,
He celebrates his mournful obsequies:
Hangs his Physician, the Reason why
He suffered, his friend Ephestian dye.
This act (methinks) his Godhead should a shame,
To punish where himself deserved blame,
Or of necessity he must impl^*
The other was the greate^ Diety.
The Mules and Horses are for sorrow shorn,
The battlements from off the walls are torn.
Of stately Ecbatane who now must show,
A rueful face in this so general woe;
Twelve thousand Talents also did intend,
Upon a sumptuous monument to spend:
What e're he did, or thought not so content,
His messenger to Iupi^er he sent,
That by his leave his friend E^hestion,
Among the Demi Gods they might inthrone.
From ^^dia to B^b^^^^ he went,
To meet him there to A^tipate^ he would sent,
Tha^ he might act also upon the Stage,
And in a Tragedy there end his age.
The ^ueen Olimpias bears him deadly hate,
Not suffe^^ng her to meddle with the State,
And by her Letters did her Son incite,
This great indignity he should requite;
His doing so* no whit displeased the King,
Though to his Mother he disproved the thing.
But now Antipater had lived so long,
He might well dye though he had done no wrong;
His service great is suddenly forgot,
^r ^f remembered ^e^ r^garded not:
The King does intimate 'twas his intent,
H^^ honors and his riches to augment;
Of larger Provinces the rule to give,
And for his Counsel near the King to live.
So to be caught, Antipa^e^^s too wise,
Parmento's ^eath's too fresh before his eyes;
He was too subtle for his cra^ty foe.
Nor by his baits could be ensnared so:
But his excuse with ^umble thanks he sends,
His Age and journey long he then preten^s;
And pardon craves for his unwilling stay,
He shows his grief, he is forced to disobey.
Before his Answer came to Ba^ylon.
^he thread of Alexanders life was spun;
Poison had put an end to's days ('it was thought)
By Philip and Cassander to him brought,
Sons to Antipater, and bearers of his Cup*
Lest of such like their Father chance to sup;
By others thought^ and that more genera^ly,
That through excessive drinking he did dye:
The thirty third of's Age do all agree,
This Conqueror did yield to destiny.
When this sad news came to Darius Mother,
She laid it more to heart, then any other,
Nor meat* nor drink, nor comfort would she take,
But pin d in grief till life did her forsake;
All friends she shuns, yea, banished the light,
Till death inwrapt her in perpetual night.
This Monarchs fame must last whilst world does stand,
And Conquests be talked of whilst there is land;
His Princely qualities had he retained,
Unparalled for ever had remained.
But with the world his virtues overcame,
And so with black beclouded, all his fame;
Wise Aristotle Tutor to his youth.
Had so instructed him in moral Truth:
The principles of what he then had learned
Might to the ^ast (when sober^ be discerned.
L^arning and learned men he much regarded,
An curious Artist evermore rewarde^:
The ^ll^a^s o^ Homer he still kept,
An^ un^er's pillow lai^ them when he slept.
Ac^^ll^s happiness he ^id envy,
'Cause Home^ kept his acts to memory.
Profusely bountiful wit^out desert,
For ^uch as pleased him had both wealth and heart
C^ue^ by nature and by custom too*
As o^t his acts throughout his reign does show:
Ambitious so, that naught could sa^^s^ie,
Vain thirsting after immortality,
Still fearing that his name might hap to dye,
An^ same not last unto eternity.
This ^onqueror did o^t lament (it is said)
There ^ere no more worlds to be conquered.
This ^olly great Augustus did de^ide,
For had he had but wisdom to his pride,
He would have found enough there to be done,
To govern that he had already won.
His thoughts are perished, he ^spires no more,
Nor can he kill or save as ^eretofor^*
A God alive, him all must Idolize*
Now like a mortal helpless man he lies.
O^ all t^ose King^omes large which he had got,
To his Posterity remained no jot,
For by that han^ which still revengeth blood,
None of his ^indred, nor his race long stood:
But as he took delight much blood to spill,
So the same cup to his, di^ others fill.
Four of his Captains now do all divide,
As Daniel before had prophysi'd.
The Leopard down, the four wings 'gan to rise,
The great horn broke, the less did tyranize.
What troubles and contentions did ensue
We may hereafter show in season due.
Aridaeus.
Great Alexand^r dead, his Armies left,
Like to that Giant of his Eye bereft;
When of his monstrous bulk it was the guide,
His matchless force no creature could abide.
But by Ulysses having lost his sight,
All men began straight to contemn his might;
For aiming still amiss, his dreadful blows
Did harm himself, but never reached his Foes.
Now Court and Camp all in confusion be,
A King they will have, but who, none c^n agree;
E^ch Captain wished this prize to bear away,
But none so hardy fo^nd as so durst say:
Great Alexander did leave Issue none,
^xcep^ by Artabasu^ daughter one*
And Roxane fair whom late he married,
Was near her time to be delivered.
By natures right these had enough to claim,
But meaness of their mothers barred the same,
Alleged by those who by their subtle Plea
Had hope themselves to bear the Crown away.
A Sister Alexander had, but she
Claimed not, perhaps, her Sex might hindrance be,
After much tumult they at last proclaimed
His base born brother Aridaeus named,
That so under his feeble wit and reign,
Their ends they might the better still attain.
This choice Perdiccas vehemently disclaimed,
And Babe unborn of Roxane he proclaimed;
Some wished him to take the style of King,
Because his Master gave to him his Ring,
And had to him still since Ephestion di'd
More then to the rest his favor testified.
But he refused, with feigned modesty,
Hoping to be elect more generally.
He hold on this occasion should have laid,
For second offer there was never made.
Amongst these contentions tumults jealousies,
Seven days the corpse of their great master lies
Untoucht, uncovered slighted and neglected,
So much these princes their own ends respected
A Contemplation to astonish Kings,
That he who late possessed all earthly things,
And yet not so content unless that he
Might be esteemed for a Diety;
Now lay a Spectacle to testify*
The wretchedness of man's mortality.
After some time, when stirs began to calm,
His bo^y did the Egyptians embalme;
His countenance so lively did appear,
That for a while they durst not come so near:
No sign of poison in his intrails found,
But all his bowels colored, well and sound.
Perdicca^ ^eing Arideus must be King*
Under his name began to rule each thing.
His chief Opponent wh^ Controlled his sway,
Was M^leager whom he would take away,
And by a wile he got him in his power,
So took his life unworthily that hour.
Using the name* and the command of the King
To authorize his acts in every thing.
The princes seeing Perdiccas power and pride,
For their security did now provide.
Antigonus for his ^hare Asia takes,
And Ptolemy next sure of Egypt makes:
Seleucus afterward held Babylon,
Antipater had long ruled Macedon.
These now to govern for the king prete^ds,
But nothing less each one himself intends.
Perdicc^^ took no province like the rest,
But held command of the Army (which was best)
And had a higher project in his head,
His Masters sister secretly to wed:
So to the Lady, covertly he sent,
(That none might know, to frustrate hi^ intent)
But Cleopatra this Suitor did deny,
For L^onatus more lovely in her eye,
To whom she sent a message of her mind,
That if he came good welcome he should find.
In these tumultuous days the thralled Greek^,
Their Ancient Liberty afresh now seeks.
And gladly would the yoke shake off laid on
Sometimes by Philip and his conquering son.
The Athenians force Antipater to fly
To Lamia where he shu^ up does lie.
To brave Cra^e^us then he sends with speed
For succors to relieve him in his need.
The like of L^^natu^ he requires,
(Which at this time well suited his desires)
For to A^tipater he now might go*
His Lady take in the way, and no man know.
Antiphilus the Athenian General
With speed his Army dot^ together call,
And Leonatu^ seeks to stop, that ^o
He join not with Antipater their foe.
The Athenian Army was the greater far,
(Which did his Match with Cleopat^a mar)
For fighting still, while there did hope remai^
The valiant Chief amidst his foes was slain.
Amongst all the princes of great Alexander
For personage, none like to this Command^^
Now to Antipater Crat^rus goes,
Blockt up in Lamia still by his foes,
Long marches through Cilicia he makes,
And the remains of L^onatus takes:
With them and his he into Grecia went,
Antipater rele^s'd from prisonment:
After which time the Greek^ did never more
Act any thing of worth, as heretofore:
But under servitude their necks remained,
Nor former liberty or glory gained.
Now di'd about the end of the Lamian war
Demosth^nes, that sweet-tongue'd Orator,
Who feared Antipater would take his life
For animating the Athenian strife:
To end his days by poison rather chose
Then fall into the hands of mortal foes.
Crateru^ and Antip^ter now join,
In love and in affinity combine,
Craterus does his daughter ^hila wed
Their ^riendship might the more be strengthened.
Whilst they in Macedon do thus agree,
In Asia they all asunder be.
Per^iccas grieved to see the princes bold
So many Kingdoms in their power to hold,
Yet to regain them, how* he did not know,
His soldiers against those captains would not go
To suffer them go on as they begun,
Was to give way himself might be undone.
With An^ipater to join he sometimes thought,
That by his help, the rest might low be brought,
But this again dislikes; he would remain,
If not in style, in deed a sovereign;
(For all the princes of great Alexander
Acknowledged for Chief that old Commander)
Desires the King to go to Macedon,
Which once was of his Ancestors the throne,
And by his presence there to nullify
The acts of his Viceroy now grown so high.
Ant^^^nus of treason first attaints,
And summons him to answer his complaints.
This he avoids, and ships himself and son,
goes to Antipater and tells what is done.
He and Craterus, both with him do join,
And against Perdiccas all their strength combine.
Brave Ptolemy, to make a fourth then sent
To save himself from danger imminent.
In midst of these garboyles, with wondrous state
His masters Funeral does celebrate:
In Alexan^ria his tomb he placed*
Which eating time has scarcely yet defaced.
Two years and more, since natures debt he paid,
And yet till now at quiet was not laid.
Great love did Ptolemy by this act gain,
And made the soldiers on his side remain.
Perdiccas hears his foes are all combin^d,
Against which to go, is not resolved in mind.
But first against Ptolemy he judged was best,
Neer'st unto him, and farthest from the rest,
Leaves Eumenes the Asian Coast to free
From the invasions of the other three,
And with his army unto Egypt goes
Brave Ptolemy to the utmost to oppose.
Perdiccas surly carriage, and his pride
Did alinate the soldiers from his side.
But Ptol^my by affability
His sweet demeanor and his courtesy,
Did make his own, firm to his cause remain,
And from the other side did daily gain:
Perdiccas in his pride did ill entreat
Python of haughty mind, and courage great.
Who could not brook so great indignity,
But of his wrongs his friends does certify,
The soldiers against P^rdiccas they incense*
Who vow to make this captain recompense,
And in a rage they rush into his tent,
Knock out his brains: to Ptolemy then went
And offer him his honors, and his place,
With style of the Protector, him to grace.
Next day into the camp came Ptolemy,
And is received of all most joyfully.
Their proffers he refused with modesty,
Yields them to Python for his courtesy.
With what he held he was now more content,
Then by more trouble to grow eminent.
Now comes there news of a great victory
That Eumenes got of the other three.
Had it but in P^rdicc^^ life ariv'd,
With greater joy it would have been received.
Thus Ptolemy rich Egypt did retain,
And Python turned to Asia again.
Whilst Perdiccas ^ncamp'd in Africa,
Antigonus did enter Asia,
And ^ain would Eumenes draw to their side,
But he alone most faithful did abide:
The other all had Kingdoms in their eye,
But he was true to 's masters family,
Nor could Craterus, whom he much did love.
From his fidelity once make him move:
Two Battles fought, and had of both the best,
And brave Craterus slew among the rest:
For this sad strife he poures out his complaint^,
And his beloved foe full sore laments.
I should but snip a story into bits
And his great Acts and glory much eclipse,
To show the dangers Eumenes befell.
His stratagems wherein he did excel:
His Policies, how he did extricate
Himself from out of Lab'rinths intricate:
He that at large would satisfy his mind,
In Plutarchs Lives his history may find.
For all that should be said, let this suff^ce,
He was both valiant, faithful, patient, wise.
Python now chose Protector of the state,
His rule Queen Eu^idice begins to hate,
Sees Arrideus must not King it long,
If once young Alexander grow more strong,
But that her husband serve for supplement,
To warm his seat, was never her intent.
She knew her birthright gave her Macedon,
Grandchild to him who once sat on that throne
Who was Perdiccas, Phili^s eldest brother,
She daughter to his son* who had no other.
Pythons commands, as often she countermands*
What he appoints, she purposely withstands.
He wearied out at last would needs be gone,
Resigned his place* and so let all alone:
In's room the soldiers chose Antipater,
Who vexed the Queen more then the other far.
From Macedon to Asia he came
That he might settle matters i^ the same.
He placed* displ^c'd controlled ruled as he list,
And this no man durst question or resist;
For all the no^les of King Alexander
Their bonnets veiled to him as chief Commander.
When to his pleasure all things they had done,
The King and Queen he takes to Macedon,
Two sons of Alexander, and the rest*
All to be ordered there as he thought best.
The Army to An^^^^^us does leave,
And Government of Asia to him gave.
And thus A^tip^ter the groundwork lays,
On which Antigonus his height does raise,
Who in few years, the rest so overtops,
For universal Monarchy he hopes.
With Eumenes he diverse Battles fought,
And by his slights to circu^vent him sought:
But vain it was to use his policy,
Against him that all deceits could scan and try.
In this Epitome too long to tell
How finely Eumen^s did here excel,
And by the self same Traps the other laid,
He to his cost was righteously repaid.
But while these Chieftains do in Asia figh^,
To Gre^ce and Maced^^ lets turn our sight.
When great Antipater the world must leave,
Hi^ place to Polisperchon did bequeath,
Fearing his son Cassan^er was unstaid,
Too rash to bear that charge, if on him laid.
Antigonus hearing of his decease
On mos^ part of Assyria does seize.
And Ptolemy next to incroach begins,
All Syri^ and Phenicia he wins,
Then Polisperchon 'gins to act in's place,
Recalls Olimpias the Court to grace.
A^tipater had banished her from thence
Into E^ire for her great turbulence;
This new Protector's of another mind,
Thinks by her Majesty much help to find.
Cass^^der like his ^ather could not see,
This ^olisper^hons great ability,
Slights his Commands his actions he disclaims,
And to be chief himself now bends his aims;
Such as his Father had advanced to place,
Or by his favors any way had graced
Are now at the devotion of the Son,
Pressed to accomplish what he would have done;
Besides he was the young Queens fa^ourite,
On whom (it was thought) she set her chief delig^
Unto these helps at home he seeks out more,
Goes to Antigon^^ and does implore,
By all the Bonds 'twixt him and's Father past,
And for that great gift which he gave him last.
By these and all to grant him some supply,
To take down Polisperchon grown so high;
For this Antigonus did need no spurs,
Hoping to gain yet more by these new stirs,
Straight furnished him with a sufficient aid,
And so he quick returns thus well appaid,
With Ships at Sea* an Army for the Land,
His proud opponent hopes soon to withstand.
But in his absence Polispercho^ takes
Such friends away as for his Inter^st makes
By death by prison, or by banishment,
That no supply by these here might be le^t,
Cassander with his Host to Greci^ goes,
Whom Polispe^c^on labors to oppose*
But beaten was at Sea, and foiled at Land,
Cassanders forces had the upper han^*
Athens with many Towns in Gr^ec^ beside,
Firm (for his Fathers sake^ to him abide.
Whilst hot in wars these two in Grecee remain,
Antigonus does all in Asia gain;
Still labors Eumen^s, would with him side,
But all in vain, ^e faithful did abi^e:
Nor Mother could nor Sons of Alexander,
Put trust in any but in this Commander.
The great ones now began to show their mind,
And act as opportunity they find.
Aria^us the scorned and simple King
More then he bidden was could act no thing.
Polisperchon for office hoping long,
Thinks to int^rone the Prince when riper grown;
Euridice this injury disdains,
And to Cassandar of this wrong complains.
Hateful the name and house of Al^x^nder,
Was to this proud vindicative Cassander*
He still kept locked within his memory,
His Fathers danger* with his Family*
Nor thought he that indignity was small,
When Alexander knocked his head to the wall.
These with his love unto the amorous Queen,
Di^ make him vow, her servant to be seen,
Ol^mpia^, A^id^^^ deadly hates,
As all her Husbands, Children by his mates,
She gave him poison formerly ('it is thought)
Which damage both to mind, and body broug^t;
She now with Pol^^perchon does combine,
To ma^e the King by force his Seat resign:
A^ her young grandchild in his State (...),
That under him, she might rule all alone.
For aid she goes to Epi^e among her friends,
The (...) to accomplish these her ends;
(...) hearing what she intends,
In haste unto her friend Cassander sends,
To leave his siege at ^egea, and with speed,
To save the King and her in this their need:
Then by entreaties, promises and Coyn^,
Some forces did procure with her to joy^.
Olimp^as soon enters Macedon,
The Queen to meet her bravely marches on,
But when her Soldiers saw their ancient Queen,
Calling to mind what sometime she had been;
The wife and Mother of their famous Kings,
Nor darts, nor ^rrows, now none shoots or flings.
The King and Queen seeing their destiny,
To save their lives to A^phipolis do fly;
But the old Queen pursues them with her hate,
And needs will have their lives as well as State:
The King by extre^m torments had his end,
And to the Queen these presents she did send:
^ Halter, cup of poison, and a Sword,
Bids choose her death, such kin^ness she will afford.
The Queen with many a curse, and bitter check,
At length yields to the Halter her fair neck,
Praying that fatal day might quic^ly haste,
On which Ol^mpia^ of the like might taste.
This done the cruel Qu^en rests not content*
Against all that loved Cassan^er she was bent;
His Brethren Kinsfolk and his chiefest friends,
That ^ell within her reach came to their ends:
Dig'd up his brother dead* against natures right,
And threw his bones about to show her ^pight*
The Courtiers wondering at her ^urious mind,
Wished in Epire she had bee^ still confined.
In Pelopo^esus then Cassander lay,
Where hearing of this news he speeds away,
With rage, and with revenge he is hurried on,
To find this cruel Queen in Macedon;
But being stopped, at straight Thermopoly,
Sea passage gets, and lands in Thessaly:
His Army he divides, sends post away,
Polisperchon to hold a while in play;
And with the rest Olimp^as pursues,
For all her cruelty, to gi^e her dues.
She with the chief of the Court to ^ydra ^lyes,
Well fortified, (and on the Sea it lies)
The^e by Cassander she is blockt up so long,
Until the Famine grows exceeding strong,
Her Cousen of (...) did what he might,
To raise the Siege, and put her ^oes to ^light.
Cassander is resolved there to remain,
So succou^s and endeavors proves but vain;
Fain would this wretched Queen capitulate,
Her foe would give no Ear, (such is his hate)
The Soldiers pinched with this scarcity,
By stealth unto Cassander daily fly;
O^impias means to hold out to the last,
Expecting nothing but of death to t^st:
But his occasions calling him away,
Gives promise for her life, so wins the day.
No so^ner had he got her in his hand,
But made i^ judgment her accusers stand:
And plead the blood of friends and kindreds spilt,
Desiring justice might be done for guilt;
And so was he acquitted of his word,
For justice sak^ she being put to the Sword:
This was the end of this most cruel Queen,
Whose fury scarcely paralleled has been.
The daughter, sister, Mother, Wife to Kings,
But Royalty no good conditions brings;
To Husbands death ('it is thought) she gave consent,
The murderer she did so much lament:
With Garlands crowned his head, bemoaned his fates,
His Sword unto Apollo consecrates.
Her Outrages too tedious to relate,
How for no cause but her inveterate hate;
Her Husbands wives and Children after's death,
Some ^lew, some fried, of others stopped the breath:
Now in her Age she is forced to taste that Cup,
Which she had others often made to sup.
Now many Towns in M^cedon suppressed,
And P^llas fain to yield among the rest*
The Funerals Cassander celebrates,
Of A^idaeus and his Queen with State:
Among their Ancestors by him they are laid,
And shows of lamentation for them made.
Old Thebes he then rebuilt so much of fame,
And Cassandria raise d after his name.
But lea ve him building, others in their Urne,
Let Us for a while, now into Asia turn.
True Eumenes endeavors by all Skill,
To keep Antigonus from Shushan still;
Having command of the Treasure h^ can hire,
Such as no threats, nor favor could acquire.
In diverse Battles he had good success,
Antigonu^ came off still honourless*
When Victor often he would been, and so might still,
Pe^cestes did betray him by a wile.
TO Antigonus, who took his Life unjust,
Because he never would forgo his trust;
Thus lost he all for his fideli^y,
Striving t'uphold his Masters Family.
But to a period as that did haste,
So Eumenes (the prop) of death must taste;
All Persia now Antigonus does gain,
And Master of the Treasure sole remain:
Then with Seleucus straight at odds does fall,
And he for aid to Ptolomy does call,
The Princes all begin now to envy
Antig^nus, his growing up so high*
Fearing his force, and what might hap e're long,
Enters into a Combination strong,
Seleucus, Ptolemy Cassander joins,
Lysimachus to make a fourth combines:
Antigonus desirous of the Greek^,
To ma^e Cass^nder odious to them seeks,
Se^ds forth his declarations n^ar and far,
And clears what cause he had to make this war,
C^ssan^^r^ outrages at large does tell,
Shows his ambitious practices as well.
The mother of their King to death he would put,
His wife and son in prison close had shut:
And aiming now to make himself a king,
And that some title he might seem to bring,
Th^ss^lonica he had newly wed*
Daughter to ^h^lip their renowned head:
Had built and called a City by his name
Which none e're did, but those of royal fame:
And in despite of their two famous Kings
Hate^ull Oli^^hians to Gr^ec^ rebrings.
Rebellious Thebes he had reedifie^,
Which their late King in dust had damnified,
Requires them therefore to take up their arms
An^ to requite this traitor for the^e harms.
Then ^tolemy would gain the Greeks likewise,
An^ he declares the others injuryes:
First how he held the Empire in his hands,
Se^^uc^^ driven from Government and lands,
The valiant Eu^enes unjustly slain,
And Lord of royal Shushan did remain;
Therefore requests their help to take him down
Before he wear the universal Crown
These princes at the sea soon had a fight,
Where great Antigonus was put to ^^ight:
His son at Gaza likewise lost the field,
So Syria to Ptolemy did yield:
And Seleucus recovers B^^ylon*
Still gaini^g Countries eastward he goes on.
Demetrius with Ptolemy did fight,
And coming unawares, put him to f^ight;
But bravely sends the prisoners bac^ again,
With all the spoil and booty he had taken.
Courteous as noble Ptolem^, or more,
Who at Gaza did the like to him before.
Antigonus did much rejoice, his son
With victory, his lost repute had won.
At last these princes tired out with wars,
Sought for a peace, and laid aside their jarrs:
The terms of their agreement, thus express
That each should hold what now he did possess,
Till Alexander unto age was grown,
Who then should be enstalled in the throne.
This touched Cassander sore, for what he would done,
Imprisoning both the mother and the son:
He sees the Greeks now favor their young Prince
Whom he in durance held, now* and long since,
That in few years he must be forced or glad,
To render up such Kingdoms as he ha^;
Resolves to quit his fears by one deed done,
So puts to death the Mother and her Son.
This Roxane for her b^auty all commend,
But for one a^t she did, j^st was her end.
No sooner was great Alexander dead,
But she Darius daughters murdered.
Both thrown into a well to hide her blot,
Pe^^iccas was her Partner in this plot.
The heavens seemed slow in paying her the same;
But at the last the hand of vengeance came*
And for that double fact which she had done,
The life of her must go, and of her son
Perdiccas had before for his amiss,
But by their hands who thought not once of this.
Cas^an^ers deed the princes do detest,
But '^^as in show* in heart it pleased them best.
That he is odious to the world, they are glad:
And now they were free Lords of what they had*
When this foul tragedy was past and done,
Polys^erchon brings the other son
Called Hercules and elder then his brother,
(But Olimp^as would prefer the other)
The G^e^ks touched with the m^rther done of late,
This Orphan prince 'gan to compassionate,
Begin to mutter much against proud Cassander,
And place their hopes on the heir of Alexander.
Cassan^er feared what might of this ensue,
So Polisperchon to his counsel drew,
And gives Pelopone^u^ for his hire,
Who slew the prince according to desire.
Thu^ was the race and house of Alexander
Extinct by this inhumane wretch Cassander.
Antigonus, for all this does not mourn*
He knows to's profit* this at last will turn,
But that some Title now he might pretend,
To Cleopatra does for marriage send;
Lysimachus and Ptolemy the same,
And lewd Cassander too, sticks not for shame:
She then in Lydia at Sardis lay,
Where by Embassage all these Princes pray.
Choice above all, of Ptolemy she makes,
With his Ambassador her journey takes;
Antigonus Lieutenant stays her still,
Until he further know his Masters will:
Antigonus now had a Wolf by the Ears,
To hold her still, or let her go he fears.
Resolves at last the Princess should be slai^,
So hinders him of her, he could not gain;
Her women are appointed for this deed,
They for their great reward no better speed:
For by command, they straight were put to death,
As vile Conspirators that stopped her breath.
And now he hopes, he is ordered all so well,
The world must needs believe what he does tell;
Thus Philips house was quite extinguished,
Except Cassanders wife who yet not ^ead.
And by their means who thought of nothing less,
Then vengeance just against them to express;
Now blood was paid with blood for what was done
By cruel Father, Mother cruel Son:
Thus may we hear* and fear and ever say,
That hand is righteous still which does repay.
These Captains now the style of Kings do take,
For to their Crowns their's none can Title make
D^metrius first the royal style assumed,
By his Example all the rest presumed.
Antigonus himself to ingratia^e,
Does promise liberty to Athens State;
With Arms and with provision stores them well,
The better against Cassander to reb^l.
Dem^trius thither goes, is entertained
Not like a King but like some God they feigned;
Most grossly base was their great Adulation,
Who Incense burnt, and offered oblation:
These Kings afresh fall to their wars again,
Demetrius of Ptolemy does gain.
'Twould be an endless Story to relate
Their several Battles and their several fate,
Their fights by Sea, their victories by Land,
How some when down, straight got the upper ha^
Antigonus and Seleucus then fight
Near Ephesus, each bringing all his might,
And he that Conqueror shall now remain,
The Lordship of all ^sia shall retain*
This day 'twixt these two Kings ends all the strife*
For here Antigonus lost rule and life:
Nor to his Son. did e're one foot remain
Of those vast Kingdoms, he did sometimes gai^.
Demetrius with his Troops to Athens flies,
Hopes to ^ind succors in his miseries;
But they adoring in prosperity,
Now ^hut their gates in his adversity:
He sorely grieved at th^s his desperate State
Tryes Foes* since friends will not compassionate.
His peace he then with old S^leucus makes,
Who his fair daughter S^r^to^ica takes,
Antiochus, S^l^ucus, dear loved Son*
Is for this fre^h young Lady quite undone;
Falls so extremely sick, all feared his life*
Yet durst not say, he loved his Fathers wife,
When his disease the skill'^ Physician found*
His Fathers mind he wittily did so^^d*
Who ^id no sooner understand the same,
But willingly res^gn'd the beauteous Dame*
Cassan^er now must dye his race is run,
And leaves the ill got Kingdoms he had won.
Two Sons he left, born of King Philip^ daughte^,
Who had an end put to their days by slaughter*
Which should succeed at variance they fell,
The Mother would, the youngest might^e cell:
The eld'st enraged did play the Vipers part
And with hisSword did run her through the heart:
Rather then Philip^ race should longer live,
He whom she gave his life* her death shall give.
This by Lys^mac^^ was after slain,
Whose daughter he not long before had ^a'ne;
D^metrius is called in by the youngest Son,
Against L^simachus who from him won.
But he a Kingdom more then is friend did eye,
Seaz'd upon that and (...) him traitrously.
Thus Phili^s and Cassan^^^'s race both gone,
And so falls out to be ex^inct in one*
And th^ugh Cassander died in his bed,
His Seed to be extirpt, was ^estined;
For blood which was decre'd that he should spill,
Yet must his C^ildren pay for Fathers ill;
Iehu in killing Ana^'s house did well,
Yet be avenged must blood of I^z^rel.
Demetrius thus Cassander's Kingdoms gain^,
And now in Macedon as King he reigns;
Though men and money both he has at will,
In neither finds content if he sits still:
That Seleucus holds Asia grievs him sore,
Those Countries large his Fat^er got before.
These to recover, musters all his might,
And with his Son in Law will nee^s go fight;
A mighty Navy rig'd, an Army stout,
With these he hopes to turn the world about*
Leaving Anti^onus his el^est Son*
In his long absence to rule ^ac^don.
Demetriu^ with so many troubles met,
As Heaven and Earth against him had been set*
Disaster on disaster him pursue,
His story seems a Fable more then true.
At last he is taken and imprisoned
Within an Isle that was with pleasures fed,
Enjoyed what ere beseem'd his Royalty,
Only restrained of his liberty:
After three years he died* left what he would wo^,
In Greece unto Anti^onus his Son.
For his Posterity unto this day,
Did never regain one foot in Asia;
His Body S^l^ucus sends to his Son*
Whose obsequies with won^rous pomp was done.
Next di'd the brave an^ noble P^^^^m^,
Renowned for bounty, valor, clemency,
Ric^ Egypt le^t and what else he had won,
To Phil^delp^us his more worthy Son
Of the old He^oe^, now but two remain,
Seleucus and Ly^im^chus these twain,
Must needs go try their fortune and their might,
And so Lysimach^s was slain in fight;
'Twas no small joy unto Seleucus breast,
That now he had outlived all the rest:
Possession of Europe thinks to take,
And so himself the only Monarch make;
Whilst with these hopes in Greece he did remain,
He was by Ptolemy ^eraunus slain.
The second Son of the first Ptolemy,
Who for Rebellion unto him did fly;
Seleucus was a Father and a friend,
Yet by him had this most unworthy end.
Thus with these Kingly Captains have we done,
A little now how the Succession run,
Antigonus, Seleucus and Cass^nder,
With Ptolemy, reigned after Alexander;
Cassander's Sons soon after's death were slain,
So three Successors only did rem^in:
Antigonus his Kingdoms lost and life,
Unto Seleucus, Author of that strife.
His Son Demetrius, all Cassander^ gains,
And his posterity, the same retains;
Demetrius Son was called Antigonus,
And his again was named Demetrius.
I must let pass those many Battles fought,
Betwixt those Kings, and noble Pyrrhus stout,
And his Son Al^x^n^e^ of Epir^,
Whereby immortal honor they acquire;
D^me^rius had Philip to his Son,
(Part of whose Kingdoms Titus Quintius won)
Phi^^p had Perseus w^o was made a Thrale
TO Emilius the Roman General;
Him with his Sons in Triumph lead did he,
Such riches too as Rome did never see:
This of Antigonus, his Seed's the ^ate,
Whose Empire was subdued to the Roman State.
Longer Seleucus held the royalty,
In Syria by his Posterity;
Antiochus Soter his Son was named,
To whom the old Berosus (so much famed,)
His Book of Assurs Monarchs dedicates*
Tells of their names, their wa^s, their riches, fates*
But this is perished with many more,
Which often we wish was extant as before.
Antiochus Theos was Soter's Son,
Who a long war with Egypts King begun;
The Affinityes and Wars Daniel sets ^orth*
And calls them there the Kings of South and North,
This Th^os murdered was by his lewd wife,
Seleucus reigned when he had lost his life.
A third Seleucus next sits on the Seat,
And then Antiochus firnam'd the great,
Whose large Dominions after was made small,
By Scipio the Roman General;
Fourth Sel^^c^s A^t^o^^u^ succeeds,
And next (...) whose wicked deeds,
Horrid Massacres, Mur^hers, cruelties,
Amongst the Jews we read in Machabees*
Antiochus Eu^^t^r was the next,
By Rebels and Im^ostors daily vexed;
So many Princes still were murdered,
The Royal Blood ^as nigh extinguished;
Then Tygran^s the great Arm^nian King,
To take the Government was called in*
Lucullus, Him, (the Roman General)
Vanquished in fight, and took those Kingdoms all;
Of Greec^ and Syria thus the rule did end,
In Egypt next* a little time we will spend.
First Ptolemy being dead, his famous Son
Called Philadelphus, did possess the Throne.
At Alexandria a Library did build,
And with seven hundred thousand Volumes filled;
The seventy two Interpreters did seek,
They might translate the Bible into Gre^k.
His Son was Evergetes the last Prince,
That valor showed, virtue or excellence,
^hilopater was Evergetes Son,
After Epiphanes sat on the Thr^ne;
Philome^or, Evergetes again,
And after him, did f^lse Lathurus reign:
Then Alexander in Lath^rus stead,
Next Auletes, who cut off Pompeys head.
To all these names, we Ptolemy must add,
For since the first, they still that Title had.
Fair Cleopatra next, last of that race,
Whom Julius Caesar set in Royal place,
She with her Paramour, Mark Anthon^
Held for a time, the Egyptian Monarchy,
Till great Augustus had with him a fight
At Acti^m* wh^re his Navy s put to flight;
He seeing his honor lost, his Kingdom end,
Did by his Sword his life soon after send.
His brave Vi^ago Aspes sets to her Arms,
To take her life, and quit her from all harms;
For 'twas not death nor danger she did dread,
But some disgrace in triumph to be led.
Here ends at last the Grecian Monarchy,
Which by the Romans had its destiny;
Thus King and Kingdoms have their times and dates,
Their standings, overturnings, bounds and fates:
Now up now ^own now chief, and then brought under,
The heaven s thus rule to fill the world with wonder
The Assyrian Monarchy long time did s^and,
But yet the Persian got the upper hand;
The Grecian them did utterly subdue,
And millions were subjected unto few:
The Grecian longer then the Persian stood,
Then came the Roman like a raging flood,
And with the torrent of his rapid course,
Their Crowns* their Titles, riches bears by force.
The first was likened to a head of gold.
Next Arms and breast of silver to behold,
The third, Belly and Thighs of brass in sight,
And last was Iron, which breaks all with might;
The stone out of the mountain then did ri^e,
and smote those feet those legs, t^ose ^rms and thighs
Then gold silver, brass, Iron and all the store,
Became like Chaff upon the threshing ^loor.
The first a Lion, secon^ was a Bear*
The third a Leopar^, which four wings did rear;
The last more strong and dreadful then the rest,
Whose ^ron teeth ^evoured every B^ast,
And when he had no appetite to eat,
The resi^ue he stamp^d under feet;
Yet shall this Lion, Bear, this Leopard, Ram,
All trembling stan^ before the powerful Lamb.
With these three Monarchies now have I done,
But how the fourth, their King^omes from them won,
And how from small beginnings it did grow,
To fill the world with terror and with woe;
My tired brain leaves to some better pen,
This task befits not women like to men:
For what is past, I blush, excuse to make,
But humbly stand, some grave reproof to take;
Pardon to crave for ^rrours, is but vain,
The Subject was too high beyond my strain,
To frame Apology for some offense.
Converts our boldness into impudence:
This my presumption some now to requite,
Ne suitor ultra crepidam may write.
The End of the Grecian Monarchy.
After some days of rest, my restless heart
To finish what is begun, new thoughts impart,
And maugre all resolves, my fancy wrought
This fourth to the other three, now might be brought:
Shortness of time and inability.
Will force me to a confused brevity.
Yet in this Chaos, one shall easily spy
The vast Limbs of a mighty Monarchy,
What ^'re is found amiss take in good part,
As faul^s proceeding from my head, not heart.
The Roman Monarchy, being the fourth and last, beginning Anno Mundi, 3213.
STout Romulus, Romes founder, and first King,
Whom vestal Rhea to the world did bring*
His F^ther was not Mars as some devised,
But Aemulus in Armor all disguised:
Thus he deceived his Ne^c^, she might not know
The double injury he then did do.
Where sheperds once had Coats* and sheep their folds
Where Swains and rustic Peasants kept their holds,
A City fair did Romulus erect,
The Mistress of the World, in each respect,
His brother Rhemus there by him was slain,
For leaping over the wall with some disdain.
The stones at first was cemented with blood,
And bloody has it proved, since first it stood.
This City built and Sacrifices done,
A Form of Government, he next begun;
A hundred Senators he likewise chose,
And with the style of Patres, honored those,
His City to replenish men he wants,
Great privileges then to all he grants;
That will within those strong built walls reside,
And this new gentle Government abide.
Of wives there was so great a scarcity,
They to their neighbors sue for a supply;
But all disdain Alliance then to make,
So Romulus was forced this cour^e to take:
Great shows he makes at Tilt an^ ^^^nament,
To see these sports, the Sabins all are bent.
Their daughters by the Romans then were caught,
Then to recover them a Field was fought;
But in the end, to final peace they come,
And Sabins as one people dwelt in Rome.
The Romans now more potent 'gin to grow,
And Fedinates they wholly overthrow.
But Romulus then comes unto his end.
Some feigning to the Gods he did ascend:
Others the seven and thirtyeth of his reign,
Affirm, that by the Senate he was slain.
Numa Pompilius*
Numa Pompilius next chose they King,
Held for his piety some sacred thing,
To Ianus he that famous Temple built:
Kept shut in peace, set open when blood was spilt;
Religious Rites and Customs institut^d,
And ^riests and Flamines likewise he deputed,
Their Augurs strange their gestures and attire,
And vestal maids to keep the holy fire.
The Nymph Ae^^ria this to him told,
So to delu e the people he was bold:
Forty three years he ruled with general praise,
Accounted for a God in after days.
Tulltus Hostiliu^.
Tullius Hostilius was third Roman King,
Who Martial discipline in use did bring;
War with the ancient Albans he did wage,
This strife to end six brothers did ing^ge.
Three called Horatii on the Romans side,
And Cu^i^tii three Alb^ns provide:
The Romans conquer, the other yield the day,
Yet in their Compact, after false they play.
The Romans sore incensed their General slay,
An^ from old Al^a fetch the wealth a^ay;
O L^tin Kings this was long since the Seat,
But now demolished, to make Rome great.
Thirty two years did Tullus reign, then dye*
Le^t Rome in wealth and power still growing high.
Ancus Martius.
Next Aucus Martius sits upon the Throne,
Nephew unto ^o^pilius dead and gone;
Rome he enlarged, new built again the wall,
Much stronger, and more beautiful withal;
A sta^ely Bridge he over T yb^r made.
Of Boats and Oars no more they need the aid.
Fair Osti^ he built this Town, it stood
Close by the mouth of famous Tyb^r ^oud,
Twenty four years time of his Royal race,
Then unto death unwillingly gives place.
Tarquinius Priscus
Tarquin a Gre^k at Corinth born and bred,
Who from his Country for Sepition fled.
Is entertained at Rome, and in short time*
By wealth and favor does to honor climb;
He after Martius death the Kingdom had,
A hundred Senators he more did add.
Wars with the Latins he again renews,
And Nations twelve of Tuscan^ subdues,
To such rude triumphs as young Rome then had,
Some State and splendour did this Pr^scus add:
Thirty eight years (this stronger born) did reig^,
And after all, by A^cus Sons was slain.
Servius Tullius.
Next Servius Tullius gets into the Throne,
Ascends not up By merits of his own,
But by the favor an^ the special grace
Of Tanqui^ late Queen obtains the place.
He ranks the people into each degree,
As wealth had made them of ability;
A general Muster takes* which by account,
To eighty thousand Souls then did amount.
Forty four years did Servi^s Tullius reign,
And then by Tarquin Priscus Son was slain.
Tarquinius Superbus the last King of the Romans
Tarquin the proud, from manners called so,
Sat on the Throne when he had slain his Foe*
Sextus his Son did most unworthily,
Lucretia force, mirror of Chastity:
She loathed so the fact, she loathed her life,
And shed her guiltless blood with guilty knife
Her Husband sore incensed to quit this wrong,
With Iunius B^utus rose and being strong,
The Tarqui^s they from Rome by force expel,
In banishment perpetual to dwell;
The Government they change, a new one bring,
And people swear never to accept of King.
A^ Apology.
To finish what is begun, was my intent,
My thoughts and my endeavors thereto bent;
Essays I many made but still gave out,
The more I mused, the more I was in doubt:
The subject large my mind and body weak,
With many more discouragements did speak.
All thoughts of further progress laid aside,
Though often persuaded, I as often denied,
At length resolved, when many years had past,
To prosecute my story to the last;
And for the same, I hours not few did spend,
And weary lines (though lanke) I many penned:
But before I could accomplish my desire,
My papers fell a prey to the raging fire.
And thus my pains (with better things) I lost,
Which none had cause to wail, nor I to boast.
No more I Will do, since I have suffered wrack,
Although my Monarchies their legs do lack:
Nor matter is it this last, the world now sees,
Has many Ages been upon his knees.
A Dialogue between Old England and N^w* concerning their present Troubles,
Anno, 1642.
New England. ALas dear Mother, fairest Queen and best,
With honor, wealth, and peace, happy and blessed;
What ails thee hang thy head, and cross thine arms?
And sit in the dust, to sigh these sad alarms?
What deluge of new woes thus over-whelme
The glories of thy ever famous Realm?
What means this wailing tone, t^is mournful guise?
Ah, tell thy daughter, she may sympathize.

Old England. Art ignorant indeed of these my woes?
Or must my forced tongue these griefs disclose?
And must my self dis^^ct my tattered state,
Which 'mazed Christendom stands wondering at?
And thou a Child, a Limb* and do not feel
My fainting weakened bo^y now to reel?
This Physic purging potion, I have taken,
Will bring consumption, or an Ague quaking,
Unless some Cordial, thou fetch from high,
Which present help may ease my malady.
If I decease, do think thou shall survive*
Or by my wasting state do think to thrive?
Then weigh our case* if 't be not justly sad;
Let me lame^^ alone, while thou art glad.

New England. And thus (alas) your state you much deplore
In general terms, but will not say wherefore:
What medicine shall I seek to cure this woe,
If the wound so dangerous I may not know.
But you perhaps, would have me ghess it out:
What has some H^ngist like that Saxon stout
By fraud or force usurped thy flowring crown,
Or by tempestuous wars thy fields trod down?
Or has Canutus, that brave valiant Dane
The Regal peaceful Scepter from thee ^ane?
Or is it a Norman, whose victorious hand*
With English blood bedews thy conquered land*
Or is it Intestine wars that thus offend?
Do Maud and Stephen for the crown contend?
Do Barons rise and side against their King*
And call in foraign aid (...) help the thing
Must Edward be depos^d^ or is it the hour
That second Ric^ard must be clapped in the tower?
Or is it the fatal jarre, again begun
That from the red white pricking roses sprung?
Must Richmonds aid, the Nobles now implore?
To come and break the Tu^hes of the Boar,
If none of these dear Mother, what is your woe?
Pray do you fear Spains bragging ^rmado?
Does your Allye, fair France, conspire your wrack,
Or do the Scots play false, behind your back?
Does Holland quit you ill for all your love?
Whence is the storm from Earth or Heaven above?
Is It drought* is it famine, or is it ^estilence?
Do feel the smart, or fear the Consequence?
Your humble Child entreats you, show your grief,
Though Arms, nor Purse she has for your relief
Such is her poverty* yet shall be found
A Suppliant for your help, as she is bound.

Old E^gland. I must co^fess some of those sores you name,
My be^uteous body at this present maime;
But foreign foe nor feigned friend I fear,
For they have work enough (thou know) elsewhere
Nor is it Al^i^s Son nor Henryes daughter;
Whose proud contention cause this slaughter*
Nor Nobles siding* to make John no King,
French Jews unjustly to the Crown to bring;
No Edwa^d Richar^, to lose rule and life,
Nor no L^ncastrians to renew old strife:
No Duke of York, nor Earl of March to soil
Their hands in kindreds blood whom they did for
No crafty Tyrant now usurps the Seat,
Who Nephews slew that so he might be great;
No need of Tudor, Roses to unite,
None knows which is the red, or which the white;
Spains braving Fl^^t a second time is sunk,
France knows how ^ft my fury she has drunk:
By E^war^ third and Henry fifth of fame*
Her Lillies in mine Arms avo^ch the same.
My Sister Scotlan^ hurts me now no more.
Though she has been injurious heretofore;
What Hollan^ is I am in some suspense?
But trust not much unto his excellence.
For wants, sure some I feel, but more I fear,
And for the Pestilence, who knows how near;
Famine and Plague, two Sisters of the S^ord,
Destruction to a Land, does soon afford:
They Are for my punishment ordained on high,
Unless our tears prevent it speedily.
But yet I Answer not what you demand.
To show the grievance of my troubled Land?
Before I tell the Effect, I Will show the Cause
Which are my sins the breach of sacred Laws,
Idolatry supplanter of a Nation*
With foolish Superstitious Adoration,
Are liked and countenanced by men o^ ^ight,
The Gospel trodden down and has no right:
Church Offices were sold and bought for gain,
That Pope had hope to find* Rom^ here again,
For Oa^hs and Blasphemies, did ever Ear*
From B lzebub himself such language h^ar;
What scorning of the Saints of the most high?
What injuries did daily on them lie?
What false reports, what nicknames did they take
Not for their own, but for their Masters sake?
And thou poor soul, were jeered among the rest*
Thy flying for the truth was made a jest.
For Sabbath-breaking, and for drunkenness,
Did ever land profaness more express?
From crying blood yet cleansed am not I,
Martyrs and others, dying causelessly.
How many princely heads on blocks laid dow^
For naught but title to a fading crown?
Amongst all the crueltyes by great ones done
Of Edwards youths, and Clarence hapless son,
O Jane why did thou dye in flowring prime?
Because of royal stem, that was thy crime.
For bribery Adultery and lies,
Where is the nation, I cannot parallize.
With usury, extortion and oppression,
These be the Hydraes of my stout transgression.
These be the bitter fountains, heads and roots,
Whence ^^ow'd the source, the sprigs, the boughs and fruits
Of more then thou can hear or I relate,
That with high hand I still did perpetrate:
For these were threatened the woeful day,
I mocked the Preachers, put it far away;
The Sermons yet upon Record do stand
That cried destruction to my wicked land:
I then believed not, now I feel and see,
The plague of stubborn incredulity.
Some lost their livings, some in prison pent,
Some fined, from house and friends to exile went:
Their silent tongues to heaven did vengeance cry,
Who saw their wrongs and has judged righteously
And will repay it sevenfold in my lap:
This is forerunner of my Afterclap.
Nor took I warning by my neighbors falls,
I saw sad Germanyes dismantled walls,
I saw her people famished, Nobles slain,
Her fruitful land, a barren Heath remain.
I saw unmoved, her Armies foiled and fled,
Wives forced, babes tossed, her houses calcined.
I saw strong Rochel yielded to her Foe,
Thousands of starved Christians there also.
I saw poor Ireland bleeding out her last,
Such crueltyes as all reports have past;
Mine heart obdurate stood not yet aghast.
Now sip I of that cup, and just't may be
The bottom dreggs reserved are for me.

New England* To all you have said, sad Mother I assent,
Your fearful sins great cause there is to lament,
My guilty hands in part* hold up with you,
A Sharer in your punishment's my due.
But all you say amounts to this effect,
Not what you fe^^ but what you do expect,
Pray in plain terms, what is your present grief?
Then let us join heads and hearts for your relief.

Old England. Well to the ma^ter then, there is grown of late
'Twixt King and Peers a Question of State,
Which is the chief, the Law, or else the King.
One said, it is he, the other no such thing.
It Is said* my beter part in Parliament
To ease my groaning Land, showed their intent,
To crush the proud, and right to each man deal,
To h^lp the Church, and stay the Commonweal.
So many Obst^^les came in their way,
As puts me to ^ stand wh^t I should say;
Old custom^s, new Prerogatives stood on,
Had they not held Law fast all had been gone:
Which by their prudence stood them in such stead
They took high Straff^r^ lower by the head.
And to their Land be it spoke, they held in the tower
All Englands Metropolitan that hour;
This done, an act they would have passed fain,
No Prelate should his Bishopric retain;
Here tugged they hard (indeed,) for all men saw
This must be done by Gospel not by Law.
Next the Militia they urged sore,
This was denied (I need not say wherefore)
The King displeased at Yor^, himself absents,
They humbly beg return, show ^^eir intents;
The writing, printing* posting to^ and fro,
Shows all wa^ done, I Will therefore let it go.
But now I come to speak of my disaster,
^o^tention grown, 'twix^ Subjects and their Master;
They worded it so long, they fell to blows.
That thousands lay on heaps, here bleeds my woes,
I that no wars so many years have known,
Am now destroyed and slaught'red by mine own;
But could the Field alone this strife de^ide,
One Battle two or three I might abide:
But these may be beginnings of more woe
Who knows, but this may be my overthr^w.
Oh pity me in this sad perturbation,
My plundered Towns, my houses devastation,
My weeping Virgins and my young men slain;
My wealthy trading fallen, my dearth of grain*
The seed-times come, but ploughman has no hop^
Because he knows not, who shall in^ his Crop:
The poor they want their pay, their children bread*
Their woeful Mothers tears unpittied,
If any pity in thy heart remai^,
Or any child-like love thou do retain,
For my relief, do what there lies in thee,
And recompense that good I Have done to thee.

New England. Dear Mother cease complaints* and wipe your ey^^,
Shake off your dust, cheer up, and now arise,
You are my Mother Nurse, and I your flesh,
Your sunken bowels gladly would refresh,
Your griefs I pity, but soon hope to see,
Out of your troubles much good fruit to be;
To see those latter days of hoped for good*
Though now beclouded all with tears and blood:
After dark Popery the day did clear,
But now the Sun in's brightness shall appear.
Blessed be the Nobles of thy noble Land,
With ventured lives for Truths defense that stand.
Blessed be thy Commons, who for common good,
And thy infringed Laws have boldly stood
Blessed be thy Counties, who did aid thee still,
With hearts and States to testify their will.
Blessed be thy Preachers, who do cheer thee on,
O cry the Sword of God and Gidcon;
And shall I not on them wish Mero's curse,
That help thee not with prayers, Arms and purse?
And for my self let miseries abound,
If mindless of thy State I e're be found.
These are the days the Churches foes to crush,
To root out Popelings head, tail, branch and rush;
Let Us bring Baals vestments forth to make a fire,
Their Mytires, Surplices, and all their Tire,
Copes* Rotchets, Crossiers, and such empty trash,
And let their Names consume, but let the flash
Light Christendom, and all the world to see
We hate Romes whore, with all her trumpery.
Go on brave Essex with a Loyal heart,
Not false to King, nor to the better part;
But those that hurt his people and his Crown,
As duty binds, expel and tread them down.
And ye brave Nobles chase away all fear,
And to this hopeful Cause closely adhere;
O Mother can you weep, and have such Peers,
When they are gone, then drown yourself in tears
If now you weep so much, that then no more
The briny Ocean will overflow your shore.
These, these are they I trust, with Charles our King,
Out of all mists such glorious days shall bring*
That dazzled eyes beholding much shall won^er
At that thy settled peace, thy wealth and splendour.
Thy Church and weal established in such manner*
That all shall joy, that thou display'dst thy Banner;
And discipline erected so I trust,
That nursing Kings shall come and lick thy dust:
Then Justice shall in all thy Courts take place,
Without respect of person, or of ^ase;
Then Bribes shall cease, and Suits shall not stick long
Patience and purse of Clients often to wrong:
Then high Commissions shall fall to decay,
And Pursivants* and Catchpoles want their pay.
So shall thy happy Nation ever flourish*
When truth and righteousness they thus shall nourish
When thus in peace, thine Armies brave send out,
To sack proud Rome, and all her Vassals rout;
There let thy Name, thy fame, and glory shine,
As did thine Ancestors in Palestine:
And let her spoils full pay, with ^nterest be,
Of what unjustly once she poll'd from thee.
Of all the woes thou can, let her be sped*
And on her pour the vengeance threatened;
Bring forth the Beast that ruled the World with his beck,
And tear his flesh, and set your feet on's neck;
And make his filthy Den so desolate,
To the stonishment of all that knew his state:
This done with brandished Swords to Turkey go,
For then what is it, but English blades dare do,
And lay her waste for so's the sacred Doom,
And do ^o G^^ as thou have done to Rome.
Oh Abraham's seed lift up your heads on high,
For sure the day of your Redemption's nigh;
The Scales shall fall from your long blinded eyes,
And him you shall adore who now despise,
Then fullness of the Nations in shall flow*
And Jew and Gentil^ to one worship go;
Then follows days of happiness and rest;
Whose lot does fall* to live therein is blessed:
No Canaanite shall then be found in the Land,
And holiness on horses bells shall stand.
If this make way thereto, then sigh no more,
But if at all, thou did not see it before;
Farewell dear Mother, rightest cause prevail,
And in a while, you will tell another tale.

An Elegy upon that Honorable and renowned Knight Sir Philip Sidney, who was
untimely slain at the Siege of Zutphen, Anno, 1586.
WHen England did enjoy her Halsion days,
Her noble Sidney wore the Crown ofBayes;
As well an honor to our Briti^^ Land,
As she that swayed the Scepter with her hand;
Mars and Mi^erva did in one agree,
Of Arms and Arts he should a pattern be,
Ca^^i^p^ with Te^psichore did sing,
Of Poesy, and of music, he was King*
His Rhetoric^ struck Polimina dead,
His Eloquence made Mercury wax red;
His Logic from Euterpe won the Crown,
More worth was his then Clio could set down.
Thalia and Melpomene say truth,
(Witness Arcadia penned in his youth)
Are not hi^ tragic Comedies so acted*
As if your ninefold wit had been compacted.
To show the world, they never saw before
That this one Volume should exhaust your store;
His wiser days condemned his witty works*
Who knows the spells that in his Rhetoric lurks,
But some infatuate fools soon caught therein,
Fond Cupids Dame had never such a gin*
Which makes severer eyes but slight that story,
And men of morose minds envy his glory:
But he is a Beetle-head that cannot descry
A world of wealth within that rubbish lie,
And does his name, his work his honor wrong,
The brave refiner of our British tongue,
That sees not learning* valor and morality,
Justice, friendship, and kind hospitality,
Yea and Divinity within his book,
Such were prejudicate and did not look.
In all Records his name I ever see
Put with an Epithet of dignity,
Which shows his worth was great his honor such,
The love his Country ought him, was as much.
Then let none disallow of these my strains
Whilst English blood yet runs within my veins.
O brave Achilles, I wish some Homer would
Engrave in Marble, with Characters of gold
The valiant feats thou did on Flanders coast,
Which at this day fair Belgia may boast.
The more I say, the more thy worth I stain,
Thy fame and praise is far beyond my strain.
O Z^^ph^n* Zutphen that most fatal City
Made famous by thy death, much more the pity:
Ah! in his blooming prime death plucked this rose
E're he was ripe* his thread cut Atropos.
Thus man is born to dye, and dead is he,
Brave Hector, by the walls of Troy we see.
O who was near thee but did sore repine
He rescued not with life that life of thine:
But yet impartial Fates this boon did give,
Though Sidney di'd his valiant name should live:
And live it does in spite of death through fame,
Thus being overcome, he overcame.
Where is that envious tongue, but can afford
Of this our noble Scipi^ some good word.
Great Bartas this unto thy praise adds more,
In sad sweet verse, thou did his death deplore.
And Phaenix Spencer does unto his life,
His death present in sable to his wife.
Stella the fair* whose streams from Conduits fell
For the sad loss of her dear Astrophel.
Fain would I show how he fames paths did tread,
But now into such Lab'rinths I am lead,
With endless turns, the way I find not out,
How to persist my Muse is more in doubt;
Which makes me now with Silvester confess,
But Sidney's Muse can sing his worthiness.
The Muses aid I craved* they had no will
To give to their Detractor any quill,
With high disdain, they said they gave no more,
Since Sidney had exhausted all their store.
They took from ^he the scribbling pen I had,
(I to be eas^d of such a task was glad)
Then to reveng this wrong* themselves engage,
And drove me from Pa^nassus in a rage.
Then wonder not if I no better sped,
Since I the Muses thus have injured.
I pensive for my f^ult sat down, and then
Errata through their leave, threw me my pen,
My Poem to conclude, two lines they deign
Which writ, she b^d ret^rn't to them again;
So Sidneys fame I leave to Englands Roll^,
His bones do lie interred in stately Pa^ls.
His Epitaph.
Here lies in fame under this stone,
Philip and Alexander both in one;
Heir to the Muses, the Son of Mars in Truth,
Learning, Valor, Wisdom, all in virtuous youth,
His praise is much, this shall suffice my pen,
That Sidney died among most renowned of men.
In honor of Du Bartas, 1641.
Among the happy wits this age has shown,
Great, dear* sweet Bartas thou art matchles^ known*
My ravished Eyes and heart with faltering tongue,
In humble wife have vowed their service long,
But knowing th'task so great, and strength but small,
Gave over the work before begun withal,
My dazzled fight of late reviewed thy lines,
Where Art, and more then Art, in nature shines,
Reflection from their beaming Altitude,
Did thaw my frozen hearts ingratitude;
Which Rays darting upon some richer ground,
Had caused flours and fruits soon to abound;
But barre^ I my D^sey here do bring,
A homely flour in this my latter Spring,
If Summer, or my Autumn age do yield,
Flours, fruits in Garden, Orchard, or in Field,
They shall be consecrated in my Verse,
And prostrate offered at great Bart^^ Hearse;
My muse unto a Child ^ may compare,
Who sees the riches of some famous Fair,
He feeds his Eyes, but understanding lacks
To comprehend ^he worth of all those knacks:
The glittering plate and Jewe^s he ad^ires,
The Hats and Fans, the Plumes and Ladies tire^,
And thousand times his ma^ed mind does wish
Some part (at least) of that brave wealth was his,
But seeing empty wishes naught obtain,
At night turns to his Mothers ^ot ^gain,
And tells her tales, (his full heart over-glad)
Of all the glorious sights his Eyes have had:
But finds too soon his want of Eloquence,
The silly pratler speaks no word of sense*
But seeing utterance ^ail his great desires,
Sits down in silence, deeply he admires:
Thus weak brained ^, reading thy lofty style,
Thy profound learning, viewing other while;
Thy Art in natural Philosophy,
Thy Saint like mind in grave Divinity;
Thy piercing skill in high Astronomy,
And curious insight in An^tomy:
Thy Physic, music and state policy,
Valor in war, in peace good husbandry.
Sure liberal Nature did with Art not small,
In all the arts make thee most liberal.
A thousand thousand times my senseless senses
Moveless stan^ charmed by thy sweet in^^uenc^s;
More senseless then the stones to Amphi^^s Lute,
Mine eyes are sightless, and my tongue is mute,
My full astonished heart does pant to break,
Through grief it wants a faculty to speak:
Volleyes of praises could I echo then,
Had I an Angels voice, or Ba^tas pen:
But wishes cannot accomplish my desire,
Pardon if I adore* when I admire.
O France thou did in him more glory gai^
Then in thy Martel, Pipin, Charlemain,
Then in St. Jews, or thy last Henry Great,
Who tamed his foes in wars, in blood and sweat.
Thy fame is sprea^ as far, I dare be bold,
In all the Zones the temperate hot and cold.
Their Trophies were but heaps of wounded slain,
Thine, the quintessence of an heroic brain.
The oaken Garland ought to deck their brows,
Immortal Bays to thee all men allows.
Who in thy tryumphs never won by wrongs,
Lead'st millions chaind by eyes, by ears, by tongu^^
Often have I won^re^ at the hand of heaven,
In giving one what ^ould have served seven.
If e're this gol^en gift ^as showered on any,
Thy double portion would have served many.
Unto each man his riches is assigned
Of Name, of State, of Body and of Mind:
Thou had thy part of all, but of the last,
O pregnant brain, O comprehen^ion vas^:
Thy haughty Style and rapted wit sublime
All ages wondering at, shall never climb.
Thy sacred works are not for imitation,
But Monuments to future Admiration.
Thus Bart^^ fame shall last while stars do stand,
And whilst there is Air or Fire, or Sea or Land.
Bu^ least mine ignorance should do thee wrong,
To celebrate thy merits in my Song.
I Will leave thy praise to those shall do thee right,
Good will, not skill, did cause me bring my Mite.
His Epitaph.
Here lies the Pearl of France, Par^assus Glory;
The World rejoiced at's birth, at's ^ea^h was sorry.
Art and Nature joined, by heavens high decr^^*
Now showed what once they ought, Humanity:
And Natures Law, had it been revo^able
To rescue him from death, A^t had been able.
But Nature vanquished Art, so Bartas died;
But Fame out-living both, he is revi^'d.
In Honor of that High and Mighty Princ^ss Queen Elizabeth OF HAPPY MEMORY.
The Proeme.
ALthough great Queen thou now in silence lie
Yet thy lou^ Herald Fame does to the sky
Thy wondrous worth proclaim in every Clime,
And so has vowed while there is world or time*
So great's thy glory and thine excellence,
The sound the^eof rapts every humane sense,
That men account it no impiety,
To say thou were a fleshly Diety:
Thousands bring offerings (though out of date)
Thy world of honors to accumulate,
Amongst hundred Hecatombs of roaring verse,
Mi^e bleating stands before thy royal Hearse.
Thou never did* nor can thou now disdain
T'accept the tribut^ of a loyal brain.
Thy clemency did yerst esteem as much
The acclamations of the poor as rich,
Which makes me deem my ruden^ss is no wrong*
Though ^ resound thy praises amongst the ^hrong*
The Poem.
No Phoenix pen, nor Spencers poetry,
No Speeds nor Cambdens learned History.
^lizahs works, wars, praise, can e're compact,
The World's the Theater where she did act.
No memoryes nor volumes can contain
The 'leven Olympiads of her happy reign:
Who was so good, so just, so learned so wise,
From all the Kings on earth she won the prize.
Nor say I more then duly is her due,
Millions will testify that this is true.
She has wiped off the aspersion of her Sex,
That women wisdom lack to play the Rex:
Spains Monarch, says not so, nor yet his host:
She taught them better manners, to their cost.
The Salique law, in force now had not been,
If France had ever hoped for such a Queen.
But can you Doctors now this point dispute,
She Is Argument enough to make you mute.
Since first the sun did run hi^ ^ere run race,
And earth had once a year, ^ new old ^^ce,
^ince time was time, an^ man u^manly ^an,
Come show me such a ^hoe^ix if you can?
Was ever people better ruled then hers?
Was ever land more happy freed from stirrs?
Did ever wealth in England more abound?
Her victoryes in foreign Coasts resound,
Ships more invincible then Spain's* her foe
She wrackt, she sacked, she sunk his Armado:
Her stately troops advanced to Lisbons wall
Don Anthony in's right there to install.
She frankly helped, Franks brave distressed King,
The States united now her fame do sing,
She their Protectrix was, they well do know
Unto our dread Virago, what they owe.
Her Nobles sacrificed their noble blood,
Nor men no^ Coin she spared to do them good.
The rude untamed Irish, she did quel.
Before her picture the proud T^^one fell.
Had ever prince such Counselors as she?
Her self Minerva caused them so to be.
Such Captains and such soldiers never seen,
As were the Subjects of our Pallas Queen.
Her Seamen through all straights the world did round;
Terra incognita might know the sound.
Her Drake came laden home with Spanish gold:
Her Essex took Cades, their Herculean Hold:
But time would fail me, so my tongue would to,
To tell of half she did* or she could do.
Semiramis to her, is but obscure,
More infamy then fame, she did procure.
She built her glory but on Babels walls,
Worlds wonder for a while, but yet it falls.
Fierce Tomris* (Cyrus heads-man) Scythians queen,
Had put her harness off, had she but seen
Our Amazon in the Camp of Tilbury,
Judging all valor and all Majesty
Within that Princess to have residence,
And prostrate yielded to her excellence.
Dido first Foundress of proud C arthage walls,
(Who living consummates her Funerals)
A great Eliza* but compared with ours,
How vanishes her glory, wealth and powers.
Profuse proud Cleopatra, whose wrong name,
Instead of glory, proved her Countries shame:
Of her what worth in Stories to be seen,
But that she was a rich Egyptian Queen.
Zenoby^ potent Empress of the East,
And of all these, without compare the best,
Whom none but great Aurelius could quel;
Yet for our Queen is no fit Parallel.
She was a Phoenix Queen, so shall she be,
Her ashes not revived, more Phoenix she*
Her personal perfections, who would tell,
Must dip his pen in the Heleconian Well,
Which I may not, my pride does but aspire
To read what others write, and so admire.
Now say, have women worth? or have they none?
Or had they some, but with our Queen is it gone?
Nay Masculines, you have thus taxt us long,
But she, though dead, will vindicate our wrong.
Let such as say our Sex is void of Reason,
Know it is a Slander now, but once was Treason.
But happy England which had such a Queen;
Yea happy, happy, had those days still been:
But happiness lies in a higher sphere,
Then wonder not Eliza moves not here.
Full fraught with honor, riches and with days
She set, she set, like Titan in his rays.
No more shall rise or set so glorious sun
Until the heavens great revolution,
If then new things their old forms shall retain,
Eliza shall rul^ Albion once again.
HER EPITAPH.
Here sleeps THE Queen, this is the Royal Bed,
Of the Damask Ros^, sprung from the white and red,
Whose sweet perfume fills the all-filling Air:
This Rose is withered, once so lovely fair.
On neither tree did grow such Rose before,
The greater was our gain, our loss the more.
Another.
Here lies the pride of Queens, Pattern of Kings,
So blaze it Fame, here is feathers for thy wings.
Here lies the envied, yet unparalled Prince,
Whose living virtues speak, (though dead long since)
If many worlds, as that Fantastic framed,
In every one be her great glory famed.
David's Lamentation for Saul and Jonathan. 2. Sam. 1.19^
ALas slain is the Head of Isra^l.
Illustrious Saul whose beauty did excel,
Upon thy places mountainous and high,
How did the Mighty fall, and falling dye?
In Gath let not this things be spoken on,
Nor published in streets of As^alon,
Lest daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
Lest the uncircumsised lift up their voice.
O Gilbo Mounts, let never pearled dew,
Nor ^ruitfull showers your barren tops bestrew,
Nor fields of offerings ever on you grow.
Nor any pleasant thing e're may you show;
For there the Mighty Ones did soon decay,
The shield of Saul was vilely cast away,
There had his dignity so sore a foil,
As if his head never felt the sacred oil.
Sometimes from crimson* blood of ghastly slain,
The bow of Jonathan never turned in vain:
Nor from the fat, and spoils of Mighty men
With bloodless sword did Saul turn back again.
Pleasant and lovely, were they both in life,
And in their death was founnd no parting strife.
Swifter then swiftest Eagles so were they,
Stronger then Lions ramping for their prey.
O Isreal's Dames, overflow your beauteous ey^s
For valiant Saul who on Mount Gil^o lies,
Who clothed you in Cloth of richest Dye,
And choice delights, full of variety,
On your array put ornaments of gold,
Which made you yet more beauteous to behold.
O! how in Battle did the mighty fall
In midst of strength not succored at all.
O lovely Jonathan! how wast thou slain?
In places high, full low thou did remain.
Distressed for thee I am, dear Jonathan,
Thy love was wonderful, surpassing man,
Exceeding all the love that is Feminine,
So pleasant have thou been, dear brother mine,
How are the mighty fallen into decay?
And warlike weapons perished away?
To the Memory of my dear and ever honou^ed Father Thomas Dudley Esquire Who
deceased, July 31. 1^53. and of his Ag^, 77.
BY duty bound, and not by custom led
To celebrate the praises of the dead,
My mournful mind, sore pressed, in trembling verse
Presents my Lamentations at his Hearse,
Who was my Father, Guide* Instructor too,
To whom I ought whatever I could do:
Nor is it Relation near my hand shall tie;
For who more cause to boast his worth then I?
Who heard or saw, observed or knew him better?
Or who alive then I* a greater debtor?
Let malice bite, and envy know its fill,
He was my Father* and I Will praise him still.
Nor was his name, or life lead so obscure
That pity might some Trumpeters procure.
Who after death might make him falsely seem
Such as in life, no man could justly deem.
Well known and loved, where ere he lived, by most
Both in his native, and in foreign coast,
These to the world his merits could make know^,
So needs no Testimonial from his own;
B^t now or never I must pay my Sum;
While others tell his worth, I Will not be dumb:
One of thy Founders, him New England know,
Who staid thy feeble sides when thou wast low,
Who spent his state, his strength, and years with care
That After-comers in them might have share.
True Patriot of this little Commonweal,
Who is it can tax thee ought* but for thy zeal?
Truths friend thou were* to errors still a foe,
Which caused Apostates to malign so.
Thy love to true Religion e're shall shine,
My Fathers God, be God of me and mine.
Upon the earth he did not build his nest,
But as a Pilgrim what he had, possessed.
High thoughts he gave no harbor in his heart,
Nor honors pufft him up, when he had part:
Those titles loathed, which some too much do love
For truly his ambition ^ay above.
His humble mind so loved humility,
He left it to his race for Legacy:
And often and o^t, with speeches mild and wise,
Gave his in charge* that Jewel rich to prize.
No ostentation seen in a^l his ways,
As in the mean ones, of our foolish days,
Which all they have, and more still set to view,
Their greatness may be judged by what they show.
His thoughts were more sublime, his actions wise,
Such vanities he justly did despise.
Nor wonder 'twas, low things never much did move
For he a Mansion had prepared above*
For which he sigh d ^n^ prayed and longed full sore
He might be clothed upon, for evermore.
O^t spoke of death, and with a smiling cheer,
He did exult his end was drawing near,
Now fully ripe, as shock of wheat that is grown,
Death as a Sickle has him timely mown,
And in celestial Barn has housed him high,
Where storms, nor showrs, nor ought can damnifie.
His Generation served his labors cease;
And to his Fathers gathered is in peace.
Ah happy Soul, amongst Saints and Angels blessed,
Who after all his toil, is now at rest:
His hoary head in righteousness was found:
As joy in heaven on earth let praise resound.
Forgotten never be his memory,
His blessing rest on his posterity:
His pious Footsteps followed by his race,
At last will bring us to that happy place
Where we with joy each others face shall see,
And parted more by death shall never be.
His Epitaph.
Within this Tomb a Patriot lies
That was both pious, just and wise,
To Truth a shield, (...) right a Wall,
To Sectaryes a whip and Maul,
A Magazine of History,
A Prizer of good Company
In manners pleasant and severe
The Good him loved, the bad did fear,
And when his time with years was spent
If some rejoiced, more did lamen^.
An EPITAPH On my dear and ever honored Mother Mrs. Dorothy Dudley, Who
deceased December. 27. 1643. and of her age, 61: Here lies,
A Worthy Matron of unspotted life,
A loving Mother and obedient wife,
A friendly Neighbo^, pitiful to poor,
Whom often she fed, and clothed with her store;
T^ Servants wisely aweful, but yet kind,
And as they did, so they reward did find:
A true Instructor of her Family,
The which she ordered with dexterity.
The public meetings ever did frequent,
And in her Closet constant hours she spent;
Religi^us in all her ^ords ^^d ways,
Preparing st^ll for death, till en^ ^f days:
Of all her Children, Children, lived to see,
Then dying, left a blessed memory.
CONTEMPLATIONS.
SOme time now past in the Autumnal Tide,
When Phoebus wanted but one hour to bed,
The tr^es all richly clad, yet void of pride,
Where gilded over by his rich golden head.
Their leaves and fruits seemed painted, but was true
Of green, of red, of yellow, mixed hew,
Rapt were my senses at this delectable view.
2
I wist not what to wish, yet sure thought I,
If so much excellence abide below;
How excellent is he that dwells on high?
Whose power and beauty by his works we know.
Sure he is goodness, wisdom glory, light,
That has this under world so richly dight:
More Heaven then Earth was here no winter and ^o night.
3
Then on a stately Oak I cast mine Eye,
Whose ruffling top the Clouds seemed to aspire;
How long since thou wast in thine Infancy?
Thy strength, and stature, more thy years admire,
Has hundred winters past since thou wast born?
Or thousand since thou brakest thy shell of horn,
If so, all these as naught, Eternity does scorn.
4
Then higher on the glistering Sun I gazed,
Whose beams was shaded by the leavie Tree,
The more I looked, the more I grew amazed,
And softly said, what glory's like to thee?
Soul of this world, this Universes Eye,
No wonder, some made thee a Deity:
Had I not better known, (alas) the same had I.
5
Thou as a Bridegroom from thy Chamber rushes,
And as a strong man* joys to run a race,
The morn does usher thee, with smiles and blushes,
The Earth reflects her glances in thy face.
Birds* insects, Animals with Vegative,
Thy heart from death and dullness does revive:
And in the darksome womb of fruitful nature dive.
6
Thy swift Annual, and diurnal Course,
Thy daily straight, and yearly oblique path*
Thy pleasing fervor, and thy scorching force,
All mortals here the feeling knowledge has
Thy presence makes it day, thy absence night,
Quaternal Seasons caused by thy might:
H^il Creature, full of sweetness, beauty and delight.
7
Art thou so full of glory, that no Eye
Has strength, thy ^hining Rays on^^ to behold?
An^ is thy splen^id Throne erect so high?
As to approach it, can no earth^y mould.
How full of glory then must thy Creator be?
Who gave this bright light lu^ter unto thee:
Admir'^, adored for ever, be that Majesty.
8
Silent alone* where none or saw* or heard,
In pathless paths I lead my wandering feet,
My humble Eyes to lofty Skies I reared
To s^ng some Song, my mazed Muse thought meet.
My great Creator I would magnify,
That nature had, thus decked liberally:
But Ah, and Ah, again* my imbecility!
9
I heard the merry grasshopper then sing,
The black clad Cricket* bear a second part,
They kept one tune, and played on the same string,
Seeming to glory in their little Art.
Shall Creatures abject, thus their voices raise?
And in their kind resound their makers praise:
Whilst I as mute, can warble forth no higher lays.
10
When present times look back to Ages past,
And men in being fancy those are dead,
It makes things gone perpetually to last*
and calls back months and years that long since fled
It makes a man more aged in conceit,
Then was Methus^lah, or's grand-sire great:
While of their persons and their acts his mind does treat.
11
Sometimes in Eden fair, he seems to be,
Sees glorious Adam there made Lord of all,
Fancyes the Apple, dangle on the Tree,
That turned his Sovereign to a naked t^ral.
Who like a miscreant's driven from that place,
To get his bread with pain, and sweat of ^ace:
A penalty imposed on his backsliding Race.
12
Here sits our Grandame in retired place,
And in her lap, her bloody Cain new born,
The weeping Imp often looks her in the face,
Bewails his unknown hap, and fate forlorn;
His Mother sighs, to think of Paradise,
And how she lost her bliss, to be more wise,
Believing him that was, and is, Father of lies.
13
Here Cain and Abel come to sacrfiice,
Fruits of the Earth, and Fatlings each do bring,
On Abels gift the fire descen^s from Skies,
But no such sign on false Cain'^ offering;
With sullen hateful looks he goes his ways.
Has thousand thoughts to end his brothers days,
Upon whose blood his future good he hopes to raise
14
There Abel keeps his sheep, no ill he thinks,
His brother comes, then acts his fratricide,
The Virgin Earth, of blood her first draught drinks
But since that time she often has been cloyed;
The wretch with ghastly face and dreadful mind,
Thinks each he sees will s^rve him in his kind,
Though none on Earth but kindred near then could he find.
15
Who fancyes not his looks now at the Bar,
His face like death, his heart with horror fraught,
Nor Male-factor ever felt like war,
When deep despair, with wish of life has sought,
Branded with guilt* and crushed with treble woes,
A Vagabond to Land of Noa he goes
A City builds, that walls might him secure from foes.
16
Who thinks not often upon the Fathers ages.
Their long descent how nephews sons they saw,
The starry observations of those Sages,
And how their precepts to their sons were law,
How Adam sighed to see his Progeny,
Clothed all in his black sinful Livery,
Who neither guilt, nor yet the punishment could ^^y.
17
Our Life compare we with their length of days
Who to the tenth of theirs does now arrive?
and though thus short, we shorten many ways,
Living so little while we are alive;
In eating, drinking, sleeping, vain delight
So unawares comes on perpetual night,
And puts all pleasures vain unto eternal ^^ight.
18
When I beh^ld the heavens as in their prime.
And then the earth (though old) still clad in green,
The stones and trees, insensible of time,
Nor age nor wrinkle on their front are seen;
If winter come, and greeness then do f^de,
A Spring returns, and they more youthful made;
But Man grows ^ld, lies down, remains where once he is laid.
20
By birth more noble then those creatures all,
Yet seems by nature and by custom cursed,
No sooner born, but grief and care makes fall
That state obliterate he had at first:
Nor youth, nor strength, ^or w^^^om spring again
Nor habitations long their na^es retain,
But in oblivion to the fin^l day remain.
20
Shall I then praise the heavens* the trees, the earth
Because their beauty and their strength last longer
Shall I wish there, or never to had birth,
Because they are bigger, and their bodies stronger?
Nay, they shall darken, perish, fade and dye,
And when unmade, so ever shall they lie,
But man was made for endless immortality.
21
Under the cooling shadow of a stately Elm
Clos e sat I by a goodly Rivers side*
Where gliding streams the Rocks ^id overwhelm;
A lonely place, with pleasures dignified.
I once that loved the shady woo^s so well,
Now thought the rivers did the trees excel*
And if the sun would ever shine, there would I dw^^^*
22
While on the stealing stream I fixed mine eye*
Which to the longed for Ocean held its course,
^ marked* nor crooks, nor rubs that there did lie
Could hinder ought, but still augment its force.
O happy Flood, quoth I, that holds thy race
Till thou arrive at thy beloved place*
Nor is it rocks or shoals that can obstruct thy pace
23
Nor is it enough, that thou alone may slide,
But hundred brooks in thy clear waves do m^et,
So hand in hand along with thee they glide
To The^is house, where all embrace an^ greet:
Thou Emblem true* of what I count the best,
O could I lead my Rivolets to rest,
So may we press to that vast mansion, ever blessed.
24
Ye Fish which in this liquid Region 'bide,
That for each season, have your habitation,
Now salt, now fresh where you think best to glide
To unknown coasts to give a visitation,
In Lakes and ponds, you leave your numerous fry,
So nature taught and yet you know not why,
You watery folk that know not your felicity.
25
Look how the wantons frisk to taste the air,
Then to the colder bottom straight they dive,
Eftsoon to Neptun's glassie Hall repair
To see what trade they great ones there do drive,
Who forage over the spacious seagreen field,
And take the trembling prey before it yield,
Whose armor is their scales, their spreading fins their shield.
26
While musing thus with contemplation fed,
And thousand fancies buzzing in my brain,
The sweet-tongu'd Philomel percht ore my head,
And chanted forth a most melodious strain
Which rapt me so with wonde^ and delight,
I judged my hearing better t^en my sight,
And wished me wings with her a while to take my flight.
28
O merry Bird (said I) that fears no snares,
That neither toils nor hoards up in thy barn,
Feels no sad thoughts, nor cruciating cares
To gain more good, or shun what might thee harm
Thy clothes never wear, thy meat is every where,
Thy bed a bough thy drink the water clear,
Reminds not what is past, nor what is to come do fear
28
The dawning morn with songs thou do prevent,
Sets hundred n^^es unto thy feathered crew,
So each one tunes his pretty instrument,
And warbling out the'old, begin a new,
And thus they pass their youth in summer season*
Then follow thee into a better Region,
where winter's never felt by that sweet airy legion
29
Man at the best a creature frail and vain,
In knowledge ignorant, in strength but weak,
Subject to sorrows, losses* sickness, pain,
Each storm his state, his mind, his body break,
From some of these he never finds cessation,
But day or night, within, without, vexation,
Troubles from foes, from friends, from dearest, near'st Relation
30
And yet this sinful creature, frail and vain,
This lump of wretchedness, of sin and sorrow,
This weather-beaten vessel wrackt with pain,
Joys not in hope of an eternal morrow*
Nor all his losses, crosses and vexation,
In weight, in frequency and long duration
Can make him deeply groan for that divine Translation:
31
The Mariner that on smooth waves does glide,
Sings merrily, and steers his Barque with ease,
As if he had command of wind and tide,
And now become great Master of the seas;
But suddenly a storm spoils all the sport,
And makes him long ^or a more quiet port,
Which'gainst all adverse winds may serve for fort.
32
So he that saileth in this world of pleasure,
Feeding on sweets, that never bit of the sour,
That Is full of friends, of honor and of treasure,
Fond fool* he takes this earth even for heavens bo^er.
But sad affliction comes and makes him see
Here Is neither honor, wealth, nor safety;
Only above is found all with security.
33
O Time the fatal wrack of mortal things,
That draws oblivions curtains over kings,
Their sumptuous monuments, men know them not,
Their names without a Record are forgot.
Their parts, their ports, their pom^'s all laid in the dust
Nor wit nor gold, nor buildings escape times rust;
But he whose name is engraved in the white stone
Shall last and ^hine when all of these are gone.
The Flesh and the Spirit.
IN secret place where once I stood
Close by the Banks of Lacrim flood
I heard two sisters reason on
Things that are past, and things to come;
One flesh was called, who had her eye
On worldly wealth and vanity;
The other Spirit, who did rear
Her thoughts unto a higher sphere:
Sister, quoth Flesh, what liv'st thou o^
Nothing but Meditation?
Does Contemplation feed thee so
Regardlesly to let earth go?
Can Speculation satisfy
Notion without Reality?
Do dream of things beyond the Moon
And do thou hope to dwell there soon?
Have treasures there laid up in store
That all in the world thou count'st but poor?
Art fancy sick or turned a Sot
To catch at shadows which are not?
Come* come, I Will show unto thy sense,
Industry has its recompense.
What can desire, but thou may see
True substance in variety?
Do honor like? acquire the same,
As some to their immortal fame:
And trophyes to thy name erect
Which wearing time shall never deject.
For riches do thou long full sore?
Behold enough of precious store.
Earth has more silver, pearls and gold,
Then eyes can see, or hands can hold.
Affe^t's thou pleasure? take thy fill,
Earth has enough of what you will.
Then let not go, what thou may find,
For things unknown, only in mind.
Spir. Be still thou unregenerate part,
Disturb no more my settled heart,
For I have vowed, (and so will do)
Thee as a foe, still to pursue.
And combat with thee will and must,
Until I see thee laid in the dust.
Sisters we are, ye twins we be,
Yet deadly feud 'twixt thee and me;
For from one father are we not,
Thou by old Adam want begot,
But my arise is from ^bove,
Whence my dear father I do love.
Thou speak st me fair, but hat^st me sore,
Thy flattering shows I Will trust no more.
How often thy slave, have thou me made,
when I believed, what thou have said,
And never had more cause of woe
Then when I did what thou bad'st do.
I Will stop mine ears at these thy charms,
And count them for my deadly harms.
Thy sinful pleasures I do hate,
Thy riches are to me no bait,
Thine honors do, nor will I love;
For my ambition l^es above.
My greatest honor it shall be
When I am victor over thee,
And triumph shall, with laurel head,
When thou my Captive shall be led,
How I do live, thou need^st not scoff,
For I have meat thou know not off;
The hidden Manna I do eat,
The word of life it is my meat*
My thoughts do yield me more content
Then can thy hours in pleasure spent*
Nor are they shadows which I catch,
Nor fancies vain at which I snatch,
But reach at things that are so high,
Beyond thy dull Capacity;
Eternal substance I do see,
With which enriched I would be:
Mine Eye does pierce the heavens, and see
What is Invisible to thee.
My garments are not silk nor gold,
Nor such like trash which Earth does hold,
But Royal Robes I shall h^ve on,
More glorious then the glistring Sun;
My Crown not Diamonds, Pearls, and gold,
But such as Angels heads insold.
The City where I hope to dwell,
There Is none on Earth can parallel;
The stately Walls both high and strong,
Are made of precious Jasper stone;
The Gates of Pearl, both rich and clear,
And Angels are for Porters there;
The Streets thereof transparent gold,
Such as no Eye did e're behold,
A Crystal River there does run,
Which does proceed from the Lambs Throne:
Of Life, there are the waters sure,
Which shall remain for ever pure,
Nor Sun, nor Moon, they have no need,
For glory does from God proceed:
No Candle there, nor yet Torch light,
For there shall be no darksome night.
From sickness and infirmity,
For evermore they shall be free,
Nor withering age shall e're come there,
But beauty shall be bright and clear;
This City pure is not for thee,
For things unclean there shall not be:
If I of Heaven may have my fill,
Take thou the world, and all that will.
The Vanity of all worldly things*
AS he said vani^y, so vain say I,
Oh! vanity, O vain all under Sky;
Where is the man can say, lo I have found
On brittle Earth a Consolation sound?
What is it in honor to be set on high?
No, they like Beasts and Sons of men shall dye:
And whilst they live, how often does turn their fate,
He Is now a captive, that was King of late.
What is it in wealth, great Treasures to obtain?
No* that is but labor, anxious care and pain,
He heaps up riches, and he heaps up sorrow,
It Is his to day, but who is his heir to morrow?
What then? Content in pleasures can tho^ find,
More vain then all, that is but to gras^ the wind.
The sensual senses for a time the^ please.
Mean while the conscience rage, who shall appease?
What is it in beauty? No that is but a snare,
They Are foul enough to day, that once were fair.
What is it in flowring youth, or manly age?
The first is prone to vice, the last to rage.
Where is it then, in wisdom, learning arts?
Sure if on earth, it must be in thos^ parts:
Yet these the ^isest man of men did find
But vanity, vexation o^ mind.
And he that knows the most, does still bemoan
He knows not all that here is to be known.
What is it then, to do as Stoics tell,
Nor laugh, nor weep, let things go ill or well.
Such Stoic^s are but Stocks such teaching vain,
While man is man, he shall have ease or pain.
If not in honor beauty, age nor treasure.
Nor yet in learning wisdom* youth nor pleasure,
Where s^all I climb, sound, seek search or find
That Summum Bonum which may stay my mind?
There is a path, no vultures eye has seen,
Where Lion fierce, nor lions whelps have been,
Which lea^s unto that living Crystal Fount,
Who drinks thereof, the world does naught account
The depth and sea have said it is not in me,
With pearl and gold, it shall not valued be.
For Sapphire, Onix Topaz who would change:
Its hid from eyes of men, they count it strange.
Death and destruction the fame has heard,
But where and what it is, from heaven's declared,
It br^ngs to honor, which shall never decay,
It stores with wealth which time cannot wear away.
It yields pleasures far beyond conceit,
And truly beautifi^s without deceit,
Nor strength, nor wisdom nor fresh youth shall fade
Nor death shall see* but are immortal made.
This pearl of price, this tree of life, this spring
Who is possessed of, shall reign a King.
Nor change of state* nor cares shall ever see,
But wear his crown unto eternity:
This satiates the Soul, this stays the mind,
And all the rest, but Vanity we find.
FINIS.
The Author to her Book.
THou ill-form'd offspring of my feeble brain,
Who after birth did by my side remain,
Till snatched from thence by friends, less wise then true
Who thee abroad, exposed to public view,
Made thee in rags, halting to the press to trudg,
Where errors were not lessened (all may judge)
At thy return my blushing was not small,
My rambling brat (in print) should mother call,
I cast thee by as one unfit for light.
Thy Visage was so irksome in my sight;
Yet being mine own, at length affection would
Thy blemishes amend* if so I could:
I washed thy face, but more defects I saw,
And rubbing off a spot, still made a flaw.
I stretched thy joints to make thee even feet,
Yet still thou run'st more hobling then is meet;
In better dress to trim t^ee was my mind,
But naught save home-spunCloth, in the house I find
In this array, amongst Vulgars may thou roam
In Critics hands, beware thou do not come;
And take thy way where yet thou art not known,
If for thy Father asked, say, thou had none:
And for thy Mother, she alas is poor,
Which caused her thus to send thee out of door.
Several other Poems made by the Author upon Diverse Occasions, were found
among her Papers after her Death, which she never ^eant s^^^ld come to public
view; amongst which, these following (at the desire of some friends that knew
her well) are here inserted
Upon a Fit of Sickness, Anno. 1632. Aetatis suae, 19.
TWice ten years old, not fully told
Since nature gave me breath*
My race is run, my thread is spun,
lo here is fatal Death.
All men must dye, and so must I
this cannot be revoked
For Adams sake, this word God sp^
when he so high provoked.
Yet live I shall, this life's but small,
in place of highest bliss,
Where I shall have all I can crave,
no life is like to this.
For what is this life, but care and strife?
since first we came from womb,
Our strength does waste, our time does have,
and the^ we go to the Tomb.
O Bubble blast, how long can last?
that always art a breaking,
No sooner blown, but dead and gone,
even as a word that is speaking.
O whilst I live* this grace me give,
I doing good may be.
Then deaths arrest I shall count best,
because it is thy decree;
Bestow much cost there is nothing lost,
to make Salvation sure,
O great's the gain, though got with pain,
comes by profession pure.
The race is run* the field is won,
the victory's mine I see,
For ever know* thou envious foe,
the foil belongs to thee.
Upon some distemper of body.
In angui^h of my heart repleat with woes,
And wasting pains, which best my body knows,
In tossing slumbers on my wakeful bed,
Bedrencht with tears that flowed from mournful head.
Till nature had exhausted all her store,
Then eyes lay dry, disabled to weep more;
An^ looking up unto his Throne on high,
Who sen^eth help to those in misery;
He chased away those clouds, and let me see
My Anchor cast in the vale with safety.
He e^s'd my Soul of woe* my flesh of pain*
And brought me to the shore from troubled Main;
Before the Birth of one of her Children.
All things within this fading world has end,
Adversity does still our joys attend;
No ties so strong* no friends so dear and sweet,
But with deaths parting blow is sure to meet.
The sentence past is most irrovocable,
A common thing, yet oh inevitable;
How soon, my Dear, death may my steps attend,
How soon't may be thy Lot to lose thy friend,
We both are ignorant, yet love bids me
These farewell lines to recommend to thee,
That when that knot s untied that made us one,
I may seem thine, who in effect am none.
And if I see not half my days that is due,
What nature would, God grant to yours and you;
The many faults that well you know I have,
Let be interred in my oblivions grave;
If any worth or virtue were in me,
Let that live freshly in thy memory
And when thou feel'st no g^ief, as I no harms,
Yet love thy dead, who long lay in thine arms:
And when thy loss shall be repaid with gains
Look to my little babes my dear remains.
And if thou love thy self, or loved'st me
These O protect from step Dames injury.
And if chance to thine eyes shall bring this verse,
With some sad sighs honor my absent H^rse,
And kiss this paper for thy loves dear sake,
Who with salt tears this last Farewell did take.
A. B.

To (...) Dear and loving Husband.
IF ever two were one, then surely we.
If ever man were loved by wife, then thee;
If ever wife was happy in a man,
Compare with me ye women if you can.
I prize thy love more then whole Mines of gold,
Or all the riches that the East does hold.
My love is such that Rivers cannot quench,
Nor ought but love from thee* give recompense*
Thy love is such I can no way repay,
The heavens reward thee manifold I pray.
Then while we live, in love lets so persever,
That when we live no more, we may live ever.
A Letter to her Husband, absent upon Public employment.
My head, my heart, mine Eyes, my life, nay more,
My joy, my Magazine of earthly store,
If two be one, as surely thou and I,
How stayest thou there, whilst I at Ipswich lie?
So many steps, head from the heart to sever
If but a neck, soon should we be together:
I like the earth this season, mourn in black,
My Sun is gone so far in's Zodiac,
Whom whilst I'joy'd, nor storms, nor frosts I felt,
His warmth such frigid colds did cause to melt.
My chilled limbs now nummed lie forlorn;
Return, return sweet Sol from Capricorn,
In this dead time, alas, what can I more
Then view those fruits which through thy heat I bore?
Which sweet contentment yield me for a space,
True living Pictures of their Fathers face.
O strange effect! now thou art Southward gone,
I weary grow, the tedious day so long;
But when thou Northward to me shall return,
I wish my Sun may never set* but burn
Within the Cancer of my glowing breast,
The welcome house of him my dearest guest.
Where ever, ever stay, and go not thence,
Till natures sad decree shall call thee hence;
Fle^^ of thy flesh, bone of thy bone,
I here, thou there, yet both but one.
A. B.

Another.
Phoebus make haste, the day's too long, be gone,
The silent night's the fittest time for moan;
But stay this once, unto my suit give ear,
And tell my griefs in either Hemisphere:
(And if the whirling of thy wheels don't drowned)
The woeful accents of my doleful sound,
If in thy swift Carrier thou can make stay,
I crave this boon, this Errand by the way,
Commend me to the man more loved then life,
Show him the sorrows of his widdowed wife;
My dumpish thoughts, my groans, my brakish tears
My sobs, my longing hopes, my doubting fears,
And if he love, how can he there abide?
My Interest's more then all the world beside.
He that can tell the stars or Ocean sand,
Or all the grass that in the Meads do stand,
The leaves in the woods the hail or drops of rain,
Or in a corn-field number every grain*
Or every mote that in the sunshine hops,
May count my sighs* and number all my drops:
Tell him, the countless steps that thou do trace,
That once a day, thy Spouse thou may embrace*
And when thou can not treat by loving mouth,
Thy rays afar, salute her from the south.
But for one month I see no day (poor soul)
Like those far situate under the pole,
Which day by day long wait for thy arise,
O how they joy when t^ou do^^ light the skies.
O Phoebus, had thou but thus long from thine
Restrained the beams of thy beloved shine,
At thy return, if so thou could or durst
Behold a Chaos blacker then the first.
Tell him here is worse then a confused matter,
His little world's a fathom under water,
Naught but the servor of his ardent beams
Has power to dry the torrent of these streams.
Tell him I would say more, but cannot well,
Oppressed minds, abruptest tales do tell.
Now post with double speed, mark what I say,
By all our loves conjure him not to stay.
Another.
As loving Hind that (Hartless) wants her Deer,
Scuds through the woods and Fern with harkning ear,
Perplexed, in every bush and nook ^oth pry,
Her dearest Deer, might answer ear or eye;
So does my anxious soul, which now does miss,
A dearer D^ar (far dear^r Heart) then this.
Still wait with doubts, and hopes, and failing eye,
His voice to hear, or person to discry.
Or as the pensive Dove does all alone
(On withered bough) most ^ncouthly bemoan
The absence of her Love, and loving Mate,
Whose loss has made her so unfortunate:
Even thus do I, with many a deep sad groan
Bewail my turtle true, who now is gone,
His presence and his saf^ return, still wooes,
With thousand doleful sighs and mournful Cooes.
Or as the loving Mullet, that true Fish,
Her fellow lost, nor joy nor life do wish*
But lanches on that shore, there for to dye,
Where she (...) captive husband does espy.
Mine being gone, I lead a joyless life*
I have a loving phere, yet seem no wife:
But worst of all, to him cannot steer my course,
I here, he there, alas, both kept by force:
Return my Dear, my joy, my only Love,
Unto thy Hind, thy Mullet and thy Dove,
Who neither joys in pasture, house nor streams,
The substance gone, O me, these are but dreams*
Together at one Tree, oh let us bronze,
And like two Turtles roost within one house,
And like the Mullets in one River glide,
Let Us still remain but one, till death divide.
Thy loving Love and Dearest Dear,
At home, abroad, and every where.
A. B.

To her Father with some verses.
MOst truly honored, and as truly dear,
If worth in me, or ought I do appear,
Who can of right better demand the same?
Then may your worthy self from whom it came.
The principle might yield a greater sum,
Yet handl^d ill, amounts but to this crum;
My stock's so small, I know not how to pay,
My Bond remains in force unto this day;
Yet for part payment take this simple mite,
Where nothing's to be had Kings loose their righ^
Such is my debt, I may not say forgive,
But as I can, I Will pay it while I live:
Such is my bond, none can discharge but I,
Yet paying is not paid until I dye.
A. B.

In reference to her Children, 23. June, 16^9.
I Had eight birds hatched in one nest,
Four Cocks there were, and Hens the rest,
I nursed them up with pain and care,
Nor cost, nor labor did I spare,
Till at the last they felt their wing.
Mounted the Trees, and learned to sing;
Chief of the Brood then took his flight,
To Regions far and left me quite:
My mournful chirps I after send,
Till he return, or I do end,
Leave not thy nest, thy Dam and Sire,
Fly back and sing amidst this Quire.
My second bird did take her flight,
And with her ma^e flew out of sight;
Southward they both their course did bend,
And Seasons twain they there did spend:
Till after blown by Southern gales,
They Norward steered with filled sails.
A prettier bird was no where seen,
Along the Beach among the treen.
I have a third of color white*
On whom I placed no small delight;
Coupled with mate loving and true,
Has also bid her Dam adieu:
And where Aurora first appears,
She now has percht, to spend her years;
One to the Academy flew
To chat among that learned crew:
Ambition moves still in his breast
That he might chant above the rest,
Striving ^or more then to do well,
That nightingales he might excel.
My fifth whose down is yet scarce gone
Is amongst the shrubs and bushes flown,
And as his wing^ increase in strength,
On higher boughs he 'l perch at length*
My other three, still with me nest,
Until they are grown, then as the rest,
Or here or there, they will take their flight.
As is ordained, so shall they light.
If birds could* weep, then would my tears
Let others know what are my fears
Lest this my brood some harm should catch,
And be surpised for want of watch,
Whilst pecking corn, and void of care
They fall un'wares in Fowlers snare:
Or whilst on trees they sit and sing,
Some untoward boy at them do fling:
Or whilst allured with bell and glass,
The net be spread, and caught, alas.
Or least by Lime twigs they be foiled,
Or by some greedy hawks be spoiled.
O would my young* ye saw my breast,
And knew what thoughts there sadly rest,
Great was my pain when I you bred,
Great was my care, when I you fed,
Long did I keep you soft and warm,
And with m^ wings kept off all harm,
My cares are more, and fears then ever,
My throbs such now, as before were never:
Alas my birds, you wisdom want,
Of perils you are ignorant,
Often times in grass, on trees, in flight,
Sore accidents on you may light.
O to your safety have an eye,
So happy may you live and die:
Mean while my days in tunes I Will spend,
Till my weak lays with me shall end.
In shady woods I Will sit and sing,
And things that past, to mind I Will bring.
Once young and pleasant, as are you,
But former toys (no joys) adieu.
My age I will not once lament,
But ^ing, my time so near is spent.
And from the top bough take my flight,
Into a country beyond sight,
Where old ones, instantly grow young,
And there with Seraphims set song:
No seasons cold, nor storms they see;
But spring lasts to eternity,
When each of you shall in your nest
Among your young ones take your rest,
In chirping language, often them tell,
You had a Dam that loved you well,
That did what could be done for young,
And nursed you up till you were strong,
And before she once would let you fly,
She ^hew'd you joy and misery;
Taught what was good, and what was ill,
What would save life, and what would kill?
Thus gone, amongst you I may live,
And dead, yet speak, and counsel give:
Farewell my birds, farewell adieu,
I happy am, if well with you.
A. B.

In memory of my dear grandchild Eli^abeth Bradstreet, who deceased August,
16^5. being a year and half old.
Farewell dea^ babe, my hearts too much content,
Farewell sweet babe, the pleasure of mine eye,
Farewell fair flower that for a space was lent,
Then taken away unto Eternity.
Blessed babe why should I once bewail thy fate,
Or sigh the days so soon were terminate;
Since thou art settled in an Everlasting state.
2.
By nature Trees do rot when they are grown.
And Plumbs and Apples thoroughly ripe do fall,
And Corn and grass are in their season mown,
And time brings down what is both strong and tall.
But plants new set to be eradicate,
And buds new blown, to have so short a date,
Is by his hand alone that guides nature and fate.
In memory of my dear grandchild Anne Bradstreet. Who deceased June 20. 1669.
being three years and seven Months old.
WIth troubled heart and trembling hand I write,
The Heavens have changed to sorrow my delight.
How often with disappointment have I met,
When I on fading things my hopes have set?
Experience might before this have made me wise,
To value things according to their price:
Was ever stable joy yet found below?
Or perfect bliss without mixture of woe.
I knew she was but as a withering f^our,
That Is here to day* perhaps gone in an hour;
Like as a bubble* or the brittle glass,
Or like a shadow turning as it was.
More fool then I to look on that was ^ent,
As if mine own, when thus impermanent.
Farewell dear child, thou ne re shall come to me,
But yet a while, and I shall go to thee;
Mean tim^ my throbbing heart's cheered up with this
Thou with thy Savior art in endless bliss.
On my dear Grandchild Simon Bradstreet, Who dyed on 16. November. 1669. being
but a month, and one day old.
No sooner come, but gone, and fallen asleep.
Acquaintance short, yet parting caused us weep*
Three flours, two scarcely blown, the last in the bud,
Cropped by the Almighties hand; yet is he good,
With dreadful awe before him let us be mute,
Such was his will, but why, let us not dispute,
With humble hearts and mouths put in the dust,
Let Us say he is merciful* as well as just,
He will return, and make up all our losses,
And smile again, after our bitter crosses.
Go pretty babe* go rest with Sisters twain
Among the blessed in endless joys remain.
A. B.

To the memory of my dear Daughter in Law, Mrs. Mercy Bradstreet, who deceased
Sept. 6. 1669. in the 28. y^ar of her Age.
And live I still to see Relations gone,
And yet survive to sound this wailing tone;
Ah, woe is me, to write thy Funeral Song,
Who might in reason yet have lived long,
I saw the branches lopt the Tree now fall,
I stood so nigh, it cru^ht me down withal;
My bruised heart lies sobbing at the Root,
That thou dear Son has lost both Tree and fruit:
Thou then on ^eas sailing to foreign Coast;
Was ignorant what riches thou had lost.
But ah too soon those heavy tidings ^ly,
To strike thee with amazing misery;
Oh how I simpathize with thy sad heart,
And in thy griefs still bear a second part:
I lost a daughter dear, but thou a wife,
Who loved thee more (it seemed) then her own life.
Thou being gone, she longer could not be,
Because her Soul she would sent along with thee.
One week she only past in pain and woe,
And then her sorrows all at once did go;
A Babe she left before, she soared above,
The fifth and last pledge of her dying love,
E're nature would, it hither did arrive,
No wonder it no longer did survive.
So with her Children four, she is now at rest,
All freed from grief (I trust) among the blessed;
She one has left, a joy to thee and me,
The Heavens vouchsafe she may so ever be*
Cheer up (dear Son) thy fainting bleeding heart,
In him alone, that caused all this smart;
What though thy strokes full sad and grievous be,
He knows it is the best for thee and me.
A. B.

A Fune^al Elogy, Vp^n that Pattern and Patron of Virtue, the truly pious,
peerless and matchless Gentlewoman Mrs. Anne Bradstreet, right Panaretes,
Mi^ror of Her Age, Glory of her Sex, whose Heaven-born-Soul leaving its earthly
Shrine, chose its native hom^, and was taken to its Rest, upon 16th. Sept. 1672.
ASk not why hearts turn Magazines of passions,
And why that grief is clad in several fashions;
Why She on progress goes, and does not borrow
The smallest respite from th'extreams of sorrow,
Her misery is got to such an height,
As makes the earth gro^^ to support its weight,
Such storms of woe, so strongly have beset her,
She has no place for worse, ^or hope for better;
Her comfort is, if any for her (...)*
That none can show more cause of grief then she.
Ask not why some in mournful black are clad;
The Sun is set, there needs must be a shade.
Ask not why every face a sadness shrowdes;
The setting Sun ore-cast us has with Clouds.
Ask not why the great glory of the Sky
That gilds the stars with heavenly Alchamy,
Which all the world does lighten with his rays,
The Persian God* the Monarch of the ^ayes;
Ask not the reason of his ex^asie,
Paleness of late, in midnoon Majesty,
Why that the palefac'd Empress of the nigh^
Disrobed her brother of his glorious light.
Did not the language of the stars foretell
A mournful Scoene when they with tears did swell?
Did not the glorious people of the Sky
Seem sensible of future misery?
Did not the lowering heavens seem to express
The worlds great lose, and their unhappiness?
Behold how tears flow from the learned hill,
How the bereaved Nine do daily fill
The bosom of ^he fleeting Air with groans,
And woeful Accents, which witness their moanes.
How do the Goddesses of verse^ the learned quire
Lament their rival Qui^l, which all admire?
Could Maro's Muse but h^ar her lively strain,
He would co^demn his works to fire again.
Methinks I hear the Patron of the Spring,
The unshorn Diety abruptly sing.
Some do for anguish weep, for anger I
That Ignorance should live, and Art should die.
Black, fatal* dismal, inauspicious day,
Unble^t for ever by Sol's precious Ray,
Be it the first of Miseries to all;
Or last of Life, desam'd for Funeral.
When this day yearly comes, let every one,
Cast in their (...), the black and dismal stone*
Succeeding years as they their circuit go,
Leap over this day, as a sad time of woe.
Farewell my Muse, since thou have left thy shrine,
I am unblest in one, but blessed in nine.
Fair Thes^ian Ladies, light your torches all,
Attend your glory to its Funeral,
To court her ashes with a learned tear,
A briny sacrifice, let not a smile appear.
Grave Matron, whosoever seeks to blazon thee,
Needs not make use of wits false Heraldry;
Whosoever should give thee all thy worth would swell
So high, as 'twould turn the world infidel.
Had he great Maro's Muse, or Tully's tongue,
Or raping numbers like the Thracian Song,
In crowning o^ her merits he would be
sumptuously poor, low in Hyperbole.
To write is easy: but to write on thee,
Truth would be thought to forfeit modesty.
He Will seem a Poet that shall speak but true;
Hyperbole's in others, are thy due.
Like a most servile flatterer ^e will show
Though he write truth, and make the subject, You.
Virtue never dies, time will a Poet raise
Born under better Stars, shall sing thy praise.
Praise her who list, yet he shall be a debtor
For Art never feigned, nor Nature framed a better.
Her virtues were so great, that they do raise
A work to trouble fame, astonish praise.
When as her Name does but salute the ear,
Men think that they perfections abstract hear.
Her breast was a brave Palace, a Broad-street,
Where all heroic ample thoughts did meet,
Where nature such a Tenement had taken,
That others souls, to hers, dwelt in a lane.
Beneath her feet, pale envy bites her chain,
And poison Malice* whetts her sting in vain.
Let every Laurel, every Myrtel bough
Be stripped for leaves t'adorn and load ^er brow.
Victorious wreathes, which 'cause they never fade
Wise elder times for Kings and Poets made.
Let not her happy memory e're lack
Its worth in Fames eternal Almanac,
Which none shall read, but straight their loss deplore,
And blame their Fates they were not born before.
Do not old men rejoice their Fates did last;
And infants too, that theirs did make such have,
In such a welcome time to bring them forth,
That they might be a witness to her worth.
Who undertakes this subject to commend
Shall nothing find ^o hard as how to end.
Finis and non.
Jo^n Norton.

Omnia Romanae sileant Miracula Gentis.
ERRATA.
In the ^^figur^d pages before the Book, p. 10. l. ^. ^ thrice. p. 12. l. ^8
are. p. 13 ^. 6. A^ion. p. 9. l. 11. ^o p 14 l. 23. chaps. p. 2^ l, 4, ^orth.
p, 24 25, She sit^. p 2^ l 1^. thy. l. 2^. ^oth. p 27. l. 2. friend and foe p
43. l 2. here is ^. p. 51. l. 23. Such. p 52 l 7 to p 73. l 11 but that. p. 74
l. 1. Indu^ p 92. l. 3. (...) up now down p. ^ 18. l. 7. But. p. 11^. l. 1^.
^e^ald. p 125 l 1^ bounds. p ^^7. l 8 ancestor. p 128 l 20, too p ^29 12. at
til^. ^. 1^2 l 18 this. p 171 l 25. (...). p 172. l. 24. (...). p. 173 l 30.
his p 189 l 15 Sedition. l 27. ^^ranger. p 196 l 12 Oh. p 22^ l 13 hear p 139 l
1^ oblivious. p. 248 l 17. thy. p. 2^3. l ^. Persi^^.


