The Day of Trouble is near.

TWO SERMONS Wherein is showed, What are the Signs of a Day of Trouble being
near. And particularly, What reason there is for NEW ENGLAND to expect A Day of
Trouble. Also what is to be done, that we may escape these things which shall
come to pass.

Preached (the 11th day of the 12th Month, 1673. being a day of HUMILIATION in
one of the Churches in Boston.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of that Church.

Ezekiel. 33.7. O Son of man, I have set thee a Watchman to the house of Israel,
therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.

Matthew. 24.6, 7, 8. Ye shall hear of wars* and rumors of wars -- For Nation
shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom: All these are the
beginnings of sorrows.

Luke 21.28. And when these things shall begin to come to pass, then look up,
and lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh.

Cambridge: Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1674.

Christian Reader,
IT is a known Observation, verified by Experience, as well as grounded upon
Scripture-Prediction, That sinful Security is the great Disease of the last
Times, whereunto those Churche^ are especially obnoxious, that have escaped the
grosser Pollutions of the World and Antichrist, and do enjoy Rest, and Peace,
and Freedom from hard Bondage. Who sees not (that sees any thing) that the
Security of this Age is very great? And may we not rationally ^ea^ that many of
the Wise, as well as the Foolish Virgins in this Land of Rest, and Quietness,
and Fullness of Spiritual Enjoyments, are slumbering and sleeping? Consult we
the Sacred Oracle, and we shall readily be informed, that one great Reason of
the prevailing of this Distemper, is, because we put far from us the evil day,
Amos 6.1, 3. Banishing the Thoughts of a day of Trouble, is both the Cause and
Effect of carnal ease in Sion. How seasonable then is this practical, solid,
succinct, and comprehensive Discourse, which here offers it sel^ to thy view,
wherein the Reverend and Judicious Author demonstrates with much strength and
evidence (yea, I say, gives not only Probable Indications, but Scriptural and
Rational Demonstrations, according to the Common Law of Divine Dispensations)
that a day of Trouble is near to New England? Many are the solemn Warnings that
the Lord has given of a day of Trouble hastening upon us. The Lion has roared,
and the Trumpet has been blown; And shall not the people be afraid? What a
dead sleep of Midnight-Security has surprised and overtaken them, that do not
hear the loud Report of the many Divine Warning-Pieces that are gone off among
us? Woe to those Rebellious ones that say, The days are prolonged, and every
Vision fails; when the Lord says, The days are at hand, and the effect of
every Vision, Ezekiel. 12.22, 23, 25* And will men lie down on the Top of a Mast
in the midst of the Sea to sleep there? and suffer themselves to be overborn
by Security in the mouth of danger? When the Judgments of God are on their
March toward us, shall we not be Alarmed? When certain Intelligence comes,
that they are ready to surprise us in our Quarters, shall we be stupidly secure
and senseless? When they are in view and prospect, making near and sensible
Approaches to us, shall we say* It is but the Shadow of the Mountains, (Judge. 9
36.) and not rather prepare and posture our selves to go forth to meet the Lord
in a way of Humiliation, Supplication, and Reformation? Though there are many
Reasons to conceive (as the wo^thy Author of these Sermons intimates) that God
will not (...) an utter End of us; yet we have cause en^ugh to conclude, that
He will not leave us altogether unpunished. Verily we have caused our day of
Trouble to draw near, Ezekiel. 22.4. And is it not high time for us to shake ^ff
Sloth and Security, and to wait for the Lord in the way of his Judgments, and
to make our Supplication to him (as David, in the Person, and as a Type of
Christ* Psalm. 22.11, 19) Be not far from us, for trouble is near? To have
Trouble near, and the Comforter, that should relieve us, far off, to have the
Philistines upon us, and God departed from us, will be a distressed condition.
It is the Interest, and will be the desire of every gracious heart, to have God
near, when Trouble is near. Gods coming near to us in Judgment will trouble
us; but his coming near to us in Mercy will either set Trouble far off, or
sanctify it, and turn it into Advantage and Comfort to us, and sweetly alter
the property of it. The design of this Discourse, and the Publication of it, is
not to enfeeble and discourage any of the Lords Servants, but to startle and
awaken sleepy sinners (that cry Peace and Safety to themselves) that they may
not be taken as Fishes in the net, and caught as Birds in a snare, or through
ignorance of their time, be snared in an evil time, falling suddenly upon them:
And to engage all persons of Interest with God, to stir up themselves to take
hold of him, when he seems to be going from us, and to get into the Gap, and
make up the Hedge, that the Evils threatened and approaching may not break in
upon us, but there may be a lengthning out of our Tranqu^lity. That this
vigilant Watchmax, and wise Discerner of the Signs of the Times, may not only
deliver his own Soul by his plain and faithful Premonitions, but also through
the rich Blessing of God accompanying these useful and seasonable Sermons, may
instrumentally deliver the Souls of many others, by awakening them to Watch and
pray, that they may be accounted worthy to escape the things that shall come to
pass, is the hearty Desire and Prayer of him who is

Thy Servant for Christ's sake, Vrian Oaks.

EZEKIEL. 7.7. -- The day of Trouble is near --
THis Chapter does contain a denunciation of Judgment. Sermon ^.
Which Judgment is described,

1. From the Causes of it. The principal Efficient Cause was God, He is the
Cause of all evils of Punishment: There is no evil in the City, and the Lord
has not done it; He creates darkness. The Instrumental adjuvent Cause was the
Caldeans, they did help forward the affliction, and are therefore said to be
the worst of men, yea the worst of the Heathen. The Impulsive Procuring Cause
was Sin: there are three sins mentioned in this Chapter (of which afterward)
as the Procurers of the Judgment threatened. The Final Cause was the Glory of
God, even that he might be known to be the Lord.

2. The Judgment here denounced is set forth from the Subject of it, or the
persons upon whom it came, v. 2. Thus says the Lord God to the Land of Israel:
which is not to be understood of the Ten Tribes, who were gone into Captivity
before this Prophecy was written, but the Jews are here called Israel. Often
in the Scripture, not only in the New Testament, but in the Old, the Jews are
called Israel: therefore Iehoshaphat King of Judah is styled, The King of
Israel.

3. The Judgment here threatened is set forth from the Greatness of it:
therefore it is called the end, ver. 2, 3. and an only Evil, ver. 5. that is,
a grand Evil: as when David confesses, Against thee, thee [onely] have I
sinned, Psalm. 51.4. i. e. against thee chiefly: So an only Evil here, notes a
principal evil, yea a sweeping Judgment, so as that there should not be need
for affliction to rise up the second time.

4. This Judgment is set forth from the Certainty of it: therefore ver. 6.
it is said, It is come, it is come. The Prophet does repeat those words, It is
come, six times over, which shows not only the vehemence of the Speaker, but
the certain undoubted futurition of the Evil spoken of.

5. The Judgment here denounced is described from the Celerity and Proximity
of it. This may likewise be intimated by those Repetitions and Iterations, but
now hinted. As Joseph said to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.32. And for that the dream was
doubled twice, it is because the thing is established by God, and God will
shortly bring it to pass. So, inasmuch as the Prophet is so Repetitious, as
here we see, it was to show, that the Evil would certainly and shortly come to
pass. And that is the scope of this Verse, The morning is come, that is to say,
Execution-day is at hand: for those words seem to be an allusion unto the Jews
Custom of executing Malefactors in the morning. Hence David says, Psalm.
101.8. I will early destroy the wicked; or as the words are, In the morning I
will destroy them, it being the Custom in Israel of old, to cut off
Malefactors betimes in the morning. But a little for opening the words.

Day] here notes Time. We must not think that the trouble here spoken of,
continued but for the space of 24 hours; for the words have respect to the
Caldean Siege, which lasted two years, yea to the Captivity, which lasted
seventy years. It is therefore usual in the Scripture to denote a Time of very
long continuance, by the name and notion of a day.

Of Trouble] The Hebrew word (...) notes great trouble. Iunius translateth it,
The day of vexation. It is the same day of trouble which is spoken of, Ier.
30.7. Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time
of Jacobs trouble. When the City and Temple were taken, and burnt with fire;
when the King had all his Children slain before his eyes, and then his eyes put
out, and he clapped in Chains, and carried Captive, that was a day of trouble
that had none like it.

Is near] It is not here said, how near that day was, out it is certain from
other Scriptures, that this trouble began within three or four years after this
Prophecy. For Ezekiel wrote in the fifth year of Zedekiah, and the Caldean
Siege began in the ninth year of Zedekiah; so that this trouble began within
four years after these words were Preached, and within six years execution was
done upon Israel: therefore well might the Prophet say, The day of trouble is
near.

And Trouble may be said to be near, in a double respect: 1. In appearance, and
probability. As it is said of Epaphroditus, that he was nigh unto death, Phil.
2.27. i. e. in appearance, and as to an eye of reason. 2. Trouble may be said
to be near in reality. And so was this day of trouble of which the Text
speaks, near not only in appearance, but in reality; and therefore the next
words are, and not the sounding again of the Mountains, that is to say, there
should be more then a mere ((...), fragor Montium) Echo of troubles. If men
shout (as in the Mountainous Land of Israel they were wont to do) amongst
Mountains, it will cause an Echo, a sounding again, which soon vanishes, and
comes to nothing; but says the Prophet, the sound of troubles at hand shall
not vanish so. The Jews heard a report, a rumor, as if the Caldeans, whose cry
was in their ships, were coming against them; now the Lord would have them to
understand, that it should be more then a sound or rumor, even a reality. The
divine Threatenings were but an empty sound with them, but the Troubles coming
for the contempt thereof, should be more then an empty sound.

From the Judgment here threatened, in consideration with the Author and
Subject of it, we may observe,

That God does sometimes bring Times of great Trouble upon his own People. Doct.


Now in the Doctrinal handling of this Truth, there are four things may be
spoken to. 1. That Israel, i. e. the Church of God, is subject unto troubles in
this world. 2. What troubles they are which Gods people are here subject unto.
3. What are the signs of a day of trouble being near. 4. The Reasons of this
Doctrine, whence it is that God does bring times of great trouble upon his own
people.

1. That the Lords people are subject unto great troubles, Scriptures are
abundant in bearing witness to that: Acts 14.22. We must through much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. As the children of Israel went
through the Red Sea, and through the Wilderness, before they could enter into
Canaan, so must we wade through a Red Sea of Troubles, and pass through a
Wilderness of Miseries, e're we can arrive at the heavenly Canaan. Here is the
difference between this world and that which is to come. Indeed in the world to
come, the Church shall be freed from troubles: it is therefore said, Rev. 21.
ver. 1. There was no more sea, such a day will come, when there shall be no
more sea, no more troubles and combustions in the world as now there is, but as
for the Saints, God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain: but before this day, Heaven and earth shall pass away, and there must be
a new heaven, and a new earth; that is to say, this will be fulfilled in the
world to come, but not in this world. Hence the Apostle speaks of the
sufferings of this present time, Romans 8.18. so that during this present time,
the Church will be subject to sufferings. Therefore also the same Apostle calls
this present world, an evil world, Gal. 1.4. So that Christians must look for
evils, they must look for troubles, as long as the present world shall endure.
Two or three things may be briefly touched on, as demonstrations of this.

1. Christ himself was exposed to sufferings when in this world. He was a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. David speaking in the Person, and as a
Type of Christ, says, Thou have showed me great and sore troubles, Psalm.
71.20. And again, Psalm. 25.17. The troubles of my heart are enlarged, O bring
thou me ^ut of my distresses. Therefore Believers must undergo troubles and
distresses also: for God has predestined them to be conformed to the image
of his Son, Romans 8.29. that is, not only in respect of grace, or of glory, but
in respect of sufferings, for of them is the Apostle discoursing in that
Context. Should not the Members be like the Head? shall we be Monsters in the
Mystical Body of Christ? Truly, if we should meet with no troubles in the
world, we should rather be Monsters then Members in the Mystical Body of Christ.

2. The Verity and Veracity of God proves the truth of this. The Lord has
said, In the world you shall have tribulation, Joh. 26.33. But if Christians
should live and die, and never meet with any troubles, how should those words
be true? Moreover, God has Covenanted with his people, that sanctified
afflictions shall be their portion, if need be, Psalm. 89.32. The Lord has put
it into the Indenture which he has made with his Servants, that they shall
have Physic as well as Food: now afflictions are Physic for the Soul. There
are Covenant-afflictions, as well as Covenant-mercies: yea, all the afflictions
which befall the Lords faithful Servants, are ordered according to the Covenant
of Grace, 2 Samuel 23.5. Hence when God entered into Covenant with Abraham, there
was an appearance of great darkness, Genesis 15.17. signifying, that all dark
dispensations of Providence are ordered by a gracious Covenant.

3. The Instruments, and immediate Causes of trouble to the Church, have ever
been. Causes of trouble there are both within and without. Within, there is sin
and corruptions in the hearts of the best; and it will be vain to expect that
the Saints shall be freed from all suffering, until such time as they are
freed from sin. Without, there is Satan to raise storms of affliction. Indeed
if the Devil were cast into the bottomless Pit, and shut up there, we might
think that there would be less trouble in the world: But we know, that as yet
though he be a Prisoner, yet he is a Prisoner at large, he has a long Chain
given him, and goes with it ranging and raging up and down the world, and
makes it his great design to raise Persecutions against the Church. Also
Instruments of Persecution in the hands of Satan have ever been: There was the
Egyptian, and the Babylonian, and the Grecian, of old: And in these days of
the New Testament, first the Heathen Emperors persecuted the Church ten times.
They were no sooner gone, but the Arrians arose, and persecuted worse then ever
professed Pagans had done before them, so that the Church was in great danger
of being swallowed up with that blood, Rev. 12.15. And by that time the Arrians
were down, Antichrist got up, who has persecuted more then all that ever were
(...) him. Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, were all but Types of
Antichrist. Wherefore, as long as there is a Devil out of Hell, or a Pope in
Rome, we may be sure that there will be days of trouble to the Church of God.

But what troubles are they, which the Saints are here subject to?

Ans. That Is the second thing propounded to be spoken to. And in general, it is
true, that Christians are in this life exposed to all manner of Miseries. This
we may see in that little Book of Martyrs, as it is wont to be called, viz. the
11th Chapter to the Hebrews.

1. There are inward spiritual troubles, Soul-troubles, which Believers may be
afflicted with: They may be molested with Satan's temptations, the best Saint
upon earth may so, as Paul was, which caused him to pour forth many a bitter
and bleeding complaint into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 12.8. He
besought the Lord thrice, that is, many a time. A true child of God may also
be under divine desertion: hence the Church said, The Comforter which should
relieve my soul is far from me, Lam. 1.16. God may hide his face from his
dearest Servants sometimes, and those are troubles indeed, Psalm. 30.7. Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled. But these are not the troubles which
the text speaks of, and therefore I will not insist there.

2. There are outward troubles; e. g. sufferings as to losses and crosses
respecting a man's outward worldly Estate. This is partly meant in the Text, A
day of trouble is near, that is, a day wherein all men's Estates shall go to
wrack and ruin. Hence ver. 12. it is said, Let not the buyer rejoice, nor the
seller mourn* why? because he should not have kept his Estate long, though he
had not sold it, inasmuch as Enemies were at hand to take it away. Again,
troubles upon the Body in respect of Sicknesses, Mortalities, etc. are here
intended: wherefore in ver. 15. the Pestilence is mentioned. Some have made a
question of it, Whether a godly man may be sick of the Plague? A needless
question. It is generally conceived that Hezekiah was sick of that disease: and
some Interpreters on Psalm. 38.11. think that David was visited with that
stroke. And the like is apprehended concerning Lazarus. In Cyprians time there
were many thousands of godly men and women that died of that disease. It should
seem, that the believing Corinthians, many of them were sick, and some died of
the Pestilence. We should be very uncharitable, did we conclude, that all those
that died of the Plague, in that day of trouble and mortality which the Text
speaks of* perished eternally. And the like may be said with respect to those
Seventy thousand that were swept away when David numbered the people. Again,
when Wars arise, it is a day of trouble: that is here meant in a special
manner. Hence some render the words, A day of Tumult is near, Polanus,
Piscator, and Lavater.
viz. in respect of confused noise, and garments rolled in blood. This may well
be called a day of trouble, because War is the greatest of all outward
Judgments, See ^. Arrow^^^ths Sermon on (...) 26 25. p 7.
and thence is by way of eminency termed Evil, Isa. 45.7. I create evil, that
is, War: those words relating to Cyrus his Expedition against Babylon.

We come then to the third thing propounded, namely, What are the Signs of a
day of trouble being near?

Ans. There are Signs of the Times, whereby whosoever is wise, and does observe
these things, may discern when a day of trouble is near. It was a sad complaint
which the Lord took up against his people of old, saying, The Stork i^ the
heaven knows her appointed ^imes, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
Swallow, observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgment
of the Lord, Jer. 8.7. These Creatures could tell when Winter was at hand, but
there was a Winter coming upon the Jews, even Judgment of the Lord was at
hand, and yet they knew it not. Christ also does blame the Pharisees for not
discerning the signs of the times, Mat. 16.3. Look as God has stretched the
Firmament over this natural World, and has placed the Stars there, to be for
signs as to Natural Events in the ordinary course of Providence; See Dr. (...)*
Epistle Dedic. in (...), p. ^.
so has he stretched out the Expansum of his Word over the Rational World, and
therein set his Statutes and his Judgments, from whence the wise-hearted may
conjecture what is like to come to pass. Now I have nothing curious or critical
to present you with, only a few plain Scripture Truths.

1. The abounding of Iniquity is a sign that the day of trouble is near.
Therefore, the Lord Jesus Christ speaking of the signs fore-running that day of
Calamity which then was coming upon Jerusalem, says, Iniquity shall abound,
Mat. 24.12. If Iniquity do abound amongst those that are the professed Enemies
of God, and of his People, that is a sign that their day is near, and that the
things which shall come upon them do make haste, Joel 3.13. Their wickedness is
great; and then it follows in the next Verse, The day of the Lord is near in
the valley of decision. So we see in Sodom, wickedness was grown to a
mavelous height there, and then on a sudden the fatal Morning came upon them.
If strange Prodigious Wickednesses are breaking forth, that is a sign that
strange Punishments are at hand: but especially if it be thus amongst a
Professing People Hence it is said concerning the old world, Genesis 6.12. God
looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh, even the Sons
of God and all, had corrupted his way upon the earth: and (...) follows, ver.
13. The end of all flesh is come, even such an end, as that which the Prophet
speaks of in this Chapter.

2. Great Security is a sign that trouble is near. This we see, if we look no
further then the Text, The morning is come: As if it were said, ^
You are asleep in your sins* but there is that at hand that will awaken you;
you think it is not midnight, but that you may sleep on securely still, but
it is morning. So in ver. 6. It watches for thee; q. d. you are asleep, and you
think that Judgment is slumbering too, when as it is waiting ready to take hold
on you. Zephaniah speaks of the same day of trouble, with this in the Text,
and stupendous Security is mentioned as a fore-running sign thereof, Zeph.
1.12*13. I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are
settled on their lees, that say in their heart, The Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil. Wonderful Security! Therefore their goods shall become
a bo^ty, and their houses a desolation* And what follows? The great day of
the Lord is near, it is near and hastes greatly; that day is a day of trouble,
and distress, a day of the Trumpet, and alarm against the fenced Cities. Look
as before the day of general judgment, there will be great Security amongst
men on the earth, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and
they shall not escape. So it is wont to be as to lesser days of Judgment,
which may come upon particular persons or places: How has the doleful
Experience of all Ages proved this? Thus if we look back into the old World,
they were minding little besides their sensual pleasures, until the very day
when the Flood came, And they of Sodom were strangely secure, when trouble was
near unto them: when Lot preached to them, that r^ine was at hand, He seemed as
one that mocked, to his sons in law, they could hardly believe that he was in
good earnest. There Is a Jest indeed (say they) shall fire come from Heaven and
destroy us? they thought Lot had dreamed of a dry Summer. And the like do we
see in Laish, Judge. 18.27. they were a people at quiet, and secure, and now
were the Dani^es at hand, to smite with the edge of the sword, and to burn the
City with fire. So in Babylon; we read, Dan. 5.1. that Belshazzar the King
made a great Feast to a thousand of his Lords, and ^rank wine before them. A
wonderful Security, that (...) such a season he should mind his Kingdom no
more, for at this very time the City was besieged with Enemies. But the
Caldeans thought with themselves, they had the River Euphrates, and a triple
Wall belonging to the City to secure them, ^
and also twenty years Provision wherewith they were stored, so that they
laughed at Cyrus his Expedition against them: well but, that very night was
Belshazzar the King of the Caldeans slain, and D^rius the Median took the
Kingdom. And the like is to be said concerning Mystical Babylon; at that very
time when Rome shall say in her heart, I see no sorrow, her plagues shall come
in one day, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire.

Nevertheless, 3. Secret dismal Fears upon the Spirits of men, are sometimes a
sign that a day of trouble is near. So it was in the day of Midian, the Lord
sent a Panick Terror amongst the Midianites, which was a sign of the day of
Tumult in the Host of Midian. ^
This some take to be meant by the Hornet (though I believe that was literally
fulfilled) spoken of Deuteronomy. 7.20. Austine, and some others, understand it
Spiritually, namely, that the Lord sent stinging fears into the hearts of the
Canaanites, as a sign that they should be dispossessed of their Land. However,
it is certain that such Fears there were, and that they were ominous. Therefore
Rahab said unto the Spies, Josh. 2 9. I know the Lord has given you the Land,
and that your terror is fallen upon us, and all the inhabitants of the Land
faint because of you. And again, ver. 11. As soon as we heard these things, our
hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man because
of you. The Lord is wont to cause such fears to come upon men, that so they may
be left without excuse if they do not prepare for the day of trouble. Hence
then, when every man's hands are upon his loins, and all faces are gathering
paleness, it is an ominous sign. This is mentioned as a sign foregoing the
troubles of the last times, Luke 21.26. Men's hearts failing them for fear, and
for looking after those things which are coming on the earth. Look as a Spirit
of Courage is a good sign, yea an evident token of salvation, and that of God*
so on the other hand, a Spirit of Cowardice and servile fear is an ill sign.
Thus it was at last with those my Text has immediate reference unto, in the
14th Verse of this Chapter it is said, They have blown the trumpet, even to
make all ready, but none goes to the battle. They would go to Pressing of
Soldiers, and make a great stir, as if they would do some great matter against
the Enemy, but when it came to, none go^th to the ba^tel, their Courage failed
them this was an ominous sign.

4. When God begins to depart, that is a sign that trouble is near. For the Lord
is a Sun and a Shield to his people, Psalm. 84.11. When a man's Shield is gone,
what can he expect but blows? And when the Sun is gone, darkness follows; so
if the Lord depart, troubles and miseries must needs follow. And if God once
begin to forsake a people, many times when he begins, he mak^^h an end also. We
see in these following Chapters in Ezekiel, when the glory of the Lord began to
remove, it went further and further, until at last there was a total departure
thereof. In which respect, if our glory begin to remove, it is very sad and
ominous: If God be at the threshold, trouble is at the door. Hence, when the
signs of the Lords Presence are taken away, it argues that a day of trouble is
coming on apace. Unity, is a sign of the Lords Presence; Live in peace, and the
God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Hence breaches and divisions, inasmuch
as they are an evidence of the Lords departure from a people, are a sign of
miseries at hand. So again, Ordinances, Civil, but especially Sacred
Ordinances, when administered according to the mind of Christ, are tokens of
the Lords gracious Presence in the midst of his people. Therefore when the Lord
removes these, or the Instruments of upholding and managing these, for the
edification of his people, it is a sad sign. Hence also, lesser Judgments are
signs of greater troubles at hand, because they are arguments of the Lords
beginning to forsake such places where those Judgments take effect. Thus we
find in the fourth Chapter of Amos, that Droughts, and Blastings, and Mildews,
etc. are signs that the morning shall be made darkness. Yea, bad Harvests are
sometimes a sign, that a d^y of great trouble is at hand; Joel 1.15. Alas for
the day, for the day of the Lord is at hand: How does that appear? ver. 16, 17.
Is not the meat cut off before our eyes -- The seed is rotten under their
clods, the garners are laid desolate, the Corn is withered.

5. When God s^irs up the Spirits of his Messengers to sound the Trumpet, and
to cry an Alarm against his people, that is a sign that the day of trouble is
near. Mica^ 6.9. The Lords voice cri^th to the City; that is to say, the
Trumpet of the Word is sounded to give the Alarm, but if that Voice be not
regarded, then Hear the Rod, Judgments follow: Son of man (says the Lord to
Ezekiel) speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring
the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their c^asts,
and set him for their watchman, if when he sees the sword come upon the land,
and he blow the trumpet, and warn the people, then whosoever hears the sound
of the trumpet, and takes not warning, if the sword come and take him away,
his blood shall be upon his own head, Ezekiel. 33.2, 3, 4. So then, if Gods
Ezekiels sound the Trumpet, ^t's a fair warning that the sword is coming: For
is it not said, Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals
his secre^ to his Servants the Prophets? God by a secret Providence is wont to
move upon the hearts of his faithful Servants, that they should speak according
to what is in the Lords heart to do. Therefore ever observe it, (for it is an
Observation that is not wont to fail) That if the Lords Watchmen do with one
voice cry, The day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the
Mountains, it is so indeed. Men may sl^ght this Sign, as the Edomites did; but
believe it, it is a dangerous thing so to do, as we see, Isa. 21.11. Watchman,
what of the night? watchman, what of the night? O say they, you have been
Preaching to us these several years, that there is a night coming upon us, but
we see no such thing. The watchman said, The morning comes, and also the
night: Albeit at present you have a morning, you are in a prosperous state, yet
a night of misery is nearer to you, then you are aware of.

6. When the Lord does mingle a perverse spirit amongst a people, it is a sign
that the day of trouble is near. This we may see mentioned as the forerunner
of Egypts ruin, Isa. 19.14. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the
midst thereof. When men are resolved to oppose and thwart one another whatever
come of it; that a man will not be for such a thing, only because such an one
is for it; and he will be sure to oppose such a Motion, only because such an
one, whom he is resolved to contradict, pleads for it: this is a perverse
spirit. Hence when there are Prevailing Factions amongst a people, it is an
ominous sign: So it was in Jerusalem before their last destruction. The love of
many was grown cold. There were (as Historians have noted) very great Factions
amongst the Jews, when the Romans came against them: Some Interpreters think,
that this is hinted at Zech. 11.8. Three Shepherds I cut off in one month:
Those three Shepherds are thought to intend those three great Heads of
Factions, ^
the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Esseans, into which the Jews were divided. Hence
also, divided Counsels are signs that bode no good to such a people. When one
shall be violent for this, and another shall be as strong and resolute against
it; this is wont to be the Judicial Effect of the Lords mingling a perverse
spirit: for then he does set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, Isa. 19.2.
This we see, Psalm. 55.9. Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues. According
to that Prayer of David, Absoloms Counselors were divided, which proved the
ruin of that party.

7. When glorious Promises are near unto their birth, we may conclude that a
day of trouble is also near. Zech. 14.7. At evening time it shall be light. If
light be ready to break forth, we may well conjecture that a dark evening will
go before it. Naturalists observe, that a little before break of day, is the
darkest time of all the night; so when the day break of any eminent Mercy to
the Church is at hand, dark and dismal dispensations are wont immediately to
proceed: it has ever been so. A little before the children of Israel were
brought out of Egypt, they were in the saddest condition that could be. David,
a little before Saul's death, whereby way was made for David's enlargement and
advancement, was in the greatest distress that ever he was i^, in all his life,
namely, when Ziklag was burnt, and his own friends spoke of stoning him. And in
the Primitive Times, the last of the Ten Pagan Persecutions, was the bloodiest
of all, viz. that under Dioclesian, who made full account that he had utterly
destroyed the Christian Name, and therefore would have Pillars erected in
diverse places, as Monuments of his Victory over Christ, as he vainly imagined,
and caused to be written on diverse of them, Christi Superstitione deleta,
(...), Anno ^04.
that the Superstition of Christ (as he blasphemously called the Christian
Religion) was abolished out of the world. Now when things were come to this
extremity, God raised up Constantine, the Great Christian Emperor, according
to that Prophecy, Rev. 12 5. The woman, i. e. the Church, brought forth a man
child, who was to Rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, (that is, a Scepter,
for in old Times Scepters were Rods of Iron) and her child was caught up unto
God, and to his throne: But before this em^nent Mercy to the Church, and the
happy Times which followed, when those in Authority were none but Christians,
the Church cried, travailing in birth. So then, if glorious things be coming to
their birth, cries and travailing pains must go before deliverance can be
expected. In these days into which we are fallen, before the Witnesses do
ascend into Heaven, the Beast which ascends out of the Bottomless Pit shall
make War against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. This is the
usual method of divine Providence, to bring light out of darkness, by the
greatest Miseries to prepare for the greatest Mercies.

We come now unto the fourth thing propounded, Sermon II. P.M.
in order to the clearing of the Truth before us, viz. To enquire into the
Reasons of this Doctrine, whence is it that the Lord does sometimes bring days
of great trouble upon his own people? Ans. The Reasons may be referred unto two
Heads:

1. The Lord does this with respect unto Himself.

2. With respect unto his people. As indeed all the Providence of God, all
that he does in the world, may be referred unto those two Heads, the Lord
therein aims at his own glory, and his peoples good.

1. The Lord has respect unto Himself, in those troubles which come upon the
Church. Hereby his Faithfulness is manifested and glorified: therefore David
says, Psalm. 119.75* I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. The Lord shows his great Faithfulness
as to the time, the kind, the measure, the manner, the duration of whatever
afflictions may befall any of his faithful Servants. And his Power also is
hereby discovered: it is a glorious evidence of the wonderful Power of God,
that the Church should be upheld and preserved in the world, notwithstanding
the troubles and miseries thereof. The Church's being continued in the world,
is one of the great Wonders of divine Providence, wherein the mighty Power of
God is seen. It is said, that the children of Israel were like two little
flocks of Kids before the Syrians, 1 Kings 20.27. Should we see a little flock
of Kids, or of Sheep, in the midst of Wolves and devourers, and yet not
destroyed, we should say, The singer of God is here. Truly thus it is: The
Church is a little-little flock of Sheep, and that in the midst of thousands of
Wolves and Tigers, yet this flock is saved alive* so then the Power of God is
seen and glorified. Moses did sometimes marvel at this thing, Exodus 3.2* 3. And
he looked, and behold the Bush burned with fire, and the Bush was not consumed;
and Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the Bush
is not burnt. The children of Israel were the Bush that was all on fire, in
respect of the Egyptian Persecution, which then they were under; but the Lord
by a mighty hand of Providence upheld them, so that the fire did not consume
them. Moreover, the Saints are wont to glorify God more in a day of trouble,
then at other times: Isa. 24.15. Glorify ye the Lord in the fires* so are the
Saints wont to do, when in the fires of affliction, they bring more glory to
God, it may be in one day, then in many years of prosperity. How was the Name
of Christ advanced, and his Interest promoted in the world in the Primitive
Times? and the reason was, because those were times of great Suffering. Hence
then the Lord brings such times upon his people.

2. God brings days of trouble with respect to his people. And that especially
on a fourfold account. 1. For their Probation. 2. For their Instruction. 3. For
their Correction. 4. In order to their Purgation.

1. The Lord aims at the Probation of his people, in those troubles which
befall them in the world. Hence Ezekiel. 21.13. the Prophet there speaking of the
same day of trouble which the Text has reference unto, says, Because it is a
trial, etc. So Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things thou shall suffer; behold,
the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be Tried. Hence the
afflictions of Gods children are compared to a refining Furnace, or to a
calcining Pot, wherein Metals are Tried, 1 Pet. 1.7. The trial of your Faith,
etc. The Greek word ((...)) signifies a Furnace wherein Goldsmiths try Metals;
even so the Lord by afflictions Tries what Metal men are made of, whether they
be Gold or Dross, whether they be Silver, or Lead only. The Faith and Patience
of his Servants are hereby put to the Trial: therefore John speaking concerning
the troubles which should come upon the Church under Antichrist, says, Here is
the Patience and Faith of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. that is to say, by these
troubles it is exercised and manifested. By this means the Lord Tries the
sincerity and fidelity of his Servants; yea, and what measure of grace they
have too. If they ^aint in the day of adversity, their strength is small; but
they that hold out faithfully and courageously in times of great trouble, have
received a good measure of grace.

2. The Lord by bringing days of trouble upon his Servants, aims at their
Instruction. Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law. Therefore does the Lord bring his precious ones
under chastening dispensations of Providence sometimes, that so he may Teach
them; yea, and many a blessed lesson does he teach them thereby. Affl^cting
times are not only Trying times, but also Teaching times: Psalm. 119.^1. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Hereby
the children of God learn, yea they learn to know more of God, and of
themselves too: as we see in Job, who after his troubles could say, Mine eye
sees thee; and, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. By afflictions, men are
taught to know that God is God, and that sin is sin. Ever since that day of
trouble which the Text speaks of, the Jews have dreaded that sin which was
the principal Cause of all their miseries.

3. The Lord in afflicting his people, aims at their Correction. Hence
affliction is called a Rod, Ezekiel, 21, 10. It is the Rod of my son, contemning
every tree. Israel was Gods son, as the Lord said to Pharaoh, Israel is my son*
my firstborn; now the Caldeans were a Rod, whereby God scourged that son of
his. It is true, that personal afflictions oftentimes come only or chiefly in
a way of Trial, but public Calamities are wont to come as Corrections and just
Punishments for sin: Ier. 30.15. Why criest thou for thine affliction? for the
multitude of thine iniquities, because thy sins were increased, have I done
these things unto thee. And to the like purpose does the Lord speak by the
Prophet Micah, Chap. 1. ver. 5. For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and
for the sins of the house of Israel.

Quest. But you will say, What sins are they for which God is wont to bring
days of trouble upon his people?

Ans. We shall here take notice only of such sins as are mentioned in this
Context, as the Procuring Cause of that day of Calamity here threatened. And
they are three:

(1.) The not ordering matters aright, respecting the Worship of God, was the
principal Crime which brought this trouble. Idolatry was the sin, that at this
time above others, troubled Israel. Hence it is said, ver. 3, 4. I will
recompense upon thee all ^hine abominations; h.e. I will punish you for your
Idols: for usually in the Scripture, Idols are called Abominations. It is said,
Rev. 21.27. He that makes an abomination, that is, he that makes an Idol,
shall not enter into the Heavenly Jerusalem. That sin of corrupting the Worship
of God, has been the grand Procuring Cause of those astonishing and desolating
Plagues that have come upon the earth. If men worship a false God, their
sorrows shall be multiplied; or if they worship the true God in false Ways, by
means which he never appointed, and which never came into his heart, that is a
sin that procures great wrath. If men shall add unto what the Lord has
commanded, and so corrupt his pure Worship with their own devices, vengeance
will come for it: Psalm. 99.8. Thou tookest vengeance of their inventions; Hos.
11.6. The Sword shall abide on his Cities, because of their own counsels; that
is to say, because they corrupted the Worship of God with inventions of their
own. So on the other hand, if there be a taking from the Word of God, in
matters referring to his Worship, days of trouble will come. In case Churches
shall not come up fully to practice the Institutions of Christ, and to stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, the Lord will punish them for
their neglects; as we see in the Jewish Church, who met with sore troubles
after the return from Captivity, and the reason of it was, because they did not
carry on Temple-work to that perfection which should have been, Hag. 1.4. Yea
moreover, if men grow careless as to the manner of their worshipping God,
(though Object and Means should be according to his Will) the Lord will visit
for that iniquity. When the Corinthians were not duly careful as to the manner
of worshipping, for this cause many were weak and sick amongst them, 1 Cor.
11.30. It is (as was hinted but now) conceived by some Expositors, that the
Lord sent the Plague amongst them, for that sin. We read in Ez^kiel, that fire
was taken from between the Cherubims, i. e. from off the Incense-Altar, and
scattered over the City, Chap. 10.2. Why? to signify that here was the cause
wherefore the City was burnt, it was the Lords Controversy respecting his
Altar, his Worship that is, which brought that famous City into ruinous heaps.
So again, Isai. 29.1. it is there said, Woe to Ariel, to Ariel the City where
David dwelt. Ariel signifies the Lion of God, and may intend the Altar, which
like a Lion did devour the Sacrifices offered thereon: here then was the true
Cause of that Woe which befell that City and Nation, in that matters respecting
Ariel, even the Altar and Worship of God, were not as should have been. Look as
when things are managed aright as to Divine Worship, great prosperity is wont
to follow, Ezra 3.3. They set the Altar upon his Bases, for fear was upon them,
because of the people of those Countries: They knew that that was the w^y to
engage the Lord to be with them, and to defend them against their Enemies, even
to set the Altar upon his right Bases; so the contrary is to be affirmed, when
the Altar is not set upon his Bases, great troubles are then like to come.

(2.) Pride is another sin here mentioned, as the Cause of this day of trouble:
ver. 10. Behold the day, behold it is come, the morning is gone forth, the Rod
has blossomed, Pride has budded: The buddings of Pride, do cause the Rod to
blossom against a people. Hence the morning, even the fatal day came upon
Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. This was the iniquity of Sodom, Pride, fullness of bread,
and abundance of Idleness. Pride is mentioned in (...) first place, because
that indeed was the first firebrand which set Sodom on fire. It was for that
sin in special, that those Proud Cities were brought down into ashes.

(3) Oppression is another Evil mentioned, as the Procuring Cause of this
trouble, ver. 11. Violence is risen up into a Rod of wickedness. Violence,
Oppression that is, brought the wicked Caldeans upon the Jews. There seems to
be a mavelous Elegancy in the Prophets words: The Tribe (the same Hebrew word
signifies a Rod, and a Tribe) of Judah is compared unto a Rod; now what were
the Buds that grew upon this Rod? even Pride and Oppression: therefore did the
day of trouble draw near. Thus we see the Lord brings troubles upon his people,
that so he may correct them for their sins.

4. God herein also aims at their Purgation. So is it said concerning the day
of trouble that was inflicted on the Church by the Babylonians, Isa. 27.9. By
this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take
away his sin. And concerning the troubles under Antiochus, of which Daniel
speaks, Chap. 11.35. Some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them,
and to purge, and to make them white. To the same purpose is that, Zech. 13.9.
And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as
silver is refined, etc. So then, that which the Lord intends by bringing his
people into the Furnace of Affliction, is that he may make pure Metal of them,
yea, that they may be purged and sanctified, and become vessels meet for their
Masters use.

We have done with the Doctrinal handling of the Truth before us, the Uses of
it follow.

USE I. If the Lord does sometimes bring days of great trouble upon his own
people, then we ought not to think it strange, or to be any ways dismayed at
it, if we see it so now: I say we should not think it strange. So does the
Apostle instruct us, 1 Pet. ^.12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial (...) is to try you, as though some strange thing happened to you.
Why* (...) is no more then what has been in almost all Ages of the Church* and
will be to the worlds end, and therefore why should we strange at it? Nor
should we be dismayed thereat, but rather say as the Church does, in Psalm. 46.
God is very a present help in trouble, therefore we will not fear though the
earth be removed, and though the waters roar and be troubled, though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Silah. Truly thus it is at this day,
the multitude of many people make a noise like the noise of the seas: we have
heard the rushing of the Nations; yea, we have heard the sea and the waves
thereof roaring. What roarings have there been on the sea, in these late days?
and the Mountains begin to shake with the swelling thereof. Kingdoms shake,
Nations shake, yet let us not be dismayed, for the Lord will carry on his own
good work and glorious designs, in the midst of these troubles. It is said,
Deuteronomy. 9.25. that the City should be built in troublous times: The Lord is
carrying on the building of his own House even in these troublous times. And
why should we be dismayed* for all these Affairs are ordered and managed by the
hand of him that is our Mediator. Therefore in Ezekiels Vision of the Wheel,
that is, the Wheel of Providence, it is indeed said, that the rings were high
and dreadful, Chap. 1. ver. 18. but it is said, ver. 26. There is a Man above
upon the Throne, that is to say, Jesus Christ, who is Man as well as God, even
He as Mediator does order all the Affairs and Motions of that Wheel of
Providence, which is matter of wonderful encouragement, when the Revolutions
thereof are dreadful for us to behold. Christ is become Head of all things to
his Church; All power in Heaven and in Earth is given to him, that so he might
manage all things, so as shall be for the good of his Church, as well as for
his Fathers glory. And therefore though troubles come, why should we be
dismayed thereat? yea, why should we be dismayed thereat? for a glorious issue
and happy deliverance (...) of all these troubles, shall certainly arise to the
Church in du^ time: Ier. 30.7. It is even the time of Jacobs (...) he s^all
(...) saved out of it.

USE II. If the Lord bring days of trouble upon his people, what will he do
unto his and their Enemies? If trouble may come upon Israel, what then will
become of Babylon? If this be done to the green Tree, what shall be done to the
dry, that is fit for nothing else but the fire? To this purpose does the
Prophet speak unto Moab, Jer. 49.12. Behold, they whose judgment was not to
drink of the Cup, have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall altogether
go unpunished? thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it.
Jewish Expositors (and that not altogether without reason) when Moab is spoken
of in the Scripture, are wont to apply it unto Rome: for indeed the Moabites
were Types of the present Antichristian generation. Why, behold at this day,
^hey whose Judgment it was not to drink of the Cup, have assuredly drunk
thereof; the Lord we see has begun with Protestant Nations, and has made them
to drink deep of the Cup of his indignation, in this day wherein he is giving
of the Cup to the Nations round, beginning at Jerusalem. And art thou he, O
Moab? Art thou he, O Roman Antichrist, that shall escape? thou shall not
escape, but shall certainly drink thereof* yea drink thereof until thou spue,
and fall, and rise no more.

And this we see is the use which the Apostle Peter makes of this Doctrine, 1
Pet. 4.17, 18. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? This might be applied to public and professed
Enemies to the Cause and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus; where shall they appear?
The Seventh Trumpet (which is the last of the Wo-Trumpets) will sound quickly;
and the Woes thereof will light upon the Heads of the Antichristian Party in
the world. Woe, woe be to them, says the Lord. This might also be applied unto
every ungodly sinner: All you that continue in your sins, what will your end
be? Troubles may come upon the Lords people, but they shall soon be over: but
as for thee, if thou die in thy sins, without Repentance, and without an
interest in Jesus Christ by Faith unfeigned in his Name, thy sorrows shall
never have an end.

USE III. If God does sometimes bring days of trouble upon his own people,
here then is matter of solemn Awakening unto us; It concerns us well to
consider, whether there be not a day of trouble near unto us. For Awakening
here, I shall mention some things, which look awfully upon us. Some Arguments
let us here take notice of, which seem to speak as if a day of trouble were
near unto us, yea and not the sounding again of the Mountains.

1. (To begin with that which is most general) There is a day of trouble coming
upon all the World; and such trouble too, as the like has not been: for I am
persuaded that Scripture is yet to be fulfilled, even that Dan. 12.1. where it
is said, There shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
Nation, to that same time. We are in expectation of glorious times, wherein
Peace and Prosperity shall run down like a River, and like a mighty stream over
all the earth; but immediately before those days, there will be such horrible
Combustions and Confusions, as the like never was. It is said, Psalm. 46.9. He
makes Wars to cease unto the end of the earth: but the words immediately
foregoing are, Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has
made in the earth. Before the days come, wherein the Nations shall learn war
no more, O what desolations will the Lord make in the earth? We look that the
Church shall be in its Philadelphian state, when Enemies shall come and bow
before the feet of Jerusalem, as Christ speaks in his Epistle to the Church
of Philadelphia, but first there will an hour of Temptation come upon all the
world, Rev. 3.10. We look that the Jews shall be Converted; I know, and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that it shall be so in the appointed time. We look
that Chittim and Ashur (that is, Pope and Turk) shall perish for ever; but is
it not said, Alas, who shall live when God does these things? Numb. 24.23. We
know that in Abraham's Vision, when the Sun was going down, an horror of great
darkness fell upon him, Genesis 15.12. Why so? but to signify, that when the Sun
is going down, even in the end of the World, when Christ is ready to come and
set up his Kingdom, and judge the earth, there shall be great horror of
darkness and misery upon the world: Darkness shall then cover the earth, and
gross darkness the people.

2. Our eyes see, and our ears hear of the beginnings of sorrows. That which
Christ spoke with immediate reference to the troubles preceding the destruction
of the Jewish Church and State, may be applied to the troubles of the last
times, the former being a Type of the latter, Matthew. 24.6, 7, 8. And ye shall
hear of wars, and rumors of wars, see that you be not troubled, for all these
things must come to pass, but the end is not yet: for Nation shall rise against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be Famines, and
P^stilences, and Earthquakes in diverse places: All these are the beginnings of
sorrows. What do we hear of at this day, bu^ Wars, and ^umours of Wars? and
Nation rising up against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom? Now if these
are the beginnings of sorrows, what, and where, and when will the end be?
There Is an over flowing scourge breaking in upon the world, even a Judgment,
that will not keep within ordinary banks or bounds, but shall pass over into
many Lands. And how far will it go? where will the Tail of this Storm fall at
last, do we think? How if it should fall upon America? Will not some drops at
least light upon New England? We may speak in the words of the Prophet in my
Text, and say, The morning is come, The day of trouble begins to dawn upon the
world. Alas for this day, it is great, there is none like it. It is then high
time for us to awake out of sleep.

3. To come nearer home; The fatal Strokes which have been amongst us speak
ominously. Is not that a plain Scripture, Isa. 57.1. The righteous is taken
away from the evil to come? The Lord has been taking away many righteous ones
from the midst of us; yea righteous ones, that should have stood in the gap,
now when the waters of many Troubles are breaking in upon us, whereby he has
made a way to his anger, Psalm. 78.50. How many Magistrates, and Ministers
especially, has the Lord bereaved us of? When Kings call home their
Ambassadors, it is a sign they will proclaim War. God has called home many of
his Ambassadors of late, and that is a sign that War is determined in Heaven
against us. Our Enemies are coming, and our Chariots and our Horsemen are gone.
Ah! poor New England, thy Chariots and thy Horsemen are gone from thee, and now
thine Enemies are coming against thee. And I would not pass by in silence, the
observable Providence of God, who has so ordered, that many Ancient Christians
have been taken away of late, as it were together. I have made some Enquiry
about that matter, and find it to be a general observation, That in many
Plantations round about, in one or two years time, a great number of aged
Christians have been hid in their graves. The taking away of the Ancient, is
mentioned as an ominous sign, Isa. 3.2. Methuselah was the oldest man in the
old world, and he died the year before the Flood came. Inasmuch as many of our
Methuselahs are lately gone, and that so near together, we may fear that a
Flood is coming. It Is a sign of a Winter at hand, that so many aged ones should
drop down into the grave together. Nor would I omit here, the sudden Deaths
whereby many have been snatched away. When Christ was told of some that were
taken away by sudden death, he replied, I tell you, Nay: except you repent, ye
shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. As if the Lord had said, I would have you
take these sudden destructions which befall some, as an Item unto you, that
your Enemies will come and make a general slaughter amongst you, except you do
by Repentance prevent it. And in the 4th of Amos, it is set down as a sign
fore-running a day of great and general trouble, ver. 11. I have overthrown
some of you, as God overthrow Sodom and Gomorrah. And how did God overthrow
Sodom and Gomorrah? Was it not with Thunder and Lightning from Heaven? Many
amongst us of late years have been so overthrown: yea this year, at least four
persons have been so, and sundry of them good men, which makes the Strokes the
more ^wful and ominous.

4. There are manifold transgressions, and mighty sins amongst us. And here if
I should leave off speaking, and we should all of us join together in weeping
and lamenting, it would be the best course that could be taken. Brethren, what
shall I say? As to matters of Religion, things are not as should be. There is a
great decay as to the power of godliness amongst us. Professors are many of
them of a loose, carnal, ungirt Conversation. We can now see little difference
between Church Members and other men, as to their discourses, or their spirits,
or their walking, or their garb, but Professors of Religion fashion themselves
according to the world. And what Pride is there? Spiritual Pride, in Parts and
common Gifts of the Spirit, and in Spiritual Privileges; yea carnal, shameful,
foolish Pride, in Apparel, Fashions, and the like. Whence is all that rising
up, and disobedience in Inferiors toward Superiors, in Families in Churches,
and in the Commonwealth, but from the unmortified Pride which is in the hearts
of the sons and daughters of men? And is there not Oppression amongst us? Are
there no biting Usurers in New England? Are there not those that grind the
faces of the poor? A poor man comes amongst you, and he must have a Commodity
whatever it cost him, and you will make him give whatever you please* and put
what price you please upon what he has to give too, without respecting the
just value of the thing. Verily I am afraid, that the Oppressing Sword will
come upon us, because of the Oppressions and Extortions which the eyes of the
Lords glory have seen amongst us. And are there not Contentions and Divisions
amongst us? It is in vain for us to go about to palliate this matter, or to
cover this sure, for the shame of our nakedness does appear, so as that we are
become a derision amongst our Enemies. We are divided in our Judgments; and if
that were all, the matter were not much: but we are divided in our Affections,
divided in our Prayers, divided in our Counsels: And will not an House divided
be brought to desolation? We may say as that blessed Buroughs once complained,
We have been so divided, B^rroughs of Heart-division^ in Epistle to the Reader.
that it is the infinite Mercy of God that our Enemies have not come in at our
breaches, and divided all amongst themselves. Alas! that Gods Diamonds should
be cutting one another. I do believe, that one reason why the Lord threatens
to send upon us that Calamity of War at this day, is because of wars and
fightings which he has seen, and been provoked with in the midst of us. If you
will needs be fighting (says God) I Will send those upon you, that shall give
you enough of it, Iam. 4.1. The Clashings and Tumults which have been amongst
us, may cause us to fear, that such a day of Tumult as the Text speaks of, is
hastening upon us. And what a woeful Worldly spirit is there in many? Hence God,
and Christ, and Heaven, and the Concernments of men's own Souls, are not minded:
yea, duties of Communion with the Lord are either totally neglected, or
slubbered over. Some don't pray in their Families above once a day: Why? they
have not time, they say. Why not? how is your time taken up? Is it in doing
public service for God or for his people? If it were so* we must have a care
that it be not said to us, Thou wast made the keeper of the Vineyard, but thy
own Vineyard thou have not kept. But that is not the reason why men neglect
duty; no, it is because they have not time for their worldly occasions. O this
World* this World* undoeth many a man, that thinks he shall go to Heaven when
he dies. And in this respect our Land is full of Idolatry. What is like to
come on us? Alas! we have changed our Interest. The Interest of New England was
Religion, which did di^^^nguish us from other English Plantations, they were
built upon a Worldly design, but we upon a Religious design, when as now we
begin to espouse a Worldly Interest, and so to ch^se a n^w God, therefore no
wonder that War is like to be in the gates. I cannot but admire the Providence
of God, th^^ he should threaten to punish us with a generation of men that are
notorious for that sin of Worldliness, as if the Lord would make us see what
our great sin is, in the Instruments of our trouble. David might see by the
Instrument of his trouble, what sin it was which God afflicted him for, when
Achitophel, who was Bathshebah's Grandfather, rose up against him. Truly so may
we in the Instruments of our present affliction, read what our sin has been.
And is there not woeful Covenant Breaking amongst us? Men when they come into
the Church, enter into the solemnest Covenant that can be; They promise in the
presence of God, Angels and Saints, that they will watch over one another
Souls: But how little is that Christian and Brotherly Watchfulness attended
ever after? Indeed, if men fall out one with another, then they can watch for
Haltings, and prosecute to the utmost, which is to serve themselves, and their
own vile lusts and passions, upon Christ and his holy Ordinance; but otherwise,
there are too many that can see one another sin, and never attend the Rules of
Christ appointed for the healing of every sinning, offending Brother. This is
lamentable! And as for the Children of the Covenant, See Mr. Oaks Sermon on
D^ut 32.29. p. 56.
as the Scripture calls them, are not they lamentably neglected? Methinks it
is a very solemn Providence, that the Lord should seem at this day to be
numbering many of the Rising Generation for the Sword; as if the Lord should
say, I will bring a Sword to avenge the quarrel of a neglected Covenant.
Churches have not so performed Covenant-duties toward their Children, as
should have been; and especially, the Rising Generation have many of them
broken the Covenant themselves, in that they do not endeavor to come up to
that which their solemn Vow in Baptism does engage them to before the Lord,
even to know and serve the Lord God of their Fathers. Yet again, How
unfruitful have we been under precious Means of Grace? How has the Lord been
disappointed in his righteous and reasonable Expectations concerning us? We
have not in this our day known the things that do belong unto our peace, and
therefore now things look as if the days of our peace were ended. It is not
long since that Scripture was opened and applied in the hearing of many of you,
Luke 19.43, 44. The days shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall keep
thee in on every side, because thou knew not the time of thy visitation. How
righteous is it, that the Lord should make us to know the difference that is
between the service of the Lord, and the service of Shishak? ^
2 Chronicles. 12.8. O New England, because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with
joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things,
therefore it is just with God to say, Thou shall serve thy Enemies which the
Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and
in want of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.

5. Signs have appeared in Heaven and Earth, presaging sad Mutations to be at
hand. By Signs, I mean Prodigies, which the Scripture calls Signs. It is a
celebrated Saying, That God never brings great Judgments upon any place, but
he first gives warning of it, by some portentous Signs. So did the Lord deal
by Egypt in the days of old: and so it was with Jerusalem, a few years before
the Roman destruction. Therefore Christ said, Luke 21.11. Fearful sights, and
great signs shall there be from Heaven. Josephus does relate at large, (...)*
7. cap. 12.
what terrible Prodigies appeared before those miserable days. The like also
happened before the troubles under Antiochus, as the Historiographers of that
Age have declared. There appeared Troops of Horsemen in array, 2 M^c. 5.
encountering and running one against another, with shaking of Shields, and
multitude of Pikes, and drawing of Swords, etc. Something like unto that, is
said to have been amongst us. I confess I am very slow to give credit to
reports of that nature: but it is credibly reported, that in sundry places
Volleys of small Shot have been heard in the Air, yea and great Pieces of
Ordnance discharged, when there has been no such thing in reality. And I think
God would not have us altogether slight that bloody Prodigy which happened about
this time Twelve-moneth (as Eyewitnesses have affirmed) in that Neighboring
place, which since is fallen into the hands of our Enemies. However, it puts me
in mind of what I have read, See Mr. (...) Sermon (...) Heb. 1^.^. p. ^.
viz. that in York in England it rained blood, a little before the Danes
entrance into the Land. Moreover, we have all seen and felt Blazing Stars,
Earthquakes, Prodigious Thunders, and Lightnings, and Tempests. We may here
make use of that Scripture, which though it have a spiritual meaning, yet some
good Interpreters do not reject a literal sense of the words, Isa. 29.6. And
thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder, and with Earthquake,
and great noise, with storm, and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. Has
it not been so with us? We have been visited with great noise, and with the
devouring flame, that is, with terrible Thunders and Lightnings, and with
Earthquakes, which are often a Prognostic of State-quakes, yea and
Heart-quakes, not far off; and with Storms and Tempests, and that too upon
Lords days, in a very dismal manner. Now let us not be of th^se, that regard
not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands.

6. There is a black Cloud over our heads, which begins to drop upon us.
Providence has so ordered, that our Enemies are come near, and may we not then
think that trouble is near? The Lord has been wher^ing his glittering Sword a
long time; we have heard a noise, and a dismal din has been in our ears, but
now the Sword seems to be facing and marching directly toward us: yea, we see
Jerusalem compassed about with Enemies. Christ said unto his D^sciples, Luke
21.20. When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with Enemies, then know that the
desolation thereof is nigh. Is not our Jerusalem compassed with Armies? There
are pretended Friends at our backs, and professed Enemies before our fa^es. The
sky looks red and lowering, we may therefore fear, that foul Weather is at
hand: As once that Prophet said, There is a sound of an abundance of Rain, and
in the meanwhile, the Heaven was black with Clouds. Truly so it is at this
day, the Heavens are black over our heads. The Clouds begin to gather thick in
our Horizon: yea, there is a Cloud of Blood, which begins to drop upon us. When
once a Cloud begins to drop, you know that a Shower is wont to follow. The
Cloud of Blood over our heads begins to drop; there was one drop fell the other
day* witness the man that was slain upon the Coasts: the Lord grant that a
Shower of Blood may not follow. What need have we to pray, that this Cloud may
blow over, and pass away.

7. Without doubt the Lord Jesus has a peculiar respect unto this place, and
for this people. This is Immanuels Land. Christ by a wonderful Providence has
dispossessed Satan, who reigned securely in these Ends of the Earth, for Ages
the Lord knowe^h how many, and here the Lord has caused as it were New
Jerusalem to come down from Heaven; He dwells in this place: therefore we may
conclude that he will scourge us for our backslidings. So does he say, Rev.
3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. It is not only true concerning
particular persons, but as to Churches, (those words were spoken to a Church)
that if Christ has a peculiar love unto them, then he will rebuke and chasten
them, as there shall be cause for it. Indeed we may therefore hope that the
Lord will not destroy us. Through the grace of Christ, I am not at all afraid
of that. The Lord will not as yet destroy this place: Our Fathers have built
Sanctuaries for his Name therein, and therefore he will not destroy us. The
Planting of these Heavens, and the laying the Foundations of this Earth, is one
of the Wonders of this last Age. As Moses said, Ask now of the days that are
p^st, ask from one side of Heaven to the other, has God essayed to go and take
him a Nation out of the midst of a Nation? Deuteronomy. 4.32, 34. God has culled out
a people, even out of all parts of a Nation, which he has also had a great
favor toward, and has brought them by a mighty hand, and an outstretched
arm, over a greater then the Red Sea, and here has he planted them, and has
caused them to grow up as it were into a little Nation: And shall we think that
all this is to destroy them within forty or fifty years? Destruction shall not
as yet be. Nevertheless, the Lord may greatly afflict us, and bring us very
low. It is a notable Observation, which I remember a Jewish Writer has, who
lived in the days of the second Temple; The dealings of God with out Nation
(says he) and with the Nations of the world, is very different: for other
Nations may sin and do wickedly, and God does not punish them, until they have
filled up the measure of their sins, and then he utterly destroys them; but
if our Nation forsake the God of their Fathers never so little, God presently
comes upon us with one Judgment or other, that so he may prevent our
destruction. So let me say, Neighboring Plantations about us may possibly sin
grievously, and yet it may be long before the Lord takes them to do, because
it may be he will reckon with them once for all at last; but if New England
shall forsake the Lord, Judgment shall quickly overtake us, because the God of
our Fathers is not willing to destroy us their Children.

These things then are enough to awaken us out of our Security. I have thought
of three other Signs of approaching Misery, which I shall not mention at this
time, albeit they are (in my apprehension) no less ominous, then any thing that
has been spoken.

USE IV. I conclude with a word of Exhortation. Let us carry our selves as does
become those that have a day of trouble near unto them; yea, so as that we may
prevent the troubles which seem to be near. I need not say much by way of
Motive. Remember the Arguments mentioned in the last Use* and the Signs of
Troubles being near, insisted on in the former part of the day. And consider,
that if we carry our selves in a suitable manner, we may possibly escape those
Evils, that otherwise are like to overtake us. It is possible that this Cloud
may blow over, Amos 5.15. It may be the Lord of Hosts will be gracious to the
remnant of Joseph. Truly we are the remnant of Joseph; we are (as Joseph was)
separated from our Brethren, who can tell but that the Lord may be gracious to
us? Zeph. 2.3. Seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the earth; seek righteousness,
seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. Nay, if
we carry our selves as does become us in a day of trouble, it is past a may be,
that we shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger.

Quest. But how ought we to carry our selves now that trouble is near unto us?

Ans. 1. It does concern us and become us to be an humble people. As sometimes
the Lord said to his people of old, Now put off thy Ornaments, that I may know
what to do unto thee, Exodus 33.5. so does the Lord by his Providence speak to
us, Put off thy Ornaments, O New England, that I may know what to do unto thee,
that I may know whether I had best spare thee, or punish thee. Prepare to meet
thy God; even to meet him as sometimes Abigail did David, with-Confessions, and
humble Supplications. And if we humble our selves deeply and unfeignedly, God
cannot find in his heart to destroy us. It is a wonderful Scripture which we
have, 1 Chronicles. 21.16. David lift up his eyes, and saw the Angel of the Lord
stand between the Earth and the Heaven, having a drawn Sword in his hand,
stretched out over Jerusalem; then David and the Elders of Israel, who were
clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces. Indeed the Angel of the Lord is
standing over us with a drawn Sword in his hand, but if we fall upon our faces
before the Lord, as does become us, God will say, Let it be enough that the
Sword is held over this people, stay thine hand, put up the Sword.

2. It b^cometh us in such a day as this, to be a very Heavenly people. As
Elison said, Is it a time to receive money, and garmenss, and olive yards, etc?
So* is it now a time for us to set our minds upon the world, and the things of
the world? We should now remember what the Prophet Jeremiah said to Baruch,
Chap. 45.5. And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not: for
behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, says the Lord. Now will nothing
serve you but the world, in this day wherein God is shaking all Nations, yea
shaking Heaven and Earth, and Sea and dry Land? What is the voice of God to us
in these dreadful dispensations, but this, See that your hearts be taken off
from the world, and set them more upon those things that cannot be shaken?

3. We should be a Believing people. That Is the way to be delivered out of
trouble: Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did
deliver them. O the mighty things that Faith can do! It is said, Heb. 11.34. By
Faith they escaped the edge of the Sword, and turned to flight the Armies of
the aliens. Though Armies should come against us, the Spirit of Faith may turn
them back. In the times of the Maccabees (for unto those troubles does the
Apostle there allude) sometimes a small handful, worsted great Armies that
came against them, because they acted Faith upon the Name of the Lord. Or if
troubles should overtake us, Faith will help us to suffer, as well a^ to do
great things for God.

4. It concerns us in this day of trouble to be a Reforming people. Let us
amend our ways and our doings, and the Lord will cause us to dwell in this
place, Jer. 7.3. Certainly we need Reformation. Where is the old New England
Spirit, that once was amongst us? Where is our first love? Where is our Zeal
for God, especially in matters respecting the first Table, which once was our
glory? What is become of that life and power of godliness, that has been in
this place? Now if the Lord help us to reform whatever is amiss, he will still
do us good, notwithstanding all our sins, which have provoked him, and caused
him to frown upon us. We have a plain Text for this, Ier. 18.7* 8. At what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, then will I repent of the evil which I
thought to do unto them.

5. It concerns us and becomes us, now that trouble is near, to be a United
people: otherwise our Enemies will say, that we are under a penal Infatuation.
We may well say as that worthy Divine was wont to express, Haec non sunt
litigandi, sed orandi tempora; These are not times for us to be contending one
against another, but rather to be praying one with another, and one for
another. Shall we be worse then dumb, and brute, and savage Creatures have
sometimes been? It is a memorable Passage, which some Historians make mention
of, V^d. Full^r W^^thi^s of England, in his F^re^ell to Somersetshire.
That once in Somersetshire in England, when there was a sudden Flood, wherein
many men were drowned, the dumb Creatures ran to the top of an Hill, that so
they might escape the fury and destruction of the Flood; and there such
Creatures as had an Antipathy in their Natures, even Dogs and Hares, yea Cats
and Mice, could sit quietly together, and never offer to molest one another.
Why behold, there is a Flood coming in upon us, And shall we not now live
quietly by one another? Shall we not at such a time as this lay aside our
Animosities and Variances about matters, which it is great pity that ever a
Contention should be upheld amongst good men, about such small differences?
Naturalists write concerning the Stone Tyrrhenus, See Mr Slaters (...) of
(...), p. 29
that if it be cast upon the water whole, it will swim, but if it be broken it
will sink presently. Would we sink, or would we swim in this Sea of trouble
that is a coming? If we break, we shall sink; if we divide, we perish, and are
like to be an undone people: But if we be whole, if we unite, we shall swim,
our heads will then be above water, let what troubles can come: yea, and we
shall then be a burdensome stone to all that shall burden themselves with us.
If we do but become one with God and one another, as we ought to be, we need
not fear all the world. Oh that our Divisions, and other Evils that are amongst
us, might be repented of, and then I dare speak it boldly before all this
Congregation, God will make New England a burdensome stone, yea though all the
Nation^ of the Earth should be gathered together against it, they shall be
broken in pieces.

6. We should be a Praying people. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble. Thus David, Psalm. 22.11. Be not far from me, for trouble is near. In a
time when trouble was near, he does betake himself to God by Faith and Prayer.
What people under Heaven have ever had more encouragement unto Prayer, then we
have had? Know it Enemies to your terror; Know it all the World, That the
Lords poor New-England-People, have ever found him to be a God that hears
Prayer: and therefore let us be at that work still. And truly, there is as much
need now as ever. We may even say, as sometimes that blessed Martyr did, Pray,
pray, pray, never more need then now. Alas, that we are no oftener in such a
solemn manner, as at this day before the Lord! We may here allude to that which
is spoken, Rev. 8. we there read that there was silence in Heaven half an
hour, and then follows an Earthquake. It Is sad to consider, that there has
been so great a silence in Heaven amongst us: I have thought on it with some
grief of heart, that there has not been so much Fasting and Praying in
New England of late years, as sometimes formerly, though never so much need as
now. Who knows, but the Lord may bring these troubles within our sight, that
so we may seek him early, yea that so the Spirit of Prayer may be awakened
amongst us? There are some that cannot pray, all unregenerate sinners are
destitute of the Spirit of Prayer; many poor miserable Souls, that keep their
Prayers and Tears till such time as they will do them no good. But I know that
there are many, Scores, Hundreds here this day, that have an Interest in
Heaven, and know how to improve it. Why then, up and be doing. If thou have but
one Tear in thy eyes, if thou have but one Prayer in thy heart, spend it now.
And let us remember the words of the Lord Jesus, Luke 21.36. Watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these
things which shall come to pass.

FINIS.

