Several Laws and Orders made at the SECOND SESSIONS of the GENERAL COURT held
at Boston in New England the Seventh of October 1674 And printed by their Order
Edward Rawson Secr.
BOSTON COMMISSIONERS.
WHereas the settling of the Power of the Commissioners of Boston is Confined
barely to the Town and neck, Commissioners power to extend through Boston
Limits.
with Nodules Island; It is upon several Considerations thought meet and;

It is hereby Ordered; That their Power be extended to the whole Limits of
Boston, in Civil and Criminal Cases, according as the Law provides for their
acting formerly in the bounded Limits abovesaid, notwithstanding the said Law.

Boston Companyes to be Divided.
WHereas this Court in the Year 1652 for the better settling of the Militia in
the several Towns, Order to divide the foot Companies in Boston.
did Order and Enact that wherein any Town within this Jurisdiction, the Number
of Soldiers who by Law are to attend constant trainings shall arise to be two
hundred men, that then such Soldiers shall be divided into two Companies, if
to three hundred, then to be divided into three Companies. etc. Now for as much
as it appears by good Information; That most of the Companies in Boston do
exceed the aforesaid number of two hundred.

This Court does hereby Declare, that the former Order of dividing, ought to be
forthwith Attended, and that the Major of the Regiment together with the
Commission Officers of each Company take speedy Order to see it performed, and
to make Returns thereof to the next Court of Election.

DEVONSHIRE.
THis Court taking into Consideration what has been acted in settling of the
Eastern parts at Kennebeck, Settlement of the Eastern parts.
and the places adjacent within our line, under our Government, according to
the Commission Granted by this Court in May (...), and that on the desire of
the Inhabitants of those places, are appointed to be the County of Devonshire,
which this Court approves of and confirms;

And do further Order and appoint, that the County Court in some place thereof,
shall be holden and kept upon the third tuesday in July yearly, etc.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That the Commissioners
Court of the County of Devon at the Eastward, have power to end, hear, and
determine all Civil Actions arising within that County to the value of ten
pounds, any LAW USAGE or CUSTOM to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

