Woe to Drunkards.

TWO SERMONS Testifying against the Sin of Drunkeness:

Wherein the Wofulness of that Evil, and the Misery of all that are addicted to
it, is discovered from the WORD of GOD.

Preached by INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Isa. 5. 11,22. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, till Wine inflame them. Woe
unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and men of strength of mingle strong
drink.

Prove. 23. 29,30. Who has Woe? Who has sorrow? -- -- Who has wounds without
cause? -- -- They that tarry long at the Wine.

Hab. 2. 15. Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor drink: that put thy
bottle to him, and make him drunken also.

I Cor. 6. 10. -- Nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdoms of God.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1673. And Sold by Edmund Ranger
Bookbinder in Boston.

TO THE READER.
THere were sundry other Sermons Preached from this Scripture, wherein the evil
of the Sin of Pride was discovered; but they are not herewith published,
because lengthy Discourses are not easily Printed, nor do they find that
acceptance with those for whom this is intended, as little Tractates sometimes
do. It must be confessed, that Pride is an iniquity that death abound every
where, and in a peculiar manner in this great Town, where the Lord has set me
as a Watchman, and charged me to blow the Trumpet, that sinners may have
warning of their danger; yea that I should (as many other of the Lords
Messengers, with whom I think my self not worthy to be compared, are not
wanting to do) cry aloud, and not spare to show unto the house of Jacob their
transgressions, and to his people their sins. That I might approve my self
faithful (in some measure) to what the Lord requires, the Discourses which
have been delivered from this Text, were first Preached and (some of them) now
Printed. My heart deceives me, if the main Motive prevailing with me to this
publication, be not an earnest desire, which (I trust I may say) the Lord has
kindled in my heart, that the dishonor of the dear and blessed Name of God,
and the eternal ruin of the Souls of men (the woeful consequent of that
iniquity, which is in the ensuing Sermons laid open) might be prevented. I have
also considered, that I am not likely to trouble the world for any long time,
and therefore have I been the more desirous to do as Abel now does, that is,
being dead yet to speak, and to witness for God, and against Sin amongst men
upon he earth, even then when my mouth shall be stopped with dust.

Now the Lord, who alone can do it, bring his Truth home with power in the
hearts of those it does concern, which has been and is the hearts desire of
him, who cease not to pray for the Conversion and Salvation of Souls, and
remains

Thy Soul-Friend, Increase Mather.
Boston, October. 30. 1673.
Woe to Drunkards.
ISAIAH 28. I. Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim.


IN this Chapter we have the substance of one of the Sermon I.
Prophet Isaiah's Sermons, of which there are two parts; The first does concern
Israel, to the 4th Verse. The second has reference to Judah, from thence to
the end of the Chapter. The words before us fall under the first part of the
Chapter, wherein we have

1. The Subject persons to whom the Prophet speaks; viz. the ten Tribes of
Israel, who are here called The Crown of Pride, that is, A proud Kingdom, and
Ephraim: often so it is, that Ephraim is put for the whole Kingdom of Israel,
partly because Ephraim was an honorable Tribe, descended from Joseph who was
the best of all the Sons of Jacob, and partly because Ephraim was the first
Royal Tribe in that Kingdom, Jeroboam who was the first King over the ten
Tribes being an Ephraimite. Also the Subject that this Prophecy lights upon,
is said to be the head of the fat valleys overcome with wine, by which the City
of Samaria is meant, which was built upon a Mountain to the which there were
fruitful Valleys belonging; thus described, Di^nsius in loc.
because they did yield much Wine and Oil. Now Samaria being the Royal City,
even the place where the Court and Representative Body of the whole People used
to be, therefore it is put for all the Kingdom.

2. We have the Judgment denounced by the Prophet against this Kingdom of
Israel, Woe to them; i. e. woeful misery shall surely come upon them: Woe to the
Crown of Pride, Woe to the Drunkards, Woe to Ephraim. And in the Verses following
we have a more particular description of the Woe which is in this Verse
generally threatened, the sum whereof is, A denunciation of speedy and utter
ruin, which was executed accordingly by Salmanasser.

3. We have the Causes of this Woe, viz. their Sins; of which two are mentioned
in the Text, namely, Pride and Drunkenness. No doubt but there were many other
evils which they were guilty of, but these two were principal, and the Causes
of many other, and thence put for all the rest. The Doctrine therefore from the
words is,

That Pride and Drunkenness are two woeful Evils. Doct.

Having discoursed at several times concerning the evil of that sin of Pride,
we proceed now to speak concerning that of Drunkenness. And in the Doctrinal
handling of this Point, we shall only attend two things: 1. To enquire what
that Drunkenness is that the Scripture denounces Woe against? 2. How it does
appear that Drunkenness is a woeful evil?

Quest. 1. What is that Drunkenness against which the Scripture denounces Woe?

Answ. There is a twofold Drunkenness: I. A Drunkenness which is Metaphorical
and Spiritual, Isa. 51. 21. Stucki^s de Antiq. Conviv. Lib. 3. Cap. 8.
O thou that art drunken, but not with Wine. The Jews were in such a case, as
drunken men are wont to be in, by reason of the Wine of Divine Judgment that
was given to them. And one may be drunken with Error and Spiritual Delusion;
therefore is it said concerning Mystical Babylon, that is Rome, that the
inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication,
Rev. 17. 2. Antichristian corrupt Doctrines do as it were intoxicate and
inebriate the Souls of them that do imbibe or embrace them: they become
drunkard-like, even vertiginous thereby. Also one may be drunk with Security,
Isa. 29.9,10. They are drunken but not with wine, they stagger but not with
strong drink: for the Lord has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep.
Delusion and Security had made them as it were dead drunk. Some think that that
is the Drunkenness which the Text Speaks of; for Pride and Security are wont
to go together, the one being the Cause of the other. Woe to the Drunkard's,
that is (say some) to those that are secure in their sins, and settled upon
their lees in an evil course. No doubt but that this is implied, and partly
intended here, but that is not the only nor the principal evil here aimed at.
Therefore 2. Drunkenness is taken in a Literal, proper sense: There is Corporal
as well as Spiritual Drunkenness, even a Drunkenness which not so much the Soul
as the Body is the Subject of; and that is it which the Prophet here denounces
Judgment for: therefore in the latter end of this Verse he speaks of being
overcome with wine. The Valleys near Samaria abounded with fruitful Vines,
Calvin in locum.
Whence they had store of Wine, and they abused that creature to great
Intemperance. When men abuse their Bodies by immoderate drinking, that is the
sin the Text condemns. Now further, there is

1. Drunkenness in the sight of God, that is, When aman does drink more wine,
or of any other inebriating drink, then the Rule allows of. Ephesians. 5. 18. Be
not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: The Apostle mentions wine, because that
was the common drink in those days, and the greatest danger was in respect of
that, by reason of the strength and pleasantness thereof: but under that
expression of Wine, all other inebriating drinks are comprehended. Now if there
be any excess in the use thereof, that is Drunkenness; if there be an inordinate
affection or love to strong drink, that is Drunkenness in the sight of him that
tries the reins and fearcheth hearts. Hence the Apostle speaks of the excess
of wine, I Pet. 4. 3. (...), immodica vini cupiditas; significant animam vino
deditum. Bullinger
the Greek word there used notech an inordinate affection and desire after
Wine. And Solomon's description of a Drunkard is, that he is A lover of wine,
Prove. 21. 17. such an one is an habitual Drunkard, and he whose practice is
according to that inordinate affection, is actually so: yea, if a man does but
drink a Cup of Wine more then is good for him, he is guilty of this Woeful Evil.
As he that eats more then is good for him, is guilty of the sin of Gluttony;
so he that drinks to any excess is justly charged with Drunkenness.

2. There is Drunkenness in the sight of men. Sometimes this evil is so gross
and notorious, as that the wholesome Laws of men take hold of it and punish it;
namely, when a man is so overcome with wine, as that he can neither speak nor
act like a rational Creature, when reason is disturbed thereby, and Sense and
Speech and Motion fail, Neque pes ^eque men's satis suam officium facit, was of
old the character and description of one notoriously drunken
when neither the Head nor Hand can do their offices aright. Prove. 16. 9. A
thorn goes up into the hand of a arunkard; had he his wits about him, he would
not suffer thorns to be thrust into his hands. Psalm. 107. 27. They reel to and
fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end: this is
palpable drunkenness. We must know that a man may be deeply and damnably guilty
of this evil in the sight of God, though it should never proceed to those
outrageous out-breakings, whereby men cannot but observe it.

We come then unto the second thing propounded for the clearing of the Truth
before us; viz. To show How it does appear that Drunkenness is a woeful Evil?
Answ. Several things may here be mentioned, as demonstrations of the Doctrine.

1. If we look into the Original and Causes of this sin, we shall see the evil
of it: And it has no better an author then the Devil himself, who never was
the author of any good (except accidentally, besides his intention, and against
his will) since he was a Devil. Drink is in it self a good creature of God, and
to be received with thankfulness, but the abuse of drink is from Satan; the
wine is from God, but the Drunkard is from the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. He that
comitteth sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning: for
this purpose was the Son of God manifest, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil. Therefore he that commits drunkenness (for that is sin) that is,
if in his ordinary course he commit it) is of the Devil. Drunkenness was one of
the works of the Devil which Christ came to destroy. It has also another
Cause, as bad or worse then the Devil, namely, Sin. It is a sin, and the cause
of sin, (as afterward will be showed) and also the effect of sin. Therefore
what a woeful evil is it? That corupt nature which is in sinners, canseth them
to become guilty of this evil, James I. 14. He is drawn away of his own last,
and enticed; when a sinner is drawn into Drunkenness, his own lust has enticed
him. Hence Drunkenness is expressly and by name mentioned amongst the works of
the flesh, Gal. 5. 19. 21. The works of the flesh are manifest, drunkenness,
revellings, and such like. How woeful must that evil needs be, that has no
other causes but such as these?

2. The very Light and Law of Nature condemns this practice. Drunkards sin not
only against the written word of God, but against that light and law which is
written in their Consciences. Now those are woeful Transgressions; The Apostle
does aggravate the sins of some, in that in those things which they know
naturally, as bruit beasts they corrupt themselves, Jude ver. 10. A Drunkard
though he be a bruit beast, yet he knows naturally that he ought not to
corrupt himself with this vile practice. If there were no Scripture to condemn
this evil, yet he has that within him, a Candle of the Lord in his own breast,
which ^^eweth him that this is an iniquity which the Judge will punish. Hence
even Heathens, that have had nothing but the light of nature to guide them, yet
have spoken against this evil, yea and made severe Laws to punish it. Solon
(who is accounted amongst the wisest of the Grecian Princes) (...)
made it a Law, that if a man in public place should abuse himself with drink,
his Crime should be deemed Capital. If he were Drunken but once, he was
punished with death for that transgression: which I mention not to justify the
severity of that Law, but to show how odious this detestable evil has been,
even to those that have had nothing but the Light of Nature and Reason to guide
them.

3. A Drunkard is an universal Transgressor of the Whole Law of God. James
faith, Chap. 2. ver. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. We cannot say concerning the Drunkard, that he
keeps the whole Law, or that he offends in one point only, but we must say,
that he is guilty of all, even guilty of the breach of all the Commandments:
and that not only as he that breaks one link in a Chain may be said to break
the whole Chain, but he has broken every link, that is, every Precept of that
Divine Chain of the Royal Law. If the question be, Which of the Commandments is
Drunkenness a transgression of? The Answer must be, Not of one alone, but it is
a general violation of the whole Law, and of every Precept therein. The
Drunkard is an Idolater, for he loves drink as he should love God, that is,
above all, even above Wife and Children, and Name and Estate, and every thing
that he has in this world. And there is Robbery, Adultery, nay Murder
enwrapped in the bowels of this sin, as afterward will appear. The Drunkard is
a Transgressor against the first Table of the Moral Law, in as much as by this
sin he is rendered unfit to Worship God in any Religious duty: for, Wine takes
away the heart, Hos. 4. 11. but the heart must be given to God in every duty:
if he Pray, it must be with understanding; and therefore when that is taken
away by drink, what work will be make of it? should a vile sinner dare to
appear before God when he is in drink, he would but take the Lords Name in
vain, and bring weath and a curse upon his own Soul. Some Sic Hebraei in locam.
Mero^hius, Christ ^^^^wright English A^^^^^
think that Nadah and Abihu were distempered with drink when they offered
strange fire before the Lord, and conceive that to be the reason of their so
miscarrying, because presently after the story of their sin and death, the Lord
faith, Do not drink wine or strong drink when ye go into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, left ye die, Lev. 109. But though that conjecture be uncertain,
yet it is from that Scripture evident, that excess in Wine will unfit for any
Religious service: and he that shall venture to Worship God when it is so with
him, will offer strange fire, and has more cause to fear that he shall die
before the Lord, then to expect any merciful answer to those polluted Prayers,
which are but as corrupt breath, enough to stain the Heavens. If his breath
stink, by his being overcome with Wine, in the nostrils of men, how do his
Prayers stink in the Lords nostrils? Moreover, the Drunkard is a Transgressor
of the Rule of Honesty as well as of Piety; therefore faith the Scripture, Let
us walk honestly, not in drunkenness. Rom 13. 13. so that the Word of God will
bear us out in calling those that deserve the name of Drunkards, Impious and
dishonest persons.

4. Drunkenness is a wastful, destructive Evil, which is another thing which
shows the Wofulness of it. A Drunkard is a mere stroy good: wherefore the
Apostle faith that is Wine there is excess, Ephesians. 5. 18. The Greek word ((...))
which is there used, signifies Wastfulness and Prodigality: It is the same
word which is used concerning the Pro^^gil, when it is said that he wanted his
substance with riotons living, Luke 15. 13. There is much Prodigality, Riot,
Pro^useness in this sin: for thereby the good Creatures of God are wasted,
which is contrary to the express charge of the Lord Jesus, who has said, Let
nothing be lost, Joh. 6.12. but all that is spent in drunkenness is woefully
lost; And this consideration proves that a Drunkard is a woeful guilty creature
before the Lord, for so are they that take his Name in vain. It is said in the
third Commandment, that God will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in
vain, which does intimate that such sinners are exceeding guilty before the
Lord. Now to abuse any of his Creatures, is to take his Name in vain: in this
respect Drunkenness is a breath of the third Commandment. It is also a great
master of precious Time; men have no need to be prodigal of their Time, they
have not so much of it: For what is your life? it is even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4. 14. Nay, it is
but a moment comparatively that any one has to be in this world; In a moment
they go down into the grave: and it is a thousand pities that any part of that
moment should be lost, yet all is lost that is spent in rioting and
drunkenness; for that Time is lost, which a man cannot give a comfortable
account concerning the spending of it unto Jesus Christ at the last day. Most
certain it is, that all men shall be called to an account in that solemn great
day which is at hand, as for all Talents which they have been entrusted with,
so in special for that great and precious Talent of Time: But what answer can
be given for the Time that has been consumed in lewd and drunken practices?
When it shall be said to you in the hearing of Heaven and Earth, You had such a
space of Time allowed to you in the world, you lived so many years upon earth,
but how did you spend that Time? And when Conscience shall bring in a black
Bill of Indictment, and say, There were so many days and nights spent in
rioting and drunkenness, what answer can you give for this, when we shall all
stand before the Son of God in that day?

Yet more, Drunkenness is a great Waster of a man's Estate. How common is it
for those that are given to this Vice, if they gain any thing when they are
sober, to lose it again when they are in drink? yea, it may be to lose more in
one drunken day or night, then they gain in many days, weeks, mon^ths, years
perhaps? The Scripture faith, that the Drunkard shall come to poverty, and
drowsiness shall death a man with rags, Prove. 23. 21. And does not Experience
^estisie that this word of God is Truth? How many have you known that once had
See in the second part of the Theater of Gods Judgments by Dr. Tailor, p.g.
110. 111. an amazing story of a must prodigious Prodigal, who by drunken and do
bauched courses spent an Estate of above thirty thousand pounds in three years
time, and died a beggar at last.
considerable Estates, they were very well to pass in the world, but when once
they have saln in with idle Company, and followed drunken Courses and Conforts,
their Estates have soon been consurned, and they clothed with Rags, nay have
scarce had Rags to cover them? Often so it comes to pass, that he that lives
a Drunkard, dies a Beggar; but seldom is it seen that a Drunkard keeps an
Estate long: therefore the Holy Ghost has said by Solomon, that He that loves
pleasure shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine shall not be rich, Prove.
21. 17. In this respect Drunkenness is a breach of the Eighth Commandment: A
Drunkard is a Thief and a Robber, yea the work kind of Robber in the world,
for he robs his own House, he robs his Wife and Children, yea himself:
and as Self-murder is the most horrid, so is Self-Robbery the greatest
Villainy. Nay, the Drunkard Robs God, for he makes himself incapable of
honoring God with his substance. Go to a miserable Drunkard, and ask him for
something to relieve a poor body that is in want, or to promote some public
and pious Work, and he has nothing to spare; the cursed Alehouse has devoured
his substance, that he has nothing left thereof, neither for God nor for
himself. How wastful and how woeful then does this Evil appear to be?

Yea 5. This woeful Vice is every way prejudicial, injurious and destructive to
him that shall be subject to it. It is so not only in the respects which have
been mentioned, but in every other respect, that may be said or thought of.

A little further to instance under this Head:

1. It is injurious to, and brings Woe and Misery upon the Name of him that
shall be guilty of it. It is a most disgraceful, infamous Vice: though a man
should be but once guilty of this sin in all his days, yet that is a blot and
dishonor upon his Name, and a matter of shame and humiliation to him, as long
as he has a day to live; how much more when he has been often and ordinarily
guilty of it? Hence it was that the wicked Pharisees, to, the intent that they
might be sure to disgrace Christ to purpose, said of him, that he was a
Wine-bibber, Matthew. 11.19. That they might make everybody think meanly of
Christ, they slanderously gave out that he was a drunken Companion: and of old
such were looked upon as the very children of Belial. Thence when Eli thought
that Hannah had been drunken. She said to him. No my Lord, I have drunk neithe^
wine nor strong drink, count not thine hanamaid for a daughter of Belial, 1 Samuel 1.13.14.15.16. For a man to love to be drunk, is horrible impiety; but it
this be true concerning. Ebria maliere nihil tarpius. Crhysost
a woman; there is a daughter of Relial indeed. Now they were the vilest of the
children of men who were so called: and hence it is that no man almost is
willing to be called a Drunkard. They that love the practice, yet would not be
thought to be as they are, because of the disgrace that is in it. The Drunkards
Credit is cracked, and lost amongst all sober man; and therefore wise men carry
toward such, as, they would do to a person of no Credit, whom they dare not
trust. Trust a Drunkard with an Estate, and when he is in his Cups he will send
it going: Whence the Jews say proverbially, (...) Intra^ vinum exit arcacum.
Vid. Drusli Adag. Hebr. decur.2 Adag 9.
Trust him with a Secret, and when he is drunken he will discover it; Trust him,
and when he is drunken he will undo himself and his friend too. I have read
Alsted. Encycl. in Ethic. p mihi 2000. ex Zwing Theast.
that in some places in Spain, if a man has been known to be over come with
drink, (though it were but once in all his life) his Testimony must never be
received in any Case, but he must be looked upon as a person of no same, or
credit in the world. Thus does it undo the Name of the Transgressor.

2. Drunkenness is injurious to the Body of him that shall be subject to it. It
brings Woe upon the Body, and therefore is rightly called a woeful Evil. Hence
are many bodily distempers. It is said, Hos. 7.5. In the day of our King, the
Princes have made him sick with hottles of Wine: Whether it was their Kings
Birthday, or his Coronation-day, or whatever that day of their King might be,
which was observed, they kept the day after a very profane manner, there was
much Drunkenness and Debauchery on that day, and Sickness was the Effect of
that Intemperancy. To this truth also does Solomon best witness, Prove. 23. 29.
30. Who has woe! who has sorrow? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry
long at the wine, they that go to seck mixed wine. Redness of eyes (blindness,
and the like) is one disease which is mentioned in stead of many more, which
follow drunkenness, and are amongst the Woes which attend it. Hence I say are
diseases, Dropsies, Consumptions, Fevers, Gouts, Apoplexies, etc. Not but that
a man may have these diseases and yet live temperately, but by Intemperancy he
shall be sure to have them, or some of them. Many a man has not lived out half
his days, but has died before his time, because he had been wicked overmuch
in respect of this iniquity. It has been averred, Plures occidit crapula and
chriet as quam gladius Vid. Zanch. in Ephesians. p. (mini)201.
That Drunkenness has killed more then ever the Sword did: Many have been cast
down wounded, many have been slain by it, yea Millions of Millions that have
been slain, and cast down into the pit for ever by the hands of this one woeful
Evil.

3. It, is injurious to the Souls of men. How woeful is that evil, which will
bring not only temperal Woe upon the Bodies, but ever fasting Woe upon the
Immortal Souls of all that shall die under the guilt of it? And that
Drunkenness is injurious and woefully prejudicial as to the Soul, is evident:

1. In that it darkeneth the Light of Reason. That noble Faculty of the Soul is
as it were over whelmed and drowned by this Vice: Hence in the 7th Verse of
this Chapter it is said, concerning those wicked and shameless Ministers that
would be drunk sometimes, They are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the
way through strong drink, they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.
Whilst a man is under the actual power of this Evil, he is like a Reasonless
Creature, devoid of all judgment and understanding: therefore the Prophet
speaking concerning Drunkards, faith, They have no knowledge, Isa. 5. 13. g. d.
they are like a company of bruits. Nay, Drunkenness is worse then a brutish
sin; for a Beast will drink no more then shall do him good, and therefore a
Drunkard is worse then a Beast. Reason is that whereby a man excels a Beast,
but this sin depriveth him of his excellency. How woeful is that Evil which
shall deprive a man of the Image of God, and debase him below a Beast? It
makes one more like a Mad man (that is berest of his Reason) then any thing
else. Senses Epist. 48.
One being asked What is Drunkenness? Answered well and truly, It is a
voluntary Madness. And to the same purpose does the Scripture speak, Jer. 51.
7. The Nations have drunken of her wine, therefore the Nations are mad. If
Drunkards were not mad, they would never do as they do. Was it not madness in
Esan, when he sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage? How much more madness
is it to part with all good for a draught of Beer? The Drunkard will lose his
Friends, and lose his Estate, and lose his Name, and lose Heaven, and lose his
Soul for ever, and all for a little drink. Oh! what horrible madness is this!
Drunkenness is a besotting sin, we say commonly, A drunken Sot; it turns men
into mere Sots. Some that have been of excellent Parts, by means of excessive
drinking have lost their Parts; and although they were before that of rare
understandings, have been besotted so as that they have been beneath the
ordinary sort of men.

2. Drunkenness brings woe upon the Conscience. There are some sins which make
deep and fearful wounds in the Conscience, and this is one of them; if the
sinner have any conscience in him, this will wound it. Indeed there are some
that feel not these wounds for the present, because they have drunk Conscience
into a deep sleep for a while, but when their Souls shall awake in the midst of
Eternal flames, all the wounds received by this sin will be felt with a
witness. You know a man may be wounded sorely, and yet not feel it at first,
but afterward he will be sensible of pain and misery enough: So it is, as to
the wounds which sin does give to the Souls of men; at present the sinner feels
nothing perhaps, but at the last! at the last! at the last! sin will wound him
terribly: Therefore is it said concerning this sin of Drunkenness, As the last
it bi^eth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23. 32. Some write
concerning that Serpent, that when a man is first (...) the poison of it
tickleth him, so as that he cannot to hear laughter, but when the venom is got
to his heart, it does torment him most intolerably: So is it with sin, and
especially the sin of Drunkenness, while it is in committing there is foolish
pleasure in it, but at the last the veneme of it will reach to the heart, and
then the bitterness will be a thousand times greater then ever the pleasure was.

3. Without Repentance this sin alone will ruin the Soul for ever. Now what a
woeful Evil is that which is the poison and bane of an Immortal Soul? Drunkards,
think of this. If you knew that there were poison in your Cups, you would be
loath to drink them off: did you see a Spider or other poisonfull Creature in
the Pot, you would be loath to drink it down. I have read Mr. Samuel wards
Sermon on Prove. 23. 32. Page 41.
of a Drunkard, that when he was drinking there happened to be a Spider in the
Pot, which he not observing, was poisoned, and died immediately. Believe it so
it is, there is Soul-poison in your Cups, there are Spiders in your Pots,
though you know it not: as sometimes they said to the Man of God, O there is
death in the Pot; so I say to you that are Pot-Companions, O there is poison,
there is Eternal Death in your Pots, drink, and your Souls will die. Now what a
woeful Evil is this, that has slain Millions of Immortal Souls, one whereof is
more worth then all the world? If a Soul be shut out of Heaven, then it is
undone: but so shall the Soul of the Drunkard be for ever, without true
Repentance. If I bring not Scripture to prove what I say, believe me not. See
then Gal. 5. 21. where the Apostle speaking concerning those that live in
Drunkenness and Revellings, and such like evils, I tell you (faith Paul) as I
have told you in times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. Hearken Drunkards, hearken; in the Name of God be it
spoken to you, You shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Remember what is said
of the evil drunken Servant, Matthew. 24. 49. with Luke 12. 45. If the evil
Servant shall smite his fellowservants, and eat and drink with the drunken:
What if he do drink with the drunken? what then? Then read the following
Verses, where it is said, The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and shall cut him
asunder, and appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Will you go on still in this trespass? will you
live and die in it? Then as sure as this Bible is the Word of God, when Death
shall come and cut thee asunder, when Death shall make a separation between thy
Soul and thy Body, thou shall have thy portion appointed thee in that place,
where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore! Thus concerning the
fifth Particular, demonstrating that Drunkenness is a Woeful Evil.

6. This is seldom goes alone, but is the unhappy parent of many other
Iniquities like it self. Hence are many wicked words uttered. When Drunkards
are in their Cups, they care not what they say, nor of whom: They will Lie,
Swear, Revile, Scoff, Blaspheme, so as some of them, when in a sober mood,
would be loath to do. Therefore David complained, saying, I was the song of the
drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. When drink is got into the brain, then out come ^^lchy
Songs, and scoffing at the best men, yea at godliness it self in the power of
it. Hence are many wicked deeds as well as words: Contentions arise from this.
Look again into that Text, which some have not unfitly termed, The Drunkards
Looking-glass, even that, Prove. 23.29. Who has woe? Who has contentions? who
has bablings? who has wounds without cause? Drunkards have all these: when
wine or strong drink has raised their spirits, they will fall to babbling, and
quarrelling, they know not about what, and words will bring on blows, and these
will make wounds when there is no just cause for it. That vile sin of Nunquam
ago ebrium castum pataho. Hieron. in Tit. 1.
Uncleanness, which he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall into, is the
fruit of Drunkenness; therefore ver. 33. faith, Thene eyes shall behold strange
women: where there is rioting and drunkenness, there is wont to be chambering
and wantenness, Romans 13. 13. Yea, the most horrid and prodigious Wickedness
that the Sun ever saw, or the Earth ever heard of do many times follow upon
this woeful cursed Evil of Drunkenness. I remember V'd. Lonicuri Exempl. P. 486.
Lonicerus mentions a sad Example of a miserable man, who being under some
disqui^^ment of mind, the Devil suggested to him, that he must needs commit
one of these three sins, Drunkenness, Adultery, or Murder: now the man thought
with himself, he had better be guilty of Drunkenness, then of either of the
other two. Now that was the subtilty of the Devil, who knew that if he drew him
into Drunkenness, he should be likely to prevail with him to commit the other
abominations also: And so it came to pass, for when he was drunken, he went and
defiled his Neighbors Wife, and after he had done that, he murdered her
Husband, lest he should be revenged of him for that wicked fact. This comes of
Drunkeness.

7. It is a sin that is rarely, truly repented of, and turned from. Hence, that
expression of adding drunkenness to thirst, is a proverbial speech, denoting
one that is obstinate and resolved in an evil course, that nothing can reclaim
him, Deuteronomy.29.19. This made a Father despair concerning his Drunken Son: when he
was told that one of his Sons was given to Gaming, he hoped for him; and when
he heard that another of his Sons was given to Uncleanness, he hoped for him
also: but when he was told that a third Son was addicted to Drunkenness, Nay
then (says he) alas! I have no hope concerning him. He supposed that for those
other Vices, Age and Experience might cure them, but this will grow with Age,
till the sinner drop down into the grave, and into Hell. I will not say with
him, there is no hope for such an one, for in and by Jesus Christ there is
hope; There is hope in Israel concerning this thing: not the vilest Drunkard in
all the Congregation, but there is help in Christ for him. There are some of
you that have lived in this sin even to gray hairs; In the Name of the Lord I
speak it to you, The Spirit of Jesus Christ is able to convert you, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ is able to cleanse and sanctify you; but you will be
Miracles of Mercy, if it should be so: such Examples are exceeding rare.
Ambrosius in Sermon de Ebrietate. Mr. Ward, ubi supra, p 34.
Some have enquired into this matter, and upon diligent search have found but
an Example or two in an Age, amongst notorious Drunkards, who have been truly
brought home to God. We may say of Drunkenness, as Solomon faith of Adultery,
Eccles. 7. 28. that not one of a thousand of those that are guilty of it, do
return from it again. It does so bewitch and besot the committers of it, as
that though they know it has, and will prove hurtful to them, yet they cannot
be persuaded to leave it: Prove. 23. 25. They have stricken me, shall the
Drunkard say, when I awake, I will seek it yet again. Blows cannot beat him out
of it, but he will to it yet again, and that too the very next day after he
has smarted for it. An old T^^oti^us.
Drunkard being persuaded to leave his Drunkenness, because it was prejudicial
to him in respect of a Disease in his Eyes, professed he had rather lose his
Eyes, then not be drunken. Forlorn Wretch! Incorrigibleness does usually attend
this sin. We see by what is written, Deuteronomy. 21.18.19.20.21. that Instruction,
Admonition, Correction, (...)
will not reform and reclaim an obstinate Drunkard. By all this then it
appears, that this is a Woeful Evil; so that well might the Prophet say, Woe to
the Drunkards of Ephraim.

We come therefore to infer some Uses from the Truth that has been thus far
cleared and proved.

USE I. If Drunkenness be such an Evil as has been Sermon II.
expressed, then the contrary is to be affirmed, concerning that Christian
godly Sobriety which the Scripture requires, even that it is a very necessary
and profitable Virtue. There is a Moral Sobriety which is not saving, and yet
even that is lovely and commendable: therefore it is said concerning the young
man in the Gospel, who having been put in mind of the Commandments by Christ,
and told that he should keep them, replied, All these have I observed from my
youth, it is said, that then, Jesus beholding him, loved him, Mark 10.20,21.
which shows that Morality is a lovely thing, and well consistent with
Christianity. Some among the Heathen have been notable Moralists, such as Cato,
Seneca, Aristiaes, etc. And although we must not say that their Morality saved
them, yet it was not altogether unprofitable to them, for God did therefore
reward them with many outward blessings, and they did thereby escape many
temporal Judgments, which otherwise would have befallen them: And they had
more quietness in their own spirits, then otherwise would have been, being
freed from those stinging Accusations of Conscience, which more profane
sinners, that usually have an Hell in their Consciences, are daily tormented
with. Moreover, their punishment in another world will not be so great, as of
those that have been of a vicious Conversation; for they shall chiefly be
punished at the day of judgment, who have walked after the flesh, 2 Pet.2.10.
and so have all Drunkards done. But then there is a Christian Sobriety, even
that grace of Sobriety, which the Scripture speaks of, and which differs as
much from that Moral Sobriety that some Heathens excelled in, as the Sun
painted on the wall comes short of the real Sun in the Firmament, the one
being only a common, the other a special grace of the Spirit. Christian
Sobriety does proceed from such Principles, as no mere Moralist was ever
acquainted with, sc. From a Principle of Love to Christ, when a man out of
sincere love to Christ, and desire to be like him, does endeavor to walk even
as he walked, that is Christianity, that is an Evidence of the grace of Sobriety.
See Gal.5.22,23. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: so that amongst the fruits
of the Spirit, Love is mentioned first, and Temperance, which implies
Sobriety, or that virtue which is contrary to Gluttony and Drunkenness, is last
mentioned, as flowing from that Mother-grace of Love, which has many
Daughters, whereof Temperance or Sobriety is one. Also true Christian Sobriety
is from Faith; hence Peter faith concerning the Gentiles, that their hearts
were purified by faith, Acts 15.9. The Gentiles were much given to that
defiling sin of Drunkenness, as the same Apostle elsewhere shows, 1 Pet.4.3.
but by Faith they were taught to see the evil of that, as well as of other
iniquities, and to live soberly as becomes the Gospel. So again Christian
Sobriety is from that grace of Hope: A believer has good hope through grace
that he shall be with Christ for ever in Heaven; this hope has that blessed
effect upon his heart and life, as that it causes him to abstain from all
those Practices which are displeasing to the Lord, and to Purify himself, as
he is pure. Here now is Christian Sobriety. All this may be intimated to us in
that Scripture, 1 Thessalonians 5.8. Let us who are of the day be sober, Putting on the
breast plate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation. Now
this Christian Sobriety is that which is especially necessary. So it is as to
the necessity of the Precept: The Moral Law requires Sobriety, and this Law is
confirmed by the Gospel, Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through
faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law. The Gospel, which is the word of
Faith, does establish, though not the Ceremonial, yet the Moral Law: wherefore
it is said, that the grace of God, i.e. the Gospel, which is a very gracious
Doctrine and Dispensation, which brings salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying a godliness and worldly lusts, we should live
[Soberly] righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11,12. Men under
the Gospel are taught piety toward God, righteousness toward men, and
Sobriety in respect of themselves. This Sobriety is also necessary, in order to
attaining Eternal life, 1 Cor. 9.25,26,27. And every man that striveth for the
mastery, is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible
Crown, but we an incorruptible: I therefore so run, I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection, left that by any means, when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a castaway. The Apostle we see was very
abstemious, even temperate in all things, left notwithstanding all his
knowledge, and gifts, and service done for God, he should miss of Heaven at
last. They that run a race must be very temperate; if they be not sober, they
will never obtain the reward: So must they that are engaged in a Christian
course, that desire to run that Race of Christianity, live temperately, or else
they will fall short of that Crown of Eternal life. Moreover, Sobriety is
necessary, that so a man may be sit for Death and Judgment. When Paul reasoned
before Felix of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix
trembled, Acts 24. 25. Well he might, for having lived intemperately, his
Conscience must needs tell him, that it would be Woe with him at the Judgment
to come. It is a vain thing for any one to hope for men, from Christ at the day
of Judgment, that does not live soberly now. Wherefore the Apostle faith, Be
sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 13. Then it is not hope, but presumption
and vain confidence in the man that shall think Christ will be gracious to him
in the day when he shall be revealed from Heaven, though Sobriety be not
regarded by him: And therefore this grace is very beneficial as well as
needful, for the Christian that has and does exercise the grace of Sobriety,
is there by capacitated to withstand the temptations of Satan. Therefore is
that, 1 Pet. 5.3. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. Men that are drunken,
are not capable of desending themselves against their enemies, that watch to
destroy them. Were not the Assyraians undone by this? Nah. 1.10. While they are
drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. A few men
may rout and ruin thousands of their enemies being over come with drink. Was
not the huge Host of Benhaded, wherein there were above thirty Kings, even
vanquished by a few of the Israelites? And how came that to pass, but because
Benhaded was drinking himself drunk, he and the thirty and two Kings that
helped him, and thereby was incapacitated to make resistance against his
enemies? 1 Kings 20.16. So it is, godly Sobriety, that does render Christians
fit to encounter with Spiritual Adversaries. And (not to enlarge further here)
by means of this Sobriety I am speaking of, Christians are sitted to attend the
duties of their Callings, not only particular and Civil, but general and
Heavenly. Hence is that, 1 Pet.4.7. Be ye sober, and watch unto prayer.
Insobriety, Drunkenness unfits for Prayer, and for every other good work (as
was showed in the demonstration of the truth before us) even so where the grace
of Sobriety is always exercised, a Soul is fit to have to do with God in any
duty, being always prepared to have blessed Communion with him; then which,
what can there be more beneficial or desirable?

USE II. If Drunkenness be such a woeful Evil, as has been proved; Then they
that have been kept from falling into this sin, and much more they in whom it
is mortified have abundant cause of Thankfulness unto God, because of his
preventing and sanctifying grace in this respect vouchsafed. If we ought to
pray (as Christ in that Platform of Prayer given to his Disciples has taught
us) that God would not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from evil, then
when the Lord does so, we ought to praise him: and if deliverance from outward
temptations be matter of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord, how much more is
this true concerning deliverance from sinful temptations? for a man had better
see many afflictions, then one sin; yea, there is more evil in the least sin,
then in any affliction, nay then in all the everlasting burnings of the
bottomless Pit. Therefore they that have been preserved from falling into sin,
have the greatest cause of Thankfulness that may be. I doubt not but that there
are many here this day, that were never guilty of this sin (at leastwise not
in sight of men) in all their lives: But unto whom are you beholden for this
preservation, but unto the preventing grace of God? Will you say that there is
a Principle of inherent Grace within you, whereby you have been kept from this,
and other the like enormities? Suppose so, yet that Principle of grace is from
God: Neither will inherent, without upholding, preserving, preventing grace
keep from this, or any other evil. Though it is impossible to live in this sin,
where there is true grace; he that has the least spark of true grace in his
heart, it is not possible that he should live in this sin, yet there may be a
falling into it: therefore Christ has charged even his own Disciples to take
heed of this sin, Luke 21.34. which shows, that a true Christian may possibly
he overtaken with it. And we read in Scripture of godly men that have been
stained with this iniquity, as Noah, Lot, Uriah, etc. yea, there is not a godly
man on earth, but has that in his own heart, which would soon lead him to the
commission of this and all other abominations, if God should but leave him a
little to himself: wherefore it was that the holy Mr. Bradford.
Martyr, when he heard of any one that was guilty of Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
or the vilest wickedness, would smite upon his breast, and say, In this heart
of mine is that which would have made me commit the same evil. if the grace of
God had not prevented. Oh therefore be humbly thankful to the God of all grace.
But much more have they cause to be for ever thankful, who are mortified unto
this sin: for a man may possibly never commit this evil outwardly, and yet the
sin not mortified in him; it may be he may not have an opportunity to practice
this iniquity, or fear of punishment, or shame may deter him, and yet he is not
mortified to it. This sin is mortified, when a man does forsake and abhor it
more then Death or Hell, because thereby God is offended and dishonored; they
that do so, shall not die -- but live, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh,
ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body,
ye shall live. Drunkenness is one of the deeds of the body, and of the flesh; I
do not say that he that does not commit that sin shall live, but he that does
mortify it shall live: for as he that repents truly of one sin, repents of
all; so he that indeed is mortified to one sin, is so to all: such then shall
live, and therefore have abundant cause of rejoicing and thankfulness before
the Lord.

USE III. This Text and Doctrine is like a Thunderbolt, enough to shake the
Soul, and Split the Heart of every Drunkard under Heaven. I could be glad if
there were no need to speak by way of Terror and Awakening to such sinners.
And time was, when there was not need for Ministers to preach much against this
sin in New England; Oh that it were so now! But we may say, as sometimes the
Prophet Oded spoke in another case to the Host of Israel, You have (faith he)
slain [your Brethren] with a rage that reaches up to heaven, but are there not
with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? 2 Chronicles. 28.9.10. so I
say, This sin is amongst us, even amongst us also, yea and the rage of it
begins to reach up to Heaven, it cries for Judgment. It is sad, that ever
this Serpent should creep over into this Wilderness, where threescore years ago
he never had had any footing, but now it is come, and I fear will hardly ever
out again, although it has already devoured many. If we speak of that which
God and Scripture call Drunkenness, namely, when there is a drinking of Wine or
strong drink to any excess, how many are there that have cause to lay their
hands upon their mouths, and to cry Guilty, before the Lord? I have heard some
say, that there is more Wine drunk in this Town, then in most Towns of the same
greatness in the Christian world. We may then fear that there has been much
excess herein, that any should have cause so to speak or think. And how many
are there that must be reckoned amongst woeful Drunkards, that nevertheless do
not believe any such thing of themselves? There are that flatter themselves in
their iniquity, and think that they are hardly guilty of this sin, because they
are not went to be subject to such, worse then beastly Drunkenness, as not to
be able to understand what they do or say; when as it may be the reason of it
is, because by using themselves to excessive drinking, they are able to bear a
great deal. Now that is worse then to be merely drunken, for it is to be a
Drunkard: One ^^
may be drunken, that is not a Drunkard; and one may be a Drunkard, that is
seldom drunken. He that abhors the sin of Drunkenness, yet may be overtaken
with it, and so drunken; but that one act is not enough to denominate him a
Drunkard: and he that lovteh to drink Wine to excess, though he should feldom
be overcome there by, is one of those Drunkards upon whom the Woe in the Text
does directly fall. Isa.5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and
men of strength to mingle strong drink. Again, there are that will make others
drunk: some have done this out of horrid profaneness of spirit, and therefore
its a delight to them, to draw those into this sin that make any Profession of
Religion. If they can but make a Churchmember drunk, then they are glad; which
argues a strange degree of impiety. Others have done this out of Coverousness:
There has been an horrible thing done in this respect; Some amongst us (who
they are the Lord knows) out of Covetousness have sold Liquors and strong
drink to these poor Indians, whose Land we possess, and have made them drunk
therewith. What a fearful sin is that! The First-fathers in this Colony, who
are now the most of them in heaven, began this Plantation, in part, out of
respect to the Conversion and Salvation of the Natives amongst whom we live;
but what woeful degeneracy is this that some should rise up amongst us, that out
of love to a little filthy lucre, shall teach them such wickedness as before
they were never acquainted with. The Indians are of themselves the saddest
spectacles of Misery, and the most woeful remembrance of the ruins of the
righteous and glorious Image of God, that ever mortal eye beheld; but therefore
their sin is not a little aggravated, that shall make such poor creatures more
the children of Hell then they were before. If there be any in the Congregation
(as I doubt there is) whose Conscience does accuse him of making others drunk,
let him hear the word of the Lord which is written, Hab.2. 15. 16. Woe to him
that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him, and make him
drunken also: The cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee. By
these things then it is sadly evident, that there is cause enough to bear
witness against this Evil.

Now to speak something further, and more particularly, by way of Conviction
and Awakening to those that love and live in this sin of Drunkenness, know and
believe.

1. That woeful Judgments have ever followed this sin. The Text faith it, and
woeful Experience proves it. What has been formerly said concerning the
wofulness of the sin of Pride, may here be applied to this of Drunkenness.
Personal Miseries come from hence upon the Estates, Names, Bodies, Souls of
guilty ones, as was more fully showed the last Sermon. And this sin brings
Family-judgements; Thousands of Families that have been brought to ruin
thereby. Drunkards bring a curse upon their Children, and poor Posterity after
them; nay, it may be one act of drunkenness, and that committed by a good man,
shall bring a Curse upon some of his Children to the worlds end. Do we not see
it in Noah? he was a righteous man, and was drunken but once in all his life
that we read of, and much might be said to exense him, in that he knew not
that there was an inebriating quality in Wine, nevertheless that Drunkenness
brought a Curse upon one of his Children, which continues to this day,
although it be Four thousand years since that sin was committed. Whose heart
then is it that does not tremble to live in such an evil? Yea, and this sin is
the woeful procuring Cause of many Public Calamities in the world: Was not this
one Principal cause of the Babylonian Captivity? see else Isa. 56. 9. All the
beasts of the field come to divour, yea all the beasts in the forest. Here now
the ravenous Babylonians are called upon to make a prey of the Jews, and the
reason of it we may see ver. 12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink: So that the luxury and drunkenness
which abounded amongst the Jews, especially considering that their Watchmen,
their Ministers, who should have been examples of Sobriety, and Mortification
to all round about them, were some of them given to this iniquity, was one
principal cause of their enemies coming to devour them. The like we may see
Chap. 5. V. II. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them. Now
mind what follows, ver. 13. Therefore my people are gone into Captivity. And
the sin also was in a special manner the procuring Cause of that Assyrian
Captivity, wherein the ten Tribes were carried away, and never restored to this
day, although it be now above Two thousand years since that Judgment befell
them: therefore is it said to the Drunkards of Ephraim, in the next words to
the Text, Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one; they boasted, and were
confident in their out ward strength and Fortifications. etc. Well, but faith
the Lord, he not proud of your strength, for I will bring a strong one upon
you, on attemp^st of hail, and destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters
overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand. The meaning is, that
the Assyrians should break in upon them and full upon them as thick as
hailstones, and destroy them, because of their Drunkenness and other sins they
lived in. And has not the Christian World drunk deep of the Cup of divine
Judgments for this sin? What Woes has it brought upon Christendom, so
called? Some have observed, (...)multos in servitutem T^r(...)orum and
Tartarorum abri^i ^^^it D^us. Ne nobis idem in Germania accidat, verend^^ est.
Quid (...) Tarcorum grando feriat(...)
that it has been in special for this sin, that God has let loose the
Barbarous Nations upon those that call themselves Christians, to scourge them,
and to destroy them. The Turks (who are meant by the second of those Woes in
the Revelation, when it is said, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth,
Rev. 8. 13.) Providence has raised them up, and sent them like a storm of hail
upon the Europaan Nations, not only (though principally) to punish them for
their Idolatry and Superstition, in worshipping graven Images, but also to
plague the Nations, even the Christian Nations, for all their Profaneness,
Luxuries, Drunkennesses. Poor miserable Germany has bled for this sin! Has
not God made the Sword drunk with Blood? Yea, at this day, is not the Sword
made drunk with Christian, and with Protestant blood for this sin? My Text
faith, Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim; even so, Woe to the Drunkards of Holland.
Is not Salmanasser at this day coming against the fat valleys for this sin? And
if we look nearer home, What sad Harvests have we in New England had of late
years? and doubtless, the prevailing of this iniquity has been one cause of
it. The good Creatures of God have been greatly abused by many amongst us, unto
much Sensuality and Intemperancy, therefore does the Lord take away Creature
comforts from us. This last Summer, what excessive Rains have there been? Since
that Drunkards are to be seen up and down in almost every Town, no wonder that
the Lord in Judgment makes the Earth drunk. Nay, come yet nearer home, and
look upon this great Town, How has God threatened us for this, as well as other
sins? Remember the sad Fire that was here in this part of the Town about three
years ago: And where did that Fire break forth? Began it not at the Alehouse?
As if the Lord should from Heaven point with the finger, and say, Behold, I am
displeased with you because of your excessive drinking. Boston, Boston! take
heed of this sin lest I lay thee even with the ground, and thou become desolate.

2. Know, that this sin will certainly be bitterness in the latter end. Suppose
the best that can be supposed, suppose the Lord should give you Repentance, and
so forgive this iniquity, yet then it will cost you much bitterness of Soul.
Extraordinary cases must always be excepted, but otherwise, God is not wont to
pardon great sins, without bringing first to great sorrows, and heavy breakings
of heart for them. Now Drunkenness is a great sin, and therefore conclude thou
may, that if ever the Lord pardon it to thee, he will first break all thy
bones and heart for it: or if the sin be not mourned for, and turned from then
bitter destruction will be the end of it. The Scripture says of those whole
God is their belly, that their end will be destruction, Phil. 3. 19. Now the
Drunkards belly is his God, unto which he offers a Drinkoffering. What bitter
and lamentable ends have many Drunkards come to? Has not the Lord been wont to
make such persons awful Examples of divine Vengeance at last? What a sad end
did Nabal come to, after he had been very drunken? 1 Samuel 25. 36. And what a
lamentable end did Amnon come to at last, who was murdered by his own Brother
at that very instant when his heart was merry with wine? 2 Samuel 13. 28. And yet
he was the Child of a godly Father, who no doubt had wept and prayed for the
Salvation of his Children full many a time. And what a lamentable end did Elah
come to at last? Whose servant Zimri conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah
drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, and smote him, and killed him, 1
King. 16. 9. 10. It may be because thou are given to this sin, God will suffer
thee to die drunken at last, and to go down into eternal darkness in that
condition: or it may be, God will leave then to that which is worse then any
death, even sometime when thou art drunk, to fall into some horrid sin for
which, it may be, the Sword of Justice shall cut thee off at last. I could
produce many direful instances to this purpose. But I will only mind you of
one dismal Example, which Austine Sermon. ^^. ad fratres in Eremo.
mentions, who says, that in Hippo (the Town where he was Minister) there was
a Citizen whose name was Cyril, who had but one only Son, to whom he was
extremely indulgent, and as Austine faith, loved him above God himself: this
Son, as he grew up, fell in with bad Company, and became a Drunkard, and once
coming home much distempered with drink, he attempted to ravish one of his own
Sisters, and killed two other of his own Sisters, and Murt^ered his own Father
that begat him, and his own Mother that bare him, who was then great with
Child: for which monstrous Impieties he was Condemned, and Executed. Now say,
was not this young man's Drunkenness bitterness in the latter end? For the
present, this iniquity may be sweet to you, but what will it be upon a
Deathbed, think you? It may be Conscience will roar for it then. Some notorious
Drunkards, when they have been upon Deathbeds, have cried our in Hellish
horror of heart, Alehouses are Hell-houses: The Alehouse has brought my Soul
down to the house of Hell for ever. Shall I tell you what I am able upon my own
personal knowledge to testify? I will tell you, that there have been some in
this very Congregation, who upon Sick-beds and Deathbeds have sent for me,
desiring that I would cry to the Lord for them, and give them the best advice I
could for their Souls. Seeing them in miserable di^ress of Conscience, I have
said to them, Tell me now, what is that sin that does most of all perplex and
torment your Conscience? O my Company keeping, and my Drunkenness, says one,
and O my Company-keeping, and my Drunkenness, faith another. These have been
the lamentable cries of poor dying sinners in this place, when they have seen
themse'ves upon the borders of Eternity. And after death this sin will be
bitter indeed: Then (as one speaks) the Drunkard for every Cop of pleasure,
will receive a Gallon of woe. Yea, for every drop of pleasure which he enjoyed
whilst living and sinning, he shall have a Tun of Woe. After Death comes
Judgment, and then the truth of this will be felt and believed.

For, 3. Know for Certain, that whoever lives and death in this sin, shall
perish to Eternity. It will be a folly for any such sinner to expect Salvation:
Can you be saved without an Interest in Christ? This Lust alone, if loved or
lived in, will keep Christ out of the Soul. I have read of a great man that
once said to Luther, (...)
Sir, we would all willingly be Christians, but we cannot since in our hearts
to leave that custom of drinking to excess. But a man must leave that custom,
or die and perish a Christless sinner for ever. It was partly showed the last
time, That Drunkenness is such an Evil as will assuredly exclude the sinner out
of Heaven: Therefore the Lord has commanded Churches to exclude such out of
their Communion, 1 Cor. 5. II. If any man that is called a Brother, be a
Drunkard, with such an one no not to eat. What a Churchmember, and a Drunkard?
Ah! vile: Ah! vile. Woe to that Church that shall know such amongst them, as
make a practice of this iniquity, and yet not make them to know the Terror of
a Censure. How plain and peremptory is that expression, Chap. 6. ver. 10. where
it is said in so many words, Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
And if not, it must needs follow, that Hell and destruction will be the eternal
portion of every Drunkard, so living, so dying. Wherefore the Evangelical
Prophet Isaiah, speaking of Drunkards, yet faith, Hell has enlarged her self,
and opened her mouth without measure, Isa.5. 14. Drunkards, tremble at this! Do
you not see Hell gaping for you, and opening her mouth wide to receive your
Souls, when once they are out of your Bodies? Yea verily, though a man should
reform his life in many things very much, though he should be swept and
garnished never so, having attained to great gifts, practicing many duties
forsaking many sins, yet if there be but this one lust of Drunkenness, which
still his heart has a secret love and liking to, there is no remedy, but dying
in his present estate, he must be a damned wretch to all eternity. Oh that you
would think sadly between God and your own Souls, on the words of the Lord
Jesus, Mat. 5. 29. 30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish,
and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand
offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into
hell. Though this sin of Drunkenness may be as dear to thee as life and limbs,
though it may be as hard to part with, as to pluck out a right eye, or to cut
off a right hand, yet away with it, away with it, as ever thou would escape
Hell fire.

4. Know, that if any of you that are here before the Lord this day, shall
continue under the guilt of this sin, your iniquity will be hainously
aggravated: for you call your selves Christians. If an Indian be drunk, that is
bad, but for a Christian to be a Drunkard, is a thousand times worse. If
Ephraimities (that is to say, such as prosess that they are the Lords people)
be Drunkards, surely the Lord will judge them as those that break Wedlock, that
break Covenant with him, are judged: yea, and you sin in the day, that is,
against Gospel light. What says the Scripture? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7. 8. They that be
drunken, are drunken in the night: but let us who are of the day, be sober. For
men that live in Gospel days, and under Gospel-Ordinarces, to practice deeds
of darkness, is shameful and horrible. And this sin is aggrarated from the
place where you live: What? to be a Drunkard in New England, where there are
severe and wholesome Laws to punish this iniquity, and some are put to shame for
it! Time was, when it was a strange thing to see or hear of a man drunken in
New England; and is this sin now become common? The Lord help! Will you be
sinners in Zion? Will you be fools in Israel! You have moreover been told of
the Judgments following this Transgression: you have been sadly, and solemnly
warned against this Evil, and that not in a word or two, but by Sermon after
Sermon. I remember I had occasion to Preach a whole Sermon, that I might
restifie against the sin of Drunkenness, in this place, it is now above nine
years ago. I am grieved at my heart, that there should be cause for me now to
Preach more Sermons then one, further to bear witness against the same Evil,
whereby the eyes of Gods glory are provoked, and his blessed Name is highly
dishonored amongst us. Take heed now how you resist the Spirit of God. I might
tell you, what I have some-where read, Vid. Theater of Gods Judgments, Chap 3.
Page 410.
that a Minister having Preached a Sermon against Drunkenness, a profane
Drunkard that was in the Congregation, went out and scoffed, and mocked at what
he had heard: and God smote him by a strange Providence, that he died
forthwith, even whilst he was deriding at the Sermon which he had newly heard.
Will you provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are you stronger then he? But if there
be any Drunkards in the Congregation so desperate, as to go on still in the
commission of this Trespass against the Lord, Be it known to you, That your
blood shall be upon your own heads. I remember what God said to his Prophet
Ezekiel, Chap. 33. 7. 8. Son of man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the house
of Israel, therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from
me, when I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely dies if thou
do not speak, to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in
his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. O Lord! I tremble to
think of that, that the blood of any poor Soul should be required of me: I
trust in Christ that it shall not be so. I trust that none amongst you shall be
able to say to me, when we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, Had you that taught us the Word of God, told us of the evil of our
ways, had you faithfully warned us of our danger, we would not have gone on
therein. I remember also what the Lord further faith, Ver. 9. Nevertheless, if
thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it: if he do not turn from his
way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul. Now then,
I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this day, that I have warned you
of this sin to turn from it: let Men and Angels, that are here present, bear me
witness at the last day, that I have not shunned nor spared to declare unto you
the Woes that will certainly follow upon continuance in this Evil. Therefore if
there be any Drunkard that will be a Drunkard still, he shall die in his
iniquity: But I have delivered my Soul.

USE IV. Let it be of Exhortation, and that in three words.

1. Let every one endeavor the suppression and extirpation of this Evil. This
we should do, by laboring to pray it down. When we are taught to pray that the
Name of God may be hallowed, therein is implied, That we must pray that this
and other such like Evils, whereby his glorious Name is much dishonored, may
be suppressed. And there are some that ought to do more then merely to pray
against it; Ministers must bear witness against it in their way: and it
concerns those that have any Civil Power in their hands, to bear witness
against it in their way. If there were Magistrates in this Assembly, I would
speak to them in his Name by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, and
all the Judges of the Earth, and Exhort them to draw forth the Sword of Justice
against this Evil. There are sundry of you that stand in some public Capacity,
Townsmen, Constables, Grand Jurymen, etc. Behold, the Word of the Lord is unto
you in particular this day, I lay the solemn Charge of God upon you, that you
do your utmost toward the suppression of this abounding iniquity: Kill this
Serpent, before it be grown too big for you. And therefore take heed that there
be not through your means, or through your neglect, that which is the Fountain
of this Evil; I mean, that there be not a Multiplication of Taverns, and
Alehouses, or the like, more then there is need for. I know that in such a
great Town as this, there is need of such Houses, and no sober Minister will
speak against the Licensing of them; but I with there be not more of them then
there is any need of. Especially see that you keep a vigilant eye over these
private, dark Alehouses, which do more mischief, then all the public Houses do
good, as being the very Sinks of Sin, whereby Youth is woefully corrupted
amongst us. And if you find out any that have made a Trade of this iniquity,
and that have got part of their Living by the blood and destruction of precious
Souls, see that you bring them forth to condign punishment; and as they have
been exemplary in sinning, so let them be brought under exemplary punishment,
that all Israel may hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

2. Much more, Let every one be Exhorted to beware of being subject to, or
coming any way under the dominion of this iniquity. For Motives, Remember what
was said in the last use, as also formerly concerning the Wofulness of this
Evil. By way of Direction here, I shall only say two things:

1. Take heed of the Occasions and Temptations leading unto this Evil. Some
there are that will pray against this sin, and yet they will cast themselves
upon temptations to it, which is to take Gods Name in vain; even as if a man
should put his hand into the fire, and then pray that he might not be burnt:
would you not say that such a one did mock the Lord? And what do they do less,
who pray that they may not be drunk, and yet will not avoid temptations that
lead unto it? e. g. Idleness is a temptation leading unto Drunkenness: when
vile persons have nothing else to do, then they must go to the Ordinary, and
drink till they be drunken. Idleness and fullness of bread, so Idleness and
fullness of drink are wont to go together, Ezekiel. 16.49. Therefore take heed of
Idleness, if you would escape Drunkenness. And take heed of Companykeeping with
those that would draw you unto this Evil; My son, if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not: walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from
their path. Take the Counsel which the Holy Ghost gives by Solomon, Prove. 23.
20. Be not amongst wine-bibbers. Avoid familiar fellowship with Drunkards;
Avoid them as you would do men that have the Plague upon them, yea a Plague
that will insect, and be the death of your precious immortal Souls. Remember
that Scripture. Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise; but
a companion of fools shall be destroyed. And take heed of being more, then you
have any just cause or call to be, in places where a temptation unto this sin
is set before you: go not to, tarry not in saverns or Ordinaries, without
sufficient reason to bear you out in such a practice. It is a sad thing, that
Professors, and Churchmembers should many of them be guilty of scandalizing the
world in this respect. A carnal creature excuses himself, saying, Why should
not I go frequently to the Tavern, such an one is a Churchmember, and I see
him there often, such an one is esteemed a godly man, and yet I have seen him
sit for hours together there, and why should not I do so as well as he? Thus
does the abuse of your lawful liberty become a snare, and ruin to many a poor
Soul. Does not the Scripture say, Look not upon the wine? Prove. 23. 31. The
meaning of which is, that men must avoid all temptations unto Drunkenness, as
much as possibly may be. Drunkenness is like the (...)
Basilick, of whom they say, that if a man do but look upon it, he is thereby
infected, and mortally poisoned. Therefore it will be your wisdom to keep out
of the sight of this Evil, and far away from whatever shall tend, and tempt
unto it. One thing more I shall mention, as a great occasion and cause of this
sin, which therefore you ought to avoid, namely, that Heathenish Custom of
Health-drinking. O'tis an (...)
Heathenish, nay an Idolatrous Rice, witness those Ceremonies of putting off
the Hat, yea of Kneeling, (a gesture of Adoration) which are Customary amongst
profane Health drinkers. But the Word of God faith, Learn not the way of the
Heathen, for the oustome of the [Heathen] people, are vain, Jer. 10.2,3. and
that Christians are redeemed from their vain conversation received by tradition
from forefathers, 1 Pet. 1.18. What should Christians do with the Mysteries
Vid (...)lib. 3^ Cap. 16. These 14.
and Ceremonies of Bacchus? Do not think that only a few Puritans or
Precifians, have been against this Custom of drinking Healths: for though
(...) vide (...) apud (...) vol 3. p. 12^2.
Papists indeed plead for the lawfulness of it, yet He that would see the evil
of this practice more fully evinced from scripture and reason, may feade Vottii
disp it de divini nominis abusious. And Rittershasius Sacr. Lect. lib. 4. Cap.
6. Loccenius Antiq. Gothic. Cap. 21. Crocius in Tit. 2 P.291. And even amongst
Papists ^ in Esti. 1.8. And in English, Mr. Pryns Healths Sickness. Mr. Geree
against Healths. Mr. Dnyname of Drunkenness. Tassin of Amendment of Life. Mr.
Hall on 2 Timothy 3.P.94
Protestants generally condemn it. And the Anbrosias de Jejunio. Hicron. in
Hos. 7. August. Sermon. de Temp. 231.232. Basil, etc.Basil, etc.
Ancient Doctors in the Church have thundered against this practice, and that
because it is (as they were wont to express it) A shoing born to draw on
Drunkenness; it is a Bacchean Artifice, which Satan has devised for that end.
The Scripture likewise does plainly enough reprove it, when Banquettings are
condemned, 1 Pet. 4.3. The Greek word ((...)) which is there used, properly
notes a drinking by number and measure, as is usual amongst Health drinkers.
But especially when any shall be so vile, as not only to drink Healths
themselves, but to force others to do the like, their practice is very sinful
and abominable. Is there any in this Congregation that has done thus, that
has compelled others to drink Healths, and will you go on to do so still? I
testify from the Lord against that man, whoever he be, that an Heathen shall
rise up in Judgment against him, and condemn him at the last day: witness else
what is written, Esth. 1.8. it is there said, that the drinking was according
to the law, none did compel; for the King had appointed to all the Officers of
his house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure. So that those
Heathens would not force any man to drink more then he had a mind to.
Therefore beware of that evil practice.

2. There is another Rule, which if it be observed, you shall never be under
the dominion of this iniquity, and if it be neglected, all other Precepts will
be in vain: it is this, Make sure of an interest in Jesus Christ, by faith
unfeigned in his Name. There are some, that in giving Directions tending to the
Mortification of this sin of Drunkenness, say to those that are guilty of it,
that they must Pray, and add Fastings to their Prayers, and Vows to their
Fastings: all which things are good, and see that you attend them in their due
order. But alas! the main thing of all is left out, if an interest in Christ be
not sought after, and made sure of. All Prayers, Tears, Resolutions, Fastings,
Vows against this sin, will never subdue it without Christ. Go to Jesus Christ
for power against this, and all Corruptions: if thou art once in Christ, thou
may by faith obtain power from the blood of Christ, for the killing of this
sin; if thou art in Christ, his Spirit also will mortify it: therefore the
Scripture faith, that if you through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, Romans 8.13. Make sure then of an interest in Jesus Christ, and his Spirit
will subdue and mortify every lust in thy heart.

The last word of Exhortation shall be unto those that have been guilty of this
woeful sin of Drunkenness; Be this day excited and persuaded to repent, and turn
from this Transgression. Some of you have through Temptation been drawn into
this Evil. How many guilty, accusing Consciences are there here before the
Lord? Oh repent of what you have done, if ever you have given way to
Temptation, so as to be overtaken with this so vile an abomination. Others (and
many too) live in this sin, in their ordinary course they commit it, and
therefore are servants to it; Oh repent, repent, before it be too late.
Remember, that are long Repentance for it will be too late. Did not damned
drunken Dives repent when it was too late? when his Soul was dropped down into
the place of Torment, and he was crying for one drop of water to cool his
tongue, then he bitterly repented of all the drunken merry-meetings, which in
his life time he had seen, but then Repentance was too late. Think seriously on
that Scripture, Romans 13.11.12.13. Now it is high time to awake out of sleep,
the night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the works
of darkness -- Let us walk honestly, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness. Do not delay your Repentance, but now practice it.
Anstine I remember consesseth, that he lived in those sins, in his vain
youthful days, before his Conversion, and he had many secret Convictions upon
his Conscience, thinking with himself that tomorrow, or sometime hereafter, he
would repent of, and turn from those vanities: but on a certain time it seemed
to him as if he heard a voice from Heaven saying to him, Toll and lige, Take
up and read; a Bible being by him, he takes it up, and goes to reading in
it, and the first place which his eyes fixed on, was this Scripture last
mentioned, and the Lord set in with it upon his heart, so as that he cried out,
And why not now Lord? I have said, that hertafter I would leave my rioting, and
drinking, and chambering, and wantonness, but let me do it now Lord. Do you
that are Drunkards say and do the lake, resolve upon present Repentance without
delaying one day, or one hour longer. And know for your encouragement, that in
case you do truly repent of this iniquity, God will forgive you. Do not think
that Have to scare you with the ^^^^ visions of that Eternal Night which is
(...) your Souls. Do not think, my Brethren, that I delight in ^^^^fying you
with the sad tidings of Hell and Deads, Indeed sometimes I am forced to it.
Knowing the terror of the Lard; I seek to persuade you by those Arguments;
never ^ I take no pleasure to tell you thereof. But now that I am speaking to
you of the pardoning grace of God, methinks I am in my Element: I could be
glad to stay and dwell here, and to enlarge my self much to you, would time and
strength permit me. But I can only say thus much, We read in Scripcute of
those that have been grievously guilty of this sin, many and many a time, even
of such as have Walked in it, yet when they have truly repented of it, the
gracious blessed God has freely forgiven them, and in Jesus Christ looked upon
them as if they had never committed this sin. To encourage to Repentance, and
to break the heart of the vilest Drunkard, I Will put you in mind of two
Scriptures: the one is that, 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past of our life may sussice
us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness,
lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquettings, etc. So that those Christians
had before their Conversion been woefully guilty of this iniquity, but upon true
Repentance they were sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ, as the beginning
of the Epistle shows; that is to say, the blood of Jesus Christ cleansed them
from the guilt of this sin, and obtained pardoning mercy for them. Another
Scripture to encourage you to Repentance, is that 1 Cor.6.11. where the Apostle
having said to the Gorintbians, that no Drunkard (that is, so living and dying
without Repentance) shall inherit the Kingdom of God, he adds withal, Such
were some of you, but you are washed, you are sanctified, you are Justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Know therefore, that
although thou have been guilty of this great sin, it may be an hundred and an
hundred times, yet thou may be justified from it in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, if indeed thou do repent of it. But then your Repentance must be thus
qualified!

1. You must mourn before the Lord, that ever you dishonored but Name by this
Transgression. Let me speak to you in the words of the Prophet Joel, Joel 1.5.
Awake ye Drunkards, and weep and howl, all ye drinkers of wine. O thou
Drunkard, now let tears be thy drink; go home, and appear before the Lord in
secret, and there lament with a sorrowful heart, that ever thou have thus
sinned against him. Do as David did, who faith, Psa. 38.18. I will declare mine
iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. What sin was that? truly, his sin in
making Uriah drunk. So do thou be sorry that ever thou have made thy self drunk.

2. You must also forsake this sin: that is implied in true Repentance. And I
speak this the rather, because I know there have been some Drunkards that would
bewa^ their sin with many tears, and yet it may be, go and be drunk again the
next week: that is no true Repentance. Thy heart must be so broken for this sin,
as to be broken from it, otherwise though a man should confess his sin till his
tongue be worn to the stumps, though he should pray against it till Heaven and
Earth shake, though he should weep Seas of Tears for it, yet if he will not
forsake it, all his Confessions, Prayers, and Tears shall never save him. Yea,
he must forsake it not only as to his Conversation, or outwardly, but
inwardly, so as to have no affection, or secret love, and liking to this
Abomination. O therefore say as once Ephraim did, What have I to do any more
with Idols? So say thou, What have I to do any more with my wicked Companions
in sin? What have I to do any more with Drunkenness, or any other iniquity that
I have in times past loved and lived in? And then thou may hope to find
pardoning mercy from the Lord; according to that gracious word, Prove. 28.13.
Whosoever confesses, and forsakes, shall have mercy. Now the Lord of Heaven grant
it, to many of your Souls, who are sadly concerned in the word that has been
spoken to you in his Name.

FINIS.

