Boston, March 22. 1672/3.
THE Deputy Governor and Magistrates adjacent being assembled in Council, to
consider of the late Awful Hand of God, consuming our Castle by Fire the One
and twentieth of this instant, thereby taking away that part of our Defense
against the Incursions of Foreign Enemies; and also in some sort disinabling
us to give check to the Insolences of unruly persons, that either are or may
occasionally come amongst us: for which ends, although the thing it self was
(...) by long experience has been found to be serviceable.

And more especially considering the present Commotions in Europe, wherein our
own Nation is deeply concerned; and that His Royal Majesty has of his princely
Care for our Peace, given us notice seasonably to provide for our own Defense
against the Enemy, who may probably be rather encouraged to attempt against us,
when this present devastation shall be known in foreign parts:

Do therefore Commend to all the Inhabitants of this Colony, that a free
Contribution be made for the Re-edifying of the said Castle; hereby declaring,
That it is our resolution to empower meet and able Instruments forthwith to set
about the said Work, and to order the finishing thereof as speedily as may be,
in such sort as may be more effectual in all respects for the ends premised,
then that was which is now laid waste.

We hope there will be no need to give Arguments to stir up the ready and
willing minds of the Inhabitants, to promote a Work so much conducing to our
Safety; there being reason to believe, That if any prejudice should accrue to
the Center, the whole will suffer thereby.

And should Leaders be slothful, or others be backward in Contributing thereto
according to their several places and abilities, it will render us to be a
people signally ungrateful, and Laish-like secure, under our present
Enjoyments, presaging our future Calamity.

The Charge of the Work propounded, we have computed to be Twelve or Fifteen
hundred pounds, which we do aim at present to raise: And in case after
reasonable endeavors, it cannot be effected without a general Leavy; Those
who shall now freely Contribute, as they will manifest their readiness to
attend their duty to God and the Public Interest, they shall be discharged
from any further Tax that may be imposed on this occasion.

ANd it is further Ordered, That the Committees of the Militia in the several,
Towns do forthwith prosecute this Order, by taking Subscriptions, and Receiving
what shall be Contributed by any at present, and make a Return of the whole
unto the Major General, between this and the first of May next ensuing.

By Order of the Deputy Governor and Magistrates. Edward Rawson Secret.


