The Wicked man's Portion OR A SERMON

(Preached at the Lecture in Boston in New England the 18th day of the ^ Month
1674. when two men were executed, who had murdered their Master.)

Wherein is showed That excess in wickedness does bring untimely Death.

(...)

Prove. 10. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened. Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which
is the first Commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou
may live long on the Earth. Paena ad paucos, metus ad omnes.

BOSTON, Printed by John Foster. 1675

TO THE READER.
THe ensuing Sermon was, (as is in the Title Page expressed) Preached upon a
very sad and solemn occasion. I did not know that it would fall to my Lot to
attend that service, a whole week before, and much other business was upon my
hands at the same Time, necessary to be done; in which respect nothing but what
is Plain and Common is to be expected in this Discourse. Yea and if I had had
never so much time for Preparation, it is my Principle, ( and those few in the
world that know any thing of me, will testify that my continued Practice is
according to that Principle) that Flaines^s in delivering the Truths of God, is
always to be endeavored after; but more especially when such awful occasions
are presented, as caused the Preaching of this Sermon. Cibus ^^^plex Optimus.
Plain food is best in a Spiritual as well as in a Natural sense.

Little did I think of Printing this sermon when I Preached it, but that God
who sometimes gives favor to those who are not then of skill has so ordered
by his Providence as that many have desired, that it might be thus exposed to
the view of the world; out of respect to whose Importunity, I have transcribed
for them a Copy of what was spoken, and that not only as to the things, but
(since that was desired) as nigh as I could remember, in the same words, which
were delivered. If I may by this Publication be instrumental to prevent any
from sinning against God; and if the Lord will bless these poor Meditations for
the good of young ones amongst us ( especially such as are of the Rising
Generation in New England, for whose sakes I am most willing, not only to
Preach, and to write, but to die, if I may but thereby Promote their Conversion
and Salvation) I have then my whole desire.

The blessing of the God of Heaven, go along with his own Truth. which is the
Prayer of

Thine in Christ, Increase Mather.
Boston, N. E. ^5. of 2 Month, 1675.
Eccles, 7. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish; why should
thou dye before thy time?


SOlomon being a man full of wisdom, was very observant of the Providence of
God, which happened in the place and in the age wherein he lived. He does in this
Chapter give us an account of some of his Observations that way, There is one
special Observation in this Context, viz in the 15 verse of this Chapter, where
we have the wise man saying, There is a just man that perishes in his
Righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth hi^ life in his
wickedness. Now lest any one should abuse this doctrine of the just man's
perishing in his righteousness; and the wicked man's prolonging his life in his
wickedness, He proceeds to a double exhortation.

1. He does exhort to beware of errors on the right hand. verse 16th. where
there are two errors on the right hand mentioned.

1. Overmuch Righteousness. Be not righteous overmuch. Not that it is possible
for any man to have more of real Goodness in him, than he ought to have: but he
may be more righteous in his own Conceit, than he should be; and he may be
Superstitious, he may add to the Word of God, which is the rule of
Righteousness, Men may likewise be more severe in punishing Offenders then the
Rule does allow of, the Corinthians did sometimes err on that hand, and that
is to be righteous overmuch.

2, Overmuch Wisdom. Neither make thy self overwise* which must be understood
as the former Particular, A man be wiser in his own eyes, than he ought to be,
He may be wise above what is written, He may pry into the s^crets of the
Almighty, and endeavor to trace him whose w^yes, are past finding out, and
whose Footsteps are not known. And this Exhortation is urged from the
Consideration of the wo^ull effect of this overmuch wisdom and righteousness,
viz self destruction. Why should thou destroy thy self? As the moth that
will venture too near to the light, de^troyeth it self, so they that will be
overwi^e, and will needs know more than God would have them to know, destroy
themselves.

2. The other exhortation is against Errors on the Left hand; v. (...) Annot.
in Loc.
of which there are two mentioned in this verse and in the words which have
been read, in opposition to the two former spoken of in the verse immediately
foreg^ing.

1. Be not overmuch wicked. S^e pemble. expos. P* 85.
q. d. though you must not be righteous overmuch, yet take heed of erring on
the other extreme, which our nature is most prone unto. The Hebrew is, (...) h.
e. do not wickedly much. Ne^i e^^e ^t^ltus. Hier^n.
Not that the Preacher does allow of any wickedness at all only his de^igne is
to show the evil of all excess in wickedness.

2. Another error on the left hand is Foolishness. Neither be thou Foolish.
Heb. (...) h. e. Neither be thou a Fool, because all wickedn^ss is folly, and
sinners are Fools, Yamet^i aliquando ^it ut impro^i in suis ^c^l^ribus
Co^sene^^^^t, ^^men (...) ^it ut imp^^borum br^v's and contracts vita ^it.
Cartwright in Loc.
as afterward we shall show. And this exhortation is likewise pressed by an
argument taken from the raiserable end that such sinners come to at last, God
in his righteous Providence does many Times so order that they die before their
Time. Why should thou die before thy Time? It is as if it were said, Though
it be so that here and there a wicked man does prolong his life in his
wickedness, yet for any one thence to embolden himself in sin, is the greatest
folly imaginable, for usually it falls out otherwise, that wickedness does
shorten the days of those that are guilty of it.

The Doctrine therefore from the words is, Doct.
That the Providence of God does oftentimes ^o dispose as that an untimely
death shall be the Portion of him that has been wicked overmuch.

In the Doctrinal handling of this Truth, Three things may be attended.

1. To enquire how any one may be said to die before his Time.

2. What overmuch wickedness that is which is usually followed with untimely
Death, or when one may be said to be wicked overmuch.

3. The Reasons of the Doctrine, why God in his providence does often so
dispose as that an untimely death shall be the Portion of such as have been
wicked overmuch.

Quest. 1. How can one be said to die before his Time?

Answ. Not in respect of the decree of God. No man shall die before the Time
which the Lord has determined be fulfilled. The Time of every man's Death is
appointed. Hence Job says Chap. 14. verse 14. All the days of my appointed
Time will I wait till my change come. and in the 5th verse of that Chapter it
is said, S^ing his day^s are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. See Mr Cotton on
Eccle^ 7.17.
Not only the years but the months, nay the days which every man shall live
are determined by the Lord, so as that he shall not live a day longer, nor die a
day sooner than was before appointed. But a man may be said to die before his
Time.

1. In respect of his own expectation. He may die before ever he does expect
Death. Hence sinners are said to die suddenly. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. When they shall
say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them as travel upon a
woman with child and they shall not escape. Sudden destruction comes upon
sinners, that is, not only which is in it self sudden, but as to their
expectation so. Thus in the Parable concerning the wicked servant. Math. 24.
48, 49, 50. If that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his
coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, the Lord of that servant
shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not
aware of. So does He die before his Time wherein he expected death is come. It
is often so with them that have been very wicked and Foolish; wherefore it is
said in the Parable concerning the Fool when he thought he had many years to
live. Luke 12. 20. God said unto him Thou Fool this night thy soul shall be
required of thee. Hence,

2. A sinner may be said to dye before his Time, in respect of his Preparation
for a dying hour. Death may come upon him, before he is prepared to encounter
with that enemy. And then he dies indeed, in dying he shall die, if death find
him unprepared; the second death takes hold on that soul. The devils
sometimes said to Jesus Christ, Art thus come to torment us before our Time.
Truly such a soul goes to the Place of Torment before his Time. There is many
a sinner that death finds without an Interest in Jesus Christ, There is some
sin that he has not repented of, nay it may be he has not truly repented of
so much as one sin, and then he is not prepared to die. It had been better for
him that he had never been born, than that he should dye and go out of the
world in that Condition,

3. A sinner may die before that Time be fulfilled, which according to the
ordinary course of nature he might have lived.

And this is especially intended here in the Text. why should thou dye before
thy time, Hebr. (...) and not in thy Time. that is to say, before that time
which according to the ordinary course of nature thou mighte^t have lived, be
expired. Many times the Divine Providence does so order as that they who have
been wicked overmuch shall not live out that time. Thus concerning the world of
the ungodly which lived before the flood, Eliphaz says Have thou marked the
old way which wicked men have trodden, See Mr Caryl ^ J^b 22. 16.
who were cut down out of time, Job. 22. 15, 16. According to the ordinary
course of Nature, they might have lived a Long Time, but they were cut down by
the stroke of Death. wicked men never by before they are ripe in sin, but they
often die before they are ripe in Nature. They are carried and chased out of the
world by some violent death.

Sometimes this is brought to pass by the Lords immediate hand. If men be
generally wicked overmuch, the Lord sends Public destroying Judgments, whereby
thousands die before their Time. so on the old world, so on Sodom and Gomorrh^;
in the morning they were well and likely to have lived many a fair day, but
dead and damned before night. Those sore Judgments of Famine, P^ague, and
Sword, come and sweep away multitudes before their time, when a people are
become wicked overmuch. And Particular Judgments do hence come upon Particular
persons, whereby they were cut of before their Time. There was that wicked Er
and his wicked brother Onan, did commit abominable uncleaness in the sight of
God, and therefore the Lord slew them, that they dyed before their Time. so
Nadab and Abi^u were wicked overmuch, and there went out fire from the Lord and
devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord. Corah and his com plices
wickedness was amongst them and in their (...), and as the Psa^mist (alleging
to that very Judgment) speaks Death ^eised upon them and they went down quick
into hell. Psalm. 55.15. Ananias and Saphira were wicked overmuch when they
committed Sacriledg, and also sinned and lied in a Church Assembly where there
is a special Presence of the Spirit of God, and they became guilty of lying to
the Holy Ghost, wherefore first the one of them fell down and gave up the
Ghost, and then the other, and thence were both cast into one grave and this
before their Time. The Scripture is full of awful instances to this Purpose.
Again sometimes Gods Vicegerents are improved as executioners of his wrath and
justice upon such sinners. The Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, but is
the Minister of God a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Hence
David speaks saying, I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I
may cut of the wicked doers from the city of the Lord. Psalm. 110.8. I will
early destroy them, in the original it is, in the morning I will destroy them,
because in those Times Malefactors were executed in the morning; and that's his
meaning, that He would see execution done upon Capital Offenders. Thus S^^ls
cursed Posterity was cut off by the hand of Justice, because of the Murder
which their Father had committed, and no doubt but they had been same way
Accessory, in (...), or approving, or not duly bearing witness against that
(...).

Sometimes again the Lord in a Judicial way gives up such sinners to the Power
of Satan, and their own Corr^p^ions, so as that they become their own
executioners, as we se in Judas, who after he had brought himself under the
guilt of innocent blood, went to the (...) to let out his wretched soul,

But thus much may suffice to be spoken to the first enqu^^y, we come to the
second thing propounded, Namely, What overmuch wickedness that is which is
usualy followed With untimely death, or when a man may be said to be wicked
overmuch?

Answ. 1. When he does make himself to be more wicked than (...). e. g. When he
does falsely accuse himself to be g^i^^y of this or that which he was never
actually guilty of. There are such woeful foolish creatures in the world, that
glory in their shame, and take a pride in saying that they have committed this
or that abomination, which yet it may be they never did commit. It is just with
God, that such should die before their Time, and that they should be dealt with,
as if they were really guilty thereof; as we se in the Instance of that
Amalekite, who accused him self as having an hand in Saul's death. It is a
question whether he had so really or no, yet inasmuch as he accused Himself,
David condemned him, 2 Samuel 1. 16. David said thy blood be upon thy head; for
thy mouth has testified against thee saying, I have slain the Lords anointed.
So when any poor creature shall say that he has out-stood and sinned away the
day of Grace, albeit the Holy Spirit is secretly striving with him still, or
that he has sinned against the Holy Ghost. Or that his sin is greater than the
mercy God. As Francis Spira after his Apo^tacy uttered such a desperate
blasphemy as that my sin (said He) is greater than the mercy of God. And thus
it was with despairing bloody Cain, he said, mine iniquity is greater than can
be forgiven. Genesis 4. 13. Austin does well reply upon him, mentiris Cain, that's
a Lie Cain, thy sin is not greater then can be forgiven. M^ H^^ker on ^^t. 2*
37.
Some have observed that Cains Desperation and blasphemy, was a greater evil
than his Murder was, when he shed the innocent blood of his own Brother. And
indeed despair lays the Foundation for all excess in wickedness, it makes
men to become no better than devils incarnate; and cau^eth them to dye before
their Time, witness Judas who in despair hanged Himself; And have not we in
our days known or heard of many ru^ull instances of that Kind?

2. When a man shall become guilty of such sins as are of a very heinous
nature, then he may be said to be wicked overmuch. There are Scarlet sins,
Crimson abominations, which the Heavens blush to behold. There are bloody
sinners, whose souls lie bleeding under Prodigious guilt, even such as have
been guilty of evils; that by the Law of God and man are Capital Crimes, these
are they that have been wicked overmuch. to mention only one or two Crimes.

Murder is a great and horrid wickedness, and so Capital as that whoever has
been guilty of it, may in no case be pardoned by man. Numb. 35. 30, 31. Whosoever
Kill^th any person, the murderer shall be put to death, moreover they shall
take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is Guilty of death, but
He shall be surely put to death. And they that have been guilty of this
wickedness, usually die before their Time, according to that scripture Psalm. 55.
23. But thou O God shall bring them down to destruction, (...) and deceitful
men should not live out half their days. It is thought by some that Cain. (who
was the first murderer amongst men) dyed before his Time. The Jews have a
Tradition that Lamech killed Cain and a young man that was with him hunting in
the woods; To this purpose some understand that place (our version does
evidently favor that Interpretation) Genesis 4. 23.24. Lamech said, R. Solo^on
qui^^ (...) (...).
I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt, if Cain ^e
avenged seven fold surely Lamech seventy and seven fold. However the providence
of God, does usually so dispose as that they who have taken away the lives of
others by violence, shall themselves die a violent and bloody death. Joab
murther^d Abner and Ama^a, and He (though an old man) dyed before his Time, He
that had shed the blood of others, his own blood was shed for it at last. Joash
conspired against Z^chariah and stoned him with stones, and afterward. His own
servants Conspired against him and slew him. Many other Instances are recorded
in the Scripture, and in humane writings all confirming the Truth of this. Yea
God from Heaven does usually Pursue this sin, with special signal Testimonies
of his Righteous displeasure. Hence the Lord ^ath strange ways to discover
this sin. Rather then the Murderer shall not be found out, the Heaven shall
reveal his iniquity and the Earth shall rise up against him. How often have the
fowls of Heaven, and the dumb creatures of the earth brought Murder to Light?

The story is ancient and famous concerning B^ssus who had murdered his own
Father; Pluta^ch
and sometime after the swallows making a noise in the chimney as it is the
manner of those birds to do, His guilty Conscience was afraid they had told of
him, whereupon he goes to kill the swallows, and being asked the reason, why
(says he) the swallows do nothing but say Bessus ^ath Killed his Father,
Bessus has Killed his Father, whereby he was suspected, and upon examination
confessed the fact.

It is also storied of a soldier belonging to King Pyrr^us, that being slain,
a dog which he had, could by no means be enticed from the dead body, but the
King coming by, he fawned upon him as it were craving help at his hands, Clarks
Examples Vol. 1. p. 230.
whereupon He caused all his army to pass by in order, and when the murderers
came the dog flew fiercely upon them, and then ^awned upon the King, the
^ouldiers hereupon examined, confessed the Murder, and received condign
Punishment. Many other Instances to this Purpose I could produce, but I for
bear.

Again, Rebellion is a Crime which they that are guilty of, are wicked
overmuch. When Inferiors shall wickedly rise up against Sup^riours. When
Subjects shall in a way of Rebellion rise up against the Authority which the
Lord has set over them, such often die before their Time, Hence Christ ^aith,
All they that take the sword shall perish with the sword Math. 26.52. that is
to say they that take up the sword in a way of Rebellion against Lawful
Authority. That Doctor Gamaliel in the speech he made in the Council takes
notice of two examples concerning this. Acts. 5. 36, 37. Th^u^as boasting
himself to be so^^body, to whom a number of men, about four hundred joined
themselves, was slain, and all as many as obeyed him were scattered, and
brought to naught, after this man rose up ^udas of Gallilee, and drew away much
People after him, he also perished, and all even as many as Obeyed him were
dispersed. So when Servants shall rise up in Rebellion against their Masters,
it is a wicked thing. wherefore even Jezebel could say, Had Zimri Peace who
slew his Master 2. Kin. 9. 31. After he had slain his Master had ^e peace in
his own Conscience* Did he Pro^per after that day? Did not the hand of God
follow him till he himself was ^^^in? Had Zimri Peace who ^lew his Master?

So when children shall rebel against their Parents, their wickedness is
excessiv^^y great. And such Children do usually die before their Time, witness
the fi^th Commandment where it is said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that
thy days, may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Therefore they that break this Commandment may expect that their days shall
not be long, but they shall dye before their Time. We see it in Ab^olom, He was
a rebellious Child, and what came of him? was he not hanged at last? and three
darts thru^t through his heart while he was yet alive. And Travelers report
that in the same P^ace where Absalom was buried, there is now a vast heap of
^^ones, which is come to pass by this means, it is Customary for every one
that passes by that Place, to throw a stone upon Absalom using these words,
Thus shall it be done to the son that rebels against his Father, Thus shall it
be done to the child that rise^h up against his Parents.

2. When a man shall multiply Transgr^ssion then ^e may be said (...) be wicked
overmuch. when he shall commit the same ^in over and over again. Once is too
much, but many Times is overmuch indeed. Eccles. 8. 12. Though a sinn^r do
evil an (...). Alas there is many a sinner that has done so, He has made
himself drunk an hundred Times. He has been unclean and abominable in the
sight of God an hundred Times, He has lied against his conscience an hundred
Times, then ^e has been wicked overmuch. So when a vile creature shall add
sin to sin, as the Prophet complains of them, I^ai. 30. 1. When he shall add
new transgressions to old sins, sins of age to sins of youth, later to former
iniquities. What says the Scripture? 1 Pet. 4. 3. the Time past of our life
may suffice us to have wrought the will of the gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings etc. Therefore
when a sinner shall add new debts to the old score, it is more than suffices,
that is to say, He is wicked overmuch.

3. They that are incorrigible in the ways of sin, are wicked overmuch. Who
sin against all means that can be used to reclaim them. There are such sinners
as do di^pi^e all means, they will take no warning. Though God himself speaks
to them by awful Providence, taking some and hanging them up before their
eyes, yet they will go on still in their trespasses. And though they that are
the Lords vicegerents on earth, do establish and execute severe and righteous
Laws, and put sin and sinners to shame, yet they still continue to transgress
against the Lord. This does evidence a desperately wicked man. It is spoken
concerning a man that is beyond measure wicked, that he does run upon the thick
bosses, of the Buckler of the Almighty Job. ^15. 26. What is the Buckler of the
Almighty? It is the Word of God, And what are the thick Bosses of that Buckler?
They are the threatenings and sanctions annexed to that Word. When sinners shall
transgress in a Land where there are Laws established and regulated according
to the Word of God, and those Laws faithfully executed, they run themselves
upon the thick Bosses of te Buckler of the Almighty, and therefore are
de^pereatly wicked. And there are that sin against the light of the Gospel and
reproofs administered in the Word and Name of God: such are wicked overmuch, and
have cause to fear that they shall dye before their Time. witness that awful
scripture Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. And there are that despise
reproves, instructions, admonitions, exhortations, privately administered in
Familyes, by masters, Parents, such are also wicked overmuch, and do often die
before their Time. Witness the sons of Eli, of whom it is said, they ^a^kned
not to the voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them 1 Samuel 2.
25. Does thy Father give thee good counsel? but will thou not harken to him?
This is a sign, that the Lord will slay thee. Remember those proud and profane
young men, the sons of Eli, they regarded not what their Father said to them,
and therefore they dyed before their Time. This comes of not harkning to the
voice of a Father.

5. They that mind nothing but this world and the vani^yes and lasts thereof
are wicked overmuch. Even they that live like Ath^^^s without God in the world.
And this last Particular suits with the scope of this Context. For as they are
righteous overmuch who under pretense of Religion neglect their particular
Callings, (...) signi^^icat, ne ^imium comm^ve^e nego^^^is ^^culi, ne nimis and
im^ o^icus e^^o in illis perpe^uo (...) and ni^ ali^d unquam an^mo ^requicto
^^gitans, (...) cont^a abillis pla ne te^e av^rtere est ^^imis ^^^tum ^^^e.
Merc^r in Locum.
so they are wicked overmuch who neglect duties of Religion, out of respect to
the world. There are that live in a continual neglect of God and of their own
souls and Salvation. Hence no prayer it may be not so much as in the Family, no
reading of the Scriptures, no Meditation, no self-examination. How do men live
as if there were no world but this, as if there were no God to serve, and they
had no souls to save? Certainly, all such are wicked overmuch.

And thus have we done with the second thing propounded in order to the
clearing of the Doctrine before us. We come to the third Particular, viz to
enquire into the Reasons of this Doctrine, why God in his Providence does often
times so dispose as that an untimely death shall be the portion of him that
has been wicked overmuch?

For Answer, we shall only mention two Reasons, briefly.

1. Rea^.
The Lord does this that he may manifest his righteous displeasure against sin
Hebr. 1. 13. He is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on
iniquity, that is to say with approbation or without detestation and
indignation against sin. The blessed Holy God does bear an infinite detestation
and indignation against sin. Hence he leaves Marks of his displeasure upon the
sinner, as God set a mark upon Cains forehead, so he sets a mark of displeasure
upon notorious Transgressors. Yea sometimes when he forgiveth the sin, yet he
does visit with Temporal vengeance, that so the world may see that sin is
odious and abominable in the ^ight of God. Hence such sinners as the Text
speaks of, must dye before their Time.

2. Rea^
That so others may thereby be warned and deterred from the Commission of the
like evils. Thus it was with Lots wife, she dyed before her Time, that so
others might be warned by her example, to beware of becoming guilty of the same
sin, which she was so awfully punished for. therefore Christ said to his
disciples, Luke. 17. 32. Remember Lots wife, meaning so remember her, as that
you may for ever take heed of doing as she did. She was turned into a pillar of
salt, that others might be seasoned thereby and preserved from the like evil.
God is wise and wonderful in his Providence, and knows how to order the
death of two or three so as to prevent the destruction of many thereby. Hence
^e has appointed that Justice shall be executed in a solemn way, upon Capital
offenders, that others may hear and fear, and none may do any more so wickedly.
We find the Lord himself gives this Reason of this matter. Deuteronomy. 13. 8,9, 11.
Thou shall not hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither
shall thou spare, but thou shall surely Kill him; and all Israel shall bear and
fear and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you.

We come now to Apply this Doctrine. There are two Uses to be insisted on, 1.
By way of Instruction or Information 2. By way of Exhortation.

1. By way of Information, Inf. 1. We may see by this, that sin is the greatest
folly in the world. Well might Solomon say as in the Text, neither her be thou
foolish, For to sin and do wickedly is the greatest foolishness that ever was
or can be. Sin is a departure from the Rule of Wisdom. For a man to part with
his life for nothing, is not that monstrous folly? And thus does a wretched
sinner do. Men's sins are unfruitful works of darkness. What Profit had you of
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Sin is the most unprofitable thing in
the world. It is good for nothing, neither for body, nor soul, nor name, nor
estate, but brings death and ruin upon all. A man by sin (especially some sins)
loses his Name. A wound and dis^onour does he get, and a reproach that that
shall not be wiped away. And he lo^eth his life, and that before the Time as
the Text shows; yea and without repentance will loose his soul for ever.
Prove. 8. 36. He that sins against me wrongs his own soul. The Impenitent
sinner brings ruin upon his own soul. Therefore sin is folly, and and the more
sinful the more foolish. The greatest Sinners are the greatest Fools in all
the world. Wherefore it is said Eccl 9. 3. The Heart of the sons of men is full
of evil, and madness is in their Heart while they live, and after that they go
to the dead. Yea to the Damned! O what horrible madness is it, for any man,
that so he may enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, to venture eternal
damnation of his precious and immortal soul?

Infor. 2. It follows from hence, that shortness of days is in it self a
judgment. For it is threatened as a Punishment of wickedness. It is a fruit of
sin and of the curse. If Adam had not sinned there would have been no short
lives, none of his Posterity should have had their lives shortened. And in the
times of the Restitution of all things, when the Curse shall be removed, it
will not be as at this day. Rev. 21. 4. There shall be no more death. To be
sure there shall be no more such untimely death as our eyes do with sadness
behold this day. Look as long life is in it self a blessing, and therefore is
Promised as such in the Scripture Psalm. 91. 16. With long life will I satisfy
him, Prove. 4. 10. Receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many.
and 10. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days. Whatever any true bel^iver
has done or suffered for, or according to the will of God, whilst he was in
the world; shall come in upon the account at the last and great day, a glorious
reward of mercy shall be given for it, thence is it, so great a mercy to live
long. So on the other hand, sho^t li^e is a great judgment, and is often
threatened as such in the Scripture. Prove. 10. 27. The years of the wicked shall
be shortened. Eccles. 8. 13. Neither shall he prolong his days, And it is
mentioned as an heavy Impr^c^tion. Psalm* 109. 8. Let his days be few. For when
a wicked man dies (dying in his sins) He is undone for ever. when once his
body is gone down into the pit of the grave, and his soul is gone down into the
pit of eternal darkness, He cannot hope for the mercy of God, He cannot hope
for the pardon of his sin, He cannot hope for the salvation of his soul.
Therefore short life is in it self a judgment. Only as to the elect of God, it
is turned into a mercy. As afflictions are in themselves evil and fruits of
the curse, but to beleivers they become the greatest blessings. So an untimely
death is in it self a great evil, but to one that belongs to the election of
grace, it becomes a wonderful mercy; for it hasteneth his eternal hapiness
and glory.

Infor. 3. Hence it likewise follows that Righteousness is the way to obtain
long life. If wickedness bring untimely death, then Righteousness will deliver
from death. There is no righteous man, but shall live in this world so long as
life shall be good for him to enjoy.

But some one will say, do we not see that good men dye when they are young as
well as others?

Answ. Very true. As there are some that are too wicked to live long, So there
are others that are too Good to live long; in such an evil wretched world as
this. Jeroboams godly son, dyed in his youth. Josiah a most eminent servant of
the Lord, dyed in the midde^t of his days. Enoch though the best man, and the
best minister of God, in all the world in his time, was taken out of the world
before he had lived half so long as men in those days were wont to live, but
then it would not be good for them to live any longer. God is only wise and
faithful, and therefore he takes his servants to himself, when he sees that
life will not be best for them.

Besides, ^ man may live long in a little Time. It is said, the child shall dye
an hundred years old. Isai. 65. 20. Though a child in respect of years, yet he
shall have the grace, and gravity, the wisdom and knowledge of a man that has
lived an hundred years. And indeed that is most desirable; It is in many
respects a great mercy to be freed from the prevailing infirmityes of old age,
See M^ C^ttons Epistle before Mr No^^^ns Orth^d^x Evan^^li^t.
and therefore to live long in a little time is most desirable, As I remember
Mr. Cotton in an Epistle which he has Prefixed to one of Mr. Nortons Books,
takes notice if it, with reference to Dr. Preston, that it was his constant
desire affectation and expression, that he might live long in a little Time,
and the Lord granted him the desire of his heart therein. Some live longer in
seven years, then others do in ten times seven years. They do more for God
and more for his People in seven years then others do in twenty, forty,
threescore, or in fourscore years. Moreover, that promise of long life will be
fulfilled to the righteous in the life to come. As indeed all promises (and
threat^ings too) are fully accomplished in the world to come. There the
righteous shall live for ever. It was promised to to Christ, that he should be
satisfied with long life. Psalm. 91. and the last. And that he should prolong
his days. Isai. 53. 10. Yet we know that Christ was not in this world much
above two and thirty years. How then did he prolong his days? In the other
world his days are prolonged to eternity, according to the Scripture Psalm. 21.
4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, length of days for ever and
ever.

Use. 2. Let it be a word of Exhortation 1. Here is a general word of
exhortation. 2. More Particular.

1. Let us all be exhorted to make a right Improvement of such awful
Providence as the Text speaks of. There is such a Providence before us this
day, which has occasioned me to speak from these words at this Time. For truly
I think God would not have us suffer such solemn awful^ Providence as these to
pass away without taking ^p^ciall notice of them, and making some good
Improvement thereof.

You will say, But what use should we make of this awf^^l Providence?

Answ. It should cause us humbly to reflect upon our own vile natures. Have we
been kept from the like evils that others have been guilty of? No thanks to
our own hearts, for we have the same nature that they have, and if God had
given us up to our own hearts lusts, we should have been as bad as they, or as
any of the children of men, that ever were in the world. Wherefore the Apostle
in the third Chapter to the Romans, discoursing of the state of men by nature,
says Their feet are swift to shed blood v. 15. Why; Is every natural man a
Murderer? Truly, he has a Murderers heart within him, and he would quickly
shed blood, He would actually commit Murder, if G^^ did not restrain him. How
should this thought humble us, and make us vile in our own eyes? Mr. Bradford.
As I Remember it is noted concerning that blessed Martyr, that if he did hear
of any that were condemned or accused on the account of Witchcraft, Murder,
Robberies or any other Impiety, He would smite upon his breast and say, In this
breast of mine, is that which would have ca^sed me, to have been guilty of the
same evil, if the Grace of God had not prevented me^. And it is recorded of
one of the Ancients, that he was never told of any great wickedness committed
by others, but it did him some Good, it made him the more distru^tfull of his
own Heart, B^rnard
He would say Ille heri, tu bodi^, ego cr as. He committed that sin
yesterday, thou didde^t commit the same sin to day, and I shall commit it to
morrow if the Grace of God do not restrain and prevent me.

2. Another Use which we should make of this Awful Providence is. To consider
sadly whether there be not some prevailing evil* that the Lord does hereby
rebuke and seek to humble us for: I fear there is such an evil, I mean with
respect to those woeful breaches of the fifth Commandment which are to be found
amongst us. This is a prevailing evil, we may see it every where. How do
Inferiors rise up against Superiors? Look into the Commonwealth, and we shall
find that Magistrates are not honored and acknowledged in their places as
ought to be. Look into Churches, and how do some carry it there, as if that
Scripture were Apocrypha even that Scripture Heb. 13. 17. where it is said Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your souls. Look into Schools, and how do Children contemn and di^pise and
disobey their masters contrary to the fifth Commandment? Look into Families,
and O what disobedient Children? O what unruly servants may we find there? Nay,
Look into the streets, and there we may observe (I have sometimes b^held it not
altogether without grief and shame) the child behaving himself proudly against
the Ancient, and the base against the Honorable: so that in this respect
New England is in a great measure become degenerate from the good manners of
the Christian world. If there be any prevailing iniquity in New England this is
it. And therefore no marvel that such an aw^ull Providence does come to rebuke
and humble us, that servants have conspired together to Kill their Master.
There has been no such deed done or seen in our Israel before now. And mark
what I say, If ever New England be destroyed, this very sin of disobedience to
the fifth Commandment will be the ruin of this Land.

3. Another Use we should make of this Providence, is to beware of those sins
which do often times end in untimely death.

Pride is one of those sins. Corah was a Proud man, He could not bear to be
subject to that order neither in Church nor Commonwealth, which God had
appointed, and He dyed not the common death of all men. Haman was exceeding
proud and highminded, and his pride brought him to the Gallows at last. But
what need we go far for examples? One of these poor condemned Creatures that
is here standing before the Lord this day, says that he thinks his pride has
been his ruin. I asked him the other day in the prison, what sin it was that
he thought in his Conscience God was provoked with him for, so as to leave him
to that which has brought him under this condemnation? He told me, he thought
i^ was for his Pride. For he thought much of it that such an one as He should
be a servant, and he sometimes used such words as these, I am flesh and blood
as well as my Master and therefore I know no reason why my Master should not
obey me as well as I obey him. Thus did he say, and now we see what his Pride
brought him unto, therefore beware of that sin.

And Idleness is a sin that does bring many to a miserable end at last. It was
one of those sins which caused thousands in Sodom and Gomorrah to die before
their Time in a dreadful manner. As for one of these poor condemned Creatures
Idleness has been his bane. He would not diligently follow the calling which
he was set in, but lived an Idle vag^ant life, and what is he now come to?
Therefore beware of that sin.

And Disobedience to Parents is a sin that is often punished with untimely
death. (as was partly intimated before) One of these that are to be executed
this day, does confess that his disobedience to his Parents has provoked the
Lord, to bring this misery upon him. He faith that when he was a Child his
Father gave him good Instructions and prayed for him, but he regarded it not.
His Father would have had him gone to School, but he would not. His Father
would have had him gone to a Trade but he would not; And after his Father was
dead, he would not be subject to those that had the care and charge of him, but
ran away from them, and since that from time to time has run away from them
that have been his Masters. And now behold what all this disobedience, has
brought him unto. All you disobedient Children that are here before the Lord
this day, hearken to the Word of the Lord. There is a Scripture which methinks
should strike Terror and Trembling into your Souls, It is that Prove. 30. 17.
The eye that mocketh his Father and despises to obey his Mother, the ravens of
the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles eat it. The eye that mocketh
his Father. Stubborne^s and contempt is to be seen in the eye, therefore the
meaning is, that he that is stubborn and rebellious against his Father, shall
be so dealt with. Well, a Father has many times that Wisdom and Authority
with him, that the child dare not disobey him, but he cares not for his
Mother; Therefore it is added, He that despises to obey his Mother. You
Children that disobey your Mothers hearken to this; ^he ra^ens are like to feed
upon you; that is to say such sin^^rs shall come to an untimely death, and it
may be not have a decent hono^^^ble burial. It is to be feared that such
children will come to the Gallows, and be hanged up in Gibbe^s for the ravens
and eagles to feed upon them if they will. And it is greatly do be observed,
that the most of those that die upon the Gallows, do confess that they have been
guilty of disobedi^nce to Parents. Yea God is so provoked with such wicked
children, as that he does sometimes leave them against nature to destroy
themselves as a just Punishment of unnatural disobedience. There was an awful
example of this, which happened in this Country about fifteen years ago. I was
not my self in this Land at that time, but I have had an account of it from
those that knew it. A young man drowned himself, but before he did that, he
left a writing directed to his Father, Abraham Warner a^ Har^f^^d in Con^cticut.
wherein he had such words as these, O Father, I have kept my soul as long as
ever I could; My ruin was, the pride and stubbo^ness of my tender years, which
should have been fetched out with sharp correction; and evil counsel and
company ^ath been my undoing. I have a young brother that follows my steps, he
is going the wide way to destruction, I beseech you take pains with him and
correct him as well as counsel him, that he may not be undone soul and body as
well as I. Words to this purpose, did that perishing young man (though the son
of a Godly Father) write when he was going into eternity. You disobedient
children think of it, and the Lord strike it home to your Hearts.

Drunkenness also, is a sin, that often brings those that are guilty of it to a
miserable end at last. A vile creature, it may be when he is drunk, He will go
and drown himself, and his soul go down into eternal darkness in that
condition, or he will commit some horrid sin, for which the sword of Justice
will Cut him off. When he is drunk He will commit Adul^ety, or a Rape it may
be. Alas we hear that such a villainy has been Committed of late, in a
Plantation not far off; Or in his drink He Will Kill a man, and so dye before
his Time. Therefore beware of that sin.

And Covetousness is a sin, which many Times brings untimely death, It did so
upon A^han. The Love of money is is the root of all evil. This has occasioned
many a bloody unnatural Murder. See Clarks Examples the 2d. vol P.45^ See also
the same story and another like to it in Dr Tailors addition to the Theater of
Judgments. P 71,72
the story is famously known of a man in Cornwell, that his son having been
many years absent from him and coming home with a Portmant^e full of silver and
Gold, and his Parents not knowing who he was, for the sake of his money
conspire together, and in the night time cut his throat, and in the next
morning when they knew it was their own son whom they had Murdered, they did
in anguish and horror, both of them destroy themselves.

And there is a Tragical story lately printed, of a profane young man, that
Killed his own Mother that bare him, out of hopes that when she was dead, viz.
Henry Jones who was executed at Mo^mouth to Wales March 11. 1671.
He should enjoy her estate. For which he was put to a most dreadful Death,
weights of iron and stone were laid upon him for two days together, until his
life and soul were pressed out of his body. This execution was was done just
about four years ago. Therefore take heed and beware of Covetousness.

Also take heed of giving way to passions, revenge, anger and the like. These
two condemned creatures, their master corrected them, and as they thought dealt
hardly with them, and therefore in wicked passion, wrath, and rage they would
take an axe and knock him in the head, for which now they must dye.

Beware also of giving way to Discontents and sullen Melancholy, for that also
causes some to dye before their Time. There is a lamentable story lately
Published, of a woman that in pangs of Melancholy discontent went to distroy
her self several times, viz M^^y Cook who was executed in Smith-field in
London March 2. 1669
but was by the Providence of God prevented, but afterward giving way to those
Temptations, and not humbling her self on the account of former miscariages,
she embrewed her hands in the blood of her own Child, for the which she was
afterward executed, near to the place where she had committed that unnatural
Cruelty and Murder. Therefore let us beware of giving way to the distempered
workings of our own spirits.

But thus for the word of General Exhortation.

2. Let me more particularly exhort, those that have been wicked overmuch. You
that have been guilty of great sins and provocations before the Lord, O Repent
and turn to God in Jesus Christ, Return Return O sinners return return. Stop
sinners! stop. go no further, if you love your lives go no further, why
should you dye before your Time? It may be Repentance may save your Lives.
There have been some that have been guilty of Capital Crimes, yet when they
have repented and turned to God in Jesus Christ, He has covered their sins,
that the world has never known of them. However if there be true Repentance,
the lives of your souls shall be saved. In some cases Repentance cannot prevent
the first death, but it will always (if sound and sincere) prevent the second
death. Oh! then Turn to God in Jesus Christ.

And I would apply this more Particularly unto these poor Guilty Condemned
Creatures, Nicholas Fever who was born in the Isle of Jersey. and Robert
Driver who was born in the Isle of O (...) in S^o^land.
who are standing in the solemn presence of the Lord, and whose naked souls
must by and by appear before God the Judge of all, to receive a Sentence either
of eternal Life, or of eternal Death. Hearken you to the word of the Lord this
once. I beseech you mind what I say, because you are now come unto your last
hour. It may be there are many here this day, that this is the last Sermon,
that ever they shall hear, but as for you the thing is Certain, you shall never
hear another Sermon; and therefore let these words sink down into your Ears and
Hearts.

A few Considerations and Directions let me spread before you.

Consider. 1. That you have been wicked overmuch. The sin which you are now to
dye for is exceeding great, even Murder. The Scripture faith that no Murderer
has eternal life. And there is another Scripture that says, that Murderers
shall have their Part in that Lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is
the second Death. And no doubt you have been guilty of many other Grievous
sins, which have provoked the Lord to leave you unto the Commission of this
horrid Murder. This Murder also is exceedingly aggravated in respect of the
person whom you have slain, even your Master. O, how have you risen up in
Rebellion against the glorious Image of God, not only in that you have shed
the blood of a man, who was made after the Image of God, but such a man as had
peculiar Dominion over you, in that respect you have offered fearful violence
to the sacred Image of the blessed God. So that you have tran^grest the fifth
and sixth Commandments at once in the highest degree that you could do. And
since your Apprehension, yea Conviction and Condemnation you have told many
lies (at least one of you, it is to be feared both of you) against your
Conscience.

2. Consider that now you must dye before your Time, especially one of you, a
poor young creature that has hardly lived twenty years in this world, and must
this day be turned out of it. Yea both of you die before your Time. you might
according to the ordinary course of nature have lived many a year. You must be
cut off by a violent and dreadful death. For indeed the anger of the Lord
would fall upon this whole Country where your sin has been committed, if you
should be suffered to live.

3. Consider, That there is yet a possibility for you to escape the second
death. Though your sin be very great, yet God can pardon it. I remember a
passage concerning a poor creature that was condemned to dye for wickedness he
had been guilty of (I the rather mention it because he was Country man to one
of you) but when he was in Person gave good Hopes of his unfaigned Repentance,
See the book c^^led ^he (...) the (...). P* ^33.
and when he came to the place of execution, He had this expr^ssion, O! God is
a great forgiver, God is a great forgiver, so I say to you in his Name, the
Lord is a great Forgiver, It is his Name to forgive iniquity Transgression and
sin. Yea and He has, (upon deep and unfaigned Repentance) for given those that
have committed this sin which you are now to suffer for. Mana^^^h shed much
innocent blood yet when he humbled himself greatly, the Lord was entreated for
him. There are some in Heaven that were once Bloody sinners. David was
delivered from Blood guiltiness. Upon his Repentance it was said to him, The
Lord has put away thy sin thou shall not dye, As to the second death he did
not dye. And Saul (afterward Paul) had once the guilt of blood upon him, And
therefore he made his Confession before the Lord, Saying, Lord; When the blood
of thy Martyr Steven was shed, I also was standing by and Consenting to his
death. Yet when he did repent and I unto God in Jesus Christ, God forgave him
his ^niquity. Know therefore, that there is Mercy enough with God to Pardon and
Save as great sinners as you are.

And know, that Jesus Christ the Son of God, Came to Save the chief of sinners.
There is Merit and Righteousness enough in Jesus Christ. He was bruised for
our In^quityes, and wounded for our Transgressions. The wounds of Christ can
make amends for those wounds which you gave your Master, when you slew him. The
Blood of Christ can satisfy for the blood which you have shed. Jesus does
deliver from wrath to come. And he does not exclude you from salvation by him,
if you do not by Impeni^ency and Unbelief exclude your selves. Neither can the
death you suffer hinder the Salvation of your souls, in case you truly repent
and believe. Jesus Christ has been made a Curse, that so he might redeem from
the Curse of the Law. Yea He (the blessed son of God) was hanged upon a Tree,
though He never knew any sin. only for the sins of his people; and therefore
he has sanctified all manner of deaths unto those that shall believe on Him. Oh
Consider of it and let it break your Hearts.

4. Consider Presently it will be too late for you to think of these things.
when once you are dead, when once your souls are out of your bodies, it will be
too late for you to think of these matters. There is no Repenting in the Grave,
there is no Believing in Hell. Behold now is your accepted Time, now is the
hour of your Salvation. If you do not Now accept of Jesus Christ upon his own
Terms, you will be undone, and damned to all Eternity.

By way of Direction I shall speak two or three words.

1. Do what you can that God may have glory by you, that little Time that you
have to live. Therefore see that you solemnly wa^n others, (especially young
ones) to take heed of those evils which your Consciences tell you, have made
way for your destruct^on. And see that you be sincere and ingen^ous in making
confession of your sin. The Scripture ^aith if we confess our sins, that is
with a Penitent broken heart, desirous never more to commit them, God is
faithful to forgive them. And again, He that Confesses and forsakes shall
find mercy but he that hid^th his sin shall not prosper. I charge you in the
Name of God, as you will answer it by and by before his Judgments seat, that
you do not deny or di^owne what you know is Truth. And I urge this the rather,
because you have not been so ingenuous in confessing your evil, as God and men
have exp^cted from you. You accuse and impeach one another. The one of you
^aith, that the other Killed his Master, and you only stood by and did not
strike one blow, and so does the other say. You accuse him and he accu^eth you.
But deceive not your selves, if you deny what you know is Truth, though God be
most merciful, yet God that made you will not have mercy on you; and though
Christ be a Savior for great sinners, He then will not save you. The devil
has brought your bodies to ruin and now his great design is to destroy your
souls. He knows if he can Pe^^wade you not to give glory to God by
Confessing, he shall have your souls for ever. I tell you truly if you now
disown the Truth, when once your souls are out of your bodies, they shall
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

2. Look up to God in Jesus Christ, that he would give you Rep^ntance and Faith
unfaigned. You cannot convert your s^lves, but God can do it, therefore look
up to him for that end, and cry mightily to him, as for your lives. If the
Magistrate should say to you (they may not, they dare not say so, because then
the displeasure of God would come upon them and upon this People) that if you
would cry earne^^ly for your lives, you should have them, O how earnest would
you be? Be^old, the God of Gods says to you this day, (and in his name I
p^oc^a^m it) that if you seek unto him with all your Hearts, it is possible
that the sentence of eternal death which is upon your souls may be revoked O
then pray for the lives of your souls. I Remember it is storied of a poor woman
that being Condemned to dye, as soon as the sentence was past, she fell a
crying and shriking in a lamentable manner, the Judge rebuked her, and bad her
hold her peace, but she replied O my lord it is for my life, it is for my life.
So I say to you, O cry to the Lord for Grace and for pardoning mercy, It is for
the lives of your souls. yea it is for the lives*of your Souls.

And further to awaken hereunto,

3. Think sadly of eternity O Eternity Eternity! It is an am^zing Meditation.
Mentioned by Dr. Preston in his Serm^ns of the A^^^ibutes. p 165.
There was a man that said, If I were to endure the wrath of God for a thousand
years only, methinks I could bear it, but when I think of Eternity I am
amazed. I beseech you think seriously of this. I might charge you, and I do so
in the Name of God, but I also beseech you. Though you are poor, vile,
condemned creatures, yet as I said to you in the Prison, so I say in this
solemn Audience. I could be content to ly down at your feet, upon Condition I
might be Isntrumental of Good to your Souls, so greatly do I desire (God is
witness) your Salvation; Therefore I pray you, for the Lords sake, I pray you
for your immortal Souls ^ake, that you would lay these things to Heart, and we
will once more cry unto the Lord, that he would have Mercy and Compassion upon
those Precious and Immortal Souls of yours.

Tibi Domine.
Errata
P. 5. l 9. for were read are.

l. 17. for all^dg^ng read alluding.

l 22. for they read thence.

l. 33. for 110. read 101.

P. 12. l. 1. for He^r read H^b.


