SEVERAL Laws and Orders Made at the second Sessions of the GENERAL COURT Held
at Boston, October 2d 1678. And published by their Order. Edward Rawson Secr.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in
my Conscience, before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles
is lawful and rightful King of the Realm of England, and of all other His
Majestyes Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor
by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any
other has any power or Authority to depose the King, The Oath of Allegiance.
or to dispose any of his Majestyes Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any
foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him or His Country; or to discharge any of
his Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give
license or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or offer any
violence or hurt to his Majestyes Royal Person, State or Government, or to any
of his Majestyes Subjects (...) Majestyes Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any De^^tion, or Sentence
of Excommunication or Deprivation (...) or to be made or granted by the Pope or
his Successors, or by (...) Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from
him or his (...) the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any absolution of
the (...) Subjects from their Obedience, I will bear Faith, and true Allegiance
to (...) Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will (...)
uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracyes and attempts, (...) ever, which
shall be made against His or Their Persons, their (...) and Dignity by reason
or color of any such Sentence or (...) or otherwise: and will do my best
endeavor to disclose (...) known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors
all Treasons, (...) us Conspiracyes which I shall know or hear of to be against
(...) any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, (...) abjure as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and (...) That Princes which be
excommunicated or deprived by the (...) be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other (...) And I do believe, and in my Conscience am
resolved, that (...) Pope nor any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me
(...) Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and (...) to be
lawfully ministered unto me; and do renounce all (...) dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do (...) acknowledge and swear according to
these express (...) spoken, and according to the plain and common sense an
(...) of the same words, without any Equivocation or mental (...) secret
Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this (...) and acknowledgment heartily,
willingly and truly upon the (...) of a Christian: So help me God.

WHereas it has pleased his most excellent (...) Gracious King, by his Letter
(...) twenty seventh of April, 1678. to (...) pleasure, That the Authority of
this (...) Massachusetts in New England, to (...) that the Oath of Allegiance as
it is by Law (...) within his Kingdom of England, be administered and taken by
(...) within this Colony, who are of years to take an Oath:

In obedience whereunto, Order to take the Oath of Allegiance.
and as a demonstration of our (...)

It is (...) and Enacted by this Court and the Authority (...) that as the
Members of this Court now sitting have (...) Oath of Allegiance, so by their
Example and Authority they (...) and command that the same Oath be given and
taken (...) Majesty's (...) within this Jurisdiction, that are of sixteen (...)
Age and up (...) And to the end this Order be duly executed (...) is hereby
Ordered, that a Convenient number of (...) said Oath of Allegiance, exactly
agreeing with the written (...) in his Majesty's Letter, and signed by the
Secretary of State, (...) for (...) to every Magistrate and Justice of Peace,
and to the Constable of every Town within this Jurisdiction.

And it is further Ordered that the Magistrates and Justices, or such as are
Commissioned with Magistratical Authority in every County of this Colony do
with all convenient speed repair to the several Towns and Villages within this
Jurisdiction, at such time, and in such order as they best may, and accomplish
the same; giving forth their warrant to the Constables of each Town to convene
all the Inhabitants of the Age abovesaid, and taking their names in writing,
administer the said Oath of Allegiance to each of them, and return their Names
to the Recorder of each County Court to be enrolled. And if any shall refuse to
take the (...) Oath, or absent themselves unless in case of sickness, the Names
of such shall be returned to the Recorder of the County, who are to be
proceeded against by the County Courts respectively, for the first Offense
thereof he is legally convicted, to pay such a Fine as the County Court shall
impose, not exceeding five pounds, or three Months Imprisonment in the common
prison or house of Correction: And for the second offense whereof he shall be
lawfully convicted, what sum the (...) Court shall inflict, provided it
exceed not ten pounds, or six Months Imprisonment without Bail, or Main-prise.

IT being the Duty as well as the Practice of all good Subjects to provide for
the safety and security of the Person, Crown and Dignity of their Sovereign
Princes: this Court being sensible of their duty and obligation to our
Sovereign Lord the King,

(...) hereby Order and Enact. That whatsoever Person within this (...)
compass, imagine or intend the death or destruction (...) Sovereign Lord the
King (whom Almighty God preserve with (...) prosperous Reign) or to deprive or
depose him from the (...), Treason punished with Death.
Honor or kingly Name of the Imperial Crown of England, or of any other his
Majestyes Dominions, and such compassings, imaginations, Devices or intentions
shall express utter or declare, by Printing, Preaching or malicious (...)
speaking being legally convicted thereof upon the Oaths or two lawful and
credible Witnesses, upon Trial or otherwise, convicted by due course of law,
then every such person or persons so offending shall be declared and adjudged
to be Traitors, and shall suffer the pains of Death.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Proceeding of Companyes
in Towns
that in all Towns within this Jurisdiction, where there shall be more
Companyes then one, the precedence of such Companyes shall be according to the
Priority of the Captains Commission.

Direction for Clerk of the Writts.
FOR the ascertaining the power of the Clarks of the Writts, Clerk of the
Writts Direction.
It is Ordered that all Clerks of the Writts shall sign Warrants only in the
Towns and places where they are chosen and reside.

2. That all Writts so signed shall pass in all Courts of Judicature throughout
the Colony they singing, A. B. per Curiam, for the town of C.

THere being a Law made in October. 1675, The Law for exportation of Provision
repealed.
prohibiting the exporting of all sorts of provision, which said Law was to
stand in force only during the Courts pleasure, which this Court having
considered of, for good reason judge meet hereby to repeal the said Law.

FINIS.

