The Times of men are in the hand of God.

OR A SERMON Occasioned by that awful Providence which happened in BOSTON in
NEW ENGLAND, the 4th day of the 3d Month 1675. (when part of a Vessel was
blown up in the Harbor, and nine men hurt, and three mortally wounded) wherein
is showed how we should sanctify the dreadful Name of God under such awful
Dispensations.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church of Christ.

Job. 23.1^. He performs the thing that is appointed for me, and many such
things are with him.

Mark. 13.35.36.37 Watch ye therefore (for ye know not when the master of the
House comes, at evening, or at midnight or at Cock crowing, or in the morning)
lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping, and what I say unto you, I say unto
all watch

Luke. 13 4, 5 Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell and slew
them think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem, I
tell you nay, but except you Repent, you shall all likewise perish.

BOSTON, Printed by John Foster 1675.

To the READER.
HOw unsearchable are the Judgments of God? how are his ways past finding out?
Sometimes his awful hand falls only upon the Righteous as to Temporal
Judgments. Sometimes only upon the wicked, sometimes he does cut off both
together. And this to the end that man should find nothing after him, whom we
cannot trace. his Judgments are a great deep. His way is in the Sea, his path
is in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known. Nevertheless there is
a day coming (and the Lord hasten that day) which is a day of Revelation, when
the mystery of providence shall be opened in the sight and hearing of all the
earth. In the mean time it becomes us, not to censure those that are made
Examples of divine Severity; and yet with Humility and an Holy Fear to take
notice of the solemn works of God, considering that it is said, they who regard
not the works of the Lord nor the operation of his hand shall be destroyed. The
Lord expects that we should not suffer such tremendous Dispensations, as that
which occasioned the Preaching of this Sermon, pass without deep and sorrowful
observation. Even the men of Bethshemesh, when the Lord had smitten so many
among them with a great slaughter Lamented and said who is able to stand before
this holy Lord God? shall we be more stupid and senseless than they? when Uzza
(though a good man) dyed by a sudden stroke of God upon him, David called the
place Perez-uzzah and he was afraid of God that day. How many perez-uzzas may
we speak of? Look in this Town, and in that Town, and in the other Town, and we
may see Places that may bear the name of Perez-uzza. It will be good for us to
keep alive in our Hearts, a reverentiall and filial fear of the infinite
Majesty, who has an absolute dominion over us and ours, and may do to us and
with us, what he will and cannot do us wrong. And it will be good for us when
our souls have in remembrance the wormwood and the gall, to be humbled for
those sins which have provoked the Lord, to inflict such bitter strokes.
Doubtless that sin of disregard to the word of God, is that which especiayll
has provoked the eyes of his glory. How many are there that give way to their
own sloth, and set themselves to sleep at Sermons, albeit that is a sin which
God sometime has punished with sudden death, witness the awful example of
Eutichus Acts. 20.9. How many that turn their backs upon the blessing of God
when pronounced by those whom God has chosen to minister, and to bless in his
Name, though often solemnly reproved for it in the Name of the Lord, who has
said, that he that being often reproved hardneth his neck shall be destroyed
suddenly? How many that make little or no Conscience to meditate on, or to
practice the things which they have heard? Is it not a Providence to be
observed, that those dreadful thundrings and lightnings which have been
amongst us from year to year, whereby not a few have been slain, have for the
most part happened upon, or near unto that day when the silver trumpet of the
gospel is wont to sound, as if God should say from Heaven, if you will not hear
my word speaking unto you, the voice of the Lord shall shake the wilderness,
that shall come which shall make you hear. And it will be good for us to
Prepare for the worst of Times or things that may befall us in this world;
Considering that sudden changes upon particular Persons are warnings to the
whole. Yea and to pray that that which these things seem to Portend may be
diverted: yea to pray, that our sun may not go down over us at noon, and that
the Lord would not darken the earth in the clear day.

If the Publication of this Sermon (such as it is) may tend to awaken any to
consider the things of their Peace, in this their day, (although the
Importunity of others greatly concerned in the late awful dispensation, has
constrained thereunto against my thoughts and inclinations) I shall have cause
to rejoice thereat. I dare not, but from time to time, (after my poor manner)
take notice of the solemn Providence of God, that so I may endeavor that my
self and others may make that Improvement of them, which the glorious and
blessed God looks for; For indeed my soul dreads to be found amongst the
number of sleeping Watchmen.

Possibly some may wonder, that I should so frequently appear in this way, who
am the least amongst my Brethren; and also one that has his Head and Hands and
Heart, otherwise full of thoughts and Labors. The Truth is (although I should
not be weary in well doing, yet such is mine infirmity as that) I am weary. And
if the Lord give me to finish two small Treatises, which I have upon the
Anvill, (and which I do confess my Heart is much upon) the one concerning
Christ and Heaven, the other respecting, The Rising Generation in New England,
I do not Purpose (although I should live much longer then I think I shall) to
be any more troublesome in this way.

I have long expected that Christ would come and call for me; but I know that
until my work be done, I am immortal. And I trust that the Lord in whose hand
my Times are, will enable to finish the work, which he has given me to do in
the world.

Let the godly Reader help me by his Prayers, who need them, And who am

Boston 9th. of 4th. Month 1675. An unworthy servant of Jesus Christ Increase
Mather.

Psalm. 31.15. My Times are in thy Hand --
THe Penman of this Psalm was David as we may see by the Title of it, where
it is said to be a Psalm of David. Concerning the time and occasion of the
penning of it, there are various Conjectures. Mollerus Musculus etc.
Some think that it was occasioned by Saul's Persecution. Others conceive that
David wrote this Psalm in the time when he was persecuted by Absalom. And this
latter seems to be the more probable Conjecture. For there are diverse passages
therein which suit with the state and condition that David was in when pursued
by Absalom. e. g. Those expressions in the 9th and in the latter part of the
10th verses, Foord in Loc:
Mine eye is consumed with grief, my life is spent with grief, and my years
with Sighing. Those expressions seem to intimate, that David was at this time
come to the close of his days, and that he was in extremity of grief and
sorrow. Now the greatest sorrows that ever came upon David, were those that
happened to him in the days of Absalom; then also was he near unto his end.
Again, in the latter part of the 10th verse he says My Strength fails
because of mine iniquity* when as the afflictions which came upon him under
Saul, were not because of any special iniquity which he had been guilty of, but
for trial, and that so he might thereby be fitted to do greater Service for
God in his Generation; but the afflictions which came upon him in Absoloms
days, were the fruit of his sin and backsliding from God. Likewise that
passage in the 21 verse where he says the Lord has showed me his marvelous
kindness as in a strong City, was literally fulfilled in Absoloms time: for
then David was at Mahanaim, and much kindness was showed unto him therein.
However certain it is that David was at this time in great distress and,
therefore his scope in this Psalm is to pray for deliverance out of trouble.
There are in this Context diverse arguments to strengthen his faith in prayer,
in that he had put his trust in God verse 14^ I trusted in thee O Lord. That's a
great argument to be used in prayer, a man would be loath to f^^l another that
confideth in him, much less will the Holy blessed God disappoint those that do
indeed put their trust in him. 2. From the consideration of that Covenant
Interest which he had in God, ibid. Thou art my God. That is a mighty argument.
He that can say unto God thou art mine, thou have in the Covenant engaged thy
self to me, as my God, may expect Salvation from him. 3. He does strengthen his
faith from the consideration of the Providence of God, so in the words of the
Text.

We shall not detain you with any opening of the words, besides what may be
spoken to under the Doctrine from them, which is Doct.
That the Times of men are in the hand of God. Now for the clearing of this
Doctrine four things may be attended. 1. To show what is here meant by the hand
of God. 2. What times of men are in the Lords hand. 3. How it does appear that
the times of men are in Gods hand. 4. The Reasons of this Doctrine.

Quest. 1, What is here meant by the hand of God?

Answ. 1. There is the hand of Divine power. Strength is manifested by the
hand: we say of a strong man that he is a man of his hands, so the Lords
strength and power it is denoted by his hand. It is said concerning Elijah that
the hand of the Lord was upon him and he ran before Ahab 1. Kings. 18.4. that
is the power of God was upon him, enabling of him so to run. And Ezekiel says
the hand of the Lord was upon me Chap. 37.1. that is a mighty power of
Prophecy. (...) on Job 2.10.
Thus Psalm. 74.11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand pluck it out of thy bosom,
that is to say exert and put forth thy almighty power. Isai. 59.1. The Lords
hand is not shortened that it cannot save. God has as much power as ever he
had, he is as able to save his people now as ever he was, therefore is it said
that his hand is not shortened. Wherefore when it is said that the times of men
are in the hand of God, The meaning is that he has power to dispose of their
times, men have not power to dispose of their own times, nor have others that
power but the Lord alone.

2. There is the hand of divine Providence, Job. 2.10. Shall we receive good
at the hand of God and shall we not receive evil. The Providence of God does
dispense afflictions as well as mercyes to his people, therefore are they said
to receive evil as well as good at the hand of God. So Chap. 19.21. Have pity
upon me O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me, that is to say,
the Providence of God is gone forth against me. 1. Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves
under the mighty hand of God, i- e. under the afflicting dispensations of his
divine Providence, and Solomon says that the righteous and the wise and their
works are in the hand of God Eccle. 9.1.

Because both the Persons and the works of the bestand most prudent men are
guided by a divine Providence. When God has bestowed gifts and graces upon any
man, qualifiing him for Service, he does by a secret providence order what work
he shall do, wherefore the divine Providence is intended by that Hand, which
the text speaks of. David does here encourage himself from the Consideration
of the All-disposing Providence of God. We come to a second enquiry viz. What
is meant by the Times of men which are said to be in the hand of God?

Answ. 1. The beginning of a man's time is in the Lords hand. He orders when
every man shall come into the world. Hence it is said that there is a time to
be born Eccle. 3.2. that is to say, God has set and determined the time
wherein every man shall be born. It was said with respect unto Isaac Gen 21.2.
Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a Son in his old age, at the set time of which
God had spoken to him. The Lord had set the time when Isaac should come into
the world, the same is true with reference unto all men that ever were or shall
be brought forth into the world. Hence some are born in one age and some in
another. Some before the Law, others under the Law, and others in the days of
the Gospel, since Christ the Son of God has come into the world. He in whose
hand are the times of men does order in what time and under what dispensation
each man shall live.

2. The end of a man's time is in the Lords hand. The time when he shall go out
of the world, as well as the time of his coming into it; the day of death as
well as the day of his birth. Hence Solomon says there is a time to dye Eccl.
3.2. The day of a man's death is emphaticaly called his time Eccle. 9.12. Man
knows not his time, that is to say he knows not the time when he shall die
and go out of this world, and this time is in the Lords hand, and thence is
said to be appointed Hebr. 9.27. It is appointed unto all men once to dye.
There is indeed a statute Law determining that every Sinner shall dye, Genesis
2.17. and in that respect death is appointed, but besides that it is appointed
in the eternal Decree of God. Not only the thing, but the time and all the
Circumstances attending the death of any man, were appointed by the Lord. Hence
it was said, The time drew nigh that Israel must dye. Genesis 47.29. Gods time was
come and therefore Jacob now must dye,

3. The duration of a man's time is in Gods hand. Not only when he shall come
into the world, but how long he shall continue in it* whether he shall be long
lived or short lived. First when a man comes into the world, no one can tell
whether he shall dye in Childhood, or in Youth, or in his middle age, or in his
old age, but God in whose hand is his Time knows how it shall be, wherefore
Job says, I will wait all the days of my [appointed time] till my change come
Chap 14. v. 14. And in the fifth verse of that Chapter he says of every man
that (...) days are determined the number of his months are with thee, thou
have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Not only the number of the
years, but the months nay the days that every man shall live are determined
by God, and beyond that time he shall not live one day. This then is David's
meaning when he says my times are in thy hand, Thou can make me live as long
as thou will, notwithstanding my enemies seek for my life.

Tempora significant per Metarymiam adjuncti conditionis varietatem, quae
temporum habet vices. Ames in L^cum. (...)
4. Those Changes of time that a people or person may in this world pass under
are ordened by the hand of God. Hence the Psalmist does not only say my Time
in the singular Number, but my Times in the plural Number. i. e. both
prosperous and adverse Seasons. There are vicissitudes of times, we read of the
times that went over David, and over Israel, and over the Kingdoms of the
Countries 1 Chronicles. 29.30. one while it was a time of peace and prosperity,
another while it was a time of great distraction and misery; thus did times
pass over them. As in public Concerns; Times may change, it is in the Lords
hand to change them when and as he pleases Dan. 2.21. He changes the times,
he removes kings and sets up kings. So as to particular persons, times may
change with them, he that is now in prosperity, may on a sudden be cast into
great misery. Psalm. 39.6, 7. I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved,
thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. How so? Absoloms Rebellion brought
a sudden change upon David. Prosperous seasons are in the Lords hand, This is
intended by the Psalmist, Thou Lord (says he) can make my days to be as
prosperous as thou will. And adverse seasons these are called Times Psalm. 10.1.
Why hidest thou thy self in times of trouble? And these are all ordered by the
hand of the most high,

5, The time of Deliverance out of trouble is in Gods hand. Thus the Chaldee
Paraphrast understands these words, my times are in thy hand viz, the time of
my Redemption, but though the words must not be so confined, yet that is
employed in them. God has determined the time when, as well as the means
whereby, he will save his people out of trouble Psalm. 102.13. The time to save
Zion, yea the set time is come. Deliverance out of trouble will not arise
until the Lords time be come. David hoped for Deliverance in the days of Saul
even till his eyes failed with looking for Salvation, but it came not as soon
as he looked for it, because the Lords time was not yet. Great have been the
expectations of these days that Rome should fall, and that the Churches final
Deliverance from the Persecution of Antichrist should be accomplished at such
a time and at such a time. Many have been looking for light, but behold
darkness. Is it because the thing is uncertain? No; but the reason of these
disappointments is, in that men have been expecting these things before the
Lords time be fullfilled, Deliverance then will not come before the set time,
nor stay one day longer than that time. Hence is that observable place of
Scripture Exo. 12.41. And it came to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty
years even the self same day it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord
went out of Egypt. God had promised Abraham that it should be so four hundred
and thirty years before, and we see that he kept his word even to a day. And it
is said concerning Joseph Psalm. 105.18, 19. whose feet they hurt with fetters,
he was laid in iron, until the time that his word came, that is, was
fullfilled: for coming in the Scripture often notes fulfilling. Ainsworth in
Locum.
God had long before showed Joseph in a dream, that he should be advanced
highly, and when the time for accomplishing that word was fulfilled, Joseph was
made to forget all his troubles.

6. The time for Repentance is in the hand of God. Hence not only Repentance
i^ se^^, but the time for it is said to be his Gift, as I have lately and
largly endeavored to show you in my course on the second Chapter of the
Revelation you have, heard how the Lord there spoke unto Jezabel I gave her
space to repent Every man's day of grace (that has such a day) is in Gods hand.
Hence it is that some have a far longer day of grace continued to them then
others have, some their day of grace is at an end whilst in youth, others their
day continues until their middle age, some to old age. Is this from
themselves? No, but from the Lord. You have often heard that life time in this
world is a time for Repentance, while a sinner is alive, it is possible that if
he seek the Lord he may find him. He may possibly obtain the pardon of his
sins, and the salvation of his soul, by Faith in Jesus Christ, but when once
his Soul is out of his body, when once he is dead (dying in his sins) it is
impossible, God that cannot lie having declared that it shall then never be.
Now the lives of men are in the hands of God, therefore Daniel said unto that
king, Chap. 5. v. 23. the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all
thy ways have thou not glorified. The time of prosperity is a day of grace,
when a man does enjoy Health, Ease, Strength etc. it is the fittest Season in
the world to repent, and make his peace with God in. Now this time you heard
but now is in the Lords hand. While the blessed Spirit of God continues
striving with the Soul, that's a day of grace indeed. When you are convinced,
awakened, affected in any measure by the word or works of God, then is an happy
time to repent in. Now that Season is surely in the Lords hand; for who has
directed the Spirit of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? wherefore the
Apostle says Phil. 2.13, 14. Work out your own Salvation with fear and
trembling, for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his own
good pleasure. As if it were said, Tremble to miss Gods Season, you know not
how soon God may cease working in your hearts by his Spirit. The time of the
Lords working upon the hearts of men, is as he shall please. Thus have we seen
what times are in the Lords hand.

The next thing is to enquire, How it does appear that the times of men are in
Gods hand

For Answer we shall only mention two things as Demonstrations of this truth.

First it is evident in that God has decreed and determined whatever comes to
pass in the world. The Lords will, his eternal purpose and decree is sometimes
expressed by his Hand Acts. 4.28. for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
counsel determined before to be done. For as men do work and accomplish their
designs by their hands, so does the Lord accomplish all his works by the power
of of his own will Ephe. 1.11. He works all things after the Counsel of his
own will. The will of God is a working will, therefore it is set forth by that
of his hand. Two things are certain, first that whatever God does will (that is
decree) shall surely come to pass Job. 42.2. No thought can be witholden from
thee. If God have a thought in his heart to do this or that, none can hinder
him from performing the thoughts and intents of his heart, He is of one mind
and who can turn him? Isai. 14.27. For the Lord of Hosts has purposed and who
shall disanul it? and his hand is stretched out and who shall turn it back?
Hence the will of God is said to be Irresistible Romans 9.19. who has resisted
his will? No one can hinder him from having his holy will in whatever he has a
mind to accomplish. Again, it is as true that what does come to pass was first
determined by the Lord. Therefore James when he was speaking in the Synod at
Jerusalem had this saying, known unto God are all his works from the beginning
of the world Acts. 15.18, If God does foreknow whatever things shall come to
pass, he must needs will them or will them, but they do not come to pass
against the Lords will, or whether he will or no. Certainly it Is in his hand
to prevent any thing that comes to pass in the world. There is no prosperous
or comfortable event at any time happens, but it was before appointed by the
Lord; nor is there any evil happens but according to the determination of the
only wise God. The most dismal Providence when once it is accomplished, we
may know that this was decreed before the world began, yea from Eternity. When
Jesus Christ the Son of God was hanged and Crucified, that was the strangest
and most dismal providence that ever was since the world began, yet this was
decreed from eternity Acts. 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate
Counsel and foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
Crucified and Slain. And particularly there is an holy and eternal Decree
respecting the times of men Job. 7.1. Is there not an appointed time to man
upon the earth? Acts. 17.26. God has determined the times before appointed.

2. Another demonstration of the truth before is this, There is a Providence in
every thing that comes to pass. God does execute his decree by his works of
Creation and Providence. Gods Providence is that whereby he does dispose of
(not only some things but) all things as shall be for his own glory. Those
things which as to men are most fortuitous accidental and casual, in respect
of God are purposely and providentially ordered; for example, Casual Homicide,
when a man kills another accidentally against his will, the holy blessed God
ordered that matter on purpose, upon holy grounds and for holy ends. See a
clear Scripture for this Exodus 21.12. He that smites a man so that he dye
shall surely be put to death. But if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him
into his hand, then will I appoint thee a place whither he shall flee. So that
if a man happen to kill another against his will, God delivers the man that is
slain into the hands of him that smote him, which evidently shows that there
is a providence of God in all such Casualtyes. So in Lottery as to men the
thing is doubtful and fortuitous, which way the Lot shall fall, but God has
beforehand contrived, and will by an effectual Providence order accordingly
how the thing shall be Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast into the lap (so was the
Custom in Solomon's days) but the whole disposing there of is of the Lord.
There is not the least matter comes to pass in the world without the
Providence of God Mat. 10.29* Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and one
of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father, but the very hairs of
your head are all numbered. The meaning is, that there is an hand of Providence
in all events, yea in the smallest matters that happen in the world. Sure then
there is not any great and solemn and awful event happening at any time in any
place but the hand of Divine Providence is therein, and that not only as to the
thing, but as to the time and manner and all circumstances whatsoever that may
occur: if a Sparrow does not fall to the ground without God, much less does a
man fall into the grave (especially if the fall be sudden and awful) but there
is a special Providence therein.

But the truth of this Doctrine will appear further by speaking to the grounds
and Reasons of it, we shall briefly mention two.

Reas 1. Because men are the Lords Creatures therefore it is but reason that
their Times should be in his hand. He is our Maker Psalm. 95.6. Come let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before God our maker. So in Psas. 100.3.
Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that made us and not we our selves.
Yea and God has made us for himself, for his own use and service Rev. 4.11.
Thou have created all things, for thy pleasure they are and were Created. If a
man make a thing for another and not for himself, he has not such power to
dispose of it, but if he make it for himself he may dispose of it thus or so,
as shall seem good unto him: now God has made us for himself and not for
another, therefore he may well dispose of us, and of our times as shall seem
good unto him.

Reas. 2. From the absolute Dominion which the Lord has over us. We may
reason from the Sovereignty of the most high. And this follows from the
former: Inasmuch as God has made us, therefore he has an absolute dominion
over us Romans 9.22. Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to
make one vessel to honor and another to dishonor. The Potter has a kind of
absolute power over the Clay, for he may dispose of it thus or so, as shall
seem good unto him. We are before God as the Clay is before the Potter,
wherefore the Scripture speaks much concerning that absolute Dominion which
the Lord has over his Creatures, Deuteronomy. 32.39. See now that I even I am he and
there is no God with me, I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal neither
is there any that can deliver out of my hand. At the same time some are wounded
and not others, some are killed by the same blow and others are kept alive;
amongst wounded ones some are healed and others shall not recover, why? It is
the Lord that does these, things and has power so to do. Wherefore Elihu said
to Job, Chap. 33.12. I will answer thee that God is greater than man, why do
thou strive against him for he gives no account of any of his matters, that is
to say he is not bound to give any account of any of his matters, though
sometimes he condescends unto it, yet that is more then he is obliged unto,
says Elihu. God may take from thee thy estate, and thy Relations, all by one
sudden awful blow of his hand, and yet never tell thee why he does so. Such is
the absolute Sovereignty and high Supremacy which the glorious and eternal God
has over his Creatures. So that well did Nebuchadnezzar make confession
saying, all the Inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing and he does
according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth, and there is none can stay his hand, or say unto him what do thou,
Dan. 4.35. No man has an absolute Dominion over others so as that his Will
shall be his Rule, but God most high has such a Dominion, so as that it is
impossible that he should do any wrong unto his Creatures, however he dispose
of them or of their Times.

We come now to Infer some Uses from this Doctrine. This Truth may be applied,
1. By way of Instruction.

2. By way of Consolation. 3. Of Reprehension. 4. By way of Exhortatoin and
Direction.

Use. 1. Of Instruction in two Particulars.

1. In case we enjoy good times, if we see good days this shows us unto
whom we ought to be thankful, even unto that God in whose hand our Times
are. If we have our lives when others are snatched away by Death, if we have
health when others are in sickness, if we have ease when others have broken
bones and are in extremsty of anguish, let us be for ever thankful unto God.
If we have plenty when others are in wants, as at this day our Neighbors are
afflicted with great Scarcity as to Provision, but we have Plenty; let not the
Lord have cause to complain against us, as sometimes against the Church of
Israel, Hos. 2.8. She did not know that I gave her Corn. We also enjoy the
libertyes of the Gospel, and in that respect see good days. As when those
Libertyes are taken away, the days are evil Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the Time, for
the days are evil. Why were they evil? namely in respect of sore
Persecutions raised against the people of God, therefore when there is no
Persecution (as through Grace with us) there is not, those are good days, and
we ought then to be thankful to God on the account thereof. And inasmuch as
that God, in whose hand is our Time has so ordered as that we are brought
into the world in these Gospel days, we owe him Everlasting praises on that
account. We might have been born in those times of Ignorance, when God
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, even in those dark ages of the
world, which were before the Sun of righteousness did arise upon the earth, and
so have perished for lack of knowledge: but God has given us to live all our
days under the light of the Gospel. And have not many of you had a long day of
Grace? There are some of you that God in whose hand are your times, has
continued to you the day of Grace, twenty, thirty, yea forty years and more to
some of you. Thankfully acknowledge the Grace of the Lord toward you.

Instruct. 2. This teaches us a Lesson of Humility and Submission to the will
of God in case we see evil days. If a change of times come upon us or ours,
the hand of the Lord is in it, and therefore to be patient and humble is that
which becomes us. Amos. 3.6. Shall there be evil in the city and the Lord
has not done it? Shall any evil happen in a Town, or in a Family and the Lord
not have an holy overruling hand in it? The Lord owneth evil of affliction as
his Creature, Isai. 45.7. I form the light, and I Create darkness, I make peace
and create evil, I the Lord do all these things. Wherefore if any afflictive
Providence do befall us, we should say as Eli did, when he first heard of such
an awful Providence befalling his Family, as made the ears of every one that
heard it to tingle, he said it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good,
1. Sam. 3.18. And indeed it is our best and wisest way, yea and Woe will be unto
us, if we will not submit to the Sovereign will and pleasure of the Almighty,
when once his will is manifested, Isai. 45 9. Woe unto him that striveth with
his Maker. God will have the mastery over his Creatures, and will make them
know that he is above them: and therefore it is in vain for any to struggle
against God, it is great sin and folly so to do.

Use. 2. Of Consolation to the Children of God, and it must needs be a
Consideration full of glorious Consolation unto them if they do by says*
apprehend this truth, that all their times are in the hand of their Father.

We shall mention two or three comfortable Meditations here.

1. If their Times are in Gods hand, then all their other concernments
whatsoever are in his hand. This follows by parity of reason. Your lives are
in Gods hand, he is the God of my life said David. Our health is in his hand,
He is the health of my countenance. Our Estates are in his hand, who is able
to keep them, and whose blessing alone makes rich. Our Relations are in his
hand, some of you have Relations absent from you afar off upon the Sea, or in
Countries remote, remember they are in the hand of God wheresoever they may be.
Others of you have near Relations, Children pehaps sick and in danger of death
remember ahat they also are in Gods hand.

2. Hence they are in the best hand that possibly can be. You can not wish your
times or concernments in a better hand, they are in a wise hand, he is the only
wise God. They are in a Faithful hand. It was Dr Prestons expression, that if
the case were so with him that he might speak but three words before he went
out of the world, these should be the words, GOD IS FAITHFUL. And in an able,
yea in an All sufficient hand, John. 10.29. My Father is greater then all, no
man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. This is a great comfort to
them that have faith to improve it. If a man be sick is it not a comfort to him
to be in the hand of a skillful, faithful, compassionate, Physician, So it is
here.

3. Here is ground of Comfort against all the designs of Satan, and his
Instruments Our times are not in Satan's hand, the Lord said to him concerning
Job, Touch not his life. The Devil would fain have taken Jobs life from him,
but he could not do it, because it was not in his hand. It is true, that it is
said of the Devil that he has the power of Death, Hebr. 2.14. Because he is
employed in great and signal Judgments, to inflict death upon men, See Dr Owen
Exposition Hebr 2.14. p. 265.
and the Jews of old had an opinion that great and sudden destructions were all
wrought by him; but then he must have a commission from a higher hand, or he
can do nothing. And the like must be said concerning his Instruments in the
world. We see in this context there were those that designed to take away
David's life, verse, 13. against me they devised to take away my life, but they
could never do it, because his times were in Gods hand and not in theirs. So
Herod sought Christ's life, and after that the Jews would have killed him, and
had many a fair opportunity so to do, and yet it was not at those times
accomplished when it was easy to have been done, forasmuch as the Lords time
was not yet come, John. 7.30.

Use 3. Let it be of sad and solemn Reproof, there are several sorts of men
that fall under Conviction and just Reprehension here.

1. This condemns those that will be curiously enquiring into those times that
God keeps in his own hands alone. The Disciples themselves were once
blameworthy in this respect, Acts. 1.6, 7. They said to Christ will thou at
this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? The Lord gave them a short
return saying, it is not for you to know the Times or the Seasons which the
Father has put in his own power. Indeed there are some Times which we ought
to be enquiring into. The holy Prophets did enquire and search diligently into
the time of Christ's coming into the world, 1 Pet. 1.11. The men of Issachar
were commended for their Understanding in the times. The Pharisees are reproved
because they could not discern the signs of the times. Such Times as God has
revealed we should modestly enquire into. He has told us how long the Reign of
Antichrist shall continue, and therefore it is both lawful and a duty, with
Humility to be enquiring into that time. But there are some that will be
enquiring into times that are kept secret, e. g. Some will be determining the
year when the day of Judgment shall begin, ^^ge Za^chi. de (...) and (...) Disp
de signis.
But (although I deny not but that the age wherein that day shall begin may be
conjectured at) Christ has said of that day and hour knows no man, no not
the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son but the Father, Mark. 13.32.
Others will be enquiring into the time when such a man shall dye etc. Some that
Calculate Nativityes, Judicial Astrologers, Fortune Tellers, are deeply guilty
in this respect. The accursed and lying Vanities and Witchcrafts of such
persons are fearful transgressions in the sight of God. Certainly every man
may say as Isaac did, Genesis 27.2. I know not the day of my death, and therefore
great is their sin and folly that will go about to determine when either
themselves or others shall dye, you know not but that it may be every day, and
the Lord hides it from you, that so you might live every day as if it were
your last.

2. This Reproves those that build upon the time to come, that say hereafter
they will do this and that and the other thing* the Apostle speaks of such
and reproves them. Jam. 4.13, 14. Go too now you that say to morrow we will
go to such a City, and continue there a year whereas ye know not what shall be
on the morrow; for what is your life? it is even a Vapor that appears for a
little time and then vanishes away. It is too much presumption for you to
allot upon the time to come, which is not in your hands, but in Gods only. How
do some say that hereafter they will repent of their Sins. This is the evil
which Young men are especially guilty of, The Young man th^nks with himself,
I Will repent and endeavor to make my peace with God when old age is come upon
me; but how do thou know that thou shall live till old age? It may be that
God in whose hand is thy time, will not suffer thee to live so long. It is
said, one dies in full strength, Job. 21.23. Do we not see examples for it
before our eyes from day to day? How do thou know but that thou shall dye in
thy full strength? Another says, I Will repent when I come to lie upon a sick
bed, and a death bed, but it may be thou shall not dye in thy bed and how then?
It may be thou shall have no sickness before death. Death may come upon thee
and not give thee a moments warning. Remember that Scripture, Prove. 27.1. Boast
not thy self of to morrow thou know not what a day may bring forth. O what
did one day bring forth this last week, one morning the other day brought forth
that which will never be forgotten by many here present.

3. This Reproves those that do provoke the Lord to cut off their time. The
Sins of men provoke God to shorten their time and days in this world. Alas! it
is not long since I did upon a very sad occasion insist upon those words,
Eccles. 7.17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish* for why
should thou dye before thy time? Great sins bring untimely death,
Drunkeness, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Atheism, Neglect of Prayer, and the
like evils bring untimely death upon those that are so guilty, especially if
they have had many offers of grace, Psalm. 81.13, 15. O that my People had
hearkened to me -- their time should have endured. But when men will not
hearken to God, he will not suffer their time to endure long. There was an
awful Providence amongst us above a year ago, which you may remember
occasioned the preaching of several Sermons from that Scripture, Prove. 29.1.
He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed and
that without remedy.

Use 4. Of Exhortation to Sanctify the Name of God whom we see his hand
putting an end to the time of these or those in an awful manner.

I would apply this particularly with respect to that fatal and dismal Stroke
which happened amongst us the last week. That Providence is it self a loud
Sermon, it is a warning piece from Heaven, and if God Preach, his Ministers
should preach too. It may not be amiss then to Second this Solemn work of God
with a Solemn word.

Some Considerations and Directions let me set before you.

Consider, 1. How awfully this Providence is Circumstanced, It is so in respect
of the time when it happens; even at a time when the Lord is frowning upon us,
and threatening of us in other respects. The Lords hand is at this day stretched
out against our Brethren in a neighbor Plantation, and God expects that we
should take notice of it, and be warned by it, as sometimes it was said
concerning Jerusalem, Zeph. 3.6, 7. I have cut off the Nations, and I said
surely thou will fear me, thou will receive Instruction. When the Lords hand
was upon Neighboring Places, he looked that Jerusalem should thereby take
warning, so now that the Famine is like to prevail upon Virginia, God says,
sure New England will fear me and receive Instruction.

This providence is likewise awfully Circumstanced, in that it comes at a time
when there are lamentable Out-breakings of Iniquity. Not long since two
Murderers were executed amongst us; and since that another horrid Murder
discovered, and it is to be feared that many will be found with the guilt of
blood in their Skirts.

And this Providence is awfully Circumstanced, in respect of the suddeness of
this fatal blow, no warning given of it beforehand, no man that expected or
ever thought of such a thing till the moment wherein the dismal blow was given.

And awfully Circumstanced in respect of the number of Persons whom the hand of
the Lord has fallen upon, no less then nine Persons, and three of them already
dead, besides another that was taken away by sudden death the very same day.

And awfully Circumstanced in respect of the quality of the Persons whom the
Lord has taken away, I mean with respect to those two who were of this
Congregation. Capt. Samuel Scarlet, and Mr John Freake.
The Commonwealth has a loss in respect of them both, since it must needs be
acknowledged that they had more of a public, noble, generous spirit then can
be said of most amongst us. Yea and the Church also has a great loss in
respect of one of them, even the Church whereof he was a member, since that he
did Industriously set himself to promote the welfare of the Church as well as
of the Commonwealth. I have heard it from some that knew it, that his Mother
who was a precious godly woman had a particular faith for that son of hers, she
believed that God would bless him and make him a blessing in his Generation,
and we have seen that his godly Mothers faith was not in vain for him, but
therefore the loss is the greater, and the providence the more awful.

Consider 2. That there are no persons in all the world unto whom God speaks
by this Providence as he does to us. Indeed the Lord speaks thereby unto
others, yea unto all that shall hear of it. He speaks to New England, and
more particularly this is a speaking Providence to Boston, but most of all to
us of this Congregation, in that they whom the Lord has slain were of us. This
thing has been done in our hearing and before our eyes, our eyes have beheld
the Slaughter which the Lord has made, yea and by their Deaths he has wounded
us. Come let us return to the Lord, for he has torn us, he has smitten us.

Consider, 3. That this is not the first warning which the Lord has given us.
How many sudden deaths have there been? Not to mention things of an elder date,
which in the day of them I have not been altogether wanting to mind you of.
This last year we have thus been warned, not once nor twice. This Spring
several amongst us have been snatched away by sudden strokes of the Lords
hand. And it is not a year ago (hardly three quarters of a year) since there
was such another awful Blow as that which I am now speaking of, when that Shop
was blown up with a Barrel of Powder, and one man was killed, and (as I
remember) seven or eight wounded. Now it is to be feared that we were not
affected and awakened with that Stroke as should have been, and therefore the
Lord is put upon it to bring another more awful then the former.

Consider 4. That if we do not sanctify the Name of God under this awful
Providence, Lamentable things will follow. Isai. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is
lifted up they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed. Woe to us if we
will not see when the Lords hand is lifted up in such an awful manner, what
can we then expect but utter Confusion? we may then expect that the Lord has
not yet done with us. No, He will not turn away from his anger, but his hand
will be stretched out still. Then look for it, the Lord will take away others
that are useful, serviceable, and desirable; and if he take away a few such
what a naked destitute people will you be? yea we may then expect that there
shall be Calamity, and Lamentation generaly. It is mentioned as a dreadful
Presage of general Calamity coming upon the Children of Israel when it is said
that God overthrew some of them as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorha, that is by
sudden and fiery destruction, Amos. 4.11. And Christ does intimate to the Jews,
that sudden and awful destruction which came upon a few of them, did (without
repentance) forerun and foretell a day of general Calamity coming upon them,
Luke. 13.3, 5.

You will say but what shall we do that so we may sanctify the Lords Name
under this awful hand of his upon us?

Answ. Follow these Directions.

1. Take notice of the hand of God in this that is come to pass. Do not think
that this is a mere accident or chance; the Philistines were willing to think
so when the hand of the Lord was upon them, 1. Sam. 6.9. Then (say they) we
shall know that it is not his hand that smote us, it was a chance that happened
to us. Christians should know and speak otherwise, it is not a Chance that has
happened to us, but assuredly it is the hand of the Lord that has smitten us:
therefore eye his holy hand, especially you that were any way related to those
that are now dead, you should eye the hand of the Lord, that so you may be
Patient and Humble under his Dispensations toward you. Thus it was with that
godly woman Naomi, when most bitter bereavements came upon her, when her
husband and other near and dean Relations were snatched from her, she
considered that the hand of the Almighty was in those Killing Strokes. The hand
of the Lord is gone out against me, the Almighty has dealt ^^ry bitterly with
me; the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me,
Ruth. 1.13, 20, 21. And thus it was with David when those Calamityes which the
Text seems to have respect unto, did befall him, Psalm. 39.9, 10. I was dumb,
I opened not my mouth because thou did it, remove thy stroke away from me, I
am consumed by the Blow of thine hand. Believe it, this stroke is the Lords
stroke, this blow is the blow of Gods hand, the Lord himself has done it.
Think of that, that so you may sit down in Silence before the Lord. If a man
did see the hand of the Almighty giving the blow, would he? durst he find fault?

2. Lay it to heart. It is not enough for us to take notice of the Lords hand,
but we must labor to be duly affected there with, Eccle. 7.2. It is better
to go to the house of mourning then to the house of feasting, the Living will
lay it to his heart. We should with Sorrow Lament over this dreadful doleful
breach. So did Moses direct the Children of Israel in the like case Lev. 10.6.
Let your Brethren, the whole house of Israel bewail the burning which the Lord
has kindled. There were two men that were taken away out of the world by a
sudden and fiery stroke, and all their brethren even the whole house of Israel
must Lament for it. Truly so it has been amongst us, Two men have dyed
Suddenly and that by fire too, now it concerns us to bewail the burning which
the Lord has kindled, we should mourn in secret places because of this thing.
It would be sad if it should be said of us as sometimes of Israel, Isai. 42.25.
He has poured on him the fury of his anger, and it has set him on fire round
about, yet he knew not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. Shall
the anger of the Lord be burning round about us, and yet we not lay it to
heart?

3. Let us adore the hand of God. We read concerning Job, that when the Lord
brought those sudden changes upon him, by the Death of near Relations, and the
loss of his estate, He fell down upon the ground and worshipped. Job. 1.20. We
should turn such things into Prayer and humble adoration before the Lord. Adore
his greatness, his sovereignty, his power, his wisdom, his righteousness, who
may at his pleasure punish us or ours, and it is not for us to say unto him
what do thou?

4. Let us labor to understand the Lords mind and meaning in this awful
Providence. Certainly the Lord speaks something by it, yea some great thing,
and therefore we have cause to blame our own fullness of understanding if we
know not what it is that the Lord would have us to hear and to learn; were we
wise as we should be, it would be otherwise with us. Mic. 6.9. The Lords voice
cries to the city, the man of wisdom shall se^ thy name, hear ye the rod and
who has appointed it. O let us not be like beasts that only feel the rod, but
hear it not. The Lords voice cries to the city. Truly this awful Providence
which I am speaking of is the Lords voice; it cries to the City, it cries to
the Town. This Solemn voice of the Lord cries to Boston. If we be men of
wisdom we shall see his Name, yea we shall sanctify his Name.

5. Let us Repent of past and present Iniquityes. Does God bring such awful
Providence upon us that so we might Censure the dead? No, but to be
Instructions and warnings to the living, that so they may be awakened to
unfaigned Repentance for all their sins wherefore Christ has said, Those
eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell and slew them, think ye that th^^
were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem, I tell you nay, but except
you repent you all shall likewise perish, Luke. 13.4, 5. So I say do you think
that these nine men upon whom this ^low has fallen, and sundry of them slain
thereby, were Sinners above any in Boston, I tell you nay, but except you
repent you shall likewise perish. Especially repent of those sins which bring
such awful Strokes as these. Security is such a sin, when mystical Babylon
(that is Rome) says I shall see no sorrow, then do her Plagues come in one
day, death and mourning. When men cry peace, peace, then comes sudden
destruction. The Lord roares from on high that he may awaken Sinners out of
their Security. And disregard to the word of God is that which brings such
dismal Providence upon poor Creatures. When men regard not the still voice of
the word, Mountains are rent, and Rocks are broken in pieces before the Lord.
Hence it is that the most awful Providence are usualy in those places where
the word of God is preached in the greatest power. God is terrible out of his
holy places. Have you not observed that there have been more Sudden deaths, and
awful Tremendous dispensations of divine Providence in New England then in
any place where you have been? How so? Even because the word of God is
plentifully and powerfully dispensed throughout this Land, but men regard it
not as they ought to do, and therefore the Lord speaks by his Works, in a
most awful manner from time to time, O think of it, and repent!

Lastly, Be prepared for change of Times. Now you are in Prosperity* but
prepare for a day of Adversity; who knows how soon the Iniquity of thy heels
will overtake thee, and the days of evil come upon thee? Especially prepare
for that last and great change which will come upon every Soul amongst you, and
you know not how soon or how suddenly. And indeed that's the voice of the Lord
in this Providence, Calling upon all that hear of it and, saying Prepare for
Death! Prepare for Death! Prepare for Death! you know not but that you (as well
as others that are gone may dye suddenly. The best man in this Congregation,
yea upon the face of the earth, may for ought that any one can say, be (as
Moses was) suddenly taken out of the world. And therefore make sure of an
Interest in Jesus Christ. If death come upon a man and find him out of Christ,
it had been better for him that he had never been born. O then labor to be
found in him, not having your own righteousness, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ. Woe for ever to that man, whom Death shall find, having nothing
but his own Righteousness. It may be he is honest in his dealings with men, and
has this or that moral Qualification, but he is a stranger to the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, if death find him in that estate, he is undone
eternally. Also see that you keep in the Lords way because Death may come upon
you suddenly, and if it should find you out of Gods way, that would be
uncomfortable. I remember one of the Ancients makes mention of a woman that
was a Christian, Tertullian
who would needs go and see a Stage Play acted, and when she was there, God
suffered the Devil to take bodily possession of her, and being demanded how he
got possession of one that was a Christian, and reputed a good woman? Why (said
the Devil) I found her in mine own ground, and therefore I might well take
possession of her* I speak not this to reflect upon the dead, I know not but
that they might be in their (...) when this Stroke came upon them, but to
Caution the living, If you go out of Gods way, the Devil finds you in his own
ground* and then are you exposed to great temptations and miseryes. O take heed
of sinning against God. A Sinner it may be as soon as ever he has sinned, as
soon as ever he has spoken a vain or wicked word, Death will seize upon him
and carry him before the Tribunal of the Lord. A Christian should often be
propounding three Questions to himself. 1. What am I? 2. Where am I? 3, What
do I? What am I? Am I in a good estate fit to dye? Am I in Christ, or am I not
in Christ? Am I one that truly fears God? And where am I? am I in the Place
which God would have me to be in? Have I a Call to be here? And what do I? Am
I doing that which is pleasing in the sight of God? Is the work which I am
about a good work, or an evil work? And he that shall be as to his State as
ought to be, and shall withal keep in the Lords way, needs not fear any Death.
No Death can hurt him though never so sudden; But if he be found with Loins
girded, and Lamp lighted, He shall go into the Chambers of Everlasting rest
and peace. Blessed is that Servant whom the Lord at his Coming shall find so
doing; yea Blessed are they which dye in the Lord, for they cease from their
Labors and their Works follow them.

Tibi Domine.

