Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT Holden at Boston the twelfth
of May 1675. And Printed by their Orders, Edward Rawson. Secrt.
BOOK-DEBTS.
IN Answer to the Petition of Several Inhabitants of Boston, as also other
Towns in this Colony;

This Court judges it meet to Declare and Order, The Law restraining
Book-debts lengthned for two years.
That the Law Restraining of Book Debts shall be, and hereby is lengthened for
two years more from this time, any thing in that Law notwithstanding.

SHEEPS-WOOL.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Prohibition of
Sheeps-wool
That henceforth it shall not be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever,
directly or indirectly to export any Sheeps-wool out of this Jurisdiction by
Sea to any Foreign parts, on penalty of forfeiting all such quantities, or
parcels of Wool, that shall be taken a board any Ship or other Vessel with
intent to transport the same; the one half to the Informer, and the other half
to the public Treasury.

The penalty
And that no Master of any Ship or other Vessel shall receive any Sheeps-wool
aboard his Ship or Vessel to be transported, on penalty of forfeiting the full
value or worth thereof: And the Select men of every Seaport Town are hereby
required to choose in each Town one meet person Annually to inspect this matter
and execute this Order.

RACCOON FURRS.
Whereas this Court is Informed of the usefullness of Raccoon furrs for making
a good sort of Hatts, for the supply of the Country; It is therefore Ordered
and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, Raccoon (...) not to be
^^ported on penalty.
that from and after three months after the Publication hereof, no Raccoon furs
or skinns shall be Shipped for exportation out of this Jurisdiction upon the
penalty of the forfeiture thereof, the one half to the Informer, the other
half to the Country. And to the end that this Law may be duly ex^cuted: It is
Ordered; That such persons as are Appointed to execute the Law prohibiting the
transportation of Sheeps-wooll shall in like manner execute this Order.

IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That it shall not
henceforth be in the power of any Marshal to make, Marshals not to make a Deputy
constitute or appoint any Deputy in his place or stead to serve Attachments,
or levy Executions where the said Deputy is personally related or concerned;
Nor shall it be lawful for any Constable to make a Deputy to serve Attachments
or levy Executions in any case; Any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

F Or the better Direction and Regulating of all Clerks, Secretaries, Marshals
and Constables, in reference to the Granting and Serving of Executions:

It is hereby Ordered and Enacted by this Court; Directions to Clerks,
Secretary and Marshals about Executions, etc.
That all Executions shall be made according to the words of the Judgment,
without Addition or Substraction; and that the Officer that grants the same
keep upon Record the Day, Month and Year when it was granted: And that all
Marshals and Constables take care to see their return Recorded, and in case of
Houses or Lands taken upon Execution, it concerns the person or persons to
whom they are delivered, to see it duly Recorded, which being done, shall be a
legal Assurance of such Houses and Lands to Him and his Heirs for ever.

WHereas the Marshals Oath requires them to make Return of such Attachments as
they serve to the Courts to which they are returnable which in many cases is
very chargeable and troublesome:

It is therefore Ordered; Marshals Directions to make return of Attachment.
That henceforth Marshalls and Constables shall be obliged only to make their
return upon the back side of the Attachment, and the same deliver to the
Plaintiff, or his order sealed up when demanded, giving first a Copy thereof to
the Defendant, if he desires it, and that no Marshal or Constable shall be
bound to serve any Attachment till they have their Fees paid them, which the
Law allows; any LAW USAGE or CUSVOME to the Contrary notwithstanding: And the
aforesaid Clause in the Marshals Oath, relating to the Return of Attachments to
the Court is hereby repealed and declared disobliging.

WHereas the Law requiring Constables to have Black staves, injoyns them to
take their said staff with them, when they are in Execution of any part of
their Office, which in some cases proves inconvenient by giving opportunity to
Delinquents to escape: For prevention whereof, and as an Explanation of the
said Law;

It is hereby Declared; That it is intended that Constables acting from their
own Authority, Constables directions about their staves.
and by virtue of the duty of their Place and Office shall then always take
with them their Black staves in the Execution of their office: But when they
shall act by virtue of warrant to them directed from Authority, they shall then
be at liberty whether to carry their black staff, or not.

WHereas the allowing and Appointing of all Commission, military Officers in
this jurisdicton, belongs properly and only to this Court by law is found both
peaceful and satisfactory; and inasmuch as this Court may not and be acquainted
with many useful and fit persons for that Service.

It is therefore hereby Ordered; Way for nomination of Military Officers.
That henceforth it shall, and may be lawful for the Committee of Militia, in
the several Towns where there shall be need to present the names of two or
three meet persons in their Towns for such service and Office to this Court for
their approbation, or otherwise as they shall see Cause, etc.

IN regard of the remoteness of the County of Devonshire, and there being no
Magistrate near those parts whereby it is matter of difficulty to have the
County Court there kept by one of our Magistrates according to the Law.

It is therefore hereby Ordered; How and by whom the County Courts in
Devonshire are to be kept
That hereafter it shall, and may be lawful for the County Court of Devonshire
from time to time to be kept by such Gentlemen as shall be by this Court
annually Commissionated to that Service, etc.

FOr Explanation of the Law Title Military: Sect. 9. In Exemption of Masters of
Ships and other Vessels above twenty Tuns from Training:

It is hereby Declared; Masters of Vessels to Train except
That it is only intended in that Order, the exemption of such Masters as Trade
and Pass to Foreign parts, and not of those whose employ of their Vessels is
in these parts, and near where they live upon these Coasts.

FINIS.

