Renewal of Covenant the great Duty incumbent on decaying or distressed
CHURCHES.

A SERMON Concerning Renewing of Covenant with God in Christ, Preached at
Dorchester in New England, the 21. Day of the 1. Month 1677. being a Day of
HUMILIATION There, on that Occasion.

By Increase Mather, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Deuteronomy.29 1. These are the words of the Covenant which the Lord commanded Moses
to make with the Children of Israel, in the Land of Moab, beside the Covenant
which he made with them in Horab

Jer.50.5. Come, let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgetten

Disputare etiam (...) un^one praedicta reformata, (h. e. pro personali et
explicita cum Deo et cum Ecclesia (...)) ex (...) ^lia professione Fidei,
Foederisque personali pactione, quam in Reformatione sua Nehemias etc.
necessarium arbitrati sunt.

Parker de Polit. Eccles. Lib. 3 p. 172, 173. In Veter^ Testamento (...) sere
legimus de renovatione (...), quot^es refertur sole^nis aliqua Ecclesiae
Reformatio.

A^es. Med. Theol. (...). Cap.32. Th.1^. BOSTON; Printed by J.F. for Henry
Phillips, and are to be sold at his Shop in the West end of the Townhouse in
Boston. 1677.

TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN DORCHESTER
Dearly Beloved in the Lord Jesus.
THere are (though none such that I know of amongst you) who have opposed the
Doctrine of the Church Covenant, not only as to Renewals thereof, but they
strike at the thing it self, denying it to be an Ordinance of Christ, or to
have any Scripture foundation. Mr. Cotton in his Book of the (...) My Father in
his printed discourse of the Church Covenant. Mr. Hooker in his (...) of Church
discipline. Chapter 4, 5. 6, 7 Mr. Norton in Responsed Apol. Cap. 2 The Platform of
Discipline. Chapter 4.
Those Eminent servants of God who were Instruments in the hand of Christ, of
planting these Churches, have asserted and proved, not only that Covenanting is
lawful, but necessary and essential to the very Being of a Church. Albeit I
doubt not but that you unto whom I am now speaking; are fully satisfied in the
Truth concerning this matter, yet it may be, it will not be altogether
unprofitable (as tending to your (...) establishment in the present Truth) to
remind you of the Arguments whereby that Principle of our way (and we trust the
way of Christ) has been confirmed, And they are such as these.

1. It is clear, beyond dispute that the Church under the oldTestament was
established by Covenant; and therefore the unchurching of the lews is expressed
by that of breaking their Covenant. Zach. 11.9, 10, 14. 2. The Names which are
given to the Church in Scripture bear witness to this Truth, It is called a
City, Psalm. 87. ^. Ephesians. 2. 9. Every City is united by Covenant; The Citizens
are received into Jus Civitatis, into right of City privileges by some
Covenant or Oath. Again, the Church is said to be Espoused to Christ, 2. Cor.
11.2, And they that join to the Church are said to be married to the Church, If
62. 5. Now we know that marriage cannot be without Covenanting. 3. All
Relations which are neither natural nor violent, but voluntary, are by virtue
of some Covenant; Church Relation is voluntary; therefore the Covenant does
constitute men in such a Relation. 4. If a Church decayed is to be restored and
reformed by Renewing their Covenant, then the Church is at First Erected
thereby; For things are to be Reformed by reducing them to their first
Institution. Math, 16.8, 1. Cor. 11. 23. Rev. 2.5. But that the Church has
still been Reformed by Renewall of Covenant, the Scriptures do abundantly
testify; How rarely do we read of a Church Reformation attained, but in this
way? 5. Let the Inventory of all other Respects be brought in and considered,
and it will be found that none of them constitute a Church, and therefore this
of the Covenant only must. It is against reason to Imagine that mere
Cohabitation should do it; For then Infidels would be of the Church. Nor does
a mere external profession make a man a member of this or that Church; For then
it would be impossible to excomunicate or cut off a corrupt member from such a
body Politic, since it is not in the power of men to prevent any one from
making a profession of the Gospel. Nor does Baptism constitute a member of the
Church: For then, if a man's membership cease by dissolution of the Church,
Excommunication, dismission, his Baptism, if the form of membership, would
become a nullity. It remains then, that a particular Church is constituted by
the Covenant, or agreement of Saints to walk with God, and one another,
according to the Order of the Gospel.

It has been objected by some, that the Doctrine of Explicit Covenanting does
unchurch all Christians but those of our way; such a practice not being known
to the Christian World until the late Separatists began it. Unto all which,
the old answer is sufficient, that although the more Explicit the Covenant is,
the better: See (...) of the Catholic (...). P. 41. and Mr. Buroughs (...).
p. 69, 79.
there is much of the visible glory of Christ appearing in it; and certainly
when men visibly, and Explicitly bind themselves and their Children to Christ,
they cannot bind them to a better Master; nevertheless, Explicitness is only an
Adjunct of the Covenant, therefore not Essential to the Being, though
desirable as to the Order, and Well-being of a Chu(...) Nor is it true that
explicit Covenanting was not in use, except among those of the Separation; For
de polit. (...). L 30. 16.
Parker and de polit Eccles. L 1. p. 158. L. 3 p. 721.
Zepper(...) (who had reason to know it) declare that upon their personal
knowledge, such Covenanting as we plead for, was practiced in some of the
reformed Churches; Yea it were easy to produce Parker (...) supra
Decrees of Reforming Synods, determining that none should be received into
their Churches, but in such a way; And therefore a late learned, and worthy
Hornbeck in Epist ad Dureum. p. 305. etc.
Professor in the University of Leyden, confesses that those of the
Congregational way are not to be blamed for their Doctrine about the Church
Covenant; Also I^ ordinis fratrum Bohem. Histor.
Comenius testifies, that such Explicit and solemn Covenanting as we plead
for, was practiced in those famous Churches in Bohemia. And it is famously
known Se the (...) 3 p 864. and Clarks (...) 2 p. 604.
that there was a Church of Christians so combined together in England in Queen
Maryes days, all whose names were written down in a Book which that blessed
Martyr Cuthbert Sympson (the Deacon of the Church) had by him, which Book was
strangely preserved from falling into the hands of the adversaryes, by means of
a redoubled dream of Mr. Roughs, the Pastor of that Church. And that great
Reformer ^
John Alafco gathered a Church in London, who were conjoined by explicit
Covenant, in K. Edward the 6 th. his days. The Dutch Church now in London are
the Posterity of that people. ^
Furthermore, it is evident, from Justin Martyrs testimony (who lived in the
very next age to the Apostles) that Christians in those days did explicitly
Covenant. For he says of them, (...) etc. They were such as did give
themselves to God, and did profess they believed that the things taught in the
Gospel were true, and that they would for the future lead their lives according
thereunto.

Others have objected, that we find nothing in the New Testament concerning a
Church Covenant. And suppose it were so indeed, Is the old Testament Apocrypha
in these days? Its a solid Notion, that things abundantly insisted on in the
Old Testament, and matters about which there was no occasion for controversy
in the Apostles time, are sparingly mentioned in the New Testament. As therein
much is not said concerning the Sanctification of the Sabbath, Nor express
mention of the Baptism of Infants, it was so plain and unquestionable a thing,
that the Infants of Believers should have the initiating Seal of the Covenant
applied to them, that there was no need to insist expressly on a matter then so
clear and indisputable. And as for the ChurchCovenant, there wants not New
Testament proof for it. For some Scriptures in the old Testament which speak of
it, refer to the days of the Gospel. So Ifa. 56.6, 7. and 44.5, and 62.5, Jer.
50.5. Ezekiel. 20 37. And in the New Testament we read of the Churches being
espoused to Christ, and that Church Members are FellowCitizens, and of their
being in Fellowship together, and being added to the Church, all which
expressions imply such covenanting as is by us propugned and practiced.

And if the thing it self be warrantable, the Renewall of it is in case a duty.
Nor can I think of any momentous objection against it; I know some are
scrupulous (and it is good to be of a tender Conscience) lest men be not duly
prepared for a Renewall of Covenant, and will not keep their Engagements, and
so greater Judgment follow, But it may be Replied, 1. This strikes at all
Explicit Covenanting, yea by this Argument we must have no days of Humiliation,
no coming to Sacraments, because if professors be formal in these things, they
break the third Commandment, and the Lord will not hold them guiltless. 2. Our
Churches are (through grace) as well prepared for this duty as the Children of
Israel were sometimes when they Renewed their Covenant, and a blessing
followed. 3. If only an External Reformation should be attained there by that
may prevent outward Judgments. 4 A number of living Christians will be sincere
in what they do, and to bring down a blessing upon others as well as
themselves. Christ sometimes judges of his Churches by the Gold that He sees
in them If a few Golden sincere members in a Church Renew, and keep their
Covenant with God; the Societyes and Towns, whereto they belong, shall fare the
better for them. In a word a Christian should not be like him that Luther
speaks of, who because he made many promises to God, that he would serve him
in newness of life, and yet kept them not, therefore resolved to live at a
loose end, and never engage himself to God any more. Only a work of this nature
should be done not in our own strength, but humbly depending upon Christ, and
with all possible seriousness, since it is a most dreadful thing to transact
personally with the holy, and infinitely glorious Majesty of heaven and earth.

And now (my Brethren) as for the publication of this Sermon, it was your
concurrent desires that prevailed with me to consent unto it. And I must
confess that I have peculiar reason to be willing to serve you in any thing
wherein I may, for I was once an unworthy Member of your Church, and my first
public Labors in the Ministry (now twenty years ago) were bestowed amongst
you (...) You were my Fathers Flock, and (I suppose) the greatest part of you
now living, the Seals of his Ministry, who served Christ amongst you for the
space of thirty three years and more without ceasing. You have also manifested
your willingness (before his death and since also) that I (however unworthy)
should have been my Fathers Successor. Your undeserved love wherein I shall
whilst I live acknowledge, and bear a grateful Remembrance of. And I bless
God, who has provided another, a faithful Pastor for you, and long may he
continue as a Blessing among you, and over you in the Lord. If this, or any
other weak endeavor of mine, may be a means to promote your spiritual
Edification, I shall have cause to rejoice. Yet I think I should hardly have
given way to this publication, had not some Judicious and worthy Persons,
conceived that it might (if the Blessing of Christ go along with it) tend to
promote the holy work, by you lately and solemnly (and I hope sincerely)
attended in other Congregations also. And who knows how far your Example may
provoke others to a godly emulation? The Lord help us to be in earnest in the
matter of Reformation, and therefore to attend all means which God has
sanctified to the attainment of that end, in this New-Englands day, left
greater Fires be kindled, and more Candlesticks removed out of their places,
and then it be too late to prevent those evils which as yet may possibly be
diverted.

I shall add no more at present, only that I do (not in a Complemental way, but
earnestly) desire the help of your prayers that I may be enabled to fulfill the
Ministry which I have received of the Lord, and finish my course with joy. So
beseeching the Grace of the Lord Jesus to be with you, I rest,

Yours in the Lord always Increase Mather.
BOSTON, 22 d of 3. Month, 1677.
Neh. 9. 38. And because of all this we make a sure Covenant.
THis Book of Nehemiah is Historical, amongst other things we have an account
of what was done by the Jews (in those days the only Church of God upon earth)
after they were delivered from the Heathen Nations, who had sorely wasted and
destroyed them, in order to a Reformation of those evils that had provoked the
Lord against them. There are two things mentioned that way in his and in the
following Chapters. 1. They kept a day of solemn Humiliation by fasting and
Prayer: the time when this day was observed is expressed in the first Verse of
this Chapter, Now in the twenty and fourth day of the month, the Children of
Israel were assembled with Fasting and with Sackclothes; and the manner how the
day was observed, and the time spent is expressed in the third verse, namely in
hearing the word and in Prayer: They read in the Book of the Law of the Lord
their God one fourth part of the way, and another fourth part they confessed.
In their Confessions they do, 1. Acknowledge the Lords great goodness to them
and to their Fathers, in that he called Abraham and established a Covenant with
him and his seed after him in their Generations, and brought them out of Egypt,
wonderfully preserved them in the Wilderness; settled them in the land of
Canaan, and there saved them many a time. The greatest part of this Chapter is
taken up in acknowledgments of this nature. 2. They confess their own
ingratitude and unworthy walkings before the Lord, v 34.35. 3. They confess
that they were under solemn Rebukes of Providence, v. 36, 37. 4. They likewise
confess that God was just in all that evil that was come upon them, v. 33.
Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou have done right,
but we have done wickedly.

2. We have the Relation of another thing done in order to Reformation, viz. a
solemn Renewal of their Covenant, which was a consequent of their Confessions
and Humiliations before the Lord. And of this we have an account in the next,
as also in the last verse of this Chapter, with which some begin the Chapter
following, sic Junius, Piscator et alii.
these words having a connection with the things related therein.

In this verse we have 1. the duty performed, (...) the making of a sure
Covenant. We make] Hebr. (...) we strike a Covenant. The word originally comes
from a root that signifies to cut or kill, because it was the manner Stabant
et (...) firmabant Foedera porta. Vir (...). 8.
of old in confirming Covenants, to kill some creature or other; by which Rite
they intimated that God should strike and kill and cut in pieces him that did
not make conscience to keep the Covenant. A sure Covenant] the Hebrew word
(...) which is here used signifies Fidelity. (...) Foedus Fidelitatis i. e. de
ser^ards fidelitate (...) Vatablus is (...)
It is as much as if it were said, we plight our Troth unto the Lord. Sept.
(...) we engage our Faith upon it, that we will observe what we have promised,
and walk more closely with God for the time to come, then we have done in the
days that are past and gone. 2. We have the Form or manner of proceeding in
this Engagement, it was done by writing. They did bind themselves to the Lord,
not only by their words, but with their hands, that so they might be sure to be
fast bound unto him. And because the Congregation was very great and numerous,
and no doubt many amongst them too that were not able to write, therefore their
Rulers and chief men subscribed in the name of all the rest.

I shall only speak to the duty at present: we know that this people was in
Covenant with God before this day of Fast was kept, and therefore the making of
a Covenant here spoken of, intends only a Solemn renewal thereof.

The Doctrine therefore before us; is, That there are times wherein solemn
Renewal of Covenant is a duty incumbent on the People of God. (...)
Now for the clearing of this Doctrine, there are four things that may be
briefly enquired into. 1. What is employed in making a Covenant with God. 2. How
it does appear that renewal of Covenant is a duty. 3. When the Lords people
ought to renew their Covenant. 4. The Reasons why they should do so.

Q. 1. What is employed in making a Covenant with God? A. 1. It Implies a
chosing the Lord the only true God in Jesus Christ to be our God. Psalm. 48. 14.
For this God is our God for ever and ever. This is C^venanting, even a making
an everlasting Choice of God. Hence it is expressed by that of Cleaving to the
Lord. Josh. 23. 8. but cleave unto the Lord your God. h.e. chose him and him
only and for ever as your God. The Substance, Soul and Life of the Covenant is
in this. As the Sum of the Covenant on the Lords part is expressed by that of
his being the God of his people, Jer. 31. 33. I will be their God and they
shall be my people. An expression which is used (as some observe) at least
fifteen times in the Scripture, to express the Covenant: so the substance of
the Covenant on our part is comprehended in that of taking the Lord to be our
God. And this is done inwardly when the heart is given up to God, when their is
an entire resignation of a man's soul and self unto God in Jesus Christ. 2. Cor.
8. 5. They gave their own selves to the Lord. Or outwardly and visibly, h.e.
when men do profess before all the world that they are and would be the Lords
Servants. Hence, when the Lords people did solemnly renew their Covenant in
Joshuahs time, he said to them, you are witnesses that you have chosen the Lord
to serve him. Josh. 24. 22. that was their open profession and declaration that
they were the Lords servants. It is therefore expressed by that of avouching
the Lord. Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have avouched the Lord to be thy God this day. So
thou have said, Hebr. (...) professuses quod sit tibi in Deum Lud. de Di. (...)
else Deun. Castellio
so thou have solemnly professed. Also, Covenanting with God in the days of
the New Testament is noted by expressions importing the same thing, Isai. 44.
5. (a Scripture that does relate to Gospel times) one shall say I am the Lords,
and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob, and another shall
subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel.
How subscribe with his hand? what is the meaning of that? It is English An^^^
as much as if it were said, he shall be the Lords Volunteer, as a Soldier
that comes, and with his own hand lifts himself under such a Commander, openly
declaring that he will live and dye in the service of such a General. Hence
also Christians by reason of their Covenant are said to have the Name of God
written in their foreheads. Rev. 14. 1. It was an ancient Custom, that
Vegetius ^, 2. 5.
soldiers had their Generals Name or brand marked on their hands, and
^odiginus l. ^. 3^.
servants had their Masters Name marked on their foreheads, whereby it was
manifest before the world, whose servants they were, in allusion to that, the
Lords Covenant people are in the Revelation, said to have the Name of God, and
the Name of Christ on their foreheads, h.e. they are such as do openly in the
sight of heaven and earth profess that they are his Servants and Subjects.
Therefore,

2. This making a Covenant, does imply a professed subjection to the revealed
will of God. As amongst men, there being a Covenant between Master and Servant,
the Servant is bound to obey the Master, and to fulfill his will, so a
Covenant People have promised submission to the will of God. They are bound to
own and subject unto the holy ways of God. Inasmuch as the Children of Israel
had avouched the Lord to be their God, therefore they were under obligation, to
walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his
Judgments, and to hearken to his voice. Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Yea indeed, such a
people, are bound absolutely to subject to the will of God, so as to obey him
not only in some things but in every thing that he shall see good to enjoin
upon them. This we see in the Context, when this people renewed their Covenant,
they promised saying, we will observe and do all the Commandments of the Lord
our Lord. Neh 10. 29. And we read of the Corinthians that after they became a
Covenant People, they did professedly subject themselves to the Gopsel. 2. Cor
9. 13. your professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ They subjected
themselves to the Doctrine of the Gospel, to the order of the Gospel and to all
the holy rules of the Gospel v. Belgic Aunot,
One Duty much commended and required in the Gospel is Charity and Benificence
toward needy Saints, and the Corinthians by reason of their Covenant were
professedly engaged to that Duty, and by their practice they owned before all
the world their Profession and engagement in that respect.

3. This Covenanting which the text speaks of, does imply arenouncing of
those things which are inconsistent with the service of God. e.g. The love of
the world is inconsistent with the service of God. Mat. 6. 24. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. They then that have covenanted to be the Lords Servants, are
under engagement, (that whatever they have been in former times) they will be
Lovers of the world no longer. Again, the Service of Sin is inconsistent with
the Service of God; and thence they that make a Covenant with the Lord, do
engage that they will not serve sin any longer. Wherefore Joshuah said unto the
people when they were about to renew their Covenant, you cannot serve the Lord,
for he is an holy God. meaning that they could not serve him and keep their
sins and Idols too. Josh.24.19. And Christians in the primitive times, when
they did enter into Covenant with God they ^
did expressly declare their renunciation of Sin, Satan and the World. When the
Question was solemnly put to them, (...)? do thou reuounce the enemies of
Christ, and of thy Souls Salvation? They would answer again, spondeo et
abre^nutio, I utterly renounce them all, and promise to serve not them but
Christ. ^
The like custom to this has been solemnly observed in some of the reformed
Churches. And we see in this Context, that when these Israelites renewed their
Covenant, they promised to forsake such and such sins, as afterward we shall
hear more fully. In a word, such Doctrines as are inconsistent with Truth in
Religion, and such practices as cannot stand with Power of Godliness a people
that renew their Covenant are bound to renounce them. We come then to the
Second Enquiry, viz.

Q. 2. How it does appear that it is not enough for men to make a Covenant with
the Lord, but that solemn renewal of Covenant is sometimes a Duty?

A. We shall mention three Arguments, all of them evincing the Truth of the
Doctrine before us. 1. It is evident that renewal of Covenant is a Duty, in
that men ought frequently to worship God. Whenever God is worshipped the
Covenant is renewed implicitly. No man does at any time worship Jehevah, but he
does therein and thereby avouch the Lord to be his God, inasmuch as that which
we worship we own to be God, and our God also. And hence is that expression,
Psalm. 50. 5. My Saints that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice, because
as often as the Lords people did offer Sacrifice to the Lord, they did by that
act of Religious Worship, renew and confirm their Covenant with him. (...) p
247.
Sacrificing was of old a foederal Rite. So, when the Lords people sanctify a
Sabbath to the honor of his Name, they do by that virtually renew their
Covenant. Ezck.20.20. Hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a Sign between me
and you, that you may know that I am the Lord your God. Due observation of the
Sabbath, is one Sign of a Covenant people* When men do religiously observe the
Christian Sabbath, they acknowledge themselves to be under the New Covenant,
even the Covenant of Grace, as under its new and last and best way of
Administration, and that Jesus Christ is their Lord and Savior. Yea whenever
Christians pray unto God in Christ, especially when they Fast and Pray, the
Covenant is renewed: for then they profess that God in Jesus Christ is the
object of their Faith, and implicitly (at least) promise to endeavor a
Reformation of the sins which they confess and beg the pardon of. Inasmuch then
as duties of divine worship ought frequently to be attended, it is not enough
for men once to enter into Covenant, but there must be a renewal of that
Covenant.

2. The Truth is further evident, in that the Lord has appointed Seals of his
Covenant. Under the old Testament the Covenant was sealed by circumcision and
the Passover: and we know that Baptism and the Lords Supper are the Seals of
the New Testament; and therefore they are commonly called Sacraments. Which
word does import the highest engagement that may be; yea an Oath of Fidelity.
It is ^
a military word: For Soldiers in former times were wont to take an Oath of
Fidelity to their General, and this they called the Sacrament. They would say
one to another, have you taken the Sacrament? meaning, have you yet taken the
Oath of Allegiance to your General, that you will be faithful unto him to the
Death? So they that are subjects of either of the Sacraments appointed under
the New Testament, are under an Oath of Fidelity unto Christ. By Baptism
Christians make a sure Covenant with the Lord. Hence they are said to be
baptized ((...) Beza.
in Nomen) Into the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost Math.
28.19. Because the Baptized person is bound to approve himself as becomes a
Servant of that God who is Father, Son and Spirit, and Baptism is said to be
into the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act.19.5. inasmuch, as the party baptized is
under solemn engagement to submit to the Name and Authority of the Lord Jesus
in all things. When a Father (or Mother) presents his child to Baptism, the
Covenant is not only then sealed to the Child, but confirmed with the Parent,
Yea he by bringing his child to Baptism, does renew his taking hold of that
Covenant, wherein the Lord has said, I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed.
Also, In the Lords Supper the Covenant is renewed both on the Lords part and on
ours. Christ therefore when he did institute that Ordinance of the Supper,
said, this Cup is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for you, Luke
22.20. h.e. the wine in the cup does signify the Blood of Christ, whereby the
Lord does confirm the new Covenant with the Believer, and the Believer does by
drinking of that cup, anew take hold of his interest in the Covenant of Grace,
and promise to walk before the Lord according to the terms of the Covenant. Now
this Ordinance of the Supper ought frequently to be attended. 1.Cor.11.26. As
often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup. So that it is an Ordinance which
Christians ought often to worship the Lord in. Some of the Ancients, Justin
Martyr, aed Turtullian.
do expressly testify that the Lords Supper was in those primitive times
observed every Lords day, and the Scripture (in the Acts of the Apostles) does
intimate no less. However it ought to be often administered, albeit there is no
stated Rule determining just how Often, and therefore the Covenant is often to
be renewed.

3. The Lords people ought to renew their Faith and Repentance, and that
implies a renewal of Covenant. When a Sinner is truly converted, then is he
savingly brought into Covenant with God in Christ. They that pretend to
Conversion, Faith, and Repentance* are visibly in Covenant with the Lord, and
they that are really converted, are everlastingly in Covenant even betrothed to
the Lord for ever. Now there are renewed Conversions which the Lords own
children may stand in need of, especially in case of any great iniquity
committed against the Lord, or special Corruption breaking forth. Hence David
after his lamentable Fall, in that matter about Uriah the Hittite prayed as in
Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart O God and RENEW a right spirit within
me. He saw that he stood in need of going over the work of Conversion again,
and so of Renewing his closure and covenant with God in Jesus Christ. And it
was said to Peter, when thou art converted, h.e. when thou shall have renewed
thy turning to the Lord. Thou (says Christ) wilt break thy Covenant and
Promise. Thou have promised to stand by me thy Master whatever come of it; but
Temptation will be too hard for thee, and then thou must renew thy Faith and
Repentance.Luk.22.32. Yea it was said to all the Disciples of Christ, except
you be converted, Mat.18.3. intimating that there was a necessity of their
being converted anew from a particular Corruption, which was at that time too
prevalent in them. Moreover the Lord Jesus does call upon the Churches in Asia
to repent, as we see in the 2 d. and 3 d. Chapters of the Revelation. They had
repented before Christ sent those Epistles from heaven to awaken them, yet the
Lord would have them to renew their Repentance; and that implies that renewal
of Covenant, which I am now speaking of. But the truth in answer to this
enquiry will appear morefully in speaking to the third particular proposed, viz,

3. When the Lords People ought to renew their Covenant?

Ans. I shall only speak concerning those more solemn and extraordinary
renewals of Covenant, which the Text has especial reference unto. For I
delight to keep as close as may be to the subject I have in hand. This then of
a more solemn Renewal of Covenant is a Duty in two cases especially, both which
are notified in the Context.

1. In case of eminent danger and distress, So here this Church and
Congregation of the Israelites having said we are in great distress, it is
added, and becauseof all this, we make a sure Covenant. The truth is that the
very dictates of natural Conscience, direct men to renew their Vows and
Covenants with God at such times. And instances are not rare in the Scripture
confirming this. When Jacob was to remove from his Fathers house, that was an
hazardous undertaking, wherefore, he vowed a Vow saying, if God will be with
me, and keep me in this way that I go, so that I come again unto my Fathers
house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. thus did he renew his Covenant.
Gen.28.20,21. And Jepthah, when he was greatly distressed by reason of the
Heathen who made an unjust War upon him, that put him upon solemn vowing to
the Lord, and so renewing his Covenant in that way, Judge.11 30. Likewise the
children of Israel, while yet in the Wilderness, when some of the Heathen that
lived in the southern parts, fought against them and took some of them
Prisoners, they vowed a Vow to the Lord, Numb. 21.1,2. Yet more, when the first
Generation of those that came out of Egypt were dead, and another Generation
risen up, who were called of God to engage in War against the Heathen Nations
round about, Moses put them upon renewing their Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.1. These are
the words of the Covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the
children of Israel in the Land of Moab, beside the Covenant which he made with
them in Horeb, Which shows that that only was a renewal was only a renewal of
the Covenant. It was necessary that the new Generation should come under the
bond of a renewed Covenant.

2. In case of Apostasy from God, Renewal of Covenant is a Duty. Thus also in
the Context: they confess that such and such departures from the Lord were to
be charged upon them, and because of this they made a sure Covenant; especially
if there be any notable defection and degeneracy among a professing people,
their great duty is to make haste to recover themselves by a solemn and sincere
renewal of their Covenant with God in Jesus Christ. If there be corruption in
Worship, then this duty ought to be attended. So in Asas time, 2 Chronicles.15.12.
And in Jehojadias time. Chap. 23. v. 16. And in the days of Hezekiah and
Josiah. Chron. 29.8. and 34.3 1. Or if there be corruption in manners, though
there should be a purity as to external Worship, this renewing of Covenant with
God is then also a duty. It is a great mistake to think that the Lords people
of old never renewed their Covenant except they were fallen to Idolatry: For
the Jews were not Idolaters after the Captivity, therefore the Pharisees could
say, we are not born of Fornication, meaning, they were not Idolaters; and so
not guilty of spiritual adultery, Joh.8.41. Yet after the Captivity they
renewed their Covenant with God from time to time. So Neh.10. And again in the
5 th. Chap. v 12, 13. Also in Chap. 13. v.25 And in Ezra 10.(...) There were
scandalous evils amongst them in respect of transgressions against the 2 d.
Table, and therefore they did, (as was in such case their duty) solemnly renew
their Covenant. Now these things are written for our instruction, upon whom the
ends of the World are come, 1 Cor. ^0. 11. As the judgments which befell the
Jews of old were recorded for our Admonition, so the course which they did
(according to God) observe for the removal on diverting Judgment, is recorded
for our imitation; and in special is it (...) concerning this renewing of
Covenant, which the Text speaks of.

Q. But why should this be?

Ans. I shall mention but one Reason of the Doctrine, and that is; because of
the Glory which does come to God hereby. The Lord Jehovah looks upon himself
as honored, when his Creatures do own him and submit unto him as God, and
therefore when this submission is in the most solemn manner renewed, it tends
exceedingly to the glory of the Name of God. Moreover this renewal of Covenant
with God through Jesus Christ is the great Scripture expedient, in order to the
accomplishing of Reformation among a professing people. Search the Scriptures,
and you will still find, that when any notable reformation was effected in the
Church, it was in this way attained. And therefore Piscator ^
upon this Text has a good observation. Here (says he) is an Example touching
renewal of Covenant, which Churches ought to to insitate when they desire to
carry on the work of Reformation. Again, this is the way to prevent much Sin
and dishonor to the Name of God. and that seems ^
to be the special Reason why the Covenant was renewed not long before Joshuahs
Death. Whatever private or particular transgressions there might be, we know
not; but it is evident that there was no public or general defection till
after Joshuahs days; for it is testified, that the people served the Lord all
the days of Joshuah, and of the Elders that outlived Joshuah. Judge.2.7.
Therefore in his dying Exhortation he said unto them cleave unto the Lord your
God, as you have done unto this day. Josh. ^3. 8. Why then did he put them upon
renewing their Covenant? Even that so they might be engaged against sin and
Apostasy from God for the future. Hence it is said, Chapter 24.25. Joshuah made a
Covenant with the People that day, and set them a Statute and an Ordinance in
Shechem, that is to say, he did ratisie it as a standing perpetual Ordinance to
them and to their posterity, so that Joshuahs design was by a Covenant for the
future, to restrain them from Idolatry and Apostasy. As for those that are
sincere, and truly Conscientious, such a renewal of Covenant as I am speaking
of, will engage them to a more close walking with God. And others that it may
be are not gone beyond a legal work, such a Covenant will be an awe upon
Conscience, so as to prevent the Commission of many a Sin. They that have any
Conscience in them, will be afraid to sin when under such solemn engagements to
the contrary. So then it does in more respects then one, tend to the honor of
God, and therefore his People ought to renew their Covenant.

USE. 1. Here is matter of sad Conviction and Reproof. And there are especially
three sorts that do fall under just Reproof from this Doctrine. 1. They that do
not enter into Covenant with God; who are so far from renewing, that they do
not so much as strike a Covenant with the Lord. Some there are that do not
visibly take hold on the Covenant; however not in that explicit manner which is
to be desired: of this sort are they that can content themselves to live
without Church fellowship, which is a ^
great sin and provocation to the Lord. For breaches of the second Commandment
do provoke the Lord to Jealousy. Now to neglect divine Institutions, such as
Baptism and the Lords Supper, and Church fellowship in order thereunto, is to
be guilty of breaking that Commandment, and God does many times punish the
neglect of his own Institutions, with as great severity as he does plague for
the practice of humane inventions in the things of God It may well be thought
that this is one special transgression, which has provoked the blessed God to
let loose the Heathen against those that do profess his Name in this Land. It
is a (...) sad thing that there should be found in the midst of thee (...)
New England, whole Plantations of men that will call themselves Christians, and
yet have lived all their days like heathen, without any Sacraments or
instituted Worship of God. Woeful to be spoken! many have been born in
New England that never saw a child baptized in their lives, and that know not
what the Lords Supper means. Yea amongst our selves many that content
themselves to live in a careless neglect of that Ordinance, not being
conscientious in endeavors to prepare themselves for, and in an orderly way to
come to the enjoyment of that blessed Ordinance. Our Fathers came into this
Wilderness on purpose that so they might build an house for God, and walk with
him in all his holy Institutions; and therefore there are none in the World, in
whom neglects of that kind are so evil and provoking to the most High, as in
the Children of such Fathers. Others there are that do not inwardly and
sincerely enter into Covenant with God. And that is true concerning all
unconverted Sinners, all that are in a natural irregenerate estate. The natural
man is a Servant to sin and Satan, and not to God. He (...) say (as the Church
speaks Lament. 3. 26.) the Lord is my portion says my (...). His heart chooses
something else, and not the Lord for his Portion. Though such is the exceeding
riches of the grace of God as that he offers himself as God to every soul
where the Gospel is preached, the grace of God which brings Salvation has
appeared to all men; the Lord in the Gospel says to every sinner, if thou will
forsake all other lords and lovers, and give up thy heart to me, and become my
servant for ever, I will be thy God, yet the sinner prefers something else
above God. Either his pleasure is his God, or the world is his God. As the holy
Apostle did bewail it with tears, that there was a Generation of men in the
World that called themselves Christians, and yet their God is their Belly, who
mind earthly things, whose end will be destruction. Phil.3.19. And Alas! What
good will the external Covenant do to a man, as to the everlasting Salvation
of his Soul, if he be not sincere therein. Was not D^ves a son of Abraham, and
yet damned in Hell fire? Nay this, except there be a work of Conversion and
Regeneration, will aggravate eternal Condemnation at the last day. Therefore
the Lord Jesus has said, the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into
utter darkness, Math.8.12. They that are of the visible Church and so under the
bond of the Covenant, and yet in a state of Hypocrisy, so living, so dying,
darkness and utter darkness will be their portion for ever.

2. This reproves those also that are backward to renew their Covenant with
the Lord. There has been too great a backwardness unto that in these Churches
generally. It is a work that should have been done before now, and then it may
be, much of that doleful Judgment and misery which has filled the Land, would
have been prevented: possibly we had not seen so many Candlesticks stand
shaking, yea and some removed out of their places, if this work had been duly
attended a few years ago. And it is for a Lamentation, that such backwardness
is found amongst the Children of the Covenant to a duty of (...) nature. Some
of them that are ready to refuse and disown the Covenant, and so the God of
their Fathers. They will not subject themselves to the Government of Christ
amongst his people. A Sin that is wont to be attended with heavy Desolation.
Remember those words of Christ, Math.2^.37,38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, I would
have gathered thy Children, as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings,
and ye would not, behold your house is left unto you desolate. When the
Children of Jerusalem will not come under the wing of the Government of the
Lord Jesus, it is not wont to be long before their house is left unto them
desolate. Truly, such are like unto profane Esau, that cared not what became of
his Birthright. And this is set as an eternal Brand upon that profane Covenant
dispiser, that he said, and what profit shall this Birthright dot unto me? and
thus Esau despised his Birthright. Others there are, that although they do not
positively refuse to submit themselves to the Lord Jesus, yet are loath
publicly to own and avouch him to be their God. Sinful bashfulness makes
them backward to attend that which they know is their Duty. But such would do
well to remember and thick upon that awful Scripture, Mark 8. 38. Whose ver
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the
Glory of his Father with the holy Angels. Moreover, how many are there, that
were born under the covenant, and as they grow up to years of discretion, do
not endeavor to prepare themselves to take hold on the Lords Covenant, but are
^
such that if they should be put upon renewing their Covenant, they would but
profane the holy Covenant, Some of them are (...) ignorant, others of them are
of a scandalous conversation Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath breakers, disobedient
to Parents, Lascivious, Thieves, Liars. Should such whilst they so continue, be
put upon m^^king God, by saying they will be his Covenant Servants? No, but
unto such wicked ones God says, what have thou to do to declare my (...), or
that thou should take my Covenant (...) thy mouth? Psalm. 50. 16.

3. They also fall under sad Reproof from this Doctrine who are guilty of
Covenant breaking. And Oh! how many, that have cause to (...) Guilty, Guilty
before the Lord in this respect? without doubt, this is the cause of that
bloody Devastation that of late has been in the midst of this Land. The people
of New England are (if any under heaven are so) a Vovenant People, But how have
they transgressed the everlasting Covenant? And therefore has the Lord been
whetting his glittering Sword, and his hand has taken hold on Judgment, he
has made his arrows drunk with blood, and his Sword has devoured Flesh. If
the Covenant had been kept as we were bound to, all this had never been.
Wherefore the Lord has said, I will bring a Sword upon you, that shall avenge
the Quarrel of the Covenant. Lev.26.25. Are not thousands of the Children of
the Church guilty of breaking the Covenant, in that they remember not their
Baptismal Vow? They labor not to make themselves a new heart; they strive not
with God in prayer, that he would bestow the regenerating Grace of the Covenant
upon their Souls. They make no conscience to observe all things which are
commanded by the Lord Jesus, whereunto all baptized ones are solemnly engaged.
And as for those that have been ever baptized into the Name of Christ, and yet
shall walk loosly and profanely, God will judge them as Covenant breakers; and
those that are under the dreadful and amazing guilt of Sacramental Perjury;
Yea. and ^ ^
their Baptism shall be brought in as a Witness against them at the last Day.
Moreover, too many of those that are in full Communion in our Churches, are
justly chargeable with the guilt of Covenant breaking before the Lord.
Certainly, we have many Church Members, that have cause to judge themselves,
and lament before the Lord this day, in respect of their manifold breaches of
Covenant. O when Professors of Religion shall be of a vain Conversation, that
one can see little difference in their spirits, in their Speeches, in their
g^^b between them, and the Ruffians of the world* this is fearful Covenant
breaking. Yet is it not even thus? May we not say as sometime the Lord be his
Prophet spoke, Mic.2.7. O you that are named by the house of Jacob, is the
Spirit of the Lord straightned? are these his doings? Is income to that (says
the Lord) that my Spirit must not be at liberty to direct the Prophets to say
any thing but what you would have? Are such Expressions and such Actions of
yours, fit doings for those that are named the house of Jacob? There is
scand^lous Covetousness, there is oppression, there is unworthy reproaching of
the Lords faithful Messengers found amongst you; and are these such doings as
do become the House of Jacob? So may we say to many amongst us. Is such a
spirit suitable to a Churchmember? Are such words and such practices becomeing
a Professor of the Gospel? When men come into the Church they promise to walk
with God, yet is there not many an one that has walked no more closely with
God since he came into the Church then he did before? they that are
Fellow Members in the same Church, are bound by their Covenant to watch over
one another Souls, Was See my Fathers Discourse of the Church Covenant. p. ^
not the neglect of due watchfulness over Achan the sin which the Church of
Israel was guilty of? and they paid dear for that breach of Covenant. And how
is Christian Fraternal mutual Watchfulness neglected among us? Many carry it,
as if they thonght Cain were in the Right, when he said, am I my Brothers
Keeper? The Church Covenant (which is also the Lords Covenant) binds men to
walk not only with God but one with another, and therefore to love one another.
Yet what scandalous Divisions have there been in many Churches? And has not
the Lord to punish this Violation of his Covenant, drawn the Sword against us?
His Sheep have been so unnatural as to devour one another, and to separate and
straggle one from another, therefore has the Lord let loose wolves upon us
all, that have made no difference.

USE 2. Let it be a word of Exhortation and encouragement to this work and Duty
of renewing Covenant with the Lord. I would apply it in special to you of this
Congregation, who have had an holy purpose in your hearts this way, and
therefore have set this day apart, that so you might humble your selves before
the Lord on the account of former breaches of Covenant, and seek unto him by
Fasting and Prayer, for the presence and assistance of his Spirit to be with
you, in what concerns that solemn renewal of Covenant which is now before you.
For your further quickening and encouragement, Consider,

1. What a most blessed and desirable thing it is to be in Covenant with God.
Psalm.144, 15. Happy is that people whose God is the Lord. If you do sincerely
covenant with God, you shall never want any thing. They that have God to be
theirs, have all; hence Jacob said to his Brother Esau, I have all (...)
Genesis 33. 11. You are then sure of spiritual Blessings, pardon of Sin, Grace to
persevere, eternal Life in heaven at last, which is therefore caled the (...)
as being a special Branch of the Covenant. Heb. 30 36 Yea and temporal
Blessings also, so far as shall be good for you to enjoy them. For Godliness
has the Promise of the Life that now is as well as of that which is to come 1 Timothy.4. 8. Besides, it is a great honor and Dignity to b^ i^ Covenant with God.
It was said of Samuel, that he was an honorable man, because a Man of God 1 Samuel.9.5. To be the Servant of a great Prince, is counted an honor, what is it
then to be the Covenant Servant of the great God? To be able to say as they
did, Ezra 5 11. We are the Servants of the God of Heaven, For this Reason the
Children of Israel are said to be a great People, yea the greatest upon the
Face of the Earth. Deuteronomy.4.6.7. For poor creatures to be espoused to the Lord,
that God himself should say to them behold I am married to you, what a glorious
dignity is this? And as for you the Saints and Church of Christ in this place,
God has put honor upon you on other accounts, in that you have been a Most of
the members of the second Church in Boston, when first Constituted were such as
did once belong to the (...)
Mother in Israel, other Congregations have issued from you, so now that you
should be among the first that do engage in this Renewal of your espousals to
the Lord Jesus, God in his providence has put an honor upon you in that
respect, it is an honor to be the first in a good work.

Consider, 2. What cause there is to set about this work in good earnest. Have
we not been under sad distresses? and do not the solemn Rebukes of God upon us
call for solemn Renewal of Covenant? Oslate there have been Burnings which the
Lord has kindled. At home there has been Death, abroad the sword has
bereaved. And shall we not because of all this make a sure Covenant? If
otherwise, there is not so much of (...) spirit found amongst us, as ought to
be. For he could say, Our Fathers have fallen by the Sword, our Sons, our
Daughters, and our Wives are in Captivity, now it is in my heart to make a
Covenant with the Lord God of Israel. 2 Chronicles 29.9 10. Besides all this, God
holds the Sword in his hand still. He has not laid down his controversy.
Sometimes we hear Rumors as if wounded Chaldeans were like to rise up, and
distress this Land more then ever. We have cause to fear another Storm of
wrath, seven times greater then the last, is yet impending, and not far of, if
we do not make haste to take some effectual course to prevent it. There are
things which I forbear to mention that look with an ominous aspect upon poor
New England. All should awaken us to this our duty. Furthermore, the iniquity
which is found amongst us, calls aloud hereunto. Our (...) which are many
testify against us. There is a lamentable decay in New England as to the power
of Godliness. This Generation is far short of the former. It was showed but
now, how the Covenant has been transgressed Where is the Life of Discipline in
our Churches? And as to the Children (...) the discipline of Christ almost
totally neglected. And give me leave to say to you, that an Omission of that
nature in you, has more of evil in it, then in some others, because you have
been abundantly instructed in Principles, and Truths of that kind, by your
former blessed Teacher. I shall never forget what he said to me when upon his
deathbed, about (...) namely, that Care should be taken that the rising
Generation be brought under the Government of Christ in his Church, and when
grown up and duly qualified that baptism should not be (...) from their
Children. If then the Covenant has not been duly observed, it ought to be
renewed.

Consider. 3. The good and benifit which will follow if this matter be duly
attended. That is the way to obtain answers of prayer: When (...) the Lord, the
Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel. Numb 21. 2. 3. Where do we read in
Scripture, that the Servants of God have vowed as well as prayed, but eminent
mercy has followed? This is one way to divert impending wrath, therefore (...)
said, it is in (...) heart to make a Covenant with the Lord, that his fierce
wrath may turn away from us. So in Asa's Time, after the Lords people had
renewed their Covenant, it is said, the Lord gave them rest round about. Who is
there but is willing that there should be rest round about, that enemies should
be wholly subdued, and that the Land should rest from war? We see what in
former generations has procured days of tranquillity. Would we not have the
dark clouds that threaten our All to be diverted? Let us then engage to reform,
and return to the Lord. ^
I remember it is storied concerning a godly Archbishop of Magdeburg, that
(...) the Duke of Saxony intended to make war upon him, He resolved that he
would endeavor a Reformation of the people and trust in God for his defense,
The Duke secretly sent a spy to observe what strength and warlike preparations
he could take notice of in his enemies country, the Spy returns, and informs
the Duke that he might easily overcome his enemy, for he made no preparations
against him, only said, that he would endeavor to Reform what was amiss, and
would pray, and trust in God for salvation. Nay then (said the Duke) the Devil
shall make (...) against him, if he will, for all me; I will never go fight
against such a man as that is. Truly for us to Reform; yea, for us to covenant
and engage to the Lord, that we will Reform the evils that have provoked the
eyes of his glory, is the best way in the world to cause designs (...) against
us to prove abortive. Yea, this is the way to obtain Blessings from the Lord as
formerly. To have Blastings, Droughts, and the like Judgments, which have a
long time afflicted us, to be in mercy removed. See to this purpose Zach.8.8.
they shall be my People, and I will be their God. that is, in other words, they
shall renew their Covenant. And what follows? It is said v. 10. that there
had been such times as that there was no hire for man nor for beast, neither
any peace to him that went out, or came in. So has it been with us. Well, but
see further, v. 11, 12. after they had returned to the Lord, and engaged
themselves to him anew, to walk as became his people, now (says the Lord) the
seed shall be prosperous, the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall
give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew. If then we do return
to the Lord in this way, He will bestow temporal Blessings upon us (so far as
shall be good for us) or if not, greater mercyes in stead thereof. And I would
not wholly forbear to mention here, that the Lord has lately and signally
owned this work of renewing Covenant amongst our Brethren in the Churches of
the neighbor Colony. ^
From that very day they met with nothing but wonderful Successes in their
engagements against the enemy.

By way of Direction,

1. In renewing Covenant with God, special Sins should be confessed, and
Reformation thereof solemnly engaged. The sins of the Times, or the Place where
we live, such as the Lord may have any special controversy for; these should be
engaged against. This we see in the Context; this people was guilty of much
Sensuality, and therefore they promised to the Lord to become a reformed people
in that respect. Neh.10.30. The Sabbath had not been observed with that
strictness and Conscience that should have been, wheresore they engage
Reformation as to that evil also. Yea and that they would endeavor to keep
themselves pure from the sins of other men. v.31. They had been guilty of sins
of omission, and thence Covenant to endeavor Reformation. There was a spirit
of Worldliness prevailing amongst them, discovering it self in
straight-handedness, as to matters that did concern the maintenance of the
public worship of God amongst them, on which accounts they faithfully promised
as before the Lord, to be more liberal for the future.

2. In Covenanting give up (...) well as your selves to God in Jesus Christ. As
for the (...) that are come to years of understanding, and fit for such a work,
they ought with their own mouths to engage subjection to the Lord; for so it
was when this people renewed their Covenant, their sons and their daughters,
every one having Knowledge, separated themselves unto the Law of God. Chap. 10.
v.28. And as for such as are in Minority, their Parents ought to act for them.
Beware how you exclude your poor Children out of the Covenant. For that would
lay a fatal corner stone of Anabaptisme, a Weed which God never planted, nor
ever watered it to this day. Yea it would lay a deep foundation of woeful
apo(...)y from God, witness that Scripture, Josh.22.24,25. If (...) to come
your Children should speak unto our Children, saying, what have you to do with
the Lord God of Israel, ye have no part in the Lord, so shall your children
make our children cease from fearing the Lord. To deny them all interest in the
Covenant, is the way to make them cease from fearing the Lord. Remember, that
when the second Generation, of them that came out of Egypt, renewed their
Covenant with the Lord, it is expressly said, not only that they themselves, but
that their little ones also did enter into Covenant. Deuteronomy.29.11.12. And one of
the great Lights of New England ^
has judiciously observed, that when it is said of those Converts in the Acts
that they were added to the Church, and added to the Lord, it does imply that
they confessed their sins, and became Disciples and followers of the Apostles
Doctrine, and so engaged themselves, and Covenanted also for their Children, to
follow the truth of the Gospel. We know (my Brethren) what pharaoh did yield
unto, go now ye that are men and serve the Lord, but as for your little ones,
not so, they shall not be engaged to serve God with you. Let not any of us be
like unto him, It is recorded in the New Testament, concerning the Christians
at Tire, that not only the men, but also their wives, yea and their Children
(children are expressly mentioned) manifested their affection to the Ministry,
and worshipped the Lord together. Act. 21. 5. And was the Lord Jesus ever more
moved with an holy indignation at his own Disciples, then at that time, when
out of a perverse zeal, and sinful scrupulosity, they would have witheld
little children from him? Men are not aware how much they displease Christ by
such a spirit, and by practices according thereunto.

3. Be sure that (...) Covenant with the Lord, you be sincere and (...) in
(...) you do. For the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts, therefore serve him, and engage yourselves to him
with a perfect heart and a willing mind. It is not enough for us to promise
with our Lips, or with our hands to write a Covenant, but our hearts, yea our
whole heart must be His, 2 Chronicles.15.12. They entered into a Covenant to seek the
Lord God of their Fathers, with all their heart, and with all their Soul, So v.
15. They had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole
desire, and he was found of them. Thus Josiah when he promoted this work of
renewing the Covenant, he did it with all his heart, 2 Chronicles. 34. ^1. Though
the people many of them, were not sincere in what they did, which is the cause
of that complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah who lived in those days, Jer.3.10.
(...) has not turned to me with her whole heart, but (...) says the Lord.
Alas, the Body of the people notwithstanding their outward covenanting and
reforming had Idols set up in their hearts still. O let it not be so with us.
After renewal of Covenant, let not your hearts go after their covetousness.

Therefore, 4. Keep Covenant with the Lord, let it be a sure Covenant.
Jer.50.5. come let us (...) our selves to the Lord in a (...) Covenant which
shall not be forgotten. It were better not to Covenant then not to make
Conscience of keeping Covenant when we have done. Therefore Solomon says.
Better it is thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not pay.
Eccles.5 5. Covenanting without Conscience to perform, will bring a heavy (...)
at last. Therefore in the context it is said of this people, that they entered
into a Curse, because if there were not care and conscience to observe the
Covenant, they made themselves liable to the curse and wrath of an holy God. It
is a dreadful thing to sin after solemn renewal of Covenant. Thence it is a
fearful thing for men to sin after they have been at a Sacrament, or after a
day of Humiliation, Because this is to break Covenant with God. Much more is it
a desperate provocation to the eyes of his Glory, for men to sin as formerly,
after the most solemn renewals of Covenant. Luther speaks ^
of a gracious woman, that when tempted by Satan, would answer him, Satan I may
not do it, for I am baptized. So if after you have anew engaged your selves to
the Lord, Satan should tempt you to this or that which is displeasing (...)
^ight of God, Answer, I may not give way to such a temptation, for I have
renewed my Covenant. If tempted to pride and vanity in that respect, say, I may
not give way to such a thing, for I have renewed my Covenant. If tempted to
sensuality and worldliness, say, I may not hearken to those allurements, for I
have renewed my Covenant.

And what shall we do that we may keep Covenant?

Answ. 5. Whatever you do, do all in the Name of Christ. Look unto Jesus for
help and Grace. Go to him for pardon of all former breaches of Covenant, that
his blood (which is the blood of the everlasting Covenant) may be sprinkled
upon your souls. Without him you cannot renew your Covenant aright, nor keep it
when you have done, Without me (said Christ to his Disciples) you can do
nothing. Joh.15.5. But through the grace and strength of Christ, you may do
all things. Be strong then in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus. Go on in his
Name and fear, humbly depending on him for the supplies of his Spirit. And I
beseech God, that the Grace of the Lord Jesus may be with you.

Tibi Domine,

