SEVERAL Laws and Orders Made at the first Sessions of the GENERAL COURT Held
at Boston, May 28. 1679, and published by their Order. Edward Rawson Secretary.
WHereas there is an abusive and evil practice taken up in several places of
this Colony, upon Training days, more public or private, and other public
Conventions of People upon civil occasions, diverse persons taking liberty to
bring into the field, and other places near such concourse of people,
considerable quantityes of wine, strong liquor, Cider, and other inebriating
Drinks, having no license so to do, whereby many People both English and
Indians that come to such Meetings, as well as Soldiers, commit many disorders
of Drunkenness, Fighting, neglect of duty, etc. for prevention whereof,

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that henceforth no
Person whatsoever shall presume to bring into the field, and sell by retail
upon such occasions* any Wine strong Liquor, Cider or any other inebriating
Drink (excepting Beer of a penny a quart) unless he or they so doing have
license from the hands of two Magistrates or the chief Military Officer or
Officers in the Field, upon penalty of forfeiting all such strong Drink, ^
and paying a Fine of five pounds, one half to the informer, the other half to
the County Treasury. And it is further Ordered, that the Constables of the Town
where such meeting is, are Ordered and required with a meet company to guard
him, shall by Warrant from the chief Officer, seize upon all strong Liquors,
Wine, Cider, or other strong Drink, and dispose of the same as this Law direct.

IT is Ordered by this Court (for the easement of the Country) that the
ordinary Trainings of Foot and Horse be reduced to four days in the year, any
Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding: unless the Commission
Officers of each Company, Four days Training only unless, etc.
in every Town respectively, shall see cause to draw forth and exercise their
Companies (after the four Training days enjoined be expired) one or two days
more, which they are allowed and empowered to do.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that clay to make
Bricks shall be dug before the first of November, Order regulating Size of
Bricks on penalty.
and turned over in the Month of February and March ensuing, a month before
it be wrought, and that no Person temper their Bricks with salt or brackish
water, and that the size of Bricks be nine inches long, two and a quarter
inches thick, and four and an half inches broad; and that all moulds used for
making of Bricks be made according to these sizes, and well shod with iron: And
what person or persons soever, shall make Bricks in any respect contrary to
this Order, in the several particulars of it, shall forfeit the one half of
such Bricks to the use of the Treasury of the Town where they are made.

AS an addition to the former Law tit. Military, It is Ordered by this Court
and the Authority thereof, Penalty for Foot-souldiers absence from Trainings.
that every Foot-Souldier that is a Delinquent on a Training Day, shall pay for
each days delinquency five shillings in money, or ten shillings per Day in
good merchantable commodities, or Grain as the Country Rates are paid, to be
levied by the Clark of each Company as the Law directs.

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that all fishermen that
are shipped upon a winter and spring voyage shall duly attend the same, for
encouragement of Fishing Trade.
according to custom or agreement, with respect to time And all Fishermen that
are shipped upon a Fishing Voyage for the whole Summer shall not presume to break
off from their Voyage, before the last of October, without the consent of the
Owner, Master, and Shore men, upon the penalty of paying all Damages.

Upon Complaint of sundry inconveniences and Prejudice arising by the Law
entitled Debts by Book, if put in execution: which Law has upon sundry
petitions from time to time been suspended, and now again by longer experience
found to be very detrimental, Law about Book-debts repealed.


This Court on serious consideration hereof, and what else is presented, sees
cause to repeal the same; and by the authority hereof it is hereby repealed to
all intents and purposes.

WHither if a Town see good to implead any Person in a course of Law, and make
their Vote to that end, and choose their Attorney, it be not sufficient Legal
Atturneyship, Question resolved as to Letters of Attorney from a Town.
and to be allowed in Court, the said Attorney bringing a Record of the said
Order or choice, signed by the hand of the Recorder of the Town, though there
be no Seal as in other Letters of Attorney? This Question was resolved by the
Court on the affirmative.

Order for listing Troopers.
WHereas Complaints are made to this Court that several foot Companyes are
discouraged and weakened, by frequent listing their best Soldiers into Troops,
(whereby the Infantry reputed the chief strength of the Militia in any Country)
are like to be very feeble, and this error arises from the misconstruing of a
Law directing the listing of Troopers, which says, that no person shall list
unless he pay for one hundred pounds estate in a single Country rate, and be
otherwise well qualified. But the practice is different from the Law (as is
conceived) for Constables giving Certificate that such a person pays in a
single Country Rate eight shillings four pence, including therein heads of
persons; Order regulating listing of Troopers.
and upon this Certificate the Captain of the Troop lysts the person Certified,
and so as it is apprehended the Law is not attended. For prevention whereof,

It is Ordered that no Constable shall give Certificate to any person desiring
to list a Trooper, unless the said person pay bona fide in a single Country
Rate for one hundred pounds estate, without respect to poll money and also no
such Foot Soldier shall list in any Troop, unless he have a Certificate from
the Major of the Regiment under his hand, that he is a fit person and has
obtained the consent of the Commission Officers of the Foot Company whereunto
he belongs, or the major part of them, etc.

Meeting Houses not to be erected without License.
FOrasmuch as it has too often happened that through differences arising in
several Towns, and on other pretenses there has been Attempts by some persons
to erect new meeting houses although on pretense of the public worship of God
on the Lords days; yet thereby laying a Foundation (if not for Schism and
seduction to error and heresy) for perpetuating divisions, and weakening such
places where they dwell in the comfortable support of the Ministry orderly
settled amongst them. For prevention whereof for the future,

It is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof; that no persons
whatsoever without the consent of the Freemen of the Town where they live,
Penalty for erecting new Meeting houses without consent of Authority.
first orderly had and obtained at a public meeting assembled for that end,
and license of the County Court: or in defect of such consent and license by
the special order of the General Court, shall erect, or make use of any house
as abovesaid. And in Case any person or persons shall be convicted of
transgressing this Law, every such house or houses wherein such persons shall
so meet, more then three times, with the Land whereon such house or houses
stand, and all private ways tending thereto, shall be forfeited to the use of
the County, and disposed of by the County Treasurer, by Sale or demollishing,
as the Court that gave Judgment in the Cafe shall order.

FOr the greater comfort and safety of all people who are intended to resettle
the Villages deserted in the late war, Order directing the settlement of towns
deserted, or New Plantations.
or the planting any new Plantation within this Jurisdiction.



It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That no
deserted Town, or new Plantation shall be inhabited, until the people first
make application unto the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, or to the County Courts,
within whose Jurisdiction such Plantation is. And the Council or County Court
are hereby Ordered and Empowered to appoint an able and discreet Committee [at
the charge of the people intending to plant] which Committee are Ordered and
Empowered to view and consider the place, or places to be settled, and give
directions and orders in writing, under their hands, in what form and manner
such town shall be settled and erected wherein they are required to have a
principal respect to nearness and convenience of habitation for security
against Enemies, and more comfort for Christian Communion and enjoyment of Gods
worship, and education of Children in Schools and Civility, with other good
ends. And all such planters are hereby Enjoined to attend and put in practice
such orders and directions as shall be given by such Committee upon the penalty
of one hundred pounds Fine to the Country, to be inflicted upon them by order
of the Council, or County Courts for their neglect or refusal to attend this
order.

10 s. per hogshead abated upon impost of Rhum.
IT is Ordered that from henceforth an abatement of the Impost upon Rhum be made
of ten shillings per Hogshead, and that two pence be added by the quart upon
all strong liquor that is retayled by less quantities then ten Gallons at one
time.

FINIS.

