Returning unto God the great concernment of a Covenant People.

OR A SERMON Preached to the second Church in Boston in New England, March 17.
1679/80. when that Church did solemnly and explicitly Renew their Covenant with
God, and one with another.

By INCREASE MATHER Teacher of that Church.

2. Sam. 7. 24. For thou have confirmed to thy self thy People Israel, to be a
People unto thee for ever: and thou, Lord, art become their God. 2 Chronicles. 29.
10. Now it is mine heart to make a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that
his fierce wrath may turn away from us. Ezra. 10. 12. Then all the Congregation
answered, and said with a loud voice, As thou have said, so must we do. Jer.
18. 7, 8. At what instant, I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it, if that nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil way; I will repent of the
evil that I thought to do unto them. BOSTON, Printed by John Foster. 1680.

To the second Church of Christ in Boston in New England.
My dearly beloved.
THe Lord Jesus said to a Church of his, as many as I love I rebuke and
chasten; And this Church of his that I am now speaking unto, has experienced
solemn Rebukes from him in the way of his Providence, and that for a long Time;
yea from our first constitution. It was upon the fifth day of the fourth
Month, 1650. That the Foundation of this Temple was laid. There is but one
stone of that first building that does now remain among us. The Eyes of those
so concerned, were (as some of you know) upon a dear Brother of mine, as
desirous that he might have been over them in the Lord. But God had greater
Service for him to do, in three other Nations successively, where he finished
his Ministry. Wherefore, it was five years before the Church was settled with
any Officers; and then the Lord gave them a Pastor and a Ruling Elder; which
latter (though a good and choice spirited man) was in short time, by bodily
infirmityes rendered incapable of attendance upon the work of his place, for
many years, until his death. Your Reverend Pastor, God continued as a blessing
unto you, for a considerable Time, even since, as well as before the Lord was
pleased to call me (an unprofitable Creature) amongst you, so that (through the
grace of Christ) we both lived together in love and peace for the space of
eleven years; Albeit, his labors also, was God pleased to deprive you of,
upwards of four years, before his course was finished in this world: so that I
have been left alone (yet not alone, if the Lord be with me) in the (...) of
Christ for these 8 years last past. That I feel the burden which I am under,
my frequent calling upon you, to endeavor after a full supply of (especially,
teaching) Officers in the Church, does sufficiently testify; yet I must
confess, that I am almost astonished, when I consider how the Lord has
disappointed hopes that way from time to time. There was one of our selves a
Luke, a beloved Physician, whom many (and for ought I know, all) of you had
your thoughts upon, for improvement as a Ruling Elder in this Church; and it
was in the purpose of my heart, the next Church-meeting, to have mentioned him
to you for that end; but the Lord by an unexpected stroke, (...) him away from
us; who were not worthy that such a blessing should be any longer continued
unto us. Also, another ((...) faithful man) that was chosen, (though not
ordained) by the Church unto some Office Relation therein, was immediately made
unserviceable, from that day to this, by reason of those infirmities that still
prevail over him. These are very solemn rebukes of Christ, the Lord help us to
understand his mind and meaning therein. That awful Dispensation of Divine
Providence which befell us above three years ago, when the house of God, (for
so does the Scripture call those places which are set apart for his worship,
Psalm. 74. 8. and 83. 12) was burnt with fire, and above forty dwellings near
adjoining, all consumed in one fatal morning, I need not acquaint you with, for
you have not forgotten it, and the marks and Remembrances of those Desolations
are still daily to be seen. You likewise know what a terrible diseases the Lord
has since that, visited us with, whereby eleven persons (besides many
Children) belonging to this Church, have been removed from us, and some of them
such as were an Ornament to the Church, as well as the glory of Christ, in
respect of those spiritual gifts and graces that shined in them.

All these things, are Intimations from Heaven, that the Lord can easily remove
the Candlestick, and that therefore it does concern us as well as all (and much
more then some) of the Churches in New England, to be renewing the Engagements
of our Souls unto God in Jesus Christ, that so he may be pleased to walk
amongst us, and continue the Token of his gracious presence in the midst of us.
I rejoice then, that God (who knows I have often begged that he would do so)
has bowed all your hearts to consent and concur in that sacred Covenant which
was lately and solemnly renewed between the Lord, and each of our Souls.

And now (my Brethren, and the Lords people) the greatest work is yet to do,
viz. sincere endeavors to keep Covenant. To help and further you wherein,
there is printed a faithful word, preached by that Worthy Person, who spoke
unto you in the Name of the Lord, on the day wherein you had so solemnly
Renewed your choice of the Lord to be your God. Read and practice as there you
are exhorted; It is not only a weighty, but a seasonable word; and I am glad
that so many of you have desired that it might in such a way be made public.
The Lord write it in every heart; And give us to be ever mindful of that good
profession which we have made before many witnesses, yea in the hearing of
Heaven and Earth; Men, and Angels too, that came down from Heaven to observe
that days solemnity, have beheld us avouching the Lord to be our God, and the
Lord did that day avouch us, and our Children with us, to be his people. The
Covenant we have entered into (many of you having so desired in order to your
being put in mind of the Obligation which is upon you) is published here with;
upon which account it will be like Joshua's stone, as, a monument of what has
been done, so, a witness against every man and woman that shall not make
Conscience to perform his vows. Let us remember (I do beseech you) that the
Eyes of the World are now upon us more then ever; Men will be enquiring, what
fruit is there of such a solemn Transaction? And if we do not walk as becomes
the Gospel, others will be discouraged from following the Example that has
been set before them, and they that bear ill will to Zion will reproach
Religion and the holy ways of Christ. On which accounts, better we had not
vowed, then that we should vow and not pay. But if the Lord Jesus help us to do
his Commandments according to those vows of God which are upon us, undoubtedly
some special blessing is near at hand; At present we are under a divine
probation; The Lord waits to see how we will acquit our selves. And in a more
peculiar manner, that branch of the Covenant wherein we have engaged against
the sins of the Times, ought most carefully to be remembered by us. Those evils
are too many to be particularly mentioned in the Covenant: but therein we refer
to what has been declared by the Messengers of these Churches, that have
convened to enquire into that matter. -- Pride in Apparel, is one of the sins
of the Times, when persons go above their Estates, and degrees, or take up
such Fashions as become not serious Christians, It is a memorable passage,
which I have met with, (and have sometimes put you in mind of) concerning
certain Protestant Gentlewomen in Ireland that being robbed and stripped by the
bloody and barbarous Papists, they called to mind the third Chapter of Isaiah,
and said one to another, This is come upon us for our excess and pride in
Apparel. Wherefore, beware of this sin, and know that if any of you or your
Children that are under your power, be hereafter found guilty before the Lord
in that respect, God will look upon you as Covenant breakers in his sight.
Again, Sinful drinking is one of the great sins of the Times: And
Church Members have too many of them given occasion unto others to sin, and to
speak evil of their holy profession, by an unnecessary frequenting Taverns, and
spending many precious hours, nay (which is lamentable to be spoken) days
therein, which if they had spent half that time, in reading the Scriptures, and
other good books, in prayer, and secret Communion with God, how happy would it
have been for their Souls, and what a weight of glory should they have been
partakers of, at the last and great day. -- Then be watchful, and for the
future, be not seen in such houses except when you have just cause and call so
to be. There are also Errors of the Times; Be zealous in bearing witness
against them, love not little Errors, left God leave you to great ones. And
charge your Children to abide in the Truth: It is a very sad thing, that the
Rising Generation should be in danger of running into the mouths of Wolves,
though in Sheeps clothing: Look diligently to your Children as to that thing
also; Otherwise you remember not your Covenant, who have promised God in the
presence of Angels and men, that you will do what in you is that your Children
may be such as those that have the Lords Name put upon them ought to be, but
this you do not, if you suffer them to go where they will be in danger to be
corrupted and perverted.

One thing more, let me stir up your pure minds by way of Remembrance,
concerning it. We have in our Church Covenant, promised faithfully to watch
over one another Souls, and that more fully then heretofore. O what a World of
Iniquity would be prevented, if this branch of the Covenant, were duly
observed? For the Truth is, that most of those visible evils which
Church Members are guilty of, arise from neglects here. Men can speak of one
another faults behind their backs, but how few that do in love and faithfulness
admonish them to their faces, when they see or hear that they do amiss. Do we
not know what befell the Children of Israel, when they did not so strictly watch
over Achan (who was a member amongst them) as they should have done? one man
sinned, and did not wrath fall upon all the Congregation, Josh. 22. 20. We had
need then to be careful and vigilant about this matter. Not that every failing
should presently be made a matter of Church censure, but Scandals are by
Discipline to be removed, and lesser Errors may sometimes call for loving
Reproofs, which is wisely applied, will promote the Interest of holiness very
much, in those, whom Holiness does become for ever. Time was, when members of
Churches in New England, could not do or speak evil, but one Brother or other
would soon help them to see their Error. Let us remember those Times and do the
first works. The good success of undertakings of this nature, depends much upon
the manner and Spirit, wherewith they are managed: God would not have us to
suffer sin to lie upon any Brother, yet he requires, that Inferiors should be
respective in their deportment toward those that in gifts, place, Age, are
their Superiors Ye younger submit your selves to the Elder, yea, all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

I have no more at present, in this way to speak unto you; only be not
discouraged, if you meet with censures from Men, for what you have done
according to the will of God. -- Not long since we did (and blessed be God that
put it into (...) hearts) set apart a day for Fasting and Prayer, that we might
cry to Heaven, for converting grace, to be poured down upon our Children. One
would have thought that none pretending to Religion, would have disliked a work
of that nature, yet what evil surmisings, and censures from some men, have we
upon that account, been the subjects of? Why? It was a New practice; as some of
old complained that Christ taught a new Doctrine. The more our sin and shame,
if that which was long ago our duty be but newly, or not at all practiced; The
like measure we must look for, in respect of our late solemn Transactions. But
it is a comfortable thought, that if a man does well, and hears ill for it; if
he has borne witness to the Truth, and against Sin, and promoted the interest
of godliness in the hearts and lives of the Lords People, and is therefore
hated, reviled, reproached, he meets with just such entertainment in the world,
as did the holy Prophets and Apostles, and Martyrs; yea, and the Son of God
himself. If then, God in his word does declare that we have done well, let us
not be discouraged in the way of duty; and the Lord does so speak as to what we
have done in promising (by the help of his grace and holy Spirit) that we will
endeavor in all things to obey his voice. When the Children of Israel did so,
the Lord said, They have well said in all that they have spoken. And O that it
may appear, that we have made this Profession in sincerity, that there is such
an heart in us, even an heart to fear the Lord our God, and keep all his
Commandments, always, that it may be well with us, and with our Children for
ever. So I rest,

Yours in the Lord Jesus, Increase Mather.
April 19. 1680.
Returning unto God the great Concernment of a Covenant People.
Hos. 14. 1. O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by
thine Iniquity.
THese Words, are a gracious Invitation from Heaven, unto a sinful backsliding
People: in which Invitation, there are four Particulars contained. 1. The
Subjects concerned, Israel. i. e. the Lords Covenant People. The very name of
Israel, did put them in mind of the Covenant that was between the Lord and
them. They were descended from Israel an holy man, that was ominently
interested in Gods Covenant, and did themselves profess that they were the
Lords People. 2. Here is the matter of the Invitation, in that word Return;
implying, that they had not been duly mindful of that Covenant and engagement
unto God, which was upon them, and that therefore it did concern them to
Repent, and in that way to Renew their Covenant. 3. Here is the Object unto
which they should return, The Lord. In the Hebrew it is [ gnad Jehovah, usque
ad Dominum] usque ad Dominum i. e. perfect, non desistens, donec Deum
contingas. OEcolampadius in locum. Ita Mercerus and alii.
even as far as unto the Lord: intimating, that they had departed far from
him, and that a continued and through Conversion was necessary. It was
requisite, that they should not only begin to Return, but never leave Turning,
until they were come quite over unto the Lord, so as to become wholly subject
unto him in every thing. Even unto the Lord, who is here described from his
Relation unto them as their God, Thy God. Which also does respect the Covenant
between God and them, whereby God became theirs, and they His. Both expressions
do imply strong Motives unto Repentance. q. d. The Lord Jehovah, is an
universal good, and the fountain of all mercies and good things, without whom
there is no life, no happiness to be had or to be hoped for. Therefore Return
unto him. And inasmuch as He is Thy God, He is gracious and willing to accept
of thee, in case thou shall unfeignedly Return unto Him. Therefore Return. 4.
This duty is urged from the necessity of it, For thou have fallen by thine
iniquity Quoni^m corruisti. Metaphora a caesis aut palpantibus in tenebris loco
salebroso, quos necesse est impingere et corruere. Pareus in Loc.
q d. Thou art Fallen into a woeful pit of sin and misery, into a gulf of
destruction, and art not able to save thy self, so that there is no way left
but this one, of Returning to thy God. Wherefore the Doctrine from the words,
is,

Doctr. That when the Lords Covenant People are fallen by Iniquity, it does
highly concern them, to Return unto their God.

There are three things may be enquired into for the clearing of this Doctrine,
1. What Falling in respect of Iniquity, it is, which the Lords People are
subject unto? 2. What is employed in this Returning which the Lord speaks of? 3.
The Reason why the Lords People should Return unto him.

Q. 1. What Falling in respect of Iniquity is it, that the Lords People are
subject unto?

Answ. 1. The Lords own People are subject to decays of Grace. Indeed they
that are sincere, cannot fall totally and finally, yet they may be subject to
partial Apostasyes from God, and from his blessed ways. They may be, and too
often are, on the losing hand, as to the degrees and measures of Grace. There
may be sad intermissions as to the timely actings and exercise of Grace. The
Spouse in the Canticles, confesses that she was asleep. And all the Virgins,
(wise as well as foolish) slept and slumbred. Mat. 25. 8. And it was said to
the Church in Ephesus, Thou have left (though not wholly lost) thy first Love,
and that therefore they should remember whence they were Fallen, and do the
first works. Rev. 2. 5. Intimating, that Grace was not so lively in them, nor
were they so much in the practice of Religion, as sometimes they had been. Thus
is it noted concerning Solomon, that in his Old age, when one would have
thought, he should have walked most closely with God, His heart was turned
after other Gods, and he did evil in the sight of the Lord. 1. Kin. 11. 4, 6.
And Asa was much declined in his latter time: which judicious Interpreters Sic
Junim ^t Malvenda.
take to be the true meaning and intendment of that Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 17. 3.
where it is said of Jehosaphat, that he walked in the first ways of David his
Father, so it is expressed in our Translation, but in the Hebrew, the words run
thus, He walked in the ways of David, of his father the first. Now Asa was
Jehoshaphats Father, and his first ways were better then his last. He acted so
in his latter times, as we do not read the like of any good man, mentioned in
the Scripture: whence a judicious Divine Mr. Hooker on Act. 2. 37. P. 66^.
does question whether Asa was indeed a godly man, and whether that expression
of his Heart being perfect, does intend any more, then his not being an
Idolater, etc. But supposing him to have the root of the matter in him, it was
a dreadful Fall into iniquity that he was subject unto: Therefore,

2. The Lords own Servants may possibly fall into scandalous iniquity: and that
both as to Judgment and Practice. A godly man may for a time be sainted with a
scandalous error: yea, with Heresy in his Judgment, albeit he cannot live and
dye so without Repentance and Recovery. Hence, the Apostle said to the
Corinthians, How say some among you, there is no Resurrection from the dead? 1
Cor. 15. 12. Whereas the denial of the Resurrection is a fundamental error.
Moreover, a godly man may become guilty of scandalous practices, both against
the first Table, as we see in Aaron, who was by the people persuaded and
prevailed with to set up the golden Calfe in the Wilderness: And in Peter, who
was once guilty of cursing and swearing falsely. As also against the second
Table, as we see in David's Adultery, and in Noah's and Lot's being guilty of
such Intemperance, as is in the Scripture mentioned concerning them.

3. They that are the Lords People in respect of a visible Covenant Interest
only, may fall totally and finally. I say they may Fall totally: For though
special Grace shall not, yet common Grace may be wholly lost. Such Professors
may degenerate into mere Formalists, even so as to become dead, sapless, and
lifeless altogether, even twice Dead. Jude 12. As having lost those Quicknings,
and gracious Illuminations which once they had experience of. Yea, of forward
Professors, they may become bitter Persecutors. Thus concerning Saul, that
which he had was taken from him, his gifts and common graces withered; the
Spirit of the Lord departed from him, and an evil spirit took possession of
him, that he became a most malignant Persecutor of holy David, whom once he had
loved and honored. And Joush, when a young man, was very forward and zealous
in the ways of God, but after the Death of his Uncle, under whom he had his
education he did persecute the Prophet Zachary (his next Cousen) unto Death,
for bearing witness against his and the Peoples Apostasy. And Alexander the
Copper smith, became a bitter and bloody enemy to Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 14. and yet
it is Sic Crotius Fstius and alii in 2 Timothy 4. 14.
conceived that that Alexander was the same, who when time was, stood up in the
defense of, and showed himself willing to suffer with that holy Apostle, Act.
19. 33. Yea, such Professors as are Hypocrites in Heart, may Fall finally as
well as totally. The Apostle says concerning Demas, He has forsaken me,
having loved this present world. 2. Tim. 4. 10. Which is the very description
of an unregenerate man. 1. Joh. 2. 15. Nor does the Scripture say any thing of
his Return: but in Dorotheus in Synops^.
Ecclesiastical Story, he is reported to be one that lived and died an
Idolater. Nay, such Professors may possibly become guilty of the sin against
the Holy Ghost, which is always attended with final Impenitency. They that
have been enlightened, and had some taste of the heavenly gift, may fall away so
as that it shall be impossible to renew them by Repentance, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. So
true is that word of Christ, From him that has not, shall be taken away that
which he has, he that has not true Grace, that common grace which he has, he
is in danger of losing it.

4. The Lords People may fall under heavy Judgments because of their Iniquity.
Impegisti. h. e. incidith in multas and graves Calamitates. Drusius in Locum.
There is a falling (...) Iniquity, and a falling by, for, or because of
iniquity. Doubtless both are intended in the Text. Sore breaking Judgments are
expressed in the Scriptures, by that of a miserable Fall, Hos. 5. 5. Israel and
Ephraim shall Fall in their iniquity, Judah also shall Fall with them: Israel,
or Ephraim, h. e. the ten Tribes, had the worst Fall, viz. in respect of the
Assyrian Captivity, they Fell so as never to rise again: But Judah Fell also,
viz. under that Judgment of the Babylonian Captivity. The saddest temporal
Judgments and Desolations, may possibly overtake the People of God, inasmuch
as their Sins are most dishonorable to his blessed Name. We hear the Church
complaining. Is there any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, where with the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce Anger. And the Prophet Daniel says,
Under the whole heaven has not been done, as has been done unto Jerusalem,
Now when it is so, Iniquity is the cause of it. Isa. 3. 8. Jerusalem is ruined,
and Judah is [Fallen] because their tongue and their doings are against the
Lord, to provoke the eyes of his Glory.

5. The Lords People may Fall from their visible Church estate. So did Israel,
Jer. 3. 8. When back sliding Israel committed Adultery, I put her away, and
gave her a bill of Divorce. As for the ten Tribes, God has called them Loammi,
and written over them Lo-ruhama, saying, He would no more have mercy them on.
Hos 1. 6, 9. And some Learned men De Israelitis qui per captivitatem Assyriam
transportati sunt, dicendum est, eos partim in Gentiles degenerasse, partim
Judaicis Synagogis se adjunxisse, et cum ^is coalluisse. Voet. Disput. de
Convers. Judaeor. p. 133, 144 145. Sic. and Hornbeck in Disput. contra Judaeos.
Prolog. P. 4.
have observed, that those Israelites that were carried into Captivity by the
Assyrians, were many Ages since, swallowed up with Gentilisme, being (as to the
Body of them) degenerated into mere Heathens. The Jews also are deprived of
their Church estate: the Kingdom is taken from them, and given to the
Gentiles, h. e. The Church of God (which is his Kingdom) is not now to be
found amongst them, but among the Gentiles, who are planted in their Room.
Hence, the Apostle speaks of their Fall, Romans 11. 11 12. inasmuch as they are
Fallen from their Relation to God as his visible Covenant People. And the like
has happened unto many particular Gospel Churches, in these days of the
New Testament: witness all the Churches in Asia. In some places in the lesser
Asia, where once glorious Churches were seen, at this day, there is not so much
as one Christian. So in Ephesus; in ^aodicea, not an house, not a man to be
seen. In Smy^ne, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, no Inhabitants
except barbarous Turks, and a few superstitious Greeks who call themselves
Christians Mr. Thomas Smith in his Survey of the 7 Churches in Asia as they now
lie in their Ruins.
One that within these ten years did visit those desolate places, professes,
that he could not look upon such amazing Ruins without horror and Admiration.
And there was once a famous Church in Rome; but the Lord has long since given
her a bill of Divorce: And therefore Paul spoke like a Prophet, when he said to
the Church of Rome, Behold the goodness, and severity of God, on them which
Fell severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou shall be cut off. Romans 11. 22. Nor is there any particular
Church in the world, but this may in time befall it. Never any Church enjoyed
such a Privilege as that of Indefectibility, or impossibility of loosing their
Church estate, which the Romanists do vainly pretend unto. Churches may
degenerate, so as to lose that which is the true Matter of a Church, sc.
visible Saints. The faithful City may become an Harlot: It was full of
Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers. Isa. 1. 21. And they
may lose that which is the Form of a Church, sc. Covenant with God and one
another. Those two Staves, Beauty and Bands, may be broken, Zech. 11. 10, 14.
Or, if Churches should not degenerate as to their Principles, they may be
unchurched other ways, and by other means e. g. By Divisions: An House (so a
Church, which is an House of God) divided cannot stand. Or, the Lord may remove
Instruments whereby the affairs of his Kingdom in this or that place are
managed. Sometimes the plucking up of one Pillar, makes way for the whole
house to Fall speedily and irrecoverably. Or a Storm of Persecution may arise,
which shall blow the Lights out of the Candlesticks, yea and overset the
Candlesticks too. The Church had like to have been carried away with that Flood
of the Arrian Heresy and Persecution, Rev. 12. 15. In Austins time, whilst he
was yet living, all the Churches in Africa, (excepting three) v. Austin's Life.
P. 159, 160.
were laid waft by the barbarous Goths and Vandals, whom the Lord let loose
upon them, Yea, and so it was with the old Church of Rome, Se my Brothers
Defense of the Protestant Religion against Popery. P. 13.
they were (about 400. years after Christ) cut off by the sword of the Goths
and Vandals, and another people, viz. those whom we call Italians, substituted
in their room. Like as the ten Tribes being fallen to Idolatry, were destroyed
by the Assyrians, and Samaritans placed in their stead.

We come then to the second Enquiry, viz. What is employed in this Returning
which the Text speaks of?

Answ. It is the same with Repentance. Sin is a departing from God, but
Repentance is a Returning to Him again. Wherefore Repentance is often expressed
in the Scripture by that of Turning and Returning unto the Lord and by that of
Conversion, the Phrase being a Metaphor taken from those that are gone out of
the right way, but do Return back again into the way wherein they should go.
Repentance is nothing else but a Turning from all Sin unto God. It implies a
change of the whole man. The mind is renewed. As in Returning, v. Dr. Sibs on
Hos. 14. P. 10.
there is a change of the posture of the Body, so where there is Repentance the
mind is bent quite another way. It was looking Sin-ward, Earth ward, Hell-ward,
but now is fixed upon God, and Christ, and Heaven. In Returning the further a
man goes from a place, the lesser do things seem that he has left behind
him, so in Returning to God, the more a man does Return, the world and the
vanities of it seem little, yea as nothing to him. Again, Repentance Implies a
great Turn in the heart and affections, so that those sins and corruptions,
which were most loved and delighted in, are become the most hateful, as we see
in Returning Ephraim, Hos. 14. 8. What have I any more to do with Idols?
Before his Return, nothing so dear as Idols, but after that, nothing more
abominable. Repentance implies also, a change in a man's Actions and
Conversation. The true Penitent is Turned into another way, Isa. 55. 7. Let the
wicked for sake his way, and let him Return unto the Lord. He was in the way to
Hell, but he is in the way to Heaven. He was going in the broad way, but is
come about, and got into the narrow way, which leads to everlasting life.

Q. 3. But why should the Lords People Return unto Him?

A. I shall mention only that Reason employed in the Text, namely, The
Consideration of the holy and gracious Covenant which they are under. Return
unto the Lord thy God O Israel: He is thy God, and therefore thou art to Return
to Him. Therefore, this consideration of the Covenant is often used in the
Scripture as an Argument to enforce Repentance, Jer. 3. 14. Turn O backsliding
Children, for I am married unto you, viz. in respect of the Covenant which was
between God and them. And the Apostle calls upon the Jews to Repent and be
Converted, Act. 3. 19. and presses his Exhortation with this Argument, You are
the children of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, v. 25. So do the
Seals of the Covenant, engage the subjects of them to repent and return unto
the Lord more and more. Hence it is said of John, that he did baptize unto
Repentance, Mat. 3. 112 because those whom he baptized, were thereby engaged to
practice Repentance. Its true, that they who are in Covenant with God, are
bound to walk closely with him and to be careful that they do not make work
for Repentance. Nevertheless, in case they do through Temptation fail and
Fall, the Covenant does engage them to renew their Repentance, and to make have
to Return unto the Lord again, when they have backsliden from Him. They that
lie under their Falls, continue breaking the everlasting Covenant. Moreover,
the Lord in the Covenant of Grace, declares unto men, that he will pardon
their Sins, in case they do unfeignedly Return unto him. The Gospel is
sometimes called the Covenant. It was prophesied concerning Christ, that he
should confirm the Covenant with many for one week, h. e. for seven years,
which is a Prophetical Week. The Lord Christ did himself L'empereur.
preach the Gospel to the Jews for the space of three years and an half, and
after that (as some observe) his Apostles did offer the Gospel other three
years, and something more, before ever they preached to the Gentiles. Thus was
the Covenant confirmed for one week, Dan. 9. 27. Now the Gospel does command
men every where to Repent, and does promise the Remission of Sins in case they
do so. And if they that are under the external offer of the Covenant only, are
bound to repent, how much more they that are indeed in Covenant?

USE. Let us hence be exhorted, persuaded and prevailed with to Return unto the
Lordour God. Return unto thy God O Israel, O New England, for thou have Fallen
by thine iniquity.

Consider. 1. What cause we have every one of us, to be Returning unto the Lord
our God. Certainly we have need to be turning from sin and from the world, yet
more and more. Repentance is the work of a Christian as long as he lives in
this world. There are many that are in a state of sin; an universal Repentance
is of absolute necessity to every such Soul. There are others that are under
the prevailing power of some special Corruption or Temptation, and they stand
in need of a Particular Repentance. Therefore Christ said to his Disciples,
notwithstanding their being converted as to their State, Math. 18. 3. Except ye
be Converted, ye shall not exter into the Kingdom of Heaven, meaning that
except they were converted from that particular sin of Pride, which was then
too apparent in them, they could not be saved. And are there not many
particular Persons, that are under woeful decays as to their spiritual estate?
Alas! they are not the same men that they were thirty or forty years ago: And
what cause have such to be thinking of Returning to the Lord, from whom they
have deeply revolted. Nay, is there not a general Declension amongst Professors
in New England! May we not confess, as the Lords People sometimes did, Jer. 14.
7. Our Iniquities testify against us, for our Back slidings are many. Again,
that which is spoken, Jer. 2. 21. may in too sad a degree be applied unto
New England, I planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed; how then art
thou turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto me. How did the
Power of Godliness flourish in this Land, and in these Churches, when time was!
But is it so at this day? Is there not a general decay as to the power of
godliness? How have Christians left their first Love? It was an Expression in
the Sermon preached on the day when this Church was gathered, By Mr. Samuel
Mather, my most dear, and now blessed Brother.
near upon thirty years ago, It is too plain to be denied, that there is a
dying Spirit in New England to the ways of God. If it were so then, how much
more now? Men have forgot their Errand into this Wilderness, What came ye into
the Wilderness to see? It has often and truly been said, That New England
differs from other outgoings of our Nation, in that Religion was the design of
our Fathers in transporting themselves and Familyes into this waft and howling
Wilderness. But men are now pursuing a worldly Interest, with their whole
hearts. The things of God, and the great Concernments of his Holy Kingdom, are
not sought after in the first place. If the body of the present standing
Generation, be compared with what was here forty years ago, What a sad
Degeneracy is evident to the view of every man, that has his heart exercised,
in discerning things of this nature?

Consider 2. How solemnly God has been calling upon us to Return. And that
more ways then one. By lesser and greater Judgments. The Lord has come upon
us, as a moth, and after that as a Lion, in tearing wrath, and furious
Judgments that have rent and born down all before them. When lighter
Afflictions would not do, the Lord has made bare his Arm against us,
brandishing a glittering Sword, making it bright for the slaughter, yea, and
drunk with blood, and the voice of the Lord was in it calling aloud from
Heaven, Return unto thy God, O New England; for thou have Fallen by thine
Iniquity. The Lord has also sent the destroying Angel among us, with a besom
of destruction, whereby many hundreds were swept away into the Land of
darkness. Ah! poor N-England; Ah! poor Boston; will thou not yet hear, and turn
and live? Once more; The Lord has fallen upon us of late, and rendered his
Rebukes in flames of Fire. May not we call the Name of this place Taberah,
because the Fire of the Lord has burnt amongst us? Come and behold the
desolations which the Lord has made. Bewail the burning which the Lord has
kindled. What is the voice of the Lord in all these solemn dispensations, if
this be not it? O New England, and thou Boston especially, Return unto the Lord
thy God, for thou have fallen by thine Iniquity.

And O Congregation, hear the Word of the Lord. We in this Congregation, in a
more peculiar manner, have been under solemn and awakening calls from Heaven.
When the Vessel was blown up in the harbonr five years ago, and several
desirable persons lost their lives, what a solemn blow was that. The Lord has
made aweful breaches upon us. One of this Church Capt. Lake.
and a most desirable and useful man, that dyed by the Sword of the Heathen:
and some by Mr. Brackenbury, and several other hope full and desirable Persons.
the late mortal Contagion, and diverse, that by other providence have been
taken away from us. God has thinned our glory. And do we not remember the
dismal Fire that was in this part of the Town above three years ago, when this
house was most desolate; the house wherein we have been wont to praise the
Lord, was burnt with fire; and this Candlestick was then under aweful shakings.
Some observe, See Mr. Fullers Sermon on Rev 2. 5.
that God uses to move the Candlestick, before he does quite remove it. Truly,
God has been moving this Candlestick, and I must needs solemnly declare, that
it looks like an ominous sign, that the Lord does intend at last, to remove
and break this Candlestick, if there be not a returning to him. Let us not be
high minded, but fear. God can bring it to pass in one day, by one fatal
stroke. O then, what cause have we, to say after the Lords people, come, let us
Return unto the Lord, he has torn, He has smitten. Hos. 6. 1.

Moreover, the Lord has been calling upon his people in this Wilderness, by
his Word and faithful Ambassadors, by whose mouth he has threatened aweful
Judgments, except we repent. The watchmen of Ephraim that have been with God,
have blown the Trumpet, and given the Alarm. Not only by some who are yet
alive, but by the former Prophets, who have finished their course, and are gone
to receive their Crown, the Lord has been speaking and solemnly warning this
people. O New England, the day of thy Watchmen is come upon thee; even the day
which thy Watchmen have told thee was coming. How inexcusable then shall we
be, if we do not return? And the Lord has very lately said, He would try one
experiment more, with a sinful people, it may be they will hear. He has
therefore so ordered by his Providence, as that the Messengers of these
Churches here met together in his Name, to enquire into the causes of that
dismal displeasure, which has been written against us, in fiery and bloody
Characters; and to fix upon Scripture expedients for Reformation. If what
comes in that way, and the voice of the Lord in it, be despised and rejected,
we may fear, that there is a woeful day, not far off. It was a serious and
weighty word which a Mr. Nathaniel Collins, Pastor of the Church in Middletown
on Connection.
faithful Minister of Christ, who lives in another Colony, not long since
expressed in a great Assembly, Your hearing the mind of God, declared by the
Synod, will be a signal Testimony of an humbled People; but if you will not
hear what is so presented to you, I testify unto you in the Name of the Lord,
it may be written over your doors, They are not humbled unto this day.

Consider. 3. As yet there has not been that Returning unto the Lord which
ought to be, and which He does expect from this People. The generality of men
do not frame their doings to Turn unto the Lord. If they Return, it is not to
the most High. It was a sad word which the Lord took up against his People of
old Hos. 11. 7. My People are bent to backsliding from me: though they called
them to the most High, none at all would exalt Him. They that did Return when
called upon thereunto, were so few, as that they seemed none at all. I doubt
not, but that (through grace) there are many particular persons among us, unto
whom God has sanctified his awful Dispensations, in order to their effectual
Conversion and Reformation: but our misery is, in that there is no general
Turning from Sin and World, unto God in Jesus Christ. Alas, that it may be said
as in Am 4. I have with holden the rain from you, yet have you not returned
unto me says the Lord. I have smitten you with blasting and Mildew: yet have
ye not returned unto me: I have sent among you the Pestilence, after the manner
of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your
horses; yet you have not Returned unto me. He that was proud, is so still; he
that was a Worldling, is so still, he that was a Pot-companion, and that did
haunt Ale houses or Ordinaryes, does so still. That which is spoken of the
Children of Israel, is sadly true concerning the most of men amongst us, Psalm.
78. 32. For all this, they sinned still. Devouring Plagues had been round about
them, for all this they sinned still. Most wonderful mercies and eminent
deliverances did the Lord vouchsafe unto them: For all this they sinned still.
And is it not so with us (...) War, Mortality, Fires have been amongst us; Yet
men continue sinning still. The Lord has by a Miracle of mercy, restored peace
and health to the Land, that the inhabitant thereof is not sick: yet men
continue sinning still.

Consider. 4. What blessed encouragement we have to be Returning unto God. He
had a delight in our Fathers, and has chosen us their children to be his
People. He is Our God still. He has not written over us Lo-ammi and
Lo-ruhamah. As yet we have a day of Grace. As particular persons, so Churches
and Congregations have their day of Grace. Christ said unto Jerusalem, (and be
wept when he said it) O that thou had known in this thy day the things that
belong unto thy peace, Luke 19. 42. And O that in this New-Englands Day, we
knew the things that belong unto our peace, before they be hid from our eyes.
We may be happy, if we have an heart to consider it. The Lord we see, is loath
to make us as Admah, to set us Zeboim. He is not willing to give up his own
Interest here: He waits to be gracious: He waits to see if we will Return unto
him, that so we may be fit for mercy, and then we shall have it. O then, let us
return before the Decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before
the day of the Lords anger come upon us. Therefore,

Consider 5. The good that will follow in case we do Return. If we Return to
the Lord, He will Return unto us, with mercies and blessings more then ever.
Mal. 3. 7. Even from the days of your Fathers, you are gone away from mine
Ordinances, and have not kept them: Return unto me, and I will return unto you,
says the Lord of Hosts. The Lord will then make it appear that he is our God,
and that he is Jehovah. As he was known unto his People in the years of ancient
Generations by his Name Jehovah, when he did fulfill and give Being to his
gracious Promises. Mark how the Prophet Daniel speaks, Chapter 9. v. 13. that we
might turn from our Iniquityes, and understand thy truth. q. d. The Lord has
promised to save and bless those that Turn from their iniquities: and if we had
done so, we should have known by gracious experience, the truth of Gods word.
So then, if we Return, the benefit will be our own: Good will come unto our
selves thereby: and to others too. Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and turn your selves,
so we read it, but the Hebrew word (...)
[ Jehashibu] signifies, to make to be Converted, Repent and make others to be
Converted. It is always the property of true Repentance, that it makes men
endeavor that others may repent too. And usually, If one Repent, another
follows: Examples are very powerful: your Zeal says the Apostle, has
provoked many, 2 Cor. 9. 2. If one Church set a good example, it may be, many
will follow: And then, O what glory will come to the blessed Name of God. If a
People should become all Righteous, the Lord is glorified, Isa. 60. 21. And
what joy does this cause in heaven? If there be joy in Heaven, when one Sinner
Returns unto God; how much more, when a whole Church shall become zealous and
Repent, and engage themselves to a more close and holy walking with God, then
ever before?

Consider. 6. We must of necessity Return unto the Lord our God. As ever we
desire to escape destruction, this concerns us. What an awful Scripture is
that, Jer. 15. 7. I will destroy my People, says they Return not from their
ways. It is not being visibly the Lords People; it is not the external
enjoyment of spiritual Privileges that can secure or save us, except we
Return: We have no other way left in heaven or on earth, but this. We have many
enemies, not only in Hell, but on Earth, ready to swallow us up, if the Lord be
not on our side. If God be not our Friend, we are the miserablest people under
heaven: And we have little reason to expect, that the Lord will stand by us, if
we will not Return unto him. Either we shall have no deliverance, or none in
mercy, if we Return not. It Is true, that God to show his Sovereignty, does
sometimes save an Apostate People, as he did Israel in the days of Jehoahaz,
and of Jeroboam the second, 2 Kin. 13. 5, 6. and 14. 27. But such Deliverances
leave men the more inexcusable, and usually end in the saddest destructions and
desolations, except there be Repentance.

Quest. But what shall be done that so we may Return unto the Lord our God?

Answ. Let us now up and be doing. The longer a person or a People shall defer
their Repentance, the harder work will they find of it: Jer. 13. 23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good,
that are accustomed to do evil. Therefore the Lord urges men unto present
Obedience: Jer. 25. 5. The Lord has sent unto you all his Servants the
Prophets, rising early and sending them, -- they said, Turn ye again [Now]
every one from his evil way, and from the evil of his doings. Ephraim is an
unwise son when he stays long in the birth. Is not Repentance a good work?
And are not the Expedients in order thereunto good to be attended? Then the
sooner we do it, the better. It was sometimes said to the Elders of Judah, Why
are ye the last to bring back the King to his house? 2 Samuel 19. 11. Every
Church is an house of David (i. e. of Christ the true David) Why should any of
us, especially, why should any Churches seek to be the last that do by
Renewing their Repentance and solemn Engagements unto the Lord, endeavor to
establish Christ's Throne amongst us.

2. Let us pray and promise better Obedience. O cry to Heaven as Ephraim did,
Turn thou me and I shall be turned. Men say, they cannot turn themselves. Must
they sit still then, and do nothing, under pretense that God must do all? Nay,
but they must stir up themselves, and call upon God. It is a precious Truth,
that the Lord has in his gracious Covenant, promised that his people shall
return unto him: Nevertheless, he says, I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36. 37 Nor is it enough for us to
pray, but we must, (though not in our own strength) promise better obedience.
And this particular, does not only suit with the solemn work, which we are now
to attend, and which has occasioned our being thus before the Lord this day:
but it is the very direction, which God himself does give unto his Israel in
this Context, that so they might become a Returned, Reformed people. Take with
you words, and turn to the Lord. What words? even words of prayer, therefore it
is added, say unto him, take away all Iniquity, etc. And words of promise too,
so will we render the Calves of our lips. The Lord puts them upon promising,
that they would live more to his praise and glory for the time to come, then
ever they had done before. And accordingly we see them Renewing their Covenant,
ver. 3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not say any more, to the works of our
hands, ye are our Gods. So that they engage against the special reigning sins
of the Times, which they had been guilty of, and that for the future, they
would endeavor to love God more, and to serve him better.

And that this Renewing of Covenant, is a duty incumbent upon these Churches,
in a Sermon on Neh. 9. 38, published 3 years ago.
I have formerly showed, and shall not now insist much upon it, especially
considering, that there is a great voice out of the Temple calling unto it, I
mean in respect of what the Messengers of the Churches, have lately and
unanimously declared to be the mind of Christ concerning this matter. The Truth
is, See Mr. Willards Sermon on Josh. 24. 22.
that if there were no visible Apostasy amongst us, yet it might be good to
Renew our Covenant with God, that so we may be the better able to stand our
ground, if a Temptation to forsake the Truth should overtake us. The Children
of Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshuah, yet he put them upon
Renewing their Covenant, that so they might be kept from Apostasy for the
future, Josh. 24. 27.

There seems to be an hour of Temptation coming upon all the World, i. e. upon
the Churches of Christ dispersed throughout the World, Prove. 3. 8. And if so,
these New English Churches, must expect a day of Trial are long, though what
the particular Temptation will be, is with God. Now for us, in the most solemn
manner, to Renew our Engagements to the Lord, and one to another, is the way
(by the grace of Christ) to stand fast in the Profession of the Faith, and
order of the Gospel. There See Dr. Reynolds on Hos. 14. P. 71.
is miserable persidiousness in the Revolting hearts of men; upon which
accounts, all Bonds that may be, are expedient and necessary. Yet I perceive,
that there are needless scruples and objections in the minds of men, against so
good and holy a work.

1. Some object, what need any particular sins be mentioned, must we tell the
World of our particular sins?

Answ. As for secret sins, which only God knows of, men ought not to declare
them before the World; But such evils as are public, they ought publicly and
particularly to be engaged against. Thus when the Lords people renewed their
Covenant in Nehemiahs Time. They did engage particularly against those evils of
unlawful Marriages, Oppression, Sabbath breaking, neglect of Divine
Institutions, etc. which were the special prevailing iniquities of that Time
and place, Neh. 10, 30, 31, 35. A general confession of sin, is not true
Repentance, except there be this and that particular sin bewailed before the
Lord. No more are general promises for Reformation sufficient.

Object. 2. Some say, our Fathers forty years ago, did not practice any such
Renewing of Covenant, as that which is now urged, nor did they approve of it.

Answ. If when Asa called upon the Lords people to attend this work, they
should have put it of, by saying, in the days of David (your great
Grandfather) there was no such thing practiced, and therefore why should we do
it now? Had it not been casy to Answer, the state of things then and now does
greatly differ. There is more cause, and a greater call, to attend such a^^luty
now, then there was then, she like may be said in this case. There was not such
Pride, Intemperance, Formality in Religion, and other evils amongst Professors,
as is now to be seen, and therefore not so much need to engage against those
sins formerly, as at this day. Nor is it truly said that this is any new
Practice, or not approved of by those, who were Instruments in the hand of
Christ, in planting these Churches. For they proceeded much upon this
Principle, v. Norton in Resp. ad Appol. c. 2. and Ames. Theol. I. 1. Cap. 32.
and Parker de Eccles. Polit. Cap. 3. P. 172, 173.
That Renovation of Covenant is an expedient for Church Reformation. And their
practice was accordingly. They were in Covenant with God, before they knew this
Land; and therefore what they did here, was a Renewing of Covenant.

Object. 3. But what shall become of the old Covenant?

Answ. If when Moses called upon the Children of Israel to Renew their Covenant
in the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 20. 1. it should have been said, but what shall
become of the old Covenant, which we entered into at Horeb, forty years ago?
Would it not have been replied, that Covenant is hereby, not nullified but
confirmed. So is that Covenant which we are now engaging our selves unto the
Lord by, a confirmation of what has been formerly done by us. There is not any
one particular mentioned in this Covenant, which is a new duty, or not required
in the everlasting Covenant, nor indeed any thing but what was contained in
that expression of the Covenant formerly. We promise to cleave unto the Lord as
our God, and to him only, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, as our only Priest,
Prophet and King. He that observes the first and great Commandment, can not
but keep all the rest. So if this general and comprehensive Covenant be duly
remembered and observed, no more is required. The particulars which this
Covenant is branched out into, do but explain and so confirm our former
Engagements. And it is of great advantage, to have the Covenant thus
particularly expressed and explained, that so any one may see what they are
bound unto.

Object. 4. Although the Old Testament speaks much about Renewing Covenant,
yet we read nothing of that matter in the NewTestament.

Answ. And is the Old Testament become Apocrypha in these days? Men consider
not, that by this Objection they strike at the Foundation of all these
Churches, and introduce a principle, that is destructive to the very Form and
being of a Congregational Church. Where does the New Testament in so many
express words speak of any explicit Church Covenant? The New Testament is more
sparing, as to the mentioning of things, abundantly insisted on in the
Old Testament. When the Anabaptists object, that the New Testament faith
nothing of Childrens right to the Seal of the Covenant; do we not rightly
answer them, but their right thereunto is plainly asserted in the
Old Testament, and no where repealed in the New? even so, we have Examples for
Renovation of Covenant in the Old Testament, and it is no where condemned in
the New. But as the Judgments which befell the Lords people of old were
recorded for our Admonition, so the course which they took, in order to
Reformation, is written for our Instruction and Imitation, 1 Cor. 10. 11. It is
a great Truth, that practices mentioned in the Old Testament, not peculiar to
that Poedagogi, but of moral and perpetual Equity, do bind men in the days of
the Gospel; and of this sort, is the Renovation of Covenant, with the Lord our
God. Nor must it be granted that the New Testament is a stranger to any such
practice. For the Jews that we read of in the second Chapter of the Acts, were
in Covenant with God, before the Time of Reformation came, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 9. 10. yet it is past doubt, that when three thousand were added
to them, (i. e. to the Church at Jerusalem) they renewed their Covenant with
God, and with the Lord Jesus Christ. And I would desire those that make this
Objection, to give us an Instance of any Gospel Church which being under
spiritual declensions, was recovered from their backslidings, without Renewing
their Covenant. When the Churches in Asia, (some of them) had fallen by their
Iniquity, the Lord Jesus called upon them to Repent and Return, and that
implies that they ought to attend Scripture expedients for Reformation; of
which this Renovation of Covenant is none of the least.

Object. 5. Some say, The Covenant is so strict, we shall make men afraid to
join to the Church?

Answ. The Covenant is no stricter then God has made it, who says unto every
one that hates to be Reformed, What have thou to do to take my Covenant into
thy mouth? In the Covenant which we are about to Renew, there is nothing
expressed but plain clear duties, required in the Gospel. They that are sincere
will not be afraid of Church Communion, because they must be under obligation
to practice according to the Scripture. And as for those that are not sincere,
they are better out of the Church then in it. It was a mercy to the primitive
Church, Read Mr. Cotton of the holiness of Church Members.
when as those that were not true Believers no man durst join himself unto
them. Act. 5. 13, 14. The fewer Hypocrites (who are loath to come up to the
practice and power of godliness) in a Church, the better. Though such will
creep in unawares, Jude. 4. yet we should not let them in, if we knew them to
be such. Sincere Professors are Golden Members; and therefore to have Churches
consist of such, as much as may be, is the way to have them continue Golden
Candlesticks.

Object. 6. This Covenant is either of Grace or of works: if of works, we dare
not meddle with it: if of Grace, why should we Renew it?

Answ. How is it possible for any understanding Christian to imagine, that a
Covenant made with God through Jesus Christ, is the Covenant of works, or that
a Covenant wherein men profess themselves unable to do any thing of
themselves, and that wherein they fail in their Obedience, they look for
pardoning mercy through the Mediator, is a Covenant of works? All which is true
with reference unto the Covenant before us. And whereas it is said that men
under the Covenant of Grace, need not to Renew their covenanting with God,
nothing can be spoken more contrary to Scripture, or to the practice of Saints.
Was not Jacob under the Covenant of Grace? Was he in a state of Salvation by
virtue of any other Covenant then that of Grace? Yet in the time of his
distress, he Renewed his Covenant, in giving himself up to God, and promising
to cleave unto the Lord as his God. Genesis 28. 20. Does not Faith in Christ give
men an Interest in the Covenant of Grace? Then as often as Believers renew
their closing with Christ, they do on their parts, Renew their Covenant. But
they that do already believe, may and should again and again give themselves
up to the Lord Jesus. Joh. 2. 11. Christians, every time that they worship the
Lord Jesus Christ, and more especially in that Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
do implicitly Renew their Consent to the Covenant of Grace. And if an implicit
Renovation of Covenant be necessary, then sometimes to do it after the most
solemn and express manner that may be, will certainly tend to the glory of God,
and to the good of Souls.

Obj. 7. In the last place some object, What should we Renew Covenant for, we
shall not keep Covenant when we have done?

Answ. That Is no good Objection. It makes me think of the man whom Luther
speaks of, that had made many Vows to God, but broken them all; and therefore
he resolved, that for the future, he would live at a loose end, and covenant no
more, that so he might be at the more liberty to sin. Is it so with any of your
souls? Then in the Name of God, how can you, how dare you approach unto the
Table of the Lord? I solemnly declare unto you in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
that if any man or woman amongst you, be secretly in league with sin, and
therefore unwilling to be further engaged to the holy and glorious God, you
will eat and drink Judgment to your selves, and the oftener you come to that
(...). Ordinance, the greater will your Damnation be at the last day. Let us
every one be sincere and watchful, then shall we Keep Covenant. 1. Be Sincere:
let us not give up our Names only, but our Hearts unto God in Jesus Christ. It
is recorded concerning the Lords People in the days of Asa, that they entered
into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their heart and
with all their soul, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. Let us be sure that our hearts be in this
work: then shall we be like to keep Covenant when we have done; otherwise not.
Good Josiah, when he renewed Covenant, he did it with (...) his (...), 2 Chronicles.
34. 31. And thence he performed what he promised. But the People too generally
did what they did, out of compliance with him, but their hearts were not in it,
Jer. 3. 10. And therefore they quickly broke their Covenant with God, O then
let us be sincere in this matter. 2. And Watchful. For a sincere godly man may
be guilty of great violations of the Covenant, and by his iniquity in that
respect, Fall under the heavy judging hand of God; and all this for want of due
Watchfullness. How have the Lords Servants come to Fall after such a fearful
manner, as some of them have done, and that soon upon the most solemn
Engagements unto God? But because they did not duly Watch, and take heed to
their spirits lest they should deal treacherously. Peter renewed his Covenant
with the Lord Jesus, when he promised never to forsake him, but to dye rather;
and yet he presently acted contrary to that Engagement, because he depended too
much upon his own strength, and was not humbly watchful as he ought to have
been.

Lastly. Look up to Christ. O look unto Jesus: let us look unto him for
pardoning mercy. He has offered Sacrifice, whereby Atonement is made for the
whole Congregation. Look to Him for all supplies of grace continually. He has
grave enough for us all. Joh. 1. 16. Of his fullness have we all received grace
for grace. And what is all that can be done or thought of, without Christ? What
are Vows and Covenants except Christ be in them? Alas! many poor souls, when
outward or inward distress and anguish is upon them, they will vow and swear to
God that they will never commit such and such sins any more: and yet when
strong temptations come, they break all bonds, and their corruptions are as
much unmortified as ever. Why? Because they promise in their own strength, and
know not what it is by Faith to fetch supplies of grace and strength from the
blood, and from the Spirit of the Lord Jesus. We say in that Covenant, which we
are here met before the Lord to engage our souls in this day, that we will do
this and the other thing which God requires [by the help of Christ] O remember
that it may be by the Help of Christ, if we do anything. And therefore let us
depend upon God in Jesus Christ, to do all our works in us and for us. Amen
Lord Jesus!

Tibi Domine.
The Covenant which was unanimously consented unto, is as follows.
WE, who through the exceeding Riches of the Grace and Patience of God, do yet
continue Members of this Church; being now assembled in the holy Presence of
God, and in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; after humble Confession of our
manifold breaches of Covenant before the Lord our God, and earnest supplication
for pardoning mercy through the blood of Christ; and deep acknowledgment of our
great unworthiness to be owned as the Lords Covenant People: Also acknowledging
our inability to keep Covenant with God, or to perform any spiritual duty,
unless the Lord Jesus do enable us thereunto by his Spirit dwelling in us: And
being awfully sensible, that it is a dreadful thing, for sinful dust and
ashes, personally to transact with the infinitely glorious Majesty of Heaven
(...) Barth; We do, in humble confidence of his gracious assistance, and
acceptance through Christ, each one of us, for our selves, and (...) as a
Church of the living God, explicitly renew our Covenant with God, and one with
another, in manner and form following. That is to say,

We do give up our selves unto that God, whose Name alone is Johovah, Father,
Son, and holy Spirit, as the only true and living God; And unto our blessed
Lord Jesus Christ, (...) our only Savior, Prophet, Priest, and King over our
Souls, and only (...) of the Covenant of grace; promising (by the help of his
Spirit and grace) to cleave unto God as our chief good, and unto the Lord Jesus
Christ by Faith, in a way of Gospel Obedience, as becomes his Covenant People
for ever. We do also give up our Offspring unto God in Jesus Christ; avouching
the Lord to be our God, and the God of our children: And our selves with our
children to be his people; humbly adoring this grace of God, that we and our
Offspring with us, may be looked upon as the Lords.

We (...) also give up our selves one unto another, in the Lord according to
the will of God, (...) and binding our selves to walk together, as a right
ordered Congregation and Church of Christ; in all the ways of his Worship,
according to the holy Rules of the word of God: promising in brotherly Love,
faithfully to watch over one another Souls, and to submit our selves unto the
Discipline and government of Christ in his Church, and duly to attend the
Seals, censures, or whatever Ordinances Christ has commanded to be observed by
his People, according to the order of the Gospel, so far as the Lord has, or
shall reveal unto us by his Word and Spirit.

And whereas, the Messengers of these Churches, who have met together in the
Name of Christ, (...) enquire into the Reason of the Lords Controversy with
this his People, have taken notice of many provoking evils, as the procuring
causes of the Judgments of God upon New England, so far as we, or any of us
have been guilty of sin in respect of any of them, we desire from our hearts to
bewail it before the Lord, and humbly to entreat for pardening mercy, for the
sake of the blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

And as an expedient unto Reformation of those, or whatever evils have provoked
the eyes of Gods glory amongst us; We do subjoyn unto our Church Covenant a
further Engagement, whereby we do, as in the presence of God, promise,

1. That we will (by the help of Christ) labor every one of us, to Reform his
own heart and life, by seeking to mortify all our Sins, and endeavoring to
walk more closely with God, then ever we have done, and to uphold the power of
godliness; and that we will continue to worship God in public, private,
secret, and this (as God shall help us) without Formality and Hypocrisy; and
more fully and faithfully then heretofore, to discharge all Covenant duties one
toward another in a way of Church Communion.

2. We promise (by the help of Christ) that we will endeavor to walk before
God in our houses, with a perfect heart and that we will uphold the worship of
God therein continually, according as he in his word does require, both in
respect of Prayer, and reading the Scriptures, that so the word of Christ may
dwell richly in us; And that we will do what in us lies, to bring up our
Children for Christ, that they may become such, as they that have the Lords
Name put upon them by a solemn dedication to God in Christ, ought to be; and
that therefore we will (so far as there shall be need of it) Catechize them,
and exhort and charge them to fear and serve the Lord, and endeavor to set an
holy Example before them, and be much in Prayer for their Conversion and
Salvation.

3. We do further engage (the Lord helping of us) to do what in us is, that we
may be pure from the sins of the Times, even those provoking Evils that have
brought the Judgments of God upon New England; And in our places to endeavor
the suppression thereof; and that we will make Conscience to walk so, as that
we may not give occasion to others to sin, or to speak evil of our holy
Profession.

Now that we may observe and keep this sacred Covenant, and all the branches of
it inviolable for ever, we desire to deny our selves, to depend wholly upon the
power of the eternal Spirit of Grace, and upon the free mercy of God, and upon
the merit of Jesus Christ, and where we shall fail, there to wait upon the Lord
Jesus for pardon, and for acceptance, and for healing, for his Names sake.

FINIS.

