SEVERAL LAWS Made at the second SESSION of the GENERAL COURT Held at Boston,
October 11. 1682. And Printed by their Order, Edward Rawson Secr'
FOR the Prevention of great Trouble and Inconvenience that often befalls
Masters and Commanders of Ships and other Vessels by reason of their Men
running themselves into Debt to several Persons in the Ports where they arrive,
and not being able to Discharge their said Debts, are restrained or imprisoned
for the same, to the great hindrance and prejudice of the Commanders and Owners
of such Ship or Vessel:

It is Therefore Ordered and Enacted that after the Publication hereof, no
credit to be given to Mariners without consent of their Master or Commander.
no person whatsoever do Trust or give Credit to any Mariner or Seaman
belonging to any Ship or other Vessel, arriving from foreign parts, without
the knowledge and consent of their Master or Commander: nor shall any Process
or Attachment be granted against any Seaman or Mariner for Debts and
Engagements made as aforesaid: And if through any carelessness, or mistake in
any Officer, any such Process or Attachment be granted, it shall be esteemed
void in Law

AS an Addition to the Law, Title Attachments:

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that after the
Publication hereof, No Attachment against Ships or Master arriving from
foreign parts; nor to a Stranger against a Stranger, before Caution.
no Stranger shall have any Process or Attachment granted against a Stranger
before the Plaintiff give in sufficient Caution or Security to Respond all Costs
and Damages that shall be judged against him; nor shall any Ship or other
Vessel arriving from foreign parts; or the Master or Commander thereof be
Arrested or Restrained without the like sufficient Caution or Security given by
the Plaintiff to Respond all Costs and Damages as aforesaid.

WHether the Constable of a Town to which any Peculiar is Annexed for the
Payment of Public Charges, may Act as a Constable in such Peculiars, as he may
in said Town? The Court Resolves this Question in the Affirmative.

WHereas there are in sundry of our Towns, and especially in Boston many Idle
Persons in Families as well as other single persons, who are greatly, if not
altogether negligent in their particular Callings: and some that do not follow
any lawful Employment for a Livelihood; but mispend their Time and that little
which they earn, to the Impoverishing, if not utter undoing of themselves and
Families: For Prevention whereof;

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the Tithing men in
each Town shall inspect all such Families and Persons, and speedily return
their Names to the Select men of the Town where they dwell, Law for Regulating
Idle Persons.
who shall forthwith return them to the next Magistrate: and (if in Boston) to
any of the Magistrates or Commissioners there, who are hereby Empowered to issue
out Warrants to the Constable of the respective Town, to require such Person or
Family to work in or about any Employment they are capable of in the Town or
Place where they reside: And if they refuse to be Regulated as aforesaid, then
to be sent by said Authority to the House of Correction, and there received
according to the Orders of that House, and kept to work: And that such Persons
and Families may be provided for, It is Ordered that all their clear Earnings
shall (by said Select men, or their Order) be laid out in Necessaries suitable
for them or their Families Use and Relief; and that their Wages shall from time
to time be stated by said Select men: And if any person or persons shall think
themselves wronged thereby, they may complain to the County Court for their
Relief.

THis Court on 24 th. At what Rate pieces of Eight to pass.
of May last taking into Consideration, the frequent Exportation of our
New England Coin out of the Country whereby Commerce and Trade is very much
obstructed; As an Expedient to keep Money in the Country, did Order that all
pieces of Eight, as Pillar, Sevil and Mexico Coin, that are good Silver, should
pass amongst us as Current Money of New England, according to their weight in
the present New England Coin: As an Explanation of that Law: it is to be
understood, and it his hereby Declared that those pieces of Eight in the Law
mentioned shall be paid and received at six shillings eight pence per Ounce,
Troy Weight: and all smaller pieces of the like Coin that are good silver,
shall pass at the same price and weight.

THis Court being informed by the Right Honorable the Earl of Frontineac
Governor of Canada, and Monsiear de la Valier Governor of Accadie, Courts
Declaration against Inhabitants Trading in the Precincts of Canada or Accadye
without License.
that several of the Inhabitants of this Colony, have committed Irregularities,
in their Trading, making of Fish, and fetching of Coals within the Territories
belonging to the French; contrary to the Treaty and Ratification of the
Articles of Peace Concluded at Breda, between the Crowns of England and France:
For the Prevention of the like Practice for the future, and the preservation of
a good Correspondence between our Neighbors of Canada and Accadie above
mentioned, and our selves:

It is hereby Declared, that this Court does not Allow and Approve of any such
irregularities and that all persons so offending are liable to the Penalties
and Forfeitures Provided against them by the Laws of those Governments where
such Offenses shall be committed.

AS an Addition to former Laws about Swine:

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that all Swine going at
liberty shall be constantly Ringed sufficiently to prevent their Rootings,
Swine to be Ringed on penalty.
upon the Penalty of six pence on every Swine, in Money to be paid as a fine;
the one half to the use of the Town where such Swine do Root, the other half to
the Informer, to be Levied by Warrant from the Select men; besides all Damages
done in Commons or Proprieties, Fenced or not Fenced, any Law, Usage or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

IN Case of Damage of Goods on Board of any Ship or other Vessel Arriving here,
where there is any need of Surveying as is usually practiced:

It is hereby Ordered and Enacted that there shall be suitable Persons
appointed in the several Sea port Towns of this Jurisdiction, as Surveyors, who
shall be Sworn to the faithful discharge of that Trust, Goods Damaged to be
Surveyed by, etc.
And be called as often as there is occasion to view such Goods as are
damnified, before they be unstowed, or any two of them, who are to make a
Return under their hands to the persons concerned, if they desire it: who are
to be satisfied by the Master of the said Ship or Vessel that Imployes them:
and the Persons appointed to perform this Trust in the several Towns, are, for
Boston, Mr. Christopher Clark, Mr. John Fairweather, Mr. Timothy Pront Senior;
for Charlstown, Capt. John Long, Mr. John Trumble, Mr. Elias Row; for Salem,
Mr. John Brown, Mr. John Hardy Senior, Capt. Richard More; for Marblehead,
Capt. Samuel Ward, Ambrose Gale, Richard Reith, and for Newbury -- And the
Persons to be appointed for this Service be chosen from time to time yearly by
the Inhabitants of such Towns as aforesaid, who have liberty to make choice of
other Officers.

THis Court does Order, that no Country Grants of Land shall henceforth be
laid out but by some known able, and approved Person whom this Court shall
appoint, Lands or Grants to be Surveyed only by Surveyers on Oath.
who shall be upon Oath to Act faithfully in that work, and make Return under
their hands of all such Land laid out by them, with the Quantity, in a fair
Draught or Plat, together with the Quality as near as they can: In pursuance of
this Order, This Court appoints and allows of Capt. Elisha Hutchinson, Mr.
Jonathan Danforth, Mr. John Flint, Mr. Samuel Andrews, Mr. David Fisk, Mr.
William Carr, Mr. Joseph Hawley, and Mr. Samuel Marshfield to be Surveyors, any
one of them to lay out such Country Lands as any person have had, or shall
have Grants from this Court. And the said persons shall take this following
Oath at some County Court before they act in Surveying any such Land.

You Swear by the Great Name of the Everliving God, Surveyors Oath.
that you will faithfully and impartially, according to the best of your skill,
Survey and Measure such Grants of Land that are made by the General Court to
any Person or Persons within this Jurisdiction; and present a fair Draught and
Plat of such Land to this Court; therewith certifying the Quality as near as
you can understand it, as well as the Quantity of such Land, all which you
shall make Return of to this Court under your hands: So help you God.

WHereas it often falls out, Coun. Courts power to empower Heirs, Executors and
Administrators to make Deed of Sale etc.
that Men makes Bargains and Sales of Land, and sometimes receive part or all
the pay for the same before the Deeds of Sale are perfected according to Law;
the Granter confiding in the fidelity of the Person that sells; and after that,
the Granter dies.

It is hereby Ordered and Enacted that it shall be lawful and in the power of
the County Court where the Land lies (the Bargain being legally proved to the
satisfaction of the Court) to empower the next Heir, or Executor, or
Administrator to the Estate, to Draw and Sign Deeds of Sale for the same.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that all Informers of
the breach of Law by Unlicensed person or persons whatsoever, to any Court,
making proof thereof, shall henceforth have one clear Third part of the Fine
Imposed and Received for such Breach.

FINIS.

