A Song of DELIVERANCE FOR THE Lasting Remembrance Of GODS WONDERFUL WORKS
never to be FORGOTTEN.

Containing in it the wonderful defeat of the SPANISH-ARMADO, Anno, 1588. the
woeful Plague, Anno, 1603. soon upon the Entrance of King James of famous
memory, unto the Crown of ENGLAND.

With the discovery of the POWDER PLOT, Anno, 1605. and down Fall of BLACK
FRIARS, when an hellish Crew of Papists met to hear Drury a Popish Priest, An
1623.

Also the grievous Plague, Anno, 1625. with Poems both Latin and English, and
the Verses of that Learned Theodore Beza.

By that Reverend, and eminent man of God, Mr. John Wilson, formerly Christ's
faithful Shepherd in Sudbury, in Suffolk in great Britain, where these
heavenly Poems, and spiritual Songs were Compiled, and at London printed, Anno,
1626, since Pastor to the first Church of Christ in Boston in New England.

For the sake of several who have much desired to see and read this work, it is
reprinted.

Psalm. 107.8. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and his
wonderful works to the Children of men.

Boston, Printed in the Year, 1680.

Christian Reader.
COnsidering how excedingly precious the remembrance of this heavenly man of
God is (whose Poems these are) unto all that knew him, yea, and the thoughts of
that sacred ashes locked up within his Tomb, the thoughts of whom is enough to
cause Fountains to run over, and to trickle down mine Eyes, and the Eyes of all
tender hearts that loved him, this emboldneth me to present unto you this
heavenly Song. Endited by him, or rather the holy Spirit of God unto him many
years ago, hoping they will find acceptanec with you, os he had a fluent
strain in Poetry, so how excellent was the matter contained in the same, being
full of Direction, Correction, and Consolation, suiting much unto spiritual
Edification. What Volums has he penned for the help of others in their several
changes of condition, which if they were all compiled together, would
questionless make a large Folio. How was his heart full of good matter? He was
another sweet singer of Israel, whoss heavenly Verses passed like to the
handkerchief carried from Paul to help and uphold disconsolate ones, and to
heal their wracked Souls, by the effectual prisence of Gods holy Spirit. Seeing
those are not so visible unto the World, he pleased to peruse these, redivived
by this present Impression, wherein we may obs^rve what were Gods former
mercyes toward his People in great Britain, his wonderful mercy to King,
Peers, and People, and unto our Fathers; when the Spanish Popish Plot was
dashed in pieces, and the half Moon of their Navy, (whose horns stood seven
mile asunder) was shattred into Confusion. Gods Judgments also in the two
dreadful plagues (which are mentioned in this Book) and Gods healing hand. The
discovery also, and defeating the hellish Powder Plot. The woeful downfall at
Black Friars, where Drury with many of his Attendants breathed their last
breath. What says Asaph, Psalm. 78.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. I will open my mouth in a
Parable, I will utter dark sayings of old, which we have heard, and known, and
our Fathers have told us, we will not hide them from their Children, which
should be born, who should arise, and declare them unto their Children, that
they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God: but keep his
Commandments: And what can be (...) suitable to read over, then what is here
presented. Considering (as h^retofore) the Devil with his Instruments have
contrived to swallow up that famous Kingdom, and the Church of Christ in it,
so now, are not all the Devils of Hell, with such whom they employ, busying
themselves to batter down the walls of Zion, and to make breaches at the gates
thereof, that so they might execute the utmost Butcheries that can be invented,
thereby to overthrow the Kingdom of Christ here on Earth in every place? but
that God who has been the refuge of his People hitherto, that overthrew the
Egyptians at the red Sea, that destroyed Sisera with his Army, he can save his
People now in all places. Only let us thankefully remember Gods former mercyes
showed to his people in both Englands, really and unfeignedly repent of
whatsoever we have provoked him with; Call and cry earnestly to him, and trust
in the only Rock of Jesus Christ, who is our hope and Salvation for ever. Take
in good part what is here presented to you from the Son of him who is (...), so
precious a Father, who heartily wishes your welfare, and the peace of all Gods
Israel.

Yours to serve in Christ Jesus John Wilson.
Imprimatur.

James Allen.



The Introduction from out of the XXXI. of Deuteronomy, where God charge
Moses to make his Song
BEhold thou shall with thy Forefathers sleep,
As for this People, [whom thou art to leave
"They will not long my Testimonies keep,
"Though now they seem to them so fast to cleave]
"But they will rise up [after thou art gone,
"To scorn my word, and trample it upon]
"After the Gods a whoring will they run,
"Of the strange People which are in the Land,
"Whither they are to take possession,
["And them amongst to fix their wandering band.]
"Me will they cast away, (and are so weak)
"My [holy Covenant, made with them to break.
"Then shall my wrath against them kindled be,
"Even in that day [my fury shall be hot,]
"Them I Will forsake, that have forsaken me,
"And hide my face from them that me forgot.
"And they shall of their foes be eaten up,
"Tasting of heavy woe and bitter cup.
"So that themselves shall be enforced to say,
"In midst of sorrow [came not all these woes,
"On us, because our God is gone away,
"Mong us no longer to have his repose?]
"I will from them in hiding hide my face,
"That evils-all, and other Gods embrace.
"Now therefore write you, for your selves, this Song,
"Which thou may teach the Isralytish fry,
"Putting the same into their mouth, [and tongue]
"That it for me against them may testify;
"For I will them into the Country lead,
"By Oath unto their Fathers promised,
"[The Country,] which with milk and honey flows,
"Where, having eat their fill and waxen fat,
"Unto strange Gods they will their heart dispose,
"And worship them [upon their faces flat,]
"But me they will contemptuously provoke,
"Breaking my Covenant, [casting off my yoke.]
"And it shall be, when many evils-sore
"Shall them befall, and make them much complain,
"This Song shall witness, [if there were no more,]
"(In mouth of all their Seed still to remain)
"That I foreknew, what is in their heart or hand
"Before I bring them to the promised Land.
Who so would see this song of heavenly choice,
Penned by that holy Shepherd, Isrells guide,
And sweetly uttered with a swan-like voice,
When here his Soul no longer might abide;
Let him unto that holy Fountain go,
From whence such streams do plentifully flow.
Nor shall he need to think his time misspent: Deuteronomy. ^2.

For what is there to Israel committed,
Has a more large and general extent,
And to our present times may well be fitted.
Now is that wall of separation own,
Now that is ours, which then was their Renown.
And oh that in their holy Name alone,
And other graces, we did them succeed
Oh that their falsehood and rebellion
Had not in us like bitter root and breed!
Oh that by their Example we might see,
Such thoughts, such deeds, such sorrows how to flee.
For us another Canan is provided
Far better: better milk, and better honey.
We look our Spirits should ere long be guided,
To Heaven it self, where without price or money,
We shall enjoy what here we may but taste,
A joyful-blessed life for aye to last.
Oh then! what manner ones should we be here?
And how refined should be both life and heart?
Not (...) this world, but like our Country d^ar,
Where none but holy ones have any part.
We need not fear these Cananites to follow*
Who be all perfect, none unsound or hollow.
Ye that in Sion are secure, awake;
Ye that do waver in a Sea of doubt,
How long will it be, ere the right way ye take,
Halting no more, or compassing about?
Or God, or Baal, Christ, or Mass adore;
Choose which you will: serve one, but halt no more.
Remember who it is that witness bare,
"Even that Amen the witness true and sure,
"Who made all Creatures to be what they are,
"I know thy works [they cannot proof endure]
"Thou art not cold, nor art thou hot enough,
"I would thou were key cold, or hot in love.
"Since then that Lukewarm is the frame and mold
["Which all this while after all my cost,]
"Thou have attained; neicher not nor cold
["So that my labor seems to be but lost,]
"I am resolved, [Consider what I say]
"Out of my mouth to spew thee quite away.
Oh heavy doom, how can we choose but tremble!
"We say we are rich, and full, and nothing need:
"But God knows all; [he knows how we dissemble]
"Poor, wretched-Caytises, without sight or weed;
"Buy then of him, gold, Robes, and Ointment bright,
"Rich, clothed, to make us; and of clearer sight.
Then shall we see the end of all his Threts,
[That he an holy awe might keep us in;]
And why his naked glittering Sword he whets,
[That we might well repent us of our sin;]
And why he does such strange deliverance send,
[That we might praise him, and our lives amend.]
This very end it was that moved me,
(Though not so fit, to undertake the Task,)
To frame this Song, or Story (as you see)
(Be sure the liquor's good, what ere the caske.)
For here, as in a glass you may behold,
The works that God has wrought, some new, some old.
Yet none so old, but young men may remember
The farthest works that here I shall recite,
Have they been hid as under heaps of ember?
Now will I take them up into the light.
Indeed they are not hid, but men are blind,
And loath to call the works of God to mind.
For diverse worthy ones with faithful pen,
Have writ the most that I am writing here,
Calling to the praise of God, unthankful men
(Which might their Souls unto his grace endeer)
But oh! how few do prize such godly pains,
Or reap unto themselves such profer'd gains?
Yet will I venture; all are not alike;
God will have praises (for they be his due,)
A silly rod the stony Rock may strike,
A silly Song forgotten works renew.
If men be mute, then babes; if babes, an Ass
Or else the stones, shall bring Gods will to pass.
And if you will have me tell you all my heart,
It Is not my hope (yet would I not presage)
That men will take my plainness in good part.
But come, ye children, ye of tender Age,
This unto you I write, and thus in Verse,
That ye might best conceive, learn, and rehearse.
Come Children, hearken and consider well,
Gods Word will teach you best, but works withal
(Such works as I shall very plainly tell)
Will teach you how with fear on God to call.
Thou Lord, which do the little ones affect,
Let this poor Song thy little ones recall.
A Song of Thanksgiving for the lasting Remembrance of Gods wonderful worsk,
never to be forgotten.
FIrst. I Will begin with Eighty eight,
That most admyred year,
When It was in king of Spains conceit
Ore's all to domineer.
The Seas were spread with stately sail,
their Men and their Munition
Were all prepared without fail
to bring us to perdition.
How many scores of Shipping-tall,
and of their Gallyes long!
How many Regiments withal
of Soldiers stout and strong!
How many hundred Horse to praunce,
and Mules for carriage meet!
How many thousand Ordinance
were carried in the Fleet!
How many hundred thousand pound
of Powder and of Bullet!
How many millions were found
of victuals for the Gullet!
Who so would make a just account
must reckon for the least,
For to such number all amount
as cannot be expressed.
Besides, great store and company
of tearing torturing Whips,
And instruments of cruelty,
provided in their Ships;
As meaning not to be so kind,
our blood at once to spill,
But by our lingering pain, their mind
and bloody lusts to fill.
From seven years old, (or if not so,
from ten and so forth on)
All had been killed, both high and low,
their Sword could light upon.
Virgins had did, when they had first
the Virgins honor lost:
Women unript, on Spears accursed,
had seen their Infants tossed.
The children, whom they meant to save,
with brand of Iron hot,
Were in their face (like Indian slave,)
to bear a seared spot.
Their Soul (alas) had been a spoil
to Soul-destroying Pope;
Their bodies spent in restless toil,
without all ease or hope.
There were but few that should obtain
this mercy, which was such
As if you reckon up the gain,
You Will say it was not much.
Yea, they that served the Romish gods
had been within the hemme
Of Spanish sword, which knew no odds
(or small) twixt us them.
For death of Catholics (quoth they)
we need not to be sorry:
Their Souls shall go the Catholic way,
to Heaven or Purgatory.
As for their wealth and dignity,
all this for us does make;
For all (how much so ere it be,)
shall fall unto our stake.
Oh blessed Souls! what better course
the highest heaven to merit,
Then if such Catholics, perforce,
their lands and goods inherit?
"Such Catholics as had the Popes
"most solemn blessing past,
"To all that would their wealth and hopes,
"into this Navy cast-
"For (you must know) the Popes Crusade
"was sent, or gentle Bull,
"To all that would this great Armade,
"enrich with purses full.
"Or, gave thereto a lesser fleece;
"who so gave what they could,
"Were quit, for thirteen pence a piece,
"of all sins new and old
"Thus went the Host to Sea with fame,
"renowned there to brave it;
" The invincible Navy was the name
"their holy Father gave it.
"Nor doubted they to make their Song
"of triumph before hand,
"As if already Spanish throngs
"had conquered our land.
" Mendoz' mendaciously begun,
"in France to give it out,
"[ England is won, all England won,
"their forces put to rout.]
" Meayna was the Admiral
"of this new Christened Fleet,
"Who left his wife, friends, goods and all,
"in zeal (but indiscreet.)
"He sought to Christ and Mary both.
"and to all Saints beside;
"Sole Christ to credit very loath,
"in doubtful wind and tide.
"Our little Fleet in July first,
"their mighty Fleet did view:
"She came but with a softly course,
"though winds behind her blew.
"Her front much like the Moon was crook't,
"(the horns seven miles asunder)
"Her Mastes like stately Towers looked,
"the Ocean groaning under.
"And now behold they were at hand,
"daring our English Borders,
"Making full sure to bring our Land
"Under their Spanish orders:
But God above, laughing to scorn
their wicked wile and wealth.
To his Anointed raised an horn
of hope and saving health.
"Prince, Prophets, people, jointly cried
"TO CHRIST ALONE for aid;
"Whose power invincible was tried
"with Banner all displayed.
"That noble Drake drove on apace,
"and made the Spaniard dive;
"And Hawkins followed hard the chase,
"them all away to drive.
"With these, well forbisht Forbisher,
"their Navy did assail:
"All at her back did thunder her
"and swept away her tail.
"Those were the Worthies three, which first,
"(next to their Admiral)
"Ventured the hostile ranks to burst,
"(spite of their Don-Recall)
"And many more of great renown
"did bravely play their part,
"In skill and valor putting down
"the Spanish strength and art.
"But why do I record the men,
"that fought with such as braved us?
"I said, (and so I say again,)
"[It was the Lord that saved us.]
He armed from Heaven his mighty Host,
to batter Babel's Towers:
His Angels (though unseen) opposed
their si^e and helped ours.
"They which to creatures yield the trust
"from the Creator taken.
"Of him and them it is most just
"they should be quite forsaken.
The blustering winds the swelling waves,
the crackes of flashing fire,
Each in their turn did check the braves
of Spains enraged Ire.
Eight of our Ships, of wildfire, pitch,
Rosen, and brimstone full,
And such like other matter which
was most combustible,
Were set on fire; and (guided well)
in secret of the night,
By help of wind, it them befell
on Spanish Fleet to light.
The Spaniards saw how near they came,
(at Anchor as they lay,)
The Sea all-bright with shining flame
(as if it had been day.)
Who fearing lest our Ships (beside
the hurt of fiery crack)
Might with some deadly Engines ride,
unto their utter wrack:
All lifting up with one consent
an hideous woeful cry,
Did fill with bitterest lament
the Ocean and the Sky.
Some pull up Anchors, some for have
their massy Cables cut:
They set up Sails, and all aghast,
their hand to Owers put.
And, smitten with a pannick terror,
confusedly they fled,
As whom their own bewitching error,
To shame and sorrow led.
They fled with shame, the way they came,
one from another scattred:
Their Shipping tall with Cannon ball,
was soundly beat and battred.
Their reckning was, that Parmoes Duke
should help them with his force;
But God his courage did rebuke,
from taking such a course.
It Is best, thought he, for me and mine,
to keep us where we are;
For they (we see) are fain to whine,
that ventured so far.
Our Holland-friends with us kept watch,
upon the coast of Flanders:
He might have soon met with his match,
if not with his Commanders.
Yet at the last he was so stout,
when to the Lady of Hall,
His vows were paid on knees devout)
his Armed Troops to call;
With whom he did to Dunkerk pass
(but later then was meet)
So that by some he twitted was,
as false to Spanish Fleet.
Thus where they left of God and men,
to wracks of wind and weather.
Their thoughts were high before, but then,
they fainted altogether.
They came not forth so thick before;
but now they went as thin,
Their numbers were abated sore,
that numberless had bin.
"As Saul did Amalek, or worse,
"they vowed us all to handle,
"As whom their Balaam did curse
"with Book, and Bell and Candle.
"But they themselves combining thus,
"where the true Amalex-brood,
"of God accursed for cursing us,
"in their malicious mood.
"Themselves were made a gazing stock,
"a by word and reproach,
"Upon the Israelitish flock,
"presuming to encroach.
Thus might they ban their Idol gods,
with discontented lours,
And well perceive the mighty odds,
between their faith and ours.
"For though sometime, the way is not
"best, that has best success:
"And 't may be holy Sions lot,
"to suffer great distress:
"Nor is a Church proved good or ill,
"by any outward things;
"But that is known for Sion-hill*
"that cripture warrant brings.
"Yet such as Idols do adore,
"or Christ an Idol make,
"Preferring Idols him before,
"or parting them a stake;
"What heavy dooms do them abide*
"come from Gods wrath above.
"As what the Saints does well betide,
"confirms them in his love.
"Thus God in days of elder hue
""did take his peoples part,
"When Egypts King did them pursue,
"into the red Seas heart.
"Their wheels fell of, and Chariots went,
"Full often (for all their frowning)
"And then by flying back they meant,
"to save themselves from drowning.
"They said before, We will them follew,
"and take, and put to foil;
'They are a prey for us to swallow,
"and for our Sword to spoil.
"But by and by they changed their Song,
"Oh let us flee apace,
"God does the Hebrews fight among,
"To kill us in this place.
"For God with sudden winds did blow,
"upon the heaped waves,
"And made them soon to overflow,
"the proud in all their braves.
"They sank as led in waters gulf,
"Horse, Chariots, men, and all.
"The Sheep escaped* the cruel Wolf
"himself did get the fall.
"Then Moses sang victoriously,
"and all his saved Train,
"Led through the Sea most gloriously,
"to the dry Land again,
"They looked back, and saw their Foes
"floating some here, some there,
"Whom late and long they feared, those
"they caused now to fear,
"The women sang with pleasant voice,
"at Myriams direction,
"With dance, and Timbrels merry noise,
"for this so rare protection,
What better type of Englands bliss,
saved from Spanish fury?
The Sea, that was our safety, is
a grave our foes to bury.
Even now, we heard of their approach,
(who feared not that heard it?
But by and by* to their reproach,
They fled before they feared it.
Not above fifteen of our Ships,
did bear the battles brunt,
Which, being light, with nimble Skips,
did theirs at pleasure hunt,
Nor was there any shipping lost,
of ours, save only one;
And that our Enemies dearly cost,
(better they had let't alone.)
When many hundreds had been slain
for one of ours, or less,
Chased away with broken Train,
they wandered in distress
With Tempests they were tossed and shaken,
(all Britain driven about.)
Some drowned in the deep, some taken,
where they could ill get out.
Some of them cast on Scottish shores,
(and by the Kings release,
More then seven hundred Soldiers
were sent away in peace.)
On Irish shores were others cast,
who fared not so well,)
Wild Irish, Foul, foul Weathers blast,
upon these fiercely fell.
Their Navy, which with wondrous cost,
was full three years preparing.
In one Months space was (well nigh) lost,
without our cost or caring.
(I say it was not cost so much
or care of ours prevailed,
But God would have the pride of such
as fought against him quail'd.)
Of all their goodly Ships remained
after this dismal War;
Scarce forty which at all attained,
to their own Havens-bar.
And those that with so much ado,
at last arrived thither,
With heavy hearts needs must they go
all rent with War and Weather.
No sooner came this happy news,
unto our listening ear.
But all our sad laments and rues
were turned to merry cheer.
Our VIRGIN-QUEEN with holy dance,
unto her Timbrel sang,
Our Land for this Deliverance,
with shouting-Ecchoes rang.
Her Soul had marched (like Deborah)
amidst the armed Train,
Her Faith had scorned with holy laugh
the bragging Host of Spain.
In hottest danger did she rest,
Upon the Lord she ^erv'd;
And him in midst of Triumph blessed,
as he had well deserved.
Unto the house of God she went,
in royallest array,
With thankful and devout intent
her promised vows to pay:
The Nobles her accompaned,
each Citizen in color,
(The conquered Banners fully spread,
to make the Triumph fuller.)
The Preacher blazed with cheerful voice,
our glorious preservation,
The Temple sounded with the noise,
of joyful acclamation.
Kings Philips friends did much condole,
to see his feats defeated,
True Britain lips seemed with a cole,
from heavenly Altar heated.
But, oh alas! the real thanks,
(which is our lives amending)
Was far away; men of all ranks,
their wicked lusts defending.
God waited long for our return,
unto a purer strain;
But we cast off his Word with spurn,
and horrible disdain.
This made our God bethink himself,
how to correct our sin,
As Father whips his peevish else
that has unruly bin.
(When Pharaohs Host was overthrown,
yet no due fruit returned,
The wrath of God against his own,
gainsaying people burned.)
1603.
ANd first, our Queen Elizabeth
ended her life and Reign;
To show that all hope is a breath,
soon come, soon gone again;
Unless as children we depend
on God the surest stay;
Unless our hearts we fully bend,
his pleasure to obey.
Our grief was great for her decease,
no lesser was our fear,
But God did soon our Souls release
and from all fainting rear*
Our Sun was set but rose a fresh,
our hearts were filled with laughter,
To see King James the Crown possess
so quietly, soon after.
No Spear against him lifted was,
at home nor yet abroad,
All as one man with common voice,
his coming did applaud,
But least we should be overjoyed,
and hope beyond all bounds,
Just then, our Kingdom was annoyed,
with Plague that all confounds:
I say, all such, in humane prop,
as dare to put their trust,
Not caring all the while to lop,
or leave their wicked lust.
Some three and twenty years ago,
(or there about) at least,
God smote the Land with heavy blow
of this contagious pest.
In three months space to death did pine
(witness the London-bill)
Thirty four thousand seventy nine,
yet had not death its fill.
Three thousand three hundred eighty five,
in one week did depart,
And many thousands more alive,
remained sick at heart.
And in each County, City, Town,
almost all England over,
Men of all sorts were smitten down,
nor could themselves recover.
It should have then repented us,
of our enormous life,
Whereby we forced our Father thus
to wrath and anger rise.
Though we would not repent, yet he
repented never the less,
His tender bowels yearn'd to see
the depth of our distress*
His bow unbent, his Arrows keen
were cast behind the back.
The flames which long full hot had been,
were made ere long to slack.
We for all this, resolved not
more purely God to serve.
Therefore our foes devised a Plot,
such as our sins deserve.
A Plot (to think on) so abhorred
as heart does fear and quake,
A Plot, that when I would record,
my pen and hand do shake.
1605.
FUll twenty years ago it was,
one thousand six hundred five,
When Papists, zealous for the Mass,
in England did contrive;
The King, Queen, Peer, and noble Peers,
the Prelate, Judge, and Knight,
And Burgesses, with powder fire
all at a clap to smite.
At Dunkerk, and at Lambeth both,
they did of things agree,
With solemn Sacramental Oath,
of deepest secrecy.
When Spanish Navy had no force,
nor Plots of foreign foes,
They meant to take a surer course,
the escaped bird to enclose.
That is, with Art to undermine
the house of Parliament,
(No fitter place to be the sign,
of such a damned intent.)
There had the cruel Laws been made,
against their Romish Priests,
There will they dig with cruel spade,
and meet their mining lists.
But who would tax (beside themselves,)
of Rigor such a Law,
As gave the use of life to Elves
that had so cursed a jaw?
A jaw so curstly wide, as would
have swallowed at a bit,
Great Englands head and body, should
the Lord have suffered it.
After some digging they discry
a Cellar to be near,
Which they resolve to hire or buy,
should it be never so dear.
They laid their powder in this Vault,
full six and thirty Barrels,
With one unheard of deep assault,
to end their former quarrels.
(Note by the way the Romish Whore,
has Barrels in her Cellar.
In March she brewed, or before,
but I Will be bold to tell her;
Thy Christmas does not yet approach
why laist thou in so fast?
Before thy time, thou mean to broach,
thy brewing will be waste.)
Billets and Faggots hid this stuff
great stones and iron crows.
(To cause a more massacring puff)
were piled under those,
Now was Novembers fifth at hand,
when ore this hellish pit,
Both head and body of the Land
were all at once to sit.
When furious Fauxe with matches three,
(for spickets) was provided,
The rest of this fraternity,
were very closely sided.
Monyes they had good store, and horse,
(some more then was their own.)
And thought to gather mighty force,
by roving up and down.
From Warwickshire to Woster-shire,
from thence to Staffordshire,
Thinking ere this, all Westminstir
was over-turn'd with fire.
They made the world believe, they went
about a hunting match,
But for their spoil and booty, meant
our Souls and lives to catch.
When first they had got, by force of Arms,
the Lady Elizabeth's Grace,
Not doubting by their Popish charms;
her Conscience to deface:
And having blown away the King,
and royal Issue male,
They thought by Crowning her, to bring
her will in servile thrall.
Then had they in her name forth sent
good store of Proclamations,
Such as might fit with the intent
of their Imaginations.
Nor would they father by and by
the Plot, (though 'twere their own,)
But meant the infamy should lie
where it was quite unknown.
If you would know what kind of man,
they would have thus traduced,
Forsooth, it was the Puritan,
(so in their style abused.)
Indeed they meant the Protestants,
should all be under guilt,
As if the blood of Popish Saints,
at once they would have spilt.
A Gull without all wit or sense
(what will not malice say?)
"The Wolf can soon find a pretense,
"why the poor Lamb to slay.
No, no: it was the Jesuit,
and Priests of Popish faction,
That brought them to this hideous pit,
though they deny the action.
Our doctrine loyal is, and course,
like to our doctrine, loyal;
They teach, (and put no less in force)
to crush the Scepter royal,
Who so their Antichristian Sect
will not their favor crown,
Let him be King, born or elect,
they will seek to pull him down.
And if their strength be not enough,
to bring about the matter,
Then Dagger, Dag, Fig, Powder stuff,
shall stab, shoot, poison, scatter.
Thus were their heads and hands at work,
our State to overthrow,
Supposing all the while to lurk,
under some faiter show.
But all this while they looked not
to God that viewed them well,
And laid all-ope their subtle Plot,
forged by the Devil of hell.
These privy works of wily men,
so long and close concealed,
By their own letter, hand, and pen,
were suddenly revealed.
The hole was searched of crafty Cubs,
and then appeared plain,
The Wood, Stones, Iron, Gunpowder-tubs,
and all the powder-train.
At this Hell-mouth, with triple match,
(dark Lantern in his hand,)
Stood Fauxe in dead of night, to watch,
and comers to withstand.
His watching had but ill event,
when from our watchful King.
Those noble Patriots were sent,
to find the secret thing.
He was in Boots and best array,
('it was fit it should be so,
Being to travail such a way,
as he least thought to go.)
He was not vexed so much about
his taking, or his shame,
As for his hap to be without,
when the Kings searchers came;
Else, he resolved, all void of grace,
(that might have made him quake.)
Them, and himself, with house and place,)
a ruinous heap to make.
About this time the hunting rout,
that were in Country mounted,
From Shire to Shire were hunted out,
and sturdily affronted.
Nor needed greater power rise
their mutinies to quail;
The Sheriffs power did suffice
to fetch them to the Jayle.
They looked that all where ere they post
should like and help the fact,
Their reckoning was without the host*
for all abhorred their Act.
Yea, mark: the house that they were in
(as in a harbor sure,)
Might well convince them of their sin,
and practicing impure.
For as their powder was too dry,
(wherein they put their trust,)
They saw it was but vanity,
to hope in fickle dust;
Which (touched with a spark of fire,)
hurt them by sudden flash,
That were inflamed with hot desire,
the highest Court to quash.
So their own powder did them tell,
to their own very face,
Their powder-workings were from Hell,
most barbarous and base.
One of them dreamed overnight,
he saw strange looks and antic;
Their morrow-faces in the light,
proved this no fancy frantic;
He dreamed, at the same time, and place,
he saw strange tottering steeple,
Which did presage the tottring case,
of this seduced people.
"They say our Churches are their own,
"our Bells, and Steeples tall,
"But, striving for possession,
"they caught a fearful fall.
"They builded Castles in the Sky,
"(no marvail if they waver,
"The bird may build her nest on high,
"(not high enough to save her.)
And here it may not be forgot,
Catesby himself was one,
(The first contriver of this Plot,)
their powder flasht upon-
In stead of whirling into Sky
our Parliament, their own
Roof (where they parl'd.) before their Eye.
into the Sky was blown.
And a great powder-bag, (entire,)
was blown up therewithal:
Which never taking any fire,
came down full in the fall.
To show that God does over-sway
both fire and powder strong,
And does their strength hold or allay,
as he sees right or wrong
Suppose the fire had touched the Train
Under the Parliament,
God could have made them both refrain
their natural extent.
Themselves were forced upon this sight,
Heavens-anger to confess,
And on bent knees (all in a fright)
their sorrows to express:
"As they, that found the Shepherds rod,
"their devellish fears to quell.
"All trembling at the hand of God
"from their presumption fell.
Thus all their hopes were overthrown,
and utterly confounded,
And Popish-hunters in their own
most cruel pit were pounded.
Catesby and Piercy, brethren sworn.
were caught and pierced together,
Back joined to back, (and all forlorn,)
by one shot, reaching thither.
Two Wrights that with their open might,
against their King rebelled,
Of roisting Rebels had the right,
by Sword of Justice quelled.
Garnett's to Gallows guarded sure,
[Nor the straw miraculous,
Where Limnet drew his face demure.
saved him from dying thus.]
Digby did for their digging pay,
on Gibbit mounted up,
Two Winters went the self same way,
Keys drank of this Cup.
Tresham had tred no other track,
if he had lived so long.
Grant had his grant, the Rebel-pack,
to end his life among.
Rookwood, that would not better look,
to hooks of bait-alluring,
Was fain like heavy doom to brook,
(with shame for ever during.)
Fauxe like a Fox* was hanged high,
and Bates his strength abated:
"Those that in Treason join, must dye
"the death of Traitors hated.
"They Are dead, we live, even in their sight:
"they are caught, we escaped away;
"What should have been their day, our night,
"is now their night, our day.
"Even as those three renowned ones,
"in furnace seven times fired,
"Were safe preserved, flesh and bones,
"skin, hair, and clothes unseared:
"The smoke devouring at a lick
"all them (and all entire)
"Which in their malice were so quick,
"to cast them in the fire,
"And as when Daniel was thrown,
"into the Lions den,
"They spared him; but flesh and bone
"all tore those wicked men.
"So when three Kingdoms with a blast,
"from Babels flaming pit;
"Were like to come to woeful waste,
"before they dreamed of it:
"The Son of God (that in the mids
"of burning bush is dwelling)
"Saved us, and kept his tender kids
"from claws of Lions yelling.
"Nay, (as if this unto his Grace,
"had seemed too small ^ thing)
"He brought our foes into the place,
"where they vowed us to bring.
Alas! if they had brought to pass,
the things they took in hand,
For Christ, the Pope, for Gospel Mass
had reigned in our Land.
And every where there had been rise,
Racks, halters, fire and stake,
Or privy dungeon deaths, by knife,
hunger, and poisoned cake.
But God was pleased from bitter brunts,
of Antichristian thrall,
To save us, and to just accounts
those bloody men to call.
Never since world began was thought
Plot more abominable.
Never Deliverance was wrought,
more strange and admirable
Our King was wise by a word to see
their secret deep intent,
Wiser to seal that firm decree
in Court of Parliament,
That year by year, most solemn thanks
might to our God redound,
Who did the Popish power and pranks
so m^ghtily confound.
Here to insert, is not amiss,
another later doom,
Which did befall long after this
some Romists in a room,
Even for this end, that all the Land
more freshly might remember,
How God abhorred that Plot in hand,
on fifth day of November.
"For he is privy to the rotten
"frame of our thankless minds,
"And sees how all would be forgotten
"without some fresher signs;
May't please you but to reckon by
Gregorian Calendar,
Then will you say as much as I,
am here to Register.
1623.
IN the one thousand year of grace,
six hundred twenty three,
(Upon Novembers fifth it was)
some Papists did agree,
To meet upon a Garret-flowre
within Blackfriars range,
Near which, the French Ambassador
lodged, till this heavy change.
Two or three hundred thither flockt,
crowding with eager lust,
The room was full (the door unlockt)
some to the stairs was thrust.
Who so repair unto the yard,
or garden where they went,
Of this sad doom and vesper-hard,
may see the monument.
For 'twas at Even-song that they met,
upon the Lords own day,
Which by his Ordinance is set,
to teach us in his way.
They came to hear Drury a Priest,
from Babel thither sent,
Who in his Jesuit parrel dressed,
did there his matter vent.
Before his Sermon, on his knees
at this chair feet he fell.
Which was reared up by some degrees,
that they might see him well.
There did he some short prayer mutter
as 't were an Ave-mary,
No vocal prayer did he utter,
(from us, perhaps* to vary:)
But presently fell to his Text,
which was about the King;
Who pardoned much to him, that vex
his mate for a small thing.
Out of which Text he wringed this,
as some (that heard him) say;
'Twould go with all such Souls amiss,
as from their sold do stray.
Because forsooth their Sacraments,
(as namely Penance doing)
To cancel, are the Instruments
what debts to God are owing.
He preached by an hourglass,
(an Emblem very apt,
To show how near the period was,
how life die death intrapt.)
Before the sand had run its course,
his breath was to be gone,
He made some way to his discourse,
but went no farther on,
The hand of God with sudden rush,
upon the Chamber came,
And did the Jesuit all to crush,
In The ruins of the same.
His Soul before that heavenly King,
did answer for this action,
There learning best, what is the thing,
that yields him satisfaction.
This sure I am, unless he did
sole Christ his pleader make,
And Popish merits farewell bid,
he could not choose but quake
With him well nigh an hundred more,
men, women, one and other,
By fall of beams, and upper flore,
were crushed in the smother.
So much of the Garret-flore fell,
as was above the place.
Where Father Rediate had his Cell
and Papists went to Mass.
But all their massing would not serve
their Priest, or them at all;
"They that from Scripture Cannon swerve,
"must look at last to fall.
Alas! what shrieks followed their mirth,
what cries most pitiful?
Like theirs, whom once the gaping Earth*
into her womb did pull:
Or like the doleful noise of all
that worshipped Dagons block;
On whom the house did rush and fall,
whiles they did Sampson mock;
Or like that dismal cry and groan,
throughout the Egyptian coasts,
When, in one night each first born son,
was slain by the Lord of Hoasts;
Or like the Galilean moan,
when in sedition found,
The sacrificers saw their own
blood spilt upon the ground.
This sad disaster might enforce
a stony heart to melt.
Which they in superstitious course
strongly beguiled, felt.
"Secrets belong unto the Lord,
"this we may well proclaim,
"What lies be damned in his word,
"his works confute the same.
They went about to blaze abroad,
as if most cruelly,
Some of the Protestants by fraud,
had wrought their misery.
By secret drawing out of pin,
or sawing half asunder
Some of the Timber, that was in
the house to prop it under.
But this's a veil that Satan cast
before their eyes to blind them,
Thereby from sight of Judgment past,
and due remorse to wind them.
For plain it was, in strictest view,
that by the peoples press
And Sommeyrs mortazing undue,
they came to this distress.
And that Gods finger may appear,
more plainly, no foundation
Nor Wall did fail, but all entire
the seeld Roof kept his station.
"Oh then, that those which did escape,
"with feet out of the snare,
"Might learn no more to run or gape,
"after such Romish ware!
"And that we all might learn to flee
"from Babel and her dung,
"Lest for our filthiness we be,
"into her sorrows flung.
But to return whence I digrest,
(take the old style or new,)
Novembers fifth must be confessed,
worthy all lasting view.
A day that justly was assigned
to the Almighties glory,
A day when all should call to mind,
the famous powder story*
But this not all to God belongs,
nor do we praise him best,
By Sermons, Prayers, or loud Songs,
Bells, Bone-fires, or by Feast.
All these are good, but somewhat else
is of far better note;
When heart, and life, our Souls and selves,
to him are all devote.
God looked for it that all Estates
should mend what was amiss,
That Truth and Judgment in our Gates,
should one another kiss.
But we, alas! did soon forgit
the mighty works of God,
Not growing better any whit
by shaking of the rod,
Nor by the wrack beyond the Sea
of Christian brotherhood;
Nor Banners that our foes display,
against Britains royal blood;
Nor by the safe return again,
of our then royal-Prince,
From his great venture into Spain,
nor his deliverance since,
(When he was safe in falling down
by guard of Angels tended);
Nor his safe coming to the Crown,
rightly on him descended:
These works of God could not suffice
to draw us from our sinning,
But still we kept the hue and size,
we had at the beginning:
This stirred up the Lord of Hoasts,
to jealousy and rage,
And made him smite again our Coasts,
not sparing any Age.
1625.
IN the one thousand year of God,
six hundred twenty five,
Was sent the Pestilential rod,
our rocky hearts to rive.
In the chief City of the Realm,
it had the chiefest seat:
There like a Sea to overwhelm
pride that was grown so great;
Or like a fire to purge away,
the dross of hateful sin;
Or like a Trumpet thence to fray,
the sleep that Souls were in.
The Queen of Cities wont to sit,
in Chair of highest state,
Now sat in dust and lowest pit,
all sad and desolate:
The highest Court of Parliament,
to Oxford did remove.
The Tearmers were to Redding sent,
their Titles there to prove.
Nor were the strangers strange alone,
to the infected City;
But her best lovers all were gone,
and left her without pity.
I mean, the rich did flock away,
and bade her streets adieu,
Except the poor (which needs must stay)
there stayed but a few.
Nothing was heard but passing-bells,
and friends their friends lamenting,
Nothing but heavy doleful-knells.
(Death not at all relenting)
Nothing was seen but heaps of dead,
to feed the hungry grave;
Or others lying sick a bed,
(no way their life to save.)
Some looked pale, and some with pain,
were forced to rave and roar,
Some did the deadly marks sustain,
and some the deadly sore:
In one years space, or less then so,
(from time the Plague began)
To what a number did they grow,
that death grip't in his span?
Sixty two thousand at the least,
Six hundred seventy seven,
Were made appear by deaths arrest,
before the God of Heaven.
Yea, do but from Junes second look
unto Decembers last,
Scarce shall you read in English-book
of like doom ever past.
Within this three months space alone,
as has been duly counted,
Fifty three thousand ninety one,
by Bills report amounted.
In London and the Liberties,
(Six more near Parishes add,)
All the forenamed closed their eyes,
and made their friends full sad.
More died in this then former pest,
by th, heavy hand of God;
In thirteen weeks (to say the least)
Eleven thousand forty and odd.
Of all which sums, the greatest part
by death departed thence,
Were pierced through with fiery dart,
of raging Pestilence.
If within and without one City Walls,
were found of men such lack,
More then six myriades of Souls
brought to so heavy wrack:
Oh then what was the wrack and spoil,
of all the Land beside,
In Cities and in Country soil,
throughout the Kingdom wide?
Trading grew dead, and money scant,
the rich doubting their state,
The poor were pinched sore with want,
all feared the dismal fate.
Men from their dwellings fled apace
where these night Arrows fell,
But picked Halberds in each place
were set them to repel.
The high ways unfrequented were,
men feared all they met,
And many keeping home, were there
caught in this spreading net.
High time it was that when the Lord,
was thus to fury bent,
All of their sins, so much abhorred,
should speedily repent.
Our Royal King right humbly fell
before the King of Grace,
In mournful weeds, becoming well,
this sad and heavy case.
It pittyed him to see his sheep,
by flocks to fall away,
It made his very Soul to weep,
to see their quick decay,
Himself began, and then he made,
his Subjects all to fast.
By Proclamation he forbad,
(so long as plague shall last)
All other works, upon the day
to fasting set apart,
That all at once might weekly pray,
to God with broken heart.
Thus all at once poured out their groans,
to God in this restraint;
Filling both Heaven and Earth with moans,
and cries of their complaint.
And God which ever keeps his word,
soon pittyed our woes,
Bidding the Angel sheath his Sword,
and slack his murdering blows.
When in one week of sickness wanne,
five thousan' a hundred five,
Died in the City, then began
the City to revive.
(Yet after this in six weeks space,
of Plague and Fevers sore,
There dyed in the foresaid place,
full seventeen thousand more.)
But oh! behold Gods mighty power:
to grave were carried thence,
In twelve weeks, after this no more,
but one of Pestilence.
Even when the Plague was spread at length,
into the Cities heart,
Then did abate the raging strength,
and poison of his dart.
"Right so the Jewish Church of old,
"For David's proud presumption,
"And for their own rebellions bold,
"fallen in a quick consumption,
"Just when the Angel stretched his hand,
" Jerusalem to stroy,
"It pleased God no more their Land,
"with sickness to annoy.
Yea mark; when those returned again
that from the City fled,
And when the Country thick came in
to market, board, and bed,
Who would have thought but by and by
the Plague should be renewed?
Yet did it still most quiet lie,
as in a corner mewed.
Never was heard of such a change;
'twas but few days before,
The sickness up and down did range,
scarce passing by a door.
The very air it self might then
seem to be quite infected;
Now Churches, Streets, shops, houses, men,
all sure and safe protected.
The eyes which had not before seen,
the Cities desolation,
Could scarce believe that there had been
such deadly visitation.
Six months are gone about at least,
since that great ebb and fall;
Few all this while died of the Pest,
and some weeks none at all.
Nor was the sickness driven out
alone from London City,
But in all Countries round about,
was showed the like pity.
For though some sparkles here and there,
to awe us yet remain,
Yet little breaks out any where,
to burn us up again.
Even in our Town (so far remote)
when this dismal disease,
On place, and house, and man of note,
most dangerously did seize:
When Town and Country were afraid,
it would have further spread,
This deadly plague with dead was laid,
as in a resting bed,
(And there it should have rested still,
as many weeks it did,
If men had not their doings-ill
with false pretenses hid.)
As for this Parish (thanks to God,
by whom the lot is cast)
To this day felt this heavy rod,
not one from first to last.
Cry of our sins and grace abused,
did well deserve the worst,
But God to hear that cry refused,
(else had we been the first:
Now what may be the Lords intent,
it is not hard to ghess,
Even this, that we might all repent,
and his free grace confess.
COnfess we all before the Lord,
his grace and mercy then,
And show his Acts with one accord,
before the sons of men.
In presence of his holy ones,
praise him with joy and fear,
Who does revive our withered bones,
and light from darkness rear.
Man, Woman, child, both old and yongue,
rich, poor, the low and high,
Laud and extol with heart and tongue,
the highest Majesty.
Ye blessed Angels honor him,
and all the heavenly band,
Ye birds that fly, and fish that swim,
and cattle of the Land,
Let every City, Shire, and Town,
Each Church, and house, and Soul,
With thankful pen write his renown
in everlasting roll.
Let all that lives confess his grace,
that saves their life and fame.
Let none by wicked life deface,
the glory of his name.
And thou my Soul remember well,
the kindness of the Lord,
Cease not with thankful lips to tell,
the trueness of his word;
Who gave thee pardon of thy sin,
and kept thee from the smart,
(For all the danger thou were in)
of the infectious dart.
THou Lord which from the Spanish yoke,
and from the powder blast,
And from that former sickness stroke,
and from this newly past,
Have saved us and ours, and thine,
so many as survive,
Oh do not of thy Grace divine
our feeble Souls deprive.
For we alas, are like to fall
into the same excess,
If to thy works thy grace withal,
come not to work redress,
So are we wedded to the toys,
of our own hearts devising.
That we neglect the heavenly joys,
from thy pure ways arising.
(Even when the scourge was on our back,
how few their life amended?
Our mending then must needs be slack,
when once the Plague is ended.)
Nor Navy, nor the powder Plot,
nor frightful noise of war,
Nor roaring of the Cannon shot.
nor all the Plagues that are,
Shall ought prevail, nor yet our strange
Deliverance from all,
Unless thy holy Spirit change,
and draw our hearts withal:
Then draw us Lord immediately,
and we shall follow thee,
And make us such effectually
as thou would have us be:
So need we not to fear the Turk,
Nor Pope, nor Spain, nor Hell
For thou shall ever e^^l work,
Reveal, defeat, and quell.
No sickness pestilential
Shall smite our Tabernacle;
Or if there do, thy mercy shall
Be our safe Rec^ptacle.
Lord sa^e thy Church, our King and State,
Lord purge out all our dross,
And such as does Gospel Late,
Infatuate and ^ross
Lord bless the Parliamental Court,
(Upper and lower House,)
And when to Counsel they resort,
In them remember us.
From King that sits upon the Throne,
To beggar in the Street:
Let all their bypast sins bemoane
Before thy mercy feet;
That we and our Posterity,
Safe-hid under thy wing,
May ever of thy (...),
And saving mercy sing.
FINIS.
DEO BISULTORI SAXUM. Ad memoriam Classis Hispanicae, Anno, 1588. Submersa,
subversae.
Vldimus (heu trepidi cum vidimus,) aequo^^ ^^era
Glass tegi: centum, and ^nas quater (...) vehebat,
Non Vincenda rates Vet^re^ ingent^a na^tae
Obstupuere ratum nova cor^ora^ Viderat illas,
Estque ^uas miratus op^s Neptun^^, and in^e
Advenisse omnes ride^ Telluri^ honores.
Nos vero h^rr^imas totito^ ^ympana crel^ae
Clam^r^mque tubae, st^^los ^uper omnia cultr^^,
Vlagorumque (...), qua b^^barus omni^ Iberus
Gentl^ in Exi^ium qua s^verat arma ^ri^^nnae.
Nos lacerae viduaque rati pes credimus. (...)
Sulphur and igne gravis, ventis (^poliata Magistro)
Tradi^^r, and votis exit (...) Host^
Mista suis pereat flammis, sed perait and host^m*
Veni^' ve^la' (...) peri^baec, sed perdi^ and hostem,
Vidimus hic laeti velis albentia pri^i
Aequora, nunc sani^ and nigro macula^a cruore,
Excutitur cursu Classis, pars aequor^ mersa est,
In mediis pars ardet aquis, pars flumire caeco
Errat, and ignotis vix tandem allabitur oris.
Ad memoriam proditionis Pulverariae Anno, 1605. Indicatae Vindicatae,
Vldimus (olaeti, cunt vi limus) eruta caeco
Rom^ tui sceleris quanta, quot arma specu*
Ferrum, saxa, faces, and dolia ulphure f^ta,
(Scilicet his Meretrix vina da^ bausta cadis)
Haec la^uere diu magni su^^ fornice Tecti,
Jussa manner manum, I (...) sceleste, tuam.
Legibus illa olim penetra^^a ^acra serendis
Prohpudor!) ^orrendu^^ pene tulere ^celus:
Rex, Princeps, Proceres, Patre^, f^os Plebis ut uno
Ietu corruerent, ip^aque R^lligi^.
Adma^ura s^cras ad^rat mer^^ ultim^ flammas,
Prodit, disperdit, vinde^at ^sta Deus.
Nil Erebum pud^at scelerum. ^^^lus hoc ^^vit (...)
Infardosque homines, Fumin^da^que pias.
En Erebo accessit sceler^s no^a forma, par^m^
Huic Prebum sceleri p^stulat (...) novum.
Par sceleri dabitur pretiam (...) unus ^triqu^
Nullus erit pene: nullus erat cel^ri.
Par merit (...) danda Deo (...) unusrtrique,
Nullus erit laudi: nullus erat ^er^^o
Rite Deo Saxumque da^um, nomenque Bes ul^or:
Vicerat hinc hosts, lu^erat inded^^es.
Perditione prius, nunc pr^di^ion^ pe^e^ant:
Perdita perditio est, prodita pro^u^o.
To God our twice-Revenger.
WE saw, but oh! how sad were we to see,
Spains (prouder) Heet on the proud Ocean spread
An hundred ships there were, and eight times three
Which made it deemed and named unconquered.
The ancient Pilots were amazed to see it,
When they beheld this new-huge bodied Fleet.
The Sea with mazed smile saw in her bounds,
All the Earths wealth and honor brought by Ships,
But we all trembled at the frequent sounds
Of Trumpets, Drums: at naked Swords and Whips,
(Sore threatened) wherewith all the Spaniard fell,
Came armed this Britain Nation to quell.
Our hopes are in alone-torne Ship (befitted,
With fire and Brimstone as her chiefest load)
She, without guide, is to the winds committed,
And forth with cruel destiny she road;
[Them and her self with her own flames to spoyle]
Winds serve; she burnt her self, put them to foil.
Here were we cheered to see the Ocean maine,
All white before with Sails, now purple grown.
As suddenly with blood of Spaniards slain:
Their Fleet is scattred, and their Ships over thrown:
Some sink, some burn in the Sea, and some at last*
After long wandering, on strange Shores are cast.
WE saw, but oh! how glad were we to see,
O cruel Rome, out of thy darksome (...)
So many weapons of thy villainy
And mighty Engines, plucked by hands of men?
Stones, Faggots, Crows, Gunpowder tubs (...),
These wines The Whore does from her vessels (...).
Long were they hid under the secret Vault,
Of that great house; and there they were to lie,
Till they were made (O horrible assault!)
By wicked Faux his hand, aloft to fly.
Those sacred rooms where Laws were wont to breed,
To sudden wrack and ruin were decreed.
King Prince, Peers, Prelates, Commons, Gospel bright,
All at one blow together were to fall:
Match was in hand to give the Trains their light,
But God revealed, destroyed, revenged them all.
Hell needs not blush: for this Impiety
Does worst of men, fiends furies justify.
Hell never knew such wickedness as this,
Another Hell (like it there need a'-been.
Should Plot and pay be like? for both there is
One measure: none of paid for, none of sin.
Should praise be like Gods grace? there is but one
Measure for both: Grace had, praise must have none.
A Pillar Conseccrated.
THis Pillar bright, and twice-Revenger's name,
Both to our God of right we are to rear;
For he has more then twice deserved the same,
Here* having quelled our Foes, and mocked 'em there.
THey first destroyers, and then Traitors played;
Destroyers are destroyed, Traitors betrayed.
Verses made by Theodore Beza, upon the overthrow of the Spanish Navy, 1588.
ST^averat innumeris Hi^panus classibus Aequor,
Regnis jun lurus Sceptra Britanna suis.
(...) rog^^as quae motus causa? supe^bos
^^pulit Ambitio, vexit Avaritia.
(...), Ambitio, mersit vanissi^^, Ventus?
(...) ^^midos v^s superastis aquae?
Quam been Raptores orbis totius Iberos,
Mersit inexhausti justa vorago maris?
^^tu cui vente, cui totum militat Aequor,
Regina, O mundi totius una decus,
Sic Regnare Deo perge, Ambitione remota,
prodiga sic opibus perge juvare pios:
Vt te Angli longum, longum Anglis ipsa fruaris,
Quam dilecta bonis, tam metuenda malis.
Thus Englished (though not according to their worth.)
THe Spaniard with great Ships, and numberless,
Ore-spread the Sea, that with his Kingdoms large
He might great Britains royal Crown possess,
Would know the cause of all this stir and charge?
'Twas this: The proud were with Ambition led,
And after filthy lucre carried.
How well were thou [most vain Ambition]
Drowned by the wind? and ye O swelling waves,
Ore-came that proud and swelling Dition,
World-spoyling Spaniards, midst of all their braves,
How well and justly in the gulf profound,
Were, of the Sea unsatiable, drowned?
And thou, for whom the winds and Ocean maine,
Are pressed to fight, O Queen (the worlds renown)
So still for God, without Ambition reign,
So still the godly with rich favors crown.
That England thee, thou England, long and long
May'njoy; the good beloved, bad feared, among.
Another Song.
O Night. O day, while days and nights shall last,
'Bove all the days and nights that ever past,
To Englands God be hallowed,
With hearts and tongues solemnized,
With Hymns and songs eternized.
Black night and direful day, thou should have been,
A thundering night, a stormy day I ween,
With hellish Tempests darkened,
With Romish murders bloodyed,
With English horror dismalled.
The Train was ready laid the powder dry,
Faulks, and the blow, I quake to think how nigh.
Now all the Fiends of Hell wide gaped.
Now all the friends of Rome well hoped,
Now all England securely slep'd.
But Gods all-seeing never slumbring eye,
As Sentinel kept watch and ward on high,
Their devilish Plots he fore-espyes,
Their Popish Miners he diserves,
Gi^^^ King and State deliveries.
Thus Hell and Rome have England twice assayed,
With force and fraud to have conquered and betrayed;
Their Navy first God scattered,
Their Treason next discovered,
And twice has us delivered.
Amongst year let eighty eight be Chronicled,
(...) days, Novembers fifth be Calendred,
(...) both be hallowed,
(...) and tongues solemnized,
(...) and songs eternized.
(...), of all, God praised be,
With hearts, tongues, lives, be honored he,
(...), Amen, Amen say we.
FINIS.

