Heavens Alarm to the World. OR A SERMON WHEREIN IS SHOWED, That fearful Sights
and Signs in Heaven are the Presages of great Calamities at hand.

By INCREASE MATHER; Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Jer. 6. 17. Also, I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the
Trumpet; but they said, We will not hearken. Joel 2. 30, 31. I will show
Wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood and fire and pillars of smoke.
The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and the terrible day of the Lord come. Rev. 8. 10. And the third Angel
sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp,
and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of
waters. Rev. 11. 14. The second woe is past, behold, the third woe comes
quickly. BOSTON; Printed by John Foster. 1681.

TO THE READER.
Concerning those admirable and amazing works of God, which are by us called
Comets, as under a physical and mathematical Consideration, there are many that
have published their Sentiments, and some to good purpose and edification. The
Scope of the ensuing discourse, is only, (that being most proper for one under
my circumstances) to make a Theological Improvement thereof. There are that do
propound this enquiry, How many Comets has the world taken notice of since the
first Creation? which is indeed a Question that no mortal living is able to
give a full and certain answer unto. It is true that sundry learned and worthy
Writers, (especially Lavater and Alsted) have attempted to give us the History
of Comets, nor has their labor been wholly in vain or unprofitable, though it
be not possible to give an account of all of them. We do not read of above
eleven Blazing Stars, in those Ages (for about four thousand years) that were
before the Incarnation of the Son of God: doubtless there were more; but the
Records of those times are very imperfect, so that we cannot say, when they
appeared, or by whom observed. The number of Comets seen these last 1680.
years, is judged to be about 158; yet may it justly be questioned whether there
have been so many, inasmuch as diverse appearances of the same Comet have been
set down by Historians as if they had been so many distinct Comets. Such Stars
(for so rather than Meteors have the Observations of later times evinced them
to be) have ever been accounted Ominous Presages of great mutations and
miseryes coming upon the world. So did the wise men amongst the Gentiles of old
Abultima antiquita^is memoria notatum est Cometas semper calamitatum
proenuncios fuisse. Cicer. denat. Deor. Lib. 2.
their Orators, Poets, Philosophers ever esteem of them. And the observation
has been sadly verefied, by the experience of latter Ages; consonant to the
holy Scriptures of Truth, Diri toties atsere Cometae Virg.
where (both in the old Testament and in the New) Prodigious Sights and Signs
in the heavens are mentioned as the Presages of great Calamityes. Et terris
nunquam spectaclum impune Cometae Claudian.
Some object that after the blazing Star, Anno 1097. a very fertile prosperous
year followed, Quando nocte Cometae sanguined lugubre rubext.
but they forget that the next year a direful Plague raged in the world. Others
object that Wickliffs and Luthers Reformations, had Comets to precede them. But
(to say nothing of the Wars and fatal changes which in those days happened in
diverse parts of the world) two or three exceptions do not invalidate the
truth of a general Assertion. If such signs are commonly Presages of sore
Calamityes, that's enough to awaken men out of their Lethargyes, though now and
then, once in an hundred times it should happen to be otherwise, which yet
remains to be demonstrated. As for their notion who think that Comets are signs
that the light of the Gospel shall be further dispersed in the world, or that
they portend mercy to the Church, and Judgment to others only; it is to be
wished that there were a solid foundation for such a conceit: But alas!
Divisions amongst the Lords professing People themselves, and great
Persecutions have oftentimes been the fatal consequents of such portentous
signs. And if public calamityes come upon the world, it is not to be expected
but that the Lords People, whilst they are mixed amongst others, (and too much
partaking with them in their sins) living in an evil world, will have their
share therein. It has ever been so, and is ever like to be so, until the sign
of the Son of Man shall appear.

As for that Blazing Star, which has occasioned this present Discourse, it was
a terrible sight indeed, especially about the middle of December last, the
stream of such a stupendous magnitude, as that no man now living ever beheld
the like. That in the year 1618. was looked upon as very prodigious, History of
great Britain, p.128. Clarks Examp. Vol. 2.p.256.
yet the radiant Locks of it were not extended above 45. degrees in length,
when as this was about 60. degrees. Yet I cannot say there never was any so
dismal since the world began, for I have read of diverse no less fearful.
Seneca Not. Quest. C.15,16.
speaks of a Comet whose magnitude was equal with that of the Sun: and of
another that prodigiously diffused it self over the Vialactea; and of one that
extended from Helice to Buris. That which appeared Anno Christi 1452. Test
Nauclero.
was above 50 degrees in length. Writers speak of some blazing Stars that have
been attended with a much longer stream Nevertheless, one so fearful to behold
as this, has rarely been known: and without controversy some great thing is
portended thereby. I see little reason to conclude, that it is an Omen of happy
days to the world, until God has made way for mercy by great Judgments.
Especially considering, that we are fallen into the dregs of time, wherein the
days must and shall be perilous: It was long since Keckerm. Phys. ubi de
Cometis. p. mihi 1657.
conjectured, that in the Ages more immediately preceding the day of Judgment,
Comets and other fearful Sights should be more frequent then formerly, Megius
de exust^me Mundi. l. 3. c. 10.
as intimations of the great and amazing Revolutions in those Ages to be
accomplished. It will not be long before the second Woe Trumpet has done its
work, and then the third Woe will come quickly. The Lord grant that we may be
accounted worthy to stand before the Son of man at his coming.

The learned and judicious Hospinian De Origin temp orum. P. 59.
writes that Anno 729. there was a Comet seen first in the east, in the
morning, and after in the west in the evening (just as with our present blazing
Star) Quasi Orienti simul and Occidenti magni ^^^cujus mali Praesagi. We have
cause to fear that this Comet so appear (...) presage and portend great
Calamityes both to the East and the West, h. e. to the world in General. That
some notable day of the Lord is at hand, when such Signs appear, we may
believe: hence are they called v. Melchior Jun Orat Par. 1. p. 425.
Prodigia a Praeostendendo, because they shaw beforehand that something
Remarkable is a coming. Further then this I would not go about to determine;
only we may modestly conjecture as to particular events like to happen. I have
ever thought it unwarrantable, for men, not acted by an extraordinary Spirit,
to make particular and positive determinations concerning the Judgments (or
the Persons eminently concerned therein) by such Prodigies menaced. The great
Melancthon has been thought (by some great Voetius in in Disp^de Sign.
Authors) to proceed something too far in applications of this nature. Peucerus
( Melancton's son in law) expresses himself more warily, in his Teratoscopia,
or Discourse about Divination from fearful Sights. Yet he affirms that whenever
great changes in the world have been near, prodigious Sights have been the
forerunners thereof; and that unusual Sights are seldom or never known to have
happened without great and miserable changes attending them. Only it is possible
for particular Persons and places through faith in Christ, and in a way of
humble Repentance, to obtain a lengthening out of their tranquillity. The
Gentiles of old Alexand. ab Alexand. L5.c.27.
when they beheld fearful Sights in Heaven, would presently betake themselves
to their Prayers, and piacular Sacrifices, (in imitation of whom idolatrous
Papists have been wont in like cases to go to their Relics, Amulets,
Processions etc.) Coelius Rodogi. l.3.c.27.
that so evils Ominated thereby, might (if possible) be averted. And shall not
Professors of the true Religion, be awakened by such awful works of God, to go
unto Jesus Christ (our only Sacrifice) and to pray earnestly that impending
wrath may be removed, and the mercy of heaven obtained? Shall we not be
humbled, as for other sins, so for that, of not harkening to his Word? the
contempt whereof provokes him to speak by fearful Sights and Signs from
heaven, which seems to be the Strigelius and Tossanus ad Locum.
meaning of that Scripture, Act.2.19. The Lord is many ways calling upon men,
to repent, and pray, and get into the Ark before the flood come. Iudeed we
should not be dismayed at the Signs of heaven, nevertheless (as that Emperor
said) We ought to fear that God who has made this blazing Star. Surely, we
have cause to speak, as sometimes the Psalmist did, my flesh trembles for fear
of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston N-E. 12. Month, V^lgo Febr. 16. 1680.
Heavens Alarm to the World.
Luk.21. 11. -- Fearful Sights and great Signs shall there be from Heaven.


THE Lord Jesus Christ, having told his Disciples that great Calamityes were
hastening upon Jerusalem, and upon the Jewish Nation; they enquire when those
things should come to pass, and what Signs should precede and presage the
Judgments predicted. This we see in the 7 th. verse of this Chapter, They
asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and what Sign will
there be when these things shall come to pass? In answer unto which enquiry,
the Lord Christ does in this context mention several things, some of which were
to be more remote, and others more immediate Signs of that miserable
Destruction, which the sacred and unerring lips of Christ had foretold. 1.
Palse Christ's would arise. v. 8. Many shall come in my name. saying, I am
Christ, etc. The Jews had rejected the true Messiah, therefore God would punish
them with false Christ, as an intimation that the days of vengeance were
coming upon the Nation for that sin of theirs. The Apostle John (Christ's
beloved Disciple) does imitate his Master in mentioning the same thing as a
sign that the Jewish world was near unto its end, 1 John 2. 18. There are many
Antichrists See Mede's Works p.818. 872.
h. e. false Christ's, such as come in Christ's Name, i.e. that pretended unto
his Office, Dignity and Authority, and thereby (faith the Apostle) we know that
it is the last time, se. the Jewish state both Civil and Ecclesiastical, was
come unto the last hour. The Period of the Jewish world was at hand. And the
Historyes of those times speak of one Theud^^ and others, that pretended to be
Christ's, and that the river Jordan should give way to them as once it did to
Joshuah, so that a multitude of silly Jews were persuaded and seduced to follow
them, unto their own destruction. 2. Another Sign mentioned, is, that of Wars
and Commotions, v. 9. When ye shall hear of Wars and commotions be not
terrified, for these things must first come to pass, but the end is not by and
by. This may be understood of those intestine Wars and Commotions which happened
in the land of Judea. -- The Galileans took up arms against the Samaritans. At
Joseph. Antiq. L.20.C.4, 5. de Bello Jud. l.2. c.11.
one time, in a mutiny there were twenty thousand slain. These were Commotions
which caused a great noise and consternation amongst men (especially amongst
those of the Jewish Nation) in those days. Hence that which is by Luke
expressed by Wars and Commotions, is by Mark called Troubles, and by Matthew,
Wars and runners of Wars. And these things happened about twenty years before the
final destruction of Jerusalem and fatal overthrow of the Jewish Nation,
therefore was it said, the end is not by and by. 3. Another Sign is that
mentioned in the 10 th. v. Nation shall rise up against nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom. v. Joseph. de Bello Jud. l.2.c.19,20,21.
So indeed it came to pass when the Jewish Nation rose up against the Roman
Nation, and their neighboring Nations, Syrians, Samaritans etc. rose against
them. In those days the land of Judea was divided into several Provinces,
which did bear the names of Kingdoms, and the chief Governors of them are
according to the Hebrew style called Kings, being the Vice-Royes which the
Roman Emperors did substitute to be over those places. See 1 King. 22.47.
Hence we read of King Herod, King Agrippa etc. Grotius and Lucas Brugensis in
Mat. 24.7.
Now the People of these Provinces were set one against another; therefore it
is said Kingdom shall rise up against Kingdom. All those troubles were
forerunners and intimations of the fatal calamity a coming, and did help to
make way thereunto. 4. There were to be great Earthquakes in diverse places. In
the beginning of this verse. Such things are usually signs of divine Anger, and
so portentous of great changes and calamityes. The intimations of State-quakes,
yea of Nation-quakes. Historians speak of very tremendous Earthquakes which
happened in diverse places Sex circiter annos, ante urbic excidium, tres Asioe
clarissimas urbes, Terroe-motu eversa^ effe, testatur Orosius. 1. 7.

Tacitus scribitsub Tiberio Nerone, duodecim civitates in Asia terroe-motu
collapsas esse. Ac denuo in quinto e^us regnt anno, tredecim urbes Terroe motu
cecidisse.


whereby several famous Cities perished, not long before Jerusalem was
destroyed. 5. Famines, Probably that Prediction, does respect the same Famine
which Agabus prophesied of, Act. 11.28. under which the land of Judea suffered
deeply. Whence it was that the Apostle Paul was very sollicitous to obtain some
relief for the Christian Jews then at Jerusalem. 6. Pestilences. v. Bertram. in
Mat. 24.7.
These two Judgments, ( Limoi kai Loimoi as in the Greek it is elegantly
expressed) of Famine and Pestilence, do often go together, the latter
following at the heels of the former, and being occasioned thereby. 7. Fearful
Sights and great Signs in Heaven: which are the words now before us to consider
of. Fearful Sights, Gr. [ phohetra] Terriculamenta. Such Sights as strike a
terror into the hearts of men that are the Spectators of them. Signs from
Heaven, viz. Prodigious Signs. These things are mentioned as the more immediate
Presages of those miseryes that were coming upon Jerusalem, with the whole
Jewish Nation.

Doct. That Prodigious awful Sights and Signs in Heaven, are oftentimes, the
Presages of great Calamity coming upon the World. For the further clearing of
this Doctrine, three things may be enquired into. 1. What sights and signs are
the Presages of Calamity? 2. How it does appear that they are so? 3. What
Calamityes such Signs do commonly presage?

Q 1. What Sights and Signs in heaven are Presages of Calamity? A. 1. There are
signs in the starry heaven. The great God, when he made the World, placed the
Stars in heaven, to be for signs as to events that in the ordinary course of
nature should come to pass. Genesis 1. 14. God said, Let there be lights in the
Firmament of heaven, and let them be for Signs. They are for Signs of heat and
cold, wet and dry seasons, and the like. Hence the Lord spoke to Job as in
Ch.38.31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the
bands of Orion? The Pleiades are the same with those which men call the seven
stars. When the Sun is in that Constellation with the Pleiades, it has a great
power and influence upon the the earth. It is Spring time then. As for Orion
See Mr. Caryl on Job. 38.31.
it is a winter Constellation, causing cold, whereby the pores of the earth are
bound. It binds the earth from bearing fruit, and as it were binds the hands of
men from labor in their particular callings. When that Constellation appears
in the evening (as it does in the ninth month) it is a sign that the earth shall
be bound as has been expressed. Yea, and it is a sign that storms and
tempestuous seasons are to be expected. Therefore was it by the Poet called
Nimbosus Orion. And hence the stars are called by the name of The Signs of
heaven, Jer. 10.2. Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the
signs of heaven. Which words may well be understood concerning the stars and
Constellations in the heavens. Ita locum imerpretant^r R. Solomon Jarchi, and
exillo Lyranus.
For the Heathen, the Chaldeans especially (amongst whom the Jews were then
going to dwell) superstitiously imagined that the stars were Rulers of the
world, and did therefore stand in fear of them and worship them, Voetius Disp.
Selec^. par.2. p. 923.
which heathenish Idolatry the Lord does caution and charge his people against.
The stars of heaven are for natural signs. Their motions and appearances are
significations that such and such things, will according to that course of
nature which God has settled, come to pass in the world. There are also
extraordinary Stars, sometimes appearing in the heavens. God in his Providence
does so order as that so metimes Blazing Stars are seen in heaven. Such stars
are called Comets, from the stream like long hair which uses to attend them.
Such a star is prodigious, and a fearful Sight. And of this may the words of
the Text be understood. The Jewish Wars of Jews, l.7* c. 12
Historian reports, that not long before the destruction of Jerusalem, there
was a Blazing star in form of a Sword, which seemed to impend over the City,
for a year together: this now was a fearful sight, and a great sign from heaven.

2. There are fearful sights and signs appearing in the Air, sometimes in the
lower heaven. which we move and breathe in. Prodigious Meteors are sometimes
seen there. And strange Appearances, which are either seen or heard speaking.
Of these fearful sights and signs is the Text likewise to be interpreted.
Josephus relates, that before the Roman Army destroyed Jerusalem, there was
seen in the air, ibidem
iron Chariots and Soldiers in battle array; and in the night time, a great
light appeared in the temple, for half an hour together, with as much
brightness as if it had been noon day, and a voice was heard saying, Let us be
gone from hence.

Qu. 2. How does it appear that such fearful Sights are Presages of Calamityes
coming upon the World?

Ans. 1. The Scripture is clear for this. The Text before us does expressly
declare no less. And the Prophet Joel foretelling the same Calamityes which
this text has reference unto, says also, that prodigious signs in heaven
should presage and portend them. Joel 2. 30,31. I will show Wonders in the
heaven. Truly, Blazing Stars are Wonders in the heaven. And in the earth blood
and fire and pillars of smoke -- before the great and the terrible day of the
Lord come. When Jerusalem was destroyed and the Jewish state dissolved, that
was a great and notable day of the Lord, a Type of the great day of Judgment.
Wonders, even prodigious and amazing signs should precede it. A very learned
Mede Discourse 6.P. 37.
and judicious Interpreter, conceives, that the Hebrews of old did use to call
Comets or blazing stars by that name of A Pillar of smeke, because sometimes
they appear like pillars of smoke, and that therefore when it is said, there
shall be Pillars of smoke before the terrible day of the Lord, the true meaning
and intendment of those expressions, is, that Comets should precede and presage
the miseryes coming upon the Jewish Nation. Yea, the Scripture informs us, that
fearful sights and signs in heaven shall precede the great and general day of
Judgment as presages thereof, Luk.21.25. There shall be signs in the stars:
meaning that such things should be observed among the stars in heaven, as would
be a sign that Christ's coming to judge the world did approach. Wherefore in
ver. 28. it is said, When these things come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. The day of Judgment is a day of
Redemption and is so called in other Scriptures, Ephesians. 41. 30. Then shall the
bodies of the Saints be redeemed from the power of the grave, and both bodies
and souls redeemed from all evils of sin and of suffering. Rom.8.23. 1
Cor.1.30. At the Resurrection in the last day, will the great Redemption be to
the Saints of God, and the greatest miseryes to the wicked that ever were
thought of. And signs in heaven shall precede them. And hence it is, that
fearful Sights are called Signs in the Scripture, it is partly on this
account, in that they are Signs that the Lord is coming forth out of his holy
habitation, to punish the world for their iniquityes.

2. The experience of many Ages does bear witness unto the truth of this
Doctrine. If the Scripture were silent about this matter, the experience both
of former and of later Ages does sufficiently and sadly confirm the truth in
hand. Hence an Cum Deus puniturus sit gentem vel urbem, Prodigiis id (...)
solet significare, Herod. 1.6. Lege Melchioris (...) Orat. Par. 1.p.425.
heathen Writer could say. If God be about to punish a City or a Nation, he is
wont first to give Warning of it by Prodigyes, by Signs from heaven. And
commonly it is so, that when stupendous Signs go before, stupendous Judgments
follow after. Some Conradus Lycosthenes Eibrum edidit in quo omnia collegit
Predigia, quoe ab exordio mundi oftensa sunt.
have written large Volumes concerning the fearful Sights which have at
several times and places been observed in the world, and the Judgments and
miseries which have followed.

3. Many times such fearful Sights are tokens of Gods anger; Zanch. de natura
Dei, P. 414.
which is another reason why they are called Signs, as being Signs of the Anger
of God. Signs that flaming vengeance is kindled and burning in heaven against a
sinful World. Now when God is angry then public Judgments come, and
testimonies of Divine Displeasure. Personal afflictions are not always
evidences of Gods anger, as we see in Job; but public Judgments are ever wont
to be so. It Is thought that the ninetieth Psalm was penned by Moses on occasion
of a public Judgment, the Plague which broke in upon the Children of Israel
and swept away many thousands of them: and (faith he) we are consumed by thine
anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled, v.7. So that if public Judgments
come, God is angry, his wrath kindled; he does by them testify and pour down
his righteous displeasure from Heaven. Inasmuch then as fearful Sights are
Tokens of Gods anger, they are Presages of great and public Calamities. As the
Rainbow (though a natural Sign) is a token of divine Favor, so are prodigious
Sights, tokens of Divine Anger.

4. These fearful Sights are many times Presages of those things which make way
for great change, and Calamityes to come upon the world. They are oftentimes
(Blazing Stars Damascen. L.2.c.6. Isidor, L.3. Etymol

Crinemque timendi, Syderis etterris mutantem Regna Cometam. Lucan. Anno 1471.
ardet Cometa. Hoc anno multi Principes moriuntur. Sic Anno 1477. multi
Principes obierunt Alsted


in a more especial manner are so) the Presages of the death of great, yea and
of worthy men. Is not the fatal downfall of Augustulus (the last Roman
Emperor) in the Scripture emblematically set forth, by that of a Blazing Star
falling to the ground? Rev.8. 10. There fell a great star from heaven, burning
as it were a Lamp, Mede In Apoc 8. 10.
It is conceived, that the ruin of Augustulus, dethroned by Odoacer the
Herulian was signified by those words, and that he is resembled to that sort of
Comets, which is called Lampadias. And when there is a star burning and blazing
in heaven commonly it proves fatal to some Augustulus, whence great changes
and miseryes ensue. Yea, the death of Worthy (as well as great) Personages, is
sometimes portended by such Signs. A little before great Constantine's death, a
blazing Star appeared, and infinite miseryes followed. In the Year Alsted
Chronol. c. 49. ubi de Cometis. See Spotwoods Hist. of Scotl. P.94.
1556. a Comet (then vulgarly called a fiery Beesom) was seen, and soon after,
many learned, useful, worthy men dyed; whose death was an unspeakable loss and
misery to the places where they had lived.

Quest. 3. what Calamityes do such fearful sights and signs in heaven Presage?

A. We must not be particular and positive in interpretations of things of this
nature. When a fearful sight appears in heaven which the whole world cannot
but take notice of now to make a particular and absolute determination, v.
Voet. in Disp^de Signis is P.919,930.
that such a place, or such a person, such a Judgment is certainly intended
thereby, is too much boldness. In general, we may safely say, that there is
just cause to expect; that great calamityes are at hand, but what persons or
places shall more eminently fall under those Judgments, is not for us to
determine, but we must leave that with God, who best knows what himself intends
to do.

This being premised, we proceed in answering the enquiry before us.

1. Sometimes such signs are Presages of great Persecutions coming upon the
Church of God. The Lord in mercy to his People gives them such warnings, that
so they may prepare for what is a coming or make have to enter into the chambers
of safety, as it were for a little moment, till the indignation be overpast.
Nero's bloody Persecution had a Blazing Star to precede it. The same is true
concerning the Arrian Heresy and Persecution; that flood spoken of in the
Revelation, which the Dragon cast out of his mouth, and whereby the woman, the
Church, fled into the wilderness, was in eminent danger of being swallowed up
and devoured. Rev. 12.15.

2. Sometimes such Signs in heaven are presages of miserable Dearths and
Scarcity. That blazing Star impending over Jerusalem, which the text has
reference unto, was attended with a terrible Famine, whereby multitudes
perished. In the years after Christ 876. 948. 964. there were blazing stars
seen presaging Famines and other Judgments. In Annis 674,675,676. Comets
appeared, and fore Droughts followed. In some Countries it rained not for 3
years together. The like miseryes followed the Comet Anno 1477. In Annis 594,
1527. 1542. Comets were seen, and Armies of Locusts followed, devouring the
fruits of the earth.
And therefore such signs are frequently portentous of those Judgments which
cause want and scarcity, e. gr. of sore Droughts and Blastings. and the
multiplication of noxious creatures that destroy the fruits of the earth. All
which particulars I could confirm unto you, by approved History, which
declares how they have all been presaged by blazing stars in heaven.

3. Lamentable Deaths and destructions amongst men, have been oftentimes
presaged by such sights in heaven. Sudden and amazing ruins by In the years
66, 78, 79, and 668. Comets appeared, after which terrible Earthquakes happened
in many places.

Annis 577,912,1530. there were blazing stars appearing and inundations
followed in diverse places. Soon after the Comet An.882. the famous city of
Triers was burnt to the ground.

Alsted. ubi supra.

Memorabile fuit Portentum Terroe motus An. 1618. quando ruina montis, qua
totum Oppidum Plurium, et Vicus Schilanus cura 900 hominibus oppressa.


Earthquakes, by Inundations, by Fire, and the like awful visitations, have
been thereby portended. Especially destructions by mortal and contagious
Diseases. That strange disease known by the name of Sudor Anglicanus, which in
a peculiar manner pursued those of the English Nation, even when in strange
lands; whence they were dreaded in all places where they came there was a
blazing Star that did precede it. Especially that which is of all diseases
miserable mortals are subject unto, the most terrible, I mean the plague of
Pestilence, Anno 1457. Cometa quem nigrum appellabant, apparuit, secuta est
Pestis diuturnior.

Anno 1472. Duo Cometoe. Pestis adeo soeviit, ut Cognati proximi desererent
suos. idem eodem Libro.

Anno 1006. Cometa, quem Pestis excepit, ut vivi cum mortuis sepelirentur,
multa Oppida plane exhausit.


it is frequently thus presaged. Such sights are Heavens Alarm to a sinful
World, to give notice that God has bent his Bow, and made his Arrows ready,
and that if Sinners turn not, the arrows of Pestilence and Death shall fall
down upon them speedily. This might be confirmed by a multitude of instances,
but it needs not. Our own experience is enough. We cannot but remember the
Blazing Star that was seen but 16 years ago and a terrible Plague followed, so
that in our own nation, near upon an hundred thousand were swept away in one
City, and in one year. And it is reported that immediately after that great
blazing Star which appeared above threescore years ago. God sent the Plague See
Mr. Gorges Description of New England. P.27.
amongst the Natives in this land, which swept them away in such multitudes, as
that the living were not enough to bury the dead. So did the Lord cast out the
Heathen before this his People, that the way might thereby be prepared unto our
more peaceable settlement here. The Lord in mercy grant, that we may never by
becoming like unto the Heathen in profaneness and irreligion, provoke him to
do unto us, as he has done unto them.

4. Such fearful sights and signs in heaven are usual presages of War among the
Nations, and so of those Devastations and Desolations which the sword leaves
behind it. Sometimes Prodigyes on the earth do betoken war and bloodshed* 2
Kin.3.22. And signs in heaven do no less. Thus in in my Text the Roman Sword,
which made the Jewish nation desolate, (according to Daniels Prophesy*
ch.9.27.) was portended by a fearful blazing Star in heaven. Belli mala sign^
Comet^. Tibull.

Stell^ rel^cebit gladii mortalibus index.

Sibyll. Orac. lib. 3.


And when Alaricus the Goth made such a terrible irruption upon the Roman
Empire, like a storm of hail and fire and blood, Rev. 8.7. blazing stars in
heaven preceded those calamityes. When Attila, who they say, called himself
Flagellum Dei, Gods Whip, to scourge the world for their wickedness, when he
was armed to be the Executioner of divine Vengeance upon the earth, destroying
Cities, and laying Nations wast before him* blazing Stars were seen preceding
and portending those miserable times. So when the Saracens (the first woe
trumpet) and the Turks (the second woe trumpet, prophesied of in the Revelation)
were let loose upon the apostate christian world, blazing stars, and fearful
sights in heaven did precede those woeful days. And are there not some alive,
and here before the Lord this day, that can remember the blazing star which
appeared in the 9 th. and in the 10 th. months, in the year 1618. and the next
year began that unhappy War in Germany, which proved so fatal to the Protestant
interest there.

Thus have we seen what Judgments and Calamityes, fearful Sights in heaven are
commonly the presages of. As for that sign in heaven now appearing, (which has
occasioned me to speak this word at this time) what Calamityes may be portended
thereby, which of the Judgments mentioned, or whether all of them be not
thereby presaged, I shall not say, but leave it unto God and time to discover.
Only in general, we have cause to fear, that sweeping Judgments are thereby
signified; that the Lord is coming down from heaven with a long Beesome of
destruction which shall sweep away a world of Sinners before it.

I Conclude with a word of Application. Nor would I speak any thing but the
words of truth and soberness, as becomes a Messenger of Christ to do, when
speaking in his Name.

USE. Let us hence be exhorted to approve our selves, as those that are under
the solomn awful Warnings of God ought to do. I need not say, (for every one
knows it) that there is a fearful fight and sign appearing in the heavens.
Such a formidable. Blazing Star, as that the like has seldom been observed. It
concerns us then, to hearken to the voice of the Lord therein, who by such
tremendous sights is speaking awfully to the children of men. Hearthen Heavens
Alarm this day. You will say, But what should we now do? What does the Lord
expect from us, when there are such dreadful Presages of evils coming upon the
world?

Answ. 1. It now concerns us to be awakened out of all security. That Is one of
Gods ends, (his declared end) in causing such fearful Sights to be taken notice
of, that so he might awaken a secure sleeping World. And indeed, the Lord,
manifests his goodness and compassion toward sinful Creatures therein. It was
a pious speech of that Ejus, clementiam laudare tene^^ur, qui nostram inertiam,
talibus a^monere dignatur indiciis^ Carolus magnus, vel ut alii valunt,
Ludovicus 1. Carolimagnifilius.
Emperor, who being somewhat terrified at the sight of a Blazing Star, said to
those about him, Let us admire the Clemency of that God, who before (...)
smites us, causes such signs in heaven, that so he might awaken us out of our
security. O let us beware of crying Peace, Peace, when the day of destruction
is at hand. O take heed of sleeping and dreaming of nothing but worldly.
Prosperity at such a time as this. When the Lord Jesus Christ had told his
Disciples, that calamitous times were a coming, and mentioned the Signs and
presages thereof, he bids them month therefore, Luk.2.1.36. Wherefore let us
not please ourselves, with imagining that such fearful sights, are signs of
mercy only, and not of Judgment. The contrary unto which opinion, has been
confirmed by more then an hundred instances Consulatur Heidfeld, Sphinx (...).
1087.

Universali experientia, and hominum censensu, proejudic atum est, Comet as
magnas mutattones portendere. Voet. Disp. de signis. P.929.


Men are exceeding apt to interpret such things in a way of favor to
themselves, when nothing less is intended thereby. So when these fearful Sights
and Signs in heaven which my Text speaks of, were seen at Jerusalem, the Jews
did interpret them as good Owens to themselves, and as ominous of destruction
to their enemies. The Prodigies in Germany See Clarks Martyrology. P. 311.etc.
were looked upon by the Protestants as signs of deliverance unto them, and of
destruction to their enemies. But alas! the event was quite otherwise. And let
us not make ourselves secure, by saying or thinking, that the Lord by such
fearful sights speaks to others only, and not unto us. As Vespasian (the
Emperor) when Testante Suetonio.
there was a long hairy Comet seen, he did but deride at it, and make a Joke of
it, saying, That it concerned the Parthians that wore long hair, and not him,
who was bald, but within a year, Vespasian himself, (and not the Parthian)
dyed. Such fearful sights are usually signs that those Judgments which are (as
Tertullian speaks) Tonsura humani generis, Gods sharp Razors on mankind,
whereby he does Poll; his Sithe, whereby he does shear down multitudes of
sinful creatures, do draw near, in which respect there is no doubt to be made
of it, but that God by this Blazing star, is speaking to other places, and not
to New England only. And it may be, he is declaring to that Generation of hairy
Scalps, who go on still in their trespasses, that the day of their calamity is
at hand, and that the things which shall come upon them make have. A strange
sight does botoken strange punishment coming upon those that have bin
prodigious workers of iniquity. Yet let not us promise to our selves nothing
but prosperity, in the doleful and the bitter day, when there shall be
Lamentation generally. I am persuaded, that the floods of great water are
coming. I am persuaded, that God is about to open the windows of heaven, and to
pour down the Cataracts of his wrath, ere this Generation (wherein Atheism and
Profaneness are come to such a prodigious height) I say, ere this Generation is
passed away. But what reason have we to think that no drops of the fatal storm
shall come near to us? If we so conclude, we may provoke the Lord to say, The
Sinners of my People shall dye by the sword, who say the evil shall not
overtake us nor prevent us. To be awakened out of security, and tremblingly to
wait for the good pleasure of God, whatever it may be, is the most likely way
to find rest in the day of Trouble. So did the Prophet find it, Hab.3.16. when
I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered, I trembled in my self, that I
might rest in the day of trouble. When the thundering voice of Judgment was
heard, his heart trembled at it, so did he find rest in the day of trouble.

2. This should put us upon preparing for another day of Trouble. And this
should we do the rather, since the changes portended by this Comet, are like
to come speedily as well as certainly. Joseph said to Pharaoh, For that the
dream is doubled, it is because the thing is established by God, and God will
shortly bring it to pass. Genesis 41.32. Does not the doubled appearance of this
fearful sight in the heavens speak as much? Let us then prepare for trouble.
We should not only expect it, but so expect it, as to prepare for it. Certainly
we have reason so to do -- If there had been no Blazing Star, yet, upon other
accounts, we have cause to expect and prepare for another day of Trouble, which
seems to be hastening upon thee O New England, and upon thee O Boston, The Sins
which are amongst us, are surer and blacker signs of Judgment then any signs
in heaven, that we may think of. I say the sins, the Pride, the Profaneness,
the worldliness, the general security and iniquity that prevails amongst us.
Especially considering how little good all former Judgments and Dispensations
have done upon us. What fiery Desolations has the Lord made amongst us? The
Lord has bin roaring out of Sion. Such roaring Judgments, have bin amongst
us, as that the report of them has been heard afar off. Sword, Death, and
Fire. But, (alas O Lord God) may it not be said concerning the generality of
men, they return not unto him that has bin smiting of them? They are the same
since the War, since the Small Pox, since the Fires, that they were before. Ah!
what will come next? We have cause to expect, and it will be our wisdom to
prepare for another day of Trouble seven times greater then the former. It
grieveth me to speak thus, but I cannot forbear. I feel that the word of the
Lord is like a fire in a man's bones, and it will break out. The Lord God has
spoken, who can but prophecy? And now know for certain, that if destroying
Judgments and Death overtake any in their sins, and sweep them away to Hell,
their blood shall be upon their own heads. For the Lord has fired his Beacon
in the heavens, among the stars of God there; the fearful sight is not yet out
of sight. The Warning piece in heaven is going off, now then if the Lord
discharge his Murdering pieces from on high, and men be found in their, sins
unfit for death, their blood shall be upon them. They had warning given them
that the Sword was a coming: Lo, the Lord himself gave them the warning, but
they would not take warning, their blood shall be upon them. Moreover, if
troubles should not come, yet it will be wisdom to prepare for them. If the
Lord, after he has sent his Angel to stand with a drawn sword over Jerusalem,
should be entreated to spare us, yet it will never do us hurt to prepare for
the most deadly arrows of affliction, that may light upon us, whilst in this
Vale of tears.

3. We should due what in the lies to divert those Judgments which seem to be
impending and blazing over our heads. This word of comfort, I may safely speak,
the Lords threatenings are not absolute, but conditional. So far as we in these
ends of the earth, these goings down of the Sun, are spoken unto, by this sign
in the heavens, it is possible we may escape the evils threatened thereby, if we
duly hearken to the voice of God therein. Jer.18.7,8. At what time I speak
concerning a nation and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it, if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. So that
when desolating Judgments are threatened either by the word, or by the awful
works of God, those denunciations of wrath are not absolute but conditional. If
Repentance intervene, the evils which otherwise must be looked for, may be
diverted. See therefore Jer.36.3,7. It may be the house of Judah will hear all
the evil which I purpose to do unto them, that they may return every man from
his evil way. Ay, a general Repentance is that which will do, if every man
turn from his evil way, that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. It may
be they will present their supplication before the Lord etc. This is that which
the Lord would have; therefore he says, He stir up the spirit of my Ministers
and Ambassadors, that they shall declare and denounce my Judgments against a
sinful Generation. It may be they will hear. And ^e speak by awful Signs from
heaven that may be as Heralds to proclaim wrath and woe to the world, It may be
they will hear, and then shall their sins be forgiven. You will say, But what
shall we do that so the Judgments which are blazing over us may be diverted
from us? Answ. Pray and cry mightily to heaven. For this let every one that is
godly pray unto the Lord in a time wherein he may be found, and before the
floods of great waters come nigh unto us. Our Lord Jesus Christ, having warned
his disciples of approaching calamityes, he concludes with an exhortation unto
prayer, Luke 21.36. Pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass. Prayer may do much toward the averting
of wrathful Judgments and desolations. When the Lord threatened to bring Famine
and destruction upon his People, Amos fell to praying* and God said This shall
not be, this Judgment and threatened desolation shall not be, Amos.7.3,6. O
then, let us deprecate impending Judgments. Do we see the sword blazing over
us? Let it put us upon crying to God that that Judgment may be diverted, and
not return upon us again so speedily. Do we see the arrows of Pestilence and
Death blazing over us? Oh! pray that the destroying Angel may not be sent to
walk in darkness, and to waste at noon day. Does God threaten our very heavens?
O pray unto him that he would not take away Stars and send Comets to succeed
them. Pray that the Lord Jesus who holds the Stars in his right hand, may
continue those in the Firmament of his Churches (the heaven which his own hand
has planted) who are indeed Stars, willing to impart the light which they have
received from Christ unto his People; and that wandering Stars, blazing stars,
seducing spirits may never come in their room. I am not without fear, that this
will at last be the Judgment of God upon New England, and upon these Churches.
Pray that it may never be. And our Supplications should be attended with deep
Humiliation, Zeph.2.2,3. Gather your selves together, h. e. come before the
Lord in a way of public solemn Humiliation, before the decree, i. e. the
Judgment written and threatened, bring forth, before the fierce anger of the
Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come upon you: seek the
Lord. -- It may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. Thus then
should we do, in this day when there are such dark and angry clouds hanging
over our heads,and we know not how soon they may break upon us. And truly, if
our Lectures, were, some of them, turned into days of Prayer, at such a time
as this, it is no more then what there is cause for. And there is one thing
more, that should in special be remembered by us; a thing that has been much
talked of, but little has been done in (...), that is Reformation!
Reformation!! When the Prophet Jonah was sent of God to preach and say, Yes
forty days, and Ninivth shall be destroyed: that was a more awful sign of
desolation, then if they had seen a blazing star, hanging over the City,
menacing the ruin thereof. Yet when they repented and reformed (though it was
but an external Reformation) the Lord spared them forty years longer. Ah!
New England, will thou not do more then Niniveh? shall there not be so much as
an external Reformation, of those things that provoke the glorious eyes of
Heaven? Will not the haughty daughters of Sion, reform their Pride in apparel?
Will they have the attire of an harlot? Will they lay out their hair, and wear
their false locks, their borders, and towers like Comets about their heads?
will they do so, until God send his arrows from heaven, to smite them down
into the Grave, where the days of darkness shall be many. And shall there be
still such a multitude of licensed Drinking-houses, (and Town-dwellers
frequenting them) to the shame of Boston, and to the infamy of New England,
notwithstanding the testimony which God and his servants have given against it?
How then shall we think to escape in the day of the Lords anger, if a
Reformation so much as in these externals, which it is so easy to reform, will
not be obtained? O Return Return unto the Lord. And in that way, let us betake
our selves unto the shading wings of the Lord Jesus! Do we not hear him
speaking to us, as sometimes unto Jerusalem? Mat.23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered thee, as an hen her chickens under her wings.
Says the Lord, the Roman Eagles, those birds of prey, are hastening upon you:
but if you would have come under my wings, you should have been safe enough.
Even so, does not the Lord say, O New England, New England! do thou not know
that the birds of prey are designing to devour thee? but my wings are broad
enough to secure and shelter thee, when the black and stormy tempest shall
break upon the world. If we be found a praying, an humble, a reforming People,
we need not doubt but that under the shadow of his wings, we shall make our
refuge, until the calamity be overpast.

TIBI DOMINE.

