KOTOGPAPHIA OR A Discourse Concerning COMETS; wherein the Nature of BLAZING
STARS is Enquired into: With an Historical Account of all the COMETS which have
appeared from the Beginning of the World unto this present Year, M.DC.LXXXIII.

Expressing The Place in the Heavens, where they were seen, Their Motion,
Forms, Duration; and the Remarkable Events which have followed in the World, so
far as they have been by Learned Men Observed.

As also two SERMONS Occasioned by the late Blazing Stars.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church at Boston in New England.

Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein.

Amos 9.6. He builds his stories in the Heaven.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND. Printed by S. G. for S. S. And sold by I. Browning At
the corner of the Prison Lane next the Townhouse 1683.

To the Reader.
THe Subject of this following Discourse, now offering it self to thy Perusal
is one of the many (...) which it has pleased the Almighty Lord of Heaven and
of Earth, to treat of and insist upon, in Drawing up and Publishing to the
World the great and glorious volume of his Works: in the Margent whereof they
have been frequently placed as Red Letters, Asterisms, or pointing Hands, to
awaken unto a more heedful attention and serious consideration, the dead
hearted sleeping and secure World of Mankind. To promote this, the best and
most blessed end and use, of such tremendous and threatening Aspects of the
highest and most Dreadful Majesty, is the pious design of the Reverend and
Learned Author, in compiling and publishing this Treatise, and its a thousand
pities it should not be attended to and attained by a People so circumstanced
as we, English transplanted into, or procreated in these American Deserts, be.
The labor and pains it has cost the Author to peruse and consult so many
Writers, ancient and modern, Astronomers, Chronologers* and Historians, is such
as will render it very disingenious, not to give it a graceful and friendly
reception and entertainment. He has therein presented thee with, first, the
Theory; secondly, the History of Comets, commonly called Blazing Stars. As to
the Theory, there is (to my understanding) as much declared, as it has pleased
the Father of Lights and Fountain of all knowledge and wisdom (hitherto) to
discover to poor ignorant Mortals; viz. the result of the judicious thoughts of
the ablest and best accomplished Artists, who upon very many accurate,
unquestionably true and exact Observations, made by the help of choicest
Instruments improved by minds intensely set to search into, and find out the
Mystery and Meaning of those abstruse and admirable works of him who is most
High; have declared what they conceive most rationally probable. The wisest of
Men know that they understand but little part of Gods ways and works; and are
not ashamed to confess that in so much things above humane Capacity, they are
rather Quaerists then Adeptists, content to be ignorant of what he is pleased
as yet not to discover; our Authors modest expressing himself, shows he wrote
under the influence of so humbling a consideration.

Of the second, or Historical part of the Discourse, the scope is, to evidence
and evince that Comets are ordinarily the forerunners of disasterous
Calamities, Mischiefs, and Miseries, hastening to follow and fall down on the
heads of senseless and secure Sinners. For the clearing up and making out of
which, by way of induction, a great multitude of particular Instances and
Examples are out of sundry Authors of approved ability and faithfulness
alleged; who have left upon Record their accurate observations of time, place,
and other circumstances of several Comets in diverse ages, with the dreadful
Revolutions, dismal Commotions and Confusions which followed them at the heels.
If it be said, that some of those Periwigged Heralds have appeared on the
ethereal stage upon a more benign account: it may be rationally replied, that
the number of such is very small: and that their blasting influences, might be
direfully operative in remoter and less known parts of the Earth. When the hand
of Heaven is seen writing MEAN MEAN TEKEL, etc. it may become the highest of
Mortals to tremble. Reader, if thou art one any whit considerably raised above
the level of the lowest sort of men, thou will not think it lost labor to
acquaint thy self with what is here presented: an awakening and humbling is the
best use thou can make of it; to see it improved unto the furthering thy
souls best good will be the most acceptable recompense of the Pious Authors
unwearied pains: That he may see the desired travel of his soul, shall be the
unfeigned wish, of him who is,

Thine in the Lord, JOHN SHERMAN.
December. 20. 1682.
To the Reader.
SOme Worthy Persons having desired me to Write the History of Comets; I
resolved (with Divine Permission and Assistance) to spend the spare hours of a
few Weeks in an endeavor that way. And accordingly I have perused what Books I
could meet with, which might be helpful to me in this undertaking. There is a
late Author Stanislai, de Lubienietae See the Philosophi^* Transactions for An.
1668. vol. 3. p 691., 1071,
who on occasion of the Comets seen Annis 1664, 65 has published a large
Volume, which he calls Theatrum Cometicum, wherein he gives an account of all
the Comets which have been observed since Noah's flood being in number 415,
together with the Events, whether Prosperous or Adverse. Also Erasmus
Bartholinus has written upon those Comets, which Books, I have very much
wished for a sight of, as supposing I should meet with Passages therein, that
would be serviceable to me in my present design: But I could not at this
distance from Europe, suddenly obtain them.

As for what concerns the Time, and other circumstances relating to these
Phaenomenus; I have been chiefly beholding to the Collections of Alstedius,
Longomontanus, Kepler, Hevelius and Ricciolus Though Rockenbachius is many
times cited, I could not obtain the perusal of his Book (it not being in this
American Wilderness) only I take his Observations upon trust from Hevelius, who
has faithfully expressed what the other has written. Concerning remarkable
Events: Besides the Authors mentioned* I have consulted Funccius, Calvisius*
Cluverius, and several other Historians; and if the Reader please to take the
pains to search the Authors quoted in the Margin, or where none is there cited,
if he look into Calvisius and Funccius their Chronologies he will find that
things have been truly related. As for Events which have happened in these late
times, it is needless to quote any Author, for that which our own eyes have
seen, or ears heard. I know (as the great Orator could say) I am not born for
my self, but for others* I may hope that my labor herein, will not be
altogether unacceptable to the English Reader, since there never was yet (so
far as I understand) an attempt of this kind by an English hand. My chief
design, is to inform and edify the ordinary sort of Readers. Yet considering
that God has made me a debtor to the wise as well as to the weak, I have added
some things of the nature, place* motion of Comets, which only such as have
some skill in Astronomy can understand; and unto such, hints of that kind will
be both pleasant and profitable; such kind of knowledge being that which
Tradition says the Holy Patriarchs were some of them delighted in. Upon the
mention of Historical passages, which imply a notable accomplishment of some
Prophetical Scripture, A.M. 202^. Abraham docuit Mathematicam and Astronomiam
Alst. Encyclop. L. 33. Ca. 8 p. 2119
I have (it being very proper for one under my circumstances so to do) taken
special notice thereof, supposing that it may be instructive to some Readers,
and not ungrateful unto others. These late years having been attended with
several Comets, and there being some who would have the World believe, there is
no cause of dread when such Ensigns amidst the Heavenly Host, are held up in
the sight of all the Earth; I hope the publishing a discourse on the present
Subject, will not be judged unseasonable. When the Benjamites saw the Flame,
with a Pillar of smoke (in a proper and literal sense) though before they knew
not that evil was near unto them, yet then they could not but be sensible of
it. Judge. 20.34, 40. If any be awakened with the sight of these Pillars of
Smoke which we have seen flaming in Heaven* to prepare for whatever changes may
befall them; And if this Treatise shall promove the attainment of that end, my
design in writing of it will not be wholly frustrated, nor my labor in vain.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston N. E. Dec. 31. 1682.
The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THat Comets are not in the Air, but in the Starry Heaven: their Origin, and
true Matter enquired into.

CHAP. II.
The several sorts of Comets considered. The natural Reason of the Blaze. The
time of their Appearance cannot certainly be praedicted. Notwithstanding their
proceeding from natural causes they may be portentous signs of evil Events.

CHAP. III.
The History of Comets from the beginning of the World to the first coming of
Christ, together with some remarkable Events attending them.

CHAP. IV.
An Historical Account of what Blazing Stars were seen within the first five
hundred Years after Christ's Incarnation, and the notable Events which still
followed.

CHAP. V.
Of Comets which appeared between the Year 500 and 1000. with some remarkable
Events.

CHAP. VI.
A continuance of the History of Comets, with the Events attending them, unto
the Year 1200.

CHAP. VII.
A further Account of Comets appearing from the Year of our Lord 1200. unto the
Year 1500. with the most observable Events attending them.

CHAP. VIII.
The History of Comets which have been observed from the Year 1500. to 1600.
with the Events.

CHAP. IX.
The History of Comets in this last Century, with the more remarkable
Occurrences of Divine Providence, which have attended them.

CHAP. X.
That Blazing Stars are commonly signs of evil Events, therefore not to be
slighted; nor this last Blazing Star, which is attended with such rare
Conjunctions of the Planets. Judicial Astrologers condemned. The Conclusion.

A Discourse Concerning COMETS.
CHAP. I. That Comets are not in the Air, but in the Starry Heaven. Their
Origin and true matter enquired into.
THe Sentiments of learned Men, concerning the place where and the matter out
of which Comets are made; have been very various. The Peripatetick School has
phansied them to be Meteors, generated out of the Bowels of the Earth, exhaled
and extolled by the Sun to the supreme Region of the Air, and there set on
Fire. It would be needless and endless to tell how many have after Aristotle
embraced this fiction, but it may not be unprofitable in a few words to evince
the contrary, viz. That Comets are not placed in the first heaven or Air, but
far above it, in the second or Starry Heaven, and that therefore they are
rather Stars than Meteors.

1. That most learned Mathematician Hevelius his argument from the motion of
Comets is irrefragable In Cometographiae Lib. 2. Page 132.
whatever body (says he) is moved in the great Circle, dividing the Sphaere,
and keeping fixed Poles, is certainly Etherial and not Aereal. But this is true
of every Comet; its diurnal or common motion, is absolved as other Caelestial
bodies are, which cannot be said of any sort of Meteors; yea, the motion
thereof is exact and regular, though at first its more swift, and afterward
more slow, yet in that inequality, there is an exact proportion and regularity
observed, when as it is otherwise with Meteors that are tossed to and fro, and
move not through the great Circle. The motion of Comets does very much imitate
not that of the fixed Stars, but of the Planets, whence they are by some called
Pseudo-Planetae* and by others Spurious-Planets. And the Holy Scripture seems
to give that name of Planets to them, or as our Translation has it wandering
Stars, Jude, 13. (...)

2. The truth of what we assert, is manifest to those that understand any*
thing in the Doctrine (...). It is an indubitable Maxim, that these i^ the
Parallax the remoter the Phenomenon. But Comets have a less Parallax than the
Moon, which shows that they are Supra-Lunary Bodies, sometimes they admit of no
sensible Parallax at all, as might by many instances be confirmed, Let us for
Arguments sake, imagine the supreme Region of the Air to extend as far as 20
Semidiameters of the Earth, h. e. 17000 German Miles (which it is most certain
it does not, nor the half of one thousand, as anon will be made to appear) if
the Comet Hevel Lib. 3. Page 160.
is no higher then that, there will be a considerable Parallax. Inasmuch then,
as to many Comets there has been no Parallax, that demonstrates their being
elevated above 17000 Mill. Germ. and consequently as far as the Aetherial
Heaven. Therefore,

3. Learned Men of these later times, wherein light in things natural as well
as divine has been admirably discovered, have by the help of Mathematical
Instruments made ocular demonstrations, that Comets are far above this Aerie
Heaven, wherein Animals live and move.

Kepler observed the Blazing Star which was seen A.D. 1618. to be at its first
appearance three times as high as the Moon. Hevelius Lib. 5. P. 317
then whom no man was more industrious and accurate in observing the Comet, A.
D. 1652. says that January the first it was as high as the sphaere of Mercury,
January the sixth as high as Venus, Ian. 8. as high as Mars, January 9. as high
as the Orb of Jupiter. It was distant from the Earth 154^4. S T. and not only
the more subtle Doctrine of Parallaxes demonstrates that Blazing Stars are
beyond the aerie Region, but other considerations also evince it, e. g. that of
its continuing so many hours above the Horizon, and being observed by persons
in Countries remote one from another at the same hour, to be in the same
constellation or place in the Heavens. Let us (says Hevelius) suppose the
supreme Region of the Air to be 20 German miles (or 80 Italick miles) off,
Kepler de Cometis P. 33.
and yet that is no doubt higher then the Air is extended; for the tops of some
Mountains are higher then the Clouds, so as that the Air does not go beyond
them: If men ascend the top of Mount Olympus in Asia, they die for want of air,
being out of their Elements, just as Fishes die when lifted above the water;
But supposing it to be 80 miles distant from the Earth, and the Comet to be
there, it would not have been above the Horizon, more then two hours; when as
it was so 17 hours. And at the very hour when Idem in Lib. 3. P. 151, 155.
Hevelius did at Dantzick observe it to be in the Star near the foot of
Persius, Bullialdus in Paris saw it in the very same place, whenas, if it had
been no higher then the supreme Region of the air, it would have appeared to
Bullialdus (being then in Paris) in Hercules and not in Persius, as it did to
those in Dantzick Nor would a Blazing Star be observed by all the World at once
(where the Stars under which it moves, are seen) if it were not above the air.
The opinion of Panaetius, who thought that a Comet was a mere Emphasis or
Parelion, proceeding from the reflection of some other Star, is solidly
refuted, from this consideration, that a Parelion is not seen in all Countries
at once; The same argument proves that Comets have their existence above the
air.

4. We may argue from the magnitude of Comets, that they are as high as the
starry Heaven. S^ellius In Libro de Cometa Anno. 1618.
endeavors by Mathematical demonstration to evince that if the whole airy
Heaven should be contracted into one Globe it would not be so big as the head
of that Comet, which appeared, A. D. 1577. how then is it possible for the air
to contain so vast a body? Majus non potest con^ineri a minori. And Gotfridu^
Wendelinus observed that the magnitude of the Comet which appeared A.D. 1652.
did equal or exceed the Moon. And Hevelius L. 6. P. 323.
writing of the same Comet, says, that it was greater then the Moon, and that
he was astonished, when with exact Mathematical Instruments he examined it; and
though other Learned Men were with him at the same time, and helpful in his
Observations, he professes he could not have believed what they said, if his
own eyes had not beheld it. Nay* he says, that that Comet did almost equal the
Sun a little before its disappearing, Ibid. P. 338.
yet the Sun is (according to his judgment) 3462 times as big as the Earth. Is
it likely that a body of so stupendous a magnitude should be contained in this
low and little Heaven, wherein Mortal Creatures have their Breath and Being?

5. Some Comets (as Galtruchius de Sphaera Mundi, Cap. 6. P. 125. confesses)
have been absconded, by the interposition of a Planet between the Earth and
them, which could not be if they did not move in an higher Sphere then the
Planet whereby they were Eclipsed: But notwithstanding these Arguments are so
convictive and demonstrative* its mavelous to see how some Popish Authors (
Jesuits especially) strain their wits to defend their Pagan Master* Aristotle
his Principles. Bullialdus speaks of a Florentine Physician, that all the
Friends he had could never persuade him once to view the Heavens through a
Telescope, and he gave that reason for his refusal, because he was afraid that
then his Eyes would make him stagger concerning the truth of Aristotle's
Principles, which he was resolved he would not call into question. It were
well, if these Men had as great veneration for the Scripture as they have, for
Aristotle's (if indeed they be his) absurd Books de coelo Sed de ^is fatis.

It is an easier matter to prove that Comets are in the Ether, then to declare
how they came there. Some ancient Philosophers judged them to be coaevons with
the Planets, and fixed Stars, and that only their appearance and not their
existence is new. This Opinion Consulantur Aristot* meteor Lib. 1* Chap. 6.
Plutarch de placitis Philosophorum, L. 3. Chap. 5. Ricciolus de Cometis L. 8.
P. 36, 40.
was embraced by Pythagoras, Diogenes, Seneca, and by the old Chaldeans. Nor is
it contradicted by Columbus, Licetus, Cartesius, with some other late Writers.
And it must be acknowledged, that notwithstanding their disappearance at
certain times, for many years together, they may be coaetaneous, and altogether
of the same nature with the true Planets. A rectilineal motion may soon cause a
Star to vanish out of our sight which yet has a real existence still. Or some
density or obscurity in the Atmosph^re though our Air should be never so clear,
may cause it to be unobservable by us. Ancient Writers speak of some fixed
Stars which are not seen by us. And diverse of them do not now appear to be of
the same magnitude, as in former ages. And sundry new Stars have of late
appeared which the former Generation never saw. It seems not consonant to
reason to imagine, either that the old Stars are lost, or that new ones are of
late created, those glorious celestial Bodies being of perpetual duration. The
Stars are by the Hebrews called Chochabim, probably by Antiphrasis, from Chabah
extinxit, because they are Lights which never go out; And for ought that any
man is able to prove to the contrary, they shall remain as everlasting
Monuments of the power and wisdom of God, throughout the days of Eternity.
Nevertheless, it is admirable De hac admiranda stella doctissimus Hevelius
peculiarem librum scripsit
to consider, that there is a Star of later times observed in collo Coeti,
which disappears every year for several Months, and then appears again, in the
very same place where it was the last year; Being at first very small and
obscure, but afterward a bright Star of the second magnitude. Also, a new Star
appeared in the Swans breast, A.D. 1601 and continued shining there until the
year 1660. and then it disappeared, Co^etographia P. 382.
and when, or whether ever it will be seen again, no man can say: also a new
Star was lately ( viz. Anno. 1672.) discerned in the Swans head. See the
Philosophical transactions for year 1677. P. 854.
But though the Argument from disappearance be invalid, it is from other
reasons manifest, that they are not such Planets as those created at the
beginning of the World are. Comets are often seen out of the Zodiac, which the
true Planets are not. They dispatch more way by far then the Planets do* That
Ricciolus ubi supra P. 41.
Comet, A.D. 1618 in the space of three Months dispatched 180 Degrees. No
Planet goes over so great an arch of the circle in so short a time. Some
Comets have moved 20, 30, nay 40 Degrees in one natural day. Whenas the lesser
Planets do not absolve two degrees in that time.

Comets then are Temporary, whenas the true Planets are perpetual. As for the
matter out of which they are generated, Suellius, Puteanus, Fromondus, and
others conceive them to be compacted out of evaporations* which do proceed from
the Sun. Our modern Mathematicians, have observed, that there are Maculae
Solares or spots about the Sun, which sometimes may be discerned for many days
together: and sometimes for several Months, nothing of that nature can be
perceived. Hevelius Lib. 7. Page 40^, 405.
concludes that the Effluvia proceeding from the Sun are such, as will afford
matter enough for 68 Comets in one year, in case those ethereal vapors should
congregate into a body. The wisest of men must ingeniously confess their own
ignorance in these things, and that what they say is but problematical and
conjectural. I shall not therefore be positive in any determination, which
concerns the matter that Comets are formed out of. Only I am easily induced to
believe, that they are generated out of the same matter which Stars were in the
beginning of the World, made of, viz. Light, or the Element of Fire, being
first condensed into lesser particles, and after that conglomorated into a vast
body. In the Scripture, the Stars are called Luminaries, Ge. 1.1415 [Meoroth]
quasi [min Or] ex luce vel igne qui abs Hebraeis [Ur] dicitur, a lucendo. We
see that the Sun does beat down fire continually, inasmuch as the beams
thereof, if condensed with a Glass, will burn. Anaxagoras Aristot. meteor L. 1.
C. 6. Plutarch de placit. Philosophorum L, 3. C 2
and Democritus of old thought that Comets were made of many little Stars
growing into one. Which Cusatus, Tannerus, and other neotericks confess to be a
very probable opinion. Some Comets have appeared broken into many Stars. In
that famous Comet which was seen A.D. 1618. one might with a Telescope discern
many small clots like Stars or Coals of Fire. At first it seemed to be one
solid lump, but on December 8. it was divided into three unequal parts, Dec 17.
it was broken into many little Stars* December. 24. it was dissolved into more
and lesser Stars Wendelinus in Teratologi^ cometica P. 21.
In the Blazing Star that appea^ed A.D. 1652. not only Hevelius and Wendelin,
but the Astronomers in Mantua viewing of it with a Telescope, perceived in the
head of that Comet, a great many of small Stars, and one bigger and longer than
the rest, like coal of fire in an Hearth or Oven, when the wood is consumed.
Mr. Robert Hook (an ingenious Mathematician now in London) observed a Star in
the midst of the head of that Comet which was seen in April, A.D. 1677. The
like is to be said concerning several other Comets, as may be seen in the ninth
Chapter of this Dissertation. And there are many who to confirm this Notion
that a Comet is a company of small Stars growing into one body, affirm that
they usually appear about the Galaxia or Milky Way, wherewith the sky
glitters. Now the Telescope discovers that part of the sky to be exceeding
full of little Stars. Blazing Stars do not always (though often) appear there.
Nevertheless, I believe that when we know more of the true and natural reason
of the Via Lactea, we shall understand more of the nature of Comets.

CHAP. II. THe several sorts of Comets considered. The natural reason of the
Blaze, the time of their appearance cannot certainly be praedicted.
Notwithstanding their proceeding from natural causes, they may be portentous
signs of evil Events.
Having briefly Discoursed of the place where, and the matter out of which
Comets have their existence; we now proceed to consider the usual distributions
of those admirable and amazing works of the glorious Creator, whose works are
great, and sought out by those that have pleasure therein. As for the parts o^
which a Comet does consist there is the Star and the Blaze proceeding
therefrom, whence we call them Blazing Stars. Or, the Body of the Star, and the
str^am that follows or goes before it, which the Greeks call Coma, whence such
Phenomenon have the names of Comets given to them. In respect of the Blaze,
Comets have been distinguished into several sorts. The Assyrians, Arabians, and
others in old times, were wont from the color of the blaze to denominate the
Comet e. g. Mizaldus de Cometis.
when it was of a dark and leadish kind of color, they called it a Saturnine;
if of a bright Silver Shining color, a Jovial; if red and fiery, a Martial* if
of a Golden aspect a Solar; if a bright yellow a Venereal; if caerulean and
various* a Mercurial Comet. But the Latins and Greeks have distinguished
Comets from the form of the Blaze, which they appear with. Pliny Not. Histor-
L. 2. C. 25
mentions about ten several sorts of Blazing Stars. But all may be reduced to
these two general heads: viz. Longoman tanus de novis coeli phoenom. C. 1.
Ricciolus de Cometis C. 2 Hevelius Cometogr. L. 8. P. 439.
That a Comet is either 1, Crinite, h. e. when the Beams or Blaze is all round
the body of the Star; under which comes that sort of Comet which is called
Disceus, appearing in form like a Dish. Pithites, when the Comet is like a Tub
or Hogshead, Hippeus, when it resembles an Horses main. Hircus, when the Blaze
is like to Goats hair. Or 2. Barba^e, h. e. when the Blaze is on the one side
of the Comet only. Under this comes that which is called Acontias, when the
blaze is in the form of a Dart. Longitis, when it is in the form of a Lance or
Spear. Xiphias, when in the form of a Sword. Ceretias when it bends like a
crooked Horn. Lampadias, when it blazeth like a Lamp. As for the true cause of
the Blaze, it seems evident that it does proceed from the Sun beams, passing
through the body of the Star. For the Coma or Blaze is not on that side of the
Star which is next to the Sun, but which is opposite there from. Some ancient
Writers began a little to take notice of this. But Appianus was the first that
did fully and clearly discern it to be so, being convinced of the truth of this
notion, by five several Comets which himself lived to see, viz. Those in Anno.
1531, 32, 33, 38, 39. Likewise Gemma, and Cornelius Frisius, Fracastorius,
Tycho, and of later times Gassendus, and many other famous Mathematicians, and
diligent observers of things of this nature whom the learned Reader may see
quoted by L. 8. P. 432.
Hevelius. Moreover, Vbi suprae C. 6. P, 16.
Longomontanus observes, that if the Comet have a more lateral disposition
toward the Sun, then it will be Caudatus, but if the opposition to the Sun be
more direct, or the Comet elevated above the Sun, then it will be Crinite, or
the Blaze but short. The blaze is long or short according to the opposition
toward the Sun, and distance from the Earth. The blaze of some Comets has
extended it self above ninety Degrees. There was one in Aristotle's time that
was an 130 Degrees in Longitude. If the Comet be higher then the Sun, the blaze
will be short. If the Comet be as low as the Sun, then the nearer it is to the
Sun, the longer will the blaze appear to be. By the things that have been thus
far discoursed, we may conclude that the time of any Comets appearance cannot
certainly be praedicted before hand. Some very learned men, (in special the
great and noble De augmentis scienti^rum P. 242.
Verulam) have supposed that this knowledge is attainable. Indeed, if Comets
were sempiternal bodies, by experience and observation their appearance might
be exactly praedicted. But since they are generated in the Ether, no man can
any more tell when they shall be seen, then he can know when a Paraelion, or
Draco volans or the like will be generated in the Air. Yet I will not deny, but
that a probable conjecture, as to the year of a Comets appearance, may be made
from the conjunction of the superior Planets. It has been Franciscus
Junctinus in Annotationibus de Cometis Cornelius Gemma Cosmogr. L. 1 C. 18
observed that those rare Conjunctions are commonly attended with the
appearance of some new Star, or Comet: So indeed it was as to the Blazing Stars
in 1504, 1506, 1525, 1577, 1583. 1664. notable conjunctions of the Planets did
praecede them. Upon this ground, Edlin in his praenuncius sydereus Page 36 37,
89.
a late Astrologer, publishing a Treatise of the conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter Anno. 1663. conjectured that a Comet would appear the next year: which
happened to be true; and if an Astrologer (as the blind man hits the mark) chance
to praedict right once, more notice is taken of that, then of his mistaking an
hundred times over. Very notable Conjunctions of the Planets happened this
present, and will do so again the next year, (as shall be more particularly
mentioned) If any man should now positively affirm, that within this twelve
month another Blazing Star will appear, it would be presumptuous, although it
is both possible and probable that it may so come to pass. But the observation
does not always hold good; For there have been both greater and lesser
Conjunctions of the Planets, when no Comet has appeared, and many Comets
without any such Conjunctions immediately praeceding. In few words, sometimes,
many Blazing Stars have been seen within the compass of a few years; there have
been at least ten within these eighty years last past. But in some ages, not
one Comet has appeared for an hundred years together. Since several may appear
(in two, nay) in one year, and it may be not one in fifty nor in an hundred
years, the appearance of such Phaenomena's, cannot be infallibly foreseen by
any humane understanding upon Earth.

There are who think, that inasmuch as Comets may be supposed to proceed from
natural causes, there is no speaking voice of Heaven in them, beyond what is to
be said of all other works of God. But certain it is, that many things which
may happen according to the course of nature, are portentous signs of divine
anger, and prognostics of great evils hastening upon the world A Learned and
Judicious Author Hevelius in Cometogr. Lib. 8. P. 540.
conceives that the prodigious darkness which happened in the Sun at the time of
our Savior Christ's Passion, was caused by a Comets interposing it self
between the Sun and the Earth; yet that darkness was a sign of Gods anger, and
that darkness of misery should come upon the Jewish Nation, for their
unparalleld wickedness in Crucifying the Son of God. Luther thinks, that then
Joels Prophecy was fulfilled, who predicted that the Sun should be turned into
Luther in Joel 2. sic and glossa ordinaria Gasper sanctius and alii in locum.
darkness before the terrible day of the Lord came. Thunder, Lightning, Hail,
and Rain, are from natural causes, yet are they sometimes signs of Gods holy
displeasure, Exodus 9.24* 34. 1 Samuel, 7.1. and 12.17. Psalm. 18.13, 14. and 77.17,
18.
Earthquakes are from natural causes, yet there is many times a very speaking
voice of God in them. The Jews have a Tradition, that the first Earthquake
happened in the days of Nahor, as a sign of Gods anger because men were then
become Idolaters. They also say that when Joshua was buried there was an
Earthquake in the place where he was interred, signifying that God was
offended at the Children of Israel, because they laid not Joshuah's death to
heart so much as they should have done, whence V. Notas Lempereur in R Benjamin
Itinerar P. 142.
that Mountain is called Har gahas The trembling Mountain: R. Azarias Vide
Hottinger dissertation de Terrae motu, P. 186.
upon occasion of a terrible Earthquake, which happened in Ferraria, A.D^ 1571.
wrote a Discourse on that Subject, and the Title of his Book is Kol Elohim h.
e. The voice of God. And the Holy Scriptures mention Earthquakes as being
sometimes Prognostics of Mutations and Miseries, and Signs of divine anger.
Amos 1.1. Zech. 14.5. Luke 21.11. 1 Samuel 14, 15. The great Revolutions and
Conjunctions of the Planets come to pass according to the ordinary course of
nature; yet are they wont to be attended with remarkable Commotions in this
lower World, as is commonly observed and believed by Learned Men, and may
further be declared in the close of this Discourse. The like is to be said of
notable Eclipses of the Luminaries in Heaven. I confess I have not so great an
Opinion of the ominousness of Eclipses, as I perceive some Learned and Good Men
have, since every Year, there is an Eclipse taken notice of in one part of the
Earth or other. Nevertheless, whosoever reads Calvisius and other Chronologers,
will perhaps think that such a notion is not wholly to be slighted.
Chronologers observe that in the very Year when the ten Tribes were carried
into Captivity, there happened a great Eclipse of the Sun, which came not to pass
without a special hand of divine providence; unto this the Prophet seems to
allude, Amos 8.9. That Eclipse was ominous of a Dark Day coming upon Samaria.
Many notable Instances might be produced to this purpose. And something has
been observed among our selves, which seems to confirm their Opinion, who
believe that total and central Eclipses, are ominous of mutations where they
happen. There was such an Eclipse of the Sun in New England (Aug. 12. A. D.
1672.) the day before the Commencement, and that Year the Colleage was Eclipsed
by the death of the Learned Praesident there, worthy M. Channcy; and two
Colonies (viz. Massachusetts, and Plymouth) by the death of two Governors, who
died within a twelve month after. Known unto God are all his works from the
beginning of the World. He that rides upon the Heavens, and in his Excellency
on the sky, when he decreed that such events should come to pass; did also
determine that such things should go before. Shall then such mighty works of
God as Comets are, be insignificant things? There are (as in the last Chapter
we shall more amply express) who think that Comets have a natural influence
upon the Earth. Hevelius Vbi supra Page 319.
acknowledges that the Blaze proceeding from some Comets, does strike the
earth, although Men perceive it not, because then the Comet must be in
Conjunction with the Sun. The accurate and ingenious Kepl^r In Cometarum
Physiologiae P. 104.
supposes that the Blaze of some Comets, is perforated by the Earth* If so,
they may well cause Droughts, and many other miseries. But others take them to
be indicant rather then natural (they may be, and for my part I believe they
are both) signs of evils to come; like as strange apparitions in the air,
Armies fighting, Ships sailing there, and the like, have no natural influence
to cause wars and commotions where they are seen, only they are indications of
such troubles at h^nd. It may furthermore be added, that though evils should
not follow, God may in his merciful providence, cause such sights to be
observed, that so he might awaken Mortals to Repentance. He sometimes
threateneth because he would not strike. Augustine Lege eum de civitate dei L.
^ C. 21. L. 3. C. 1 L. 22. C. 8
speaks of a fiery Cloud that hung over the City of Constantinople, whereat
the People were ama^ed, and fell to praying and crying to God for mercy, and
promised reformation of their evil ways, and Judgment did not follow. Volens
quidem Deus ^errere civitatem, and terrendo, emendare. I know there are that
esteem Prognostications of this nature, as weak and groundless. So does
Erastus, and many Popish Authors, and some few others. Vincentius Guinisius
made an Oration de faelicitate Cometarum, declaring that the Blazing Star which
appeared An. 1618. was an happy Blazing Star, but I believe there is not one
good man in the World of his mind as to that particular Comet. A Franciscus
Milleit Asro. L. 8. P. 582.
Jesuit (who I suppose is still living) has these words, plerosque cometas
absque ulla calamitate fuisse assero. A false and a bold assertion. Another
Jesuit Ricciolus de Cometis P. 34
no less learned then the former, attempting to give a Catalogue of happy
Comets, could not reckon up above twelve such since the World began, and some
of those were attended with the most direful effects that can be mentioned;
only because Tamerlain prospered, it must be called a Faustous Comet. I have
elsewhere mentioned, that the Wise Men among the Gentiles always looked upon
Blazing Stars as malorum praenuncios, the Heralds, and Messengers of evil
Tidings to the world. The ancient Doctors in the Christian Church, Tertullian,
Damascene, and Quos vide citatos apud Tannerum in dissertatione de coelo Quest.
7. Par 4.
many others, were of the same Opinion. And so are the generality of our modern
and judicious Divines. And surely this Opinion tends more to piety, and the
fear of God, then theirs does, who think that Blazing Stars signify no more
then a Cloud in the air. It is moreover, of weighty consideration with me, (and
I hope will be so with many others) that the Scripture does declare, not only
that the Stars are for signs, but that Fearful sights in the Heavens Comet^
(...) a Christo dicitur F^antzius de ^nterpretatione Scripturae Page 1023.
(and such are Comets) signify calamitous times, and that signs in the Stars,
betoken a storm amongst the Nations upon Earth, and that Pillars of smoke
portend a notable day of the Lord to be at hand; also the experience both of
the former, and of this present age declares, that when Blazing Stars have
been seen, great mutations and miseries have come upon Mortals, as will by the
subsequent Relation be made to appear.

CHAP. III. The History of Comets from the beginning of the World to the first
coming of Christ; together with some remarkable Events attending them.
THere are sundry Learned men, who affirm that in the Year after the Creation
1656. which wa^ (according to the computation of those great Chronologers,
Calvisius and Helvicus) two thousand two hundred and ninety two years before
our Saviors nativity, there was seen a formidable Blazing Star, which all the
old World beheld for the space of nine and twenty days. It appeared first in
the sign of Pisces, and in a months time passed through all the twelve Signs
of the Zodiac, as is affirmed by In discriptione cometae 1607
Herlicius. In Historia cometarum
Eck stormius, and Rockenbachius. This is the first Comet, that any Writers (so
far as in my small reading I have observed) make mention of. Immediately upon
its appearing Methuselah died, and according unto the signification of the
name, which his Father Enoch (being a Prophet) imposed upon him: The next Year,
the Flood came wherein all the Men, Women and Children throughout the Earth
(excepting eight persons) perished. And it is the judgment of some, Aventinus
Sebastianus Frank. and alii.
that more persons were drowned by Noah's flood then are now living upon the
face of the whole Earth, or ever have been at one time since that.

Anno Mundi. 1744* There appeared a Comet in the sign of Capricorn, Testante
Rockenbachio de cometis
which in the space of sixty five days passed through three of the Caelestial
Signs. The building of Babel, confusion of Languages, and consequent disparsing
of Mankind throughout the World, have been noted as Events attending that
Comet. Nimrod, (the first Tyrant in the world) was Subito non comparuit trans
latus a diis. Berosus (...) a malis daemoniis ob^taximam impietatem. Funccius
carried away after an unknown manner, some think that God permitted the Devil
to carry that most wicked man alive body and soul to Hell.

A. M. 2118. A Comet was observed in the sign of Aries, which continued for the
space of 22 days. After this followed that Famine mentioned in the Scripture
which caused Abraham to remove into Egypt. Also Camesenuu^ Berosus
headed an Army, and fell upon the Assyrians, but Ninias withstood him, in
Battle overcame him, and caused his head to be cut off.

A. M. 2128. Idem ubi supra
Not many years after the death of Abraham, another Comet appeared in the sign
of Leo for the space of nine days. Great mutations and miseries quickly
followed in the World, as Serapis and Osiris (Egyptian Demons) had
prognosticated. Also, that Famin^ in Isaac's days of which we read Genesis 26.1.
About this time Phaeton (who is thought to be that Son of Chaus who is by Moses
called Phut) Funccius.
caused a fearful conflagration in Italy. Whence it was called then Palesana,
i. e. the burnt Country.

A.M. 2230. A fiery and terrible Comet was seen, appearing in Sagitarius,
coyling after a strange manner, representing the form of an imperfect circle
Lib. 2.25.
It Is judged that Pliny speaks of this Prodigy. It was by the King of Egypt
then living called by the name of Typhon, i. e. Vort^x fumigans sed sine igne.
Which seems to confirm their opinion who think that in old time a Comet was
known by that Name Mede Discourse on John 10.28. P. 37
of a Pillar of Smoke. After this Comet, there was a Dearth for Hujus famis
meminit Justinus Lib. 36. and Orosius Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
seven years together, and that in all Countries; viz. that spoken of in the
Scripture in Ioseph's time, which followed the seven years plenty in Egypt*
Canaan, Aethiopia, Aegy,t and other Countries felt the direful effects of that
Prodigy.

A.M. 2453. Rockenbachius in libro supra citato. vid. Alsted praecogn Theol L.
2. P. 451.
A Comet was observed in Syria, Chaldea, etc. in the sign of Capricorn; in
which year the Children of Israel were delivered from their bondage to the
Egyptians, when Pharaoh and his Host received that fatal and memorable
overthrow so much celebrated in the Holy Book of God.

A.M. 2770. In the Idem.
Month of August, a formidable Comet appeared in Gemini. After which followed
the death of that wicked Tyrant Autenemos. Also, that long and miserable War
which arose about Helena, and the doleful destruction of Troy. Likewise the War
of the Amazons, with the Thebans, was near this time.

A M. 2795. A Comet Idem.
was seen in Aries, flaming for the space of 43. days. This was in the days
of Samson, at (and by) whose death all the Lords of the Philistines, and about
3000 Men and Women were slain by the fall of their Idol 's Temple, as they were
Sacrificing to Dagon their god. Historians also speak of a Comet which was
taken notice of about the Year of the World 3458, and was termed Ceratius, De
quo cometa praeco^ius, Lycosthenes, Rockenbachius, Ec^^stormius, Hevelius, etc.
Scripserunt
because of its appearing crooked like to an Horn. Writers vary about the
praecise year, when this Comet appeared. Only it is indubitable, that it was in
the days of Anaxagoras and Democritus, who are the most ancient Writers that
give us any hystorical account about Comets. There was a notable Eclipse of the
Sun, preceding that Comet; which Calvisius judges to be extraordinary and
supernatural. Remarkable Providence which happened about that time vid. Funcil
Chronol.
were; Haman's bloody Plot to Massacre all the Jews in one day, together with
the strange discovery and disappoin^ment of that hellish contrivance. Also,
Xerxes his motions who put the whole World into an uproar, mustering together
an Army of seventeen hundred thousand Foot and fourscore thousand Horse, and a
Fleet consisting of above two thousand Galleys. Yea, Herodotus reports that
his Army did at least consist of above five Millions; designing to subdue
Greece. But his Navy was vanquished by Themistocles, his great Army routed. No
less then three hundred thousand Soldiers under the Command of Ma^donius were
all slain; Athens was burnt.

A.M 3518. (Or as others compute the age of the World An. 3537.) There was seen
a fearful Comet for 75. days together L. 2. C. 25
Pliny In Lysandro.
Plutarch, Meteorologia
Aristotle, and other ancient Writers, speak of this Comet. Anaxagoras took
upon him to predict, that an horrible Tempest would follow. He happened to
conjecture right. There was Charlmander in libro de Cometis.
a strange Whirlwind, that took a little Rock off from a great Rock, and lifted
it up on high, and carried it away through the air, until it fell down at
Aegos, a River in Thrace, to the amazement of the people there, who supposed
that mighty Stone to have come down out o^ Heaven. But the great commotion
attending this Comet, was that civil war among the Graecians, called the
Peloponesian War, which continued for 27 years, until Greece was almost emptied
of Inhabitants. Also, a Ricciolus de Cometis.
pestilential and mortal Catarh so prevailed in Athens, as greatly to
depopulate that place. A prodigious Earthquake happened about a year after this,
so that a Mountain was broken in pieces, and a City turned into an Island.

A.M. 3537. (or as others 3553.) a septentrional Comet appeared in Jaenuary
which many Aristotle's in Meteor L 1. C 6 Mizaldus L. 1. Cap. 11. Eberus,
Pencerus Ekstormius and alii.
Writers have taken notice of. That fearful slaughter of the Athenians, which
Historians make mention of, did accompany this Prodigy. About nine years after
that Aristoteles ubi supra. Seneca. Not. Qu. L. 7. C. 16.
another Comet was observed, appearing in the winter time, immediately after
Sun set. At first only the stream and not the Star was seen (because of its
nearness to the Sun) which was extended over a third part of the heavens, i. e.
130 degrees. It ascended to Orions girdle, and there disappeared. After that,
happened that Earthquake Deluge in Achaia, wherein multitudes perished. Helice
and Buris (two famous Cities) were lost in the Sea. It was about this time that
Nehemiah built up the walls of Jerusalem, and then the times were troublous,
Dan. 9.25.

A.M. 3594. There was seen in Leo, a bearded Comet, which afterward changed
its form and appeared like a Spear. The remarkable Events then observed, were
the burning of Diana's Temple at Ephesus, and Alexander surnamed the Great, his
Birth in the same day. Ptolomaeus Al^rites, killed the King, and Reigned in
Macedonia. A miserable Destruction came upon Sidon.

Fifteen years after, there was a another Comet, near the Equinoctial circle,
Aristoteles L. 1. C. 7. Rockenbachius.
in Sagittarius, continuing nineteen days. What strange and amazing changes
happened in the World after that by means of Alexander the Great, is known to all
men. Of him the Prophet Daniel speaks, Chap. 8.5. when h^ says, He saw an H^
goat come from the West, on the face of the whole Earth, and he touched not the
ground. For Alexander made speedy work in conquering the Nations. In the space
of six years, the face of things all the Earth over was changed. The Pe^sian
empire brought to its period, and the third of Daniels Monarchies then began.

A.M. 3729. There was a Comet Rockenbachius
appearing in Aries, for the space of 22 days. After which great Wa^s in
France followed. Selenchus* the King of Asiae and Syria treacherously Murdered.
Amilcor marching with an Army into Spain enlarges the Dominions of the
Carthaginians.

A.M. 3752. A Comet was seen some few days in Capricorn, and two Months after
again in Cancer, for the space of 19 days. Rockenbachius Lycosthenes. v.
Joseph Antiq. I^d. L. 12. C. 3
Two years after this* another Comet of a stupendous magnitude appeared for
eighty days together, this I take to be the same which some Authors place
about ten years after; viz. a Comet appearing in the sign of Pisces, extending
it self over (near upon) a fourth part of the Heavens, Cornelius Gemma in
Cosmo. ^. 1 C. 8
and its fulgor was such as did overcome the brightness of the Sun, so as that
it was seen not only in the night, but also in the light day.

Mithridates his wars, and those between Antiochus and Achaeus, and the bloody
Battle fought between the Roman^ and the Car^^aginians, wherein Hannibal wa^
^vercome by Marcellus and Asdrubal by the Scipio's; the death of the King of
Sicily (whose Son succeeding and carrying himself insolently, was slain) are
mentioned as great Events attending that Prodigy. In this second Punic war
fifteen hundred thousand* lost their lives. In Spain* no less then 300 Towns
were destroyed.

A.M. 3789. A Comet was seen in Aries appearing thirty two days. King
Seleuchus was poisoned, and there succeeded Antiochus, whom his flatterers
called Epiphanes, but the Scripture terms him a vile Person. He raised a
terrible Persecution against the Church of God, committing horrid and
outrageous Cruelties, defiling the Temple, interdicting the public worship of
God Dan. 11.21, 31. He was a notable Type of Antichrist, nor is it to be
wondered at, if a Star, Blaze in Heaven, when such miseries were coming on the
Earth.

Rockenbachius writes of a Comet appearing A.M. 3795 for the space of a Year
and three weeks together. But there must needs be some mistake in that
Relation, and therefore I praetermit it, and proceed unto,

A.M. 3798. (or as others 3782) when there appeared a Comet in September*
presently upon an Eclipse o^ the Moon. After which Perseus the last King of
Macedonia was overcome by Aemilius. Within 10 years another Comet appeared,
which was attended with a woeful Dearth and Plague and a long war between the
Carthaginians and the Romans. An Army of the Bastans going over the Ice, it
broke under them, that very few escaped with their lives.

A.M. 381^. There appeared a Comet in the sign of Capricorn, in magnitude
equalling the Sun, and with its light overcoming the darkness of the night. Of
this Seneca Not. Quest. L. 7. C. 15.
and after him many others have written. This Prodigy was attended with the
Achaick War. The City of Carthage was taken and destroyed by Scipio. The City
of Corinth was burnt by Mummius.

About ten years after that, another Comet appeared for the space of eighty
three days, of which Seneca writes. At the first appearance it was very small
but within a few days it grew to a stupendous magnitude, Seneca ibid
extending it self over the Via Lactea, so as was wonderful to behold.

Lib. 37.
Justin speaks of a Comet whose fulgor was like that of the Sun* the tail of
it being 90 Degrees in length, shining so as that all the heaven seemed to be
of a light fire, which is supposed to be the same with that mentioned by
Seneca. As for Events, bloody Battles were fought between the Romans and the
Gauls, wherein a (...) infinite number of men were slain: Also wars between the
King of Syria and the King of Egypt. The King of Syria was deserted by his
Soldiers, taken and slain.

A.M. 3863. (Or according to the computation of others Anno 3879) Scribentibus
Rockenbach. Ebero, and aliis.
A Comet was seen in the sign of Virgo, continuing 94 days. This was that
which L. 2. C. 25*
Pliny calls Terrificum sidus, the terrible Star. Mithridates invaded. Asia;
after which followed that bloody Civil War between Marius and Octavius.

A.M. (Circiter) 3900. Several Testibus Plinio, Lucano, etc.
Comets were observed as portentous of the War between Pompey and Caesar; And
of Pompey his fall. It is also reported Mizald. L 1. C. 9. Rockenb.
that Caesar's death was attended with a Comet of that sort which is called
Xiphias.

A.M. 3920. A Licosthenes Rockenbach*
Comet appeared in Libra, flaming for 95 days. The same year Antonius being
overcome, killed himself, and Octavius Caesar subdued the Land of Egypt. It is
almost incredible to relate how many Millions lost their lives in those
distracted times, by the Roman sword at home and abroad.

And thus much for Comets appearing from the beginning of the World until the
Incarnation of the Son of God, so far as Authors have taken notice of them.

CHAP. IV. An Historical Account of what Blazing Stars were seen within the
first five hundred Years after Christ's Incarnation, and the Notable Events
which still followed them.
WE proceed to consider what Blazing Stars have appeared since our Saviors
Nativity. Some mention that, which directed the Magi to the Town and House
where Christ was born. The superstition of former ages has p^ctured that Star
with a Blaze pointing toward Bethlehem. But Tycho and v. Ricciolum de novis
stellis C. 19. P. 179. etc.
others, have by invin^ible Arguments, proved that that admirable Star was not
a Comet properly.

The first then which we shall take notice of, is, that which was seen, A.D 13.
appearing in the sign of Aries Alstedius in Chron. C. 49
for the space of 32 days.

Arseruntque toti passim minitantia mundo Lumina -- After which three Roman
Legions perished; Quintilius Varius, was slain by the Germans. Upon whom the
Emperor Tiberius makes war.

Cum fera ductorem Germania Varum. Infecitque trium legionum sanguine campos.
A.D. 14. As Calvisius reckons, but according to other Chronologers A.D. 16.
Suetonius* Alsted.
diverse Comets (or several appearances of the same Comet) were observed, which
have been judged as portentous of the death of Augustus Caesar, who died not
long after. Other remarkable Events attending this Comet, were, a great Mutiny
in the Roman Army, terrible slaughters amongst the Germans, whose King Arminius
was slain by his own Kinsmen: an Earthquake whereby a great part of the City
of Rome was ruined, and an inundation through the River Tiber's overflowing so
that many Persons and Edifices were destroyed.

A. D. 56. A Star was seen in the sign of Cancer, Lycosthenes. Alsted. encyclop
P. 2159.
blazing for the space of four Months, directing its course from the North
toward the East. The Emperor Claudius died, bloody Nero succeeded, who
murdered besides his own Mother, and his Wife, and his Master Seneca, an
infinite number of holy Martyrs. The same Comet appeared again the next Year,
so that Nero's Reign began with a blazing Star, great Commotions happened in
Jsudea, Chronologers observe that it was in this Year, that Hermogenes and
Phygellus made woeful Apostasy and Schism in the Asiatick Churches; and so
apeared to be no other then wandering Stars, 2 Timothy 3.15.

A.D. 62. A Comet was seen flaming in the Heavens, Seneca Not. Q.L. 7. Chap.
21, 09,
for the space of six months together, having its motion from the East, partly
toward the West, and partly toward the South Alstedius
This appearing after Nero's quinquennium, wherein he seemed a good Emperor,
was expired, it is Alstedius
thought that it was portentous of his after unparalleld Cruelties, and most
Tragical end.

A. D. 66. Another Comet Tacitus Rockenbachius. Mizaldus. Alsted.
appeared for six Months together in the sign of Gemini. After which followed
prodigious Tempests, and a fearful Earth quake, whereby Laodicea, Hierapolis,
and Coloss (famous Cities in the lesser Asia) were sorely afflicted. This
Blazing Star was attended with a terrible Persecution, in the which the
Apostles Paul and Peter were put to Death. Rome was set on fire by Nero, that
Conflagration continued for six days together. Soon after this Meander and his
Followers caused great trouble among Christians in the Primitive times. He was
an Antichrist, h. e. a false Christ, it is not improbable but that the Apostle
John has respect to him as well as to other pretended Christ's, 1 John 2.18.

A D. 70. (or as others 71) A blazing Star like a flaming Sword appeared
Josephus de bello Judaeorum. L. 7.
for a year together. It was first observed at the time of the Jews Passover
(viz. on the eighth of April) in the sign of Virgo. This was attended with a
new Emperor, viz. Vespasian, with the destruction of Jerusalem, and the most
miserable ruin of the Jewish nation, by the Sword of the Romans. Zonaras. T. 1.
Many other Prodigies were taken notice of at the same time. Armies fighting in
the Air, etc. Xephilinus writes that there were two prodigious Eclipses of the
Moon, viz. that the Moon was obscured on the fourth, and on the seventh day*
And from him Lycosthenes speaks to the same purpose. But Calvisius did by
calculation find, that there were two Eclipses of the Moon this year, which
were not supernatural.

A.D. 76. (or 77.) A Comet called Plin. L 2. C 25. Sueronius. Lycost^enes, etc.
Acontias, because of its appearing in the form of a Dart, was observed. The
Emperor Titus (in the fifth year of his Consulship) d^scribed this Comet in
verse. The next year another Comet was seen (or rather the same Comet appeared
the second time) there followed an horrible Earthquake in Cyp^us and other
places, whereby many Towns perished. Hevelius and Rockenbachius.
The next year a Comet was seen again eighty days. Earthquakes followed, and
a terrible Plague in Rome, and a remarkable Drought. When Vespasian the
Emperor saw this Blazing Star, he joked at it, saying, it concerned the
Parthians who had long hair, not him who was Bald. But soon after Vespasian
himself died. This Comet was attended with the Heresy of Corinthus and the
Ebionites.

I cannot find in Authors, that any Comet appeared after that, for about the
space of fifty years, viz. not until the year of our Lord 138, when a Star
Rockenbaechius
was seen blazing 39 nights together in the signs of Aquarius and Pisces. An
Earthquake followed, so that the Cities of Nicopolis and Cesarea were swallowed
up thereby.

A.D. 145. Idem.
A Star was seen blazing in Aquarius six nights. An Earthquake and a
Prodigious Flood followed. Rhodus and other famous places were shaken after an
horrendous manner. The Valentinian Heretics prevailed about this time.

A.D. 188. A bearded Comet (from its form called Pogonias) was seen. Herodian
L. 1. Lavater.
Great Wars ensued in the Roman Empire. The Temple of peace (so called) was
suddenly burnt down. The Capitol was struck with Lightning and set on fire, the
neighboring Edifices (wherein was a famous Library) was consumed. The next
year the City of Rome was afflicted with a sore Famine. About this time the
Britans losing their King Lucius fell into dissentions amongst themselves, and
so became a prey to the Romans.

A.D. 195. in the days of the Emperor Severus V. Hevelii Cometog. C. 12 P.
805.
a Star was seen blazing for many days together. Which was then looked upon as
an Omen of appro^^^ing Miseries. About that time, there were great wars between
the Romans and the Parthians; Also lamentable contentions and schisms amongst
Christians* about the observation of Easter. The Bishop of Rome took upon him
to excommunicate those that were not of his mind about that matter whereby a
world of sin and trouble was occasioned, and way made for Persecution. Not long
after this the Originists and those that would be called Apostolici occasioned
great troubles in the Churches.

A.D. 217. Calvisius Lycosthenes.
A Comet appeared in the sign of Pisces for 18 days. This was attended with
the Death of Caracalla. The Emperor Antonius visiting the City of Alexandria,
desired to see the Youth therein, and giving a sign to his Soldiers caused
them to be cruelly slain. The Romans made great slaughter amongst the Goths.
The of Parthia came with a great Army against the Romans. The Emperor died.

After this time, no Blazing Star appeared (or however none is mentioned by any
Hystorian, that I have met with) for near upon an hundred years. The next was
Scribente Rockenbachi^
A. D. 306. soon after which Constantius Chlorus (the Father of great
Constantine) died at York in England (then called Britain.) The blazing Star
was attended with the most bloody and cruel Persecution that ever was, viz.
that under Dioclesian, who hoped he had (according to his design) destroyed all
that did bear the Name of Christ throughout the Earth. This Year did Miletius
his Schism happen. Within a few years Arius began to disseminate his
Pestiferous Doctrine, and Donatisme put the African Churches into an unhappy
Blaze.

A D. 323. A Comet appeared Peucerus de divinatiene. P. 359. Alst. etc.
in the sign of Virgo. After which the Arian Heresy prevailed exceedingly, so
that the Christian world (as Jerome speaks) sighed to see it self become an
Arian. The memorable wars between Constantine and Licinius happened about that
time, which issued in wonderful changes, the whole Empire being turned upside
down. The mavelous things spoken of in the twelfth Chapter of the Revelation
were now accomplished.

A. D. 337. A stupendous Comet, and terrible to behold, was seen in the sign of
Aries Oros^us L. C. 19. Eutropius L 10 Alstedius etc.
continuing for the space of six Months. Immediately after which followed the
death of Constantine, surnamed the great, whose death made way for great
Divisions in the Roman Empire, and infinite miseries upon all Christendom. His
Son Constantius being an Arian, quickly became a Persecutor.

A D. 363. A Blazing Star Eckstormius ex Ammiano L. 25. D. Christiani Hevelius
etc.
was seen and that not only in the night but in the day time. This was attended
with Julian the Apostate his war against the Persians, and with the prodigious
death of that great Apostate. About two years after that, another Comet was
seen in Aries, continuing eleven weeks. A most prodigious Earthquake followed
Alst. ubi supra and in Encycloped. p. 2165 Calvisius in Chronol.
which was perceived (as Historians affirm) in all parts of the world. The like
to this Earthquake was never known. The waves of the Sea were roul'd out of
their channels, and Ships left hanging on the tops of Houses; and a
fearful-Inundation, so that many Cities, and innumerable Souls perished by
those Calamities. Many Persons about Constantinople were killed by an
Hail-storm. The Macedonian Heresy caused great troubles and disturbances in
the Church of Christ. The Jews attempted to rebuild a Temple at Jerusalem, but
fire came from Heaven, and utterly consumed their Foundation. The cruel
Persecution under Valens began the next year, so that the Church was in great
danger of being carried away by that flood, as John foretold in the Revel. Chapter
12.15. A.D 383. (or as some Historians A.D. 393.) A Comet was seen of that sort
which is called Rockenbachius. Alstedius, etc. V. Niceph. L. 12. C. 33.38.
Xiphias in respect of its appearing like a Sword, bigger and higher then the
Morning Star, which was then where this Comet appeared, viz in Libra,
continuing for the space of four Months, viz. from the beginning of May to
September. Its motion was toward Vrsa Major, in the midst of which
Constellation it disappeared. This was looked upon as portentous of Eugenius
his Invasion. The Battle fought between Theodosius and Eugenius was a very
memorable Providence, inasmuch as upon Theodosius his Prayers, God sent a Storm
which beat back the Arrows of the Enemy into their own faces, the Stars in
their courses fighting against them. Some mention Valentinians strangulation,
and a prodigious overflowing of the River Nilus as direful consequents of this
Comet. The Helvidians, Priscillianists, and other Heretics who caused great
troubles amongst Christians began this Year.

A.D. 389. A Blazing Star appeared from the North, being in the sign of Gemini,
continuing for twenty days. Peucerus apud Tychon^ Tom. 1. P. 619 625.
Its Magnitude and brightness equal to Lucifer. In form like unto a Pillar.
Proclus observed this Comet to be higher then the Planet Jupiter. One
remarkable event which happened after it, was, a most prodigious Hail storm
continuing without intermission for two days together. Great Commotions and
changes in France by reason of Marcomers invasion happened not long after this.
Also wars between Theodosius and Maximus.

A.D. 402. ( circiter) Lavater ex Sozom. Hist. Eccl. L. 8. C. 4. Claudianus in
Poemate de bello Geteco
An exceeding bright Comet in form like a Sword was seen. After this Gainus
made an attempt upon Constantinople. Stilicus waging war with the Goths,
overcame them. The Emperor Arcadius died. An Army consisting of no less then
two hundred thousand Barbarians under Radagiso made a fearful irruption upon
the Roman Empire. Now was the first Trumpet (which John speaks of in the
Apocalypse) sounded. These terrible shakings in the Roman Empire being fitly set
forth by that of a storm of Hail, and Fire, and Blood, Rev. 87. as Mr. Mede
interprets. A great Persecution was raised against the Christians in Persia.
Also the Persecution raised by the Donatists in Africa, was within a year or
two of this time.

A.D. 409. There was an amazing Eclipse of the Sun, so that the Stars were seen
in the day time. This was attended with a fearful Comet appearing like a Sword
in the sign of Virgo, Niceph. L. 13. C 36. Alsted.
blazing for the space of four months (viz, June, July, August, September.) The
greatest Calamities followed that had been heard of in the World. All Europe, a
great part of Asia, and Africa, was overwhelmed with Judgments. A sore Drought,
and Famine and Pestilence, and wars amongst the Nations swept away an infinite
number of Men. Rome was taken by Alaricus the Goth, who set up whom he pleased
as Emperor there. Now did the second Angel sound the Trumpet, and the Roman
Empire suffer a violent death, and is therefore resembled unto a Sea made
bloody by the fall of a great Mountain all in a flame, as the forementioned
great Interpreter does expound, Rev. 8.8.

A.D. 418. A Comet was seen in Libra, in the Month of September. Herlicius.
Alstedius, and alii.
Great Sedition and Commotions followed throughout Italy, and in Spain. The
Africans prepared a formidable Fleet and marched toward Rome. Not long after
this, Famous Hierom died. The Pestilent Heresy of Pelagius occasioned much
trouble in the Churches.

A.D. 423. An horrible Comet was seen flaming: Mercellinus. Eckstormius ex
Scho^^ero. Hevelius.
Immediately upon which the Emperor Honorius died. Casti^us with an Army
comes upon the Vandals and makes great slaughter in Spain. The Scots and
Picts grievously infest the Britains.

A.D. 423. This Year upon a great Eclipse of the Moon, a Comet appeared,
Lycosthenes Lavater Alsted
after which Prodigious showers of Blood were rained down upon Tholous in
France for a whole day together. A terrible Persecution was raised against the
professors of the truth in Africa, by Gense^icus. Theodoricus the King of the
Visigoths warring against Attila, was slain.

A.D. 448. A Comet was seen in the sign of Leo, continuing many days.
Herlicius Eckstormius
There followed a Prodigious Earth quake in the East. Attilae oppressed and
destroyed a great part of Italy. The Venetians perished by a Flood. The
Eutichean Heresy began to prevail.

A.D. 454. ( circiter) There were diverse appearances of a Blazing Star which
was attended with Earthquakes. Sigebertus Funccius, Alsted.
The Emperor died. Attila after he had destroyed seventy Cities in the East,
and conquered the Northern parts, came with five hundred thousand Soldiers,
and making fearful Devastations in Germany, was himself slain in a bloody
Battle with A^tius. Rome was taken and spoiled by Gensericus.

Historians make mention of two other Comets observed in this Century. The one
Lavater, Lycosthenes, Alstedius.
A.D. 459. which was followed with a sore Pest amongst miserable Mortals. The
other A.D. 488* After which great troubles were raised by Arian Heretics.
Gundamond the King of the Vandals became the Author of a great Persecution.

CHAP. V. Of Comets which appeared between the Year 50^ and 1000, with some
remarkable Events.
A D. 519. A Bearded Comet appeared 26 days, in the East, pointing westward.
Calvisius ex Cedreno, Alsted.
After which there was a wonderful Earthquake, whereby many (not only persons
but) whole Cities perished.

A. D. 533. A formidable Comet appeared in the Month of December, in the sign
o^ Sagittarius. Calvisius Praetorius, Alsted.
This was followed with an Earthquake. A popular tumult in Constantin^ple. A
Plague at Antioch and in other places. The Hun^ cause troubles in Europe.

A.D. 541. A notable Comet appeared on Easter Day. Lycosthenes, Rockenbachius.
There followed an universal Earth quake in the which Epidamon, Corinth and
Anazerbum, did above other places suffer damage. Totilas overcame Demetrius in
a Sea Fight, took several Cities and Countries. The memorable changes wherein
Belisartus was concerned, happened about this time. Totila the King of the Goth^
was called Flagellum dei Gods Scourge. He raised a cruel Persecution against
the Christian^ which were at this time in Italy.

A.D. 555. A Comet in the form of a Lance or Spear was seen in the North,
pointing Westward. Funccius. Praetorius. Alstedius babet Annum 550.
After which Rome was taken by Totila. The Huns wasted Francia and Tharingia.

A.D. 586. A Comet appeared for a Month. Lavater. Rockenbachius. Fascic
temporum. Alstedius and alii habent annum. 589
It is observed, that ^his Comet was attended with the death of many Princes.
And the War between Mauritius and the Persians. Also, a fearful inundation, and
the Plague in Italy happened not long after.

A.D. 594. A formidable Blazing Star appeared in January, for a M^^^th
together, and was seen both in the morning and in the evening. Diac. L. 4. C.
4. Lavater Alstedius.
After this, Italy was afflicted with Armies of Locusts. A sore Drought,
Famine, and the Sword were the woeful attendants of this Prodigy.

A.D. 600. ( circiter) A Comet Horrendous to behold, appeared six Months
together. Nicephorus, L. 18. C. 35. Rockenbachius. Alstedius.
Mauritius (the Emperor) was by the Bishop of Romes instigation Murdered by
Phocas. Great contentions were kindled between the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople. The former, was now declared to be the universal head of the
Church. Ever since this time the Bishops of Rome have been no better then
Blazing Stars. Four Years after Lycosthenes.
this, another Comet was seen in the Months of April and May, and again in
November and December, viz. Anno. 610. ut habet Alsted. in Chronol Cap. 28.
Not long after which Co^roes the King of Persia grievously infested the Roman
Empire, He delivered ninety thousand Christians into the hands of the Jews, to
be by them with wicked hands slain and murdered.

A.D. 620. Another Comet appeared. About this time Calvisius, Hevelius, and
alii in annum 615. hunc Cometam transponere videntur.
Mahomet began to diffuse his pestiferous Doctrine. He had an apostate Monk to
help him in composing his diabolical Religion, whereby much of that part of the
World, which had been enlightened with the Sun of Righteousness* was overwhelmed
again with the darkness of Infidelity. He is therefore fitly set forth in the
Apocalypse, by the type of a Star falling to the Earth, and a smoke arising
therefrom, whereby the Sun and the Air was darkened; And it is not to be
wondered at, if so great a Plague to the World as Mahometism, is, was preceded
and attended with Blazing Stars, as in the after Relations will appear. Never
was the dominion of any Nation spread so far, and in so short a time as that of
the Sarazens. In the space of about fourscore Years there was added to the
Diabolical Kingdom of Mahomet, Palestina, Syria, both Armenias, almost all the
lesser Asia, Persia, India, Egypt, Numidia, all Barbary, Portugal, Spain, a
great part of Italy, as also Sicily, Candy, Cyprus, etc. Though many of these
places were not subjugated to Mahomet, until the next Century. In a word, the
Sarazens are not without reason thought to be intended by the first w^ Trumpet,
v. Mede in locum.
Prophesied of in the Revelation. Those tormenting Scorpions proved a bitter
Plague to the Christian World, more especially for the space of five
prophetical Months ( h. e. 150 Years;) and the times were then so woeful, as
that men aid in those days seek Death, but could not find it, Rev. 9.6.

A.D. 633. A Blazing Star in form of a Sword standing toward the South
appeared for ^ Month. Funccius, Lavater, Alsted, Sigebert.
This was attended with an Earthquake for thirty days together. About this
time the Sarazens subjugated Jerusalem, Damascus, and all Syria.

A. D. 676. ( Circiter) A Comet was seen diverse times. Sigebert, Hist. Eccles.
Cent. 7. C. 13.
Once it appeared for three Months together, being seen in the Morning in
August, rising in the East. In appearance like unto a flaming Pillar. The
Plague and Famine followed, also a great Drought, so that it rained not
Bellarmine Chronol. in Anno 678. Alstedius Chron. Cap. 49. and in Encycloped.
P. 2171.
in some places for the space of three years together, The Sarazens came with a
great fleet into Sicily, and brake in upon the Roman Empire like a flood. Pope
Donas died this year.

A. D. 684. A Comet was seen in the Months of December, January, and February.
It was observed in the day time as well as in the night, near the seven Stars,
shining with a dim light not unlike to that of the Moon when covered with a
thin Cloud. Platina in vita Benedicti. Lavater, Alsted, Ricciolus.
After this, most horrible Thunder-storms, Plagues, Famine, and Floods
followed, to the amazing ruin of mortals. Also the direful flames of Vesuvius,
brake forth to the no small terror and confusion of the Country adjacent.

A.D. 729. Some Lycosthenes, Lavater Palmerius, Alstedius.
write of two Comets appearing this year at the same time, viz. in the Month
of January. The one in the Morning before the Sun, the other in the evening
after Sun set. But others do more probably conceive that by reason of its great
declination, the same Comet appeared both in the morning and in the evening,
Ricciolus, Appianus, and alii.
A terrible Plague followed in many places, especially at Constantinople in
which City three hundred thousand were swept away by that Besom of Destruction.
The Sarazens invaded Spain. The Long^bards ^ell upon Italy, besieged Rome it
self. Hospinian de Origin imaginum P. 59. v. Mordens Geography, P. 33.
Woeful Tumults and Schisms were amongst professed Christians about the
worshipping of Images. Not long after this the Christians under the conduct of
Charles Marell slew above three hundred thousand Sarazens.

A D. 745. A Comet appeared in the latter end of this year. Funccius, Hevelius,
Alsted, Praetorius.
Various Diseases and much Sickness was observed to follow, in special a Plague
of three years continuance miserably depopulated Sicily, the Mediteranean
Islands, and all Greece.

A. D. 763. A Blazing Star appeared for the space of ten days in the East.
Hist. Eccles. Cent. 8. Cap. 23.
After that in the West twenty one days. Another Comet was seen about two
years after this. Remarkable Events attending these Prodigies, were, the Turks
breaking in upon Armenia; an intolerable cold Winter, and after that as fiery
a Summer, and a very afflictive Drought.

A. D 814. A most strange kind of Comet was observed in the Month of November.
Camerarius Append. Chronol. Niceph. P. 54. Alsted.
Both the Light and the Figure of it was amazing to behold. It appeared like
two Moons meeting and departing, and sometimes like a Man without an Head. The
principal Event attending this Prodigy was the death of Charles the Great. The
Emperor himself was astonished at this Comet, (if we may call it a Comet)
supposing it to portend his own Death, and great changes to follow in his
Dominions.

A.D. 837. A Comet Calvisius, Hevelius.
appeared in April in the sign of Virgo, and in the space of 25 days passed
through Leo, Cancer, and Gemini, until it came into the head of Taurus, and
there disappeared under the feet of Auriga. The next year another (or the same
again) Comet appeared in Autumn, in Libra, it was seen in the morning before
Sun rise, and of an horrendous aspect. The Spring following another (or the
same Comet) appeared in Aries, it was seen in the Evening.

A. D. 842. A Comet was observed in Aquarius. Funccius, Eckstormius. Car^^an de
subtle. L. 4.


A.D. 844. A Comet was observed by Albumasar to be above Venus. As for the
remarkable Events attending these Comets, thus frequently appearing in so short
a space, there are many memorable passages noted by Historians as happening about
this time. e. g. The death of the Emperor Ludovicus Pius, and of Pipin King of
France. The Sarazens came upon Italy like a flood, not leaving Rome it self
untouched; many of them perished in the waters as they returned into Africa*
Imperial History.
An unhap^y War brake out between Lotharius and his two Brethren Lewis and
Charles. A mighty Army was brought into the Field, Lotharius was worsted. The
greatest part of the Nobil^ty and Flower of the French Nation was slain. Alsted
Chronol Cap 25.
Not long after this in Germany, Famine prevailed so as that the Parents did
eat their own Children, and somet^mes Children their Parents.

A*D. 868. A Comet appeared Lavater. Alsted and alii.
which was attended with a great Earthquake. The next year the Emperor
Lotharius died. The Danes cruelly wasted England, so did the Slavi do in
Batavia at the same time. Michae^ the Emperor of the East, was deprived of the
use of his reason, one of the meanest of his Servants killed him, and became an
Emperor, between whom and the Sarazens there were great conflicts. The Greek
and Latin Churches were at variance, and the Patriarch of Constantinople was
deposed.

A D 874. A Blazing Star with long and fiery Beams appeared in the beginning of
April, continuing for a Month, being seen in the day as well as in the night
Hector Boethius L. 10. Fol. 208. Alstedius, Rockenbachius and alii habent Annum
876.
The next year a Comet whose color was more red then uses to be, the tail
very long* was seen in the Month of June. The Plague and Famine followed. The
cruel Danes made more fearful slaughters in England, until they got the Land
into their possession* Ethus the King of Scotland, and the Emperor Lewis the
second died this year. The Germans invade France with an Army. Italy was again
sorely afflicted with the Sarazens.

A D. 882. A Comet with a long tail was seen in the Month of January
Calvisius, Lycosthenes, Alstedius.
within a few days after which Lewis the King of Germany died, also the King
of France died that year. The Normans fell upon Germany, and burned the famous
City of Trevirs. There was this year an attempt to poison the Pope ( John the 8
th.) but the poison not being strong enough, one took an hammer and knocked out
his brains.

A.D. 902, A Comet appeared in the month of May, for forty days. Alstedius
habet annum 900, alii vero annum 904. Calvisius.
The Hungarians sell with a great Army upon Italy, destroying famous Cities.
And in Lombardy they laid all waste before them. The Sarazens spoiled Greece,
and the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea. Lewis the King of the Longobards
being taken Prisoner by Berengerius (the Popes Emperor) had his eyes put out.
Soon after this Donaldus the King of Scotland died.

A.D. 912. A red fiery Comet appeared in the sign of Capricorn. Lycosthenes,
Hermannus. Quidam habent annum 908. Mizaldus habet annum 913.
After this the Hungarians caused woeful Desolations in Germany. There was also
a great inundation of Waters in Saxony. The Emperor Lewis the second having
ill success in his Wars, died with grief, Alexan^er the Emperor of the East,
was taken ill as he was playing at Ball; the next day Blood issuing out of all
parts of his Body died. Anastasius the Pope, and Abdal the Sarazens King died
this year also.

A.D. 942: A Comet appeared in the Month of November continuing for about
fourteen days. Eckstormius, Alstedius, Calvisius.
There followed Civil Wars in Italy. A great Sedition and Rebellion in France.
The Turks invaded Turace. Constantine the King of Scotland betook himself to a
Monastary. There was great Mortality of all sorts of living Creatures, and some
parts of the World were afflicted with a sore Famine.

A.D. 944. A Comet appeared which was of mavelous magnitude near Cassiopaea,
with fiery Beams issuing from it. Lycosthenes, Lavater, etc.
The Plague, Floods, and Famine followed.

A.D. 975. A fiery Blazing Star was seen in the Month of August, continuing
for eight Months together. Calvisius.
The Emperor Otto, grievously wasted Bohemia, which injuries were revenged by
the Duke of Bavaria. Zimis^^s the Emperor was poisoned. Culinus the King of
Scotland, Alhaca the King of Corduba in Spain died.

A.D. 984. A Blazing Star was seen. Lycosthenes, Alstedius.
An Earth quake, Wars, Plague, Famine followed, The Emperor and the Pope died.

CHAP. VI. A Continuance of the History of Comets, with the Events attending
them unto the Year 1200.
A D. 1000. An horrendous Comet was seen appearing in the Month of December,
about 9 th P M* Wolfius ex Chronol. Sax. Alstedius, Calvisius, Usher de statu
Eccles. C. 3. P. 59.
There followed a most terrible Earth quake. And great Wars between the
Emperor of Constantinople and the Bulgarians. Otto the Emperor killed
Crescentius who was then the principal man in civil power at Rome, whose Widow
gave the Emperor a pair of Gloves infected with Poison, which proved his
Death. Ekfard the Duke o^ Saxony put in for the Imperial Crown, but he was
resisted by the States of the Empire, banished, and the next year killed*
England was grievously infested by the cruel Danes. In Scotland the fish died
in the waters, so as that they were in great multitudes cast upon the shore,
putrefying and stinking, that the air was corrupted, and sickness followed.
Also a grievous Famine attended this Comet, and a prodigious Drought, so as
that both Men and Cattle died of thirst, most of the great Rivers in Europe
might be waded over.

A*D. 1005. A Blazing Star horrible to behold was seen flaming in the Heaven in
the Praetorius.
Spring time, for the space of thirteen days. And Lycosthenes, Sigebertus.
Calvisius.
again in October* There followed a most fearful Plague continuing for three
years. In some places whilst the living were burying the dead, they drew their
last breath, and were thrown into the Grave with those whom they intended to
leave there. Many whole Cities were utterly laid wast thereby. And the Villages
were emptied of their Inhabitants, so as that the Cattle belonging to them had
none to own them or look after them. Above half the Inhabitants of Germany were
swept away with that Besom of Destruction. A War also between the Emperor of
Germany and the Polanders followed this Comet. The Duke of Lorain (who was the
last of Carolus Magnus his Posterity) died. Baldwin the Earl of Flanders took
up arms against his Uncle Godfrid Duke of Araen whom the Emperor had
constituted Successor to the Duke of Lorain. About this time there were great
tumults and blood shed in Germany, occasioned by the Emperors imposing
Meingardus as Archbishop of Triers, whenas Adelber was before chosen, and the
Duke of Bavaria engaged in his quarrel against the Emperor.

A D. 1009. A Southern Comet terrible to behold was seen in the latter end of
May. Ricciolus ex Cardano. Hist. Eccles. Cent. 11. Cap. 13.
An unhappy Civil War in Germany followed* in the Month of August, a great
fleet of Danes landed in England, and cruelly destroyed the Inhabitants of the
Sea coast. This year also Pope John 18. descended to his own place, whose
Successors name was Petrus Bucca Porci.
Peter Hogs Snout, being ashamed of his Swinish Name (though not of his Swinish
nature) he called himself Sergius; ever since which, it has been the fashion
for those that arrive at the Popedom to have a new name given to them. The
next year the Duke of Saxony died. The Sarazens destroyed that most sumptuous
Church which the Christians had built in Jerusalem, and burned down many
Monasteries and Religious Houses. The Normans made woeful havoc in the
Netherlands, burning the Cities of Thile, Vtreck, etc. The Alsted Chron. ubi de
mirabilibus dei and in encyclop. P. 2178.
Plague swept away multitudes in many parts of the World. Also a great
Inundation happened, by reason whereof in Flanders some thousands were drowned.

A D. 1017. A Comet in form like a Beam, appeared in the sign of Leo,
continuing for the space of four Months. Herli^ius, Mizaldus and alii.
This was attended with Wars between the Danes and the Swedes. Also the Pope
set the Normans and the Greeks together by the ears. The Bishop of Vtreck took
up arms against the Earl of Holland. The Jews in Italy were exposed to great
miseries, because (as Historians relate) they were seen Mocking, Scourging, and
Crucifying our Lord Christ in effigy. In some parts of the World the Plague
raged, This year also, the Duke of Austria died, and the Duke of Bulgaria was
slain. In France it rained Blood.

A.D. 1031. Another Glaber, Calvisius.
Comet appeared. France was embroiled in civil Wars. Great mutations followed
in Burgundy, by reason of the death of their King, which put an end to that
Kingdom after it had continued for the space of 144 Years. Odo (the King of
Burgundy his Sisters Son) put in for the Crown, but Conrad (then Emperor)
waged War upon the Burgundians, and deposed (...) The Vanaals fell upon the
Empire, laying wast above an hundred Villages, and carrying away many thousands
of Captives. The Sarazens burnt down many Towns and Cities in Syria. Also, with
no less then a thousand Galleys they fell upon the maritime Islands. Alstedius.
It is moreover observable, that a Flood, and Plague, and Famine did attend
this Blazing Star.

A.D. 1038, A Comet was seen. Calvisius.
This year Conrad the Emperor being in Parma, The People proved tumultuous and
seditious, the event of which was, many of the Citizens were destroyed, and the
City was burnt. A great Battle was Fought between the Emperor of the East, and
the Sarazens, who having civil discords among themselves were overcome, The
King of Cast^ll subdued the Mores, whose King was killed. The King of Hungaria
died this year. Pandulph was by the Emperor ejected out of his Principality,
Berosus.
Thessalonica and other places were grievously afflicted with a Famine. The
next Year several Princes expired; and the Emperor died suddenly.

A.D. 1042. A Comet was seen the sixth of October, continuing all that Month
with long flaming Locks, having its Progress from the East toward the West.
Cedrenus Lycosthenes. Calvisius.
Maniatas falling out with the Emperor, sought to get the Imperial D
Christian. Alstedius.
Crown upon his own head, for which end he betook himself to the Bulgarians,
and obtained a Victory over the Imperial Army. Nevertheless he was himself
mortally wounded* and soon after died. Also, the Servians rebelled against the
Eastern Emperor, who lost forty thousand of his Soldiers in endeavoring to
subdue them. It was in this year, that Hardecanute, Polydor, Virgil.
who then Reigned in England, after he had barbarously caused his Brother
Harold to be dug out of his Grave; as he was Feasting, died suddenly of an
Apoplexy. Alfred succeeding in the Kingdom, died within a few Months. Michael
the Emperor of the East, after he had Reigned four Months removed his Queen
Zoes putting her into a Monastery, whereupon the multitude made a tumult,
pursuing the Emperor with stones, forcing him to set the Queen at liberty, and
then took him and put out his eyes* and sent him away into a Monastery, and
another person married Zoes and became Emperor. Alsted Chron. Cap. 25.
This year a Famine began, which lasted se^^n years.

A.D. 1058. A Comet was seen. Funccius, Alsted.
The King of Poland died. A Famine in that Country followed. Isaacius
Calvisius.
the Emperor as he was going by water to Constantinople, was smitten with ^
flash of Lightning, which did so astonish him, as that he laid down his Robes,
and resigning his Crown unto one that was no way related to him, betook himself
to a religious House, where of an Emperor he became a Porter.

A.D. 1066. An amazing Comet was seen by the whole World. Spondanus, Calvisius.
It appeared first in the beginning of May, and continued for the space of
forty days. The body of it was as big as the Moon when at the full, but as it
began to have a stream; that increasing, the body of the Star decreased.
Authors moreover affirm, that another Blazing Star (or the same again) did
appear in the two following years. Alstedius.
As for remarkable Events attending this Prodigy, they were such as these.
Great Wars in many places of the World. e. g. In Asia, between the Christians
and the Sarazens. In Europe, between the Emperor and the Vandals. The King of
Norway, with a thousand Ships invaded England; He cruelly wasted the Land;
murdering above a thousand of the Clergy, but was in Battle overcome by the
King of England, and slain. In the latter end of the year William the Duke of
Normandy (commonly though improperly called the Conqueror) came into England,
there was a bloody Battle fought between him and Harold, then King of England,
wherein Harold was slain, after which the Land became Subject to the Normans.
Also, a great Drought, Plague, and Famine attended these Blazing Stars.

A.D. 1071. An Oriental Comet appeared in the Morning for twenty five days.
Praetorius, Alstedius.
The stream long and flaming. Great Seditions and Commotions in Holland
followed. Spain flamed with War, the three Sons of Ferdinand striving for
Dominion, until Sanctius overcame his two Brethren, but was himself the next
year treacherously slain* and his Brother Alfonsus was brought out of a
Monastary to wear a Crown. The Saxons rebelled. Great Contentions arose between
the Emperor and the Pope, until at last the Pope caused the imperial Majesty
to ly down under his feet. Diogenes (the Emperor of the East) had wars with
the Turks. His Army was betrayed by his Son in Law Andronicus, so was he taken
by the Turk^, who after they had treated him with great civility, gave him his
liberty again, but Andronicus made a Prisoner of him, and caused his eyes to be
put out, not using any Medicines for his healing, so that worms bred in his eye
holes, whereby he died miserably.

The latter end of this, and the beginning of the next Century, was famous for
the appearance of Comets with an unwonted frequency. For good Ques vide citatos
apud Heveli^m in Cometographia. L* 12.
Historians relate concerning A.D. 1095 96* 97, 98, 99, 1101, 1102, 1103, 1104,
1106, 1109, 1110, 1113. that a Blazing Star was seen in every one of these
years. It would fill a volume to speak particularly and fully concerning the
miseries of these doleful times. In Syria a flood happened, whereby innumerable
thousands were drowned. Famine, and the Plague raged throughout almost the
whole Earth. In Alsted ubi supra.
Germany the Pope stirred up the Saxons against their lawful Emperor Henry V.
There were no less then five bloody engagements, wherein the lives of many
famous Princes were lost* and Rivers of Blood were spilt upon the ground. But
the most remarkable and great concern attending these iterated blazing Stars,
was the Holy War (as it uses to be called) which lasted for many years, and
proved most unhappy to the whole Christian World.

A.D. 1132. A Comet of horrendous magnitude appeared in the Month of October.
Hist. Eccles. Cent. L. 2. C. 13. Buntingus.
The Swedes and Danes revolt from their Emperor which caused great troubles
and commotions in those Countries. The Earl of Holland falling upon Frisia made
woeful desolations there. Ratisbone was burnt down to the ground. There were
also great Commotions in Sicily this year.

A.D. 1145. A Comet appeared continuing for a Month, being of a bright and
fiery color* Eckstormius. Paris Hist. Angl. P. 77. Calvisius*
Which was attended with great troubles between the Armenians and the Turks* In
Hassia the Nobles rebelled. Saxon^ flamed with war In Poland the King and his
Br^thren fell out, which troubles issued in that unhappy Princes being forced
to fly out of his own Country, and die in exile. It was in this year, that a
tumult happened in Rome, some body (not known who) threw a stone, which (...) the
Pope ( Lucius II.) by which blow that Blazing Star died. The next year the new
Pope was driven from his Seat by the tumultuous Romans. On the twenty second of
May there was an extreme Frost, so that both Vines and Trees were killed by it.

A D. 1165. There appeared two Blazing Stars at the same time. Hector Boethius,
Hist. Scot. Lib. 13. Fol. 210. Rogerius.
The one in the South, and the other in the North. Remarkable events this year
were the death of Malcom the King of Scotland. Troubles and great Commotions
both in the upper and in the lower Germany. The Sulden of Egypt was murdered,
which caused great Commotions in those parts of the World. Calvisius.
In Sicil^ there was an unexpected inundation of waters for three days
together, so as that twelve thousand Souls perished in that flood. The next
year was attended with great troubles in Spain, and in Hungaria. Also Bavaria,
and Suevia were miserably wasted* Presently after the appearance of these
B^azing Stars (the very next year as some Hystorians Vide Mede de numeris
Danielis. P. 44.
relate) the Papists fell upon the poor Waldenses with bloody fury so as that,
ere this Persecution ended, in France alone they barbarously slew no less then
ten hundred thousand Souls. It was was now manifest that the Pope (successively
taken) is the Antichrist; so that Daniel's numbers (mentioned, Chap. 12. Ver.
11, 12, seem then to be expired.

CHAP. VII. A further Acccunt of Comets, appearing from the Year of our Lord
1200. unto the Year 1500. with the most observable Events attending them.
A D. 1200. A Comet appeared in 15 of Scorpio. Its motion was contrary to the
order of the signs in the Zodiac. Cardanus ex Haly Ben Rodoan. Calvisius.
It was of a rotund figure, and in magnitude three times bigger then the
morning Star, giving as much light as a fourth part of the Moon uses to do.
This year was attended with Commotions in Alsatia, and almost all the upper
Germany. There were also great mutations amongst the Vascons, whose Kingdom
was swallowed up and div^ded by the Kings of Castle and Arragon. Philip the
King of France was excommunicated by the Pope. He at first made light of the
Popes Bull, ejected the Bishops who adhered to the Popes in (...). But the next
year, being afraid le^t the Pope should cause tumults and miseries in his
Kingdom, he complied with him. The Bohemians and Thuringians had bloody
Contests the next Year.

A.D. 1211. A Comet was seen in the Month of May, near to the Arctick Pole,
continuing for the space of 47 days, in the evening the tail pointed eastward,
and in the morning westward. Michov. Hist. Polon* Funccius.
Soon after which the Tartars (who were before an unknown Nation) made a
doleful irruption upon Poland. The Russians coming in to their succor, were
cut off by a lamentable slaughter. There were Wars between the Turks and the
Moors. The Sarazens betaking themselves to their ships were vast multitudes of
them drowned. Two hundred thousand of them were slain. The Popes Thunderbolt
set the Empire on fire, and so it did England, where also there was great
trouble by reason of a Welsh rebellion. Moreover, about this time the
Albigen^es were again cruelly persecuted an^ slaughtered by the bloody Papists.

A.D. 1214. (or as others 1215.) Histor Eccles. Cent. 13. Cap. 13. Boethius,
Calvisius.
In the Month of March a terrible Blazing Star was seen, both preceding and
following the Sun every day, which caused many in those days to think that
there were two Comets at the same time. This was attended with a Persecution in
Germany; in Starsborough, eighty persons were for their Religion burnt to death
by the Papists. A general Council sat at Rome wherein were 412 Bishops and more
then a thousand of inferior Clergymen. Whatever the Blazing Star in the sky
had, so many Blazing stars being in Conjunction at Rome, must needs have a
malignant influence upon the World. The times in England were now most doleful
by reason of King John his ill management of affairs. His tyranny caused the
Lords to take up Arms; to be avenged on whom, King John, Acheronta movebat,
moved the Pope to appear on his side, who immediately sets his Bull a roaring;
The English Lords affrighted with the bellowing of the Pope's Excommunication,
request the King of France to come in to their Assistance, so that the Land
became a stage of Rapine, bleeding under the devouring miseries which must
needs follow, when two merciless Armies were in its bowels. See Sr. Richard
Bakers Chronicle.
Several things accounted disastrous happened. 1. Hugh de Bones coming to aid
King John with threescore thousand men out of Britain, and Flanders, were all
drowned in the Sea. 2. Coming to Walpool in Norfolk, he was careful to obtain a
guide to himself, with some few, that he might go over the Fords where it was
passable, but took no care of the multitude which followed him, so that they
all perished in the water, which disaster filled King John with much anguish of
mind, that he fell sick and died. Yet some write that he was poisoned by a
Monk, the year after the Blazing Star last mentioned was seen. The King of
Scotland died. The Spaniards slew two hundred thousand Moors.

A.D. 1217. A Southern Comet appeared in the latter end of this year, a little
after Sun set. Hist. Eccl. ubi supra. Calvisius.
It gradually declined Westward. In form being like to a Broom, reaching almost
to the midst of the sky. Remarkable Events which followed were such as these.
Wars between England and France, the French being notably worsted. The Emperor
Otho died* The King of Castle as he was playing at Ball, a Tile happened to fall
upon his head, whereby he was killed. The Sarazens destroyed all the Christians
in Jerusalem. The next year, there was a dreadful inundation, so as that all
Frisia was overwhelmed therewith, and no less then an hundred thousand souls
perished in the waters.

A. D. 1223. A terrible Comet appeared. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 305. Nauclerus.
Presently after which the French King died. The King of Denmark was
treacherously surprised by Suerinus. A great Commotion happened in Poland by
reason of Henricus Barbatus his rebellion. The Emperor Frederick being
provoked by the Pope, marched with an Army into Italy, and had probably driven
the Pope out of Rome, had not John the King of Jerusalem interposed and
reconciled the difference. Trythemius says, that this year there was a general
Murrain amongst Cattle, so that a third part of them died.

A.D. 1240. A Comet Albertus Magnus Meteorcol. L. 1, Tract. 3. C. 5. Paris vbi
supra P. 6.
was observed near the Pole, pointing South-east. It was seen in February, and
continued six Months. P^lyder, Virgil, Lycosthenes, and alii.
Writers speak of another Blazing Star: appearing the next year for thirty
days together in January, of a direful Aspect. Remarkable Events were, the
King of Denmark died. The Tartars miserably wasted Russia. They came over the
Ice into Poland, and got the victory over an Army that was raised to oppose
them. From whence they went to Cracovia; and burned down all before them. Also
in Silesia and Bohemia they caused great desolations. The Empire was put into a
strange hurly burly. For the Emperor had no less then seven Armies to defend
himself. The Pope and He were at daggers drawing; the Pope resolving to call a
Council of such as liked him best, whether the Emperor would or no; He ( i.
e.) the Emperor) surprised the Bishops Navy as they were transporting
themselves to the Council, sunk three of their Ships. took twenty of them, and
the Bishops in them became his Prisoners. The Pope immediately died with grief
and vexation. Another remarkable thing was, that a great Mountain in Burgundy
was by an Earth quake removed, whereby five thousands of Country People, living
in the Villages were overwhelmed, and killed in a moment.

A. D. 1254. A Comet Rockenbachius, Alstedius, and alii.
of immense magnitude appeared for several Months together. There followed
terrible and prodigious Tempests. Wars between the Genovenses and the
Venetians. The cross-bearing-Army took such a course to convert the Russians to
the Faith, as was never taught them by Christ or his Apostles, for with fire
and sword they fell upon them, and made them promise that they would be
Christians. The Emperor and the Pope being at variance* the Emperor died
suddenly, not without suspicion of Poison by the Popes procurement. The Pope
himself died within a year. The new Pope made a great disturbance in Italy, but
his Army was shamefully overcome. A Rebellion brake forth in Frisia. There were
great troubles and commotions in Saxony.

A.D. 1264. A mighty Comet was seen this year, in the sign of Taurus,
continuing for three Months, viz. from July to October 7. Its motion was
retrograde. For at first it appeared before the Morning Star, but at last after
it. Palaeologus, Palmerius, and alii. Wolfius habet annum 1263. Appendix ad
Hist. Matthew. Paris P. 967. habet annum 1265. Hoc anno (ait) apparuit Cometa
notabilis, 'ut nullus tunc vivens, viderit talem. Zuinger Vol. 5. Lib. 4. Page
1423. Calvisius.
The stream was long and broad, appearing before the body of the Star was seen.
When that came above the Horizon, it extended it self Westward over the one
half of the Heavens. It was observed by the Writers living in that age, that
that Blazing Star disappeared the very night in which the Pope died. Other
Remarkables attending this Comet were these; The Earl of Angiers did at the
Popes instigation remove out of France, and fell upon Sicily, causing the King
there to be treacherously killed. Armenia was all in a flame* by means of
Banducar (the King of Babylon) his coming upon them. Hetruria was in an uproar.
Spain was set upon by the Sarazens, who slew and were slain in great
multitudes. England blazed with Civil Wars. It would make this Discourse too
voluminous, if we should expatiate particularly upon the strange and amazing
revolutions which happened there, as well as in other parts of the World about
this time.

A D. 1268. An horrendous Blazing Star Cardanus, Ricciolus.
was seen, which was attended with these Remarkables. The Suldan of Egypt fell
upon Antioch, slew no less then seventeen thousand Christians there, and made
an hundred thousand of them Captives. Monaavus the King of Portugal renounced
his Christianity, and became a professed Infidel, and raised a cruel
Persecution against the Christians. In Scotland there were fearful destructions
made by horrible winds, which Cardan thinks were the special evils portended by
this Comet.

Historians Quos citat Hevelius in libro supra (...). Aldedius.
have noted that in the latter end of this and the beginning of the next
Century, Blazing Stars (some of them of an horrendous magnitude and direful
aspect) appeared every year, for seven or eight years together, viz. A.D. 1298,
99. 1300, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. in the last of which years the destroying Angel was
let loose upon the World, the Plague raging and killing in all Countries and
Nations. But the great and stupendous providence attending these Heralds of
Heaven, whereby the World was thus loudly and frequently Alarmed, was the
rising of the Turkish Power united in and under the Ottomanical Family: So that
in those days the second Apocalyptical Woe (and it was a Woe indeed to the
Christian World) began to be poured forth. The huge and horrid Armies of the
Turks, whereby Christendom (as it is called) has been miserably wasted* and
the Eastern Churches made most desola^e, are set forth Mede in locum.
in the Revelation, by that of an Army of Horsemen, consisting of two hundred
thousand thousand, which are prepared to kill the third part of men, Rev. 9.15,
16. Now was the time when this Army being furnished with Instruments of death,
out of whose mouths issues fire and smoke and Brimstone, began to do their
woeful Execution.

A.D. 1313, A great Northern Lycosthenes, Funccius and Buntingus habent annum
1312.
Comet appeared fourteen days, having its motion toward the South. The next
year a Wolfius, Camerarius, and alii.
Comet was seen blazing in Virgo for six Months together. And in the Lavater,
Herlicius.
year after that, another Blazing Star appeared in December. Thad. Hagecius In
sua dialexi de nova stella, P. 56.
writes that the year 1315. was attended with two Comets, the one of which was
in the Arctick Circle, the other near unto Mars, and in the same sphere with
that Planet. Remarkable Events which attended these Blazing Stars, were, the
Emperor being poisoned by a wicked Monk, a Civil War b^oke out in Germany
about a successor to the Crown, which continued for eight years together, to
the unspeakable misery of the Countries subject to the Emperor. It rained all
the Summer Funccius, Calvisius, ut lateat nullum tempus famis ecce CVCVLLVM.
long, a terrible Famine and Plague followed, so that a third part of all
creatures living perished. In Portugal and the Countries thereabouts, the
Famine lasted for three years. In some places men were killed that others might
eat them. In the City of Erford eight thousand persons died with hunger. The
Scots went with a Fleet into Ireland, wasting the Country with fire and sword.
A dismal blow was given to England; For King Edward II d. raised an Army
consisting of an hundred thousand to fight the Scots, who not having half that
number in their Army, by a Stratagem routed the English Army, killing an Earl*
several Lords* seven hundred Knights and Esquires, and about fifty thousand
common Soldiers.

A.D. 1337. Two Comets were seen this year at the same time Lavater, Funccius,
Calvisius Lycosthenes.
one of which appeared in the sign Taurus, for the space of four Months, and
before that was gone, another was seen, which continued blazing with the
former, for three Months. Niceph. Greg. Hist* Romans L, 11.
It was not a Crinite but a Barbaete Star. It was first seen in the feet of
Pegasus, the Coma (or Beard) extending it self very broad and pointing toward
the East. Observable consequents whereof* were, the death of the King of
Sicily. In the East there were great stirs about a Successor to the Imperial
Crown. Wars between the Turks and Thracians, who were miserably slain, and
thirty thousand carried into captivity at once. In some places a prodigious
cold Winter, so as that the Cross bearing Army had their Noses and Fingers
frozen. A formidable Army of Locusts devoured Bohemia, Austria, and other
Countries: The breadth of which Army was twenty eight miles, the length of it
could not be found: when they flew they darkened the Air, as if the Heavens had
been covered with a cloud.

A.D. 1340. A Comet in form like a Sword, appeared in the Month of March, near
unto Spica Virginis, Lavater, Palmerius, Praetorius, Eckstormius.
moving forward every day one Degree, until it came to the sign Le^, and there
it vanished. This year Andronicus the Emperor died. A terrible Plague raged in
Italy; War between England and France, wherein the French were egregiously
worsted, their Navy burnt and broken by the English. The next year the Turks
caused Poland, Moravia, Hungaria, to become miserable stages of Rapine, Blood,
and Fire. An Earthquake in Burgundy, removed two Mountains which fell upon the
People thereabout. A prodigious Tempest and destructive Flood happened in other
parts.

A.D. 1347. In the Month of August, a Comet appeared in Taurus, continuing
sixty days. Lavater; Ricciolus* Calvisius.
Many things worthy of remark happened this year. For the Scots invading England
with an Army, fifteen thousand of them were slain by the English, and their
King taken Prisoner. There was a general rising of the People in Aragon. The
Emperor as he was hunting a Bear fell off his Horse and quickly died. The King
of Sicily was strangled by his Queen in his sleep. A sweeping Plague lasting
for the space of six years, wen^ through the World. It came out of Asia into
Europe this year, There died in the City of L^beck ninety thousand, in Avinion
an innumerable multitude; In England nine parts of ten died throughout the
Land. Above fifty seven thousand in the City of Norwich. So fearful was this
Besome of Destruction, as that a third part of Mankind was not left alive upon
the face of the Earth. Alstedius Chronol. Chap. 25. P. 174.
(a grave and learned Author) Writes, that this Plague swept away no less then
a Million, two hundred and forty four thousand four hundred and forty four
Monks, which (though strange) yet considering that the World did then swarm
with Monks is not impossible to be true.

A.D. 1351. A Lavater, Lycosthenes.
Northern Comet appeared in December. Some Schosserus, Eckstormius.
Authors speak of Blazing Stars seen in the two following years also. These
Prodigies were attended with fearful Tempests, Drought, Famine, and Plague,
especially in Italy. Wars in Germany, and a devouring Army of Locusts in Asia,
and in Africa. Fearful burnings and desolations in many places, occasioned by
lightning.

A.D. 1362. A fearful Comet appeared Eckstormius, Hevelius, ex Hist. Pol.
Praetorius, and Alstedius habent annum, 1363.
in the Evening on the eleventh of March, in the sign Aquarius, being ninety
Degrees in length, pointing Eastward, and continuing for the space of three
Months. Things which followed, were, the Pope and the King of France both died
within a year. Wars and great troubles in many places e, g. between the King
of Castle, and of Arragon, the Earl of Holland, and the Gildrians, the King of
Cyprus and the Saraz^ns. In Poland a Famine prevailed, and a violent Plague
throughout all Britain.

A.D. 1375. A Comet appeared Lycosthenes, Rockenbachius.
Soon after which the Emperor Charles the IV. died* Great tumults in Cracovia;
a War in Thuringia lasting two years. Wickliffs Doctrine was condemned in
England. Seventeen To^ns in Flanders were crowned. The French ^ook the ^sle of
Wight, burn Hasting, etc. Prince E^ward died.

A. D. 1380. (which year was famous for the first invention of Gu^s) A Comet
^ockenba^^i^s, Alstedius.
appeared in Aquarius, continuing three Mon^^hs* And Idem, Bonfinius,
Ecks^ormius.
another (or the same) appeared again w^thin two years, Remarkable Events,
were* a terrible Plague. The death of the King of France, and of the King of
Hungaria. Locusts in Germany. A prodigious Rebellion happened in England. The
Kings Coll^ctor behaving himself rudely, was knocked in head by one whom he had
affronted and enraged, whereupon no less then an hundred thousand of the rabble
rout gathered together, and siezed upon the Tower of London, in which was the
King and Queen, and caused the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Chief
Justice, and others to be barbarously slain.

A.D. 1394. A blazing Star in form Lavater, Lycosthenes.
like a spit (which Astronom^rs are wont to look upon a^ most unhappily
ominous) with the head downward, and the Coma or Blaze pointing upwards, was
seen in the West* moving Northward. This year the Pope died, and the next year
the Duke of Austria. The King of Arragon as he was hunting, beheld a Wolf (or
rather a Devil in the same likeness) of a prodigious magnitude, at the sight
whereof he was frighted to death. About that time, all the Jews in Germany were
either killed or banished. Wickliffs Doctrine began to enlighten Germany.
Troubles arose between the Germans and the Italians. The Chiverus.
Turks being informed that the Christians were at great variance amongst
themselves, came with an Army of two hundred thousand, under Bajazet, and
obtained a fatal and remarkable Victory over the Europeans. About this time the
Duke of Lancaster made such an interest in England, as to cause King Richard to
be deposed from his Throne, and after he had resigned the Crown, to be
privately murdered by bloody Villains.

A. D. 1400. In the Herlicius, Praetorius, etc.
Spring time a Comet was seen. But the next Historia ^^zantina.
year in February, the whole World was amazed with the sight of a fiery and
flaming Comet in form like a Lamp, whose Blaze was four Cubits in length. The
light of it was so great, as that it obscured the Stars, and overcame the
darkness of the night as long as it was above the Horizon. It continued until
the Sun entered into Libra. The consequents of this Blazing Star, were no less
prodigious, then the Comet that appeared. Alsted*
In diverse places the Plague raged, and other grievous Diseases before that
time unheard of. Great Rivers were dried up. It would make this Discourse too
voluminous, particularly to enumerate all the fatal and memorable accidents
which happened by reason of Wars in many Countries. Our English v. Sr. R. Bakers
Chron.
Chronologers, say, that this Blazing Star was portentous of that effusion of
Blood in Wales and Northumberland, which followed quickly after. A very
prodigious thing happened the same year in Danbury in Essex; the Devil in the
shape of a Gray Friar, entering the Church, put the People into a lamentable
fright, and in the same hour with a Tempest of Whirlwind and Thunder, the top
of the Steple was broken down* and half the Chancel scattered abroad. In
Bohemia, John Huss standing up in defense of Wickliffs Doctrine, no small
Commotions were occasioned thereby. But that which most amazed the World, was,
Tammerlain came out of Asia, with an huge Host. He overcame the Turkish
Emperor, and used him like a slave. He called himself the Anger of God, and
waster of the Earth; and indeed he made the Earth to swim in blood.

A.D. 1432. A total Chr. Polon.
Solar Eclipse was attended with a small Comet. The next year another great
Comet of a red and fiery aspect, was was seen. Funccius Alstedius.
It continued blazing all night long; nor was it extinct for a quarter of a
year together. Remarkable Events, were, a Dearth of six years continuance.
Calvisius,
An inundation throughout all Germany, in Thuringia 40 Villages perished in
that Flood, also several Towns in Bohemia. In the Spring time there was a great
Snow continuing for 40 days together, so that Beasts and Birds perished in
great multitudes. Hunger brought the wild Beasts upon the Towns, either to kill
or to be killed. A flame of War was kindled between the Duke of Saxony and the
Prince of Brandenburg. France was sorely distressed. The King of Portugal and
the King of Poland died. The Duke of Venice, was beheaded. The Pope had like to
have been stoned to death, being forced to disguise himself, and so to flee out
of Rome.

A.D. 1419. Funccius, Camerarius, etc.
A Comet appeared. This year Albert the Emperor died. Great commotions were in
the Empire by reason of the Turks; And Wars between the English and the French.
The Marshal of France was burnt for Sorcery. The King of Bohemia died. A bloody
Rebellion broke forth in Spain. The Council at Basil deposed the Pope* and
chose a new one, which caused a notable Schism amongst the worshippers of the
Beast, some adhering to the old Pope, and others to the new one. The next year
was famous for the first Invention of the Art of PRINTING, by John Guttenberg a
Goldsmith in Strasburg.

A.D. 1444. About midsummer Praetorius, Rockenbachius.
a Blazing Star was seen in Leo. The King of Hungaria, with a great multitude
of Christians was slain in Battle with the Turks. The King of France and the
Helvetians fall out. Tumults happened in England. Amurathes the Turkish Emperor
being distressed by the King of Hungaria, (who had at the persuasion of the
Cardinal Julianus, violated his Covenant with Amurathas) prayed to God for
help, vowing that if God would give him the victory, he would betake himself to
a Monastery; Which after the Victory he accordingly performed, and resigned his
Crown to another, whereby great commotions in the Turkish Empire, and the
burning of Adrionople was occasioned. The next year, a terrible inundation of
waters happened in the Netherlands, so as that above an hundred thousand persons
lost their lives in that flood, besides an infinite multitude of Cattle.

A D. 1450. A Comet was seen this Summer, appearing a little after Sunset, in
form like a Sword, moving from the West toward the East. Ricciolus ex Franz.
Hist. L. ^. C. ^1.
The Moon being at the full, this Comet is reported to cause it to suffer an
Eclipse, (I do not remember that I have read the like of any Comet) whence the
Turks were not a little astonished* at the beholding of it. Remarkable events,
were The Turkish Emperor died. The Eastern parts flamed with War.
Constantinople was taken by the Infi^els. The Empire was embroyled with civil
Discords. Also Jack Cade his mad Rebellion in England happened in this year, when
diverse Nobles of the Land were murdered. The French taking advantage from the
troubles in England seize upon all the English Territories there, leaving
nothing to the English but Calice. This year Naples was shaken with an Earth
quake, and thirty thousand persons were destroyed by that Earthquake, in
places adjacent.

A D. 1456. A Comet appeared in Cancer, and another in Leo, extending it self
over two of the Funccius, Calvisius, etc. Sed alii habent annum, 1457.
Celestial Signs ( h. e. 60 degrees.) This Blazing Star was attended with a
dir^ful Earthquake in Italy, by means whereof thirty thousand persons lost
their lives, also a great Plague. Bloody Wars between the Turks and the
Hungarians. That brave Prince of Transylvania, Hunniades, after he had
destroyed two hundred of the Turks ships, and in one Battle slain forty
thousand of them, died. The young King of Hungaria, on the day appointed for
his Marriage* di^d suddenly. One of Hunniades his Sons being then a Prisoner,
and expecting Sentence of death, was Alsted Chronol. Cap. 25.
set at liberty, and chosen King, so that there was a sudden and stupendous
alteration of affairs. Scanderbegs Wars and the great Commotions caused
thereby, were about this time.

A D. 1460. A notable Comet was seen. Praetorius, Rockenbachius, Funccius.
The King of France, and the King of Scotland died. Cracovia was laid waste
with Fire and Sword. In England the Duke of York aspiring to the Throne, headed
an Army, designing to depose the King, but was himself slain. His Son the Earl
of March, put in for the Crown, between whom and King Henry VI. there was this
year the bloodiest Battle fought that ever was known in England. No less then
thirty seven thousand Englishmen were slain in one day. The Earl gets the
Crown, and the King was kept Prisoner in the Tower. A Civil War began in France.

A. D, 1470. A marvel (...) Comet appeared this year. That great Mathematician
Reg^omontanus (whom In Schol. M^^hem.
Peter Ramus calls the glory of Germany) was accurate in observing that
Prodigy* in all its motions, from whom Mizaldus has given an exact description
of it. The body of the Star, did at first seem small, but on a sudden it grew
to a wondrous magnitude, and then again decreased. Sometimes of a white,
otherwhile of a flame like aspect. The Blaze In Cometogr. Lib. 1. Cap. ult.
was at the first appearance, and a little before it disappeared short, but
after it had been seen forty days, the length of it was above fifty degrees.
Its duration was the space of eighty days. At first it could be seen only in
the morning, at last only (...)* the evening, in the middle of its duration it
might be seen all the night long. Its motion (which was always retrograde) at
its beginning and ending was slow, but in the midst of its circuit was swift,
even so as to dispatch 40 deg^ees in one natural day. It passed from Virgo
through Boots, the Dragon, Vrsa minor, the feet of Cephe^s, breast of
Cassio^^a, Andromeda, Pisces, Serpentarius, until it came to the Whale, where
by reason of Occ^sus Heliacus, it disappeared. The Blaze did continually point
at the Gemini. In the same night presently after Sun set it would point to the
East, near midnight to the South, after midnight to the West, a little before
Sun rise to the North. As for Events, There followed a very great Drought of
three years continuance; so that in Hungaria, the great River Danaw (which is
the greatest River in Europe) might be waded over; such horrible w^nds in
Germany as blew down many Houses. A terrible Plague, in which many were
deserted of their Relations, that so they might escape with their own lives.
The cruel Wars of the Duke of Burgundy, which continued until his death, Also
Wars between the Hungarians and the Polanders, and in the East between the
Persians and the Turks. This year, the King of England, Henry VI. was Murdered
by the bloody hands of the Duke of Gloucester.

A.D. 1477. A Caerulean dark colored Comet was seen. Eberus, Buntingus,
Eckstormius, etc. Alstedius
The Emperor Charles V. used to say that that Blazing Star was portentous of
his Grandfathers Death, who fell amongst others that were slain in that Battle
fought before Nance this year. It was a fatal year to many other Princes. A
direful Plague followed, and such heat and drought, as that great Rivers were
dried up; and not only Fruit Trees were destroyed, but whole Forests were set
on fire by the scorching heat of the Sun. A terrible Plague followed.

A.D. 1491. A Comet appeared in the evening Mizaldus, Praetorius ex Walteri
Observationibus, Funccius.
a little after Sunset. The Star small, but the Stream long, extending it self
Eastward in direct opposition to the body of the Sun. Immediately after which
the Turks overcame Dalmatiae, and Slavonia. There was also a great Mortality
both amongst Men and Cattle. The Pope and the King of Poland died this year.
The King of Portugal was killed by a fall from his Horse. The next year the new
World (as it uses to be called) viz. that part of the World which now bears
the Name of America was discovered by Christopher Columbus.

CHAP. VIII. The History of Comets which have been Observed from the Year 1500*
to 1600. with the Events.
A D 1500. In the Month of April, a Comet Rockenbachius, Funccius, Mizaldus
was observed in the sign of Capricorn, of a fearful magnitude, appearing for
above a quarter of a year* and was seen in the day time as well as in the
night. And another Lavater, Hevelius, Alstedius.
the same year in January, seen also in the Day, for above a week together.
Four years after, there happened a Conjunction of the Superior Planets, which
was attended with a notable Blazing Star almost as light as the Moon, so that
people could see to Travel by the light of it. The next year another Comet was
seen in April continuing two days. And ag^in in August, under Coma Berenices,
and near Charles Wain. Remarkable Events attending these Comets were, the death
of the Arch Duke of Austria, and of the King of Spain, and of the King of
Bohemia, and of the Queen in England. Plague, Famine, and sore Drought lasting
from January to November, in some Countries. Prodigious Tempests and
Inundations in other places. The Tartars wasted Poland, the Muscovites
Lithuania. The Bavaric War also War between the Germans, the Venetians, and
French. The Spaniards began their most bloody Butcheries amongst the Indians.
The Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Iamaica were exceeding populous, but the cruel
Spaniards made them desolate. A Writer of their own confesses that in a few
years time, they killed more then ten hundred thousand Natives, fourteen times
told.

A.D. 1513. A Comet appeared in Cancer, Ricciolus ex Petro Surdo, Zanch* de
operibus Dei. L. 3. C. 2. P. 335.
continuing from December to the latter end of January. The color various, the
stream long* see^ all night. This year that great Blazing Star which had put
the whole Christian World into a flame, died, viz. Pope Julius II. The King of
Scotland with an Army of sixty thousand invaded England, but he was slain in
battle, and (besides three Bishops, twelve Earls, seventeen Lords) many
thousands with him. The King of Denmark died. Insurrections in many places in
Germany followed. The next year the Popes Legate made a Proclamation in
Hungaria, that whatsover would go out against the Turks should have Indulgences
granted them, whereupon a great rabble gathered together, but instead of
warring against the Turks, they sell upon their own Countrymen, ^lew seventy
thousand of them, amongst which were four hundred of the Nobles. The Turks and
Christians had a bloody engagement; an hundred thousand of the Turks best
Soldiers were cut off in one day. About this time Armenia was conquered by
Selimus, and annexed to the Ottoman Dominions, v. Rica^t of the present state
of the A^menian Church, P. 389.

A D. 1516. A Comet Mizaldus, P. Jovius.
of a Lunar nature, was seen for some days. The King of Spain died. The next
year Luther began to declare against indulgences. Soon after which great
Commotions and mutations followed throughout all Antichristendome. v. Purchase
Pilgrim, Part, 4. L ^. P. 1577.
Now did the merciless Spaniards fall upon the Indians inhabiting the Terrae
firma, where they murdered above four Millions of Souls. The Sulden of Egypt
was miserably Murdered, and the Mamalucks power (that had kept Egypt under
three hundred years) swallowed up by the Turks.

A D. 1523. And in the next year also, a Comet appeared. Praetorius,
Rockenbachius, Junctinus, Eckstormius.
A fearful Inundation followed, and Earthquakes. The Sedition of the Rusticks
in Germany, in which sixty thousand lives were lost. The King of France was
taken Prisoner by Charles V. The Duke of Saxony died. In England, after a great
Rain, there followed such an extreme ^rost, as that many lost their nails, and
some died with cold.

A.D. 1527. On the eleventh day of August, a most terrifying VVolfius, Cent.
16. P. 293. Lavater, Herlicius, Gemma.
Comet was seen, of an immense longitude, and bloody color. The form of it,
was like a man's arm holding an huge Sword in his hand with which he was ready
to strike. Such terror and horror surprised the Spectators of this Prodigy,
as that some died away with dread and amazement. Ricciolus.
The next year another Comet was seen in Pisces, Jan. 18. There followed a
great Dearth in England by reason of extremity of Rain in Seed time; also a
Famine in Venice, and in several other places, whereby many perished. And that
woeful Disease known by the name of the English Sweat, infected all places of
the Realm, whereby whole miriads were sent to the Grave. The Duke of Barbon
took Rome, and sacked it. The Turks wasted Hungaria. In some places, Armies of
Locusts devoured the fruits of the Earth.

A D. 1530. A Mizaldus, Eckstormius, etc.
Comet was observed. And again the next year in August and September, having
its motion from the beginning of Leo unto Libra, appearing first in the Morning
before Sunrise, afterward in the evening. Again, Appianus. Confessio Augustana.
the year following from September 25. to October 20, its motion being from
Virgo to Scorpio, and at first a southern, but at last a northern Latitude. The
body of the Star was three times as big as the Planet Jupiter; the stream
exceeding long, pointing to the South-west. The next year in June, in Gemini;
the Star somewhat greater then Jupiter, the figure like a long sword. As for
the more remarkable Events, attending those Blazing Stars, thus annually
appearing, they were such as these. An Earthquake in Portugal; above a
thousand houses were thrown down thereby. A sore Famine in some Countries. A
great Flood or Inundation of Waters in the Netherlands, viz. in Holland,
Friezland, and Zeland (no less then four hundred and four Parishes were
drowned;) yea and in Poland: Also at Rome the River Tyber overflowed its Banks.
Now did the famous Confession of Ausburg come forth, and the name of Protestant
was first known. That Confession was put into the form of a Covenant,
subscribed by several of the Electoral Princes, who protested they would abide
by the Truth, so did the opposers of Popery come to bear the name of
Protestants. The World blazed and flamed out with Wars every where. In the East
the Persians and Turks were at variance. Also the Turks made an irruption upon
Christendom. Hungaria was full of Troubles. In Heluetiae there was an unhappy
War, wherein Zuinglius (that Star of the first magnitude) lost his life. In
Westphalia, the Munsterian Anabaptists brought all to confusion. In Denmark,
the Popish party designing to suppress the Protestants, involved that Kingdom
in War and Blood. In Africa, the Kingdom of Tunis was put into a flame by
Barbarossa. Great mutations happened in England which filled the World with
discourse and wonderment, for King Henry VIII. cast off the Popes Supremacy,
and turned the Monks and Friars out of doors, disposing of the Church Lands to
whom he pleased. By all which things it appears, that the Blazing Stars
mentioned were not seen for nothing.

A.D. 1538. A Comet appeared in January, Jacobus Pincelius.
continuing three weeks. It was seen in the evening (in the sign Pisces) the
Blaze 30 degrees in Longitude. The Appianus. Hallerus.
next year a great Comet appeared in Leo, from May 6, to 17. Many things worthy
of Remark happened in this year. Amongst the Napolitans, the Sea was dried up
eight miles; and out of that place there was a most horrendous irruption of
fiery flames, and ashes, which falling upon the People living thereabouts, they
were miserably destroyed. A terrible Conflagration happened in Constantinople
continuing several days. A fiery Summer and a scorching Drought in many
places. The King of France came with an Army into Italy. The King of Spains
Navy was overcome by Barbarossa. The Duke of Saxony died with grief, and his
death occasioned great mutations and miseries in that part of Germany. The
Antinomians headed by an obscure and illiterate person (one John Isl^b) did now
first begin to Blaze in Germany. A principal City in the Country of Mexico was
almost overwhelmed by a Deluge of boiling water which descended from a Vulcano
near unto it.

A.D. 1542, A Rockenbachius, Eckstormius, Ricciolus ex ^romordo and Senerto
habet An. 1543.
Blazing Star terrible to behold, was seen forty days. Three years after that
another appeared of a bloody color. Remarkable Events, were, a great Drought,
in England, the lesser Rivers were clean dried up, much Cattle died there for
lack of Water. In Silisia and other Countries the Locusts did much harm. The
designed Expedition of the Christians against the Turks proved unhappy, a great
part of the Christian Army dying by an Epidemical Disease. The latter of these
Comets was attended with the first Session of the Council of Trent; Also at the
Popes Instigation the Wal^enses were destroyed for their Religion, and Popish,
Barbarous, Unparalleld Cruelties exercised toward them, The next year ( viz.
A.D. 1546.) Luther died, imm^diately upon whose death a Cloud of Blood which
had been long impending, fell upon Germany, for a fatal War broke out between
the Emperor and the Protestant Princes.

A.D* 1556. A Comet in Libra was seen from the beginning of March to April 23.
The Color varied. Hommelius, Camerarius, Bizaras, Histor. Genuens. Kepler,
Cardanus, and alii.
The body of it shining like a^ half Moon, the stream near its head more
compact, but in the end more rare. Its motion from Virgo through Boots to the
North Pole of the Ecliptic; from thence through Andromeda to Piscis
sep^entrionalis, where it vanished. In the midst of its appearance the motion
was most swift, for it dispatched 15 Degrees every day. At the first it was
retrograde, but afterward direct. In the space of four days it was removed
about 70 Degrees Westward, and 30 Degrees Northward It moved toward the Planet
Saturn, the nearer it came to him, the slower was its motion. Gemma.
Its magnitude at its disappearing in a manner equal to what it was at first.
This Comet was attended with the death of many Learned and Worthy Men; and with
the fiery part of Queen Mary's Persecution. This year also, the Emperor
Charles V. did to the amazement of the World, resign his Crown, and betook
himself to a Monastery. Such an Inundation happened at Rome (...) River Tybers
overflowing, as that a great part of the City was thereby destroyed.

A.D. 1558. A Comet was seen in the Evening under Coma Berenices, of a pale
color, continuing about 30 days. Thuanus, Lib. 21. Page 577. Tycho Epist. P.
144.
Also in May the next year, and in December the year after that. These three
years did not pass without such things as were very observable. In England
there was such a prodigious Tempest as the like (in respect of circumstances)
is seldom mentioned in any History. That year also Queen Mary died, and famous
Queen Elizabeth seconded, whereby affairs both in Church and State were
strangely altered. The Emperor Charles V. said that Comet was sent to give him
notice of his approaching Death. And at the sight of it, made this Pentameter,
His ergo judiciis me mea fata vocant. So it happened, for he died that year,
Ricciolus.
The next year the Pope died, and no less then fifteen Cardinals, also the King
of France, the King of Portugal, the King of Denmark, and many other Princes.

A. D. 1577. This year a notable blazing Star amazed the World for three
Months together. Those famous Mathematicians Michael Mastlin, Cornelius Gemma,
and Tycho Brahe, have written largely and learnedly concerning that Comet. It
was seen first on the ninth of November, in the beginning of Capricorn, passing
through that sign and Aquarius, to the midst of Pisces. The Star was equal to
Venus in magnitude, being a compact solid body* and like a little Moon, shining
as the purest Silver. The stream differed in color from the Star, for it was
red and fiery, in breadth five Degrees, and in length thirty. Toward the body
of the Star, the rays were more condensed, but the longer they were distended
they appeared to be more scattered and diffused abroad, which argued that the
Stream was procreated by some external light penetrating through the body of
the Star; and it was observed to be opposite to the Sun, yet so as that the
form of it was bending like a Bow, whose convexity was toward the Zenith, and
concavity toward the Horizon. Both Gemma and Tycho found that this Comet was
higher then the Moon. According to Tycho's observation, the true Diameter of
the Star was 368. Mill. Germ. so that its proportion to the Earth was as 3 to
14. The Longitude of the Comets tail he found to be 96 Semidiameters of the
Earth. He concluded it was not in the Airy but in the Etherial World, because
it did admit of no sensible Parallax. On November 10. the Parallax was 19 12
which was diminished every day until it came to two minutes, and that was a
demonstration that the Comet ascended higher and higher. At the first it was
distant from the Earth 173 Semidiamiters, but at last 1733. h. e. it ascended
as high as the Sun it self. As for Events, the King of Persia died by poison.
The great Turk was slain in Battle, and seventy thousand with him. The King of
Portugal would needs venture into Mauritaniae that so he might restore Mahomed
to the Kingdom which his Uncle Abdelmeleck had detruded him from; in that
memorable Battle the King of Portugal was slain, and the greatest part of the
Nobility with him. Abdelmeleck though he obtained a victory died that day of an
Apoplexy. Mahomed was drowned in the Marshes, so that three Kings lost their
lives in one day. This (...) also Novograde in Muscovia (whose Inhabitants were
wont to say that nothing was able to oppose God, unless it were great
Novograde) was taken, the Conqueror carrying away with him (as its said)
Mordens Geography rectified, P. 122.
an 100 VVagons of Gold and Silver.

A. D. 1580. A wonderful Comet appeared this year. It was observed first
October 2 having no Coma for several days, sc. not till October 9. When on a
sudden it appeared with a formidable blaze. The reason of which Maestl^n
judges to be this. The Sun and the Comet were in opposite signs in the
Zodiac, so that at first the Coma ascending directly upwards could not be
perceived by men here below, but as the Star receded from the Suns Diameter,
the rays issuing from thence were seen, which were adverse to the Sun, though
not in exact (...) opposicion thereto. Its appearance con^inued above three
Months. At first in the (...) at 7 h. but November 14. it was seen (...) ^n
the Morning and in the Evening, until December 6. when it appeared in the
Morning only. It was bigger then a Star of the first magnitude, only of a
darker color, and not moving as the fixed Stars but as the Planets do. At
first retrograde and slow in (...) progress, afterward swiftly passing through
Aries, Pisces, Capricorn, Sagittarius, but toward the end of its appearance,
the motion was more remiss, until it became almost stationary, it was as high
as the Planet Mercury, or Venus, viz* 157. S.T. There followed an epidemi^^^
Disease, which strangely run through all Europe. Also great Wars between the
Emperor of Muscovia, and the Suevians and Polanders. The States of Polland
united in renouncing obedience and subjection to the King of Spain, and from
thence they bear the name of the United Provinces. The Christians in Cyprus
this year rebelling against the Turks, were miserably destroyed: See Ricaut of
the present state of the Greek Churches, P. 91.
So that of fourteen thousand Villages of Christians which then were in that
populous Island, there now remain but seven hundred.

A. D. 1585. A strange Star appeared Tyco Braheus, Christoph Rothmannus.
from the 8 th of October, to the 5 th of November, in the Sign of Pisces,
having its motion direct through Aries, Taurus, etc. The magnitude equal to
Jupiter but affording an obscure cloudy kind of light without any Coma. It was
observed to be as high as Saturn.

The next year Ricciolus.
the Plague raged in the lesser Asia, Austria and Hungaria. Italy and the low
Countries were afflicted with a Famine. In the Country near Constantinople,
Armies of Locusts devoured the fruits of the Earth. The Queen of Scotland being
in England was tried for her life, condemned and beheaded.

A.D. 1590, A Comet appeared from February 23. to March 6. near. Pisces
Borealis. The blaze very thin and small, and about ten degrees in length. It
was by Tycko observed to be as high as the Sun.

As for Events, the Pope Sixtus V. died, and his Successor Vrbanus VII. lived
but ten days after he came to the Popedom, Gregory XIV. succeeded him, but
lived not a whole year, the next Pope, viz. Innocentius IX. lived but two
Months; so that four Popes successively died in little more then a years time.
There was a terrible Earthquake this year in Moravia and Austria, whereby many
Houses (especially in Vienna) were destroyed. The (...) Summer there was a sore
Drought. A Shepherd in a place in Holland carelessly throwing some fire upon the
ground, by reason of the dry season, the ground took fire, and burnt so that
the Heavens seemed to flame nor could the fire* ^e extinguished, until the Sea
water was let in upon it. In Paris thirteen thousand Persons were famished to
death this year.

A.D. 1596. July 9. A Comet of Saturnine aspect appeared in Vrsa major, from
whence it hastened to Coma Berenices. Bucholzer, Maestlinus and alii.
It passed through Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, and there turning aside, became
Stationary. Remarkable Events were; a drought and earthquake in diverse places.
The English burnt the Spanish Fleet. The Turks in Battle overcame the
Austrians. This year many great Personages Sr. Richard Bakers Chron. p. 387.
d^ed in England, Also Cluverius Hist. P. 753.
many famous for Learning in other Countries. Ireland blazed with Tyr Owens
Rebellion, nor could that Flame be extinguished without the effusion of much
English blood* An exundation of the River Tyber drowned 1500 persons in Rome,
and the City received inestimable detriment thereby.

CHAP. IX. The History of Comets appearing in this last Century, with the more
remarkable occurrences of Divine Providence which have attended them.
A D. 1607. September 25. A Comet appeared Kepler, Longomontanus, Go^^r.
Wende^in, Cluverius.
continuing about forty days, making its progress from the foot of Vrsa major,
through Bo^^es, until it came to the hand of Ophinebus, where it began to alter
its course. The Star was not exactly round, but seemed to have a swol^ face. It
appeared bigg^r then any fixed Star. The rays proceeding from it, were more
condense and compacted then uses to be. Because of its Septentrional Latitude,
it might be seen both in the evening and in the morning, (and in Germany all
the night long) whence the vulgar ignorantly concluded that there were two
distinct Comets. As for remarkable occurrents, the Prince of Transylvania was
poisoned by his Chancellor. The Hayduques with the Turks made woeful havoc in
Hungaria; The Emperor was in great distress, by reason that his Brother the
Archduke headed an Army, aspiring after the Imperial Crown, and prevailed so
far that he was declared the King of Hungaria, after which he persecuted the
Protestants in Austria. The Duke of Lorrain died. There were great Wars between
the Sweeds and D^nes.

A.D. 1618. This year is famous for Blazing Stars, inasmuch as therein no less
then four Comets were observed. The first appeared from August 25. to September
25. about three hours after midnight, casting its blaze from the East toward
the West. September 1. Kepler observed it to be a little below the left foot of
Vrsa major, and declining toward the head of Leo, its motion was retrograde.
Sept. 6. with the naked eye no blaze could be perceived, but with the Telescope
one might perceive it like a thin Cloud: Sept. 23. it was come to 29. of
Cancer. Lat. Boreal. 23. about 10 days, deflecting from the Ecliptic
Southward, almost 15. Degrees, having a retrograde motion. The Star was hardly
perceivable in Europe by reason of its vicinity to the Sun, but in Persia, and
in the East Indies (though not in Europe) continuing from November 22* to
December 13. The fourth and last Comet appearing this year, was that which all
the Earth looked upon with astonishment. It was first taken notice of November
24. and continued to January 24. h.e. for the space of 60 days. There are some
now living who remember this blazing Star. But I find a far other kind of
Description given of it, in the Books of those learned Mathematicians, who were
accurate and diligent observers of this Prodigy, then that which is related by
those still alive, that in their youth might see it. There had not the like
Comet to this appeared for the space of 150 years.

It was seen first in Libra, moving toward the North with some inclination
Westward, viz. through the midst of Libra and Boots, when it came there it
might be seen all the night long. The body of the Comet was to appearance
bigger then a Star of the first magnitude, and would sometimes seem to twinkle.
Wendeline, Cusatus and others that viewed it with a Telescope, did to their
admiration observe a little Nut or Star in the body of this Comet; after that
it was broken into three Stars like Coals of fire in a flaming Oven, after that
into a multitude of little Stars which could not be numbered because they would
sometimes sparkle out, and otherwhile abscond from the eye. The blaze was
narrow near the Star, but broad at a distance from it. At its first appearance
it bended like a Bow, but afterward it appeared straight. The Color of the
Blaze near the Star was red and fiery, but toward the end of it white and
pale, very much resembling the Via Lactea. December 21. the visible Longitude
of ^he blaze was 22 Degrees, December 8. it was 58 Degrees, December. 9 it was
75. Degrees in length. Longomontanus says that once the Blaze was extended one
hundred and four degrees in length; and that as for its distance from the Earth
it was four times as high as the Moon, viz. 240 S.T. Before it was extinct it
had a less Parallax then the Sun, and therefore was above it. The true length
of the blaze was beyond that of its distance from the Earth no less then 445
S.T. so that ^ man going forty miles every day would not in an hundred years go
so far as that blaze extended. He might sooner go round the whole Earth seventy
times over, then once go over the extent of that formidable blaze. Remarkable
Events, attending these Comets, were, the death of the Emperor and Empress. A
drought all that Winter; An Earthquake (which happened on the day when the first
of these Comets appeared) in Italy removed a Mountain which fell upon the Town
of Plours, whereby an 1500. persons were crushed to death in a moment. But the
great and fatal consequent of this Prodigy, was, the Bohemic and Germanic War,
in which Rivers of Blood were poured forth. No less th^n six (some say eight)
hundred thousand lives being cut off by the devouring mouth of the Sword. And
the Prince Palatine, King of Bohemia dispossessed of his haereditary Estate,
forced to fly for his life, and his Country made a desolation. Quickly after
these Blazing Stars, God sent the Plague amongst the Indians here in
New England which swept them away in such numbers, as that the living were not
enough to bury the dead. This year also in Grand Caire in Egypt there died six
hundred thousand by the Pestilence.

A.D. 1652. A Comet was seen December 10. continuing 21 days. Its motion was
retrograde from the South toward the North, through the Hare, the foot of
Orion, Taurus, unto Perseus. Its diurnal motion at first was 11 Degrees and 16
Minutes, but at last hardly 30 Minutes. When it was nearest to the Earth, its
distance was 110 S.T. the Parallax being 31. m. 15. sec. But a little before
its disappearance it was removed 2250^. S.T. the Parallax being but 9 sec. so
that at last it was as high as the Orb of Jupiter. When observed with a
Telescope, the head appeared to be round, Heve^us, VVendelinus.
and not less then the Moon when at the full; and four or five clo^s might be
discerned in the Cometical body* whereof two were something bigger then the
rest, and many minute little bodies resembling Stars, but their light not so
vivid as that of the true Stars is. These clots in the Cometical body, did very
much alter and dissipate every day. The blaze was seven degrees as to its
visible Longitude, in form like a Pyramid^ or Pillar of a duskish, smoaky kind
of aspect. The true diameter of the Comet was 825. Mill. Germ., so that if a
Man should travail 10 German (or 40 of our) miles every day, he could not go
round the body of this Comet in less then 259 days, of so vast a circumference
was its magnitude. Many undertook to predict strange things from the appearance
of this Blazing Star; Especially a blind but insolent Vic. Will* Lilly*
Buzzard of our own Nation (as learned Mr. Gataker in the English Annotations
on Jer. 10.2. not undeservedly calls him) foretold matters which never came to
pass, yet several things very remarkable we all know attended this Comet, e. g.
Wars between England and Holland, Denmark, Sweden. Bloody Sea fights, the Sea
and the Waves thereof roaring. Strange alterations in England, for the next
year Cromwell dissolved that which is known by the name of the Rump-Parliament,
and set up for himself. Also Quakerisme now began to infest the World. The Po^e
and the King of Bohemia died within a year or two of this Comet.

A.D. 1661. A Comet appeared in the morning from Febr. 3. to March 28. S.T. N.
It was below the Dolphin, between the heads of Aquil^ and Equuleus in the 10.
Grad. (...) distance from the Earth was at first 2000, and at last 9000 S.T. so
that it was higher then the Sun. Its motion direct from the East to the West.
The Telescope discovered a Star to be in the body of the Comet, about which a
more thin and dilute matter might be discerned. Feb. 5. that Star was divided
into several parts. Febr. 6. it was dissipated into many little Stars, one of
which was more dense and shining then the rest. The blaze was obscure and about
seven degrees in Longitude, according to Hevelius Cometogr. L. 12. P. 892, etc.
but Franciscus Milleit Astron L. 8 P. 582.
writes that it was sometimes extended unto 20 Degrees in Longitude, of a
conica^ form. As for Events, the Turks fell upon Germany (where especially this
Edlins Discourse of the Conjunction, An. 1663.
Comet was observed) making woeful havoc there. That black Bartholomews day,
which the Nonconformists in England, so much complain of, happened but half a
year after this Comet. The Fanatics say, that the like is not to be paralleld
in any History, that five and twenty hundred* Ministers should be silenced in
one day. It is also said, that these Stars which were thus cast down, were some
of them of the first magnitude. And therefore a Comet might well precede an
event so remarkable. But this must pass for a Phanatick notion, Not long after
this Comet, the cruel Tartars made incursions into Hungaria, Moravia, Silesi^
sacking and burning many Towers, and making no less then an hundred and
threescore thousand Souls Captives, v. Mordens Geography, P. 140.
whom they sold to their barbarous Brethren the Turks.

A.D. 1664. A famous Comet was conspicuous to the whole World this year. Many
have published their Sentiments concerning it. A Reverend and worthy Person Mr.
Danforth Pastor of the Church in Roxbury.
amongst our selves (who is now ascended above the Stars) has left us his
observations about the motions of this Comet as by himself taken notice of. But
no man has done it with greater accuracy then Hevelius, who being singularly
advantaged with the best Mathematical Instruments which the World can afford to
make discoveries of this nature. In libro supra citato.
Reports that it was observed by him in Dantzick, December. 14. S T. N. About 5
h. A.M. in the 8. Degree of Libro, the head of a somewhat yellowish color,
affording a dull and dim light, never so vivid and splendid as the true Stars
or Planets appear with, in the very middle of which one might perceive a more
clear shining body, whose diameter was about four Minutes, environed with a
thinner Body of 12. Minutes, whose light was more dim But when observed with a
long Telescope, one might see that the Star in the midst of the head of the
Comet, did not consist of one clot only, but of many particles, some of which
were more compact and lucid, others more thin and obscure. As the subtle
matter observed about the small particles like Nuts in the body of the Comet,
was condensed, the head grew bigger, so as that December 20. it was observed to
comprehend 24 Minutes, and in the midst of it a most lucid and thick clot, of a
fiery color, which was compassed about with matter, some of which was more
rare, some more dense, intermixed with lesser Nuts o^ Stars. In the beginning
of January, that thick and lucid Clot began to attenuate, and break away,
whence the head of the Comet was diminished, that January 6. it seemed to
contain but 8 Minutes, January 22. The form of the Comet was not exactly round,
but seemed to be rough and broken, and in some places pointing out more then in
other places. As for the true magnitude of the Comet, it was at first about six
times as big as the Earth, after it was diminished in January, it was again
augmented in February. It did not always keep the same distance from the
Earth. The Parallax was 59. sec. In the midst of its appearance, when the
motion was most swift about 4. m. and at last but 16. sec. So that at first it
was distant from the Earth 3500. S.T. in the midst 1000 And February 4. 1200.
S. T. Toward the end of December when nearest to the Earth, it was twenty
times as far off as the Moon, in the middle of January it was as high as the
Sun, in the beginning of February as remote from the Earth, as Mars is. The
Blaze was 14. Degrees in Longitude, being toward the extremity spread abroad,
resembling a Peacocks tail. It appeared sometimes longer, and sometimes
shorter. December 21. it was observed to be 22 Degrees in length, and toward
the point of it, to bend a little* the concavity toward the Horizon, but the
next day it was straight again December 28. a sudden and great alteration (...)
observed in the Blaze; for it pointed not toward the West, as before it had
done, but upwards and toward the North. From December 29. it began to incline
more Eastward. January 5. the Blaze pointed directly toward the East. It was
observable that it seemed still to point toward the Gemini; so that the Blaze
was ever in opposition to the Sun; and we may therefore conclude that it did
proceed from the beams thereof, piercing through the body of the Comet. The
Star lost its Blaze in the latter end of January, and yet recovered it again in
part in the beginning of February. Its motion was retrograde, from Corvus,
through Hydra, the Skip, Canis major, the Hare, Eridanus, the head of the Whale
unto Aries, so that it passed through six signs in the Zodiac, viz. Libra,
Virgo, Leo, Cancer, Gemini, Taurus. Thus far is Hevelius his account of this
notable Comet. Not long after this another, no less admirable did appear. It
was by the but now mentioned learned person first observed, April 6. St. N.
about 1 h. A*M, in the breast of Pegasus, viz. in 14.21. of Pisces, and Lat.
Boreal. 26.30 of a clear and radiant aspect. In the midst of the Comets head
one might with a Telescope discern one Nucleus or Star very lucid and shining
like Gold, which was encompassed with a more dilute matter. The Blaze
proceeding therefrom was almost as thick as the matter in which the Nucleus was
contained. April 8. it appeared very lucid, so that one might perceive the
Comet after the other Stars disappeared, the Nucleus not much altered from what
it was at first April 16. the Comet seemed brighter then any of the fixed
Stars, yea to outshine Saturn; then by the help of the Telescope one might
discern the Nucleus to be more bright and bigger then before. The Diameter of
the Nucleus was less then Jupiter's, but equal to Saturn's, whence one might
conclude that the Comet was as yet increasing. The Nucleus seemed to cast a
notable shadow on that side which was a verse to the Sun. For the blaze seemed
to be divided, the reason of which might be because the Nucleus was so compact
and solid, that the beams of the Sun could not pass through it, only through
the thin matter which was on both sides of it. The matter on the fore part of
the Nucleus as the Comet came nearer to the Sun* appeared to be more acuminated
and diminished. The Parallax of this Comet was at first 69 sec. at last 41.
sec. The magnitude of the Nucleus was 12. sec. and of the whole head of the
Comet 6. min. so that when nearest to the Earth, it was sixty times as high as
the Moon, and at last as high as the Sun. The blaze was 17. sometimes 25.
Degrees as to its visible Longitude. The motion of this Comet was direct
according to the order of the signs, at first appearing in Pisces, and at last
in Taurus. It continued for the space of fourteen days.

As for remarkable Events attending these Blazing Stars, we cannot but remember
what doleful things quickly followed. An unhappy War between two professing
Nations, viz. the English and the Dutch, whereby much Christian and Protestant
blood was shed. A terrible Plague in England the like never known there before
this time, so that in London (besides what was in some other parts of the
Nation) there died sometimes above seventeen thousand in one week; and more
then an hundred thousand were swept away in a years time in that one City by
the besome of Destruction which the Lord sent amongst them. The next year the
Papists set London on fire; which dreadful Conflagration continued for several
days, until eighty seven Parishes were consumed by those fatal flames. The
smoke of that burning caused the Sun to look as if it were turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood. It has been computed that there were burnt
within the Walls of the City twelve thousand houses, and without a thousand.
See Mr* Morde^s Geography, P. 18.
The whole damage amounting to at least nine Millions, and nine hundred
thousand pounds sterling. Also, the miseries which the English inhabiting the
Caribbee Islands, were not long after these Comets, exposed unto, not only by
the Sword of their Enemies, but by the prodigious Tempests which God sent
amongst them, are still fresh in memory.

A.D. 1667. Feb. 15. A Comet was seen only the Coma and not the Star could be
by us discerned by reason of its being in the sign Pisces, where the Sun then
was. Its Longitude above thirty Degrees. See the Philosophical Transactions for
An. 1668. Vol. 3. P. 683, 684.
March 1. Its extreme point reached to that Star in Eridanus which is called
the fourteenth by Bayerus. March 2. it passed through the 15 Star in Eridanus,
and left to the Southward the 14 th. tending to the Southern Star which
precedes the Ear of Lepus, so that it was more Northerly, and more Easterly
then at first. Both in Italy and in Portugal it was observed at the same time,
as with us in New England. Also at Lions and several other places in France;
and yet (which is very strange) it was not observed at Paris, nor at London or
in any part of England. The London Gazette says, that March 17. at Venice they
observed a Comet to the North-East, the tail of it much longer then that which
appeared three years since, but of less brightness, and that it was seen late
in the night.

As for Events; many places were this year sorely afflicted with Earth quakes.
In Asia, there was an horrendous Earthquake which continued for 80 days
together. The Cities of Begbara, Angora, and several other Towns suffered much
thereby. The City of Tocall was wholly levelled to the ground. Polio (a
considerable City) was destroyed, a thousand and eight hundred persons being
killed by their Houses falling upon them. Torqueto (another considerable City)
was overthrown in a moment, and above six thousand persons lost their lives,
being buried in the ruins, of the City. Also several places in Europe were
affrighted with Earthquakes this year: particularly Constantinople, and
Adrianople, but especially Raguse which was in a great part destroyed. Also the
Plague broke out, in the chief City of the European Tartary; and in great
Poland, and in Paccardy, it raged in Donay, Ghent and other places. A fire in
Moscow destroyed thirty thousand Houses, and five hundred Churches and
Chapels; a great part of the Cities of Gottenbourg, and Stetin, were this year
also consumed by fire. In the Country about Cadiz there was a great Drought,
so as that the Death of many of their Cattle was occasioned thereby. The Turks
made very furious Assaults upon Candia, which was the next year surrendered to
them. The King of Poland resigned his Crown into the hands of the States, by
which means that Kingdom was involved in troubles and confusions. A prodigious
Tempest happened there, Hailstones of an incredible bigness fell upon the Trees*
breaking them so as was strange to behold. The people there concluded that this
Hail-storm was a presage of their future sufferings. Don Juan caused great
Troubles and Commotions in the Kingdom of Spain. There happened a Popular Tumult
in Sardinia wherein the multitude enraged at the Taxes imposed on them killed
the Viceroy. In Africa Taffiletto made great stirrs subduing the Kingdoms of
Fez and Morocco to his obed^ence* so that by his Conquests, he at last styled
himself not only the King but the Emperor of Barbary.

A.D. 1677. A Comet appeared in the sign Taurus, between the Base of the
Triangle, and the unformed Stars in the Cloud of Aries. The head of it was in a
right line with the heart of Cassiopeja and the Alamak. See Mr. Robert Hooks
Remarks upon this Comet.
It seemed to be about the bigness of a Star of the first magnitude, but of a
much fainter and duller Light. It had a bright Star in the middle of it, about
the brightness of Saturn, when near the Horizon, and was about 25 Seconds in
Diameter, the matter in which it was involved having an hazy shining, but not
so clear, and bright, and dense as the Nucleus in it was. The length of it was
about eight Degrees, sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter. C^ssini observed
it at Paris, April 18. Philosophical Transactions for the year 1677. P. 868.
Hevelius at Dantzick, April 17. and it continued until April 28, h. e. 12
days. Its motion being direct, it soon came to be in conjunction with the Sun;
and then could not be by us discerned*

As for Events following this Comet; within a year a Town in Piedmont called
Bosia suddenly sunk down into the Earth, so as that nothing of it appeared,
only two persons in the whole Town that escaped with their lives. But I find
that some late Writers in England, think that this Comet was an Omen of the
late Horrid Popish Plot, wherein it was resolved that the Protestant Name
should no more be had in remembrance, which hellish design was ripe for
Execution, had not He which sits in the Heavens prevented. It was before
observed, that Hamans bloody Conspiracy to cut off the Lords People, was
attended with a Blazing Star. And why might not this Combination of the
Antichristian party (which was worse then that of Hamans) be so too? Now as the
Discovery of Haman (who was a Type of Antichrist) his wicked contrivance,
ended in the utter destruction of himself, and of his Children; So the Lord
grant that the revealing of this Popish Plot may issue in the ruin of
Antichrist, and of those that do uphold him; and let every Man that fears God,
or that bears any love to his Name and Truth, say* Amen!

A*D. 1680. The motion of the Comet which appeared this year, was diligently
followed by the Ingenious Mr. John Foster, the late Printer in Boston in
New England. And though he be gone (not without a public loss by his death and
the sorrow of many) it being mentioned amongst evil Omens, that the cunning
Artificer shall be taken away) he has left behind him, some of his
Observations concerning this Comet. It was first here taken notice of Nov. 14.
at 5. h. A.M. near 18 Degrees of Libra. 1 Gr. and 30. min. Lat. Austral. Nov.
19. It was within a Degree of Spica Virginis, directing its course Northward
about 40. min. Several Mornings after that were cloudy here in Boston, and not
long after it was in conjunction with the Sun, so that it was seen no more in
the Morning. It was then conjectured that within a few days it would appear in
the Evening, and so it did Dec. 10. when only the Blaze and not the Star was to
us visible. December 12. Its Blaze appeared very red and fiery, extending as
far as the breast of the Swan. Dec. 14. its head was first discerned, the Blaze
passing to the Northward of Cor Aquilae. Dec. 16* its appearance was very
terrible, the Blaze ascended above 60 Degrees almost to its Zenith, growing
continually broader from the head, and was brightest on both ends, especially
on the South side, the middle considerably darker then either of the sides.
Jan. 8. Gave the fairest opportunity to find its true place and parallax, by
its approach to a fixed Star of the third Magnitude, in the right shoulder of
Andromeda. At 6. h. 5. m. it was 28. m. distant from that Star. At 50. m. past
6. its distance was 25. m. At 10. h. 5. m. The Comet passing by the said Star,
left it 12. m. Southward. Its visible hourly motion was 6. m. direct, which if
compared with its daily motion, we shall find it little (if at all) retarded by
reason of its Parallax, which is an evidence of its vast distance from the
Earth. For if it had not been much higher then the Moon, its true motion would
have far exceeded its visible. About the middle of February, it vanished out of
our sight.

As for Remarkable Events, attending this Blazing Star, We that live in America
know but little of the great Motions in Europe, much less in Africa and Asia,
until a long time afterward. Only we are informed of some considerable
Commotions the last year, between the Tartars and the Chinese. Likewise in
Hungaria, some things worthy of Remark have happened. Above four hundred Villages
in that Country have lately been laid desolate by Sword and Fire. The Turks
have an Army on foot there, and it is strange to consider (only God makes the
Earth to help the Woman) that those Barbarous Infidels, should declare unto the
Emperor of Germany, that they will not be at peace with him, except he does
restore unto the oppressed Protestants their liberties and estates which have
been unjustly taken from them. The Pope has disposed of the Ecclesiastical 10
th. in the State Millan to be employed in a war against the Hungarian
Protestants. This last Summer the Protestants (commonly called Rebels) in those
parts have had Wonderful successes against the Popish Generation. It is
possible this may be a beginning of Revenges upon the Enemy. The great
expectation, is, that the next year the Grand Signior will come in person
against the Emperor, with the most formidable Army which has been known in
the World for these many ages. It may be another (the last and most fatal)
blast of the second woe Trumpet, is now about to sound. In the Summer after this
Blazing Star, there was an afflictive Drought* not only in America, but in
Europe. The next ( i. e. the last) winter, there was a great Inundation in the
Netherlands; many thousands peri^hed in the fatal night when those great Waters
came nigh unto them. It is said that those Provinces suffered more by that
Inundation, then by all the French Wars which of late have been so heavy upon
them. The poor Protestants in France, are blazing in a flame of Persecution.
The French KING in his Declaration newly come forth, boasts that he has caused
several Millions of Protestants to forsake their holy Profession, and to turn
Roman Catholics; He also and the Pope are quarelling who shall be Pope in
France. Yea his hand seems to be against every one, and every man's against him,
the issue whereof must needs in probability be some great overturnings and
alteration of the present State of Affairs in Europe. And besides these
particulars (which are considerable) other things have come to pass in Europe
since the Comet last mentioned, which deserve to have a Remark set upon them.
For the last year there was a terrible conflagration in Moscow (it begun in a
Stable) whereby four thousand Houses were consumed, and turned into ruinous
heaps. And this last Summer the great City of Plesco, is made desolate by fire,
not above seventy Houses remaining. Also the Czar (or Emperor) of Muscovia is
lately dead; and his Death has occasioned a very great Commotion about a
Successor to the Crown. At first his Brother was Proclaimed; but the City of
Mosco rose up in Arms about it, and the Soldiers there have lately made a
dismal slaughter amongst the Nobility and chief Citizens, deposing the late
Czar's Brother, and setting up his Uncle as Emperor in his stead. For three
days together ( viz. 15, 16, and 17 of May last) things in that great and
imperial City, were in the strangest Confusion imaginable; on the seventh day
of June last, a terrible Earthquake happened in that part of the World,
continuing for the space of half an hour, whereby many stately Fabrics were
thrown down to the ground, and an hundred lives destroyed by their fall.
Moreover this last Summer, God has opened the Windows of Heaven in a very
awful manner, so as that the Floods occasioned by the great Rains, have
destroyed many Towns in Sicily. We hear that Mount Aetna (which has been wont
to vomit Fire) has of late cast out such an abundance of Water, as that the
Neighboring Country is drowned thereby. We hear also, that on the sixth day
of June last, a most prodigious Tempest happened in Sicily, whereby the Town of
Randazzo, Francaville, and Tortorica became subject to a sudden and unexpected
ruin. About half an hour before Sunset, there happened so great a darkness, as
that no object could be distinguished at the distance of four paces; after
which there arose an amazing Storm of Rain, Thunder and Lightning* which lasted
for thirty six hours. About one of the clock in the Morning, great Torrents
fell upon the Neighboring Mountains, with such irresistible fury, as that
Trees of extraordinary bigness were carried away before them, which coming
against Tortorica threw down the Walls and Houses thereof, 600. of the
Inhabitants were drowned. The Archdeacon, and many others ran into the Church
of St. Nicholas for safety, but the violent Waters overthrew the Church, and
destroyed all the People which hoped to find Sanctuary therein On the 25 of
June last the Popes Palace of St. Peter's in Rome, was stricken with a
Thunderbolt, the Fire-ball passing from one Room to another, until it entered
that where the Pope uses to give Audience. Fanatics think that this may be an
Omen that Heaven will pour down a Vial full of Wrath upon the Throne of the
Beast ere long.

A.D. 1682. It is reported that in Germany a Blazing Star was seen June 17. in
the South-west, which continued visible for the space of an hour, and was then
obscured by the rising of the Sun. If that Relation be true, there have been
two Comets (or one has twice appeared) this present year. For it is certain
that there was one visible in August last. Some had a sight of it August 15.
for my own part, I saw it not until August 18. 3. h. A.M when it was in the
foreclaw of Vrsa major. The stream about 10. Degrees in Longitude; the Star
bigger then that which appeared about 2 years ago. It was then perceived by us
in N.E. only in the morning, whenas I am informed by Letters from London,that
they saw it in the Evening the same night when we beheld it in the morning
only. By reason of its septentrional Latitude, it is past doubt that in the more
Nor^hern Climates it was seen both in the morning and in the evening of the
same day, yea all the night long, as has been noted concerning the Comets
appearing Annis 1432, 1470, 1513, 1607. August 23. it was by us in New England
seen in the Evening only, having removed from the place we first saw it in,
about 39 Degrees, and was come near Coma Berenices; not considerably changing
its Latitude, but moving in a line almost parallel with the Ecliptic. Thus it
passed through Coma Berenices* and through the leg of Boots* August 31. Its
Latitude was diminished from 24. to 16. Gr. It was come between the feet of
Boots, about 75. Degrees from the place we first saw it in. I had not an
opportunity to view it with a Telescope above once (and that was Sept. 12.)
through which it appeared to be a very dim and hazy kind of body. It was then
about the foot of Virgo, where it disappeared in the Month of September.

There is an Anonymous Astrologer in London (some of whose Notions are taken
out of Gadburies Book of Comets, Printed Anno 1665.) that has published his
Sentiments upon this Comet; presumptuously determining not only what the Events
are which shall attend this, with the former Blazing Stars, but the places, yea
and persons concerned therein. No man of wisdom and judgment can relish the
boldness of such a Prophet after; Especially considering that he does praedict
things that are contrary to the Scriptures of Truth. He prophesies of the Turks
Conversion, and consequently Salvation; when as the sure Word of Prophecy unto
which we shall do well to give heed, informs us that the Turk shall come to his
end, and there shall be none to help him, Numb. 24.24. Dan. 11.45. Rev. 9.15.
The vain Astrologer likewise affirms, that Rome shall be destroyed by the
Turkish power, when as the holy Scriptures assure us, that it shall be done by
some of those horns which have given their power to (the (...)) Antichrist,
which the Turk: never did, Rev. 17, 16. If men did with understanding read the
Scriptures more, they would mind Judicial Astrologers less. This
notwithstanding I find that judicious Writers are of Opinion, that such a
Saturnine Comet as this was, has a natural influence into, and therefore does
portend a cold and tedious Winter, much Snow, and consequently great Floods;
Malignant and Epidemical Diseases; in special the Plague: concerning which Deus
avertat Omen! Some things worthy of Remark, have already happened in Europe,
being contemporary with this Blazing Star. I understand by Letters, that Vines
and Corn are very much damnified, in several Countries by the great Rains which
have fallen the latter end of this last Summer. We are also ascertained, that
about the middle of September last (the Comet being hardly out of sight) there
was a very prodigious Tempest in Italy. Not far from Florence there happened most
terrible Thunder and Hail mingled with Fire; the Hailstones were many of them
three, some of them five pound in weight; the like was never known in those
parts; The wild Beasts and Birds were killed thereby. For the space of eight
Miles in length, and two in breadth. It swept away all the Branches from the
greatest Trees, as Oaks, Chestnuts, etc. It destroyed all the Autumn Harvest
that was on the Ground, and left not a Vine standing* It carried away the roofs
of Houses; inasmuch as persons were killed in their beds. A Church was beat
down to the ground, and the Bells carried a quarter of a mile. Since this
Discourse was written and sent to the Press, we have the sad Tidings of
another dismal Fire, which happened in London this Winter, viz on the 19 th. day
of N^vember last: It is reported that a thousand Houses were consumed in those
unhappy Flames. What further Events shall attend this Blazing Star which our
eyes have so lately beheld, is known unto him, Who rules in the Army of
Heaven, and does what he will amongst the Children of Men.

CHAP. X. That Blazing Stars are commonly signs of evil Events, therefore not
to be slighted; nor this last Blazing Star which is attended with such rare
Conjunctions of the Planets. Judicial Astrologers condemned. The Conclusion.
FRom the things which have been expressed, We may rationally conclude, that
all the wise Men who lived in all former Ages were not altogether mistaken*
when they believed that Comets are forerunners of some great and commonly
miserable Events hastening upon the World. Judicious Zanchy (as well as Mede)
conceives that by the Pillars of Smoke spoken of in the Prophet Joel, as
portentous of the amazing and terrible things which were coming upon the Jewish
Nation Blazing Stars are meant, he says that when he lived at Strasburge,
there was a Comet seen; after which the death of some great Personages, and
civil Wars in France ensued: and adds De operibus Dei, L. 3. C. 2.
that if we read and observe Histories, we shall find that thus it has been
ever since the World begun, that Comets have never appeared, but soon after,
miserable Wars, mortal Diseases, etc. have followed. So that they are preachers
of divine wrath, and the consequences of them prove fatal unto some or other,
in which respect all ought to walk with an holy fear of the infinite Majesty,
who does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and Earth, in the Sea* (...) in all
deep places, and accordingly causes such tokens to appear in the Heavens when
it seems good unto him. And whereas, Droughts, Caterpillars, Tempests,
Inundations, Sicknesses, are frequently known to follow upon the appearance of
such Phaenom^na's, I see no sufficient reason why we should not suppose them to
be not only signal but causal thereof; and perhaps of Earthquakes Non
defuerunt qui ex coeli observatione terrae-motum praedicerent. Philo.
also. It is undubitable that the true Planets and fixed Stars have a natural
influence into such things, though the manner of their operation is by us silly
Mortals undeclarable. Genesis 1.14. Deuteronomy. 33.13, 14. Judge. 5.20. Job 38.31, 32,
33. And therefore it is not impossible but that Comets may have the like
natural influence, especially when they are near to the Sun, and that therefore
the Blaze proceeding from them reaches the Earth, though by us undiscernable.
The light which the Moon receives from the Sun has a physical and wonderful
influence upon the Earth, so may the Beams which blaze through a Cometical body
have likewise. As to their natural operation, they may have different effects,
causing Droughts in one place, inundations in another, Earth quakes in another,
etc. according to the occult qualities which are in the subjects of their
influence. And whereas, Wars, Commotions, Persecutions Heresies, the Death of
Princes, Changes, and overturnings in the World do usually happen after the
appearance of such Stars, they seem to be only signal and not causal of such
events. The reasons alleged by some to prove that Comets have a physical
influence into such effects are not solid. (...) should therefore rather
conclude, that they are signs of such things to follow only in respect of their
Universal and supernatural cause, God having ordained them for that end, that
so the Inhabitants of the World, when they behold such fearful sights might
thereby be awakened unto repentance. I know some Learned Men do not assent unto
this conclusion. Scaliger laughs at their conceit who De subtilitate exercit.
79.
suppose that Comets threaten Kings and Kingdoms. Budritius Referente
Keckermanno in Syst. Phys. L 6 P. 742.
has published a Tractate, whose design is to prove the contrary. And the
truth is, that the Arguments insisted on by the Admirers of Aristotle are
frivolous; And when they speak of Comets falling upon the Earth, and so
infecting the Air, and tell us that sometimes Stones of a Sulphurous nature
have fallen down out of them, their phansies are ridiculous. But it does not
follow that a princ^ple is not true, because it has been weakly maintained by
some that have undertaken its Patronage. The weightiest objection against the
inference which we adhere unto, is, That there have been some happy Comets, and
that the evils pretended to follow after them, have sometimes happened when no
Comet has appeared* Tacitus calls that an happy Blazing Star which was seen
before Nero's Death, because it signified the downfall of one that had a
malignant influence upon the whole Earth; Others mention the Comets that were
observed before Wickliff, Huss, and Luther began to publish the Gospel, as
happy Omens that the light of truth should be dispersed in the World. But
truly, the number of instances on this hand, is so small and inconsiderable,
that it cannot invalidate their Assertion, who affirm that Blazing Stars are
most commonly pornentous of evil Events. And if we should say as some do that
the appearance of a Comet is like the coming of a New Ruler to the people, v.
Keckerman in eodem libro P. 732.
Either a great good or a great evil, there is room left to fear the worst.
Moreover, as there are contrary Interests in the World, so that may be happy
for one, that will be woeful for the other. And although such evil Events as
those in the preceding Chapters related, have sometimes happened without any
blazing star immediately forerunning, that does not prove, that when such signs
do appear in heaven, they are not signal of miseries not far off. Wars and
commotions have happened though Armies have not been seen fighting in the Air.
Will any man therefore say, that such apparitions are not to be accounted
ominous or significative that evils of that nature are like to ensue? However,
it is certainly much better for men to fear and prepare for the worst, then
that Judgment should overwhelm them in their sin and security. A Jesuit
confesses, Ricc^olus P. 34.
that when Johannes de Capistrano upon the appearance of a Comet. A*D. 1460.
declared in his public Sermons, that except the world did reform their lives
and w^yes, they might justly expect that great Calamities were at hand, it was
both piously and prudently done of him. It is dangerous for men to jest with
such awful works of God. They that do so are guilty of worse then barbarous
profaneness: and such persons (be they high or low) seldom long escape the
vengeance of Heaven. Some have observed that Alsted. Theologiae Naturalis pars
2. p. 300.
when Pericles slighted a great Eclipse of the Moon, it proved a fatal Eclipse
to him, and to those that he was concerned in. And Vespasian's Example should
teach men to be careful how they despise such Works of God. Lege Historiam ne
fias Historia. The merciful and righteous God uses to discharge his Warning
pieces, before his Murdering pieces go off. Thrice happy they who take the
Warning. I know not but that the possessed man might speak Truth, who affirmed
the best Verse in Virgil to be that, Discite justitiam moniti and non temnere
Numen.


And as for this last Blazing Star, which is generlly disregarded amongst Men
in the World, it seems to be the more Ominous, in that some rare Conjunctions
of the Superior Planets happen this year also. October 20. There was a
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, there having been in the praeceding
Month of September, first a Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, and then of
Saturn and Mars in the same sign. And (which is notable because unusual) these
two superior Planets make two Conjunctions more in the same sign, the one in
the next Month, viz. on the thirtieth of January, in the 18. Degree of Leo;
the other the sixth of May next in the sixteenth Degree of the same sign. As
for those great Conjunctions of all the Planets which happen but once in 794.
years, there have been but seven of them since the World begun. The second of
which was attended with Noah's Flood. The third with the overthrow of Pharaoh,
when the Children of Israel were brought out of the Land of Egypt. The fourth
with the Captivity of the Ten Tribes. The fifth with the beginning of the
Christian, and the Destruction of the Jewish World. The sixth with the division
of the Empire in the days of Carolus Magnus. The Last was 79. years ago. A
Learned and Judicious Author Alstedius in Chronol. Cap. 48.
says of it* that as the foundation of Rome was laid at the same time when the
Children of Israel were carried into Captivity by the Assyrians under the
fourth of these Conjunctions, so the seventh ere the consequents or
concomitants of it be over, will be attended with the conversion of the Jews,
and the utter ruin of Rome, which he thinks will come to pass in the year 1694.
About which time some others conjecture that great things will be accomplished
in the World. Mr. Brightman on Rev. 9.15 ^o^cludeth that the present Turkish
Power shall not be continued beyond the year 1696. Dr. Meo^ supposes that the
time allotted for the Reign of Antichrist will expire about the year 1692. Du
Moulin's judgment was that the Pope shall not be able to make War with the
Saints, so as to overcome them any more* after the year. 1689. Outinam! Others
conceive that Annus 1688. will be a year of wonders, which brings to mind the
Verses published by Regiomontanus above two hundred years ago, "Octuagesimus
Octavus mirabilis annus
"Ingruet, and secum Tristia fata trahet.


Whether any of these have guessed right, he that lives thirteen years hence,
will be better able to say: I am apt to believe that ere this Century be
expired, there will be very great Revolutions in the World. But besides these
general ones, there are particular Conjunctions of the two Superior Planets,
which meet together once in (about) 20 years, and use to continue in their
conjunction, until Mars come and join with them; and then it is admirable to
behold three great Stars shining in the same sign in the Heavens* without any
scintillation, v Kepler Epit. Astron. L 6 P. 854.
and these some call great Conjunctions Conjunctio Saturni and Jovis vocatur
conjunctio magna quia res magnas portendit. Keckerman. Astron. L. 1. C. ^^.
as portending great Events in the World. And such a conjunction there has and
will be within this twelve months, besides several others, in the same year
and in the same Sign in the Heavens (as but now was noted) which is admirable
to consider; some say the like has not been these two thousand years. And it
being in one of the signs in the fiery Trigon, there are who conclude that
great Desolations by burning are at hand. I find that some weighty Writers
conceive that such rare Conjunctions are portentous not only of great
Revolutions and Changes, but also of new and unheard of Diseases amongst
Mortals. The judiciously learned Hospinian De origin Pestorum Christianorum,
P. 28.
seems to incline unto this Opinion. It cannot be denied, but that the Planets
have a great influence upon the Earth as to things which according to the
course of nature are produced: The five lesser Planets are in the Scripture by
way of eminency termed Byth^er in Ps^lm ^. ver 4.
Stars of light, and are conjunctly mentioned with the Sun and Moon, as
affording light, and being influential to the Earth beyond what may be affirmed
of other Stars, Psalm. 148.3 therefore to observe the Motion of the Celestial
bodies, and what effects they do produce according to the ordinary course of
nature, which the divine providence has stated, is lawful and good.
Turnheuseri^s reports (how he knew it to be so, I cannot tell) (...)
^^ckermanno in System. Physic. P. 762.
that the Holy Patriark Abraeham, by occasion of the Comet which appeared A.M.
2018. was induced to study Astronomy, that so he might be the better able to
judge of the nature and meaning of such works of God. All this notwithstanding
the curiosity and presumption of Judicial Astrologers, is not to be justified,
who undertake peremptorily to Prognosticate, what the particular things are,
(yea, and the places and persons concerned in them) that shall come to pass
after such Configurations and Planetary Aspects. I have read of a Mah^medan
Astrologer who did praedict a great inundation to be in Syria, A.D. 1095.
because of a Conjunction of all the Planets (except Saturn) in the watery sign
of Pisces, (like as it was before Noah's Flood) which fell out to be true. But
such Astrologers have at other times come off with shame by their bold and rash
predictions, as Calvisius, and Wendelinus have more then once noted e. g. A.D*
1^86. because of rare Conjunctions of all the Planets then happening; the
Astrologers of those days declared that there would follow ho^rendous Tempests
of Wind, and after that I know not what miracles, nothing of which came to
pass. Again, A.D. 1323. By reason of a notable Conjunction of the Planets in
Libra, one John David (a great Astrologer at Toledo in Spain) and many others
with him, sent forth his Proclamations a broad into the World, declaring that
that Conjunction of the Planets would be attended with Famine, Earthquakes,
and such a Storm of VVind, as that there would be no living above Ground,
affirming that all the Philosophers and Astrologers in Spain, Arabia, and in
Greece were of the same Opinion. But when these things should be accomplished,
not a word of them proved true. Another on the like ground, declared that the
World would end, Anno. 1464. Another from the like Planetary Conjunctions,
prophesied that Anno. 1524. a General Deluge would overwhelm the Earth; which
many injudicious people giving credit unto, got either into Ships or unto high
Towers, lest happily the Astrologers flood should drown them. v. Wendelin. Cont.
Phys. Sect. 2. P. 349.
But the event proved these predictions to be false and foolish.

Thus God delights to baffle Judicial Astrologers, when they will presume to
know the times and the seasons, which he has (...) in his own power. It was
the saying of a wise King in Poland, that to be able certainly to predict
future Events is Gods Prerogative: Opinio praeteritorum homini cerra esse
potest; futurorum per naturam non admodum potest, quamvis Deo tempora omnia
presentia sunt, P. Rami Dialect, Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
And a wiser then he, yea, the wisest amongst the sinful Sons of Men has said,
A Man cannot tell what shall be, and what shall be after him, who can tell?
Eccl. 10.14. Notable changes have happened in our days, which the Monthly
Prognosticators could tell us nothing of, before that God who rules in the
Kingdoms of Men brought them to pass. The Star-gazers in old Babylon, who by
looking upon the Heavens, and observing the Courses and Conjunctions of the
Stars there, would undertake to tell the fates and fortunes of Kingdoms, all
the Judicial Astrologers and Wizards there, could not by all their skill in the
Stars read their own and the Nations ruin, until the day that it came upon
them, Isai. 47.13, 14. Therefore it is not good positively to determine what
the particular miseries or mutations are, nor the persons or places that shall
undoubtedly perceive the effects thereof, when rare Conjunctions of the
Planetary Bodies happen, or when Blazing Stars appear. Only that at least some
of those Evils which have been wont to attend the like appearances, are at the
door, we may rationally conjecture and conclude.

I shall therefore finish this Discourse, with the apposite and celebrated
Expressions o^ that Famous Poet Pontanus qui nulli (...) seculi poetae cessit,
dicente Boissardo in Bibliotheca.
who Speaking of Comets, says, Illi etiam belli motus, feraque arma minantur
Magnorum and Clades populorum, and funera Regum.
Vt cum, seu Coeli occasum* seu solis adortum
Extulerint caput infaelix, and crine minaci
Horrendum lat^^ implerint terroribus urbes, etc.


To the same purpose another in English speaks thus, Silvester in his
Translation of Dubartas. P. 14.
There, with long Bloody Hair, a Blazing Star
Threatens the World with Famine, Plague and War:
To Princes death; to Kingdoms many crosses:
To all Estates, inevitable losses:
To Herdsmen Rot; to Plow men hapless Seasons:
To Saylors, Storms: to Cities civil Treasons.


Soli Deo Gloria.
ERRATA.
P. ^. L. ult. r. Element. p. 19. l. 16. Har Gagnash. p. 43* l. 11. for the r.
this. p. 56. l. 5. r. Martell. P. 69 l. 19. (...) their, r. the. P. 94. l. 23.
for whatsoever r. whosoever. p. 101. l. 13. for seconded, r. succeeded. p. 102.
l ^8* r. 19 m 12. sec. P. 108. l. 17. should be read thus, 23, Gr. 41 min. The
second Comet this year appeared November the tenth, continuing, etc.


