A COPY OF The Church-Covenants which have been used in the Church of SALEM
Both formerly, and in their late Renewing of their Covenant on the day of the
public Fast, April 15. 1680.

As a Direction pointing to that Covenant of Gods Grace in Christ made with his
Church and People in the holy Scripture.

Gather my People unto me which have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice,
Psalm. 50. 5. Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12 24. The Blood of
the Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. The Blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb, 13. 20.
Who is this that engages his heart to approach unto me, and ye shall be my
People, and I will be your God, Jer. 30. 21, 22. They shall go and seek the
Lord their God, they shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward,
saying, Come let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not be forgotten, Jer. 50. 4, 5. BOSTON, Printed, at the desire and for
the use of many in Salem, for themselves and their Children, by J. F. 1680.

There was a Church Covenant agreed upon and consented to by the Church of
Salem at their first beginning in the Year, 1629, Aug. 6.

This following Covenant was propounded by the Pastor agreed upon and consented
to by the Brethren of the Church, in the Year, 1636.

Gather my Saints unto me that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice, Psalm,
50. 5. WE whose Names are here under written, Members of the present Church of
Christ in Salem, having found by sad experience how dangerous it is to sit
loose from the Covenant we make with our God, and how apt we are to wander into
by paths, even to the losing of our first aims in entering into Church
Fellowship; Do therefore solemnly in the presence of the eternal God, both for
our own comforts, and those who shall or may be joined unto us, renew that
Church Covenant we find this Church bound unto at their first beginning, viz.
That we covenant with the Lord, and one with another, and do bind our selves
in the presence of God to walk together in all his ways, according as he is
pleased to reveal himself unto us in his blessed word of truth, and do more
explicitly in the name and fear of God, profess and protest to walk as
follows, through the power and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We avouch the Lord to be our God, and our selves to be his people, in the
truth and simplicity of our spirits.

We give our selves to the Lord Jesus Christ, and the word of his grace, for
the teaching, ruling and sanctifying of us in matters of worship and
conversation, resolving to cleave to him alone for life and glory, and to
oppose all contrary ways, Cannons and constitutions of men in his worship.

We promise to walk with our Brethren and Sisters with all watchfulness and
tenderness, avoiding Jealousies and suspicions, backbitings, censurings,
provokings, secret risings of spirit against them; but in all offenses to
follow the rule of the Lord Jesus, and to bear and forbear, give and forgive as
he has taught us.

In public or private we will willingly do nothing to the offense of the
Church; but will be willing to take advice for our selves and ours, as occasion
shall be presented.

We will not in the Congregation be forward either to show our own gifts and
parts, in speaking and scrupling or there discover the weaknesses and failings
of our Brethren, but attend an orderly call thereunto, knowing how much the
Lord may be dishonored, and his Gospel and the profession of it slighted by
our distempers and weaknesses in public.

We bind ourselves to study the advancement of the Gospel in all truth and
peace, both in regard of those that are within or without, no way slighting our
Sister Churches, but using their counsel as need shall be, not laying a
stumbling block before any, no not the Indians, whose good we desire to
promote, and so to converse as we may avoid the very appearance of evil.

We do hereby promise to carry our selves in all lawful obedience to those
that are over us in Church or Commonwealth, knowing how well pleasing it will
be to the Lord that they should have encouragement in their places, by not
grieving their spirits through our irregularityes.

We resolve to approve our selves to the Lord in our particular Callings,
shunning idleness as the bane of any State, nor will we deal hardly or
oppressingly with any wherein we are the Lords Stewards.

Also promising to our best ability to teach our Children and Servants the
knowledge of God and his will, that they may serve him also; and all this not
by any strength of our own, but by the Lord Christ, whose blood we desire may
sprinkle this our Covenant made in his Name.

This forementioned Covenant was often read and Renewed by the Church at the
end of days of Humiliation, especially in the year 1660, on the sixth of the
first month; when also considering the hour of Temptation amongst us by reason
of the Quakers Doctrine, to the levening of some in the place where we are, and
endangering of others, we do see cause to remember the admonition of our
Savior Christ unto his Disciples, Math. 16. Take heed and beware of the leven
of the doctrine of the Pharisees. And do judge (so far as we understand it)
that the Quakers doctrine is as bad or worse then that of the Pharisees.
Therefore,

We do Covenant by the help of Jesus Christ, to take heed and beware of the
leven of the doctrine of the Quakers.

Also this following Covenant was in several Church Meetings in the beginning
of this year 1680. considered of, agreed upon, and consented to by the
generality of the Church, to be used as a direction for the Renewing of our
Church Covenant, as being more accommodated to the present times, and state of
things amongst us.

Accordingly it was made use of in that way at the conclusion of the public
F^^^, Apr. 15. 1680. viz.

We, who (through the mercy of God) are Members of this Church of Salem, being
now assembled in the presence of God, and in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
after humble confession of our manifold breaches of Covenant with the Lord our
God, and earnest supplication for his pardoning mercy through the blood of
Christ and deep acknowledgment of our own unworthiness to be owned as the Lords
Covenant People; also acknowledging our inability to keep Covenant with God, or
to perform any spiritual duty unless the Lord enable us thereunto by the Grace
of his Spirit, and yet being awfully sensible that in these times by the loud
voice of his judgments both felt and feared, the Lord is calling us all to
Repentance and Reformation; we do therefore in humble confidence of his
gracious assistance, through Christ, Renew our Covenant with God, and one with
another in the manner following.

1. We do give up our selves to that God whose name alone is Jehovah, Father,
Son and Spirit, as the only true and living God, and unto our Lord Jesus
Christ, as our only Redeemer and Savior, as the only Prophet, Priest and King
over our Souls, and only Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, engaging our hearts
unto this God in Christ by the help of his Spirit of Grace, to cleave unto him
as our God and chief good, and unto Jesus Christ as our Mediator by Faith, in a
way of Gospel Obedience, as becomes his Covenant People for ever.

2 We do also give up our Offspring unto God in Jesus Christ, avouching the
Lord to be our God and the God of our Children, and our selves with our
Children to be his People, humbly adoring the Grace of God in Christ Jesus,
that we and our Children may be looked upon as the Lords.

3. We do also give up our selves one to another in the Lord according to the
will of God, to walk together as a Church of Christ in all the ways of his
worship and service, according to the Rules of the Word of God, promising in
brotherly love faithfully to watch over one another Souls, and to submit our
selves to the discipline and government of Christ in his Church, and duly to
attend the Seals and Censures, and whatever Ordinances Christ has commanded to
be observed by his people according to the order of the Gospel, so far as the
Lord has, or shall reveal unto us.

And whereas the Elders and Messengers of these Churches have met together in
the late Synod to enquire into the Reasons of the Lords Controversy with his
people, have taken notice of many provoking Evils as the procuring causes of
the Judgments of God upon New England, so far as we or any of us have been
guilty of those Evils, or any of them, (according to any light held forth by
them from Scripture) we desire from our hearts to bewail it before the Lord;
and humbly to entreat for pardoning mercy for the sake of the blood of the
everlasting Covenant. And as an expedient unto Reformation of those Evils, or
whatever else have provoked the Eyes of Gods glory amongst us, we do promise
and engage our selves in the presence of God.

1. That we will (by the help of Christ) endeavor every one to reform his own
heart and life, by seeking to mortify all our sins, and to walk more close with
God then ever we have done, and to uphold the power of godliness, and that we
will continue to worship God, in public, private and secret, and this (as God
shall help us) without formality and hypocrisy, and more fully and faithfully
then heretofore, to discharge all Covenant duties one toward another in a way
of Church Communion.

2 We promise by the help of Christ, to reform our Families, and to walk before
God in our houses with a perfect heart, and that we will uphold the Worship of
God therein continually, as he in his Word does require both in respect of
prayer, and reading of the Scriptures, and that we will do what lies in us to
bring up our Children for God, and therefore will (so far as there shall be
need of it) Catechize them, and exhort and charge them to fear and serve the
Lord, and endeavor to set an holy Example before them, and be much in prayer
for their Conversion and Salvation.

3. We do further engage (the Lord helping of us) to endeavor to keep our
selves pure from the sins of the Times, and what lies in us to help forward the
Reformation of the same in the places where we live, denying all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, making Conscience to walk so as to give no offense nor to give occasion
to others to sin or to speak evil of our holy Profession.

Finally, giving glory to the Lord our God, that He is the faithful God,
keeping Covenant and mercy with his people for ever, but confessing that we are
a weak and sinful people, and subject many ways to break our Covenant with
him; therefore that we may observe and keep these and all other Covenant duties
required of us in the word of God; We desire to deny our selves, and to depend
wholly upon the grace of God in Christ Jesus for the constant presence and
assistance of his holy Spirit to enable us thereunto, and wherein we shall
fail, we shall humbly wait upon his grace in Christ for pardon, for Acceptance,
and for healing, or his Names sake. Amen.

FINIS.

