The Benefit of a Well-Ordered CONVERSATION, As it was Delivered in a Sermon.

Preached June 24th. 1682. On a Day of public HUMILIATION.

As also A Funeral DISCOURSE upon the three first verses of the third Chapter
of Isaiah; Occasioned by the Death of the Worshipful Major General DENISON, Who
Deceased at Ipswich, Sept. 20. 1682.

By Mr. WILLIAM HUBBARD.

To which is Annexed an IRENICON Or a Salve for New-England's Sore:

Penned by the said Major General; And Left behind him as his Farewell and last
Advice to his Friends of the MASSACHUSETTS.

Printed at Boston by Samuel (...) 1684.

To the Serious READER.
T He Wise Man says, Words in season are as Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver, or fitness of words (well tuning them) is the grace of them, and puts
wheels to the Chariots to carry them to the mind; Such is the Discourse here
presented thee, Apples of gold in silver pictures, seasonable Truths timously
and aptly applied; through the blessing of God they were carried to the hearts
of some in the he^ring of them, whose importunity prevailed (...) the Reverend
Author to keep* them (...) the wheels, and expose them to public view. And
though the life and vigor of the Speaker (...) ^e drawn, yet you have the words
fai^^^ully delivered you, and if the same (...) spirit that then a^^isted the
Speaker will animate and enliven them, they may be as beneficial to you as then
they were to others. Oh that all New England, the People of God at least, would
Peruse this Compendious Treatise, where is the sum of what has been frequently
urged, and pressed upon us ^s the present duty, and be upon the mount or height
of duty that God may be seen in the Mount of our difficulties. Oh that we might
be found walking with God as Enoch, upright in our generation as Noah, mourning
over and for the unclean Conversation of those we live amongst, putting away
our Idols, reforming our Persons, and families, or (as heredirected) ordering
our Conversations aright; then should we see that Salvation which God only can
and certain^^ will bring about for this his People: Tha^ ^his may be the
Success of this small Treatise, is the earnest Prayer, and hearty Wish of your
Souls Friends and Servants,

^. Allin. (...). Moodey.

To his worthy FRIEND, The REVEREND MR. William Hubbard, Teacher of the Church
of Christ at Ipswich, upon an occasional sight of his SERMONS on PSALM. 50.
Verse. 23.
What I, and only I, these Papers see.
And that by accident, (...) shall not be.
I Will hazard wrath, whose rise is modesty,
And like Samaria's Lepers, Roast-meat cry;
For though I cannot dish it out in Print,
Yet I affirm, there is Fat and Marrow in it.
Apples of Gold in silver pictures too,
Well seasoned food for souls both old and new.
Me thinks (dear Sir) you should not gr^dge no^ spare
To feast a land upon your Fast day fare.
Pity to see a Land all in a maze,
Fooled into Boggs, and Fe^s, by fire ^lies blaze.
Hang out thy Light, open and press thy Text,
And all our Labyrinths are unperplext.
Teach us our Conversation how to order,
That we may camp within Salvations border.
Riches and Garments, Gold and silver too,
Unused, corrupt, moth-eat, and canker do;
Their price and use are one* Pray, Sir, produce
Your Treasure, put it out to Public use.
Nature, her richest ^oard in secret put,
So Golden Mines came trodden under foot;
Whilst every Creature that is worth an eye,
Keeps gazing on the spangles of the Sky.
(...) or thy Books cre^^t, would (...),
Within the gates thine own works thee shall praise
Or suffer fon't: For good Books now adays
Like virtue practice need, but no man's praise.
Thanks for the sight, and if the world do'nt see'^*
But what I saw, prove it is own winding sheet
When thou have locked it up, write on thy Chest
Here lies a Phoenix, dead in's spicy nest.
Here lies Religion, reformations Path,
The nearest way that God's Salvation has,
Zeal without wildfire, pious Politics.
Sure conduct void of Phaetontick tricks,
Rain thunderless, doctrine like heaven-dropt dews
The sun will suck it up, if Earth refuse.
Posuit N. N.

The Reader is desired to Correct the following Errata, which escaped the eye,
by reason of the badness of the Copy, and the distance of the Author from the
Press.
PAge 1. Line 1. for 27. read 23. p. 6. l. ult. r. the, p. 10. l. 3. r. good,
p. 12. l. 24. de^^ by, p. 16. l. 9. r. Conversation, p. 18. l. 12. r. he, p.
19. l. 21. r. there, p. 20. l. 16. r. that, p. 20. l. 19. r. washed, p. 22. l.
25. r. several, p. 24. l. 13. r. is: p. 25. l. 3. r. posterity. p. 26. r. (...)
p 28. l. 3. r. with, p. 29. l. 18. r. no. p. 37. l. 7. r. necessary, p. 42. 16.
r. clear, p. 43. l. 6. r. all, l. 20. r. discretion. p. 44. l. 13. r. declined*
p. 45. l, 15. r. humanity. p. 46 l. 2, 3. r. hard teeth, p. 48. l. 11. r. them.
p. 53. l. 14. r. led. p. 55. l. 92. r. attaque p. 62. l. 6. r. own name. p. 68.
r. 2. l. 12. r. see. p. 72. l. 1. r. grace rather, l. 10 r. adversary. p. 87 l.
1. put in of, p. 90. l. 15. r. bottom, p. 26. l. 8. r. the. p. 117. l. 22. 22.
r. costly, p. 121. l. 15. r. succenturiated, p. 128. l. r. set up. p. 135. l.
2. r. est per p. 138, l. r. means. p. 156. l. 21. r. Ring. p. 157 l. 15. r.
Cun^^is, p. 158. l. 9 r. pains, p. 168. l. 8. r. recipitque (...) locus (...).
p. 174. l. 3. r. them p. 193. l. 5. r possessed, l. 20. r. more, p. 200. l. 5.
r. his, p. 203, l. (...), r. conclusive, p. 205. (...) 13. r. s^.

PSALM. 51. 27. And to him that orders his Conversation aright will I show the
salvation of God.


THis Psalm is thought by some Interpreters to be penned by David after the
Angel of God had appeared to him, and designed the place where he should build
an Altar at present, and where afterward the Temple was to be built by Solomon,
pointing, as it were, to the place which the Lord had chosen to cause his Name
to dwell there; as it is said, Deuteronomy. 12. 11. This they likewise think was after
the Israelites had been afflicted with three years Famine, 2 Samuel 21. and with
three days Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. which might be the reason of those words in
the second verse, as Junius concludes, Out of Sion the perfection of beauty God
has shined: For now it is declared by God himself, that the light of his
favor is restored to his People, after the darkness and calamities of former
times were passed over. The Psalmist takes this occasion to inform his holy
people, how they ought to carry on his Worship, by not resting in the external,
and ceremonial, but rather attending to the moral, and spiritual part thereof,
ver. (...) 15* the former in comparison of this (...) being in a sense to be
rejected, and laid aside without it, as insignificant in the account of God, if
it be not accompanied with the other: And hereupon is a digression made unto
the wicked in the 16 verse, to ^ell them, that they can expect no benefit by
attendance upon the Ceremonial Worship of God, so long as they hate to be
reformed in their lives, which the covenant of God principally requires: The
more to affect this sort of men, the Psalmist person^^^s them ^n their wicked
words and (...) from ver. 17. to the 22 d. where he (...) ^^cal them from their
sinful ways, (...) ^ring them back to repentance by the ear of Gods inevitable
wrath in that verse, and then shuts up the whole discourse of the Psalm by a
solemn Epiphonema, in the last verse, consisting of two parts: in the first of
which is shown how acceptable to God is spiritual Worship, he that sacrifices
praise glorifieth me; in the latter is seen how profitable to man is moral
obedience; To him that orders his conversation aright will I show the
Salvation of God: These are the last words of the Psalm, but are not of least
moment and importance, for they contain the sum and substance of the whole
Psalm foregoing.

The Textual difficulties in this last clause of the verse, are not above three
or four, and in a few more words will be all cleared.

If it be enquired therefore* First, what is meant by the Conversation? It is
Answered, that according to the Original word, nothing is intended therein, but
the way or course of a man's life, according to the Metaphor usual in the
Scriptures, where a man's works or the course and frame of his life is compared
to a way or path that leads from one place to another; with this difference
only, that as there are many places in this lower world whither men may repair,
so there are many paths or ways that directly lead thereunto; but as to the
other World, there are but two places to which all our actions tend, and to one
of which they will certainly bring all that persist therein, viz. either Heaven
or Hell, Life or Death, Salvation or Damnation: such as are our works here,
will be our reward hereafter. The way which we have designed to our selves, and
persist in, will certainly in the issue bring us to the good which is promised,
or the evil threatened in the Word of God. There is no other word in the Hebrew
to express our conversation but this of our way. In the Greek Testament, there
is a word properly answers Conversation; which comes from (...) and (...).
Versari ^u^, illuc, as Horsemen in a Battle, that turn this way* and that way,
as occasion serves: yet still aims to carry on the main design at first
intended. Thus the Apostle says, he was made all things to all men, that he
might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22. So must every Christian, in
a sense, shape his course according as the Wind and Current of providence
shifts, or sets this way or that way; by doing, and suffering, bearing, and
forbearing keep on in the way of obedience; joining the wisdom of the Serpent,
with the innocence of the Dove: or as the Seamans Phrase is, when they pass
through difficult and dangerous passages on either hand, aloof for one, and
bear up for another, yet still keeping on in the direct way that leads to the
Heaven of rest and happiness.

Secondly, What is it to order our way aright?

The Hebrew word properly signifies to put, dispose: Mercer renders the Word
Art, cura, and ordine ponere, aut disponere; and therefore it is fitly
rendered in our Translation, order aright. It is used to express a singularis
observantia, in reference either to the acts either of the body or mind. There
is need of a great deal of skill and artifice, as well as ca^e and industry in
the ordering the frame of our lives: Not to seek the first* that should be left
to the second place: as our Savior bids us seek first the Kingdom of heaven,
and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6. 33. He that seeks other things in the
first place, and leaves the care of his Salvation, with Felix, when Paul
discoursed of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come, to a more
convenient season, does not order his way aright, for that will bring him to an
ill end at last. Thus Jehu ordered his way aright to the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes, but quite wrong as to the Kingdom of God, when all his care was to walk
in the way of Jeroboam's Idolatry, but took no heed to walk in the Law of the
Lord God of Israel with all his heart, 2 King. 10. 31.

This ordering the way aright may imply a threefold act of a Christian: First,
of the mind, to judge and apprehend, what is the right, or the wrong way that
leads unto life. To discern what is the principal thing to be desired.
Secondly, an act of the affection to embrace, desire that way which is the most
necessary and excellent. Thirdly, An act of the Will, for purpose and
resolution to pursue that which is in it self most necessary and desirable. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, (says David) and that will I seek after,
Psalm. 27. 4. And our Savior tells us, There is but one thing necessary, and he
commends Mary for making her choice of that, and not cumbring her self with
other things that were not necessary.

Thirdly, What is that Salvation of God which they shall see, who order their
way aright? By salvation unto the people of God under the dispensation of the
old Testament, was generally signified, preservation or deliverance from any
temporal evil that at any time they were pressed withal with obtaining the
contrary good. Yet so as thereby, in a spiritual, and sublime sense was
signified, Deliverance from all evil both of sin and judgment, temporal or
eternal, which they had made themselves obnoxious unto by their disobedience,
with the obtaining the favor of God toward them in the peaceable enjoyment of
the good land, which they were possessed of, till they came to obtain happiness
of Gods Kingdom in the other World, of which the land of Canaan was a standing
type and shadow. So Salvation is most frequently taken in the old Testament;
The obtaining of all that good both temporal and eternal, which was necessarily
required to make any people or person, prosperous and happy, with deliverance
from all the evil which is contrary thereunto.

This is called Gods Salvation, not only as that which is in it self most
eminent, or excellent; as excellent Cedars, are called Cedars of God: but
because, 1. It is a Salvation which God only can give: as the Psalmist says,
elsewhere, Give us help from trouble, for vain is the ^elp of man, Psalm.60. And
so he speaks of looking unto those Hills, from which comes his help. And it is
Gods salvation which his People seek for; and therefore David often styles God
his Salvation and his Deliverance. 2. A Salvation which God will give: For
(...) the Hebrew it is, I will cause him to see the salvation of God, which is
to note the effectualness of this promise* though it may seem never so
improbable, and almost impossible; yet God will make them that order their way
aright, to see his salvation at such a time. 3. It is also more emphatically
expressed in the third person; Such a one shall be made to see the salvation of
God. It was a time of great extremity in Samaria, in Jehoram's time: Death as
well as Dearth was come upon them: There is a word of Salvation comes from the
Lord by the mouth of the Prophet; which speaks of great plenty that should be
forthwith in Samaria; God made it good, but the unbelieving Lord, though he saw
it with his eyes, yet he never felt the good of Salvation, because he did not
order his way aright, to give Glory to the God of Israel, by believing the word
which he spoke by his Prophet.

Junius renders the word See, by enjoying; for so the sense of seeing, which is
the most noble, active of all the senses, is frequently put for seeling,
enjoying, obtaining; as it is in Jer. 17. 6. where the unbelieving wretches
that trust in an arm of Flesh, whose hearts depart away from God, are said
(...) cursed; and shall be (...) like the (...) in the Desert, that shall not
see when God ^ometh. If we observe the conduct of ^^ovidence in the former as
well as in the present age, we shall find the people of God often reduced to
those streights that none but the Almighty could grant them Salvation from.

The words thus opened, do very naturally, and of themselves run into this
proposition or point of Doctrine:

Doct. A right ordered Conversation is the direct and necessary way for any
people or person to obtain Gods Salvation. The best improvement of this
Doctrine will be, 1. By showing wherein consists a well ordered Conversation.
2. By laying open the salvation which such shall see. 3. Confirming this truth
by such instances, and reasons, as may be found in our experience. 4. By
answering such objections as look another way. 5. By making such Application,
as the nature of the truth requires.

1. For the first of these, there are sundry things necessary to a well ordered
Conversation.

1. A good beginning, or a sound principle within. He that does not begin well,
will never end well, if he will never alter his course. For he that sets out in
a wrong way, the longer he continues therein, is gone further from the desired
end (if Gods Salvation be that which was aimed at) then at his first entrance
thereinto. For so Christ tells the Pharisees, that their proselytes are twofold
more the Children of Hell, than they were before. They must not set out in the
Flesh, that ever intend or hope to end in the Spirit. A good Tree is absolutely
needful to good fruit; and so is a good heart unto a good life. If the Fountain
be not clean, it will never send forth good Water in its Streams: for as James
tells us, The same Fountain can never send forth sweet water and bitter. The
heart must be changed before the words and works will be found pure and
perfect; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the hands
work, and the feet walks: the Index in a Clock points to those figures without,
that the wheels within move unto. The heart is the primum mobile, in this
little World, that carries all the other Orbs of the thoughts, affections,
senses, and Organs along with it. Since the Fall, the frame of every man's heart
is bent to evil, only to evil, and that continually; and therefore the whole
frame of nature must be changed and turned about, before any motion can be made
toward this salvation of God. There must be a gracious disposition or
inclination of the Will, whereby it comes to be determined to well-doing,
before any hope of Salvation will be brought about: For as Ames says well, It
is the heart or will that is the proper seat and subject of virtue: Because,
Voluntas, ne^ a se nec a ratione sufficienter determinata est ^d bonum ergo
opus ^abet suapr^pra dispositione ad recte agendum. i. e. the Will is neither
of it self, nor by the force of reason sufficiently determined unto good,
therefore it stands in need of a proper disposition of its own to incline it to
well-doing. Take any of the children of men of the most towardly natural
disposition, let him be advantaged by the most likely way of education, both by
precepts of virtue and good examples leading thereunto. Lay before him as many
Arguments, Reasons as may be of force to convince the most obstinate mind, and
obdurate heart, so as he shall be forced to acknowledge that the precept is
holy, just and good: the way directly tending unto life; yet till the heart be
changed and over-poured by a work of supernatural grace, the life will always
be found barren of any good fruit, void of holiness, and sincere obedience: yea
many times none are found more vicious in their lives than such as have had the
best advantage for piety, by their education? None ever proved worse Children
than those who have had the best of men for their Parents, till their hearts
were changed by the power of divine Grace, if ever they attained thereunto. Of
which Ishmael and Esau, Simeon and Levi, Hophni and Phinehas, Ammon and
Absalom, in the families of Abram, Isaac, Jacob, Eli, David; Jonathan the Son
of Gershom, Judge. 18. 30. the Grandchild of Moses, the Ringleader of Idolatry
among the Tribes of Israel: the like may be said of Joash under the tuition of
Jehojeda. Amongst the Heathens, Nero the Emperor of Rome was bred up under
Seneca the best of Heathen Philosophers; yet of all the Heathen Rulers, none
ever proved more prodigiously wicked. Thus as Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 15. 47, 48.
The first man is of the earth earthy, the second man is of the Lord from
Heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. Till there be a change wrought
in the heart, that does imprint the image of the heavenly Adam upon the Soul,
there will be nothing but an earthly Conversation, until we become born again
from Heaven, it will never be said truly, that our Conversation is in Heaven.

This seems to be the reason why the Scripture lays so much weight upon the
uprightness, and obedience of the heart: My Son give me thy heart; And above
all keepings keep the heart, for out of it are the issues of life, that is, the
great wheel that carries all other powers and faculties along with it. And if
the heart be nor changed by the infusing a new disposition, though you may by
force imprint another motion for the present, yet it will not hold long, unless
it have a new nature stamped upon it. It will be* but as a stone that may be by
Engines forced upward, or as water heated by the fire, which retains their
innate qualities, to which they will soon return again, and to that place of
their center. Therefore he that would have his way set right, must begin with
his heart, and get that changed, and put into a right frame, and then all the
rest will follow. He that made the heart at first, and forms the spirit of
man within him, must also make the heart anew, and renew a right spirit within
every man, must renew it again: This is the sense of the Church of God in all
ages as to this article of Religion, Turn us O God of our Salvation, and then
we shall be saved, phraim is at last convinced that he cannot be turned unless
God will please to tu^^ him. This turn in the heart necessari^^ includes Faith
in God, through the Lord Jesus, by whose merit alone Salvation to be obtained.
But,

2. The second thing required to a Conversion ordered aright, is a suitable
operation constantly proceeding therefrom which will be necessarily required in
the several actions of our lives and change that pass over us: for though our
way (...) but one in the general, as to the main tendency thereof, yet there
are several part of the same; like so many distinct branches in the Trees of
Righteousness, (...) which though every one is but one Tree yet are there many
Branches in every Tree, all of which ought to be laden with the fruits of
righteousness. The person is the same, though he pass through the differing
changes of Youth (...) Age, single and married Estate; public and private,
prosperous and adverse estate; in every of which changes, he ought to order his
(...) aright. There is an evil time, when (...) Righteous are to keep silence;
and a ^od time, when more liberty and free^^me may be used. And Solomon tells
us ^^ere is one duty properly belongs to pro^^erity, and another to adversity.
The ^escription of the Righteous that are ^anted by the Rivers of Gods
Sanctuary, (...) that their Lea^ shall not wither; they shall never change
their hue, or recede ^^om their profession; and that they shall ^^ing forth
their fruit in the season of it* Thus the Apostle John applies himself in his
Epistle to young Men and Children, as well as to old men; implying that
di^^inct fruit was to be expected, according (...) those distinct ages of
Christians: in respect of the operation of virtue. The way of any man that
desires to see the Salvation of God, may be best digested unto this method, or
order:

1. As to what is past.

2. As to what is to come.

1. As to what is past, his way is to (...) Repentance from all dead works
formerly committed, which cannot be carried on effectually to Salvation with
out Faith in the Lord Jesus, by whose m^^rit and blood alone, pardon and
remission of sin must be had, and reconciliation wit^ God obtained. For that
man will never walk aright in the way of Repentance* that is not by Faith first
reconciled unto God. As the Scripture tells us, without Faith it is impossible
to please God; and whatever is not of Faith is sin. David complains, that it
was as a Sword within his b^nes, while they said unto him, where is thy God? if
at any time we have lost ou^ hold of God, it will never be obtained again
without the renewed actings and exercise of Faith: And as he that in the state
of Nature and unregeneracy is estranged from God, can never be reconcile^ unto
him without the Act of Faith un^ting of him to the Lord Jesus, as a Surety Head
and Savior, in whom the Father (...) well pleased. Till then, as we can have
no interest in God, so neither can he have any actual communication of life and
Holiness with him without the daily exercise of Faith in Christ which is our
life; and who as a living foundation and root, does quicken all those who are
as lively stones built upon him, and as living Branches united unto him, as to
the true Olive. Repentance therefore is another part of our way together with
faith: These two are inseparable Companions in the condition of the Gospel:
These two are always joined together in the Doctrine and way of Salvation.
Sinners that would enjoy the Salvation of God, must as well undo the evil that
is past by true Repentance, as endeavor to do that which is right for (...)
time that is to come. Forgiveness is as freely extended by God, as a God of all
grace, as it was ever declared in the promise, or covenant of Gods grace; yet
it is added, only acknowledge thine iniquity. And though the^^ be many instances
of Gods pardoning grace extended to great sinners, yet it is no particular
instance, of any such act of Grace from God, where there was no certain sign of
true Repentance. David's heart went too intemperately out toward Absalom: that
he seems resolved to have pardoned him, though he had never given any real
evidence of sincere Repentance. But the pardoning of Fratricide without
repentance made him the readier to adventure upon Paricide afterward. God
seemed as forward and willing to pardon David as ever he did any of the Sons of
Men, and accepts of as little evidence for Repentance; yet that which was, was
sincere, and therefore sufficient, David said, I have sinned. Confession, as
that was circumstanced* implied all the other parts of Repentance.

And seeing we are apt to sin daily, and are directed to pray daily for the
pardon of our sins, so Repentance is a work, it is never out of season, while
the Children of God carry a body of death along with them. He that is (...)
already, may have daily need to wash his feet, Joh. 13. 10. Although our
persons be already sanctified by the Spirit; yet in regard of the remainder of
corruption, (...) affections are as apt to be defiled by our converse with the
men of the World, as are the feet of them that tread upon that Earth. They that
would be found as a new lump, must daily be purging out the old leven. While we
are in the World we shall have occasion of commerce with the Idolatrous,
Covetous, Fornicators of this World, or else as the Apostle says, we must go
out of the world, for fear of defilement; therefore we must daily cleanse our
selves in the l^vor of Repentance, as was the custom of the Jews to wash and be
clean, as to their outward man, after they came from the market. If we say we
have no sin, as the Apostle John says, we lie, and the truth is not in us: but
if we do sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, whose blood cleanses us
from all sin, and the way to make use thereof, is by the exercise of
repentance, as well as of Faith, else it may justly be returned upon us in any
of our duties of Religious Worship, as God says to the wicked, What have thou
to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. And
therefore we shall find it always prescribed by God, and practiced by his
People, in any time of distress and danger, when they needed Gods Salvation, to
sanctify a Fast, and call a solemn Assembly, to make their peace with God by
Repentance of sins that were past, and by entering into a new engagement, by
renewing their Covenant for their good abearing, for the time to come.

2. The right ordering our Conversation as to what is future, consists in new
obedience. Attending on the duties of Religion and Righteousness. To frame
their doings so as to turn to their God, from whom before time they have fallen
by their iniquity: yet now they must come up to a resolution to do so no more.
The wrath of God which is revealed from Heaven, is against the ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of Men, and therefore the way to enjoy the Salvation of God,
and avoid the wrath which is to come, requires us in the first place to live
godly in the present World, of which there are two Branches.

1. A religious observance of all the duties of Gods Worship. God expects to be
worshipped after a due manner by all those that desire to see his Salvation.
That God who is the Creator of the ends of the Earth, always required homage
from the Inhabitants thereof; and those Families are destined to his Curse and
Vengeance, that live in the neglect thereof, a^ the Prophet Jeremy speaks,
Chap. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen, and upon the Families that
call not on thy Name. Such therefore as restrain Prayer, and call not on the
Name of the Lord, are so far from seeing his Salvation, that they may justly
fear, they shall feel his Indignation. Abraham was called the Friend of God:
for whose sake he reproved Kings, giving them in special charge not to work him
any harm, where ever he came to ^^journ. The first thing you hear of him is his
building an Altar, and calling on the Name of the Lord, as may be seen in the
first part of his Pilgrimage, Genesis 12. 7, 8. and 13. 4, 18. Nor was Abram the
first who was noted for this Religious care of Gods Worship. For we read that
Noah, as soon as ever he came out of the Ark, built an Altar, and offered
Sacrifices thereon, (...) of those few clean Beasts that were left alive after
the great Deluge. Probably he might conceive, that it was in great part for the
neglect thereof, that a Deluge of Water was brought upon the World. For ever
since the days of Seth, when first there were found People enough to make
public Assemblies, they began to call upon the Name of the Lord, and so
continued till the degenerate Offspring of the succeeding Generation, had
through their great impiety in a manner wholly laid aside.

In like manner was it observed as most commendable in David, that as soon as
ever he was settled in his Kingdom, the first public design he takes in hand,
is the bringing home the Ark of God to the Tent which he had prepared for it at
Jerusalem; as well knowing that his establishing the Worship of God, would be
the directest means to establish the Kingdom in his possession, for the work of
God had been sadly neglected, or but slightly managed, ever since Saul was
called to the Kingdom. Jeroboam that had so large a promise for settling of the
Kingdom in his prosperity, yet lays the Foundation of ^^s and their ruin in his
Idolatry, and false Worship: which proved in like manner a ^atal stumbling
block in the way of all the succeeding Kings, though in many things else, never
so hopeful and commendable in themselves. It was the neglect of the Worship of
God that lost Jehu and his Family the Kingdom, and which at last cost the ten
Tribes their Country. ^or how zealous soever Jehu was in abolishing the
Worship of Baal, he was as remiss as the rest in setting up the Worship of the
Lord. For it is said, He took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord, it must in
a special manner be understood, as to the Idolatry of the golden Calves, for in
other things, he was careful very exactly to fulfill that will of the Lord, as
in punishing the house of Ahab, as the Lord had commanded him. Thus was it
foretold by the Prophet Joel, That whosoever called on the Name of the Lord
should be saved. What was it that ruined the Gospel Church but Idolatry and
false Worship, The suffering of false Worship, as to the Object, and
will worship, as to the manner of their Devotion has always proved fatal to
Christian Families and Churches. This was (...), as (...) Mede calls it in the
Church of Rome.

Then if you would your selves, or desire that yours should see the salvation
(...) God, look to maintain and carry on the Worship of God in your Assemblies,
Families, and in your own hearts and cl^sets. The Worship of God was ordered
aright in David's and Solomon's time, and in the first part of Rehoboam's
Reign; And so long things went well; but when Rehoboam and his People, forsook
the Lay of the Lord, God forsook them, and let them in the hand of their
Enemies: (...) did any of the following Kings ever so the Salvation of God
longer than they were careful to maintain and carry on the true Worship of God,
as may be seen in the History of Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezechia^ and Josiah, Kings
of Judah: For by the Idolatry and false Worship of the other Kings, their
Kingdoms became low and broken, till at last they were broken to pieces, were
carried Captive to Babylon, and were never restored to the honor of a Kingdom
afterward.

2. The second part of our Religious care must be to maintain Purity and
Holiness in heart and life; that the Holy God not only be Worshipped, but that
he be worshipped in an holy manner: Reverend and Holy is his Name; and he will
be ^^nctified in all them that draw near unto him, else he will sanctify
himself upon them; and they shall by that means be far from seeing the
Salvation of God; as was the case of them that offered strange fire upon Gods
Altar. Thus the Prophet Haggai tells them, and convinces them out of the Law,
that the impurity of their hearts and lives, rendered all they did, as to the
external part of Gods Worship, unclean: For where the mind and conscience is
defiled and unclean, all the service that such perform must needs be defiled
thereby. It is the lifting up of clean hands that must obtain Gods Salvation:
he threatens to hide his eyes from beholding those hands that are defiled with
blood, or any other wickedness: for which our sincerity in our worship and
obedience, all manner of wickedness and impiety may be carried on under the
outward form of religious Worship, as Paul foretold concerning the latter
days, and we have seen it fulfilled in our times. This was the condition and
state of the Church of Israel in the time when this Psalm was composed, and
many others; I will not reprove thee for thy burnt offerings, I will take (...)
Bullock out of thy Stall. Offering and Sacrifice says David in another Psalm,
thou delightest not in, else would I give it thee, i. e. comparatively; They
were the Sacrifices of Righteousness, that God most of all delighted in: the
other without this, were not of themselves desirable at all. Outward Worship
without the concurrence of inward piety, and holiness, are part of the bodily
exercise Paul speaks of, which profits little. Saul himself seems not to have
been wanting in Sacrifices; for he reserved the fattest of them for that end;
but Samuel tells him, that Obedience was better than Sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of Rams.

Austin complained in his time, that the Church was burdened with the
observation of too many Rites, and Ceremonies, and Superstitious Observations.
And yet himself Good man (the more was the pity) was not unwilling to increase
that burden by superfluous additaments, which with other Bishops, that lived in
those times would assuere or few unto the ornaments of the Church, what would
he and they have said, if they had survived to following times, when there has
been so much (...) about outward Rites, and Semblance of Holiness, in places,
days, garments and gestures, (...) care taken by Christians, to cleanse their
hands, and purify their hearts from the unclean lusts of the Flesh; whereas
David's care was to wash his hands in innocence before he compassed Gods Altar.
God is a Spirit, and requires such Worshippers, as worship him in spirit and in
truth: that take care to wash the inside as well as the outside of their
vessels.

If we consult the History of the Scriptures, we shall there find that they
were only men that feared God, and walked with him in way of Holy Communion
that enjoyed his Salvation: who though they were Pilgrims and Strangers upon
Earth, yet by the holiness of their lives an^ ways, approving themselves to
God, (...) those that desired to fear his Names, the always were made to see
his Salvation and to dwell under the wings of his p^^^ection.

3. The Duties of Righteousness, as well as of Religion, are also a necessary
part of a well ordered Conversation. There were two Tables of the Law (...)
God, the Duties of Religion were written in the one, the Duties of
Righteousness in the other. These two were alway^ to walk hand in hand, and
kiss one another in the Mount of God, like Moses and Aaron, Joshua and
Zerubbabel; the on taking care of the affairs of God, the other of the things
of Men. These two were as the Pillars before Solomon's Temple; they do not only
adorn, but bear up the Foundation of a Peoples Prosperity; if either of these
gives way, desolation will soon break in upon a People or Place.

These are the two great Commandments on which hang the Law and the Prophets.
It is in vain to pretend to the one, without care and conscience of the other
when our Savior gives a resolution to the young Man's case, Mat. 19. about the
good thing which was to be done in order to eternal life (which was in effect
no more than to see Gods Salvation) he is sent to the second Table of the Law,
not as if the other were to be neglected, but that he might be convinced how
far he fell short in the Duties of Righteousness toward his fellow creatures,
and so might the more easily be made to understand what an hard matter it was
to fulfill the Duties of the first Table: For as John says, He that loves not
his Brother, as he should, whom he has, and does daily converse with, how
shall ^e be able to love God as he ought, whom he has not seen, 1 John 4. 20.

Hereby is showed also, that love to our neighbor (which includes all acts
(...) Righteousness) is requisite unto life, as well as love to God. This was
the Doctrine of Moses's Law, and of all the Prophets, whose Writings were but
as Comments thereon: what man is he says David, that desires life, and loves
many days that he may see good, i. e. Gods Salvation* Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips from speaking guile, etc. Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14, 15 and the
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, etc. his ears open to their cry. Men
must as well work righteousness as fea^ God, and all they that so do are
accepted of God in every nation, Act. 9.

The want of the care in either of these* cuts us off from Gods Salvation: For
(...) James says, that man's Religion is in vain who bridleth not his Tongue.
And visiting the Fatherless, or the Widow, is made by him so essential unto
true Religion, as if it were the intrinsic part thereof.

True Religion may fitly be compared to a Tree, as such are called Trees of
righteousness; which look s upward, yet take s root downward; we look up to God
by our holiness, and the devotion of our hearts unto him, and so are said to
have our conversation in Heaven, yet while we are conversant here below, we
must attend the duties, that do concern those amongst whom we sojourn on the
Earth. The particular duties, and rules of this Righteousness toward men are
many. They are summed up in a few words by Moses, in the Decalogue, or the
Commandments, and are yet expressed by our Savior in fewer; To love our
Neighbor as our selves: And that is a sure rule whereby we may be satisfied
about the Righteousness of our Actions toward others, by looking into our own
hearts, and asking them, if we would be willing, others should do so unto us;
which Rule if it were put in practice, would put an end to all, or most of the
controversies that Professors, to the scandal of their Religion are often times
so eagerly contending about. This is the golden Rule of Christianity, on which
we may write Probatum est.

The Prophets under the Old Testament as well as the Apostles under the new,
are found to declaim against impurities, oppression and deceit amongst men, as
well as against impiety toward God; for both arise from the same Principal of
corrupt Nature in us all. The Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 5. 7. makes a complaint how
the Vineyard of Gods Church had degenerated from the sincerity of obedience,
into ways of unrighteousness; I looked for Judgment but behold oppression, or
corruption; for purity and behold a cry. There is a greater elegancy in the
Hebrew words, that can be answered by any of our translations, by the
similitude of the sound in those words. It thereby appears, that (...) Garden
or Vineyard of God which is his Church, is overrun with those rank weeds, that
smell so strong of injustice, cruelty and oppression, he is ready to pull up
the hedge of his Protection and lay them wast, or leave them to final
extirpation. ^was said the cry of the sins of Sodom ascended up to heaven, and
it was so loud a cry, that they pierced the very seat of the Almighty, and
pulled down vengeance from Heaven* and what were their sins? Pride, which is
the mother of Contention, and Cruelty, marches in the van, the filty Lusts of
intemperance bring up the ^ear; so as righteous Lot, and his Family are almost
crushed between them, as between two Millstones: Gibea and Benjamin are ripe
for judgment, when they will go about to maintain iniquity by a Law, instead of
seeing Gods Salvation, they and all their Confederates shall feel his
indignation, and know that the righteous Lord loves righteousness. As before,
when in the days of the old World, the Earth was filled with violence viviter
ex rapt^: their unrighteousness opened the Floodgates of Divine vengeance,
which carried them all away with a Flood. And not long after, when in the days
of Nimrod, the great Grandchild of Noah, the Inhabitants of Shinar proclaims
War with the Almighty, and bid defiance against Heaven, God blasts their vain
enterprises, and makes them see their own confusion, instead of his Salvation.

4. The next Branch of a well ordered conversation, is that which concerns our
selves, viz. Sobriety and Temperance, which according to the assertion of the
Apostle Paul is part of that Doctrine which brings Salvation along with it*
wherever it is put in practice. As we find it expressed, Tit. 2. 12. And here
lie^ the greatest danger of a professing People* Open unrighteousness is
restrained by the severe Laws and Edicts of civil Nations, where Intemperance,
and Profaneness may appear with open face upon the stage* Injustice in civil
affairs, as it is obvious to humane and common observation, so is it more apt
to be restrained and punished* as standing in direct opposition to the
commerce, and traffic of Nations: every one will be ready to bring a stone to
^ling at an Oppressor, Thief, or Robber; but now the Lusts of Intemperance are
more (...) and silently carried on; under (...) th^se Banks that seem to keep
it in, and imensibly by degrees, like the Ivy, sucking out the heart and life
of the Religion of those whom it seems to compass about and embrace. These
Lusts of the Flesh secretly eat out the life of holiness and damps the heat of
our zeal. They are also the more apt to prevail upon the minds of the
uncautelous; because they are seated in such things as for the matter of them
are not unlawful, yea are both natural, and accessory; which made one sadly
complain, In licitis perim^^ omnes* When Israel could neither be enchanted by
Sorcery, nor corrupted by Idolatry, yet they may be charmed by the Siren of
sensual delights* for when the people had committed carnal Fornication with the
Midianitish Women, they are easily led on to commit spiritual Adultery with
their Idols. Solomon might speak it by experience, as well as by observation of
the strange Women, that strong men have fallen down wounded by her: When the
Devil came to assault our Savior, he found nothing in him to fasten his
Temptations upon; there was no combustible matter for his fiery Darts to sieze
upon, but when he comes to David, though never so holy a man, he finds
something to fix upon, especially when he lay at an open Guard, having ungir^
himself, and laid aside the Armor of light. A chaste conversation coupled with
fear, is the best security against those Lusts of the Flesh that war against
our Souls.

The seeds of Piety and virtue, are in as much danger of being choked with
these Weeds of Intemperance, as by the Thorns of Covetousness and other Lusts
of like nature.

5. There are other Branches of a well ordered Conversation, very necessary to
bring about this Salvation of God. Sometimes Profaneness and Impiety may get
such an head in places, that it is not possible to suppress or bear them down
without an eminent degree of zeal, God was so provoked with the sensual lusts
of Israel at Baal-peor, that if it had not been for the zeal of Phinehas, that
Generation as commendable as they were, had seem but little of the salvation of
God: it was his zeal that s^ayed the Plague from consuming the People. If our
zeal be not as hot as fire, it will easily be quenched by these Fleshly Lusts.
Eli did not want a principle of holiness and the fear of God, but he wanted the
holy passion of zeal to actuate and exert it. No man had ever more experience
of seeing the Salvation of God than David, and what man did ever declare more
zeal against sin, and for the Glory of God, and casting off the works of
iniquity; does he not engage that a vile person shall not tarry in his sight,
and him that tells lies he would cut off: If such be suffered says Solomon,
by the Ruler, all his Servants will be mis^ead* Then farewell Gods Salvation.
The Church of Laodicea lost her dignity for want of zeal; and is severely
threatened for this defect: Be zealous, and repent, or else I will ^pue thee out
of my mouth, Rev. 4. 16. a cold dull, un-active, lukewarm spirit will in a
little time lose the very life of godliness; when in the primitive Church the
love of many began to wa^ cold; it was a presage of their Desolation, which
soon after came to pass.

But here we must look to our zeal, that it be not mingled with too much
wildfire; for the wrath of man will never work the righteousness of God. The
Lord Jesus, was, as became the Lamb of God, meek and lowly of heart; yet was
(...) zealous against Hypocrisy, and (...) ^niquity.

It Is good to be zealously affected in a good ma^^er, says the Apostle. And so
also in a good manner: The Disciples were zealously affected against them that
did not follow them; this was not in a good matter: nor was their zeal to be
commended that forbad them bringing little Children to the Lord Jesus. And if
the Angel that contended with the Devil about the body of Moses had brought
railing accusations, there had been a defect in the manner. Zeal is an holy
affection, and will thrive best in a meek and quiet spirit. No man so meek upon
the face of the Earth as Moses, and yet no man was found so zealous as Moses,
in ^^forming the Idolatry of the People, when he set every man against his
fellow that was gulty of the fact; and at last grinding the Idol to powder that
they might drink it down, that so eagerly had drunk down that cursed Worship.
The zeal of Moses was far more acceptable to God than that of Jonah, or Jehu.
It is not the hot, fiery, cursed tempers in a place, that will maintain and keep
up the purity of Religion, and good order, so well as that which proceeds from
men of sedate, composed, even tempers, who are always the same for their love
to piety and holiness, and hatred of all sin.

6. In the next place, Constancy and Perseverance may be added here: It is not
enough to begin well, unless we (...) on, unless we would fall under the
Apostles censure of the Gallathians, Ye did (...) well once, who hindered you?
he that turns aside out of the way, or sits down discouraged, will no more
obtain the desired end, than he that never entered thereinto. Therefore Christ
tells us, He that endures to the end, only shall be saved. Many a Man's
obedience is by fits and girds, as they are urged, and put on by the force of
external motives, whereas those that act from an inward Principle are ever the
same. The Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, that such as his Letters were
when he was absent, such shall his deeds be when he is present, 2 Cor. 10. 11.
So should a Christian be, the same at last, which he was at first. The
Righteous says Job* shall hold on his way, and he that has strong hands shall
grow stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. Who ever enters into the way of Gods
Precepts with a sincere mind, must engage with David, to continue in the same
to the end: and such who do not so do, will appear to be, (...), selfcondemned.
For if it were not in their judgment and conscience the right way, why did they
never walk therein? and if it were really so, why did they turn aside
therefrom! And as to Gods Salvation, there will no sort of men in the
conclusion be found further therefrom, than such as are guilty of backsliding
from the way of Obedience. The back-slider in heart is threatened to be filled
with his own ways. One says well, There are none so bad as they that have
been good, and are not, or may be good, and will not.

Under this of constancy may be included universality of Obedience; his
Conversation cannot be ordered aright, that lives in the omission of any of the
known duties of Religion or righteousness: David accounted it matter of shame
to be found not to have respect to any of Gods Commandments. How can two be
said to walk together that are not agreed upon all the points of love and
obedience, wherein they are concerned. As God was not liable to be taxed for
breach of Covenant in any the least particular of his promises, so does he
threaten to make the Israelites know to their cost their insinuation of the
contrary; yea, shall know my breach of Covenant, Psalm. 78. In like manner he
expects universality and constancy of obedience in his People.

7. The last thing here required is direction and wisdom. It was not enough
for David to choose the perfect way of Gods Preceps to walk in, but to walk
perfectly therein, Psalm. 101. 2. There are errors on the right hand as well as
on the left; he that would approve himself as upright, must turn aside to
neither: for the preventing of which no small Wisdom will be required. This our
Savior would have his Disciples aware of, when he advises them being sent as
sheep among Wolves, to be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves. There is much of
Truth in the old saying, Quisque faber fortun^e su^e: every one in a great
measure is the Author of his own weal or woe. We may by this means do much of
our selves, toward ^our seeing the Salvation of God. David was wise as an Angel
of God, and by that Wisdom decl^^ed much of that evil which otherwise might
have overtaken him in Saul's Court: so as it is said about five times in one
Chapter, David behaved himself wisely among Saul's Servants, and prospered
whither soever he went: And indeed the Hebrews do express Prosperity and Wisdom
by one and the same word, because Wisdom has a great influence into the
success of our affairs. Many Instances may be given hereof:

Abraham, after he had been called out of his own Country, was cast among
several People or Families of another, or rather of a false Religion; that
lived without the fear of God: he accounted it his Wisdom, not to intermeddle
in their quarrels, nor yet to enter into too much Familiarity, so neither not
to decline mutual Duties of Humanities, wherein they might be mutually helpful
one to another; yet on the other hand was careful not to quarrel with those of
his own persuasion, for fear of giving o^fence to the Heathen amongst whom they
sojourned: he will rather loose of his just right, in matter of his
Possessions, than loose his reputation in point of Religion.

He wisely foresaw the Perizzite would make an ill use of his quarrelling with
his Brother Lot, about so inconsiderable a matter as their Sheep-walks.

In case of contending with our Superiors, says Solomon, it is not best
always to stand too much upon the defense of our own Right.

A soft answer pacifieth wrath, and a soft tongue breaks the bone, which the
ha^d^^^th sometimes cannot deal with. And be not hasty to go out of his sight,
who does whatsoever pleases him; and a wise man's heart discerns both time and
judgment, Eccles. 8. 3, 4, 5. So for our Inferiors and Equals; Wisdom as we
are told in the Proverbs, must discover to us when we should make answer to a
Fool, and when (...) should leave him to answer himself in his own Folly. Nor
is it always best to force a matter on with main strength, when Wisdom may
direct how to overcome the greatest difficulties, by forbearing a while: David
succeeded better against the Philistines by fetching a Compass, then by falling
directly upon them. Josiah one of the best of all the Kings of Judah, yet by an
error in this kind, did not see the salvation of God in that last Trajedy of
his life, whereby he brought a fatal stoak of death upon his own person, which
his Holiness and Piety had a great while before kept off from the People and
himself, and so might still have done, if he had not so much failed in point of
this Wisdom, about meddling with a controversy which did little or nothing
concern him at that time. For he that medleth with a strife, that does not
belong unto him, as Solomon tells us, does but hold a Dog by the ears, whom he
can neither detain, nor let go without great danger to himself. Hezekiah had
better success in his contest with the great King of Assyria, for as it is said,
Wisdom and Knowledge were the stability of his times, and therefore it is
added, that the strength of Salvation was his, Isai. 33. 6. If we cast an eye
upon all the following Histories of the Church, in succeeding Ages, we shall
find, that much of those sufferings which have fallen upon the Generation of
the just, might either have been prevented or much abated; if they had governed
their affairs by a suitable measure of Wisdom in their concerns with themselves
or others. For the confirmation of this Truth, temporal Deliverances in those
times were but as Types and Shadows figuring out the spiritual Salvation of the
Church of the Gospel; when being delivered from the hands of all spiritual
Enemies, they might serve God with Holiness and Righteousness all their days:
even in those times when the Church of the Faithful was visited with the
Dayspring from on high, and made to see this Salvation of God in the full
accomplishment of it as to this life* Many are the afflictions of the
Righteous, says David, of old, but God delivers you out of all, Psalm. 34. 19.

David himself was a long time exercised with troubles and trials, but by Faith
and Patience, he lived to see the Salvation which God had promised to come out
of Sion. This was but a type of that general Salvation of the World through
Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, which was to begin at Jerusalem. The
Writings of Moses are as full of Promises and Threatenings, as they are of
Precepts and Exhortations, to keep the way of the Lord and to do justice and
judgment. The 26 th Chapt. of Levit. and the 28 th of Deuteronomy. are wholly taken up
that way. Dwell in the Land and do good, so verily thou shall be fed, and see
good. Behold the upright and perfect man, Psalm. 37. 37. the end of that man
shall be peace: whatever are the various changes God leads them through by his
unsearchable dispensations; so it is said, Isai. 1. 19. If ye be obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the Land: so long as they were obedient they did so, both
in the former and following times. All the days of Joshua and the Elders that
over-lived Joshuah, they saw the Salvation^ of God in all their enterprises;
because all their time they ordered their way aright, to keep the Commandments
of the Lord, and to do judgment and justice; but when they of the next
Generation fel^ from God, and turned into other ways* what miserable
calamities befell them in the time of the Judges, and their Idolatrous Kings;
there was no peace to them that went out, or to them that came in, for God
vexed them with all adversity, and they could never come to see the salvation
of God.

Gods providence ordinarily have been like Weather-glasses; the waters thereof
as to their peace and prosperity might have been discerned to rise and fall
according as his people did ebb or flow in the course of their obedience: They
say the Egyptians use to presage of the health, or fertility of every year, by
the rising of the River Nilus, higher or lower: so might any one who lived in
the time of any of their Judges, or Kings, have foretold the prosperity, or
misery of the people according to the measure of their obedience. When they did
evil, it went ill with them; and when they did well in the lowest degree, and
that which was right in the ^ight of the Lord, though not in that perfect
manner as they should; yet ordinarily they were made to see the salvation of
God: As in the first years of Rehobo^am, Abijah, Joash, Amazias and Uzzias.
Thus did God ordinarily proportion the ways of his providence to his peoples
obedience.

When of old the whole World degenerated from the true Religion and worship,
and none was found Righteous but Noah, and a few in his Family; God makes him
and them only see the Salvation of God.

So afterward, 2 Samuel 8. it is said David prospered whither soever he went, even
against five several Nations at once, because his heart was right, and he
ordered his way aright before God, he was made a lasting monument of Gods
deliverance, as he had been a standing pattern of obedience. Thus we may say
with the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, time would fail to speak of
other Instances, upon whom this promise was made good, both before and after
the captivity; who ever walked with God, and ordered their way aright before
him, they were made to see the salvation of God in the midst of Armies, Lions
Dens, Fiery Furnaces; and amongst multitudes of Enemies, who were all armed
with envy and malice against them, as well as with force and power.

Afterward as Ezrah ordered his way aright in bringing up as many as he could
persuade to attend thereunto out of the Captivity, and in seeking the face of
God by solemn Fasting and Prayer, so God caused him to see his Salvation more
immediately than if he had obtained a band of Horsemen from an Heathen; And
Nehemiah, at another time, obtains favor in the sight of the man, as he
desired, who had then all power under God in his hands, concerning the poor
captive Jews; because he ordered his way aright, first to seek God by solemn
Prayer, and then to go on courageously without fearing the face of Man,
especially such Sons of malice and wickedness, as were Sanballat and Tobiah,
who though they pretended a desire to help build the Temple of God at
Jerusalem, yet in their hearts were filled with rancour and enmity, and ready
to gnash their teeth, that any came thither, that sought the welfare of the
people of God.

As for the state of the Christian Church since Christ's time, for the first
three hundred years, how mightily did the Word of God increase and prevail! The
favor of the knowledge of Jesus Christ ever triumphed in every place: the
three measures of meal, i. e. the three parts of the World then known were
leavened with the Doctrine of the Christian Religion; the whole World was in a
manner overspread therewith, notwithstanding all the fury, rage and malice of
their persecuting Enemies; he that sat upon the white Horse, with his Bow and
his Crown, went on conquering to conquer, and did prevail. All this while they
ordered their way aright; they set themselves by faith and patience to wait
upon God, and were made to see his Salvation. When Israel came first out of
Egypt, if God had let them presently into the possession of the land of Canaan,
before they had been inured to the difficulties of a War; God must miraculously
have cut off all their Enemies to have put them in possession of Canaan, and
then they would have been in danger to have been overcome with luxury,
sensuality and security, as too soon came to pass afterward: therefore God in
his infinite wisdom did train them up to encounter with Marches and Journyings
in the Wilderness, and then acquainted them with the difficulties of a long
War, that they might learn Obedience, by what they underwent: so in a manner
were Gods dispensations toward the Christian World; God would not miraculously
subdue them to the obedience of Faith; but by the labor and travel of the
Ministry in holding forth the Doctrine of the Gospel, the word of Christ's
patience, least if it had been otherwise* they should have grown secure and
carnal, and turned the Grace of God into lasciviousness; as many were too apt
unto: but presently after the winter of Adversity and Persecution was over and
past, and the summer of prosperity came upon them, how soon were they, even the
face of the whole Christian World overrun with a deluge of Impiety and
Profaneness? how soon was the pure and choice Wine of the Gospel mingled with
the Mara waters of the Curse, and their silver all become Dross? The dreggs of
Arrianism presently after Constantine ^p^ysoned the Fountains of living water,
in all the Eastern Churches; as the sink of Idolatry and Superstition had
infected all the Churches of the west, which made way for the cursed Impostures
of Mahometanism, with other barbarous manners in the East, as Antichristianism,
Tyranny and Oppression that surprised the western Churches of the World, that
overspread the whole Christian World with a very Sea of Abominations, out of
which the Church has been laboring a long while to wade; but she has not as
yet been able sufficiently to shake her self from out of the dust of Babylon:
such is the deplorable estate of the Church in this present time; not much
unlike the state of Israel, when having been by the conduct of Moses drawn out
of Egypt, toward the edge of the Wilderness, and frontiers of the land of
promise; when behold the Dragon that formerly held them in Bondage is pursuing
them, not without hope to attain them again, and bring them under subjection a
second time. But they that order their way aright, in the sense of the Text,
shall sooner or later see the salvation of God.

The Reasons of this Point are principally these three:

Reas. 1. From the consideration of God, whose Name is engaged for the defense
and salvation of his People. The perfections of the Almighty oblige him to show
his salvation to all them that order their way aright, and only to them that so
do. His eyes run to and fro through the whole Earth to show himself strong in
the behalf of them whose heart is perfect before him: then 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. his
omnipotent arm is stretched out to save and deliver all such: walk before me,
and be upright, I am God alsufficient, says God to Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. And as
his hand is able to save them, so is his ear, as well as his eye open to their
cry, Ps. 34. 15 yea, sometimes before they call God is ready to answer, and
whiles they are yet speaking he will hear, Isai. 65. 24. to the like purpose is
that promise, Isai. 58. 9, 10. His word and faithfulness is engaged also, to
save all the meek of the Earth: they whose hearts are lifted up in them, are
not right before him, but humble, contrite ones, are the people he is engaged
to save and defend: yea he has bound himself by his promise, in the 15 verse
of this fiftieth Psalm, that if they call upon him in the day of trouble, he
will answer them The face of the Lord is set against all them that do evil. He
is an holy God, and therefore has declared, that the evil shall not dwell with
him: he hates the workers of Iniquity, and all them that turn aside to their
own crooked ways: and his Justice is armed against them with vengeance to
punish them. Not one iota of his threatenings shall pass away till all be
fulfilled sooner or later upon all the wicked of the World, whose ways are
perverse before him. Yea, he has declared concerning all such, that when they
spread forth their hands he will hide his eyes, and when they make many prayers
he will not hear, because their hearts and hands are defiled with the guilt of
sin.

Reas. 2. From the consideration of his People, who when they order their way
aright, are in a meet capacity for mercy, and fit for salvation. In case of a
peoples continued obedience, they may plead Gods Covenant, that they are his
People, he is obliged to be their God, i. e. to be their Savior, and to do all
that a God can do for them; and in case they have sinned, and done never so
perversely before him, yet if they order their way aright, as to Repentance and
Reformation, his Covenant does then also oblige him to cause them to see his
Salvation: this is expressly mentioned by Solomon at the Dedication of the
Temple, when there was a solemn restipulation, or renewing of Covenant between
God and his People, 2 Chronicles. 6. when God appeared unto Solomon, as is expressed
in the 14 th verse of the next Chapter; he seems to assent to all those
Articles; If my People, who are called by my Name, shall humble themselves and
pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from
Heaven and forgive their sin, and will heal their Land, in respect of all those
Calamities insisted on at large in the former chapter, and briefly summed up in
the former verse. They shall be made to see the salvation of God delivering
them from all those evils, or what ever else might be conceived to befall them.
It may be said of such an holy, or such an humbled People, that they are a
people prepared for the Lord; ready for the salvation of the Lord, and it shall
not be long before they see it. Salvation shall be for Gates and Bulwarks to
such a People: so was it unto Hezekiah, and the people in his time; who had
sought the Lord, and did by Faith rely upon him; Jerusalem is now walled about
with Salvation: the proud Assyrian shall not be able to shoot an Arrow over
such Bulwarks, much less shall he be able to break through those Gates of
Salvation.

This is an experience confirmed of old to the Faith of a believing People,
ever since Jacob's time: no doubt he had been humbled for his deceiving his
Father, and was reconciled to God, before he took his journey into Padan-aram,
and therefore now he can plead the Covenant of God, and put the Almighty in
mind of his promise; Thou said thou will bless me; therefore Jacob shall be
made to see Gods Salvation, in the midst of those dangers he is surrounded
with. Thus if his People stir up themselves to lay hold of his strength, they
shall see the salvation of God in their utmost perils.

God did afterward make the way of his Precepts plain before his Servants in
the Book of Deuteronomie; instructing them how they should walk before him in
the enjoying, and improving that good Land they were going to possess; how they
should till and dress it, how they should reap it, and dispose of the fruits
thereof; if they could then say, when they came with their Oblations, Deuteronomy. 26.
13, 14, 15. I have brought away the hallowed things out of my house, etc. I
have not transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I forgotten them, etc.
Then might they also add what is in the 15 th verse, Look down from thy holy
Habitation, from Heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the Land which thou
have given us, as thou swa^est to our Fathers: Thus having ordered their way
aright, they might with confidence and comfort, expect to see the Salvation of
God. When a People so walk, as that they can approve themselves to God himself,
as Abraham, I know Abraham, that he will not only himself keep the way of the
Lord, but command his household after him to keep the same; It may then (...)
expected that God will bring upon them the good which he has spoken.

Reas. 3. From the consideration of others in the World. If such a People that
order their ways aright in their daily walking with God, or that so frame
their doings as to turn unto the Lord their God, if at any time they should
humble themselves before him, and yet should not see the salvation of God, what
would the wicked and ungodly of the World say, but that it is in vain to serve
God? And what advantage is there in circumcision, and keeping the whole Law of
God? if they are like to be plagued as other men; it will be in vain to alter
their course and live otherwise than formerly they did.

This were certainly to sin against the generation of the just, in the midst of
whom God is always wont to be found. God will therefore have it known in the
world, that there is great recompense of reward in keeping the Law of the Lord,
and that though the righteous scarcely are saved, yet saved they shall be,
whatever become of others. Let Balak and Balaam conspire together to enchant
the Tents of Israel, and lay stumbling blocks before their Feet, yet some shall
be ^^^nd in the midst of them, so to order their ways, as that they shall be
able to save the rest. They may else plead with God as Joshuah once did in such
an exigent, when Israel did not (...) the salvation of God in a Military
expedition, And what will thou do for thy great Name? Josh 7. 9. But Joshuah is
bidden not to be discouraged; let God alone to look after the glory of his own,
if his People do but look after themselves, and order their way aright, God
will make all the rest of the Nations to behold the glory of his Salvation: God
is able to ^xalt the valleys and make the rough places plain; The glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, and all Flesh shall see it together.

Obj. But notwithstanding all these great and glorious things that are spoken
of the City of God; there lies this great stumbling block in the way of natural
men, that they never can get over; yea, which the Saints themselves are often
times at a great set before they can see through it: they observe that though
those who are called the people of God, order their ways never so right; yet
they see the salvation of God no more than other men. They bear them complain
with Asaph, Psalm. 73. Though they cleansed their hearts, and washed their
hands, yet all is in vain, they are yet plagued like other men all the day
long, and chastened every morning. And with the Church in Psalm. 44. We are
counted but as sheep for the slaughter, yet is not our heart turned back,
neither have our steps declined from thy way, etc. and for thy sake are we
filled, etc.

Sol. Those that take up Asaphs objection, should take along Asaphs and the
Churches answer, Asaph acknowledges it was his folly and ignorance so to speak:
Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand,
thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. It is
the end of a matter that is the ground of a right judgment thereof. Finis
coro^at opus. Jo^ ordered his way aright; yet was harrowed with much
affliction* so may the Church and People of God, but it is only to prepare the
^oyle for the receiving the seed of everlasting joy and comfort. The People of
God are never nearer Salvation than when they are exercised with the greatest
sufferings, and so to the eye of sense seem furthest from it; so it was with
Israel in Egypt; they never were more grievously oppressed, nor served with
more rigor, than a little before their deliverance. In like manner the
sufferings of the Church under Antichrist, when they come to the greatest
extremity, in the three days and an half, that strages, or slaughter
immediately precedes their exaltation into Heaven, and that in the fight of
their Enemies. So immediately after the three days Pestilence in David's time,
the Lord, sends out an Inhibition to the Angel that destroyed the People. For
now David and the people are sufficiently humbled, therefore God is willing to
be reconciled, and accept them into terms of favor again* and does also then
signally discover the place he had chosen for his Name to reside in. It may
certainly be said unto every humbled, penitent, believing person, as Christ
said to his Disciples, they shall see the Kingdom of God, and obtain his
salvation; and if they do not live to see a temporal salvation in this world,
they shall be sure not to miss of eternal salvation at the last. Now let every
one choose what he would have, to be saved from the wrath that is to come, that
shall destroy the world of the ungodly at last, or to be saved from trouble and
danger here, (...) perish eternally at last. But the full answer to all
objections of this nature, is, that according to Gods ordinary providential
dispensations, God is with his People* while they are with him; which is a
truth confirmed by the experience of all ages* and all People: for some have
observed that the long continued success, and prosperity of their heathen
Empire of Rome, was a reward of their justice, temperance, and industry. So was
it in the days of David, Solomon, and other good Kings of Judah. But if God
should see cause for a time, out of his infinite wisdom and sovereignty, to
change the hands of providence, and lay the left hand of favor and prosperity
upon the younger and less deserving, he is a sovereign Ruler and may do what he
will with his own; he may afflict his people in this life, and prosper the
wicked for a time, for ends best known to himself; yet all this while, he is
near unto his people in all they call upon him for, to uphold and preserve them
in, and carry them through all their sufferings, and make them see his eternal
salvation at last. None of these things, sc. outward tribulations, and crosses
moved the Apostle Paul, so he might finish his course with joy. They needed not
much trouble themselves whatever become of their bodies, if they can say with
respect to their souls, as a Monk said, stroking his paunch, Modo hic sit been.
Or what were a man the better if he could gain the whole world, and miss of the
salvation of his soul at last. If the body be lost, destroyed by the elements,
returned to its first principles, or reduced into the minutest Atoms, yet all
shall be gathered together again* and raised up in a state of greater Glory and
beauty, than ever it was laid down in; 'Twas observed that the spirit of Glory
rested upon the primitive Martyrs, and Confessors, so as there enemies were not
able to behold the refulgence of them. 'Twas said of Stephen, that they were
not able to resist the wisdom, and spirit, by which he spoke; and that as he
saw heaven opened, the Glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God, so they saw his face, as if it had been the face of an Angel. This might
be said to be extraordinary. But Paul speaking of all Believers, declares how
they are able to triumph over sin and death, and boldly challenge the victory
from them all: Oh death* where (...) sting, Oh grave where is thy victory? yea,
he proceeds further, Romans ^. 37. Nay, in all these we are more than Conquer ^s.
A great speech, for one that had been so sadly handled by Men and Devils. Yet
such is the victory of faith, whereby Believers are enabled not only to get the
victory, but even to triumph over all their enemies: therefore does it
necessarily follow, that through faith, which is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, they may be able to see the sight of
Gods salvation, even then when they pass through the dark valley of the shadow
of death. The Lord Jesus was never seen more glorious on earth, than in that
apparel which was dyed red, and stained with the blood of his enemies, when he
speaks in righteousness, mighty to save. In like manner the followers of Jesus
are also glorious in their apparel, when they are thus clothed with the
garments of Salvation, and assuredly believe, that which ere long they shall
certainly enjoy.

USE 1. The best of Gods servants in the times of their greatest prosperity,
are never so far secured from trouble, but that they may need salvation. All
Believers are, or may be assured of spiritual salvation; they may certainly
conclude, they shall at the last receive the end of their faith the salvation
of their souls: but they may often stand in need of temporal salvation. David
had as great prosperity in his reign, as ever any King on earth before him, for
it is said the Lord preserved him whithersoever he went: whence he was too ready
to take up this conclusion, that he should never be moved: That now all his
foreign enemies, as well as intestine foes being subdued, his mountain stood
so strong that it could never be shaken; But he soon found no small trouble to
arise by the hiding of Gods face, Psalm. 30. 7, 8. For though affliction comes
not forth of the dust, as Job speaks, neither does trouble spring out of the
ground, yet man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward: i. e. Troubles
come not by chance, nor are to be imputed to the miscarriage of secondary
causes; yet man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward: he works himself
trouble as easily, and ordinarily as if he were born for that end. It is as
natural for man to breed himself trouble, as for sparks to fly upward. Weeds
grow out of the ground without men's labor or care; but men's sins are the
meritorious cause deserving, and procuring, and Gods wisdom and sovereignty are
the efficient and inflictive cause of them, we bring our selves into troubles,
but it is God only that can save us out of them. God has the heart^ of all men
in his hand, and turns them as the Rivers of water: He can turn them to favor,
or hate his People as he sees cause. The time was when all that David did
pleased the people, but afterward the people are displeased with him, forsake
him, and follow Absalom. God intended thereby to chasten David, and to punish
the iniquity of the People, that had no better improved the blessing, and
privileges of God in the time of David's reign. In Hezekiah time Sen^acherih
comes up against all the fen^ed Cities of Judah, and takes them, and lays
siege to Jerusalem it self. The Prophet therefore calls the Assiyrian the Rod
of God's anger, and the (...) of his indignation in their hand; but when God
has accomplished his work upon mount Sion, and Jerusalem, for the humbling of
his People, and pulling down their pride, he will then punish the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks: He will
then call them to account for their proud words, and blasphemous speeches. God
leads his People through various changes and difficult paths, sometimes they
are made to pass through the water, sometimes through the fire; they are in
danger of being destroyed by either, without some special kind of Salvation
stretched forth. In the days of Amos, God called sometimes to contend by fire,
that devoured the great deep, and eat up a part, as he speaks, and sometimes by
famine, all which bring Jacob low, that he is scarce able to arise. At another
season God suffers the multitude of this nation to gather themselves together
against his People, for the trial of their faith and exercise of their grace
then the punishing of their sins, as in Asa's and Jehosophat's time, or rather
that there might be a fit occasion to cut off the wicked nations of the world;
but yet they threaten sorely the Church and People of God, that they might
learn to put their confidence in him, who is the rock of their Salvation. There
was one season in Solomon's time, when Israel was without adversar^^^ or evil
occurrent: Solomon was at that time called of God to attend the building of the
Temple, and while he was intent upon that work, God was pleased to secure him
from all outward troubles; but after that time, God stirred him up many
adversaries round about, that he was never able to suppress; and though he
might forget that calamity coming upon his family* he was neverable by all his
wisdom, to save himself and them from, or in the least prevent. So as
notwithstanding God may have made a Covenant with his People ordered in all
things and sure, as to their eternal salvation, yet there may be cause for God
to visit them with temporal calamities and evils which they know not how to
save themselves from* So deceitful are the hearts of the best of men, and so
dangerous are the temptations of the world, that God knows not how to trust his
People long with much outward prosperity and favor, lest they should be
ensnared, and wax wanton and secure thereby. After the return from the
captivity, when it might have been thought, that they had received double for
their sin, and that therefore now their warefare should be accomplished, and
that now from that time foreward, nothing but the oil of comfort should be
poured into their wounds; yet you will find their sufferings were not quite
ended: many clouds of threatening evil did continually arise, which much darkened
their hopes of a settled time of tranquillity. A messenger that came from Judah
informs Nehemiah, that the remnant of the captivity who were left then in the
province were in great affliction and reproach, which made him sit down and
weep, and mourn many days: that in all that long tract of time, from Cyrus his
days, to that time there was still remaining nothing but the former ruthful
spectacle of the old seige. The wall of Jerusalem was not yet repaired, nor the
gates set up; and which was yet worse, there appeared no hope of bettering
their condition, for the People of that Land, as is said in Ezra 4. 23. Still
weakened their ^ands, and hired Counselors against them, and hindered them,
all the remainder of Cyrus his time, and all the following Kings, till the
reign of Darius, when they obtained a decree to force them to desist from the
work. And in the time of Nehemiah, they invented and fomented false reports
against them, that they intended to rebel, which was the reason rendered, why
they were so intense about rebuilding the wall; and when that would not do,
some were hired by their malicious enemies, Sanballat, and Tobiah to dishearten
them by lying prophesies when God sent them not; only they were set on by
others to put him in fear, that the work might not be carried on. Had Nehemiah
been a man but of an ordinary courage, he might have been affrighted, and fled
away to hide himself; but he was a man of so much magnanimity, as not to be
affrightned with great words or letters, though reiterated so many times over;
but Nehemiah's confidence is in God, to whom he looks, to save his People from
those malicious attempts of their enemies. Haman afterward prevailed so far by
lying, and false accusations, as to bring their neck unto the block. The day
was appointed, the decree was sealed, the nation of the Jews was distressed,
and the whole City was perplexed; it was God only who was able to save them: by
turning Hamans (as formerly he did Achitophels) counsels to foolishness, and
turning the snare, those great Politicians had laid for others, into an halter
wherewith to hang themselves. There is no new thing under the sun, says
Solomon, that which has already been done, and at present is, the like will be
put in practice, while there is a devil in hell to tempt, and wicked men in the
world to disquiet, and disturb the building of God's Church upon earth. Report
they say in Jeremiah's time and we will report it; invent a Rumor and we will
blow it up and spread it abroad. It is reported among the Heathen, and Gashmues
says it, that the Jews think to rebel. Was it not so in the former age? Did
not Pulpits and Presses abound with invectives against Protestants in Germany,
Hussites in Bohemia, Hugonots in France, Lollards in England; the scene it may
be is now changed; other persons have since ascended the Stage: It was Puritans
before, and now Fanatics: The names are differing, the spirit is the very same
with which they are pursued: they proclaim these men are no friends to Coesar.
Never was there any age since Christ's time; yea, since enmity was put between
the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent; but those that fear God,
had cause to look up to him, by servent Prayer, and so wait upon him by
ordering their ways aright, that they might be made to see the Salvation of
God.

USE, 2. Salvation is from God only: It is his Salvation, that his People only
expect: They say with the Psalmist, Psalm 60. Give us help from trouble for vain
is the help of man. They still are praying and waiting, that the Salvation of
Israel were come out of Sion: for God dwells in Sion, and has his habitation in
Jerusalem; and from thence must his People look for Salvation: I will look unto
the Hills from whence comes my help. It is God only who is able to cloth his
People with Salvation. The Lord Jesus, who is the only Savior of his People,
is brought in by the Prophet Isa^^^, as one astonished, that there was none to
be found on earth, that would save his Church. I looked and there was none to
help: I wondered that there was none to uphold, therefore his own arm brought
him salvation. If we look round about the world, amongst the Princes, and
Potentates of the Earth, how few friends has Sion among them all; yea, few of
her Sons are forward to take her by the hand. God's Church at this day is not
much unlike the man that was found between Jerusalem and Jericho, that fell
among thieves, who stripped him who wounded him and left him half dead: The
Priest and the Levite who are most engaged by their relation, and profession,
to help, in stead of that, pass by on the other side, that they might not see
or take notice: If God should not put it into the heart of some good
Samaritans, what would become of the poor Church of God? Some have power in
their hands to effect it, and may seem to be called to the helm in their
kingdoms for that very end* yet are not willing to put their hand to the Lords
work. Some it may b e are willing, but question their call or their power so to
do. If the case be so, that the promotion and salvation comes neither from the
East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but from God only; let all his
People say with Jacob, we have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord. Let that (...)
the answer to be returned to the Messengers of the nations, that come to
enquir^ or solicit about leagues or engagments that God has founded Sion, and
the poor of his People shall trust in her. God not only has the hearts of
Kings in his hand to turn them as he pleases, but he has also the Devil under
his authority, if not to turn him, yet to chain him up, that he shall not
hinder the Salvation of his Church. Such troubles may befall them that no other
hand can save them from; but their comfort is, that although the powers of
darkness may conspire, and the gates of hell combine, yet they shall not
prevail against them. Greater is he that is in them, than he that is in the
world.

The experiences of all former ages give in full evidences to this, that it is
God only who is the Salvation of his People. Solomon had received a double
portion of his fathers spirit, and prosperity: yet David tells them in Psalm.
127. Unless the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain: and that
the workman labored in vain, except the Lord built the house: So it is God
alone from whom comes our Salvation.

USE 3. This may comfort the People of God, who though they sin, and suffer for
their sinning, yet they need not sink in their sorrows; for there is a way,
that they may be made to see God's Salvation. There is hope in Israel
concerning this thing. His People may draw water with joy out of the wells of
Salvation: Cisterns are apt to be broken, and the brooks of Tema to be dried
up, but wells are living fountains; and if one should fail, yet there are many
wells of Salvation prepared for such as order their way aright. Say not these
wells are deep and we have nothing to draw, for those that walk aright shall
find a bucket, as well as a well, and strength also to draw. It was a joyful
time with Israel, when they encamped in the Wilderness, at Elim, where were
seventy Palm trees, and twelve wells of water: A well for every one of the
tribes in particular: yet this was but at one station; but there are wells of
Salvation now under the Gospel in every station, of their Pilgrimage; such
considerations as these that follow may furnish us with this Salvation.

1. God, who is the God of all such as order their way aright, is, the God of
Salvation, Psalm. 68. 20. which implies these things; 1. That he is able to save
his People; No Enemy so potent, no difficulty so great, no sickness so
dangerous, but he is able to save his people from. He is also said to be a God
to whom venge^nce belongs; God will then avenge his people of their Enemies.
These are dreadful speeches to the enemies of Gods People, and more comfortable
to themselves, which ye have, Deuteronomy 32. 39. etc. I even I am he, and there is no
God with me, that glorious, great, and supreme God, his glory is spread over
all the World: I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal, neither is there
any that can deliver out of my hands, etc. If I whet my glittering sword, and
my hand take hold of Judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and
reward to them that hate me, etc From the beginning of revenges upon the Enemy;
Rejoice O ye Nations with his People, for he will avenge the blood of his
Servants, and will render vengeance to his Adversaries, and will be merciful to
his Land, and to his People, i. e. beginning at the head, the Devil who is the
prince of this world; as Diodati notes on the place; or as the prince of the
great worldly Empire, enemy to the Church, seeing those great Empires which
have named themselves universal, have always warred against God and his
Church: let none say that these speeches concerns the nation of the Jews only;
for though it might respect them primarily, yet secondarily it includes the
Church and people of God in all following ages, and all those who have opposed
them, and has accordingly been made good upon them, as is evident in the
vengeance of God upon Antiochus, Diocle^^an, Maximi^us, Maxentias and Juli^^^
afterward, who were all destroyed by some more than ordinary hand of God, in a
way of vengeance upon them. They are saved also from their sins, the worst of
their Enemies: for now under the Gospel, the People of God (for all such are
supposed to order their way aright) being delivered from the hand of their
Enemies, shall be enabled to serve him in holiness and righteousness all (...)
days of their life. 2. It is here implied that he is willing to save them. He
takes pleasure in this work of Salvation: Who is a God like unto thee, says
Micah, that delights to pardon iniquity, or that passes by transgression,
because he delights in mercy; he will subdue their Iniquities: If sin be
subdued, that is the worst, and most dangerous of all our Enemies; there is no
great fear from any of the rest. And if the malady of sin be taken care for,
there is no other disease insident to such a people, that will prove deadly.
The Inhabitants of Sion, shall never complain of any sickness, when once their
sins are forgiven them. 3. That he is wont to save them. Such titles come to be
appropriated to Rulers from their usual custom to do such or such things: He is
wont to be the hope of Israel, and Savior of them in the time of trouble; did
they ever miss of Salvation in one regard or other, that waited upon him for
Salvation. Idolaters, Hypocrites, and Unbelievers, in time of their distress,
shall curse their King, and their God, and look upward, Isa.8. 21. i. e. to see
if any help will come to them from Heaven; they may look indeed, but there will
be none to save, even unto the Lord, but he will give them no answer: Saul was
one of these, therefore God gave him no answer, neither by Urim nor Thummim,
nor yet by Dreams or Visions.

2. God has appointed a Savior for his People; and has imposed a Name upon
him that declares it; His name shall be called Jesus, Mat. 1. 21. for he shall
save his People from their sins: He is also said to be able to save unto the
utmost all that come unto God through him: when the question is asked, who is
this that comes from Edom, glorious in his Apparel? it is answered, I that
speak in righteousness, (...) to save, i. e. The Lord Jesus Christ, who has
promised everlasting Salvation to his Church, and will powerfully perform it.
If this seem a difficult thing, his other Names make way for the belief
thereof; The Government shall be upon his shoulder, and His Name shall be
called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of peace, i. e. as is interpreted, the everlasting Son of God, and has
taken our nature upon him, by being born of the Virgin, and defends the
Churches right against all her Enemies in quality of a Mediator and head of the
same; who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who has made peace betwixt God
and his People, and Reigns thereby to Life and Salvation for ever.

3. God has promised to be the Salvation of his People. There is a ground for
Faith to work upon. Salvation is said to be the end of our Faith; there is no
other ground for Faith to build hope of Salvation upon, but the Word of God.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for: It gives Subsistence, and Being to
the things that are hoped for: such as walk before God in a right way, may
conclude he is faithful who has promised, who also will do it. It was said of
Archimedes, the great Mathematician of old, that he would undertake by the
force of Engines which he would invent, that if he had a Foundation to place
his Engine upon, he would raise the whole body of the Earth out of its Center:
it was a great speech, but natural Ingeny will never be able to out-vye
Theology. Faith can do greater things than natural strength or skill. Gods
immutable word is a foundation for Faith to rest upon while it accomplishes all
things that are needful for Salvation. God is our strength and refuge says
David, Psalm.46. 1, 2. a present help in time of trouble, therefore we will not
fear, though the Earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the midst
of the Sea; what is this great mountain before Zerubbabel? the least degree of
Faith, as our Savior tells us, is able to remove the greatest Mountain of
opposition or difficulty that stands in the way of Faith. Therefore seeing God
has promised that such shall see his Salvation, they may believe it. The
Church may sing her triumphant Song in all her troubles. We have a strong City,
Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks: mountains of Brass and Gates
of Iron are not so strong as the promise God: In confidence of them. The Church
of God though in her self, but as a poor despised Virgin, yet will deride and
laugh unto scorn: the great and mighty Army of the Assyrians, that come u^^^ike
the swelling of Jordan, yet such is the interest of Faith in the promises of
God, that it can see the salvation of God, through all those dark Clouds of
Adversity. Of a truth Lord, said Hezekiah, the Kings of Assyria have laid wast
all the Nations, and their Countries; his Faith was almost at a stand; his
heart was ready to recoyl; but the Word of the Lord sent by Isaiah reinforces
his confidence, and makes him acquiess in that promise of the Lord, that the
Kings of Assyria should not come into the City, nor shoot an Arrow there; but
that he should be blasted by the breath of the Almighty, as indeed it came to
pass; so as their eyes that waited on the Lord might behold the King in his
beauty, and see his Jerusalem a quiet habitation. True Believers after
deliverance from that dangerous assault, should see Hezekiah Flourish again in
power and glory, who was a figure of Christ in his heavenly Glory, beautifying
the meek of the Earth with his eternal Salvation.

4. The People of the Lord do believe all this, therefore their hearts are not
d^^mayed. Therefore have they found in their hearts to pray with the Psalmist,
Turn us again O God of our Salvation, and we shall be saved; which is redoubled
again in that Psalm, in token of their assured expectation thereof. Moses
believed it at a time of utmost hazard, when they were hemmed in with deadly
dangers on every side, and falling within the very gates of Destruction; stand
still and see the Salvation of God; and they that believed did see Gods
Salvation, as it is added that day the Lord saved Israel out of the hand of the
Egyptians, Exodus 14. 30.

Mordecai believed it with respect to Gods power and faithfulness, and not to
Esthers interest in the King of Persia, who knows but thou may be raised to
the Kingdom for this very end, but if thou resuse^t, Salvation shall come some
other way. Daniel and his Companions believed it, when they were cast into the
fiery Furnace, and thrown into the Lions Den.

Those Examples of seeing Gods Salvation were written for our instruction in
these ends of the World, that we also believing might speak the same thing, and
give glory to God.

5. God has saved his People and made them see his Salvation, we have a cloud
of witnesses brought to our view in that little Book of Chronicles (as one
call^ (...)) in the eleventh Chapter of the Hebrews. Our Fathers trusted in
thee and were delivered, They looked unto God from the ends of the Earth and
were saved. Their eyes were enlightened with the joy of Gods Salvation. Israel
indeed may say if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, we had been
swallowed up, when their wrath was kindled against us; the streams had
overwhelmed us, the proud Waters had gone over our Soul.

As was said of some of those worthy Confessors, that afterward laid the
Foundation of our New England Churches, when they were driven out of England,
by the prevailing power of the Hierarchy, and made to Fly into the Netherlands,
they met with such a dreadful stormy passage, that the Vessel was even
over-raked with the Waves, when their mouths were filled with salt water, as
they were exercising themselves with servent Prayer; some of them used these
words, Yet O Lord thou can save, and so he did above and beyond all hope, the
Seamen crying out, we sink, we perish, we are going down to the (...) of the
pit, where our heads shall be wrapped about* with the weeds; yet God made them
see his Salvation. Look into the History of the Church in all Ages, Writings
Ancient and modern. How many ways has God made use of to save his People in
all their distresses; the snare was broken, and their soul was made to escape.
If they have met with sorrow, it ^asted but a night; the joy of Salvation has
risen upon them in the morning. The sorest of Antichristian Persecutions was or
is to last but three days and an half. Athanasius said of the Arrian Tempest
in his time. Nubecula h^ec, cito per transibit. The storm may be sharp, yet it
will be but short. If Christ be in the Ship, all that are embarked shall be
saved. The Ship of Christ's Church may be tossed, yet it shall be preserved; the
Angel of the Covenant assures us so, that every soul that entered shall be
saved. In those bloody Marian days, she that ^ate at the Helm of the Nation,
stretched forth her hands with Herod, to vex certain of the Church; three or
four hundred were burned alive, and more were imprisoned, but it would not do;
those iron Gates and Bars were broken open. The Snare is broken and we are
escaped. The chief Instruments of that persecution, as well as the Authors
thereof, to the vexation of their hearts, saw that the more they endeavored to
suppress the Protestant Religion the more it increased. The blood of the
Martyrs proved the seed of the Church, which made some of them pine away with
rage and madness, to see their Endeavors frustrated; and that the Word of God
was not bound, though here and there some of the Ministers thereof were under
restraint, but that it did more and more prevail. God has many times by
unexpected ways prevented the mischief intended against his People, and
brought destruction upon their Enemies, and made his People see his Salvation.
It is reported that once a Chancellor of Bohemia, having procured a Diploma
from the Emperor at Vienna to persecute the Protestants in that Kingdom; as he
was passing the Bridge over Danubius, it brake under him, so as himself was
drowned; but his Box of Writings could never be found again, though his dead
body was afterward taken up. The Protestants in Germany standing courageously
for the Truth of the Protestant Religion, saw the great Emperor Charles the V.
driven out of Germany by a small handful of men under Mauritius Duke of Saxony.
In Queen Mary's time, a busy Persecutor, that was bound for Ireland, out of
hatred against the Protestant Religion was be^ooled by his Host at
West-Chester, and carried over the Knave of Clubs to the Deputy there, instead
of his Commission the which he could not get renewed, till the Reign of the
persecuting Queen was atan^end; and another advanced that favored the truth.

USe, Of Examination: This may put the present Generation of New England upon
the enquiry, if they be such as order their way aright. It is now a day of
rebuke, a time of Jacobs troubles, he is brought very low, by whom shall he
arise? It is Gods Salvation alone that we must expect; and who are they that
shall be assured to see that; They are only such as order their Conversation
aright. Our Forefathers did approve themselves as such and accordingly they
were made to see Gods Salvation; they had as many Enemies, met with as many
dangers, encountered with as many difficulties, yet God delivered, saved them
out of all. Do we that are yet surviving and coming on, so order our way, that
we may say or hope we shall be made to see the salvation of God.

We were at the first planted a righteous Generation, and noble Vine, do we so
continue? Of all the Reformations that ever yet began in the World, there have
been but a very few observed to continue above an hundred years in that
splendour and brightness with which they were at the first set forward. Take for
instance, those of ancient time, before or since the Gospel began. That of
David and Solomon, Asa and Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, lasted but their
time. That of the Maccabees did not outlive their time, at least in the beauty
of it. That of the Primitive Church was not so much a reforming, as a new
planting of the Church in Gospel Order, when the night of Heathenish darkness,
and Jewish Ceremonies was quite spent, and the day of the Gospel was at hand:
But the Reformation of Constantines time scarce continued in its primitive
luster and glory, a full hundred years before a great degree of Aposta^ie
appeared: for it is said, The Woman fled into the Wilderness after the birth of
her Man-child, that was to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron. She hasted into
the Wilderness where she was to continue 1260 days prophetical days, which
are so many Julian Political years: It is to be supposed, that the Church was
some considerable time going before she was quite gone into the Wilderness. The
day of this last Reformation began first to break out in the time of
Wickcliffe, but it was not perfect day till Luther's time, from whose days to
the present time, who ever takes a view may easily determine whether in the
Nations that first embraced the Protestant Religion, there be the same measure
of Piety, Zeal, Holiness, as was at the first.

In what integrity Geneva has stood since Calvin's time is not unknown to many
of them who are carrying on the Work of the present Generation,

As for our selves here in New England, we were or might have been* set in the
right way, having no prejudicate Opinion, or practice to forestal our
Judgments; bu t had the help of all the former ages, and other Nations as well
as our own, Godly and Learned Divines in them, to take pattern and example
from, in the laying our first Foundation, both of Religion and Righteousness,
Doctrine and Discipline, Church and Commonwealth. Our first Rulers and Leaders
in both were careful to order all things according to the pattern in that
Mount; Children that would not lie, so God became their Savior; saving them
from foreign and intestine Foes: If we that are their posterity be found
Children that will lie, deny our first principles, either in Faith or manners,
how can we expect that God should be our Savior.

Now compare things:

1. In the first place: They sought first the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and waited upon God, for addition of such other things
as he judged necessary. They came not hither for the World, or for Land, or
Traffic* but for Religion, and for liberty of Conscience in the Worship of
God, which was their only design; and accordingly God blessed them, and gave
them the desire of their hearts; they had the privileges of God's Kingdom to
their great content and satisfaction; and he added outward things above what
was or could be expected in a Wilderness: and when the first way of supply
began to be stopped up, God in his merciful providence opened another, by
turning us into a way of Trade and Commerce, to further our more comfortable
subsistence: So God was pleased to bless our Issachar in his Tents, and our
Zebulun in their goings out, who still called the People to the mountain, and
offered Sacrifices of Righteousness: while they did thus, like Solomon that
sent his Ships to Ophir, which brought in that which was of necessary and of
substantial use. God blessed them, and made them see his salvation; but when
men could not content, themselves in such a way of dealing, but Traded only for
Apes and Peacocks as was said by Mr. C. that is, brought in nothing but Sack
and Sugar; Commodities to make fuel for Lusts, and called young people not to
the mountain of the Lords ^ouse, but to our own private recesses, to offer
Sacrifice to Bacc^us and ^enus, and burns Incense to the evil Fiend; has not
God broken our Ships at E^io^, Geber* and is he not now laying the Axe to the
root of our Religion, as well as Civil Rights and Liberties* and begins to cut
^s short every way. Has not God called to contend by Fire, and by Water, by
Famine, and by Blasting, Mildew, Sword, and Pestilence; and is not his hand
stretched out still? Our Estates and Persons are spoiled by Murderers, and
barbarous M^hometans; and it is to be feared the Lords controversy is not yet
ended. The Daughters of our Sion walks with stretched out necks, etc. And may
we not find an Inventory of our Virgins Wardrobes in the third Chapter of
Isaiah. The Ensigns of Pride are exalted in our high places, and all the
produce in a manner of the whole Country is converted to maintain a commerce
of superfluous v^^nities. God threatens not to save, but severely punish, the
Minister and Scholar, the Mistress and her Handmaid for such things (...)
those;* yea to cut off the Tabernacles (...) Jacob, for such things as these.

2. That Generation were zealous for the Worship of God; they would by no means
admit of any mixture of human^ Inventions with divine Institutions in the
matter of Gods Worship. When they came over hither, they were as (...), fit to
receive any Impression from the spirit of truth, either as to Doctrine or
Worship. It might have been said of them in way of commendation, that they
could not bear them which were evil, and ^^ducers from the way of truth, and
th^^ they tried them, which said, they were Apostles, and were not, and did
find them Liars. They also hated the deeds of the Nicholaitans, which were also
hateful to the spirit of the Lord Jesus* They kept the word of Christ's
patience, they were also kept from the hour of Temptation.

None were suffered among them to wear a rough Garment to deceive, but they
were ready to show the wounds which they received in the house of their
Friends* none were suffered to set up their Posts by Gods Posts, nor to sow the
fields of Gods Churches with diverse seeds: none were suffered to disseminate
the seeds of corrupt Doctrine: they might with some measure of Truth, have said
with Elijah, when God came to visit him in the Cave; I am jealous for the Lord
of Host. The Pastors were jealous over their Flocks with a godly jealousy,
least their minds should be carried from the simplicity that is in Christ.
Rulers were jealous over their People, least any corrupt Principles should be
introduced to undermine the foundation* of right Government; none were suffered
to enter into the sacred function of the Ministry before they were approved;
and none admitted to hold forth those truths of the Gospel to others, which
they had not first experience of in their own hearts, even such as would take
heed both to themselves and unto their Doctrine and continue therein, that
thereby they might both save themselves, and those that hear them. If this be
the way of New England now, it is hoped they may yet see the salvation of God.

3. They were not only pure in their Doctrine, but peaceable in their manners;
As those that were endued with the wisdom from above, which made them easy to
be entreated. If any seem to be contentious, the Churches of New England had no
such custom. They would ask counsel at Abel, and so end the matter. Care was
taken that they who were to speak in the Name of the Lord Jesus, should all
speak the same thing, and be perfectly joined together in the same mind and
judgment. There was no noise of Axe or Hammer in the building of the Church of
God, every thing was so exactly squared according to the rules of the Gospel;
so as the (...) that came in might report and say, God was in them of a truth.

4. They were also zealous against sin. Judgment ran down our Streets like
waters, and Justice like a mighty stream; iniquity dare not to appear
barefaced upon the Stage, none were suffered to countenance any evil doers,
but they were even ready to be taken from Gods Altar, and made to suffer the
justice which they had deserved. The Lord Jesus who was mee^ and lowly of
heart; yet was seen to (...) the Money Changers out of the Temple; who had
turned the house of Prayer unto a den of Thieves. There was no connivance at
any-evil; no root of bitterness suffered to spring up, lest trouble should be
occasioned thereby, and many come to be defiled. They left Religion in a good
equipage when they went off the stage and commended it to Posterity, as their
chief care.

5. They were of an holy and serious frame of spirit: all their deportment in
their civil converse and behavior, as well as in the acts of Religious
worship, favored of a spirit of Piety and the fear of the Lord. Holiness was
written upon all their Habitations, and instruments of their callings; that
which was said of Tire might in its measure have been truly affirmed of
New England That her Merchandise was holiness to the Lord: whatever their
employments were as to the occasion of the World, yet their conversation might
have been said to be in heaven.

They were careful not only to avoid gross and scandalous sins, but even the
very appearances of evil. Such is the odious and filthy nature of sin, that
Christians cannot keep at too great a distance therefrom, so as to hate the
very garment spotted with the Flesh. Our Rulers like Nehemiah would not take
that liberty which is usual with men of that capacity in other places, because
of the fear of God* The Priests or Ministers of the Sanctuary were also
clothed with Salvation. There was no compliance with the World, in the vain
customs, and foolish fashions thereof, least they might seem to fall short of
the promised rest. They labored rather to be transformed by the reniewing of
their minds, than conformed to the World. Sobriety, Temperance, and Moderation
were the guize of those times: Civil employments were so ordered and managed,
as not to hinder the higher designs of Faith and Holiness, and promoting the
glory of God. They rested not in outward forms, and modes of Worship and
Religion, without the life and power thereof. If there be still, the like
awfulness and circumspection in the hearts and lives of Professors, the same
fear of offending, and care of sanctifying the Name of God in all the duties of
his Worship, we may then hopefully conclude, that our light shall rise in
obscurity, and our darkness be as the noonday.

Use of Exhortation:

If any design to see the Salvation of God, here is the most compendious way
leading thereunto, viz. To order our Conversation aright: what is required
thereunto has been described before; which all may be reduced to these three
heads.

1. To set God at our right hand, and then we shall never be moved by any
temptation or tribulation. Set up his Glory as the end we aim at in all our
designs: Gods Salvation will certainly fall into all those that will sincerely
aim at his glory in all they undertake; both as to their employments, and
enjoyments. He is the life, says Moses, and thy length of thy days; who gave
us our lives at first, and lengthens out our days, which we should therefore
direct all unto his glory as to our last end and chiefest good. Whether we eat
or drink, do all says Paul, to the glory of God. It is the property of all
rational Agents, to act for some end; otherwise we act but like bruit
creatures, that are led by a kind of sensitive instinct as things and objects
are casually presented to their senses or fancies: Now those who are guided by
a principle of Reason, can aim at no lower end, than God himself, who is the
Author of our being, and proposed that to himself, when he formed us, that we
should be unto his praise. He is the (...) and (...) the first and the last
Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things, to whom
be glory for ever, Amen.

2. Make use of all the means which are requisite to the attaining this end
which can be no other, than what God himself has propounded. Non per ve^itur
ad deum, nisi per deum.

Of old time, God himself foreseeing our readiness to shape unto our selves
ways of Worship suitable to our own fancies, has strictly forbidden all men
from lifting up their tools to his Altar: and this is the reason why David
seems to be so much ^ommended for a pattern of Obedience ^o all the following
Kings of Israel and Judah, because he was a Man after Gods own heart, that is
one that framed all his Actions, Sacred and Civil to answer the ^^ill of God;
as he says: That then he should not be ashamed, when he had respect (...) the
Commandments of God. Psalm. 119.

And this was the answer which our Savior gave to that inquisitive young man
concerning the good thing which he ^^ght to do in order unto life; If thou
(...) enter into life, keep the Commandments; now this we must take into our
thoughts, that there are Evangelical Commandments, as well as legal* there is a
Command to believe as well as to obey, And that is the great command of the
Gospel, The great work of God which we must do, if we would see Gods Salvation,
to believe in him whom he has sent into the World, to give Salvation to all
that obey him Before the Fall it was to do of our selves, by our own strength;
since the Fall it is to begin with Faith, which works by love, and which is
the fulfilling the whole Law. Under that of the Commandments of God are
contained all the Duties of Religious Worship, whither natural or instituted,
as well as (...) of righteousness toward men. And (...) we read in the Gospel,
that men are (...) to Faith and Repentance in order unto Salvation; that is not
to exclude, moral Obedience, but to show us what course we are to take, to be
put into a way of Salvation, viz. to study and put in practice Repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, that thereby being
reconciled unto God by the merit of his Son we may be enabled to work out our
Salvation in the performance of all such duties of holy Obedience, as God in
his Word requires of us. See then if there be any Duty of Gods Worship which we
wilfully omit, or any duty of Righteousness, which we presumptuously
transgress, and we shall find it impossible to see Gods Salvation* for he that
in this manner breaks any one command of God, is guilty of the breach of all,
as the Apostle James speaks, Jam. 2. 10. though he keeps the whole Law in
all other points. The Apostle Paul in Gal. 6. 15, and 16 verses tells us of the
new Creature, If any (...) be in Christ he is a new creature, in the next
verse, he shows us the rule of the ^^w creature, As many as walk according to
this rule, peace be on them, and mercy upon the Israel of God. What is that
Rule? The rule of the Gospel, which requires them that believe, to be careful
to maintain good works. And in Gal. 5. 6. it is said* Neither Circumcision nor
uncircumcision availes any thing to salvation, but Faith, which works by
love, and love is the fulfilling the whole (...). An able Divine and worthy
Minister of the Gospel in England (Mr. Edward Reyner of Lincoln,) not long
since wrote a Book, which he styles, Precepts for Christian Practice, or the
Rule of the New Creature, wherein he has reduced (...) of Christianity unto
ten heads* which he therein largely insists upon, and at the last closes with
a discourse about the government of the thoughts and affections* Solomon sums
up all in one general Rule, Pro 4. 23. Above all keepings keep the heart, for
out of it, are the issues of life: the heart is the primum mobile in the little
world of man; the great wheel in that active Engine of our nature: the fountain
out of which flows the stream that drives the Mill of all our motions, the root
out of which springs the fruits of our whole life: the well governing of that
will keep our whole conversation aright; both our thoughts and our words, our
affections and actions. Naturallists tell us, there are two great veins that
arise out of the heart, the one called Vena porta, the other Vena cava, which
carry forth out of the heart the spirits that quicken all the whole body: so
spiritually, the heart purified by Faith, by those two great issues of Religion
and Righteousness maintains the whole frame of obedience in the new creature,
teaching us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously* and godly in this present world; They that so do are infallibly in
the way of Salvation.

3. With Resolution and Holy Co^^^ge continue in the pursuit of all those means
to the end, and we shall surely be made to see Gods Salvation: we shall ^ast
the first fruits of it here, and come to the full fruition of it at last.

It is true many times in the experience of real and sincere Christians, that
though they may, (through Grace) sometimes will, yet they know not how to
perform: If we be found sincere in our endeavors, our Savior Christ will put
the best construction upon our ways* He is the best Judge of sincerity, for he
^ells us, at least, speaks for all his genuine and true Disciples, that the
Spirit is willing* though the Flesh be weak. Who would not do all they can for
so good a Master, that they may be accepted of ^im at the last. We should do
well to ^ind up our hearts to the highest pitch of Resolution, which in this
state of imperfection we are capable of. Let every one say for himself in his
own particular; Whatever become of others, as Joshua said of old, I and my
Family will serve the Lord. And then we may with comfort conclude in the Words
of the Psalmist, That whatever troubles befall us in the way that yet at the
end, we shall be made to see the Salvation of God.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.
A FUNERAL MEDITATION
From those Words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3 verse
Occasioned by the Interrment of Major DANIEL DENISON On September 22. 1682.
THe Words of the Text (...) added as a reason of th^^ Words foregoing, Cease
(...) from man whose breath is (...) his nostrils, For behold (...) Lord, the
Lord of Hosts does take away, etc.

The time which they seem to refer unto was under the Reign of Ahaz King o^
Judah, when the state of that Kingdom was low and broken by foreign Invasions,
as well as (...) troubles: for we read, 2 Chronicles. 28.6, 8. that in his days,
Pekah the Son of Remaliah slew an 120000 in one day, all valiant men, besides
near double that number which were ^^rried Captive, both Sons and Daughters*
neither do any other times appear so ca^^mitous since the Death of Jeroboam, to
which these words could so fitly be applied, ^hen God was taking away from
Jerusalem, and Judah, the whole staff of read, and the whole stay of water,
etc. when he would give children to be their Princes, and Babes should rule
over them, i. e. when he would withdraw all means, one and another, whereby as
with a staff, man's life is sustained, and a state supported by the removing of
the first, each man's life was in danger; by the latter, being the prime
persons, for Martial, Civil or Ecclesiastical affairs, and not only the chief
Ornaments, but the very Pillars and Props of the body politic, both of Church
and State, when these are removed, the ruin of both must needs ensue, as (...)
an house when the principal Studs are ^ull'd away that bear it up, so it befell
the Temple of the Philistines, when Samson ^ull'd down the Pillars that did
support it, as the Annotators speak upon the place. The mighty Man] such as are
mighty for strength of Body or courage of mind, which in the phrase of the
Scripture, are usually called Mighty men of valor; such were David's Worthies;
and such were promised God would bless his people with^^* that one should chase
a thousand, and two of them should put ten thousand to flight. Men that were
not afraid to (...) with the Enemy in the Gate: but ^are lift up their Spears,
one of them against some hundreds of their Enemies, or such as were mighty, by
way of power of command, and authority, as were Joab and Abishai, and Ittai,
under each of whose command, a third part of David's Army was put, when they
were marching out against Absalom.

The man of War] Men that are skilful and expert in feats of Arms, and making
War, that know how to go out, and to come in before a People; for this require
as well wisdom of the mind, as courage and resolution of the heart, and
strength of the Body.

The Judge, and the Prophet] Public Officers of the Commonwealth, and of the
Church, the one to reform and punish vice by the execution of Justice, and
inflicting of punishment upon Offende^^ the other to press on to the study
(...) practice of virtue; by instruction (...) men's minds in the knowledge of
the truth.

The Prudent and the Antient] In (...) Hebrew, it is the Diviner; but not to
(...) taken in an evil sense, to foretell fut^^^ events, by a Diabolical art of
Divination but on the better; for m^n of much (...) city* and depth of
Judgment, strength (...) Reason to bolt out the truth in things difficult and
abstruse; to foresee-effects in their causes, to deem of future con^^quences by
present appearances; readi^^ to make conjecture of following events, by the
present estate of affairs, as if he had a spirit of Divination, and by a kind
of secret instinct could foretell a Storm of evil while it is impending in the
Clouds over head. The wise man's heart discerns of time and judgment; that which
is said of the men of Issachar who had understanding in the times to know what
ought to (...) done, for the avoiding of the evil fea^^^, or to bring about the
good desired; such were the wise men that stood before Solomon, who could tell
Rehoboam what would become of his Kingdom, if he attended the sudden and rash
advice of his young upstart Counselors.

And the Antient] Such as by their years and age have had experience of all
kind of affairs; and therefore are the more able to guide the helm of public
concerns, especially in a stormy season. It is dangerous sailing on those seas
in winter or stormy times.

The Captain of fifty] Such breaches were made in their Military matters, that
there was scarce left a man able to command fifty followers; no such were left
as were able to undertake the conduct (...) Martial designs; some of whom were
called to lesser, and some greater numbers, as well as them that were to lead
the whole.

The Honourable] In the Hebrew it is Eminent in countenance; not by Descent or
Pedigree, or Nobility of Stock, which properly are not our own, as the Poet
speaks, Nam genus and proavos, etc. one that by reason of his wisdom and
gravity carries Authority with him in his very countenance, though he pretend
to (...) honor by his extraction; as our Savio^^ intimates, That a true
Prophet deserves honor at home as well as abroad, though (...) should be the
Son of a Carpenter, and not (...) a Prophet. Authority that is acquired by
desert, or real worth, is much better th^^ that which is obtained by dignity of
pla^^ or birth: Lewd persons may reproach the stock they issue from and gain
Families no honor thereby, as one answered Tu dedecus generi tuo, etc.

The Counsellour] Such as are able to advise in the most weighty matters of
Church or state. Solomon the wisest of Men would not act without counsel
himself, as he advised others to take that course, as a way of more safety; for
we know he had those that stood before him for that end: And we read that
Hezekiah took counsel with his Princes in his Wars with the Assyrian: and it
is to be feared that good Josiah lost his life by acting without, or against
the counsel of his few counselors, as Rehoboam did his Kingdom. When things of
great moment are managed without counsel all is like to fall to the ground, or
miscarry at home or abroad.

The Cunning Artificer, and eloquent Orator] The one is necessary for Ornament,
as the other for Stabiliment and Safety. Moses and Solomon might have made a
courtly Tabernacle and Temple, without the help of such cunning Artificers, as
were Bezaleel, Aholiab and Hyram, but not so magnificent. God had sometimes
promised to make his people Israel the head, and not the tail; which must be
understood of curious Artifices, as well as of costly Contrivances, and other
Badges of Dignity. In the Catalogue of the Captives of Judah, are reckoned up,
the Smiths and other Artizans, as well as the rich Citizens; for as the King
himself is served by the Field, so is the honor of a State maintained by the
skill of their Artificers, in their several occupations: Therefore the re^^oval
of these is to be looked upon as a special judgment, as well as the loss of any
other sort of men.

As for the eloquent Orator; it is in the Hebrew, He that is skilled in Charms,
i. e. one that has that power and efficacy in his speech, either by the
strength, of his Arguments or El^^^ence of his utterance or Elegancy of his
Language, subtilty of his Expressions* that he is able to overcome and carry
them Captive that he speaks unto; as it is said of David, that he bowed the
hearts of all the Men of Judah as one man; the iron sinews of men's wilful
obstinacy, and rebellious humors, are as it were melted by an insinuation of
sweet words. The soft tongue breaks the ^one; such Eloquent Orators by the
silver Cords of their Rhetoric, do as it were chain the Hearers to their Lips:
and his affable Words and Persuasions have the (...) efficacy upon the Hearers,
as a ^^ell or charm has upon the Serpents who as the most malicious of all
creatures will bite without Enchantment. Thus Abigail, as it were charmed David
by her speech: And the wise Woman of A^el by her words of Wisdom charmed Joab
and his Army first, and then the City, so as they laid aside their Hostility on
either side, and hearkened to reason, in not destroying a mother City in
Israel, Demosthenes by his Eloquence did as much among his Athenians, as Philip
the Father of Alexander the great, could with his Arms and Weapons of War among
the Ma^edonians. When such as are the forementioned, are born into, the World,
the Inhabitants thereof would rejoice if they knew it, as they do, when they
may sit under the shadow of their Authority and Government; And therefore when
they are taken away by Sickness, or other accidents, they have great reason to
mourn and be in heaviness, especially where there is but little hopes, that
when these are removed, few others are raised up, like to succeed in their
places with the same spirit and power: As where Cedars are fallen and none but
Sycamores are le^t for future service. As to the first part of this Tragedy, we
may say it is at this day fulfilling amongst us in New England: As for the
latter (which is one of the saddest changes that can befall a People) let them
look to it, who are not yet imposed upon by Babes and Children, or at least
need not so be, seeing they have power to choose such as are here described, if
they know where to find them.

Now our old Pillars are removing, let us take heed what new ones we put into
the Building. An Emperor once said, Inveni Romam lateritiam, reliqui
marmoream, which should be the ambition of every good Ruler to mend, not mar
the State.

From the premises this Conclusion may be taken up.

DOCT. That it is a sad presage of evil times ensuing, when men of worth are
removed out of any Church or State, and no^^ to be found fit to supply their
places. The Children of Israel, had been in a very sad plight when the Earth
and the Inhabitants thereof were dissolved under Saul's Government, if there had
not been one found to be succentriated after him, who was able to bear up the
Pillars of it.

It is observable, that in all the Governments upon the Earth, since the sad
fall of the first Monarch of the World, vanity has been written upon all their
habitations; upon the Royal Palaces of Princes as well as the meanest Cottages
of Peasants, greater and lesser Societies have their Fates and Destinies
attending them as well as particular Persons and Families. It is a long time
before some of them attain unto their (...), after which they are continually
upon the declining hand. The glorious Fabric in Nebuchadnezar's Image soon
degenerates from an head of Gold, to feet and toes of Iron, and Clay; It was a
long time before the Assyrian Provinces did culminate in that Head of Gold
amongst the Chaldeans, who were but one Branch of the Royal Stem, which came by
a lineal descent from Sem the Son of Noah; The Government of the Assyrians
passed through various changes, before it arose to that Grandeur among the
Babilonians, but after that time, in every Generation they became more base and
vile, till they fell as low as the Earth it self at last.

The Roman Monarchy (if it be no part of the former Image, as many learned
Interpreters think it was not) that will afford another pregnant instance of
the ^oresaid Maxim; for after it had once arrived at its highest pitch of
Glory and Renown in the days of Augustus Caesar, it continually declined, till
it quite expired in Augustulus, as Mr. Mede observes For in all the succeeding
Emperors times, whatsoever Glory was gained by the Masculine Prowess, and
Wisdom of their first Founders, or chief Leaders in any age, was basely lost
and wasted by the effeminate excess of Luxury of their degenerate followers in
the next. But there is no need to repair to Heathen Kingdoms, or States for the
evidence of this Truth. For in the Family of Jacob, under the Rule and Reign of
their former Judges, and succeeding Kings, each Generation brought in fresh
Examples of Sin and Judgment; their glory and luster, was never permanent and
lasting above an Age.

And as in Solomon's time they obtained their greatest glory, so in his time
was laid the first Foundation of their following Ruin.

And the mighty men of valor in David's time, were laid aside under Solomon
(which ^ave an occasion to the Rebellion of the Edomites in the latter end of
his Reign) so the Honorable Counselors, and Elo^^ent Orators that attended
his Court, were either over-looked or neglected in the very beginning of his
Successors Reign.

And thus it fared with them ever since the first planting of the Seed of
Israel in that good Land Flowing with Milk and (...): Soon after the death of
Joshua, and the Elders, that for a little while furvived, arose up another
Generation that knew not the Lord, nor his great works, and then presently we
read of another sort of men, that came in place, neither honorable for wisdom
or valor, unless now and then when God raised up some extraordinary person,
enabling him by extraordinary assistance, to work their deliverance in a kind
of miraculous manner: As it is expressed in the Triumphant Song of Deborah;
there was scarce a Shield or Spear found amongst forty thousand men of Israel:
And possibly Shamgar and Samson obtained those signal victories over their
^^emies, with such unusual Weapon^ as Ox^-goads, and Asses Jaw-bones, because
by the ^lothfulness and Luxury of those degener^^^ times, other Weapons were
said aside (...) ^eedless, and useless. Might it not easily have been presaged
from such a Generation of men, (...) either did discountenance or discourage
the cunning Artificers, or men of War, (...) in Elies, and the beginning of
Readiness time, that they were di^^urnished either of ^miths to make, or valiant
men to use Armor, and Weapons of War, what (...) they were running into, as
befell them in the latter end of Readiness time?

The removal of such men of worth must needs be a sad omen; if either we
consider the necessity and use of such men or the cause of their removal, such
are necessarily required both to the being and well-being of any People; For
they are (...) eyes to the blind and ignorant as Moses speaks to Jethro, when
they were to pass through the Wilderness of Arabia; And as legs to the lame,
and hands to the weak. If a Nation be either destitute of men of might, or
those that are justly styled so, cannot find their Hands, what will become of
their Followers is not hard to say. The same will take the prey, if those that
should sway in the Government are not able to strengthen their Mast, or keep
their Tackling taught, as the Prophet speaks; and if their Pilots be unskilful,
how will they save themselves from Ship-wreck? If their Prophets and Pastors,
are become dumb Dogs, that can neither bark nor bite, the poor Sheep will be in
danger of being devoured by the ravening Wolves: If Gods Prophets, i. e. such
by Name and Title, prophecy for hire, they will surely prophecy Lies. If the
Preachers at Herod's Court will dawb with untempered Mortar, and the chief men
countenance Adultery, and Idolatry; Incest and all other vices will be rife
there: and John the Baptist must not dare to intermeddle without danger of
losing his head. They must not prophecy in the Kings Chapels, or in Bethel,
that will lift up their voice like a Trumpet, to convince the people of their
sin and their transgression.

Such as these are the Pillars of the House, the Foundation of the Building, if
these fail, what can the righteous do more?

It was the poor and wise child that delivered the City, although his wisdom
was neither remembered nor rewarded.

It is time for the faithful to cry help Lord, when the godly cease, and the
^aithful man fails from among the children of men.

What would have become of the Kingdom of Judah, if it had not been for
Jehojadah, when Athaliah got the upper hand, They that desire or endeavor
Reformation, shall then be accounted treacherous, and prosecuted accordingly.

The cause of removal of such as these is the sin of those they belong unto.
For the transgression of a People many are the Princes thereof. They are
hurried out the World by untimely deaths, and others of less use are sent in
their room. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is the reproach of any
people.

If the righteous are taken away from the Earth, it is because evil is coming
upon them. If God begins to cut Israel short in the Reign of Jehu's Posterity,
it is because of their Idolatry. If Josiah be cut off by an untimely death, it
is because of the cry of the sins of Manasseh, that Justice can no longer
forbear their punishment: In such cases of general Apostasy, or notorious
public Iniquities, the few Righteous that are left shall only deliver their
own souls, they shall not be able to keep off the Judgment from others. It was
for the sins of Ahaz and his people, that the Kingdom of Judah was made bare
and, stripped of all their worthy men. And when Noah is housed in the Ark, let
the old World look to it. When Lot is escaped to the Mount, let Sodom beware.
When poor Christians are gotten into Pella let Jerusalem be warned. When Austin
is called out of Hippo. When Pareus is taken out of Heydelberg, the barbarous
Enemies shall soon come and take possession.

USE I. Although Death be the common Calamity of all men, and one of the
Ordinances of Heaven that are more certain and immutable than any of the Laws
of the Medes and Persians, from which none are excepted; For it is said to be
appointed for all men once to die; yet the providence of God is always to be
observed in taking away men of use and worth in the places where they are.

Some are taken away more immediately, as were Enoch and Elijah found, and as
Moses and Aaron in a more than ordinary manner, yet in a way of mercy to the
persons themselves, though in a way of Judgment to the places or people they
belong unto. So is the name of Methuselah interpreted by many, that as soon as
ever he should die, the dart of Gods vengeance would fall upon the earth; as it
is observed, that the Flood happened the same year wherein he died. There are
Worthies of God at times upon the earth, of which the World is not worthy; they
are for a while standing in the gap, to keep out evils from breaking in upon
the places where they are; but as soon as ever they are removed, calamities
immediately break in upon the places from whence they were taken. The people of
Judah were ripe for Judgment in Manasseh's time, and for his sins; but when
after all the long-suffering and patience of God under Josiah's Reign for a
considerable time, there seems little amendment in the body of the people, he
is at the last hastened out of the World by a violent death, when Gods
Judgments can be no longer forborne. Others like David, having served their
Generation fall asleep by the Will of God; but ordinarily it may be observed
and known when men of parts and of great use in Church or Commonwealth are
taken away in Gods displeasure.

1. When they are taken away by a violent death, as probably those were in Ahaz
his time, which seems to be intended in the Text; if not for their own sin, yet
for the sins of them whom they belong unto. It Is used that bloody and deceitful
men shall not live out half their days; as was verified in Joab, Ab^er, Amasa,
Absalom and others.

2. When they die in their youth, or Flower of their age; or in their full
strength; before they come to be aged, and gray headed. As may be seen in Abija
the Son of Jeroboam; and Abijam the son of Rehoboam, who though he was
successful in his Wars, yet his heart was not right with God.

3. When they are taken away in times of eminent danger; when they might have
been of eminent use, if their lives had been spared; as is expressed in those
doleful Lamentations of Jeremiah, the breath of their Nostrils, Lam. 4. 20. The
anointed of the Lord is taken in their pits, under whose shadow we said, we
shall live among the Heathen. If Jehosaphat and Hezekiah's lives had been drawn
out a little longer, how much evil in an ordinary way had been prevented, which
broke in upon their people immediately after, under their wicked and degenerate
issue. Thus (...) a people are degenerate, are grown sensual, secure, profane,
and regardless of Gods honor and their own duty; it is just with God to remove
away those who by their piety, prudence and prayers, have been instruments to
keep off Judgments and Calamities from breaking in upon the World. The Angels
tell Lot, They can do nothing as to the executing the Judgment of God upon
Sodom until he be come out of the City. The Deluge is kept off the World till
all the Righteous of the former Generation are gathered to their Fathers in
peace, and an Ark is prepared, wherein Noah (the (...) righteous person left
alive) and his Family are to be secured from the impending Calamity.

4. When the Righteous are taken from the evil to come, Isa. 57. 1. in a way of
mercy to themselves, but of judgment to others. God had determined to punish
Judah for the sins of Manasseh; but Josiah shall not live to see it, he shall
be gathered to his Fathers in peace as Hul^ah the Prophetess tells him, i. e.
before that general Calamity intended in former Prophecies, should come upon
the Land, to break the Kingdom in pieces; although himself, as a just
chastisement of God upon him, for his wilfulness, in not taking counsel of God
by his Prophets, and neglecting the mind of God intimated by his Enemy, died a
violent Death, to the amazing astonishment of those he left behind.

5. When men, that have been of eminent use in their times and places, are
Idolized and Adored by their followers. When the honor due to the supreme
Agent is given to his Instruments; God will have men know that he stands in
need neither of their wisdom, nor of their courage; and that he can carry on
his designs, and fulfill the counsel of his own will without* as well as with
means; by weak means, as well as by the more likely, and most probable or
powerful means. He knows how to make his Jacob arise, when he is fallen the
lowest of all: He can save Israel without the help of a Jonathan. The Battle is
not always to the strong, no more than the Race to the swift. When Moses is
dead he can raise up a Joshua, that shall subdue the Cananites, and bring his
Israel into the full possession of the land of Canaan. It has been generally
observed, that when men dote on their fellow creatures, and too much admire the
gifts and rare endowments of men, that God either removes them out of the
World, or else blasts their beauty, or confounds their wise policies, turning
them into foolishness, as he did Achitophels. How did the whole body of the
people of Israel dote upon Absalom, who by his beauty, and courtesy, had
stolen away their hearts, until they saw him first hanged up, as a monument of
Divine vengeance upon him, for his horrid Murders, Parricide, Rebellion, Pride
and Ambition, and then hurled under a rude heap of stones in the wild woods as
unworthy of a better Sepulcher. If the Sons of Josiah begin to pride themselves
in their extraction, or relation to the famous Josiah King of Judah, he will
deal with them as with despised broken Idols, and order them to be buried with
the burials of an Ass, without the Gates of their own, or any other Royal City.

It was said that Gustavus Adolphus the famous King of Sweden did on this
account presage his own fall, not long before his last and fatal Battle at
Lutzen, telling his Chaplain, Dr. Fabritius, he believed, or thought God would
ere long take him away, because the people did so overvalue and dei^ie him:
For after his death, the Swedes not only kept the field at that Battle, but
continued victorious, against the Imperialists, as if God would have the world
know, that he needed not the help of any king or Captain on earth to carry on
his designs.

It is here also to be known, that God is said to take away not only those he
he removes into the other World in an extraordinary manner, as was mentioned
before; or those who by his immediate stroke are smitten in a judicial way, as
David's Child; The Corinthians for abusing the Lords Supper: but even those who
die by ordinary sickness, or other usual casualties; for their death is ordered
by the providence of God, without which, as our Savior tells us, not an hair
of our heads shall fall to the ground. By what means ^^ever such changes come
to pass, they are ordered by his counsel, who is wonderful in working, and who
suffers nothing to come to pass but what himself has foreordained, before any
of (...) had a being in the World.

USE II. Prudent men are of excellent use in the places where they are, else it
would not be such a sore Judgment to have them taken away.

They are as a stay, a staff for others to bear upon, which when it breaks they
are ready to fall to the ground. If any desire to know, who are to be accounted
wise men; they may learn by the character given to the heads, or chief Leaders
of the Tribe of Issachar; they are men that have understanding in the times,
that know what Israel ought to do. The Schoolmen say, Prudentia est ratio
agibilium; ad qu^m requiritur quod homo sit been dispositus (...), quod quidem
est perectum appetit^m; That a man knows what is upon every exigent needful to
be done, and that he has his heart prepared and fixed to set upon that
practice of what right reason determines is best to be attended. So it is said
Prudentia est oculus cujuscumque virtutis. The eye that directs the hand to
act, and the foot to walk in the path of virtue, or in the way that is right.
Men of the greatest knowledge are not always men of the greatest Wisdom or
Prudence: As the Ambassador of the Spartans once told the Athenians, who were
more eminent for their knowing of things, than the rest of the Grecians;
Athenienses scire, quoe recta sunt, sed ^a facere nolle; That they knew those
things which were right, but they would not practice them. Now there are many
ingredients necessary to the composition of a wise man, or one that in the Text
is called a Prudent man.

1. The first Ingredient, is Sagacity, or a spirit of discerning, and quickness
of understanding, that makes a man to be fore-sighted to look into the
penetralia of a case or difficulty; to see afar off; to discern events in their
causes, and consequents in their antecedents, as Solomon says, Prove.22. 3. The
wise man foreseeth an evil, and hides himself; when he that is dull and weak
sighted, passes on and is punished. The Lord commended the unjust Steward
because he had done wisely, he is not commended for using of deceit and
falsehood, but for his Wisdom, in foreseeing the danger of being put out of a
Stewardship, and having no where to betake himself in a time of distress; so it
is said, the wise man's eyes are in his head, as in the watch Tower to look
round about, and discern what may be approaching afar off. The (...) of the
Lord is the beginning or principal part of this Wisdom; as it is said of Pharaohs
Servants, upon the threatening of the Hail, He that feared the Lord made his
Servants, and his Cattle flee into the House before hand^. David's wisdom
traces Joab in all the Woman of Tekoaes wiles. There is in some persons an
oracular kind of wisdom, that they can discern the most secret kind of things,
and find out the (...) difficulties, whereby they can discover the true nature
and state of the most hidden things.

Solomon finds the way to pass a right Judgment in a very difficult case; by
the secret affection of the natural Mother to her own child; whence the people
observed the wisdom of God was in him to do judgment: this was by a natural
sagacity, whereby he was able to judge of things by their causes and effects. In
like manner did Solomon judge of Ado^ijah's hidden Rebellion, by his tampering
about Abishag as an overt act that discovered a secret intent in his heart to
turn about the Kingdom to himself by his intimation, that the Kingdom of right
did belong to him. So did he by a like depth of wisdom, pass such a prudent
Sentence upon Shimei, which though good and favorable in it self, yet was so
warily circumstanced that it became a Trap to take an old Sinner in, and bring
upon him the punishment justly due, without breaking David's word.

2. Another part of wisdom is to pitch upon the right manner, after the end is
discovered; many a man fails in the compassing or bringing about the great and
main design of his own happiness and security for lack of this wisdom: He that
foreseeth the evils if he does not betake himself to a right shelter, may be
overtaken therewith, though he has foreseen it: When Israel saw his wound he
sent to King Jareb; so did Ahaz, but that did not heal or help them, but
plunged them further into the depth of their misery. Suppose we have rightly
judged of the end, be it an evil to be avoided, that may be like to ruin us; or
a good to be desired to make us happy; if we take an indirect course, for the
one or the other, we may get a curse instead of a blessing or run into a
greater mischief than that which we intended to avoid: He that makes use of
lawful means, as one says, to bring about an unlawful end, does as it were put
God into the Devils service, as he that does evil, that good may come thereon,
puts the Devil into Gods service both which are abominable. True wisdom brings
all circumstances into consideration, which are to be weighed in the balance;
and what means, with all circumstances considered is the most proper to
accomplish the end propounded is only to be made use of. When the Iron is
blunt, wisdom must be had to direct, whether more sharpness in the Instrument,
or more strength in the Agent be best to be improved: wisdom must teach men
when to answer a Fool according to his folly, and when not. There is a time to
speak, and a time to keep silence; wisdom must determine by circumstances,
when the the time of the one, or the other is. Non minus est magna virtus scire
desiner^ quam scire dicere; Nature teaches all men to do the one, it is wisdom
that teaches some men the other. Hushai befooled all Absolom^ Counselors, and
under God was the means of defeating Achitophel's perilous Counsel, by
propounding the unseasonableness of the time; which was the very hinge on which
hung the weight of the whole business which none of the rest discerned but
Achitophel. Thus a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment as well the
time when, as the matter, what is to be done. If Rehoboam could have served the
people but that one time, they would in reason have served him for ever.

3. He is a wise man that is cautious to redeem the time, as well as to discern
it. The Apostle tells us, they do not walk circumspectly, as wise but as fools
that do not redeem the time. Time, which is one of the preciousest Talents in
our hands can never be recalled when once it is past. Post est occasio calva.
This is the precipice of Destruction where thousands are shipwreckt because
they do not improve their season, but act as if they had time lying on their
hands, which is the quickest commodity in the Market of Eternity, for it passes
away swifter than a Weavers Shuttle, or the Eagle through the air.

4. Diligence also denominates a man to be wise; without that no design or
enterprise of moment can ever be carried on. Diligence is a qualification to
which many promises are made; and experience declares it to be a principal part
of wisdom: Therefore says Solomon, he that is diligent in his business, he
shall stand before Princes, who use to carry on designs of the greatest moment:
This preferred Jeroboam first to the charge of the house of Joseph, and
afterward to be over all the rest of the Tribes. As on the other hand, he that
is slothful in business is brother to a great waster; Through the slothfulness
of the hands the house will drop through, and so be ruined, as well as if it
were pulled down by the hands of foolishness. The vineyard of the slothful is
overrun with Thistles and Thorns (which with diligence might have abounded
with pleasant fruits) so is the heart of the slothful Professor with lusts of
the Flesh.

5. The prudent man is no changling: He that orders his affairs with
discretion, does not dance up and down like a meteor in the Air, but his heart
is fixed trusting in the Lord: Those men of old called Homines quadrati, that
are always steady, resting on their Basis, and not turning and rolling from one
side to an other; not like quicksilver, running every way, but fixed no where.
The ^eall Stars that are to lighten the world are always fixed in their own
Orb, not like Comets driven about by every new motion from inferior bodies.
Solomon advises the Children of wisdom to fear God and the King, and not to
meddle with them that are given to change; that do studere novis rebus, that
cannot keep their place; that turn up and down for advantage: They that are
unstable as the water were never counted to excel in wisdom, or any other
virtuous quality. There is nothing that more directly tends to confusion in
Church or State, than for persons of principal place in either, to shift their
station. They that do not study to be quiet, cannot do their own business,
unless they abidee in the same place and calling wherein they were called.

6. The prudent man shows favor and lends; It is part of the discretion
whereby he orders his affairs, Psalm. 112. 6. His wisdom will not let him be
slack handed, for thereby he will run behind hand with his great Creditor: As
his diligence makes him take the fittest time wherein to sow his seed early or
late, so his wisdom teaches him so much liberality, as not to sow sparingly
lest he reap sparingly; for according to our work shall be our Reward. Wisdom
does suggest to him, that it is better to give than to receive; as the
condition of him that lends, is better than of him that borrows to whom the
other is a kind of Servant. Prudence did suggest it as an advantage to the
unjust Steward to bestow his Goods where he might receive after benefit
thereby, though his unrighteousness did not commend it as a Duty. The Argument
that David uses to encourage himself and his People to give liberally toward
the building of the Temple, was because they were Strangers and Sojourners
before God, as all their Fathers were, and their days on the Earth were as a
shadow, and there was no abiding, 1 Chronicles 25. 15. As if they had acknowledged,
that by reason of the brevity of their lives, they could not perpetually enjoy
those things that were in their possession, they did out of mere devotion and
piety consecrate the same to him from whom they had received all their Wealth
and Estate, who they knew out of his mere bounty would requite them with
eternal life and glory; there is no abiding of our time upon the earth nor of
our riches in our hands, which may take them to their wings, and Fly away as a
bird toward Heaven; therefore wisdom teaches them to give while they may. So
also on the same ground his Son Solomon advises to give to the poor, which will
prove but lending to the Lord, who will liberally repay.

7. Wisdom makes men deliberate, advised in their actions, sedate and composed
in their spirits; with the well advised there is wisdom: They that do things
over hastily, may have too much time to repent afterward. A man of
understanding says Solomon, is of an excellent spirit, the Hebrew is, of a
Cool, i. e. Sedate, Composed temper, not too much over heated with the fire of
Anger: Be not hasty says he also, to go out of the presence of him who has
power to do what he pleases. David was too sudden in his determination about
Mephibosheth case; thou and Zibah divide the Land, before he had taken so much
time as to hear the allegations on either side: Audi alteram partem, i. e. hear
the other side, was a maxim of wisdom in ancient time. So was that also,
Secundoe cogitationes sunt ^eliores, or second thoughts are better; David had
leisure enough afterward to repent of his sudden, rash command to Joab to
number the people. The next or shortest way to the end is not always the best
and safest. It is better sometimes to march about to gain the wind than to fall
directly upon the Enemy, as David at Baal-Perazim.

So 'twas said Charles sir-named the wise, King of France overcame our Edward
the third by Policy and Deliberation, which his Father could not do by all his
power.

8. Wisdom teaches men to govern their passions: our passions both of love and
hatred are violent, and must be restrained, else they may endanger the whole
man. Solomon calls them Fools, who suffer anger to rest in their bosom. He that
lets the Sun go down upon his wrath, may be like to have the Devil for his
Bedfellow, says one. Samson's violence in his love, makes him lose his life
and his liberty in the issue, many do by their Souls as the Mariners did by
their Ship wherein Paul sailed; for so losing Rudder bands of Reason they
spread the Sail of all their power and endeavors, and to commit themselves to
the winds and waves of their passions, which violently drive them upon the
Rocks or Sands, where they suffer Ship-wreck of all that is Em^arqued. Abigail
who had been the prudent Wi^e of a rich Fool, wisely reproves David for his
passion, who at other times was counted wise as an Angel of God.

9. Wisdom makes men humble and lowly of heart, in imitation o^ him in whom are
hid all the Treasures of wisdom, as well politically as spiritually; for so our
Savior convinces the Pharisees of their folly, as well as pride in taking the
uppermost seats at the first hand as they come into the Feast; whereas if they
had wisely taken lower Seats at first, they might with honor have been
advanced, whereas afterward some of them were forced with shame to give place
to their betters; Wise men cannot but see great reason to be humble, because a
double promise is annexed thereunto; both by being advanced by God himself, and
of being taught by him also. Therefore seeing God himself has made humility
the way to honor, he is not a wise man that shall refuse to walk therein. A
poor and wise Child is preferred before an old and foolish King, that is too
high to receive an Admonition. A wise man's head will never be broken by a
reproof. Out of the Prison the wise Joseph and David comes to Reign, when he
that (may be) is born Heir to a Kingdom, becomes poor by his Pride, as did
Absalom and Amaziah.

10 Wisdom makes men confident and bold, as well as Righteousness; because they
trust in the Lord, and build upon the sure Foundation of his Word, who is the
Rock of Ages. Hence are they called wise Builders that build on this
Foundation, as they are also called wise Virgins, that lay such foundation of
their hopes, as will bear them up in times of greatest dismaying, for such
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, because they are fixed in the truth,
trusting in the Name of the Lord.

If these be properties of a prudent Man, the greater must their loss needs be
who have lost a Commander, Counselor, Companion, Husband, Father, Friend or
Benefactor so qualified; which losses God sometimes brings upon an unthankful
World to punish them for ingratitude; and upon his people to teach them to live
by Faith, and not to lean upon broken Reeds of humane wisdom and power. God
does not need the wisdom of a Solomon, or counsel of an Achitophel or policy of
a Machiavel to govern the World by; although he does sometimes diffuse here and
there more radiant beams of that excellent quality to make others imitate their
Examples and Virtues.

It still may be an enquiry, a virtuous or prudent Man or Woman, who shall
find? their price is about Rubies, for wisdom is Gods special gift, not an
acquirement of our own endeavors, therefore we must ask it of God.

USE, See what cause of lamentation is before us. We have been sadly bereaved
of Men of such Worth, as is expressed in the Text; many of excellent endowments
in other respects, are yet great strangers to Prudence, which is a lamentation,
and should be for a lamentation. There are but few men born into the World in
any age, in whom all these desirable qualities are eminently met together, And
none in these parts of the World (if that be not too great a word to say) in
whom so many, or more of such honorable endowments were joy (...) together in
such a degree. The greater is our sorrow who are now met together to solemnize
the Funeral of a person of so great worth, enriched with so many Excellencies
which made him neither live undesired, nor die unlamented, nor go to his Grave
unobserved. Former* Ages of the World knew not how to bestow Elogies high and
large enough up on those, whose wisdom transcended the reach of ordinary
Mortals, or whose Heroic and worthy Acts, either in time of War, or peace
rendered them so useful and beneficial unto others. Hence David called upon the
Daughters of Israel to weep over Saul and Jonathan, who clothed you in Scar^et:
with the like lamentation does the same David lament over Abner the Captain of
the Host; Is there not a Prince and a great man fal^ this day in Israel, ^o in
a sense may it be said here, A great man is fallen in our little Israel. And
David himself while he lived, was honored as the Angel of God for his wisdom;
although his exiquies were attended with a less degree of mourning; because of
the illustrious Wisdom of his Successor that began so early to appear to the
dazzling the eyes of all beholders, before his Fathers Sun was quite set.

The Globe of the natural World made up of Heaven and Earth, is a fit
resemblance of the state of the Moral, or Rational World, and the transaction
of Affairs therein, where some men are as far exalted above others, as the
Heaven is above the Earth; for what makes the visible Heavens so conspicuous,
and glorious above the opake dark body of the Earth beneath, but the bright
glittering Stars with which it is bespangled, some of which are continually
setting beneath as others are ascending above the Horizon; yet may it safely be
said, that if all the Stars of the first magnitude were withdrawn, Heaven it
self would be a less glorious Orb, compared with what now it is; even so would
the sphere of this lower World be far less desirable, ^f it were not
enlightened with some rad^ant Lamps much brighter than others; so far do some
Stars excel others in Glory.

The Saints compared with the rest of the World; are as the Salt of the Earth,
the Lights of the Firmament, the Pillars and Shields of the Earth.

They are the Salt of the Earth, that keep others sweet, and preserve the World
from Putrefaction. Some men's Souls, as one says well, serve only for Salt to
keep their bodies from stinking, and corrupting, which they presently do, as
well as their names, as soon as their Souls are expired; but the righteous and
the wise are a sweet Savor both living and dead, and their memory shall be
blessed: Their very lips are as a tree of life, and as well-springs of living
water, that reveive the Spirits of those they converse with. They are the
choice and excellent ones upon the Earth, and keep up the honor of others
where they live.

They are the lights of the World, that enlighten others by the light of their
wisdom, and refresh them by the luster of their holiness. Every particular
Christian may have light enough for himself in his own Family; As a Torch or
Candle end, that may suffice to guide himself in his own station and family, but
these are as Stars in the firmament of Heaven, that give light to the whole Orb
of Church or State where they are placed.

They are as the Pillars that bear up the Fabric, and support the whole
Building: every particular person may be of use to fill up the sides of the
building, or as Artifice to adorn the outward surface thereof; but they are of
far more choice and excellent use that serve as Pillars, to bear up the weight
of the whole work, without which all would presently fall to the ground; As
happened in Ely's and Readiness time, when the Earth and the Inhabitants thereof
were dissolved for want of some to bear up the Pillars of it. And so likewise
are they as Shields of the Earth, as the Chariots and Horsemen thereof to
defend it: the common People without Leaders, are but as sheep without a
Shepherd, ready to be devoured by every Enemy that appears. As may be seen by
the Kingdom of Judah, which flourished and prospered well all the days of
Jehoiadah but presently after his decease, a small company of the Assyri^ns
destroy an huge Host of them, when like an headless Multitude they come to
engage with a small Army of their Adversaries: Such Princes as was Joash
destitute both of wisdom and courage, like the Bramble, as soon as the Oak,
under which it grew up, was removed, was blasted by every Storm that surrounds
him. This made Solomon conclude that wisdom is better than Riches, or them
weapons of War, when a poor man by his wisdom can save and deliver the City
from out of the hand of a Mighty King that encamped against it. Thus Wise men
are not only the stay and staff, the safety and security of a People, but they
are the Honor and Ornament of their Country, like the Jewel of the King,
which though of Gold, yet receives all its luster and beauty therefrom.

Concerning the Gentleman, whose Funeral Obsequies were lately celebrated
amongst us, not to say more than is convenient to prevent emulation in them
that are surviving. His Parts and Abilities were well known amongst those with
whom he lived, and might justly place him among the first three, having indeed
many natural Advantages above others for the more ea^ie attaining of skill in
every science.

It may without flattery be said of him as the great Orator D. H. said of Hugo
de groot of Holland.

Natura qua pr ius N^^^rea c^tis illi matter fuit. Nature which is Nutrix
obstetrisque omnibus, yet acquaints many of her Offspring with hard labor and
study, and great pains, to search and beat out things, and some are forced to
break their teeth, before they can break the shell, and come at the Kernel,
while she is more propitious to others, as her Favorites, that by the strength
of their reason, and quickness of their parts can see through every thing at
the first dash, as the genuine Children of their first Father, who could at the
first view discern the intrinsical being of things, and creatures; and
accordingly impose suitable Names upon each, while others must own that with
great ^ums, i. e. much labor and skill they have purchased that skill, as the
Captain of the Castle in Jerusalem speaks: His Military skill some years before
his death advanced him to the Conduct and Command of the whole, which he was
able to have managed with great exactness, yet was he not inferior in other
Sciences: And as a good Soldier of Christ Jesus, he had attained to no small
confidence in his last conflicts with the King of Terrors, being not afraid to
look Death in the face in cold blood, but with great composedness of mind
received the last Summons: For though he was followed with tormenting pain of
the Stone or Strangu^y that pursued him to the last he neither expressed
impatience under those grinding pains, nor want of confidence, or comfort from
his first seizure; yea such was his earnest desire to be discharged from his
Warfare, that he could not be persuaded to say Amen to the earnest desires of
his best and nearest friends for recovery from his present sickness, or for
continuance of life any longer: As was said of Frederick the Palsgrave of the
Rhine, who told his Friends, that came about his sickbed, He had lived long
enough for them on earth, it was now time for him to live to himself in Heaven.
So having fought the good fight, run his Race, and finished his course; he
quietly resigned up his spirit to God that gave it. Blessed are they that die
in the Lord, for they rest from their Labor, and their works follow them. His
last thoughts and endeavors were for the good of the public, as may be seen
by the Irenicon now lately found amongst his Papers, which it is thought would
be too much ingratitude to withhold from the view of all any longer.

If after his death he should meet with that which is common to other men of
wisdom and worth in the world, to be traduced, and hardly censured, it would be
no wonder. Sore eyes cannot bear the light: Men of corrupt minds and manners
are most forward to oppose the truth and its assertors; to say he was without
infirmities, was to say he was not a Man, for there is no just man that sins
not; yet as they say of natural Physicians, their Errors are buried in the
Church yard, though their Cures are written with the beams of the Sun: if he as
a Physician of the state in course had any skill above others, let none envy
him the honor thereof: if he ever committed any Errors, let them be buried
with him in his Grave, as in a Sepulcher of oblivion. The memory of the just
shall be blessed, who only of all others are ascended out of the reach of Fate
and Corruption.

Ult. Let all hence learn, seeing all sorts of persons are like to be taken
away out of this world, sooner or later, to be ready and prepared for such a
change: when that time is once come, at which we must all go to that place
whence we shall not return, it will be to no purpose, to linger or delay, as
Lot, who was loath to go out of Sodom, or to say with Hezekiah, we are not
ready; Death the King of Terrors who holds his assignment more certain than any
other Monarchs, will have no denial when he comes with his Writ of Habeas
Corpus: happy will all they be who then have their Quietus est granted them,
and Sealed in the Court of Conscience. Time or rather Providence that orders
it, is truly said to be the Mother of all things, in whose fruitful Womb they
are all conceived, both persons, events, and actions, that now are upon the
stage, or ever were, or shall hereafter be; And what ever is conceived there,
will surely be brought forth in its appointed season; And therefore as the
birth of all sorts of persons that are at any time brought forth into the
World, had their original conception there; in thy Book (says David) were all
my members written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was
none of them, so also is their death and dissolution written there, which shall
fall out exactly in the season fore-appointed of the Father, who has all in
his own hand: And when one Generation is gone off, another Generation is
coming, yet the same stage; and when they have acted their part, they must all
in like manner withdraw, and give place to them who are to succeed: The
Righteous, and the Wise, and their Works, are all in the hand of God, as
Solomon tells us, Eccles 10. 1. that is, as our Interpreters give the sense of
it: The persons of the best, and most prudent men, are not in their own power,
or at their own disposal; but are guided by a Divine Providence and by a
secret, invisible, and unpreventable direction from above, by him who works
all things according to the counsel of his own will, ruling them by his
powerful, though sometimes secret, and invisible Government: Our works are
transient things, and as they come from us, seem to vanish away, and to be no
more; they are quickly out of our hands; but they are always in Gods hands,
and written in his book; he reserveth them unto the time of Retribution, and
keeps an exact Record, and Register of them, so that no one of them shall be
unrewarded; Men cannot do to us, or dispose of us as they will, neither can we
dispose of our selves as we please; but he who is wisest, and knows what is
best for us, and what uses we are fittest for, does, as it pleases him, order
both our persons, our times, our places, our callings, our work and our wages,
as may be most for the glory of his Name, whose we are, and whom it is our
happiness to serve in whatsoever station he shall be pleased to place us in:
all our care and solicitude should be to be faithful and diligent therein, that
when our Lord shall come, we may be found so doing.

Hezekiah in his solemn Song of Thanksgiving after his recovery, compares man's
life to a Web in the Weavers Loom, I have cut off as a Weaver my life, Isa. 38.
12. The Weaver is forced often times to cut off his Web, before it is finished,
for want of matter to weave it up to the end of the Warp, or by some other
occasion. Frail men too often cast their designs in a larger and more spacious
mould than was ever yet granted to any Mortals; and purpose this day what they
will do many years; hence whereas they should consider the time is short, and
therefore should so set about inferior things, as not to be hindered in the
managing things of the highest nature, such as are the concerns of the other
World: while they are in the Loom of life, their care should be to make good
stuffs, for every man's work shall be tried, and nothing but what is perfect
will pass for current in our last account, and be accepted of God. To build Hay
or Stubble upon the true foundation, will be to our loss. Let our works be such
as are wrought in God, and then we need never be afraid to give up our account.
Such they are only, that will follow us into the other world, and for the sake
of such only will they be declared blessed that die in the Lord. These are the
only ground of that hope which makes Christians not to be ashamed. I have not
so lived (said one of the Ancients) that I am ashamed to die; Another amongst
our Modern Divines, with a little alteration, repeated the words, I have not so
learned Christ as to be afraid to die. The two great works of a Christian, are
Faith and Repentance; By the one we receive life from God, and a principle of
new obedience; by the other, we return all unto God again, by love, and an holy
life. Those that are clear in either of these (for they are both inseparable
twins and companions in the state of the new life) need never be afraid to
appear before their judge* You that are Soldiers, know the last Enemy you have
to conflict with is death which you can never overcome but by Faith in him who
overcame both death, and him that has the power of Death that is the Devil.
And that Faith which is sincere, will always work by love, and manifest it
self by the fruits of Repentance and exercise of a good Conscience.

This was the ground of Paul's rejoicing: the testimony of a good Conscience,
which made him so careful to maintain a Conscience void of offense both toward
God and man; the thought of this will be the best preservative against the
corruption and temptation of this evil World. Turpe quid ausurus te fine test
time. This will be the murus aheneus, which none of our infernal Enemies will
ever be able to scale. This is the only Armor of proof, which none of the
Adversaries Darts will ever be able to enter. He that has not the Breastplate
of Righteousness, as well as the shield of Faith, will never be able to stand
in the last conflict. There is nothing more scandalous to the Christian Name,
than the timorousness of its Professors, when they come to die.

Is it not a shame and dishonor to him whose followers they pretend to be, or
really are, that mere Heathens should outdo them in that point.

Some of them could say, Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori. The Soldier
takes his life in his hand; and the Mariner places it in the Planks of his Ship
or other brittle Vessel, without sear of death or danger, upon no other
encouragement, than of fading Honor, or uncertain wealth: why should they that
fight under the Banner of Christ Jesus, or are embarked in his Cause, be more
afraid to die? who may be assured to come off with honor and safety at the
last, and arrive at the Haven of rest, and eternal happiness in the close of
their lives.

The Heathen Philosophers and Soldiers also, were generally in the dark about
the Resurrection, which has always been one of the Articles of the Christian
Creed: For so says Seneca in one of his Epistles Cogite mimus nos cito eo
perventuros quo alios per venisse moeremus and fortasse (sui modo sapientum
verafamasit) recipit quem putas periisse, premissus est. Endeavoring to
comfort his Friend upon the death of a near Relation; If only (says he) the
report of our wise men prove true, that there is a place to receive us after
death; he, whom you lament, as if he had been lost, is not quite gone, but only
gone before, to take possession of Eternity, till his surviving Friends shall
follow after.

Yea, the followers of that cursed Imposter Mahomet, are ready to upbraid poor
fearful Christians; who have a saying, That if the Christians had the same
Opinion in their hearts, which their Books are full of, they would not be so
afraid of Death which is the only way thither. We cannot be clothed upon with
life and immortality from above, till we be unclothed of this mortal flesh we
carry about with us:

The House of this Earthly Tabernacle must be dissolved, and taken down, before
we can be possessed of that House not made with hands, which is eternal in the
Heavens.

Death is but a Sleep unto the Righteous, which puts us upon a little
intermission of our labors, till the time of refreshing, and the day of
general Redemption shines forth.

The wise Heathen of old have usually made Sleep the image of Death, but with
them, the similitude holds not so exact a proportion as with us Christians,
because of their Ignorance, or at least their uncertain hope of a Resurrection,
and Blessedness of a future life.

By motion and action we may understand life; there is a defect of these, while
the Senses and bodily Organs are tied up by the bonds of sleep, and lie as it
were buried for that while; but when the morning Sun has driven away the dark
shadow of the night. That vigor, which was not lost but intermitted, as one
says, return again: in the mean time the soul which has a power not depending
on the body, performs the Offices of both times, so when the term of this
mortal life is come, the body lies torpid and unactive for a time, rendering its
parts to the original dust; But wait till the great day shine forth, then it
will appear the body only rested for a time which seemed lost. And says the
same Author, It seems a sufficient benefit of an earthly death, to be put out
of danger of sinning any more.

Another says, It is for want of integrity in Religion, and right understanding
that men by so much labor and anxiety of spirit, endeavor to adjourn what
nature has allotted for every one in general, without exception of any thing
upon the Earth, which is endued with life. Such considerations as these the dim
light of nature may suggest to arm us against the fear of that our last enemy:
yet Philip de Comines reports of Lewis the 11th. a great and politic King of
France, how he commanded his Servants, That if he were in danger of death, they
should only move him to confess himself, and dispose of his Conscience, and not
sound in his ears the dreadful word Death, which notwithstanding he was forced
often to hear, and patiently to ^ear in his last sickness, by the Tyrany of his
Physician of whom he stood in awe: But real Christians, who with the Apostle,
can say, for them to live is Christ, will say, for them to die is gain. Illius
est nolle mori, qui non vult ire ad Christum. It was an excellent saying of
Bucholzerus, one of the German Divines, in his last sickness, In cognitione
Christi vivere pulchrum, mori pulcherrimum; and that to live holily was the
only way to die happily.

To conclude, seeing nothing is more certain than that God will sooner or later
take us all away from hence, let us labor to be always ready against the time
when our Lord shall return from the Wedding. Incertum quo loco expectat te
mors, ergo omni loco expecta tu mortem; seeing it is uncertain in what place
Death waits for thee, do thou in every place wait for death. Once an Heathen
said in contempt of Death, in comparison of an indignity offered him, Mors
nobis pr^ remedio data est, vira prosupplicio; much more may Christians say so.

It Was said of Julius Coesar, the first and famous Emperor of the Romans, that
he would never let any of his Soldiers know when they were to dislodge, or
march away, because he would always have them ready. The like Command have all
Christians received from the Captain of their Salvation, always to have their
loins girt, and their staves in their hands, to watch and pray that they enter
not into temptation, because they know not at what time they will come, who
have power to require our Souls of her. In vita vigilent justi, ideo in morte
dicantur dormire, said Austin, i. e. The just do always watch during the time
of this life, Therefore in death, they are said only to sleep. Watching is the
posture of the Christian Soldier. What can be more dreadful than to be found
unprepared, or unprovided at the last Summons? And as another speaks; Quid
facies anima miserabilis? quo te vertas? comparere erit intolerabile, latere
impossible. That soul must needs be in a miserable plunge, that shall find
(...) as impossible to ly hid, as intolerable to appear. The only way to die
happily is to live holily. They that have been careful of the one, need not be
afraid of the other: Difficile est homin^^^ exuere, said one: For when we cease
to be men, we shall begin to be as Angels. Therefore as Lot welcomed those
heavenly Satellites, that were sent to ^ake him out of Sodom, before it was
destroyed, so should we entertain those Messengers, whose business only is to
take us out of a miserable and sinful World, and translate us into the place of
Glory. Speranti grandia mediocria sunt^ingrata: All things tend to their
center. The stones tossed from the Earth, borrow wings to their weighty nature
to descend beneath, where they have their look. Rivers are touched with amarous
curiosity to revisit their Mother the Sea. The pyramidal flames of fire witness
they burn, but with desire only of joining themselves with their first
beginning. Heaven is our center, why should we not be ravished to be there, to
join as Atoms to their unity; as rays to the body of the light* To show us the
way from alo^^, those Torches of the night gallantly shows us their twinkling
baits: They shine not to us but to show us the way of their azure vaults as
being the only place of our repose, (...).

It is matter of complaint with the Prophet Isaiah, That the Righteous perish
and no man lays it to heart, and that merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous are taken from the evil to come; peradventure in
those times men need for piety, and virtue were taken out of the World, as a
presage of approaching evils, from which God would exempt those his faithful
Servants: yet is it added for their comfort, that they shall enter into peace,
resting in their beds; for as their Death is called a Sleep, so are their
Graves likened unto Beds, in which perfumed with the Odours of their Savior
merit, they rest in quiet till the great day of refreshing come.

FINIS.
Irenicon, OR A SALVE For NEW-ENGLAND'S Sore.

By Major DANIEL DENISON.

Printed in the Year. 1684.

To the Reader,
T He Excellency of the work of making, or maintaining peace may be gathered
from the great reward promised by our Savior to all such, that they shall be
called the Children of God: And although it be a Duty principally incumbent on
the Counselors and Embassaders of peace, yet such is the necessity thereof often
times, even in the best times of the Church that may encourage any one, and
discourage none that may have an opportunity of dealing therein. It is recorded
of old, that not only Bezaleel and Aholiab attended to the work of the
Tabernacle, who were immediately inspired, and called of God to that service,
but that all who were wise in heart willingly offered themselves thereunto: on
which considerations, it need be the less wondered at, that the Worthy
Gentleman, who Penned the following Essay, applied himself to such a Service,
for promoting the peace of this our Jerusalem, Although his proper Work and
Employment lay in another Sp^eare. Holy David himself that was a Man of War,
and expert in that Service, famous for his skill, and success therein, makes
this Declaration for himself; That he was for Peace, though others when he
spoke, were for War. And indeed they were commanded of God to offer terms of
Peace to the worst of their Enemies (all save the Cananites that were under the
Anathema) before they enterprized a War upon them. Great have been the
mischiefs and (...) of Dissension and Strife in the later, as well as former
Ages of the Church, which often times have ended in a kind of War: As in Germany
the controversy between the Lutherans and others, about the Lords Supper, was
called Bellum Sacramentale: Every one having a share in the common Bottom,
whereon we are all Embarked; it is great pity any endeavors should be omitted
to prevent a Shipwreck. They who being advanced above others by the eminency of
their Wisdom and Experience, as well as by the Dignity of their Places, have a
peculiar advantage above the (...) to foresee Dangers approaching, and cannot
do a better service to their Neighbors, than to give them timely notice of the
evils impending, and of the surest ways to prevent them. He must need be very
dull of understanding, who does not observe how in our Constitution, Difference
in Church matters are like to have no small influence upon our Civil Affairs;
especially when it is ready to come to siding and making of Parties. Paul tells
the Corinthians, while one says he is of Paul, another he is of Apollos, they
are carnal, and walk as men. It is a too apparent symptom of a spirit of
Dissension prevailing, when men are denominated, or known by others to be of
this or that Party, although they should not so speak of themselves.

As for the manner of handling this Subject, by the Author, If the Writings of
very learned and judicious men treating thereof, be consulted withal, it will
appear that he has as discreetly laid open the malady growing upon us, and
laid down as exact, and compendious a method for a suitable Medicine, as any
other that has meddled therewith. It was the Observation of Solomon the wisest
of men, and seconded by the experience of all future times, that only by Pride
comes Contention, as it is written by a very learned Pen: And that emulation
about wisdom, wealth and holiness have put the whole Earth into combustion.
This is the root of bitterness to all other evils of self-love, malice and
envy, of all which Covetousness is an inseparable companion: and is either
chief in the first enterprise, or overrules in carrying on all ways of
commotion. A Disease when first discovered, may easily be cured, as Physicians
tell us. If that be our case at this time, the Receipts propounded in the
ensuing Discourse seem very proper; and if seriously applied* may with Gods
blessing be a great help to bring a sober people into a meet posture, for
obtaining the desired blessing of Peace; which the God of all Grace, grant unto
this poor People, which have with great cost, labor and hazard travailed so
far to enjoy: It is the Apostolical Blessing, to them that are of one mind, and
live in peace, That the God of Love and Peace shall be with them.

Irenicon.
FOr the Divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart; The manifest
Distempers in our Israel cannot but affect the hearts of all her Children, and
call for present help: shall Desolation and Destruction the unavoidable
consequents of such Divisions come upon her, and shall none of her Sons that
she bath brought forth take her by the hand to guide her into the ways of her
peace? is the Disease incurable? is there no Balm in Gilead, is there no
Physician there? I am no Practitioner in that Art, but that ardent affection
which opened the mouth of the Dumb Child to the saving of the life of his
Parents, has drawn from me these rude and simple Proposals which if propounded
according to Art might be sanative and healing: I would not be an Emperick
though short of a Physician. I had rather be accused to want skill than good
will to help in a Case so dangerous; want of leisure and ability may secure
you, I shall not be tedious: what I have to offer to consideration you will
find under these Heads;

1. What our present Maladies are, intended in this Discourse.

2. What might be the Occasion thereof.

3. The Danger.

4. The blameable Causes

5. The Cure.

1. The Distemper (if my Rules fail me not) is originally a Cathexie or ill
habit of the Body, the Spring and Fountain of many dangerous Diseases and
lethal symptoms which if arising from the constitution, the cure is hopeless,
if from external Accidents (though dangerous yet) not remediless.

Among the manifold symptoms of this Disease, I apprehend none more threatening
our Dissolution than the sad and unreasonable Divisions about matters of
Religion, in which I include not the Quakers nor professed Anabaptists, but
shall confine my Discourse to those that call themselves Independents or
Congregational men, and those that are called by them Presbyterians, supposing
that an union or reconciliation between these parties, would restore the Body
to an Athletick plight, and enable it without the help of Physic, to master or
expel the other pe^cant Humors, sed hic locus lubricus and di^^icilis, I hope
it is no Noli me tangere, though it will not bear rough handling, yet there
must be some search at least with a Ladies hand, if we desire a Cure.

The Differences between the parties abovesaid at least as they are scattered
in the breasts of individual men (for it will be hard to find a company
agreeing in the same) are in general about the external Order and Regiment in
the Church, and Administrations therein, agreeing not only in all Doctrinal
Points, but in the same manner of Administrations in all the Essentials of
Order; The particular differences may be referred to two Heads, (1.) The
References or Relations our particular Church has to other Churches, as to
Councils, and Communion with each other, and the Members of each other. (2.)
Relating to the exercise of Rule within the Church it self.

Those that are now called Presbyterians (by others formerly called
Independents) do in the Points aforesaid own and acknowledge what i s delivered
in Print by the Pious and Learned Mr. Cotton (in hi s Book of the Keys a s I
take it) in hi s distinction of power of Authority and power of interest (and
exemplify by the instance of a Judge and Jury) and making association of
Churches an Ordinance of God, and in reference to Synods what that Reverend man
has delivered in his Apologetical Preface to Learned Mr. Norton's Book* in
answer to Apollonius, and what the said Mr. Norton has in these very minutes
and particularities returned in answer to the said Apollonius, as the mind and
judgment not only of the New-English Churches, but of the whole Congregational
way, in the particulars aforesaid, they have not only the two Champions
abovenamed, but a whole cloud of Witnesses, as appears by the Platform of
Discipline, laid down by the Synod at Cambridge, in the year 1647, and approved
by the General Court, and in the answer to the two Questions, about the Subject
of Baptism, and Communion of Churches, by a Synod also at Cambridge* as also in
the answer to Mr. Dury subscribed by all the Elders at least of this
Jurisdiction.

They which call themselves Independents, and differing from the other in the
points aforesaid, seem not to be of one mind; some denying they are bound to
the directive judgment of a Council, some larger, some streighter, as to the
extent of other Churches; some affirming the Power and Rule of the Church is in
the Brethren without the Elders, and that the Elders, except in Preaching and
Administrations of the Sacraments, calling of and Moderating in Church
Meetings, have no more authority, than any particular Brother, though this will
not down with every palate, yet on these dissenting from those they call
Presbyterians, and at some times bynamed from their Leaders, and Apostates from
their first Principles, and are by them repaid with the surname of Brown,
Morellius, and both pretending to the Congregational way, but not agreeing what
that way is, Hinc ille Lachrim^e, This is our sickness.

2. The Occasion.
2. A wise man excusing himself wh^ he could not follow the ancient Father (as
they are called) in all they delivered, says, he did believe, that which they
jointly and calmly delivered, as the received Doctrine; but he could not
receive every looser or ungirt expression, nor all they delivered, in heat of
opposition and dispute, in defense of the Truth against Errors, a very venial
offense, though not without danger; the valiant Captain by overcharging
endangers himself and may bring a mischief to the whole Army; our Leaders
without diminution to their great worth were but men, and many of them
unacquainted with the practice of this way, sufficiently experienced in their
sufferings and pressures under the Episcopal way, they might by some less
distinct expressions, occasion some of their hearers to mistake their meaning;
not only those that before their coming hither had imbibed the Principles of
separation: but even others of honest Principles, who could not but willingly
^mbrace power and authority (that they never before dreamed of, Quis nisi
mentis inops oblatam respucit (...)) to be put into their hands immediately
from Christ: and was necessary and safe for the preservation of his Kingly
Government: modest men refuse not the honor due unto them, and are not willing
to have that just power which is their right, wrung out of their hands; But
have not these men mistaken their Teachers? have they led you into these
persuasions from whence some of themselves are fallen? we must do to others as
we would be done by, we would not be charged with words spoken more laxly, and
as it were by the by: Neither would we take it kindly if upon consideration we
seriously and solemnly declare our minds to the World under our hands, we
should not be believed, or at best be charged with contradiction; possibly it
may be said they practiced not accordingas they now profess; they were not
bound: affirmative Precepts do not bind ad semper, their candor, forbearance to
others, fear of disturbing the Peace* hope of gaining different minds,
prevailed with them to a condescension in practice, whereas had they attended
their own Principles they had saved us this trouble, forgive them this wrong.

3. The Danger.
3. Where there is contention there is every evil work: Division in the
politic, is as a wound in the natural body, Solutio continui, which unless
healed as the Artists speak by the first intention, will come to suppuration,
and that in the nobler and Vital parts produces inflammation, and other deadly
accidents* it is not our fingers that are cut, or feet surbated; they are not
Heretics we complain of, it is thou my familiar friend* it is the vital part
of New England that are and will be engaged in this conflict; a man without
Spectacles may see the lamentable influence this sickness has in all our
common concernment in Church and State, in Town and Field;

The Distemper that is dangerous to an Athletick, is mortal to a decayed body;
are not gray hairs upon us? are we not past our Meridian? is not our Sun past
the Tropic? and are not all motions the swifter the nearer they are to their
period? the Physicians tell us that old age is a sickness, and are not we (...)
confecti? are not decays upon us? have we not lost our best blood and spirits?
where are our Winthrop, Dudley, Cotton, Hooker's, cum multis aliis, the
Shamgars that singly could have made (...) against a whole Host; and good
Wilson, whose Faith and charity would have been a Sovereign Alexipharmacon in
our contagious distempers.

Our Divisions in these matters, verify the predictions of the Bishops and
Presbyterians that we would not agree, must moulder away, not having, or not
acknowledging any way to determine our differences; will justify them in their
steadiness to their way of order, though with some defects in it, because no
other can be agreed on: all this to the scandal of our Profession, and the
dishonor of God.

Lastly, As for the present it renders the place undesirable to any godly
heart, so it exposes us to the utmost hazard of the loss of what we desire to
enjoy, many expecting but a breach wherein they might with more facility enter
upon us; and then Tros Tyriusve mihi nullo discrimine habetur. Such
Congregational men, and such Presbyterians will be esteemed alike. I conclude
with the indubitable Testimony of the truth it self, A Kingdom divided against
it self cannot stand* En quo discordia cives perduxit miseros?

4. The Causes.
4. Omitting the just and righteous hand of God, who for the punishment of our
wantonness, and abuse of Liberties* and other Evils, has sent a fire from
Abimelech to devour the men of Shechem, and a fire from the house of Shechem to
devour Abimelech: I shall mention two blameable efficient causes of our Malady,
the one without us, the other within us.

1. We need not make search for a Jesuit, the Authors and Fomenters of Discord
in the Christian World, their Father and Master, the arch Enemy of Christ and
his Church needs no such subordinate Instruments, to work his own ends in our
ruin, being warned, we should not be ignorant of his devices; what the red
Dragon cannot effect by force and violence, the subtle Serpent will attempt by
deceit. Woeful experience convinces us, what he effected by the one upon our
first Parents, and what he attempted most impudently upon the Son of God, our
blessed Savior, both ways, by Herod and immediately by himself is well known
with the same rage and malice, has he in all Ages prosecuted the members, as
he did the head, he goes up and down seeking whom he may devour, the Scripture
says it, and experience of all ages do witness, the Man Child was no sooner
born, but the red Dragon stood ready to devour, but failing in that attempt,
and finding the blood of the Saints was the Seed of the Church, he soon betakes
him to other Weapons, by sowing Errors, Heresies, Divisions and Discord, by
which means driving the Woman into the Wilderness, he became Dominus fac totum;
and who is like to the Beast? and all the World wandered after him: since the
Reformation, what Coesar could not effect by force, viz. divide the
Protestants, he wrought by his cunning, under the Names of Lutherans and
Calvinists, the latter how he has subdivided, animus meminisse horret, is too
well known; that one of these parties should again multiply the division,
cannot be sufficiently bewailed; nor effected in New England (after so much
experience the persons now litigating have had of the piety and faith of each
other, the Cananite and Perezite being in the Land) without the impulse of
Satan, who having had his Throne here for many ages past, will not easily be
dispossessed, but will vent the utmost of his rage, policy and devices to
recover his hold, and avenge himself of those that go about to disturb him, and
erect a Kingdom opposite to his; It cannot be forgotten how subtly and
forcibly he assaulted us, by the Antinomians, commonly called New-Opinions, and
that when we were in our full strength and vigor, how hardly we made good our
ground, though led on by skilful and learned Leaders; yet could not come off
without loss, the Trophies of which victory, he has erected within our view,
which yet remain ( Proh Dolor) to the shame and scandal of our Profession;
after that he has most inc^ssantly alarmd us of the first by the Gortonians,
Muggletonians, and other Elves and Hobgoblins; but since more slily by the
Anabaptists, and more violently by the Quakers; and lastly, but not less
dangerously (because within our very Bowels) by our dear Friends, Brother
sharpening his Sword (bitter words) against Brother, now Presbyterians,
Semi-Presbyterians, Apostates on the one side, Independents, Seperatists,
Morellians, Semi-nab A aptists, and less offensively Anastates on the other
^ide; brave sport for Satan, whose design is to ruin us thereby, who loves to
warm himself by the sparks of our fire; a s one says, shall we conspire with
Hell, and be Legionaries to the Prince of Darkness? Be not ignorant of hi s
Devices.

2. The Cause within us is in general our corrupt natures; we must acknowledge,
our Father was an Amorite, and our Mother an Hittite, and we are renewed but in
part, the remainder of the old Man unmortified will manifest it self, but the
next and proper immediate Causes of our Distempers, are. 1. Pride and
Self-conceitedness, they are rarely separated, every proud man thinks well of
himself, and commonly better than he deserves; every wise man has a modest
Opinion of his own worth, yea can prefer another before himself, by Pride comes
contention, and an exalted Opinion of a man's own excellencies will make him
violent and injurious to any that do ^oppose him, and cannot subscribe his
Dictates or admire his worth; Pride like Scum will float uppermost, must have
the Wall or justle for it; the Moralists allow some grains of it, to greater
parts and acquirements, at least as tolerable, but in meaner abilities decry it
as loathsome and grievous, such as wanting the principles of Knowledge, and
being led by Appetite and Interest, which quenches those tender sparks of
reason Adam has left them, are like to be very bad discerners of truth, but
are easily deluded into mistakes. They will be ignorant in nothing; omne
^cibile is scarce an adequate object of their knowledge; and in all questions
and causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, can as confidently and magisterially
deliver their determinations, as if they p^^^essed the chair. The modest Dr.
Sibs, speaks of such in these words; When blindness and boldness, ignorance
and arrogance, weakness and wilfulness meet together in one, it renders men
odious to God, it makes them burdensome in society, dangerous in their
counsels, troublers of better designs, untractable and incapable of better
direction, miserable in the issue; and therefore advises them, to know their
parts and place, and not to enterprise any thing above their measure, which
makes both their persons and their case obnoxious to scorn; But are these
qualities to be found among us? No where men discovered according to the
varieties of tempers and humors, considering our feeble temptations, and high
professions, omitting those lesser* yet idle vanities glistering in the outward
garb of many; where have you a people less regardant of the judgment and
determinations of their Leaders in Church and except it be in some Paroxism,
where do men of worth weigh so little, but because we put our selves in the
other Scales; though former Education has not advanced our natural endowments,
and our present condition calls for all our times and spirits to relieve our
necessities, yet the experience of some slender opportunities of the knowledge
of some affairs in Church and state has so elevated the conceits of many, that
they dare not only vye with, but contemn the judgments of those Grandees whose
abilities and achievements all wise and sober men have admired, Matchiavel
himself was but a fool (perhaps a Knave) Walsingham and Burleigh weak men to
them, Calvin, Ames, etc. lived in darker times, and saw but in part, they
arrived not to their seize, they are Alboe Gallinoe filii, meliore luto
ficti; is not such a spirit amongst us, does not this spirit last to envy and
strife, and incite the child to behave himself proudly against the ancient, and
the base against the honorable: But enough of it and too too much.

2 Ambition and Envy; Coveting of honor to our selves and grudging that others
are preferred before us, are forcible engenderers of strife and division;
Covetousness is the root of all evil, Honor is as desirable to many men as
Riches, and possibly here more attainable; A man of worth, as they would be
supposed, may be an expectant once in the Year, for the one, whenas he may have
small hope in his whole life to grasp the other; Ambition is restless, must
raise commotions, that thereby it might have an opportunity of advancement, and
employes envy to depress others, that they fancy may stand in their way, and
will oblige any parties, that may be subservient to their design. Thus did
Korah and his adherents, seducing the whole Congregation: and by the same
Artifice did Absalom draw after him the ten Tribes: They cannot (with patience)
sail on a quiet Sea, they desire and would raise a storm, hoping some
bo^sterous Billow will heave them into the Port, and if it prove a Rock,
whereon they are ship-wreckt, they doubt not to float on shore with the
company, They cannot attend the Philosophers counsel, sort tua contentus abi,
nor that of the Holy Ghost, to abide in the calling, wherein they are set, they
cannot stay for the blessing, nor believe when God has need of their service,
he will find them an employment, whatever stands in the way of their design,
must give place, they are resolved with Hannibal, ant vi^^am inveniam aut
faciam, though they very often miscarry; for the race is not to the swift, nor
the Battle to the strong, nor favor to men of skill, etc.

3. Censoriousness, disparates, that have diverse objects, others and our selves
those we account our Antagonists, and these our Friends; we are sharp-sighted
to observe, and espy, the errors and lapses of the one, we exaggerate and
aggravate them, and severely animadvert upon them, we can misconstrue their
actions, slight their best performances, raise and foment jealousies, and
prejudices against their persons, and that with confidence, pretending zeal for
God and his Cause; on the other hand we are dim-sighted, not able with the help
of a Prospective; to see our own faults, or those of our parties, we can
extenuate and excuse them, and at the utmost but gently stroke them, we can put
the best face upon their worst actions, cry up and extol every petty service,
exalt and proclaim the merit and worth of their persons. Thus we are enamored
of our own shadows, and can dandle our own Brats, despising the real worth of
others and very evilly entreating their most ingenious productions; The potency
of these passions we may see in David's, Thou and Ziba divide the Land, and in
his Deal gently with the young man, even with Absalom, prejudiced against the
faithful Mephibosheth by the false insinuations of Ziba, indulgent to a
treacherous and wicked Son, against the counsel of safety, and to the
provocation of his best friends; And happy it were, if those humors were purged
from our public Administrations, where we should act as in Gods stead, whose
the judgment is, who without respect of persons judges every man, shall we say
of our Leaders, as the Poet of their deities, AEqua venus Teucris, Pa^^asini
qua fuit: and attend the counsel of the Morallist though a Heathen Deem rebus
personam and vide quid in unaquaque re ^it; and in every of our capacities,
consider, we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of the Righteous God, and
therefore, who art thou that judge thy Brother? and why do thou judge thy
Brother, and set him at naught? why do we not remove the Beams out of our own,
that can espy the Motes in the eyes of others? why do we lay out our perdues,
and set our Sentinels upon others, and keep no Guard upon our own quarters?
complain of the ill husbandry of our own Neighbors, our own Fields lying
unfenced and overgrown with Weeds: There may be other adjuvant, but these are
the principal impelling causes of our Malady which calls for a remedy, Sed hic
labor, hoc opus est.

5. The Cure.
Contrar^a contrariis curantur, is the rule of Hyppocrates, but before we come
to our topical Medicines, we must begin with preparatives; let your moderation
be known to all men, much more to your Brethren, justle not with every Opinion,
you approve not, spit not on every face you fancy not, you are all one Man's
Children, begotten of the (...) immortal seed; by the everliving Father, are of
the same Family, are nourished with the same food, and expect to enjoy the same
inheritance, you are in your travail to your Country (...) why do you fall out
by the way your heavenly Father has furnished you wit^ varieties of gifts
(though not all alike) for your journey, are all Apostles? are all Prophets?
are all Teachers? to one is given wisdom, to another knowledge, by the same
spirit; do not quarrel at this providence, nor question his wisdom, but as far
as we have attained let us walk by the same rule, God expects not that we
should be ^^omniscii, but that we be Christiscii; And Paul desires to know
nothing but Christ, and him crucified, and have not we so learned Christ? must
we revile and lash our School-fellows as dulheads and trewants, whose
proficiencies are not so much as ours, nor their seize so high? ought we
not to leave that care to the Master, who best knows their capacities? or at
least remit it to his Ushers; our overmuch diligence (which will never procure
us thanks) causes our trouble. But must we not contend for the Faith? and stand
fast in it? yes, but not be clamorous, or obstreperous, reproaching or reviling
your Brethren, your Disputes must not be as with with Swords and Guns, you must
not lay more weight upon your notion than it will bear, to highten the
difference; nor endeavor to drive it in with a beetle. There are Fundamentals
and Superstructures of Faith and Order, in which we all agree there may be some
finishing work, about which, we are not altogether alike minded, yet no need to
pull down the building: Some scruples and doubts may remain for the resolution
of the next Age; Cum Elias venerit solvet nodos: this having been highly
honored with the discovery or clearer manifestation of many hidden truths;
should we particularly enquire into notions or things wherein we differ, we
shall find out discords, divisions, debates and animosities, to be causless and
unreasonable, Sinful and unchristian.

For Example, The one affirms, no Church Act can pass without the consent of
the Elders, viz. Ordinarily: the other to affirm the major vote of the Brethren
is concus^^ive, and makes a Church Act though the Elders consent not, I demand,
what damage has any Church sustained by any Elderships acting, according to
the first opinion, if it be said, some proceeding may have been hindered
thereby: And may it not be better, that proceedings be forborne when the Guides
and Rulers dissent, with whom doubtless, diverse of the fraternity will concur.
And does not former and latter experience show that the dissent of many less
considerable persons do much enervate proceedings in Churches, where matters
should be carried on, sweetly, by moral suasion, not despoticatly, by imperious
determinations; but so we may lose the truth. You may preserve it in your own
heads, but not beat it into others. A Pastor who is called to Baptize as well
as to Preach, believes his office obliges him to Baptize in a Latitude larger
than your opinion, and may have the judgment of a Synod concurring with his
own, shall it be a grief to you that he actts according to his own faith? What
cause have you to be offended? He is fully persuaded in his own mind, to the
Lord he baptizeth, and for the Lord he does it, whose Minister he is, but your
Guide, Overseer and Ruler, and who art thou that judge another man's servant,
to his own Master let him stand or fall, were the case doubtful, which I
determine not, (...) is, favores sunt ampliendoe, better two admitted to whom
it does not belong, then one denied whose right it is. I cannot imagine the
enlargment of the visible kingdom of Christ, can be any matter of offense to
any Christian, especially to those that do pretend to be the sole asserters of
his kingly Government.

For Council, None of us say their determinations do bind the particular
Churches juridice, some say they do oblige, directive, and for order in foro
exteriore, all yields they are useful for light and help; what need we here
contend^ Have they gone beyond their Teache^ allowed by all? When they do, we
(...) dispute the point, in the mean time let us not change them that they take
too much upon them, nor quarrel, and rent, and divide, and make our selves
incapable of accepting any good counsel upon a conceited possibility, that in
time, we may, be damaged by them: By the same reason we may decline the most
necessary supports of humane society, which at some times, and in some places,
have degenerated, or have been perverted from their primitive and natural
instituon, whether Councils be an Ordinance and Institution of God, as some
Reveren^^ and learned from Acts 15. conclude, or founded upon Reason and other
Scriptures, in the multitude of Councillors there is safety; and from the
light of nature, which in case allows us to use the best and utmost help; we
need not contest about, seeing we all accord (from one or all these grounds)
they may be very necessary and useful to preserve Truth and ^eace in the
Churches: and for that end (...) ^uppose all sober men will, in all doctrianl
determinations acknowledge in them a greater obliging power, than in the
judgment of the ablest man; and in composing of differences, as much as they
allow to Arbitrators in civil cases, otherwise I see not the necessity, nor
much usefulness in them.

For the Association of Churches commended to us by the last Synod, not
accepted by many, for fear of introducing Prelacy, or something as bad, nor yet
practiced by any, and while the matters do stand, why do we contend? Let not
sear and jealousy precipitate our damage, nor debar us from a useful, and in
case, necessary helps and supports; we cannot forget what the Holy Ghost says,
Woe be to him that is alone; I cannot see that a particular Ecclesiastical Body
has less need of combining or associating with other Churches than a civil
Society, or a natural body, I mean a man, each of which are fitted and
furnished in their several capacities with organs and abilities, Ad been
beatque vivendum, and Originally and naturally depend upon no other of their
kind, to exert their faculties, and put forth their operations for that end;
yet necessity has enforced them to associate with their like, for their mutual
support: Yet it is possible for diverse civil bodies to remain separate; and
following their Laws and Manners to flourish in wealth and peace: And for many
sober well meaning men, to live in the neighborhood, and observing the
dictates of their own reason, (which God has given them for their guide) to
live in peace and freedom, without submitting themselves to the common reason
of others, combined in a body politic; this, though possible, yet we choose to
commend civil Order and Government, reserving to our selves those natural
powers by liberties which God and Nature has betrusted us with as men. And why
may not particular Congregation s of a vicinity, whose concernment s are the
same associate themselves upon the same ground s, reserving themselves what i s
necessary for a single Congregation. The particularities and just boundaries I
undertake not to define. By this I hope we are on all hands convinced there is
no just cause of our distempers and divisions: my preparative having wrought so
well, makes me hopful of the cure,; I have to the particular medicines
appropriate to the forementioned malady.

1. The fear of God, a Catholicon for all distempers, especially for this; it
is the beginning of wisdom, it has the promises of protection, preservation
and deliverance from evil, and of all blessing and good, no good shall be
lacking to them that fear him. They that have awful apprehensions of Gods
Omnipotency, omniscience and sovereignty, and acknowledge him as their Father,
Master and Lord, dare not brawle with their Brethren, quarrel with their
School-fellows, beat their fellow servants in his sight and presence; dare not
before the eyes of his glorious Majesty (who is a jealous God) set themselves
upon his Judgment Seat, and pass their Sentences upon those that must stand and
fall to their own Master, but would pardon those whom he forgives, and embrace
those whom ^e entertains. A Stranger observing our actings, would conclude a s
he did, there is no fear of God, in this place, or at least we have not right
conceptions of him, notwithstanding our ^retentions; doubtless if the fear of
God possess our hearts, our divisions will cease, our hearts be allayed, our
actions ^^ore regular, our Churches, State and Persons happy: Blessed is the
Man that fears God, and he shall see peace upon Israel.

2. Humility, a precious virtue of strange operation, it lays a man low, and
yet exalts him, God gives Grace to the humble; it is prescribed by an ancient
Doctor for the same Malady: Sit aliquis fide^is, sit potens in explicanda
cognitione, sit sapiens in Sermonum justa dijudicatione, sit castus in
operibus, quanto major esse videtur, tanto humilior esse debet: The humble
Spirit, sensible of its own unworthiness, will find work enough at home, and
think all his diligence too little to secure his own heart, will find no spare
time or abilities to pry into other men's ways; suspects himself more than he
does others, esteeming them better than himself; the object of his greatest
displeasure is within, he is most severe to himself, and indulgent to others,
he will seek for and embrace peace abroad, that he may make War at home, where
his most deadly Enemies lurk, which he makes his only business, not engaging
himself in the contest of others? believing they may be composed by the
prudence of a few wise men, and would be enflamed by the intermedling of men of
no greater abilities, than he will own to be in himself; and truly wise men,
and weak men will very hardly be drawn to make or intermeddle in a Fray lest
they get a broken head for their pains.

The humble man is not ambitious of advancements, least he get a fall and Qui
^acet in terra non habet unde cadat; He acknowledges God has given him a full
employment with his own business, and an ample reward for all his services in
his present state, and for the remainder promised, is very well content to stay
till the general day of payment, in the mean time, he thinks been vixit, been
qui latuit, and therefore will not tread upon other men's heads, that he may be
the more conspicuous, nor fire the temple of Diana, that he may be talked of;
nor evaporate his science, and scatter his notions that he may be admired, and
dicier hic est, all his ambition i s to know Christ and to be known of him.

3. Charity a Divine virtue, the efficacy whereof is inexpressible,
inerrabilis, says one, Omnia sustinet, nihil illiberale aut sor didum in
charitate, nihil superbum, charitas non agnoscit schisma, charitas seditionem
non movet, charitas omnia in concordia facit: According to the Doctrine of
Paul, 1 Cor. 13. It vaunteth not, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
rejoiceth not in iniquity, it never fails, having a divine original, the love
of God shed abroad in our hearts. That inexhaustible fountain can never dry up,
nor the streams thereof ever cease running; it makes us not only love God, but
those whom God loves; he that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten, because he is a Son of God, not because he is of the same opinion, or
that this or that quality in him is pleasing: such love of the brethren, is no
character of our Adoption, though the want of it will be of the contrary. Novit
amor spiritualis nos in hac vita, non nisi ex part cognoscere, at amor
carnalis non nisi omnia scientem and per omnia consentientem amare novit, one
scruple of this love so straightly commanded and so highly commended to us by
our Lord and Savior, and by his beloved Disciple, that we love one another,
were sufficient to remove our distempers and unite us in him, and enforce us to
love those, whom he has loved, and for whom he died; were our differences and
provocations arrived to a greater height, then thanks be to God, as yet they
are, and which this discourse labors to prevent; and if it effect it not, He
change my Profession from a Physician to a Preacher, and tell you that he that
loves not his Brother, the love of the Father is not in him: Brethren, ye have
been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh,
but by love serve one another; but if ye bite and devour one another, take heed
that ye be not consumed one of another; our Father will certainly find some Rod
to make his Children quiet and agree together.

4. Meekness, a Virtue most necessary to fit for Society, making us gentle,
tractable, perswadable, willing to bear the yoke in a Society; without it men
are like wild Beasts, and untamed Hei^ers* that will strike with the foot, and
push with the horn, there is no coming within them, they are children (...), of
unperswadableness, or of disobedience* the one being a natural effect of the
former. The meek spirits are the Glue and Soader that unites Societies; by this
Moses bare the manners of a crooked Generation in the wilderness, and without
it would have treated them as Rebels, for so he terms them; Hear ye Rebels,
when he spoke unadvisedly with his lips: Take away meekness, you take away
peace from the Earth, they are the meek Souls that keep the World quiet, and
have our Saviors promise, to inherit the Earth, they are the only meet
Scholars of Christ, Learn of me for I am meek* them he promises to teach his
way; and to guide in judgment; they that have learnt of such a Master cannot but
be desirable, being easy to be entreated, whenas others like thorns, cannot be
handled without pricking; the one lamb-like may be lead by a Child, the other
Lion-like, not yielding to the greatest strength; Duris ut ilex tonse
bipe^^ibus, will stand many a stroke before they fall; some men are led as
Bears to a stake, and are held there with no less difficulty, till opportunity
be gained of running to their Den; they cannot see, they cannot understand, a
Sickness it seems infesting our Nation in Chancers time (that which Englishmen
wills not, that he understands not:) It is a sickness of the flesh we labor of
under ^^^tred, variance, emulations, envying, wrath, strife; the cure of which
prescribed by the Apostle is recipe of the fruit of the Spirit, Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness.

5. Honoring and reverencing our Seniors, in all respects, especially your
Rulers and Leaders in Church and State, it is the first Commandment with
promise, honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear: it is a just debt we owe
them, the non-payment whereof will occasion many contests and ^uits, witness
our many Courts, and the much time spent in deciding the controversies of Meum
and Tuum; you will say, our common speech will evince we are not defective in this
matter, we call them Honored and Worshipful, and Reverend* etc. good words I
confess, (and I could wish those that deserve them might never have worse) but
good words will not pay debts; we have learnt to Complement, if we were hearty,
it would be demonstrated by a more ingenious remuneration (at least as to the
specie) then is done in many places, sed hoes obiter, and preter scopum, my
intention is that honor and respect, which God and nature requires from us, to
our Parents, Leaders, Guids and Shepherds, My sheep hear my voice, a Son
honors his Father, Travelers follow their Guids, and Soldiers obey the
commands of their Captain; and unless they do so, will undoubtedly miscarry:
Sheep scattering from their Shepherd, are in danger of the Wolf, Soldiers
disputing the Commands of their Captain, lay themselves open to the Enemy,
Travelers quarrelling with their Guide, may happen to lose their way, and
Children disobeying their Parents may fall short of their Portions: we must not
pervert the order of God and nature, why should I expect my fellow-traveller
should direct my way better than my guide? why then do I employ him? that my
Comrade should give a command more advantageous than my Captain, that a Sheep
(though it were vir gregis) should lead the flock into better Pasture than the
Shepherd; that my Brother should have a greater care for me than my Father: At
bonus aliquando dormitat Homerus, they may mistake, they are but men subject to
passions, errors and irregularities. They claim no freedom from humane
infirmities and failings, yet we may say they are not mere men, though not Dii
(...) or minorum gentium, yet the scripture honors them with the title of
Gods, and also calls them M^n of God, who acting for God, In his (...) and by
his order and appointment, (...) expect a greater assistance from the spirit of
truth, than private men, considering also their advantages of Education and
experience, and the joint Prayers of those for whom they labor, which I hope
will not be denied them: But what greater certainty can you have of others, are
they infallible? may not they also? do not they mistake? have not they their
frailties? undoubtedly they have, and though amongst them there may be
acknowledged diverse pious, prudent, knowing men (I pray God increase their
number, near will envy for their sakes) yet they have not the same call from
God, nor the like promise of assistance as their Leaders have; and such men
doubtless, If they are what they are taken to be, will be most forward to
assist and support the Authority of their Leaders, and be the most (...) in
obedience; and for others, (...) those that are otherwise minded, that (...)
and love to behold their Fathers ^^kedness* let them but remember from whom
they are descended, that such ways lead to confusion, and every evil work, and
will in conclusion draw upon them heavy judgments; let not us that have and do
enjoy the greatest privileges have been (...) hi^herto by wonderful providence
(...) own ruin by our sinful (...), to prevent which I have proposed these
Medicaments. A ^eceipt of these five simples, without composition accompanied
with Fasting and Praying, till they are well digested, with Gods blessing may
bring about the ^^pected (...): for the Dose you need (...) trouble your self,
there is not danger (...) taking too much; And if this should (...) which I
fear not, I have another (...), but I fear it is somewhat corroding (...) I
hope I shall never have occasion (...) my lenitives working according to (...)
^^^pectation: so I take my leave, (...) you to God, and a good Nurse.

FINIS.

