SEVERAL Laws and Orders Made at the second Sessions of the GENERAL COURT
Holden at BOSTON October. 15. 1679. and Printed by their Order, EDWARD RAWSON
Secr.
FOr the prevention of the profanation of the Sabbath, and disorders on
Saturday night by Horses and Carts passing late out of the Town of Boston.

It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court; Order to prevent Sabbathbreaking.
That there be a Ward from Sun set on Saturday night, until nine of the Clock,
or after, consisting of one of the Select men, or Constable of Boston, with two
or more meet persons, who shall walk between the Fortification and the Towns
end, and upon no pretense whatsoever suffer any Cart to pass out of the Town
after Sun set nor any Footman, or Horseman without such good account of the
necessity of his business, as may be to their satisfaction; And all persons
attempting to ride or drive out of Town after sun set without such reasonable
satisfaction given, shall be apprehended and brought before Authority, to be
proceeded against as Sabbath breakers, and all other Towns are empowered to do
the like as need shall be.

THis Court having a sense of the great Ruins in Boston by Fire, and hazard
still of the same by reason of the joining and nearness of their buildings, for
prevention of damage and loss thereby for future.

Do therefore Order and Enact; New Buildings in Boston to be Stone or Brick.
That henceforth no dwelling house in Boston shall be erected and set up,
except of stone or brick, and covered with Slate or Tyle, on penalty of
forfieting double the value of such buildings, unless by allowance and liberty
obtained otherwise from the Magistrates, Commissioners and Select men of Boston
or major part of them; And further the Select men of Boston are hereby empowered
to hear and determine all Controversies about proprietyes, and rights of any
person to build on the Land wherein now lately the housing has been burnt
down, allowing liberty of Appeal for any person grieved to the County Court.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that henceforth the
Select men of each Town take care that Tything men be Annually chosen in their
several precincts of their most prudent and discreet Inhabitants, and sworn to
the faithful discharge of their trust (where no Magistrate or Commissioners
are) before the Select men of the place, (...)
and the said Tything men are required diligently to inspect all houses
licensed, or unlicensed, where they shall have notice, or have ground to
suspect that any person or persons do spend their time or Estates by night or
by day; in Tippling, gaming, or otherwise unprofitably, or do sell by retayle
within doors or without strong drink, wine, ale, Cider, Rhum, Brandy, Perry,
Matheglin, etc. without license, and into said houses where such disorders
shall by them be found, they may, and are hereby required and empowered to enter
into and make search in their Cellars, or any other places within or about the
same where they may suspect, or have notice, that wines, strong beer, Ale,
Cider, Perry, Matheglin, Rhum, Brandy, etc. are lodged, and in case they shall
find any quantity of either, whereof the Owners do not give said Tything men a
satisfactory account of their having the same, any three of them agreeing, they
shall by Warrant from any Magistrate, or Commissioners invested with
Magistratical power, or (where no Magistrate is within five miles of the place)
they shall without Warrant requiring the aid of the Constable, seize, carry
away, and secure all such wines, strong beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Matheglin,
Rhum, Brandy, etc. and present an Account thereof with the names of the persons
from whom they took it to the next Magistrate, or Commissioner of the Town
where any be that are invested with Magistratical power, who may, and are
hereby empowered to proceed against said delinquent parties, and dispose of said
wines, strong Beer, etc. as to them shall seem meet; and if for value more then
ten pounds, they are then to bind said parties over to the County Court, to be
there proceeded against as the Law directs. In all which Cases full recompense
shall be made to the Tything men, and other Officers for all their care,
trouble and expenses in searching and securing said goods, and the remainder of
the Goods seized, or value thereof, where the Magistrate, County Court, or
Commissioners Court, that have orderly Cognizance thereof, shall not see reason
to return the same to the parties from whom it was taken, the same shall be put
into the County Treasury.

Also the Tything men are required diligently to inspect the manner of all
disorderly persons, and where by more private admonitions they will not be
reclaimed, they are from time to time to present their names to the next
Magistrate, or Commissioner invested with Magistratical power, who shall
proceed against them as the Law directs, as also they are in like manner to
present the names of all single persons that live from under Family Government,
stubborn and disorderly Children and Servants, night-walkers, Typlers, Sabbath
breakers, by night or by day, and such as absent themselves from the public
Worship of God on the Lords days, or whatever else course or practice of any
person or persons whatsoever tending to debauchery, Irreligion, profaneness, and
Atheism amongst us, whether by omission of Family Government, nurture, and
religious duties, and instruction of Children and Servants, or idle,
profligate, uncivil or rude practices of any sort, the names of all which
persons with the (...) whereof they are accused, and witnesses thereof, they
shall present to the next Magistrate, or Commissioner, where any are in the
said Town invested with Magistratical power, who shall proceed against and
punish all such misdemeanors by Fine, Imprisonment, or binding over to the
County Court as the Law directs.

WHereas you A. B. are chosen a Tything-man within the Town of D. for one year,
until others be chosen and sworn in your room and stead, you do here swear by
the living God that you will diligently endeavor, Tything Men's Oath.
and to the utmost of your Ability perform and intend the duty of your place
according to the particulars specified in the Laws peculiar to your Office, So
help you God.

IT is hereby Ordered, (...)
that henceforth no Ordinary keeper shall have any action or recover any debt
that shall hereafter be made by any Inhabitant for any sort of drink, or Liquor
sold to such Inhabitants, and that the said In-keeper besides the losing of his
Debt shall upon Conviction before any Magistrate or persons Authorized in such
a case forfeit the sum of five shillings in money to the County where the fact
is committed for every such offense or Act.

THis Court being informed that many persons do not appear and attend Military
Exercises in the places to which they did of long time belong, and being called
upon for their defects, give Answer that they are removed, Soldiers when and
where to attend Military Service. etc.
when indeed being young men, and unwilling to be confined to any certain place
they move backward and forward, and so perform duty at no place.

Does hereby Order and Enact, that when any person is entered and belongs to the
Military Company in one Town, he shall not be at liberty, or escape duty in
said place till he bring a Certificate from the chief Officer of the place to
which he removed, to the chief Officer of the place from whence he removed that
he is entered in their Lists and taken notice of as one of their own men, so
that he may be in a way of duty; and until that time the remover to be liable
to duty in his first place, and to satisfy by distress, or suits the demands of
the Commander or Clark according to proportion of former Laws.

WHereas there is no declaration made by this Court what shall be taken for an
Alarm in the day time, and by reason of the variety of occasions, the signals
prescribed for a night Alarm would be full of uncertaintyes in the day,
especially, Order about Alarm.
to Neighbor Towns.

It is Ordered, that besides the above said signs or some of them given in the
place where the Alarm is first taken or made, there shall be a Messenger or
Messengers sent to the neighbor Towns by the Committee of Militia, or some of
them, and directed to the Committee of Militia, or some of them, whence
Assistance is desired, who crying Arm, Arm, etc. shall be an Alarm to all such
places, and thereupon all the Soldiers of that Town shall be bound immediately
to repair to their Colors, and then attend further Orders sent by writing, or
by word by a sufficient Messenger, and all this under the penalty of five
pounds a man for every defect.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that all Ships and
Vessels above twelve Tuns, (except the Confederates of this Colony) that trade
within our Ports, belonging to other places, An Order for 12d per Tun of all
Vessels above 12 Tun.
or that the greater part of the Owners thereof are not Inhabitants of this
Jurisdiction, shall pay one shilling in money for every Tun of burden they are
of, every Voyage they make hither, toward provisions for public
Fortifications, which is to be paid to Mr. Paul Dudley for the Ports of Boston
and Charls-Town. Mr. Hilliard Veren, Sen. for the Ports of Salem and Marble
head. Mr. Richard Martin, for Piscataqua, or to whom they shall depute under
their hands, and in case the Ship Master or Commander of any such Ships or
Vessels shall refuse upon demands to pay the same, it shall be lawful for the
said Gentlemen, or any one of them to send forth their Warrants to any Marshal
or Constable to distrain for the same, with the charge thereof upon the Goods
of such Master or Commander, or any one of the Appurtenances of their Vessels,
and the Gentlemen above appointed shall be accountable to the General Court
when called thereunto, for what they shall receive by virtue of this Order, and
are to deliver the money they have in their hands once every year, or oftener,
unto the Surveyor General, excepting one shilling out of every twenty shillings
they shall receive, which shall be allowed them for defraying the necessary
charges thereabouts, and the former Law of six pence per Tun is hereby repealed.

IT is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, Constables to read the Laws
of the Sabbath in all Towns.
that the Law with respect to Ministers reading the Laws respecting the Sabbath
once in the year publicly upon the Lords day be henceforth repealed.

It is further Ordered, that the Constable or Town Clerk of each Town perform
the same upon some public meeting of the Inhabitants.

UPon Complaint from several Committees of the Train Bands that their Drummers
refuse to attend their duty, and will lay down their places, unless hired, and
that too at unreasonable Rates.

This Court does therefore Order, and be it hereby Ordered and Enacted; That
any Drummer now in place, or belonging to any of the Companyes in this
Jurisdiction that shall desert the said service, or lay down his place during
his abode in the Town, Order about Drummers.
unless regularly dismissed by the chief Officer or Officers of the Company,
(or in case of just complaint) by the County Court, shall forfeit forty
shillings in money to be levied by the Clerk by Warrant from the chief Officer
of said Company, and for future it shall be in the power of the Commission
Officers of each Company to nominate and choose out of their own Company any
meet person or persons to serve as a Drummer, and if any shall refuse to accept
the place, and attend the Service, or desert the service unless regularly
dismissed as above, he shall pay forty shillings in money to the use of the
Company, to be levied as above; And all Drummers so chosen and serving, shall
be allowed Ten shillings per Annum in Case the Company find and maintain the
Drum, or Twenty shillings per Annum if he maintain the Drum, which shall be
delivered to him in good repair: all persons chosen Drummers agrieved, have
liberty to make their Complaint to the County Court for Relief.

Whether when a Case is committed to a Jury, they ought not to bring in their
Verdict upon the merit of the Case without evading the issue upon any
Circumstance in way of Bar, Resolution of a Question.
or Nonsuit pleaded, if it be not allowed by the Judges of the Court at the
time. This Question is resolved on the Affirmative.

AS an Addition to the Law Title Weights and Measures, This Court does Order,
that the Country Treasurer do provide upon the Country charges these further
brass weights following, one seven pound weight, one fourteen pound, Order
about Weights and Measures.
one twenty eight pound, and one fifty six pound, which shall be after sixteen
Ounces to the pound, with fit Scales and Steel beam to weigh and try withal.
And the Constable of every Town within this Jurisdiction, where such weights
are frequently used, shall within six months after publication hereof, provide
upon the Town charge all such weights, at least of Lead, to be tried and sized
by the Countries standards, and sealed, kept, and used in the several Towns as
Standards, and improved by the Select men and Constables as the Law directs for
smaller Weights.

FINIS.

