SEVERAL LAWS MADE AT THE SECOND SESSIONS OF THE General Court Held at BOSTON
October 10. 1683. And Published by their Order: Edward Rawson Secr.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That all the Laws under
the Head or Title of Imposts; Impost on Wine and strong Liquors; Law as Public
Charges Repealed from June 10 1684.
Impost upon all goods and Provisions, with any Explanation or Addition made
thereunto; and the Law Title Public Charges, Section the third, referring to
the Treasurer, issuing out Warrants to the Constables, for Collecting of
Assessments yearly, shall be and remain in force for the present Year, and
until the tenth day of June, which will be in the Year Sixteen hundred eighty
and four, and for no longer time; Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AS an Addition to the Law Title Schools:

This Court does Order and Enact; That every Town consisting of more than five
hundred Families or Householders, shall set up, Addition to the Law for Schools
both Grammar and Writing, etc
and maintain two Grammar Schools, and two Writing Schools; the Masters whereof
shall be fit and able to Instruct Youth, as said Law directs.

And whereas the said Law makes the Penalty for such Towns as provide not
Schools as the Law directs, to pay to the next School ten pounds:

This Court hereby Enacts, that the Penalty shall be twenty pounds where there
are two hundred Families or Householders.

AS an Addition to the Law Title Inkeepers: Whereas the Law Section 3d. Imposes
a Fine of five shillings on the Licensed Persons that are the breakers of that
Law;

This Court does Order, that the Penalty for the Breach of that Law shall
henceforth be forty shillings.

FOr the Prevention of Deceit and Cousenage by Persons being taken by
Execution, or delivering themselves over as Servants unto any, thereby to
prevent their Creditors taking hold on them.

It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, that
henceforth no Person or Persons shall be taken or delivered over by Execution,
or shall deliver up themselves to any one or more of their Creditors in way of
Service for satisfaction of any Debt or Debts, owing by him or them, unless it
be with the knowledge and approbation of the Court of that County where such
Debtor or Creditor dwell, that they may receive satisfaction in the justness of
the Debt, and likewise set the time that the Debtor shall serve; and that it
may be publicly Declared that he is a Servant:

Provided this Order shall not be Interpreted so as to obstruct the legal
Procedure of any other Creditors, against any Person so disposed to Service,
either formerly or hereafter.

FINIS.

