SEVERAL LAWS MADE AT THE General Court Called and Held at BOSTON on the
seventh of February and Continued by Adjournment to the thirty first of March
1683.
And by their ORDER Printed and Published; By Edward Rawson Secretary.
I. WHereas by the Law, title Mines; It is Provided that the fifth part of Gold
and Silver Oar, which is found in this Colony, shall be paid to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors: and there being Rumors of such Mines found
in this Jurisdiction; Law to prevent all deceit by opening of Mines etc that
His Majesty may have his due, etc.


It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that some moet
Persons be appointed from time to time by this Court to make Enquiry after such
Mines, and do their uttermost endeavor: that a fifth part of the said Oar be
reserved for His Majesty, and that they take care that His Majesty may have his
just due for the same, both in quantity and quality: And it is further Ordered,
that if any Person or Persons shall make Discovery of any Royal Mine or Mines,
of Gold or Silver, and shall Improve said Mine or any part of it to his own use
and benefit before he has given Account and Information to the Officer that
shall be appointed as aforesaid, the Person so transgressing shall forfeit the
treble value thereof, and shall be fined ten pounds for one Offense. And Mr.
Jeremiah Dummer is Appointed to be the Officer till this Court take further
Order.

As an Addition to the LAw title NAVAL OFFICE.
IT is Ordered that the Port of Boston, to which Charlstown is annexed, and the
Port of Salem, to which Marble-head, Beverly, Gloucester, Ipswich, Rowley,
Newbury and Salisbury are annexed as Members: Addition to the Law title Naval
Office.
are and shall be the lawful Ports in this Colony, where all Ships and other
Vessels shall Lade or Unlade any of the Plantations enumerated Goods, or other
Goods from foreign parts, and no where else, on penalty of the Confiscation of
such Ship or Vessel, with her Goods, Tackle, etc. as shall Lade or Unlade
elsewhere.

II. That no Ship or other Vessel Arriving from Foreign parts, shall break
Bulk before Entry with the Governor and Naval Officer if they come into the
Port of Boston, and in all other Ports not before Entry with the Naval Officer,
on penalty of Confiscation of Ship and Goods, and when the Masters of said
Ships or Vessels are not Inhabitants in this Colony, then into whatsoever Port
they Arrive, their Entry shall be made with the Governor and Naval Officer
that belongs to the Port where they Trade.

III. That no Ship or other Vessel shall Lade or Unlade any part of their Cargo
in the night season, that is not of the growth of this Country, unless it be
in case of necessity, and then notice to be given to His Majesty's Officer upon
the place, if any be there, on penalty of Confiscation of said Goods.

IV. That no Ship or other Vessel shall take on Board any of the enumerated
Plantation Commodities more then their Ships Store, before they have given
Bond, or show a Certificate that they have already given Bond, as the Act of
Parliament requires, on penalty of Confiscation of such Ship and Goods, unless
they be such as pass from Port to Port of our own Jurisdiction; who are then to
have a Permit signed by the Naval Officer.

V. And for the information and Satisfaction of all persons concerned: It is
hereby Declared, that His Majesty's Officer has power to sieze any Ship or
Vessel he judges forfeited to His Majesty in order to her Trial, and that he
has liberty to search all Vessels, that are outward Bound, and to put Waiters
on Board all Ships inward Bound.

VI. And that the time of Entering and Clearing at the Naval Office be betwixt
the hours of ten and twelve, in the Forenoon, and two and four in the Afternoon.

VII. That no Vessel of twenty Tonnes and upward, except such as fetch Wood,
Board, Stones or Lumber, shall pass the Castle without a Let-pass from the
Governor for the time being, if resident in Boston, and in his absence from
the Deputy Governor, on penalty of twenty Pounds.

As an Addition unto, and Explanation of the Law title Shipping, Page 141.
persons penalto Trade with Ships on the Coast before come into the Harbor.


It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that no person shall Trade
with any Ship or Vessel Arriving on our Coast until they are brought to Anchor
in one of the Ports assigned and appointed in the Law title an Addition to the
Laws title Naval Office, on penalty and forfeiture provided in the said Law
title Shipping.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the Law made
October 15 th. 1673. Entitled as an Addition to the Law title Freemen, Section
the third is hereby Repealed. Law in Page 73 as to Freemen Repealed


THis Court being informed that there are several Commission Officers in this
Judisdiction that have not their Commission according to Law.

It is therefore Ordered by this Court, that each Clark belonging to the
several Military Companies in this Colony, shall within one Month after the
publication hereof, repair to the Secretary, and take out such Commissions as
shall be wanting, and them to deliver to each Commission Officer belonging to
their own Company, as they shall be directed; And so from time to time within
one Month after any Commission Officer is Chosen and Appointed by this Court:
Commissions to Military Officers to be taken out by the Clerks of Companies
within one Month, etc.
And if any Clerk shall neglect his Duty herein, he shall forfeit the sum of
twenty shillings to the use of the Company.

FINIS

