SEVERAL ORDERS and LAWS Made at the Second SESSIONS of the General Court Held
at Boston, October: 15th. 1684. And Printed by their Order: Edward Rawson Secr'.
IT is Ordered, that in case of Misdemeanour or vehement Suspicion thereof,
where no Court is at hand, any Magistrate, or Magistratical Commissioner,
Magistrates and Commissioners power in case of Misdemeanors suspected etc.
by Warrant under his hand or being present by his command, may empower any
person to make Search and Apprehend any Disorderly Person, whereby their
Misdemeanors may be brought forth and punished, and further Evils of like kind
prevented; which Man so Empowered or Commanded, shall in the particular he is
Employed in, have equal power with a Constable for requiring Aid and Assistance.

IT is hereby Ordered; that it may and shall be lawful for the Clerks, or
Recorders of any and every County Court of this Colony to direct any Execution
by them drawn to the Marshal General, as well as to the Marshals of the County,
Executions may be served by the Marshal Gen: in cases
so that the person who shall obtain a Judgment, and take out Execution, may
employ which of them he shall see meet; Provided always, when any such
Execution shall be delivered to the Marshal General, the cost of it shall not
be greater than if it had been Served by the Marshal of the County where the
Judgment was granted.

THe Consideration that the Country is at great Charges for transportation of
Pay to Boston and Charlstown, from the remote parts of the Colony; as also
great loss in Measure:

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; Country debts to be
paid to all parties in the several Towns they live in:
that those to whom the Country is indebted for Salleries, or otherwise, shall
have order from the Treasurer to receive their pay in the Towns where they live
out of the Country Rates, so far as it will reach, or by the next Towns
adjacent for what is due in Country pay; Provided the Payments ordered by the
Treasurer be conveyed to those who are to receive it by the Constables at the
Countries charge, to prevent so much loss and cost for carriage.

WHereas Complaint has been made to this Court, that Wolves have been taken in
one Town and afterward carried into another, and there killed; whereby such
other Towns has been unjustly charged.

This Court does Order and Appoint, that no Town or County shall be liable to
make any payment by virtue of the Law Title Wolves, Wolves to be caught and
killed in the Town bounds or not to be paid for;
except for such as shall be both caught and killed within their Bounds
respectively; Any Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

