SELF-IMPLOYMENT IN SECRET: CONTAINING

I. Evidences upon Self-Examination.

II. Thoughts upon Painful Afflictions.

III. Memorials for Practice.

Left under the Handwriting of that Learned and Reverend Divine, Mr. JOHN
CORBET, Late of CHICHESTER.

The Third Edition, carefully Corrected.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND Printed by Richard Pierce for Joseph Brunning, And are
to be sold at his Shop at the Corner of Prison-Lane next the Exchange 1684.

To the Reader
THE Self-Examinations, Meditations, and Holy Directions emitted herewith, have
been Printed elsswhere. Sundry piously Affected Persons in this place, who have
thought it there Concern to improve some part of the outward Estate which God
has Blessed them with, in promoting the Publication of Books, the Reading
whereof may ^^nd to the Good of souls, happ'ning to meet therewith, desired
that the same things might be reprinted here also: and having Importuned ^^e in
a few Proefatory lines to Recommend what is here to be seen unto the Readers
serious Perusal, I could not but readily embrace such (...) Motion, and
Encourage such an Undertaking.

Concerning the Author, Some of those books published by himself in his
Lifetime, show him to be a man of Parts and Learning; And what is here brought
into public view, from the papers found in his Study after his Death,
manifest that he was a very Holy man and one that did walk before God with a
Perfect heart. Knowledge and Grace are seldom found in an eminent degree in the
same man, But if they do (as sometimes they do) meet together; they render the
Person in whom they are exceeding Lovely and Desirable. And tho men should
attain unto never such Eminency in Speculative and Rational knowledge, if they
are unacquainted with Religion in the Power of it, or remain wholly ignorant of
themselves, and of their own Spiritual and Eternal Estate Godward; all other
Sciences will at last aggravate the Condemnation of those who have arrived to
the greatest perfection in them. I have often thought on that excellent Saying
of one of the Ancients, Multo melior et laudabilior es si te Cognoscis, quam
si te neglecto cognosceres Cursum syderum, Vires bobarum, Complectiones
Hominum, Naturas animalium, et haberes omnium Coelestium et Terrestrium
scientiam. Bern. He that knows Christ and himself is a happy man, tho he
should know nothing else; And tho a man should know all other things if he
knows not Christ and himself, he will never be happy. We see therefore that
the most Learned men in the world when they come to dye, wish that they had
spent more time in Devotion and in the practical part of Religion. Salmasins
had spent many years in Readings and hard Study, and yet as he was going out of
the world, complained bitterly that he had lost a world of Time, and that if he
might live another year it should be spent in reading the Scriptures saying All
the Learning in the world without true Piety and the Fear of God, is nothing
worth. There was in Holland a poor man of exemplary holiness who used thus to
divide and spend his time daily, Eight hours he allowed himself for Sleep and
repose, eight hours he spent in Labor, attending his particular Calling, the
other eight hours he spent in religious excercises, such as Prayer, Meditation,
Reading the Scriputures etc. Grotius who is esteemed as Learned a man as any
the last Age did afford, and who was in other respects a great man, professed
that he would give all his Learning and Honors for the Piety of that poor
devout soul, who made Religion his main Business. The same Grotius said of
himself, Vitam perdidi operose nihil agendo, having too much neglected the
practical part of Godliness, he had taken a great deal of pains for that which
at last he saw was nothing worth. Another, (being a man of admirable parts both
natural and acquired,) upon his Deathbed had these words I repent of all my
Life but that part of it which I spent in Comunion with God and in doing Good.

Some whose Devotions have bin only Formal have found such soul-contentment
therein, as that they have preferred such a life to the greatest Earthly
Glories; yea, have valued it above Crowns and Kingdoms. But what blessed and
glorious Consolations may they hope for who Exercise themselves unto Godliness
in the power of it. Tho some such have their dark hours for the present, yet
commonly when they are upon deathbeds their souls are filled with Comfort,
having this rejoicing, the Testimony of their Consciences, that in simplicity
and Godly Sincerity they have had their Conversation in the world. However they
that have sown in tears shall hereafter reap in joy. We should consider the
end of the conversation of the Lords faithful servants, especially such as have
taught the Word of God, and follow their Faith and Holiness. It is a great loss
to the world when men of singular Piety are taken out of it: Yet sometimes the
Lord Jesus does by the death of his dearest Servants Cause the Interest of his
own holy Kingdom to be promoved in the hearts of those that survive. Timothy
indeed; who was intimate with Paul knew his manner of life more than others
did; But there are Eminent Saints who have meet with that of God in Secret
which none living know of but the Lord and they; only after they are dead
others come to be aquainted with their secret walkings before the Lord, and
thereby many a soul has bin Edified by that which was designed only for a
private help. So it has happened with respect to what is here presented. If the
Republication of it among ourselves shall any way Conduce to the Promoting of
Holiness in the Hearts and Lives of men, they that have had an hand therein
will have no cause to repent of what they have done. That it may be so, is the
Prayer and hearts desire of him who is

Less than the Least of Saints INCREASE MATHER.
Boston N. E. November. 27. 1684.
Mr. CORBET'S ENQUIRY INTO THE STATE OF HIS SOUL.
HIS INTRODUCTION.
IN order to peace of Conscience and Assurance of my good Estate toward GOD,
it must in reason be supposed, that I may rightly understand the marks of
Sincerity set down in God's Word, as also the predominant inclination and
motions of my own Soul; and that I may be so far Assured of my right
understanding of the things aforesaid, as to have no reasonable ground of
Doubting thereof. For I have no other ordinary way to know my Sincerity in
order to the said Peace and Assurance, but to Examine it according to my best
understanding by the Marks thereof set down in God's Word. In this
Self-Examination it is requisite that I use all Diligence and Impartiality with
Constancy; and that I earnestly pray for God's asistance in it, and heartily
offer my self to His Search, as David did, Psalm. 139. 23. Search me, O God, and
know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts. Wherefore if upon the most
Impartial and Diligent Search, that I can make, according to the best of my
understanding, together with Earnest and Constant Prayer to God to assist me
therein, as in my Greatest Concern, it does most rationally appear to me, that
the predominant Inclination and Motions of my Soul are agreeable to the marks of
sincerity set down in God's Word, then my Conscience doing its Office aright,
is to Judge for me accordingly, viz. that I am Sincere. And in this Judgment I
am to acquiesce, because it is the Judgment of God's Agent and Minister, which
He has set up within me to judge under Him of my internal State, according to
His Law, by which he Himself does and will judge me. God has the same Aspect
upon the Soul, which Conscience his Vicegerent has, as it from time to time,
or ordinarily judges not against Him or without Him, but under Him and
according to His Judgment, either acquitting or condemning. To this purpose the
Apostle speaks 1. John 3. 20. 21. If our heart Condemn us, God is Greater
than our heart, and knows all things. -- if our heart Condemn us not, then
have we Confidence toward God.

THE STATE OF MY OWN SOUL, According to the Strictest Search that I can make
Psalm. 139. 24. Search me O LORD, and know my heart, try me and know my
thoughts.
And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting,
Amen.

The following Particulars were set down in December. Jan. Feb. Anno 1663.
AS far as I am able to discern my heart and ways, I have chosen the Lord for
my portion; I take up my rest in Him, and not in the Creature. To Love and fear
and admire and bless him, and to have Comunion with him is my chief Joy. And
the eternal Vision and Fruition of God is my great Hope. I would not only have
God hereafter, but here in this World for my Chief good. He is even now better
than all the world

I come to God by Jesus Christ. And as I believe in God, I believe also in
Christ, and rejoice and glory in him, and acknowledging my own sinfulness and
unworthyness, I rest entirely on him as the ground of my Justification to Life,
and of all favor and Acceptance with God.

I receive Christ as my Lord, and give up my self to him, I let him into my
heart by Faith; I Esteem him precious, and am willing to suffer the loss of
all, that I may win Him. I desire to know him in the power of his Death and
Resurrection, and am much grieved that I do so weakly experience that power,
and feel it no more operative in me, in my dying to sin and the world, and in
living and walking in the Spirit.

I do not cease to lament the more heinous sins of my Life, and cannot forbear
the continual imploring of the Pardon of them, I do not return again to them,
and I resolve never so to do. I watch and pray and strive against all sin, but
especially against those sins, to which I am more especially inclined. My
conflicts are daily and am put hard to it; But I do not yield up my self to any
sin, nor lie down in it, yea I do not suffer sinful Cogitations to lodge in me.
Howbeit I am many times much discomposed, damped in spirit, deadned in duty,
distracted in my studies, and molested and hindered every way by the sin that
dwells in me. But I resolve that sin shall have no rest in my soul, and that
I will never enjoy it. Though I cannot keep sin out of my heart, yet it does
not reign in my mortal body, nor do I yield my members to the service of it.

I would fulfill all Righteousness, and owe nothing to any man but Love. I had a
hundredfold rather suffer wrong than do the least wrong.

It was said of Christ, that no guile was found in his mouth, and of the
faithful Company that followed the Lamb, that no guile was found in their
mouth: And that it may be so with me, I Endeavor with my whole heart.

I trust God with my chiefest outward Concernment, even with that, about which
I am most solicitous, and wherein to be satisfied is of great moment to me, for
that it has as great an influence upon my Spirit, as any outward thing has.
And I do believe that God will provide for me herein or otherwise supply the
want of it. My earnest desire of God is, that my outward condition may be so
stated by his Wise and Gracious Providence, as I may be least exposed to
Temptation, and best disposed and furthered unto Duty.

I have an inclination to seek self, particularly in vain applause, and that in
Religious services; and herein I have been highly guilty, but I shame my self
for it before God, and I am willing to be satisfied in the praise that comes
from him alone: and I trust through his Grace, that I can deny my self in matter
of Reputation to do his Will.

I love the Lord Jesus Christ, and all his Saints. The broken estate of the
Church, especially by intestine Evils, is a great trouble to my Spirit. The
Scandals of Professors I am truly grieved at, and I would not by their
Weaknesses seek to excuse my own faults, or an advancing of my own virtues.

I have no settled Bitterness and Revenge against my Enemies, but I Love, pity,
and pray for them. As concerning God's Enemies I am more Provoked, but I would
not be inhumane or cruel against them: For the wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of God.

I contemn none, I would not imbitter the Spirit of any. I would answer all
obligations of Courtesy, as counting it a Righteousness. I would not insult
over the weakness of any; and this is partly out of natural tenderness and
moral Considerations; and I find that the goodness and kindness of God, the
meekness and Gentleness of Christ, has hereunto made imPression upon me.

I find upon the review of my Life Past, according to the clearest Judgment
that I can make, that I have not gone backward, but proceeded forward in the
ways of Godliness. And this increase I reckon not by sudden fits now and then
happening, but by the main progress of the work in the total Sum.

I have been grieved that I am no more elevated in the hope of Heaven, and that
I cannot attain to a longing desire to be gone hence, and to be there with
Christ. I have labored to raise up my heart, and have had enlargment, even
when deadness and flatness had been upon me. I think with my self sometimes,
were my Evidences clear for Heaven, I would exult to begone hence this very
hour; but I find not this Readiness at all times.

When I have had a good enterprise in hand for God's Glory and some public
benefit, I watched against vanity of mind, and vain glory in carrying it on; and
I desire purely to Aim at the Glory of God, and to be satisfied with my reward
in him. And I take heed that I forget not my mortality, when I am pursuing that
design; but I would fain bring up my self to this frame, to be contented to be
taken hence in the midst of it, as judging that I shall be no loser by my
removal, and God cannot stand in need of that Service.

Lord forgive mine inordinate Self-love, which has disturbed the Actings of
pure Charity in diverse passages of Moment. For SelfLove in my sensitive
appetite has had motions Contrary to the Love of God and my Neighbor.
Nevertheless my Judgment has disallowed it, and I have for the most part acted
against it, and for that, which the Love of God and my Neighbor did command.

O Lord forgive my Ten thousand Talents. I come to Jesus Christ who has made
Satisfaction, and lay this heavy Reckoning to his account. Lord forgive my
Iniquity, for it is exceeding great.

These following Passages were set down March 4. Anno 1675.
UPon the Review of the foregoing Evidences, after Twelve Years, I find through
Grace the same abiding in me, and more and more rooted. And some particulars
which did make me more to doubt of my good estate, I find to be since that time
in a greater degree Vanquished.

I have done what in me lies, to call to Remembrance all my remarkable Sins
from my Childhood and Youth till now, and as far as I can Judge I have repented
of them, both generally and particularly: And now I Repent of them all from the
bottom of my heart, with a selfabhorrence, if I can know my own heart, by the
strictest and most impartial Search that I can make.

Upon the best Judgment that I can make of the Nature of Sin, and the frame of
my own Heart and Course of Life, I know no sin Lying upon me, which does not
con^^^ with habitual Repentance, and with the hatred of Sin, and with an
unfeigned consent that God (...) my Savior and Sanctifier, and with the L^^ing
of God above all.

The mercy of God toward me, in the prolonging of the day of Grace, in the
strivings of his Spirit, in his chastisements, in the Checks of Conscience, in
the Recovery of my Soul out of Distempers and Backslidings, does greatly
affect my Heart, and strongly engage me to Him; and does often Call upon my
Soul, and all that is within me to bless His Holy Name.

Though my Spiritual growth be very low and slow; yet to this present time I
have not grown worse, but better; speaking of growth in the whole space, or
greater spaces of my time Past, and not every particular Day.

By Prayer and Endeavors long continued, I have in some measure overcome a
special very sinful Distemper of mind, and gained the Contrary Temper against a
natural Propensity.

Though my Faith in Christ be weak, yet to have part in his promises, I am
ready to part with all that is dear to me in this world, I have no Hope of
Happiness but in Jesus Christ.

Though I have had doubtings touching the promised Salvation, yet I know that
as to my own Felicity, I prize nothing more, then that Salvation, being the
Glorifying and enjoying God forever: And I embrace it as my best Good. I Love
Christ whom I have not seen, and I am affected toward him as toward a Person,
who Taught and Did the most excellent Things, and promised a most excellent
State to his Followers, and purchased their Redemption at the dearest Rate.

I am heartily grieved for loving God so little, yet I am sure this I wrote
according to a full persuasion at that time: I love nothing more than God, and
in my Esteem and Choice, I prefer the Spiritual, Divine, and Heavenly Life;
incomparably before the Carnal, Animal, and Earthly life: And this Esteem and
Choice is made good by performance in Ordinary.

I love to Love God: And I desire this Love not only as an evidence of my
Salvation, but for it Self. I had much rather have a heart to love Him
perfectly, than to have all the Riches, Honors, Pleasures, and Delights of
this World.

My Conscience bears me Witness that in the present exercise of my Ministry, I
have no self-end of worldly advantage, or Reputation among men, or any Interest
of the carnal mind; but if the Command of Christ, and the necessities of Souls
did not oblige me to this Service, I should gladly retire into Privacy and
Solitude.

My Temporal estate is mean and Low, yet I am Contented with it, and humbly
bless God for what I have. I live in as narrow a compass for Expenses as I can,
that I might have something to give to the poor, and to be helpful to those
that are in Need, according to my Ability. And as God has required of us to
love Mercy, and our Savior has said, It is a more blessed thing to give than
to receive; so I have more pleasure in giving a portion to the Needy, as far as
my mean Estate will bear, than in laying out for my own sense or worldly
Conveniences. And this proceeds not from a conceit of merit in any thing that I
can do, but from a Love to please God, and to do Good.

Though I have a good Knowledge about the premises, yet I am apt to waver about
the Conclusion. And though I aprehend the Evidences of my sincerity to be
Clear, yet a Timorousness remains in me.

Though I have not as yet overcome the fear of Death, yet I am sure that the
unwillingness that is in me to dye, is not that I might enjoy the pleasures of
Sense, or any Gratification of the Animal Life.

I feel in my self a burden of Sin and corruption, much Sensuality,
Earthlyness, Selfishness, nevertheless I judge there is that predominancy of
Love to God, and Holiness, which I hope is immoveably seated in my soul,
whereupon I hope that it cannot be that I should be Cast out of his blissful
Presence into that Perdition, which is the State of immutable hatred of Him.
And I apprehend, that the most horrid and hellish State of Hell it self, lies
in its Everlasting and Utmost Emnity against God.

Thus I am Searching and trying my Heart and ways; and what I find by my self
I write down that I may have it by me, for my relief in a Dark and Evil day,
and an hour of Temtation: For I must expect the time, when by Weakness or
anguish of Body or mind, I may be disabled to recollect my self, and duly to
state the case of my own soul: And the Powers of Nature may so fail, that I may
have but a very weak Apprehension of what I have to do in this great
Concernment. I am warned by the Parable of the Ten Virgins to look to it, that
together with my Lamp I may have Oil in my Vessel, and be ready to enter in
with the Bridegroom at his coming.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner, to me one of the chiefest of sinners. O my
exceeding Sinfulness! O ye Riches of thy goodness toward me! should not I
Loathe my Carnal Self? Should not I grieve for grieving thy Spirit? I desire to
do so, I hope to do so. Do what thou will with me so thou pardon, and
Sanctify, and Save me. I am afraid of thy Judgments, I can endure but a
little, O how weak is my heart! Nevertheless I will Endeavor, and I trust
Through Grace, that I shall be enabled to bear thy Correcting Hand. Thou art
Wise and Holy, Thou art Merciful and Gracious, Thou retainest not thine Anger
forever, because Thou delightest in Mercy. O spare me, and consider me, and
deal with me not after my sins, nor reward me after mine Iniquities; but as far
as the East is from the West, so far remove my Transgressions from me: Comfort
me and satisfy me, For I wait for Relief from Thee. I believe, O Lord help my
Unbelief. Lord increase my Faith. O my God I lie at thy Feet and Mercy, I put
my sinful and distressed soul into the hands of Jesus Christ, and I rest on the
Covenant of Grace made in Him, as all my Salvation, and all my desire, A MEN.

More Observations touching the State of my Soul, March the 27th. Anno 1676.
O The Wonderful Mercy of God toward me a most vile and wretched sinner in
Convincing, rebuking, and awakning me unto a Self-abhorrence, and an utter
Detestation of my Sins, my special Sins; so that I cannot be reconciled to
them. Since the powerful awakning of my Conscience, I never have, and am
persuaded never shall return to those former sins, which made a breach between
God and my soul. I hate every Sin impartially. A sinful State is in my internal
Sense, an horrid and Hellish State.

I find my self firmly resolved to give up any part of my worldly Estate that I
shall be found to hold to another wrong: If it be doubtful where the Right
lies, I am resolved first to endeavor a Reference to Conscientious knowing
Men; and if that cannot be fitly had, to submit it to a legal Trial, with a
desire that Right may take place. I know not that I hold any such Estate, or
that there is any doubt of my Legal Right to any thing that I possess: but I
have made Supposition for the Trial of my own Spirit.

When I had a Father or Mother, I would have trusted them to defend or deliver
me from any Evil, from which it was in their power to defend or deliver me: in
the same Manner I now trust to my loving Wife. Why then should I be suspicious
of God. in whose Hands I am? Why should I doubt of His dear Love and tender
Mercy toward me, or call in question his Good will to preserve, or deliver me
from any Affliction that would be too hard for me to bear, or to sustain and
Comfort me under any Suffering, which He sees fit to inflict upon me?

If when I was more careless and forgetful of God, and when I ventred upon
breaches with him, He was pleased to Convince me of my Sin, and to rouse me up
to a greater Care, and to make me more Earnest for Pardon, and for Healing, and
for all needful Grace, and more thoroughly resolved to follow him throughout.
Surely he will not refuse me in my Addresses for more Grace, and a more
Confirmed State of Holiness: if I follow on to know the Lord, I shall know Him
and See His Salvation.

Though Death and Judgment be of dreadful Consideration; though God be Holy
and Just and I be vile and guilty, and worthy of eternal Perdition; yet why
should I doubt of Mercy and Forgiveness, and of support and comfort in the
Darkness of death, and of Justification in the day of Judgment from a Merciful
and a Faithful God, through a powerful Redeemer and Advocate; seeing as an
humble, penitent Believer. I lie at his Feet, and cast my self into His Arms,
and wait on his Grace, and am resolved to keep his Ways, And never to return
to Folly.

I more desire to be sincere than to know that I am so. The Comfort and Delight
of being and doing Good, I set not so much by, as the very being and doing
Good. To Love God and to be Conformable to Him is that which I most of all
desire should be in me.

I will trust God in his ways. I will Strive against an over-timorous
Solicitude about my own Salvation, and will submit my self to God who is the
infinite Goodness and Love, and I will lie down, and take my Repose therein.

I am grieved when I observe or hear of the Scandals of some Professors, and
the disorders of those that are in Charity to be judged Sincere, and the
Follies and Frailties of the more Sincere and Upright. And it humbles me by
Causing me to reflect upon my self, and my own Weakness and proness to offend;
and it makes me more to desire the Heavenly Society, and to be among the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect.

My Sins of Sensuality in every kind and degree I search out, and repent of. I
am kept by Grace from gross sins of this sort. In the Gratifications of Sense,
which are Lawful in general, I scrupulously dread excess, and undueness of
Circumstances. How earnestly do I desire an absolute purity;

All Envy, Unrighteousness, Uncharitableness, Uncompassionateness,
Undutyfulness, and base Selfishness which is the Root of all, I have Seen,
Lamented, and Abhorred. The Motions and the Stirrings of Mind that way are
suppressed and dislodged, I will never give way thereunto.

Self-applauding, Self-seeking in matter of Praise and honor before Men, I
strive against. I desire to be as sincere to another Reputation as to my own,
I would not value others by their regard to me, but by their true worth: I
would be contented to be little in the eyes of others; This I unfeignedly
Desire and Endeavor, and I hope that I have it in some good Degree.

All my Omissions and Negligences in the work of the Ministry, in Preaching, in
Personal private Application, I bewail, and heartily resolve upon more
Diligence and Faithfulness.

Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant O Lord, but remember me, and Spare me
according to thy great mercy in Christ Jesus, the great Propitiation for Sin in
Whom I desire to be found, and under the Covert of whose Wing I stand, that I
may be saved from thy Wrath, and enjoy thy Peace, and live in thy Presence,
where is fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.

Febr. 22. 1678/9
GOd will never Damn in Hell any Soul, that has the Habitual predominant Love
of God, though culpably Remiss, and otherwise sinful, while he remains such;
yea Hell and such Love of God are inconsistent.

I Love the holy Will of God with all my heart and hate all Disconformity to
it. Nothing is more grievous to me than to dispease God, and nothing is more
pleasant to me than to please him.

I Strive after Christian perfection.

I Labor to be unbottomed of Self, to dye to Self-advancement, to
Self-glorification, and to all Selfish joys, and to live wholly in and to God,
and to have Self swallowed up in the Love of Him.

I Labor in the work of Self-resignation, that my Will may be confined to, and
included in the Will of God.

I Strive after Patience in its perfect work, and do find a Willingness to
yield to God's Will in my Chastisements. I still Justify God and do not
entertain an hard Thought of his Dealing with me, but conclude that it is
altogether Holy, Just, and Good; and for the best.

I feel my sin a greater burden to me than my Affliction. I had rather have
health of Soul in a body full of pain; than health and ease of Body with a
distempered Soul. And the sense of my own sinfulness disposes me to Patience,
under my afflicting Infirmities of Body.

I narrowly watch my heart, that it may not lodge or admit a vain thought. When
I am surprised with vanity, I suppress it as soon as I observe it.

I am very fearful of offending in a word. When on a sudden and by Incogitancy
I have spoken a word which upon second thoughts is doubtful to me, though I had
not such doubt in the speaking of it, I have been much perplexed about it, and
engaged my self to a greater Watchfulness.

Aug. 1630.
Surely, Christ has my heart. Whenever I swerve from Christ in a thought,
word, or deed, it is by inadvertancy and Surprizal against my fixed principle;
and I have great Regret at it, and Loathe my Self for it.

If I were out of all fear of Damnation, I had rather be holy than unholy; and
I take pains, and use God's Means to be holy in opposition to the Flesh, and I
make it my chief Care. And I do this, because I make the Enjoying of God my
Chief Good; and rather than lose the Hope thereof. I would willingly undergo
the sufferings of this Life, (which lead to that blessed Fruition) not
excepting the Fiery Trial it self.

Sept, 1680.
I Hope, when the End comes, my God will say to me, Dear Child, thy Warfare is
accomplished, thine Iniquity is pardoned, enter thou into my Rest. Therefore I
will both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. I will hope to the
End. Strengthen me O my God, that I saint not.

October. 4th 1680.
I Have no design, I pursue nothing contrary to God's Interest: but all my
designs and pursuits are for God and Holiness I think I am sure of this, if I
be sure of any thing. My great Aim, and Care, and Labor is to cleanse my self
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect holiness in the Fear of
God.

To whom I yield my self a servant to obey, his servant I am. But I do not
yield my self a Servant to Sin to obey it; but I do yield my self a Servant to
God, to obey Him. The design and business of my Life is to do his Will.

THE WORKINGS OF MY HEART IN MY AFFLICTION
Aug. the 5th 1680.
THE Will of God in Laying this Affliction upon me, I unfeignedly approve as
Holy just and Good. And I am unfeignedly willing to bear the Affliction, as it
is an Evil laid upon me by his will, till the time come in which he shall think
fit to remove it. I Watch, and pray, and strive that I may not give way to a
repining thought against his holy Hand. In this point the Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak. My Mind does really consent to God's dispensation, and
to my Submission, being most agreeable to his Wise and Gracious government and
most conducing to my Salvation. But my sensitive part and my Mind also as it is
in part Unrenewed, Weak, and sinful, does greatly reluctate; so that I am put
hard to it, and I must say, I am willing, Lord help my Unwillingness. I have
not observed these several days, that a thought of direct or positive
Coffeehouse, or Vexatious Commotion of Mind has been admitted by me;
nevertheless I see to my grief, that I fall exceeding short of that Quietness,
Contentation, and Cheerfulness in my Condition, and of that Freeness of
self-resignation to God's Will that I desire, and His Goodness calls for.

I wrestle with God by importunate prayer, that this Thorn in (...) flesh might
depart from me, that this Distemper might be removed or so mitigated, that I
might be in some Comfortable Ease, and get a more cheerful Freedom in doing my
Duty: Yet I would not wrest this Relief out of his Hands unseasonably, and
without his good Will and his Blessing; I would wait His time and desire to
have it with his love and Favor, and with a saving Benefit. And so my earnest
desire thereof is limited with submission to his Holy Will. Yet I find that
this submission is no easy Matter, but that I must take pains with my own
Heart, and that it is God, who must work my heart to it, and keep under the
flesh, which is always ready to rebel. It is hard to be willing to bear my
wearisom Condition: And O how weak is my heart, and ready to sink if it be not
upheld by a strength above my own! O let his Grace be sufficient for me, and
let his power be made perfect in my weakness.

I feel my self bettered in the inner Man, by this Chastening: It has
furthered Mortification and self-denial, and done much to the Breaking of the
heart of Pride, and to bring me on toward that more perfect Self-Examination
for which I labor. It has much deadned the World to me, and my desire to the
World. It makes me know in earnest the Emptiness of all Creatures, and how
great my Concern is in God. It drives me close to him, and makes me to fetch
all my comforts from Him. I see of how little Value all outward Contentments
are: and not only in my present Afflicted State, but if I were at Ease, and in
full prosperity. The sense of this benefit to my soul, is the great Means of
bringing my Will to that weak degree of submission to God's Will, to which I
have attained.

O that I could live more by Faith in this Trying Affliction. I endeavor to
impress upon my soul those Arguments, which the Scripture affords for Patience
and Long-suffering with joyfulness. But this will not do the work, unless the
Spirit of Faith and Patience be given from him, from whom comes down every good
and perfect gift. I pray, I cry to my Father, that he would give me the Holy
Spirit, according to his gracious promise that I might show forth the power of
his Grace and that I might not dishonor Him, nor discourage his Children, nor
reproach Religion by my weakness. And in the bearing it well, my Reputation is
nothing regarded by me in Comparison of the Honor of Christ. Him I desire to
glorify both in my Obedience and Patience.

I do not love God the less because of his Correcting hand upon me. As my
necessities drive me, so His Love draws me, and my Love brings me to Him. I
look to Him as my Father: And shall I not honor my Father, and give him
Reverence when I am Chast'ned of him? The Lord is my portion says my soul,
therefore will I hope in him. I will wait for the Lord who hides his face; I
will look after him; He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights
in Mercy. Therefore he will turn again and have Compossion upon me. If he kill
me I will put my trust in Him: for he will not Cast me off for ever, if I
cleave to him with Faith unfeigned; but even through Death it self will he
save me. He will bring me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his
Righteousness. When I say, What shall I do incass of such or such troublesome
or dangerous Consequents? My Heart answers Be not careful, God will provide; I
will leave it to him.

Besides a natural desire of Ease and Rest, the sense of the Temptation to
which I am liable in this Condition, makes me importunate to be delivered from
it. I feelingly know the weakness of my own heart: and I am not ignorant of the
Devil's Malice and Subtilty, and how he will make the fiercest Assaults where I
am weakest. Whereupon I tremble in my self for fear of being Tempted, and
shaken and greatly amazed. And upon this ground, respecting my Soul's safety, I
judge an humble and patient Importunity with God, for the Removeing or
Moderating of my Distemper, to be my Duty. Yet to keep me from being over
sollicitous and Anxious in this thing, I Consider that God does Govern and
Limit all our Temtations, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we
are able, but will with the Temptation open a way for us to escape.
Nevertheless, I find that I do much offend by too great a Vehemence of desire
to be delivered from this grievous burden, without due submission, also by too
much disquietness and Dejection, when after some expectation of Benefit by the
means, I perceive that my hope thereof is like to be frustrated. The Lord help
me to carry it better and as I ought to do, and keep my Mind in its right frame.

My business under this Affliction is to be careful about my own part, and to
Leave God's part to his care. My part is to do my duty and to get the benefit
of the Affliction; but to remove it is God's Part. Let me perform what belongs
to me; and what belongs to God, He will certainly perform in his own time and
way. The Sum of my Duty is graciously to Comply with the Dispensation, and to
Behave my self suitably to it, and to please and honor God under it:
Accordingly in this I Labor, and in this way I seek for Comfort.

And first I justify God, and judge my self. God exercises his own Holiness
and Justice in this his Castigation; both which, I approve, and accept the
punishment of mine Iniquity, and Exercise an hatred of the Sin for which I now
smart. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
Him, and I repent with a Self-abhorrence; and I lie in the dust at his feet,
and wait on him until that He have Mercy upon me, and I am glad to receive
Mercy upon his Terms.

I have fled for Refuge to lay hold on the hope that is set before me. I do
most heartily take God for my portion, and I had rather live the divine life in
Conformity to Him, and Fellowship with Him here, in the first fruits of the
Spirit, and hereafter in the fullness of Glory, than live in the fullness of the
delights and contentments that belong to the natural Life upon earth, in a way
of Sin and Alienation from the Life of God. I do most heartily take Christ
according to the offer of the Gospel, not only to be justified from my sins,
and delivered from the Wrath to come, by his Merits; but also to be Sanctified
by his Word and Spirit, and to be Governed by His Laws, and to be brought by
Him unto the aforesaid Fellowship with God. And my Life and Practice in the
main Bent, and ordinary Course thereof, is according to this Choice, in a daily
walking not by Sight and Sense, but by Faith; not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit, in setting my Heart not on Earthly but on Heavenly things. I cast off
vain desires and Hopes, and my Expectations of Good are from God, according to
the Tenor of his Promises, When I walk in Darkness and see no Light of outward
Comfort, Humane Helps, and Visible Means; I will trust in the Name of the Lord,
and Stay my Self upon my God. I strive with my own Spirit to Subdue it to the
Will of God: And in whatsoever I am Tempted to be most impatient, therein I
Labor most for Patience. My great Care is that I may not sin against my God in
any kind; and more especially that I may not sin by a Rebellious Impatience
under his Correcting Hand. In this present distress I look upon my self as
being upon my. Trial, and therefore I look more diligently to my behavior in
it. Now a Price is put into my Hand for the proof of my Sincerity, and I Labor
accordingly to make a good proof of it. I am willing to serve God in Pain and
Patience, else I were unworthy of so good a Master. I am willing to be
Conformable to Christ in Suffering else I were unworthy of Him. But here I must
say again, The Spirit indeed is willing but the Flesh is weak; Lord help my
Unwillingness, I am called to deny all the pleasures of Sense, and to mind them
no more; and I am heartily willing of it. I am called to declare to others, by
the exercise of Faith and patience, the Righteousness of the Lord, and his
tender Mercies, and great Faithfulness, and that He alone is Allsufficient. O
that the Power of his Grace may be thus Magnified in me! This is the Fruit of
the Afflictions that I look after, and in this will I Labor more and more. And
through the help of Divine Grace I will not doubt of a Good Issue, while I am
found in the way of Duty. To them who by patient Continuance in Well-doing seek
for Glory and Honor and Immortallity, God who cannot lie has promised to give
Eternal Life.

I am desirous to be delivered from this Affliction (if it be the Will of the
Lord) upon this account, that I might have a more notable proof of my freer
choosing of God for my portion, when I am not thus driven to Him (as now)
because I can go no where else for comfort, also my freer turning from the
world even then when I am capable of enjoying it. To have such a proof of these
things in my self I should take for a great advantage, and be greatly Thankful.
Nevertheless for the quieting of my Mind, I consider that my present Afflicted
state does better secure me from Temptations, which might draw my Heart from
God to the Love of the world, in which Respect Prosperity is far more dangerous
than Adversity. Moreover, my present State gives me Advantage for a Higher
proof of the Grace that is in me, and of the power of divine Aid upholding me
in a life of Faith and Patience, by which I Live upon God alone, when Worldly
Comfort Fails me, and by which I am enabled to overcome things grievous to
Nature; and to get above, not only the pleasures, but the sharp pains of Sense;
and to live and endure with little Natural bodily Rest. Also it gives me the
Advantage of exercising a resolved, willing Self-resignation to God in this
Dispensation, which is harsh to Flesh and Blood, and a resting Hope, when there
is no present appearance of Help, and a waiting and Looking for the Lord who
hides his Face, and a cleaveing to Him by Constant Love, though he does fore
bruise me. If I continue in the Exercise of these Graces they will give me a
good Proof that the Heavenly Nature is in me, and will make way for Great
Assurance toward God, and full Consolation on Jesus Christ. And yet further, I
trust that I have long before this distress chosen God for my portion, and
drawn off my heart from the flattering Vanities of this world. And I know that
in this Distress I do not come to Him Constrainedly, or merely as driven: For
I delight to draw nigh to Him to pour out my heart before Him in prayer and
Meditation. My Meditation of him is sweet to my soul, and I do not Love to be
diverted from it. And when my Distemper is any (...) more easy, it works unto
a Rejoicing in Him. And it is for an enlargement of Heart toward Him, that I
Chiefly desire bodily Ease and Rest.

Hear my Cry O God, attend unto my praer! I will cry unto Thee when my heart is
overwhelmed: Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I.

God the Infinite Goodness and Love, will not cast off a poor soul that lies at
his Feet, and Cries for the Help of his Grace when it is ready to sink under
the Burden, and is willing to have Mercy upon His terms.

Therefore I will still cry to Him, and look for Him, and lean upon Him, and
will not depart from Him by an Evil hear of Unbelief.

This I resolve in His Strength, Lord strengthen me unto the perfect work of
Patience.

Lord I heartily consent that Thou should use me as Thou please, so thou
use me as one of those that Love thy Name. Disposal is an effect of propriety,
but it is alwais a regular and a loving disposal of the Subjects of His
Government. O! deal favorably with Thy Servant: Thou know my Frame:
Remember that I am but Dust.

The Lord will perfect that which concerns me: Thy Mercy, O Lord endures
forever. Forsake not the Works of Thine own Hands. O Lord, without Thee I can
do Nothing: Therefore I must beg and thou will give Grace sufficient; without
which I cannot Subsist: For therein is the Life of my Spirit.

For Ever, O Lord, thy word is Settled in Heaven.

Pity me O Lord as a Father pittyeth his children.

Comfort me O Lord, as one whom his Mother Comfort,

The Lord will wait that he may be Gracious unto me: For the Lord is a God of
Judgment: Blessed are all they that wait for Him.

Can I be in a better Hand? As my professed Judgment is Concerning God's
Proceeding; So let me stand affected toward it.

NOTES FOR MY SELF
KEep thy Heart with all Diligence; for out of it are the Issues of Life.

Death and Life are in the Power of the Tongue.

Entertain not a Sensual Imagination for a Moment; and give not way to the
least Glance of the Eye toward vanity.

Be always expecting some trouble or other to interrupt thy outward Peace and
Rest.

Never expect any thing from the world, and when it offers thee any thing that
is good for thee, receive it; but cath not at it greedily.

Be always mindful what thou may do for thine own and others Salvation, in
every Instant, upon every Occasion.

Dye daily.

In Arguing with another, watch against evry every Inordinate heat of Passion,
loud speaking and every rash word.

If any neglect or Slight thee, care not for it, yet observe it.

Any Matter of Trial to thee, reckon among thy Gains.

Take no delight of Sense, but in a manifest and direct subserviency to
spiritual Ends, and use not that delight to irritate but to allay sensuallity.

When a sensual Imagination or Passion breaks in, then excite and Taste of the
Powers of the World to come; and delay not to recover the Divine Frame.

What thou doubtest, do not.

In thy Actions, consider not only what is Lawful, but what is Best in the
present Circumstances, and do that.

In every delight of sense, watch against all Bruitishness.

When thou art in company where ye talk is vain, watch to put in a word that
may be to Edification.

If any despise thee, do not bear a grudge against him for it. And be not
offended with any, merely because they do not honor thee.

When thou art framing excuses, take heed of speaking an Untruth or approaching
near to it, lest in avoiding the offense of Man, thou make too bold with God:
Take heed of this also, when thou would speak pleasingly, and avoid Offense
in Speaking.

Use no Recreation or delight of Sense, but what thou can at that very time
desire of God that it may be Sanctified to Spiritual Ends.

When thou hear that another has spoken any thing to thy Injury or
Disparagement, beware of a transport of Anger, that thou speak not harshly or
unadvisedly against him, or too passionately for Self, or as too much concerned
for Self.

Uphold the Reputation of thy Colleague, or any that is joined with thee in
Service, as thou would thine own.

Watch against all secret pleasure, in the lessening of another for the
advancing of thy self.

Mind the following Paragraph, O ye Reverend Divines.

Pray heartily for the success of thy Colleague and others, who perform the
same service that thou art engaged in. And rejoice in whatsoever good is done
by them, as in what is done by thy self, and own it before men.

Use not Animosity and contention in any matter that may be brought to a good
issue in a way of peace.

Engage not hastily as a party in a difference between others but reserve thy
self Impartial and uningaged, that thou may moderate between them.

Whilst thou lamentest thy weakness in some cases, and seek more strength,
besure to use that greater strength in all other cases, whereunto thou have
attained; and be not Remiss or forgetful in any duty that is more facil to
thee: so shall thou have comfort in thy willing Mind and honest care, and do
much toward the attainment of that which thou yet want, and Reachest after.

In the time of Prayer, let no business divert thee from it that is not of
present Necessity.

When thou have an opportunity of speaking a word for the good of another's
soul, defer not the doing of it till another time.

Watch against all bitter, and over-passionate speeches, against malignant
opposers of the Truth: For meekness of Spirit and Behavior is more according to
Christ than wrathful Zeal.

Be not transported with passion against those Conformists, who are more sober
than many others; yet manifest too little compassion to their suffering
Brethren: for even in the regenerate, there is a Remainer of the Spirit of
Envy, Partiality, and Selfishness, and too much of Wrath and Bitterness, and
other parts of the Serpentine Nature, though in a mortified Degree. And we are
to yield grains of Allowance for the Temptations of Prejudice, Interest, etc.
to which good men as well as others are Obnoxious.

In thy zeal against the sins of others, be mindful of thy own exceeding
sinfulness: And Call to Remembrance thy great Offenses, which though they be
Unfeignedly Repented of, give thee to understand what Cause thou have to be
meek and humble and patient toward all men.

Watch against the motions of Pride and Hypocrisy, in the presence of any
person, whose Favor and good Opinion thou much Esteemest. What is Man that
thou should pass to be judged by Man's Judgment, or seek applause from Man!

Be not discomposed about some petty absurdities of Behavior or little
Indecorums, or O over-sights: for so to be is Pusillanimity.

When thou have Conceived a dislike of any Person, his ways, or actions, or
do ill resent his Carriage toward thee; take heed thou do not take any
secret pleasure in the foresight of Evil coming upon him, or in hearing any
such following his, as tends to his Reproach, or Ruin, or notable Damage.

If thou have fore-spoken the Calamity, or any Evil that in Reason is like to
befall one, who does unadvisedly manage himself, and his affairs, take heed of
Wishing or Will-ing that the evil should come to pass, lest thy Judgment or
foresight should seem to be disparaged, yea, take heed of any Motion rising
toward such a Wish or Will.

My own exceeding Faultiness ingages (...) in seeing and hearing the Faults and
Follies of others to pity them, rather than to rejoice or glory over them; and
to cover or lessen those Faults, rather then to aggravate or display them.

The Mercy and Forgiveness that I have found, and Hope for at the Lord's hand,
Engages and disposes me to forgive Injuries and abuses done to me. And I should
not think it much, that I who am so sinful should bear some Contumilies or
Abuses from men.

It is displeasing to me, to hear the faults of others insisted on, whether
they be matters of Folly and Inconsiderateness, or of Perverseness and Malice;
but Especially if the matter be not Evident.

I find that petty Damages and Injuries are apt to be vexatious, especially in
a matter the whole whereof is but little; as in a little Farm or Living.
Wherefore I endeavor that I be not surprised with a troublesome appearance,
and consider the Moment of a thing how light it is.

Abhor every Thought, Word, and Deed, which is contrary to Love; and tends to
the Hurt of others.

The more men wrong thee, the more watchfully maintain thy Love toward them.

After thy public Ministrations in Prayer and Preaching, be not thoughtful or
much concerned how Men like thy performances, but be concerned for this, how
acceptable is it to God, and how effectual and successful to holy and Saving
Means.

If God single me out for Special great Suffering, I have no reason to judge
amiss of it: For such is the State of the Things of the World to come, that
some individuals must of necessity suffer for the good of the People: and why
not I, as well as another? God is my owner, and he may do with me as with any
other, even as he pleases; and he is my Father and he will use me well, and
make me sufficient Amends for all my Suffering, and I shall be no Loser, but an
Exceeding Gainer thereby in the End.

In this present State of Trial, it is requisite that there be a sufficient
Difficulty and Hardship, for all those that shall be saved, to grapple with.

For all our boasts of Free Will, unless there were some heavy weights of
sufferings, cast by Providence into the balance, to poise against our
propensions to follow lusts, and Pleasures, and worldly Allurements, we should
never Seriously set our selves to the severe and self-denying duties which
belong to true Godliness.

To avoid Inconveniences to thy self, Expose not any to danger, whose safety
thou art bound to provide for.

In all Accusations, whether public or private, after thou have made a
sufficient defense, enter not into needless matters for Ostentation or such
further Vindication as is not Necessary, if thou stand in a slippery place; but
lie at close Gaurd, lest thou be entangled, or in some Point circumvented.

I will never wittingly and wilfully do amiss by Commission or Omission in a
greater or leser Matter, because I shall too often do amiss, at least in
smaller Matters, through Ignorance or Inadvertancy, or Surprizal of Passion, do
what I can.

Watch every Opportunity to put in a Savory word, for the good of a Soul, with
whom thou have occasion of Converse.

Remember thou have nothing of thine own, but all is the Lords, and accordingly
use all that thou have to no Carnal Interest, but to serve Him, as being wholly
devoted to Him.

Be as Serious and hearty in thy Prayers to God for the Concerns of others, as
for thine own.

Watch against selfishness, lest it work unto great uncharitableness.

When thou have Evidences of thy Sincerity which cannot in reason be gainsaid,
hold to them, and take comfort in them: yet still endeavor by Reviews and
further searchings to clear it more and more.

We keep our Evidences, by keeping our Graces in their lively Exercise.

Fetch thy Comforts from Heaven, and not from Pleasures or Hopes here below.

Do not overvalue any Worth that is in thy self; but think it rather less than
more than it is indeed.

If any slight thee, be neither dejected nor provoked.

Do not value Men according to their Esteem of thee, but according to their
true Worth.

Watch against the Expectation of Hearing thine own praise; and when such a
thought arises, instantly suppress it.

When thou art Commended, let not thy thoughts dwell on it with delight, but
let it be to thee as nothing.

Take heed of too great a Valuation of thine own Work or Usefulness in thy
place; and lay not too great a Stress thereon.

When Friends out of Love overvalue thee, it concerns thee not to overvalue
thy self, nor to take more than thy due, though they give it.

Have a Habit of Compassion toward the Afflicted, firmly fixed in thee, that
the Motions thereof may be sutably stirred up on every Occasion.

Let an Abhorrence of any Content in another Sufferings be deeply Imprinted on
thee; that every thought thereof may be prevented, or instantly suppressed:
Yea, hate all Disregard to another Misery.

Watch against all Eagerness, and immoderate delight in Eating and Drinking;
and against minding any kind of Food for the pleasing of the Sense. Come to thy
Meals not like a Bruit, but as becomes a Saint. Never terminate in the
Sensitive pleasure, but make use of it to raise thy Heart to God.

When thou have Eaten so much, so that thou think more is not Expedient, or
is better forborne than taken, proceed not to a Bit more lest thou be entangled
or disturbed.

Still consider, Is this Act I go about agreeable to one that has Communion
with God? Will this Act promote Communion with God? Do I come to this Act, so
as to have Communion with God thereby promoted.

Seek the Lawful Contentment of any that are about thee, as thou do thine
own; and be as glad, to gratify them as thy self, so far as is convenient for
them. Hate and shun all Motions of unworthy selfishness: And see that others be
sharers with thee in thy pleasant Things, and be not content to have them to
thy self alone.

Be not over sollicitous for humoring thy self sensitive Suavities, but rather
be suspicious it, and absteinous from it.

Always mind and do the the present Duty, Comply with the present
Dispensation, and make the most of it. Thy business is to please God, and God
will provide for thy Comfort.

Lay thy Heart to rest in the Will of God; For there is no other Rest for the
Soul to be thought on.

I will not Indent with God for any Good, but what is included in the Covenant
of Grace. I will expect no Good but according to the Tenor of that Covenant,
which is all my Salvation and all my desire.

I am resolved that Pride shall not set me to Study, or Preach, or Pray, or
carry me on in any Service. If thoughts of men-pleasing, or Man's applause,
steal in with my honest Intentions, I will instantly cast them out, as soon as
they be discovered, and I will watch and pray for the preventing of them. I
will watch when I go forth in my Service for God, that pride do not send me
forth: Men's Opinion of me shall be nothing with me, but the pleasing of God,
and the doing of good, shall be my whole Scope.

In performing Prayer I am intent upon God and his Hearing, and observing my
thoughts and words; And I earnestly purpose and str^^^ against Thoughts about
Men's Observing (...) Judging of my performance. Nevertheless (...) do find,
that together with my sincere and earnest Intention directed to God, Thoughts
of regard to Men's Esteem and Judging, will too often thrust in, (do what I can)
so as either to be pleased, or troubled as I think they judge. These thoughts
have greatly troubled my spirit: Hereupon I consider, that a due Regard to
Expressions for Men's sake, that they be Affecting and not Offensive, is not
faulty but necessary, and therefore must be heeded. And think that my thoughts
about Men's Judging have this intention at last chiefly, that my Expressions be
Affecting, and not Offensive; Yet I am jealous of a Mixture of Corruption and
Vanity. I earnestly endeavor to have my Heart so filled with the Apprehension
of God's Infinite Majesty, and my infinite Concernment in Him, that all
Impertinent Thoughts may be quite swallowed up. All designing and endeavoring
to please Men for my own praise, I do at that very time detest and abandon;
Yea, at that very time I am sure, I do very little regard either the
approbation and praise, or the disallowance and dispraise of those very
persons, about whom my thoughts are apt to run out as aforesaid. I do my
uttermost to prevent, restrain, and suppress all such Thoughts, they are (...)
to me: There is scarce any thing (...) Stirs within me that has less of my
Will (...) these thoughts have: There is scarce any thing, against which I do
more watch, and pray, and Strive, than against these thoughts. And whatsoever
tincture of Vanity and Corruption be found in them, I am heartily sorry for it,
I hate and Loath it: and I hope that the merciful God will not impute it unto
me, to the rejecting of my prayer, or to any breach between Him and me.

I find that my very Fear of this Evil, and my desire to avoid it, does draw my
thoughts it, as a man's great desire to sleep, and his fear that he shall not
sleep does commonly keep him waking.

These thoughts I abhor, not only before and after, but in the very time they
come in: And I strive with Might and Main against them. If God approve my
service and own me in it, I shall be abundantly Satisfied, though men
(whatsoever or how many soever they be) should despise and Loath it, On the
contrary, If men should never so highly approve it, I can never be satisfied if
God do not accept and bless it. This I am sure of, if I be sure of any thing.

I discern, that by care I have brought it to that pass, that my thoughts of
others present with me in prayer, are not with regard to their praise, which I
value not, but to what is (...) to be done by me in that Service, and to (...)
being affected with it.

I find I am prone to be anxiously scrupulous; Yet I should consider that there
be Inevitable weaknesses (as Impertinent thoughts) accompanying the best
Performances.

FINIS.

