SEVERAL Laws and Orders Made at the first Sessions of the GENERAL COURT FOR
ELECTIONS Held at Boston, May 19th. 1680. And published by their Order; Edward
Rawson Secr'.
AS an Explanation of the Order of this Court made in February last, respecting
the Form of Military Officers Commissions,

This Court does declare, Courts Declaration as to Military Officers
Commissions, and Precedence, etc.
that that Order intends, not only all Commissions following, but also
preceding the same. And it is hereby Ordered, That the Secretary do issue out,
when they shall be demanded, new Commissions to all former Officers in the said
Form. And that the precedence of Captains go and be according to their former
Settlement.

IN answer to the Petition of several of the Inhabitants of Boston, the Court
considering the present inability of many Persons that have suffered great loss
by the late Fire, The Law requiring Buildings to be Brick or Stone in Boston
suspended for three years.
to rebuild with Brick or Stone, Judges it meet to suspend the executing and
prosecuting the late Law Tit. New Buildings in Boston to be Brick or Stone, for
the space of three years only, when it is to be in force, and all Persons are
required then carefully to attend the same.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That henceforth the new
Measures that are now come over from England by Mr. Foy shall be the Standard
for this Colony of the Massachusetts, Standard for Measures.
which said Measures are of Bell-mettal, the half bushel and the Peck for
measuring of Corn, and other Grain, and Salt etc. And also one Quart, and one
Pint for Beer or Ale, which are attested to by Daniel (...) Keeper of
Guild Hall, of the City of London, Yeoman of the Chamber thereof, and Sizer and
Sealer of the Weights and Measures, to be just and right according to the
Statute for measuring called Winchester Measure: together with a Standard of
Brass to Size a Yard and an Ell: And also one Gallon, one Quart and one Pint,
being Wine Measures according to the custom of London; And that all half
Bushels and Bushels shall be sized by this half Bushel, and all other Measures
shall be sized by these other Measures before expressed: And that the Country
Treasurer issue forth his Warrants forthwith to the Constable of every Town in
this Colony, to bring in all the old Standards of the several Towns, to whom
the Treasurer shall order, to be sized by the new Measures now allowed and
approved of by this Court, within one month after Publication hereof: And that
henceforth it shall not be lawful for any Person whatever, to buy or sell by
any other Measures then what are allowed of, and sealed by or according to the
abovesaid Standard under the Penalty of five pounds to any Person that shall so
do, the one half to the Informer, and the other half to the Town they belong
to; and if any Town or Constable thereof shall neglect their duty herein in not
bringing in their Standards to be sealed according to the time appointed, they
shall pay as a Fine to the Country ten Pounds.

And the new Seal for these measures shall be M NE

FINIS.

