A Brief ANSWER To a Small Book written by John Norcot AGAINST Infant Baptism

This Answer is written by John Eliot for the sake of some of the Flock of
Jesus Christ who are ready to be staggered in point of Infant Baptism by
reading his Book.

Boston: Printed by John Foster. 1679.

A brief Answer to a small Book written by John Norcot, against Infant Baptism.
This Answer is written by John Eliot for the sake of some of the flock of Jesus
Christ, who were ready to be staggered in the point of Infant Baptism, by
reading that Book.
THe Book speaks with the voice of a Lamb, and I think the Author is a godly
though erring Brother; but he acts the cause of the roaring Lion, who by all
crafty ways seeks to devour the poor Lambs of the flock of Christ. The chief
hinge that the whole discourse hangs upon is, that there is no place of
Scripture for baptizing Infants.

I will therefore begin there, to stop the gainsaying mouth of this Book.

The baptizing of Believers and their Infants was one of the first Gospel
Apostolical Institutions commanded in the Gospel polity, Acts 2.37, 38, 39.
when those heart pricked penitent Jews solemnly asked touching the great change
of Church Polity that was now in motion, what shall we do? or how shall we
engage our selves into this new Polity? this is one part of their question, as
it appears by the Answer. The Apostle answers them, ver. 38, 39. the
substance and sense of which words in respect of our question is thus formed.

Every one of you to whom the promise belongs, we do order and appoint you to
be baptized.

But the promise belongs to all you penitent believers and to your Children.

Therefore we order and appoint all you penitent Believers and your Children to
be baptized, consider the words.

Some Gentile Believers, or the Apostle himself on their behalf, further
promoteth the same question, touching them that were afar off, viz. in respect
of Church state, and Interest in the promise. What shall they do that have no
Interest in the promise? being afar off, in respect of the Covenant, and afar
off in place also, as the Gentile Nations ^ere.

The Apo^tle answers, that we order the same Law and ^n^titution to all, viz.
whom the Lord our God shall call; when the Lord our God shall call any of the
Gentiles to be penitent Believers, as now you Jews be, then the promise does
belong unto them, and unto rheir Infants; and we do order, that they and their
Infants shall be baptized, and marked for the Lambs of Christ, that do belong
to his Fold.

Behold here a clear Gospel Institution of baptizing Belie^ers and their
Infants, in all the Gospel Churches, be they Jews or Gentiles. All endeavors
of an Answer to this Text do only mud the waters to hinder a clear sight of the
Truth that shines in the words.

As we see a clear precept for Infant Baptism, so I shall show a clear practice
and example of it, Act. 2.41. then they that gladly received his Word were
baptized, viz, they and their Children were baptized. For I ask, did they
receive the whole Word of Apostolical Institution? or only a part of the Word?
sure you will say, they received the whole Word of Institution, therefore these
Believers and their Children at first or at last were baptized. Had the
believing parents only been baptized, and left out their Children, then they
had received but part of the Word of In^titution. So then, here we behold a
famous example, according to which all the Gospel Churches have walked ever
since unto this day, and that without interruption, saving that sometime some
small interruption has been made by the Anabaptists that deny or have
questioned Infant Baptism.

Baptism is the seal of the Covenant, whomsoever therefore God does receive
into Covenant with him, they have a fundamental right in due order to receive
the Seal, the Seal is so annexed to the Covenant, that it is called the
Covenant, Genesis 17.13. now God does receive the Children of Believers into
Covenant, Acts 2.38, 39. the promise does belong to you and to your Children,
and therefore the Seal does belong unto them.

Math. 3.15. So it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness, says Christ, who
are meant by [ us] of whom Christ speaks? Answ. He speaks firstly of
himself, and John, then of all his Church and members thereof. Therefore as it
was meet and righteous for Christ the Head to fulfill that Law and Institution
of God in being baptized; so it is meet that every member of the Church of
Christ should in due order do the same, it is righteous that it should be so.
Now Infants of Believers are members of the Church of Christ, the Covenant
comprehends them, the promise belongs unto them, and therefore they ought in
due order to be baptized.

Mark. 10.14. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto
them, suffer the little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the Kingdom of God, Christ says that the Kingdom of God both
Militant and Triumphant does consist of many such members, how come they into
the Church?

Answ. God does admit them by his Institution into his Covenant, Ge. 17.7. a
God unto thee and to thy Seed after thee and the Church does solemnly receive
them by Baptism.

Quest. How can the Church receive them, when they do not know them to be fit
matter for the Church?

Answ. The Church may lawfully admit unto Communion in all the Ordinances upon
sufficient Testimony, as Acts 9 26, 27, 28. The Primitive Church admitted Saul
upon the Testimony of Barnabas. Now for the admitting of Infants we have the
best and greatest Testimony in the World, that they are fit matter for the
Church, and that they are duly and acceptibly qualified: for we have the
Testimony of God, the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. I have
more boldness of Faith in receiving Infants into the Communion of the Church,
then up-grown persons, whom we have most accurately tried, because our Infants
are received upon divine Testimony, others though we admit them according to
divine Institution, yet upon more inferior Testimony.

Romans 11.16. If the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy, if the Root be
holy, so are the branches also. A Believer and his Children are but one lump,
in his Church station, the believing Parents sanctify the whole household, who
are under the Parents tuition, a Believer and his Children are but one Tree in
the Church or Vineyard of the Lord, and when the Root is holy, the whole Tree,
all the branches are holy, this is the Ecclesiastical state of all believers.
Hence therefore we ought to receive all the Infants of believers unto Communion
in the Church, according to their Capacities. Now Infants are capable of
Communion with the Church in Baptism: which does most evidently appear in the
Church of the Jews, where they were capable of Circumcision, and were ever
admitted into the Communion of the Church therein, and the Apostles were wont
to baptize all the Household, when the Parents believed. The Lord does account
them visible Believers that are branches of a believing Root, and gives that
Testimony of them. And God who appointed it, best knows what is acceptible to
himself. The present administration of Baptism to Infants is a present
exercise of Faith, love and duty in all the Church, and especially in the
Parents, and it is an after exercise of Faith, love, and duty in the Child,
when he is grown up to years of capacity, and as long as he lives his
Baptismal Covenant christianly improved upon him, does very powerfully by the
assistance of the Spirit oblige him to walk as becomes a child of the Lord,
and prepares him for confirmation, in laying hold on the Covenant of God by
his own choice, consent, and act. There is a passive reception of Christ and
his Kingdom, which Infants are capable of: in which act of grace adult up
grown persons must humble themselves to become like Infants, Mark. 10.15.
whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child shall not
enter thereinto. If then God knows how to have, and exercise such spiritual
Communion with Infants, who are we that we should keep them from him when he
calls for them? and has instituted an Ordinance for that use and end, Mark.
10.14. I return to this Text where Christ says, suffer little Children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. The
instituted ordinary way of little childrens coming to Christ is by Baptism,
there coming at this time, instanced in this Text was for his blessing, that
was their end at that time, but on that occasion Christ treats upon the
doctrine of Infants coming to Christ, and Christ commands that it should be
so, and has instituted an ordinary means whereby they may come unto him, and
that is by Baptism, as in the old Church they did by Circumcision. This
command of Christ, for Childrens coming to him is of force to this day, and
will be to the worlds end, and therefore it does not intend only a personal
coming to the bodily presence of Christ, as at that time, but Christ intends
the visible, external instituted way of Infants coming to Christ, this we are
commanded to suffer, the Elders and the Church are commanded by Christ to
suffer Infants to come to him, the means of their coming to Christ is by
Baptism Christ is so serious and earnest in this matter, as that he expresses
this precept both affirmatively [ suffer them] and negatively, forbid them not.
This word speaks directly and home unto the opposers of Infant Baptism,
Christ has forbidden you to be an hindrance to them, by word, speech, writing,
power, or any other way, forbid them not.

And the Lord is so full in the stream of this Command to suffer them, and of
his forbidding us, to forbid or hinder them, that he does urge it with a great
Reason, viz. of such is the Kingdom of God; the militant Church consists of
many such members, half our Churches are Infants, and what? will you not suffer
Christ to have Communion with them, nor them to have Communion with Christ by
the Ordinance which Christ has appointed for it? the Kingdom of Heaven has
many Infants in it, and shall Christ have Communion with them in Heaven, and
will you not suffer him to have Communion with them on Earth in the visible
Church when he requires it?

Yea, this point is several times instanced and repeated in the Gospel, to
show, how much the heart of Christ is upon this point. Yea, this Text says
that Christ was very much displeased with his Disciples upon this occasion, it
is very seldom that Christ expressed himself displeased with them (about
twice) and this was one of the times, and the occasion of it.

Job^ 21.15. Christ has appointed it as one great part of our Ministerial
charge to feed the little Lambs, so the word signifies, the Infants being part
of them, how can we feed Infants? surely by administering Baptism unto them,
for Infants are capable of this instituted way of feeding, this Text is a
strong evidence, Christ has made the little Lambs the Subjects of
Ecclesiastical Ministerial feeding, therefore no doubt the Lord has instituted
some public Ordinance, that they are capable to be fed withal, and that is
Baptism, Infants are secondarily fed by f^eding their Parents, but they are
personally fed by Baptism, and constantly.

From the first Creation of man God has transacted with man by a Covenant, and
has always comprehended the Parents and children together in his Covenant,
thus it was with Adam in innocence, the children of Adam were comprehended with
him in the Covenant of works, as we know by woeful Experience. After the fall,
God brought Adam under the Covenant of grace in Christ, and in that Covenant he
comprehended his Seed with him. When God called Abraham, he brought him under a
Covenant, and comprehended his Seed with him, I am thy God, and thy Childrens
God. And that was our Gospel Covenant, touching which the Apostle says, the
promise belongs to you and to your Children, and thus it is with all the
Gospel Churches, both Jews and Gentiles, even with all Believers, whom the Lord
our God shall call. And it is the Infinite mercy of God to bind himself to us
by Covenant, both to strengthen our weak Faith, and that his Covenant mercy
might bind and stay the revenging hand of Justice from destroying us for our
iniquities. God remembers his Covenant and therefore spares us and our
children, as we may see, Psalm. 105.8, 9, 10. and ver. 40, 41, 42. and Psalm.
106.43, 44, 45. and Psalm. 89.30 31, 32, 33, 34. be thankful therefore to God
for his Covenant with us, and with our children, exclude them not from this
great mercy.

1 Cor. 7.14. It seems some in Corinth doubted whether the children of such
Parents were in Covenant with God, and to be received by the Church, when only
one of the Parents was a believer, the other wicked, a Pagan, and it is like it
was a frequent case, sometimes the husband was converted and not the wife,
sometimes the wife converted, and not the husband: and this case might well
come into question, by reason of that ancient famous practice of Ezra, and the
Jewish Church.

To the question the Apostle answers, that if either of the Parents be a
believer, their children are accepted by God into the Gospel Covenant, and the
Church ought to receive them, because in such a case the unbelieving husband or
wife is sanctified by God unto the believing, to bring forth an holy Seed. If
they were not so, then all such children of a believing Parent should be
unholy, but says the Apostle, that is not so, for all the children of a
believer are holy, though their yoke fellow were unholy. God received such
children into his Gospel Covenant, with the believing Parent and all the
Churches did receive such children, and now the question is stated and settled
by divine Authority, viz. that all such children that had but one Parent a
believer, were received by the Church as an holy Seed.

One Rule of judging of the soundness of a Doctrine is by its tendency to
holiness, charity, and unity among the Saints. The opinion of the Anabaptists
has not such a tendency, it is a most uncharitable opinion, and therefore
contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel of Christ, love and charity is a peculiar
character of a disciple of Christ, Joh. 13.35. by this shall all men know that
ye are my Disciples, censoriousness of others, especially when better then
themselves is exceeding contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, and such does
their opinion expose them to be, what their inward state is, I do not meddle
with it, but if they follow their opinion, as this book of John Norcot does
thoroughly, it leads them to the highest excess of censorious
uncharitableness, (to say no worse,) and that against men much better then
themselves.

Though there be so clear an Instance of circumcision of Infants, and Christ
himself was circumcised when he was an Infant, Luke 2.21. though there be so
clear an institution of Baptism to seal the Covenant, as circumcision did unto
believers and their Seed, and though there be so clear a Testimony that the
primitive Church did so practice, and all the Gospel Churches ever since have
so walked: yet because they do not see these things to be so, they do think
that the primitive Church had not so much light as to practice so, and whereas
all the Gospel Churches in the world have ever since so practiced, they judge
they have walked in sin, and their Baptism is null, all the world are
unbaptized persons, saving themselves, and they now call themselves Baptists,
and all the rest of the christian world baptized in their Infancy are
unbaptized persons, Churches, Ministry, Sacraments, all are nullified, etc.

What an horrible degree of uncharitableness is this; to say no worse of it.

Again, because if they grant Infants of believers to be comprehended in the
Covenant, they cannot deny them the Seal of Baptism, therefore they do rather
exclude (in their opinion) all the world of Infants of believers from the
Covenant of God and the Church, then to grant them subjects to be baptized.
They rob the Lambs of their interest in the Church, in the communion of Saints,
and in the Covenant of God, which is a wicked injury done against the Lambs of
Christ, who are not able to help themselves, therefore Christ will help them,
and woe to those that do them this injury.

Math. 18.5, 6, 10. Who so shall receive one such little child in my Name
receives me, but who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe in
me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Christ does account the children
of believers to be believers, the Root and branches make but one Tree, ver. 10.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for Isay unto you, (and
Christ does know it perfectly) that in Heaven there Angels do always behold
the face of my Father which is in Heaven.

Again, the uncharitableness of this opinion does sadly appear in this, that
they teach men to be without natural affection, which is one of the gross sins
of these latter and perilous times, 2 Timothy 3.3. and this they do, in one of the
highest points in the world, viz that Parents should exclude their own children
from sharing with them in Christ, and from Church Interest with Christ, yea, to
put them away, and say, you have no portion with me in this great matter.

Christ was displeased with his Disciples when upon occasion of much business
in teaching the people, they forbad Parents to bring their children to Christ
to have his blessing. What think you, he will say to the Anabaptists, who teach
and cause their very Parents themselves to put away their children from Christ?
not only not to bring them, but to exclude them, never since the world began
was there more unnatural affection then this is. Parents always endeavor to
interest their children with themselves in their Religion, and in their God, as
being the best thing they have in the world.

Again, it is great uncharitableness in respect of such Infants of believers,
as dye in their Infancy, to judge them to dye without interest in the Covenant
of God, thereby depriving both Parents and the Church of the comfort of that
hope, that they dyed in Gods Covenant.

Again, it is great uncharitableness to hinder (as much as in them lies) the
Church from opportunity of eminent exercise of Faith in communion with the
Father and with the Son, for when we receive little children into communion
with the Church, we have communion with Christ, and with the Father, Math.
18.5. who so shall receive one such little child in my Name receives me, Mark.
9.36, 37. and he took a child and set in the midst of them, and when he had
taken him in his arms, he said unto them, whosoever shall receive one of such
children in my Name, receives one, and whosoever shall receive me, receives not
me, but him that sent me, Luke 9.47, 48. Jesus took a child, and set him by
him, and said unto them, whosoever shall receive this child in my Name,
receives me, and whosoever shall receive me, receives him that sent me. We
see here is eminent communion with the Father and with the Son, in receiving
Infants into our communion, and how do we receive Infants into our communion?
the instituted way is, by owning them to be comprehended in the Covenant of
God, with the Church, and visibly receiving them into the communion of the
Church by Baptism, if there be any other way of receiving Infants in the Name
of Christ, Instance in it: this way is clear in the Scripture our receiving
them in Baptism, our communion with the Lambs of Christ, in the Name of Christ
which is very well pleasing to him. Never to do this, yea, to refuse to do it,
is a sinful and offensive gap in our communion with Christ, to reject Infants
from this communion is an o^^ence against Christ of a provoking nature, and
especially to glory in our so doing.

Psalm. 127.3. children are the heritage of the Lord, and how come they to be so
interested? it is by virtue of their parental Covenant: our Covenant Interest
is our spiritual Patrimony, our Estate in Religion which our Parents conveigh
unto us, it is an Estate of good use unto us all the days of our life,
especially at some difficult times a Christian has two stocks to live and
spend upon.

1. His Patrimony, or Covenant Interest which his Parents left him, 2 dly. His
acquired state in grace which he has got and gained, by the good improvement
of his Patrimony, a Christian lives and spends upon both these stocks, and
we need them both, and all little enough sometimes, as we shall see anon.

The Anabaptists deny this spiritual Patrimony, the Covenant Interest by
Parents, and live only upon an acquired state of grace, which they have gained
without improvement of their parental Covenant, if we may believe them, but
they are deceived.

For our parental Interest in the Covenant, our spiritual Patrimony is a great
and sanctified means of conversion, though not the only means, for strangers
(as our Indians) are converted by the Gospel without that means, so far as we
know. But in the Churches of Christ all our converts are converted by their
improvement of their Patrimony, their parental Interest in the Covenant as one
means which does plainly appear in their confessions, when they come into the
full communion of the Church, and therefore in this respect they deal very
uncharitably, (to say no worse of it) with their children, to deny them their
Patrimony of Covenant Interest.

Prove. 13.22. A good man leaves an Inheritance to his Childrens Children, that
is, by bringing up his children so well, that he sees his Patrimony secured to
his second Generation. So it is in our spiritual Estate, a good man will
(through grace) so improve the Patrimony, the Covenant Interest which he does
conveigh to his children, as to bring them to take hold on the Covenant
themselves, by their own act, and free consent willingly, Deuteronomy. 29.10, etc.
Nehem. 10.28. and hereby is the progress of their Covenant Interest secured and
conveyed over to his second Generation. Sometimes Parents are put so hard to
it in pleading with God for their children, (or for some of them at least) as
that they have nothing to plead on their behalf but the Covenant Interest,
their Patrimony, they may be so prostigate that they have nothing else to plead
upon, and blessed be God, that will hold to the last, this was David's case and
so he pleads, 2 Samuel 23.5. although my house be not so with God, yet he has
made with me an everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure, for this
is all my salvation and all my desire although he make it not to grow. Now the
Anabaptists cut themselves and their children off from this plea, by denying
them their Patrimony, Covenant Interest in God. Sometimes a Christian may be so
low brought by desertion and distress of Soul, as that they may be glad to fly
to their Patrimony and Covenant Interest to help their Faith. Sometimes David
was so hard beset, that he was caused to plead and spend upon his Patrimony,
Psalm. 86.16. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
Servant, and save the Son of thy Handmaid. And sometimes in his Thanksgiving,
he does acknowledge that his Covenant Interest, his parental Patrimony was one
spring of his mercyes which he has received, Psalm. 116.16. Truly I am thy
Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son of thy Handmaid, thou have loosed my Bonds.
Sometimes Gods Children may be sunk so low, as that they can see no acquisite
grace or Interest to plead, nothing to plead or improve for themselves but
their Patrimony, their Covenant Interest, Isai. 93.17. Why have thou made us to
err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear, return for thy
Servants sake the Tribes of thine Inheritance. How ill do the Anabaptists
provide for their own comforts, when they cut off (so far as in them lies, if
an opinion could do it,) themselves and their children from this plea and
succor of Faith. God in his wisdom and mercy saw that we are weak, and have
need of a Patrimony, a Covenant Interest by our Parents, and sometimes to live
upon a Talent of his providing, when our own good Husbandry would fail us; and
when it is so he directs and commands us to improve our Covenant Interest,
our Patrimony, Isai. 51.2. look unto Abraham your Father, and Sarah that bare
you, 1 Chronicles. 16.12, 13. Remember his mavelous works that he had done, his
wonders, and the Judgments of his mouth, O Seed of Israel his Servant, ye
Children of Jacob his chosen, but such as reject their own Patrimony, and
refuse to provide one for their children, must live only upon their own Trade
and gains. What are they so strong in grace as that they need not to improve
that Patrimony which God has provided for our relief? Sometimes Gods people
are fallen so low that God has no ground of showing them mercy, but only
because of their Patrimony, their Parental Covenant, 2 King. 13.22, 23, Hazael
oppressed Israel and the Lord was gracious to them and bad compassion on them;
and had respect unto them, because of his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence as
yet. And God has promised thus to deal with his children and people, Psalm.
89.28, ad 35. My Covenant shall stand fast with him, if his Children forsake my
Law, and walk not in my Judgments, if they break my statutes, and keep not my
Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with the Rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take
from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail, my Covenant will I not break,
etc. and what a blessed Patrimony is Gods Covenant, yet the Anabaptists cut off
their Children from this blessed privilege. Sometimes Gods people may be so
apostate that they have nothing acquired lest for their recovery, onl^ their
Patrimony, only the Covenant, as it is at this day in that dreadful Apostasy of
Israel and Judah, yet we have Faith for their recovery by their Patrimony,
their Interest in the Covenant of Abraham, for the gifts and calling of God are
without Repentance, and the riches of Gods Covenant! how contrary to the Spirit
and chari^y of the Gospel is that opinion, that cutteth off the children of the
Church from this blessed Patrimony! the more I experience the charity of the
Gospel, (which God knows is but a little) the more does my Soul loath that
uncharitable opinion of the Anabaptists.

Furthermore, this opinion is pernicious and destructive unto the Churches of
Jesus Christ, it kills the Church in the bud, it robs them of their Lambs,
and will soon make the Churches and Kingdom of Jesus Christ thin and poor, but
the world and Satan's Kingdom will be full and rich, if this opinion should
prevail, which God forbid! when Laban hired Jacob to serve him for wages, Jacob
bargained for no other wages but Lambs, and though Laban liked it well at
first, yet he soon found that Jacob grew rich, and he grew poor, the same issue
will all the Churches find, that the excluding of the Lambs as the Anabaptists
do, or the neglecting them as other Churches do, will in a few years make the
Churches thin and poor, there is an hurtful bird in some countries, that
spoyleth Orchards, and makes them barren, by feeding upon, and devouring the
buds in the spring time, it is very needful to keep a diligent watch against
such evil birds, least our Churches become barren Vineyards, and empty Vines.

It may be some will say, that notwithstanding all that is here said, I do not
yet see that there is either precept, institution or Example of baptizing
Infants. Ans. what? is it not so, because you see it not? if you be dark,
blind, ignorant in so great a point as this is, are all the Churches in the
world mistaken, who do see both precept, Institution, and Example for it? are
your dark minds and blind eyes the standard by which every bodies light and
understanding must be regulated? must all men light their candles at your dim
light? what bottom does that flag grow in? consider this, that all they that
oppose Infant Baptism, they do not bring any positive evidence against it,
only a negative, and that negative is grounded in their own darkness; and
ignorance it is not so, say they, because I see it not.

We agree with the Anabaptists in the general proposition which is this,
nothing is to be received in Divine worship, but that which has a Divine
Institution.

We agree to it, but the parcicular proposition, the minor, the assumption;
there we differ, which is this.

But the baptizing of believers and their Infants has a Divine Institution,
this we affirm, and prove, and therefore we conclude that believers and their
Infants ought to be baptized.

They deny this proposition, and what proof bring they? nothing at all that I
know off, but this, I do not see it, therefore I do not believe it, therefore I
oppose it. Their chief discourses are cavillations against our proofs, whereby
Satan does effectually keep their eyes shut, so that they cannot see the Truth,
but are puffed up with their own ignorance.

I shall now take a brief consideration of the Book And I will give one
direction to such as read it, which being observed it will quite enervate the
whole Book, viz. when the Book mentions baptizing of believers, do you add in
your mind [and their Seed] which if you hold unto, the Book has nothing in it,
that I remember, that will hurt you in that point. Nor is this a begging of the
question, because I have proved, that when Baptism of Believers was first
instituted in the Gospel Churches by the Apostles, the baptizing of their
Infants was also instituted. And I have proved that God does account the
Children of believers to be believers, they may be (for ought we know) actual
believers, as John Baptist was, and if they dye in their Infancy (as many do)
we ought to believe that they are saved by the power and grace of Gods
Covenant, under which they are comprehended, if they are not actual believers,
and live to show it, yet they are under Gods instituted means and Ordinances,
to be trained up to become believers, and therefore all such God does account
(as to Ecclesiastical respects) to be believers, and Subjects capable to be
baptized. The believing Parent the Root, and his Infants the branches, make but
one Tree in Gods Vineyard, therefore those things which God has put together,
let not us put asunder. And for this Reason I give the Reader this direction,
always, when the baptizing of believers is mentioned, add in your mind [and
their Infants]

CHAP. I.
THat Jesus being about thirty years old was baptized of John, in Jordan, is
true; But Baptism was not instituted till about that time, by John, had it
been instituted when Jesus was an Infant, he would have submitted to it, as he
did submit himself to be circumcised, when he was an Infant, Luke 2.21.

CHAP. II. Of the great Commission for baptizing believers, I add, and their
Infants.
GO teach and baptize, teaching is first, true, and Infants are taught and made
Disciples, in that their Parents are so. And God does account them believers,
as their Parents are, and therefore God has instituted, that they also as well
as their Parents should be baptized.

CHAP. III. Of Examples.
John. 4.1, 2. Jesus made Disciples and baptized, they were made Disciples, not
born so,.

Answ, So it was with the first believers, but their Infants had the privilege
to be born Disciples. And this was at the beginning of the public Ministry of
Christ, the order of the Gospel Churches was not yet instituted and fixed, that
was done at the beginning of the Apostles Ministry,, Act. 2. And what though
the Samaritan believers both men and women are mentioned to be baptized without
mention of their Infants, that is no evidence that it was not done either first
or last, seeing it is a divine Apostolical Institution that Infants are
comprehended with their Parents. The Eunuch was a stranger, and from home, his
Family absent, therefore there is no force in that instance, but on the
contrary rather, for he carrying home tidings of the Gospel, it was so
effectually received (as Historians report) that it continues with them unto
this day, and Infant Baptism among other parts of Gods worship. When Paul was
baptized he had no Children, nor was he ever married that we know of, therefore
his Example has no force to oppose Infant Baptism.

The Example of the Jailer affords consideration of weight, the Head of the
Family being converted, his whole Family are accounted believers, and were
baptized. Such as were adult in his Family no doubt manifested their Faith; the
Infants of his Family were in Gospel order to be trained up in the Faith of the
Gospel, and therefore were accounted believers, and therefore all his household
were baptized. The same may be said of Lydia and Crispus.

CHAP. IV.
HEre the book proceeds by digressing into another litigious point, viz.
whether Baptism is to be administered by dipping, or as we do by washing* or
sprinkling. Which manner of administration, though the holy Scriptures have
left it indifferent, either way may be lawful, yet this treatise fixes a
necessity upon dipping, yea such, as to nullify that Baptism that is not so
administered.

In another place the Book blames, at least seeks to invalidate our doctrine
of Infant Baptism, because we take it up and teach it, only upon consequence,
though it is not so, for we plead positive Institution and Example. But this
point of dipping is taken up only by consequence, and that but probable
consequence at the best, there is no proof that any in the times of Christ were
baptized by dipping, nor that John nor Phillip baptized by dipping. Baptism is
a sign, and a little of the sign is enough to signify great matters, a
little bit of bread a little sip of wine is enough to signify wonderful great
things, Ioh. 13.9, 10. when Christ washed his Disciples feet, Peter said, thou
shall never wash my feet, but when he understood that it was for spiritual use
and instruction, he would have more of the sign, not my feet only, but my
hands and my head, but Christ says, it is enough that the feet only be washed,
he that is so washed is clean every whit. So it is with our brethren, they
knowing that Baptism is of great signification and use, therefore they desire
a great deal of the sign, they would be dipped quite under water, over head
and ears in the sign. What need that be? a little of the sign is enough to
lead up Faith unto its glorious Objects in Christ. The face is the most eminent
and principal part of man, if therefore the face be baptized, the whole man is
baptized. If the face be a little washed, buried, sprinkled, covered with
water, it is enough to signify unto our faith all that is signified by
Baptism. Baptism is sundry times set forth to signify our death, burying,
and rising with Jesus Christ. It is sundry times set forth by sprinkling with
the blood of Christ, it is sundry times set forth by washing, once by putting
on Christ, if therefore Baptism be administered either by washing, or by
sprinkling, or by dipping, our Faith must be raised unto all these
significations of the Baptismal sign, and it is indifferent which of these
ways be used, either pouring with the hands of the baptizer a convenient
quantity of water upon the face, by way of sprinkling or washing, or by dipping
the face, there is much exercise of divine knowledge and faith in that part of
Gods worship in the administration of, and participating in the Sacrament of
Baptism more then can be expressed by the sign, though all is signified. And
to give a short touch of the indifferency of the manner of its administration.
It is but in two places where they went into the water to baptize. John always
so did, for he preached in the Wilderness, where there was no accommodation to
do otherwise, and there the River was broad, and by that means more shallow
toward the bank, so that people might come to him, standing in the water, and
lifting up their faces to Heaven, he taking up water in his hands sprinkling
and pouring it on their faces, and so they were baptized, in which action there
is death, buryal under water, resurrection, washing, covering, sprinkling, a
little of the sign of those great things signified thereby, it is more
probable, as I conceive, that this was the manner that John and Phillip used
when they went into the water to baptize. Phillip and the Eunuch going into the
water to baptize, is the second and last Example that I know off, who were
travailing in the Road where they had as little accommodation to do otherwise,
as John had in the Wilderness.

But that great administration of Baptism, Act. 2.41. was performed in the
Temple, where was no River, nor deep waters for dipping the whole body, but
there was always plenty of water in the Temple, very much was used about the
sacrifices in washing and boiling, and much was drank by the people, who did
eat and drink in Gods presence, though there was a little wine brought with the
Sacrifice by Institution, yet at all their sacrifice Feasts the people would
need water also to drink, and it was readily to be had, for there were many
whose office it was to be drawers of water for the Temple Service, and who ever
needed water might easily have it. And there belonged unto the Temple all sorts
of Vessels needful for the Service of God, Basins, Charges, Platters, etc.
Therefore in this famous business of baptizing those Gospel Converts, the water
drawers would readily supply all the baptizers with sufficient water, in
fitting Vessels, not for dipping, but for washing, sprinkling, and pouring
water with their hands upon the faces of the baptized.

Acts 16.33. The same hour of the night the Jailer was baptized, he and all his
straight way, there was no going to a River for dipping. Paul was baptized in
the room where he lay sick, Acts 9.18, 19.

Cornelius and his Family, and Friends were baptized in the place where the
Word was preached to them, and prayers were made, and the holy Ghost was poured
out upon them, they were baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with water Baptism
in the same place, there is nothing intimated of the Assemblies removing to
some River for water Baptism. Baptism is a part of Gods worship, which is to
be administered in the public Assembly of the Church, and so do the generality
of the Gospel Churches walk, in all places of the world, which places of
Assemblyes rarely be by River sides.

CHAP. V
IN this Chapter there is no difference of moment that I see, saving that it is
affirmed, that Lydia was baptized in the River, which cannot be proved.

Chap. VI. I pass by this Chapter also.

Chap. VII. Believers (I add and their Infants) Baptism is a great Ordinance.

CHAP. VIII.
THis Chapter answers Objections in Numb. 22. but many of them are trivial,
of little concernment, and unto others of them, I have already said enough for
the present, therefore I shall take up here and there one, and pass on.

Object. 5. Does not Baptism come in the room of Circumcision? the Book
answers, no surely, there is no Scripture for it. Answ. I pray consider, Romans
4.11. he received Circumcision, the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, which
he had yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all that
believe, though they be not circumcised. And Gal. 3.17. this I say the Covenant
which was confirmed before of God in Christ, etc. viz. confirmed by
Circumcision, we see that Circumcision confirmed their entrance into the
Covenant of Faith, and so does Baptism confirm their entrance into the Gospel
Covenant, Acts 2.38, 39. Circumcision was one of the first Ecclesiastical
Ordinances, which did engage and oblige them to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3.
So Baptism is one of the first Ecclesiastical Ordinances which does engage and
oblige us to obey the whole Gospel, all things whatsoever I command, Math.
28.19, 20.

Why they deny Baptism to come in the room of Circumcision I know not, unless
it be for fear of an Argument that it affords for Infant Baptism, which they
know not how to evade.

Object. 10. Infants were once Church members, and we do not find them cut off.
Answ. Touching Infants interest in the Covenant I have said a little already, I
shall add a word or two more to something that is here said, Math. 3.9, 10.
think not to say we have Abraham a Believer for your Father. Answ. They made a
carnal confident use of their parental Covenant, as also they did, Joh. 8. and
other places, though they were of ripe years, and should have improved the
Covenant by laying hold on it, unto their sanctification, yet they did not so,
they lived in gross sin, and yet plead their paternal Covenant, alas it
profits not in that case. It is now with us in our infancy and minority, our
parental Covenant alone is of great Efficacy, but when we are up-grown, we must
take hold on the Covenant our selves, and improve both our own, and our
parental Covenant, for our mortification and holiness of life, and think not to
say Abraham a believer is our Father, upon any other Terms, especially if they
cloak over a vile conversation, with Abraham is our Father, Abraham will not
own such Children, and ^^rther John shows them that by reason of their carnal
abuse of their paternal Covenant, God was about to break them off through their
unbelief, to which end, the Axe is laid to the Root of the Tree, etc. the Tree
is the Nation of the Jews, the Root is their Ecclesiastical state, in the
Covenant of Abraham, the Axe is the Roman, whom the Jews themselves did whet
and sharpen to do thorough Execution upon them, and therefore he exhorts them
to be penitent and fruitful believers.

The Book further says, where were infants ever members of a particular Gospel
Church? Answ. See it Act. 2.36, 37. 1 Cor. 7.14.

Object. 16. I was baptized in my infancy, what need I be baptized again? you
say it is not water thrown in the face that makes Baptism. Answ. Alas, who
says so? nor is this any Scripture Language: if the scope of these words be
to disparage the Ordinance, we may see how prone we are to drop words that need
a pardon in the blood of Christ. The Parent gives consent to the Baptismal
Covenant, and acts Faith in the behalf of the Child, and the child is trained
up and taught to do it himself, and this is accepted of God. They in Act. 19.1,
etc. were not rebaptized, but instructed by the Apostle, that they were rightly
baptized, if there be an error in the infant Subject, and in the manner, (in
both which you are deceived) yet it seems great boldness to nullify Baptism,
and to affirm, that all the Churches and Saints from the Apostles to this day
are unbaptized persons, except your inconsiderable selves. O what need have we
of humility and charity!

CHAP. IX.
The design of this Chapter is to set the baptizing of believers and of
infants in opposition one against the other, when as God has conjoined them
together, believers and their infants are to be baptixed; there is more deceit
than weight in this doing, the first and the two last of these touches deny
that there is any Scripture for infant Baptism, and upon that Hinge the rest
hang. You know we plead Scripture Authority for infant Baptism, and therefore
I will pass by this Chapter as a confused heap of hay and stubble.

CHAP. X.
THis Chapter is a gathering together of many Texts of holy Scripture, which I
read with reverence, and find nothing in them against baptizing believers and
their infants.

CHAP. XI.
THis last is a Chapter of Considerations and Conclusions, which I shall answer
unto with my Considerations: wherein I am occasioned to say the same thing many
times over, because I make Answer to every Proposal.

1. Infant Baptism is one of the Ordinances of the Gospel Churches. Lord make
the Opposers of it ashamed that they may see it to be thine Ordinance.

2. Lord give us all renewed hearrs, that we may walk in thy Statutes and waves
to do them.

3 They reject the Counsel of God that reject the Infants of believers from
Baptism.

4. To exclude infants of believers from the Seal of the Covenant, is to change
Gods Ordinance: God has commanded that believers and their infants should be
baptized.

5. God has commanded to baptize believers and their infants: we therefore
offer to God that which he has commanded, and has always accepted ever since
the institution thereof unto this day.

6. There was no error in their Baptism, Acts 19.1. etc. nor were they
rebaptized, they were so far instructed by the Apostle as to see that they were
rightly baptized. There have been many errors and stains in baptism, by the
corruption of Antichrist: but we are not therefore to be rebaptized: an error
in the infant-subject, and in the manner of the action, as you suppose in our
infant baptism, is not essential, and therefore neither destroy baptism, nor
require a rebaptizing, were the case as you say.

7. My infant baptism is true baptism according to divine institution. I live
in the obedience of that gospel ordinance, my parents believing, covenanting,
promising on my behalf are accepted with God, I am brought up by Gods grace,
and taught to make them mine by my one voluntary taking hold on the Covenant;
and praised be God for this gospel way of propagation of Religion, and
continuation of the Churches.

8. Baptism was delivered to believers and their infants as Circumcision was.

9. I know not who those believers be that deny baptism to their infants,
unless some of the Anabaptists approve themselves to be found believers.

10. What Truth has not been opposed and disputed? Truth comes forth, not the
worse, but the brighter; and I believe so will the issue be of the doctrine of
baptizing of infants. Letters passing between Mr. Jesse and me, I proposed that
Question to him, Whether when the Jews are converted will they baptize their
infants? He answered, He believed they would, and gave me two Texts of
Scripture for it, one was Jer. 30.20. the other I have forgotten, I think it
was in Isai.

11. There is a famous Example of baptizing believers and their infants, in
supra, Acts 2.41.

12. If the salvation of my Soul lay upon it, I dare with holy boldness of
Faith (...), that believers and their infants were baptized in the Primitive
Church.

13. This I pass by as inconsiderable.

14. Baptism of believers and their infants is a written Ordinance by divine
institution.

15. Christ has in faithfulness to the Church left us many Scripture
Testimonies for infant Baptism.

16. Christ has left written in the holy pattern of Gospel institutions, that
believers and their infants are to be baptized.

17. The baptizing of believers depends not only upon sound Consequence, but
also upon the plain written Word. Baptizing by dipping depends only upon
probable Consequence, and therefore cannot nullify such Baptism as is done by
sprinkling.

18. Though the infants in Lidiahs house be not named, yet the whole household
is mentioned, and who shall teach the Holy Ghost to speak.

19. Christ our Lawgiver has given us an express institution for baptizing
believers and their infants.

20. Baptizing believers and their infants is brought into the Church by
express institution and command.

21. It is safe to admit baptizing believers and their infants being expressly
commanded and when the parents are taught, the infants also are taught.

22. We can say with a clear Faith, Lord thou have required us that we should
baptize believers and their infants, you cannot so answer for excluding infants
from the Covenant, and from the Seal thereof.

23. Baptizing believers and their Seed is a Gospel Ordinance in express words
and command.

24. We are baptized according to the express command of God, to reject infants
from it, is to reject the Counsel of God.

25. We ought to believe that our infants may be regenerated from the womb, if
not, yet they are in the way to be regenerated, and are brought under the (...)
of the Spirit to accomplish it, and this is accepted.

26. We are not ashamed of baptizing believers and their they that exclude such
infants have cause to be ashamed Lord make them ashamed.

27. We baptize believers and their infants by an express word of command.

28. Baptizing believers and their infants is a pure Ordinance of God by an
express Rule.

29. In baptizing believers and their infants, we do what God has commanded,
and we shall have the comfort of well done my good Servant, but they that
exclude such infants, shall in that point lose the comfort of, well done my
good Servant, Christ was much displeased with them, for hindering infants to be
brought unto him.

When I say the same thing over and over, do not nauseate at me, but consider
that I am led unto it, by the paper that I answer, which proposes all the
matter which I answer unto, I confess it is a very confused heap.

Lord lead us into thy Truth, and help us to Truth it in love, Ephesians. 4.15.

FINIS.

