SEVERAL LAWS and ORDERS Made at the second SESSIONS of The General Court Held
at Boston, October. 13. 1680. And Published by their Order. Edward Rawson Secr'.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That henceforth it
shall not be lawful for any Ship, Sloop, Ketch, No Masters of Vessels to carry
servants etc. without Permit
or Vessel of more then twelve Tunns burden to sail out of any Harbor or Port
within this Colony, or entertain on board thereof any Passenger or Passengers,
or any Servant or Negro, without the Permit of the Governor for the time
being, or such as he shall appoint to that trust, on penalty of twenty pounds
Fine to be paid by the Master or Skipper of said Ship, Ketch, Sloop or Vessel
that shall be convicted of transgressing hereof, and shall be liable to
satisfy double damages to any that shall be injured thereby, to be recovered
by an Action of the Case.

THis Court being informed of the great deficiency generally found among the
Troopers, some in one kind some in others etc. and for prevention of future
mistakes in the Law, Tit. Charges public, wherein Troopers claim abatement as
to their Persons and Horses being exempted,

It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That henceforth all
Troopers (excepting only those who by the first Law Anno 1648. were allowed
five shillings a man, and the abatement of their Head and Horse, Troopers
Privilege wh^^, etc.
which is only to be understood as to one single Country Rate) shall pay for
their Heads and Horses to all public Assessments as others do, any Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding: Provided, that such as listed
themselves upon the account of that Privilege hereby abated as to their head
and horse only, shall have free liberty to dispose of their horses, and list in
the Foot-Company again.

IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That there shall be
annually chosen according to our Charter eighteen Assistants besides the
Governor and Deputy Governor, in manner following. The Constables of each
Town shall give timely notice unto, and warn their Freemen to meet upon the
second Tuesday in March yearly, who shall then put in their Votes in distinct
Papers for such Persons being Freemen, and resident in this Jurisdiction, whom
they desire to have chosen for Magistrates or Assistants at the next Court of
Election, not exceeding the number of twenty, and all in one List clearly
distinguished: and no Freeman shall put in above one Vote for one person under
the penalty of ten pounds for every offense. And the said Freemen so met, or
the major part of them, shall then and there appoint One to carry their Votes
sealed up unto their Shire Town upon the last Wednesday in March, Nomination
and Election of Magistrates, etc.
at twelve of the clock, which Persons for each Town so assembled shall appoint
two of themselves as Commissioners for each Shire, Hamshire only excepted, to
carry them unto Boston the second Tuesday in April at nine of the clock in the
morning, there to be opened and perused in the presence of the Governor or
Deputy Governor, or so many Magistrates as please to attend it, otherwise by
those Persons that brought them, at the Townhouse in Boston, or such other
place as the Commissioners for Suffolk shall appoint. And all Lists that exceed
twenty, or have one man's name more then once shall be thrown away, and those
twenty six who have most Votes shall be the men (and they only) which shall be
put to Vote at the Court of Election for Magistrates or Assistants as
aforesaid; and the said Commissioners of each Shire shall forthwith signify to
the Constables of the several Towns within their County, in writing under their
hands, the names of those twenty six persons aforesaid, with the number of
Votes for each, which the Constable of each town shall signify to their
Freemen, and as any have more Votes then others, so shall they be nominated for
Election, except such who were Magistrates heretofore, who shall have
precedence of all others in Nomination on the Election day.

It is further Ordered, That the Constables of each Town shall call together
their Freemen on the wednesday next before the Election day, from year to year,
when and where such as please may put in their Proxies for Election, viz. of
Governor, Deputy Governor, and all other public Officers in distinct Papers
as formerly, and for twenty Assistants to be chosen out of the twenty six
persons in Nomination, by Indian Corn, which Proxies shall be sealed up with
the name of the Person written on the paper, and delivered to the Deputy of the
said Town, or some other meet Person chosen by the Freemen, who shall bring the
same to Boston on the Election day, when and where all the Freemen who have not
voted by Proxy are required to appear at the Court house by eight of the clock
in the morning, to bring in their Votes as aforesaid; where the Votes of the
Governor and Deputy Governor are first to be opened and sorted, and the
chosen proclaimed, and then the Votes for the twenty six persons chosen by Corn
to be opened and counted, and those eighteen who have most Votes are to be
proclaimed Assistants for the year ensuing, and all other general Officers to
be chosen as formerly. Moreover, all the Votes that are brought in for
Nomination and Election, shall be brought in by the person voting, or sent in
by the Deputy or the Constable of the Town where such person dwells, or
otherwise lose their Votes: And if any person betrusted in this Order shall
fail in discharge of his trust, he shall forfeit ten pounds.

It is further Ordered, That the Commissioners of each County before they open
their Votes, and so all that are admitted to receive in sort, and count the
Votes on the day of Election, shall be under Oath as the last year.

THis Court being sensible, that Persons who belong to other Colonies or
Plantations do by their bringing into this Colony, or selling to the
Inhabitants thereof their Neat Cattle, Sheep Horses and Swine, thereby filling
up our Market, and incapacitating our own Inhabitants to sell what they breed
and raise and pay Duties for, whereby much of our money is exported contrary to
our Law, and no allowance is made to this Colony for such Cattle, Horses,
Sheep, etc. for prevention whereof for the future,

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that henceforth for all
that cattle, Horses, Sheep and Swine, which shall be brought into this Colony by
any Inhabitant of the other Colonies, or by any (...) Colony going forth and
buying any or all of the said kinds above mentioned, the said Persons shall pay
by way of Rate in money to the Treasurer of this Colony for the time being,
Cattle Rated.
or his Order, these following Rates, viz. for all sorts of Neat Cattle, Two
Shillings and six pence Per Head; for Swine of all sorts, One Shilling Per
Head; for all Sheep or Lambs, Six pence Per Head, and for all Horse kind, two
Shillings six pence Per Head. And for the true and well effecting thereof, It
is Ordered by the Authority aforesaid. That all sorts of Persons whether Vendor
or Buyer of any or all the kind, above expressed, shall, and are hereby obliged
to make entry of all or any of the said kinds at the first Town of this Colony
through which they shall or may pass, on the penaltyes hereafter expressed,
viz. for all sorts of Neat Cattle not so entered, forty Shillings Per Head;
Horses twenty Shillings Per Head; Sheep and Lambs five Shillings Per Head;
Swine ten Shillings Per Head in money as abovesaid And it is further Ordered,
That the Clerk of the Writts of every Town, or such whom the Treasurer of this
Jurisdiction for the time being shall appoint in every Town, shall be the
persons, and they only, for making of such Entryes, and for receiving said
Rates, all which Entryes so made by any of the Persons so deputed, shall
contain in them the number of each kind, a true Copy whereof they that give out
to Vendor or Buyer under their hands, of any or all of the said kind, which
alone shall be their security in passing through any of the other Towns of this
Colony, without being liable (...) any or all the said kinds by any person or
persons whatsoever. And all persons authori^^d and empowered, whether Clerk of
the writts, or any other (...) the Treasurer of this Colony for the time being
shall depute, shall make a true and just Entry of all such kind in a Book, and
^^^nd obliged upon his or their Oaths to make a true Return to the Treasurer
of this Colony twice in the year; and all Fees for their Entry shall be three
pence for an Entry, and three pence for a Copy, and paid by the Party, and
twelve pence in the pound out of the money received; and that every Informer
upon any defect therein, prosecuting to effect, shall have one third to
himself, the rest to be to the Country. And this law to be in force on the
twentieth of November next.

FOr explanation of the Law, Tit. Cask, Cooper, Gauger, Packer, The Law for
Cask is to be understood of all Cask dry as well as liquid: Explanation of the
Law Tit. Cask, Cooper, Gager etc.
and London Assize is to be understood, Butts, one hundred twenty six Gallons;
Puncheons, eighty four Gallons; Hogsheads, sixty three Gallons; Terses, forty
two Gallons; Barrels, thirty one and an half Gallons etc. And the inspection
thereof shall be, and is hereby added unto the Gaugers Office of each Town, as
he is and shall be from time to time under his Oath for the true performance of
the same according to all the Particulars specified in the said Law.

IT is Ordered. Direction for Clerks of the Writts.
That when any Clerk of the writts shall grant Attachment in a civil Action to
any Plaintiff lying in Goal upon Execution for Debt, he shall require
sufficient Security to answer the Defendants Costs, as in case of Strangers.

FINIS.

