A POEM Dedicated to the Memory OF The Reverend and Excellent Mr. URIAN OAKS,
the late Pastor to Christ's Flock, and Praesident of Harvard-Colledge, in
Cambridge, Who was gathered to his People on 25d 5mo 1681. In the fifty'th Year
of his Age.

1 Samuel 25. 1. And SAMUEL dyed, and all the Israelites were gathered together,
and Lamented him. Scindentur Vestes, Gemmae frangentur, et Aurum; Carmina quam
tribuunt Fama perennis erit. OVid. Magna dabit qui magna potest; mihi parva
potenti Parvaque poscenti, parva dedisse fat est. BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND,
Printed for John Ratcliff. 1682.

TO THE READER
WOrthies to Praise is a Praise worthy thing;
Christ did it; and will do it! And to Sing
The Elogyes of Saints departed in
The Rhythm of Elegyes, has always been
Esteemed Reason! David bids me go
My Christian Reader! and like him do so.
Cotton Embalms great Hooker; Norton Him;
And Norton' s Hearse does Poet-Wilson trim
With Verses: Mitchel writes a Poem on
The Death of Wilson; And when Mitchel' s gone,
Shepard with funeral Lamentations gives
Honor to Him: and at his Death receives
The like from the [like-Maro] Lofty Strain
Of admirable Oaks! I should be vain
To thrust into that gallant Chorus: Pride
Never made me such an Icharus: I cried
Of good Exemples [Ahimaaz his Thought]
How if I should run after them? And brought
These as a Pattern, and a Plea for what
I do; that my cross Reader blame me not.
But why so late? my Naenia's some will deem
Both out of Time, and Tune! To some I seem
Grief's Resurrection to essay; and be
Just like the Trojans who came late to see
And sorrow with Tiberius! -- Only this
Shall be Replied! The fond Bookseller is
Now guilty of this Paper's ravishment
When long suppressed: Give him thy Discontent!
Since Oaks ( as Homer) has all Places Claim; BOSTON. Anagr. SOB NOT.

Let Boston too forget its Anagram!
Memoirs of the Life and Worth: Lamentations for the Death, and Loss of the
every way admirable Mr. URIAN OAKS.
WEep with me, Reader! Never Poet had
His Quill employed upon a Theme so sad
As what just Providence (Grief grumble not)
Does with black Warrant Press me to! O what?
This! OAKS is dead! One of the bittrest Pills
(Compounded of three Monosyllables)
That could have been dispensed! Absalom
Sure felt not more Distress, Death, Danger, come
With the three Darts of Joab! --
Blessed Shade! an Universal Tax of Sorrow
Thy Country ows thee! Ah! we need not borrow
The Prafica's: Say, Oaks is dead! and there!
There is enough to squeese a briny Tear
From the most flinty Flint: Once at the Blow
Of Moses, from a Rock, a Stream did flow;
But look! the Almightye's Rod now smites us home
Oh! what Man will not a Mourner now become?
Dear Saint! I cannot but thy Hearse bedew
With dropping of some Funeral Tears! I Rue
Thy Death! I must, My Father! Father! say,
Our Chariots and our Horsemen where are they?
I the dumb Son of Croesus before mine Eyes
Have set, and will cry when (...) dies
Oh! but a Verse to wait upon thy Grave,
A Verse our Custom, and thy Friends will have:
And must I brue my Tears? ah! shall I fetter
My Grief, by studying for to mourn in Meter?
Must too my cloudy Sorrows rain in Tune,
Distilling like the softly Showrs of June?
Alas! My Ephialtes takes me! See It!
I strive to run, but then I want my feet.
What shall I do? Shall I go invocate
The Muses to mine aid? No; That I hate!
The sweet New-England-Poet rightly said,
It is a most Unchristian Use and Trade Mr. M. Wigglesworth, in Pref. to D. D.

Of some that Christians would be thought, If I
Called Help, the Muses mother Memory
Would be enough: He that Remembers well
The Use and Loss of Oaks, will grieve his fill.
Ih'd rather pray, that He, in whose just Eyes
The Death of his dear Saints most preciose is,
And He who helped David to bewail
His Jon'than, would not my Endeavors fail.
A sprightly Effort of Poetic Fire
Would even Transport me to a mad Desire:
How could I wish, Oh! that the nimble Sun
Of thy short Life before thy Day was done
Might backward Ten Degrees have moved! or
Oh! that thy Corpse might but have chanced for
To have been buried near Elisha's bones!
Oh! that the Hand which raised the Widows Sons
Would give thee to thy Friends again! But, Fie!
That Passion's vain! To sob, Why did it thou die?
Is but an Irish Note: Death will not Restore
His Stolen Goods till Time shall be no more.
Shall I take what a Prologue Homer has (...), etc.

Let me Relate the Heavenly Powers Wrath?
Or shall I rather join with Jeremie,
And over our great and good Josiah sigh,
O that my Head were waters, and mine Eyes
A fountain were, that Hadadrimmon's Cries
Might bubble from me! O that Day and Night
For the Slain of my People weep I might!
Ah! why delay I? Reader, step with me,
And what is for thee on Grief's Table see
Memoria Prateritorum is
The Dish I call thee to: Come taste of this.
Oaks was! Ah! miserable word! But what
He was, Let Never, Never be forgot.
Believe me once, It were a worthy thing
Of's Life and Worth a large Account to bring
To public View, for general Benefit.
I would essay (with Leave, Good Reader) it,
So far as feet will carry me, but know it
From first to last, Crief never made good Poet. Ovid

He that lasht with a Rod could versify,
Attained, and could pretend far more than!
Short was thy Life! Sweet Saint! and quickly run
Thy Race! Thy Work was, oh! how quickly done!
Thy Days were ( David's measure) but a Span;
Five Tens of Years rolled since the Life began.
Thus I remember a Greek Poet Rhimes,
They whom God Loves are wont to die betimes.
Thus Whit'ker, Perkins, Preston, Men of Note,
Ay! many such, Never to fifty got.
And thus ( Rachel New England!) many Seers
Have left us in the akme of their Years.
Good Soul! Thy Jesus who did for thee die,
In Heaven longed for thy Company.
And let thy Life be measured by thy Deeds, Non Annis, sed Fa^^is vivunt
mortales.

Not by thy Tears; Thy Age strait nothing needs.
Divert, My Pen! Run through the Zodiac
Of Oaks his Life: And cause I knowledge lack
Of most Occurrents, let me now and then
Snatch at a Passage worthy of a Pen.
Our Mother England, even a Village there
( Fuller, insert it!) did this Worthy bear.
Over the Ocean in his Infancy
His Friends with him into New England fly:
Here, while a lad, almost a miracle
(As I have heard his Aged Father tell)
Saved him from drowning in a River: He
Would (guess) a Miracle and Moses be.
Now did Sweet Nature in him so appear
A Gentlewoman once cried out, If ere
Good Nature could bring unto Heaven, then
Those wings would thither carry Urian.
Prompt Parts, and early Piety now made
Men say of him, what once observers said
Of great John Baptist, and of Ambrose too,
To what an one will this strange Infant grow?
Her Light and Cup did happy Harvard give
Unto him; and from her he did receive
His Two Degrees: (A double Honor to
Thee ( Harvard! Own it!) did by this accrue!)
So being furnished with due burnisht Tools
The Armor and the Treasure of the Schools,
To Temple-work he goes: I need not tell
How he an Hiram, or Bezaleel
Did there approve himself; I Will only add
Roxbury his first fruits (first Sermon) had.
Some things invite: He back to England goes;
With God and Man he there in favor grows:
But whilst he lives in that Land, Tichfield cries
Come over, Sir, and help us! He complyes:
The Starr moves thither! There the Orator
Continued charming sinful mortals for
To close with a sweet Jesus: Oh! he wooed,
He Thundered: Oh! for their eternal good
How did he bring the Promises, and how
Did he discharge slashes of Ebal? Now
He held Love's golden Scepter out before
The Humble Soul; Now made the Trumpet roar
Fire, Death, and Hell against Impenitent
Desp'rates, until he made their hearts relent.
There did he merit Sibs's Motto, I Praelucendo perco.

Just like a Lamp, with lighting others die.
Ah! like a Silkworm, his own bowels went
To serve his Hearers, while he foundly spent
His Spirits in his Labors. O but there
He must not die (except Death Civil) Here
(Why may not we Sigh it! here dark Bartholmew
This gallant and heroic Witness slew.
Silenc't he was! not buried out of sight!
A worthy Gentleman does him invite Col. N.

Unto him; and like Obadiah, hide
Him, dear to them with whom he did reside,
Finding his Prayers and Presence to produce
An obed-Edom's blessing on the House.
A Spirit of great Life from God does enter
Within a while into him; He does venture
To stand upon his feet: He prophesy's;
And to a Congregation Preacher is,
Joined with a loving Colleague; who will not
Be buried, till Symmons be forgot.
But our New England Cambridge wants him, and
Sighs, " Of my Sons none takes me by the hand,
" Now Mitchel's gone! Oh! where is his parallel?
" Call my Child Urian! Friendly Strangers tell
" An O ACHE of my own breed in England is,
" That will support me Pillar-like; and this
" Must be resolved; I Will Pray and Send! Agreed!
Messengers go! and calling Council, speed!
The good Stork over the Atlantic came
To nourish and cherish his Aged Dam.
Welcome! great Prophet! to New England shore!
Thy feet are beautiful! A number more
Of Men like thee with us would make us say,
The Moral of More's famed Utopia
Is in New England! yea, (far greater!) we
Should think we Twisse's guess accomplished see,
When New Jerusalem comes down, she Seat
Of it, the wast America will be it.
Cambridge! thy Neighbors must congratulate
Thy Fate! Oh! where can thy Triumvirate
Meet with its Mate? A Shepard! Mitchel! then
An Oaks! These Chrysostoms, these golden Men,
Have made thy golden Age! That fate is thine
( To be blessed with the Sun's perpetual Shine)
What Sylvius sais of Rhodes. Sure thou may call
Thy Name Capernaum! But oh! the fall
Of that enlightened Place we will humbly pray
Dear Lord! Keep Cambridge from it! --
But Quill! where fly'st thou? Let the Reader know
Cambridge some years could this brite Jewel show,
Yet here a Quartane Ague does arrest
The Churches Comfort, and the Countries Rest.
But this (Praise Mercy) found some Ague-frighter,
He mends, and his Infirmity grows lighter,
Even that his dear Orestes smiled So small
Tour Illness, you would as good have none at all.
Well! the poor College faints! Harvard almost
(An Amnesty cries ' st!) gives up the ghost!
The branches dwindle! But an OAK so near
May cherish them! 'T was done! The gloomy fear
Of a lost College was dispelled! The Place,
The Learning, the Discretion, and the Grace
Of that great Charles, who long since slept and died Mr. Charles Chauncey B. D.

Loved, and Lamented, worthy Oaks supplied.
His Nurse he suckles; and the Ocean now
Refunds what the Earth in Rivers did bestow.
Pro Tempore (a sad P^^^epsiis) was
For a long time his Title; but just as
We had obtained a longed for Alteration,
And fixed him in the Praesident's firm Station,
The wrath of the Eternal wields a blow
At which my Pen is gastred! --
But Up! -- Lord! wee're undone! -- Nay! Up and Try!
Heart! Vent thy grief! Ease Sorrow with a Sigh!
Lett's hear the matter! Write de Tristibus!
Alas! Enough! -- Death has bereaved us!
The Earth was parch't with horrid heat: We fea'rd
The blasts of a Vast Comet's flaming Beard.
The dreadful Fire of Heaven inflames the blood
Of our Elijah carrying him to God.
Innumerable Sudden Deaths abound!
Our OAKS a Sudden blow laid on the ground,
And gives him blessed Capel's wish, which the
Letany prays against, To die Suddenly.
The Saints hope to have the Lord's Table spread;
But with astonishment they find him dead
That used to break the Bread of Life: O we
Deprived of our Ministers often be
At such a Season. Lord, thy Manna low
In our blind Eyes we fear is wont to go!
The Man of God at the first Touch does feel
[With a Prasage] his Call to Heavens weal;
He fits himself for his last Conflict; Saw
The ghastly King of Terrors Icy claw;
Ready to grapple with him; then he gives
A Look to him who died and ever lives;
The great Redeemer does disarm the Snake;
And by the Hand his faithful Servant take,
Leading him through Death's black Valley, till
He brings him in his arms to Zion's Hill.
Fallen Pillar of the Church! This Thy Translation Hinc illae Lachrymae

Has turned our Joys into this Lamentation!
Sweet Soul' Disdaining any more to trade
With fleshly Organs, that a Prison made,
You Are flown into the World of Souls, and we
Poor, stupid Mortals lose thy Company.
Thou join'st Consort with the Happy gone,
Who (happ'er than Servants of Solomon)
Are standing round the Lamb's illustrious Throne
Conversing with great Israel's-Holy-One.
Now could I with good old Crynaus O falicem Diem! quumad illud Animarum
Concilium proficiscar; et ex hac Turba, and Colluvione discedam.
say
"Oh! that will be a bright and gloriose Day,
" When I to that Assembly come; and am
"Gone from a world of guilt, filth, sorrow, shame!
I read how Swan-like Cotton joy'd in Thought,
That unto Dod, and such he should be brought.
How Ballinger deaths grim looks could not fright
Because twould bring him to the Patriarchs Sight.
(Well might it be so! Heathen Socrates
In hopes of Homer, Death undaunted fees.)
Who knows but the Third Heaven may sweeter be
Thou Citizen of it! (dear Oaks!) for thee?
Sure what of Calvin Beza said; and what
Of thy forerunner Mitchel, Mather wrote,
I Will truly add, Now Oaks is dead, to me
Life will less sweet, and Death less bitter be.
Lord! Let us follow! --
Nay! Then, Good Reader! Thousand I must try
To Tread his Steps! He walked Exemplar'ly!
Plato would have none to be praised, but those
Whose Praises profitable we suppose:
Oh! that I had a ready Writer's Pen,
(If not Briareus hundred Hands!) and then
I might limn forth a Pattern. Ah! his own
Fine Tongue can his own worth Describe alone
That Is it I want; and poor I! Shall Not I show
Like the man, Cic. pro hia Poeta.
whom an Hero hired to
Forbear his Verses on him! Yet a lame
Mephibosheth will escape a David's blame.
Well! Reader! Wipe thine Eyes! and see the Man
(Almost too small a word!) which Cambridge can
Say, I have lost! In Name a Drusius,
And Nature too! yea a compendious
Both Magazine of worth, and Follower
Of all that ever great and famous were.
A great Soul in a little Body. (Add!
In a small Nutshell Graces Iliad.)
How many Angels on a Needle's point
Can stand, is thought, perhaps, a needless Point:
Oaks Virtues too I Am at a loss to tell:
In short, He was New-England's See the Parallel in Mr. Mather's Epistle
before a late Sermon of Mr. Oaks.
SAMUEL;
And had as many gallant Propertyes
As ere an Oak had Leaves; or Argus Eyes.
A better Christian would a miracle
Be thought! From most he bore away the Bell!
Grace and good Nature were so purely met
In him, we saw in Gold a Jewel set.
His very Name spoke Heavenly: Urianus, quasi (...).
and He
Vir sai Nominis would always be.
For a Converse with God; and holy frame,
A Noah, and an Enoch he became.
Urian and George, are Names aequivalent;
We had Saint George, though other Places han't.
Should I say more, like him that would extol
Huge Hercules, my Reader 'l on me fall
With such a check; Who does dispraise him? I
Shall say enough, if his Humility
Might be described. Witty Austin meant
This the First, Second, and Third Ornament,
Of a Right Soul, should be esteemed. And so
Our Second Moses, So styled by Mr. Buroughs.
Humble Dod, cried, Know,
Just at Humility men's Grace will be,
And so much Grace so much Humility.
Ah! graciose Oaks, we saw thee stoop; we saw
In thee the Moral of good Nature's Law,
That the full Ears of Corn should bend, and grow
Down to the ground Worth would sit always low.
And for a Gospel Minister, we had
In him a Pattern for our Tyro's; Sad!
Their Head is gone: Who ever knew a greater
Student and Scholar? or beheld a better
Preacher and Prafident? We looked on him
As Jerome in our (Hungry) Bethlechem;
A perfect Critic in Philology;
And in Theology a Canaan's Spy.
His General Learning had no fewer Parts
Than the Encyclopedia of Arts:
The old Say, Aliquis in Omnibm, Nullus in Singul^^.
He that something is in all,
Nothing's in any; Now goes to the wall.
But when the Pulpit had him! there he spent
Himself as in his only Element:
And there he was an Orpheus: He Would even draw
The Stones, and Trees: Austin cries, If I saw
Paul in the Pulpit, of my Three desires
None of the least (to which my Soul aspires)
Would gratified and granted be. He might
Have come and seen't, when O ACHES gave
Oaks an Uncomfortable Preacher was Cambridge Light.
I must confess! He made us cry, Alas!
In sad Despair! Of what? Of ever seeing
A better Preacher while we have a being.
He! Oh! He was, in Doctrine, Life, and an
Angelical, and Evangelical.
A Benedict and Boniface to boot,
Commending of the Tree by noble Fruit.
All said, Our Oaks the Double Power has
Of Boanerges, and of Barnabas:
He is a Christian Nestor! Oh! that we
Might him among us for three Ages see!
But ah! He Is gone to Sinus Abraha.
What shall I say? Never did any spitt
Gall at this Gall less, Guile-less Dove; nor yet
Did any Envy with a cankred breath
Blast him: It was I Am sure the general Faith,
Let Oaks Be, Say, or Do what e're he would,
If it were O ACHES, it must be wise, true, good.
Except the Sect'ryes Hammer might a blow
Or two, receive from Anabaptists, who
Never loved any Man, that wrote a Line
Their naught, Church-rending Cause to undermine
Yett after my Encomiastick Ink
Is all run out, I must conclude (I think)
With a Dicebam, not a Dixi! Yea,
Such a course will exceeding proper be:
The Jews, whene're they build an House, do leave
Some part Imperfect, as a call to grieve
For their destroyed Jerus'lem! I Will do so!
I do it! --
And now let sable Cambridge broach her Tears!
(They forfeit their own Eyes that don't; for here is
(...) sad enough!) Your Sons pray call
All Ichabod; and Daughters, Marah! Fall
Down into Sackcloth, Dust, and Ashes! (To
Be senseless Now, Friends, Now! will be to show
A CRIME and BADG of Sin and Folly! ANAGR.
) Try
Your fruitfulness under the Ministry
Of that kind Pelican, who spent his Blood
To feed you! Dear Saints! Have ye got the Good
You might? And let a Verse too find the Men
Who fly'd a Sermon! Oh! Remember when
Sirs! your Ezekiel was like unto
A lovely Song of (Been't deaf Adders you)
One with a pleasant Voice! and that could play
Well on an Instrument! And i'n't the Day,
The gloriose Day, to dawn (ah! yet!) wherein
You are drawn from the Egypt-graves of Sin
Compelled to come in? For shame come in!
Nay! Join you all! Strive with a noble Strife,
To publish both in Print as well as Life
Your preciose Pastor's Works! Bring them to view
That we may Honey taste, as well as you.
But, Lord! What has thy Vineyard done, that (...)
Command'st the Clouds to rain no more? O show
Thy favor to thy Candlestick! Thy Rod
Has almost broke it: Let a Gift of God,
Or, a sincerely Heaven-touch't Isra^^
Become a Teacher in thy Peoples sight
At last I with License Poetical
(Reader! and thy good leave) address to all
The children of my People! Oh! the Name
Of Urian Oaks, New England! does proclaim
SURE I AN OAK was to thee! ANAGR.
Feel thy Loss!
Cry, ( Why forsaken, Lord!) Under the Cross!
Learn for to prize Survivers! Kings destroy
The People that Ambassadors annoy.
The Counsil of God's Herald, and thy Friend,
[ Be wise! Mr. OAKS Elect. Sermon.
Consider well thy latter End!]
O lay to heart! Pray to the heavenly Lord
Of the Harvest, that (according to his Word)
He would thrust forth his Laborers: For why
Should all thy Glory go, and Beauty die
Through thy default? --
-- Lord! from thy lofty Throne
Look down upon thy Heritage! Let none
Of all our Breaches be unhealed! Let
This dear, poor Land be our Immanuel's yett!
Lett's be a Gosben still! Restrain the Boar
That makes Incursions! Give us daily more
Of thy All-curing Spirit from on High!
Let all thy Churches flourish! And supply
The almost Twenty ones, that thy Just Ire
Has left without Help that their Needs require!
Let not the College droop, and die! O Let
The Fountain run! A Doctor give to it!
Moses's are to the upper Canaan gone!
Let Joshua's Succeed them! goes when one
Elijah, raise Elisha's! Paul's become
Dissolved with Christ! Send Tim'thees in their room!
Avert the Omen, that when Teeth apace
Fall out, No new one should supply their place!
Lord! Let us Peace on this our Israel see!
And still both Hephsibah, and Benlah be!
Then will thy People Grace! and Glory! Sing,
And every Wood with Hallelujah's ring.
N. R.

Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona
Multi; sed illachrymabiles
Urgentur ignotique longa
Nocte; carent quia Vate sacro.
Hor. Non ego cuncta meis amplecti Versibus opto. Virg. -- Ingens laudato Poema:
Exiguum legito! --
Call. Qui legis ista, tuam reprehendo, si mec lauds
Omnia, Stultitiam: Si nihil, Invidiam.
Owen. Non possunt, Lector, multae emendare Liturae
Versus bos nostros: Una litura potest.
Martial. Advertisement.
THere is to be sold by John Browning, at the Corner of the Prison-Lane next
the Townhouse, a Sermon of the late Reverend Mr. URIAN OAKS, preached from
Eccl. 9. 11. Showing that Fortune and Chance are infallibly determined by God:
By which alone, it might appear that the Elogyes of him are not a vain
Hyperbole, but as it were, the Echo of those Words which his Works speak
concerning Him.


