THE Foundation of Christian Religion Gathered into Six PRINCIPLES And it is to
be learned of ignorant People that they may be fit to hear Sermons with profit,
and to receive the Lords Supper with Comfort.

PSALM. 119. Ver. 133. The entrance into thy Word shows light, and gives
understanding to the simple.

By William Perkins.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND Printed by Samuel Green, and sold by Mary Avery near the
Blue Anchor in Boston. 1682.

TO ALL Ignorant People That desire to be INSTRVCTED.
POor People, your manner is to sooth up your selves, as though you were in a
most happy estate: but if the matter come to a just trial, it will fall out far
otherwise. For you lead your lives in great ignorance, as may appear by these
your common opinions which follow.

1. That Faith is a man's good meaning and his good serving of God.

2. That God is served by the rehearsing of the ten Commandments, the Lords
Prayer, and the Creed.

3. That ye have believed in Christ ever since you could remember.

4. That it is pity that he should live which does any whit doubt of his
salvation.

5. That none can tell whether he shall be saved or not certainly; but that all
men must be of a good belief.

6. That howsoever a man live, yet if he call upon God on his deathbed, and
say, Lord have mercy upon me, and so go away like a lamb, he is certainly saved

7. That if any be strangely visited, he is either taken with a Planet, or
bewitched.

8. That a man may lawfully swear when he speaks nothing but the truth, and
swears by nothing, but that which is good, as by his faith and troth.

9. That a Preacher is a good man no longer then he is in the Pulpit; They
think all like themselves.

10. That a man may repent, when he will, because the Scripture says, At what
time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, etc.

11. That it is an easier thing to please God, then to please our neighbor.

12. That ye can keep the Commandments as well as God will give you leave.

13. That it is safest to do in religion as most do.

14. That merry Ballads and Books, as Skoggin, Bevis of Southampton, etc. are
good to drive away the time, and to remove heart qualms.

15. That ye can serve God with all your hearts; and that you would be sorry
else

16. That a man need not hear so many Sermons, except he could follow them
better.

17. That a man, which comes at no Sermons, may as well believe, as he which
hears all the Sermons in the world.

18. That ye know all the Preacher can tell you: for he can say nothing, but
that every man is a sinner, that we must love our neighbor as our selves, that
every man must be saved by Christ: and all this ye can tell as well as he.

19. That it was a good world, when the old Religion was, because all things
were cheap.

20. That drinking and bezeling in the Alehouse or Tavern, is good fellowship,
and shows a good kind nature, and maintains neighborhood.

21. That a man may swear by the Mass, because it is nothing now: and by our
Lady, because she is gone out of the country.

22. That every man must be for himself, and God for us all.

23. That a man may make of his own whatsoever he can.

24. That if a man remember to say his prayers every morning (though he never
understand them) he has blessed himself for all the day following.

25. That a man prays, when he says the ten Commandments.

26. That a man eats his Maker in the Sacrament.

27. That if a man be no Adulterer, no Thief, no Murderer, and do no man harm,
he is a right honest man.

28. That a man need not have any knowledge of Religion, because he is not
book-learned.

29. That one may have a good meaning, when he says and does that which is
evil.

30. That a man may go to Wizards called wise men, for counsel: because God
has provided a salve for every sore.

31. That ye are to be excused in all your doings, because the best men are
sinners.

32. That ye have so strong a Faith in Christ, that no evil company can hurt
you.

These and such like sayings, what argue they, but your gross ignorance? now
where ignorance reigns, there raigns sin, and where sin raigns, there the
devil rules; and where he rules, men are in a damnable case. Ye will reply unto
me thus: that ye are not so bad as I would make you. If need be, you can say
the Creed, the Lords Prayer and the ten Commandments: and therefore ye will be
of Gods belief, say all men what they will, and you defy the Devil from your
hearts.

I answer again, that it is not sufficient to say all these without book,
unless ye can understand the meaning of the words, and be able to make a right
use of the Commandments, of the Creed, of the Lords-Prayer; by applying them
inwardly to your hearts and consciences, and outwardly to your lives and
conversations. This is the very point in which ye fail.

And for an help in this your ignorance to bring you to true knowledge,
unfeigned Faith and sound Repentance, here I have set down the principal points
of Christian Religion in six plain and easy Rules, even such as the simplest
may easily learn: and hereunto is adjoined an Exposition of them word by word.
If ye do want other good directions, then use this my labor for your good
instruction. In reading of it, first learn the six Principles: and when you
have them without book, and the meaning of them withal, thtn learn the
exposition also which being well conceived, and in some measure felt in the
heart, ye shall be able to profit by Sermons, whereas now ye cannot; and the
ordinary parts of the Catechism, namely, the ten Commandments, the Creed, the
Lords Prayer, and the institution of the two Sacraments, shall more easily be
understood.

Thine in Christ Jesus, William Perkins

The Foundation of Christian Religion Gathered into six PRINCIPLES.
The first Principle.
Quest. WHat do thou believe concerning God?

A. There is one God, Creator and Governor of all things, distinguished into
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Proofs out of the Word of God.

1. There is a God.
For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are
seen by the creation of the World, Romans 1.10
being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be without
excuse.

Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, Act.
14.17.
and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness.

2 This God is one.
Concerning therefore meats sacrificed to Idols, we know that an Idol is
nothing in the world: and that there is none other God but one. 1 Cor. 8.4.


3. He is Creator of all things.
In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth.

Genesis 1.1 Heb. 13.3.
Through faith we understand, that the world was ordained by the Word of God: so
that the things which we see, are not made of things which did appear.

4. He is Governor of all things.
Prove. 15.3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good.

Yea and all the hairs of your heads are numbered. Mat. 10, 30.


5. Distinguished into the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost.
Mat. 3.16.
And Jesus, when he was baptized, came straight out of the water: and lo, the
heavens, were opened unto him, and John saw the Spirit of God descending like a
Dove, and lighting upon him.

Ver. 17
And lo, a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.

For there are three that bare record in heaven, Joh. 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one.

The second Principle.
Q. What do thou believe concerning man, and concerning thine own self?

A. All men are wholly corrupted with sin through Adams fall, and so are become
slaves of Satan, and guilty of eternal damnation.

1. All men are corrupted with sin.
As it is written, there is none righteous no not one. Romans 3.10


2. They are all wholly corrupted.
Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2^
and I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This I say therefore, Ephesians. 4.17
and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk
in the vanity of their minds:

Having their cogitations darkened, and being strangers from the life of God,
Ver. 18,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts.

When tht Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, Genesis 6.5
and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually.

3. Through Adams fall.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death went over all men, Romans 5.12.
for so much as all men have sinned.

4. And so are become slaves of Satan.
Ephesians. 2.2.
Wherein in times past ye walk according to the course of the world, and after
the Prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in the
Children of disobedience.

For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them, Heb. 2.14
that he might destroy through death him, that had the power of death, that is,
the devil.

2 Cor. 4.4
In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, that is of Infidels, that
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God, should
not shine unto them.

5. And guilty of eternal Damnation.
Gal. 3.1^
For as many as are of the works of the Law are under the curse: for it is
written Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written
in the book of the Law, to do them. Likewise then as by the offense of one, the
fault came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the benefit
abounded toward all men to the justification of life.

The third Principle.
Q. What means is there for thee to escape this damnable estate?

A. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, being made man, by his death upon the
Cross, and by his righteousness has perfectly alone by himself accomplished
all things that are needful for the salvation of man kind.

1. Christ Jesus the eternal Son of God.
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof,
Joh. 1.14
as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

2. Being made Man.
For he in no sort took the Angels, Heb. 2.16
but he took the seed of Abraham.

3. By his death upon the Cross
But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities:
Isa. 53.5*
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes w^ are healed.

4. And by his righteousness. Romans 5.19.

For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous.

For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

5. Has perfectly.
Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him,
Heb. 7.25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

6. Alone by himself.
Neither is there salvation in any other, Act. 4.12
for among men there is given none other name under Heaven, whereby we must be
saved.

7. Accomplish all things needful for the Salvation of mankind.
1 John 2.2.
And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole World.

The fourth Principle.
Q. But how may thou be made partaker of Christ, and his benefits?

A. A man of a contrite and humble spirit, by Faith alone* apprehending and
applying Christ with all his merits unto him self, is justified before God and
sanctified

1. A man of a contrite and humble spirit.
For thus says he that is high and excellent he that inhabiteth eternity,
Isai. 57.15
whose name is the Holy one; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart.

The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and broken heart,
Psalm. 51.17
O God thou will not despise.

2. By faith alone.
As soon as Jesus heard that word spoken, Mat. 5.36
he said unto the Ruler of the Synagogue Be not afraid only believe.

So Moses made a Serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign; Numb. 21.9
and when a Serpent had bitten any man, then he looked to the Serpent of brass,
and lived.

And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, John 3.14
so must the Son of man be lifted up:

That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.
Ver. 15.


3. Apprehending and applying Christ with all his merits unto himself.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, Joh.
1.12
to them that believe in his name. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of
life, he that comes to me, John 6.35
shall not hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never thirst.

4. Is justified before God.
For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, Romans 4.3
and it was counted to him for righteousness.

Even as David declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, Ver. 6
saying,

Ver. 7
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

5. And Sanctified.
And he put no difference between us and them, Act. 15.19
after that by faith he had purified their hearts.

But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor.
1.30
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

The fifth Principle.
Q. What are the ordinary or usual means for obtaining of Faith?

A. Faith comes only by the preaching of the Word, and increases daily by it,
as also by the administration of the Sacraments and Prayer.

1. Faith comes only by the preaching of the Word, and increases daily by it.
But how shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14
and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a Preacher?

Where there is no vision, the people decay, Prove. 29.19
but he that keeps the Law is blessed

My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have refused
knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no Priest to (...): Hos.
4.^
and seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
Children.

2. As also by the administration of the Sacraments
After he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness
of faith, Romans 4.31*
which he had when he was uncircumcised, that he should be the father of all
them that believe, not being circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed
to them also.

Moreover, Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, 1 Cor. 10.
that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, etc.

3. And Prayer.
For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

The sixth Principle.
Q. What is the state of all men after death?

A. All men shall rise again with their own bodies, to the last judgment:
which being ended, the godly shall possess the kingdom of heaven: but
unbelievers and reprobates shall be in hell tormented with the devil and his
angels for ever.

1. All men shall rise again with their own bodies,
Marvel not at this: for the hour shall come, Joh. 5.28
in the which all that are in the grave shall hear his voice.

And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
but they that have done evil, Ver. 29
unto the resurrection of condemnation.

2. To the last Judgment.
Eccl. 12.14
For God will bring every work unto judgment with every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil.

But I say unto you, that of every Idle word that men shall speak, Mat. 12.36.
they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment.

3. Which being ended, the godly, etc.
2 Pet. 2.7
And delivered just Lot, vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked.

And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the City, Ezekiel. 9.4
even through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of them
that mourn and cry out for all the abominations that be done in the midst
thereof.

4. Shall possess the Kingdom of God.
Then shall the King say to them on the right hand, come ye blessed of my
Father, Mat. 25.34
inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

5. But unbelievers and reprobates shall be in hell tormented with the devil
and his angels.
Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, Ver.
41.
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

The Scriptures for proof were only quoted by the Author, to move thee to
search them: the words themselves, I have expressed at the earnest request of
many, that thou may more easily learn them: if yet thou will be ignorant,
thy malice is evident; if thou gainest knowledge, give God the glory in doing
of his will.

Thine T. S.

The Exposition of the Six Principles.
The first Principle Expounded.
Question. WHat is God?

A. God is a Spirit, or spiritual substance, John 4.24
most wise, most holy, eternal* infinite.

Q. How do you persuade your self that there is a God?

A. Besides the Testimony of the Scripture, plain reason will show it.

Q. What is one reason?

A. When I consider R^^. 1.20 Act. ^4.17
the wonderful frame of the world, me thinks the silly creatures, that be in
it, could never make it neither could it make it self, and therefore besides
all these the Maker of it must needs be God. Even as when a man comes into a
strange country, and sees fair and sumptuous buildings, and yet finds no living
creatures there besides birds and beasts, he will not imagine that either birds
or beasts reared those buildings, but he presently conceives that some men
either are or have been there.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Romans 2.15 Genesis 3.8, 10 and 12.24
A man that commits any sin, as murder, fornication, adultery, blasphemy, etc.
albeit he does conceal the matter* (that no man living know of it) yet
oftentimes he has a griping in his conscience, and feels the very flashing of
hellfire, which is a strong reason to show that there is a God, before whose
Judgment seat he must answer for his fact.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. No 1 Cor. 8.6
(...) more but one.

Q. How do you conceive this one God in your mind?

A, Not Deuteronomy. 4.16 Amos 4.13
by framing any image of him in my mind, (as ignorant folk do) that think him
to be an old man sitting in heaven, but I conceive him by his properties and
works.

Q. What be his chief properties?

A. First he is Job 2.13
most wise, understanding all things aright, and knowing the reason of them.
Secondly, he is Isai. 6.3 Exo. 20.5.6
most holy, which appears in that he is most just, and merciful unto his
creatures. Thirdly, he is Isai. 41.4
eternal, without either beginning, or end of days. Lastly, he is Psalm. 139.12.
infinite, both because he is present in all places, and because he is of power
sufficient to do whatsoever he Job. 9.4
will.

Q What be the works of God?

A. Ier. 10.12 Psalm. 33.6
The creation of the world, and of every thing therein, and the preservation of
them being created by his special providence. Deuteronomy. 10.17


Q. How know you that God governs every particular thing in the world by his
special providence?

A. To omit the Mat. 10.30 Prove. 16.13
Scriptures, I see it by experience: Lev. 26.26 Mat. 4.4
Meat Drink, and clothing, being void of heat and life, could not preserve the
life of man, unless there were a special providence of God to give virtue unto
them.

Q. How is this one God distinguished?

A. Into the Joh. 5.7 Mat. 3.16, 17
Father, which begets the Son; into the Son, who is begotten of the Father;
into the John 15.26
Holy Ghost who proceeds from the Father and the Son.

The second Principle Expounded.
Q. Let us now come to our selves, and first tell me what the natural estate of
man is?

A. Every man by nature is Ephesians. 2.2 1 Timothy 5.6
dead in sin, as a loathsome carrion, or as a dead corpse lies rotting and
stinking in the grave, having in him the seed of all sins.

Q. What is sin?

A. Any 1 John 3 Rom 7.4, 7 Gal 3.10
breach of the law of God, if it be no more but the least want of that which
the Law requires.

Q. How many sorts of sins are there?

A. Sin is Col. 3 Psalm 51.5
either the corruption of nature, or any evil actions, that proceed of it, as
fruits thereof.

Q. In whom is the corruption of nature?

A. In all men, Rom 3.10
none excepted.

Q. In what part of man is it?

A. In every Gen 6.5 1 Thessalonians 5.23
part both of body and soul, like as a leprosy, that runs from the crown of
the head to the sole of the foot.

Q. Show me how every part of man is corrupted with sin?

A. First, in the 1 Cor 2.14 Rom 8.5
mind, there is nothing but ignorance and blindness concerning heavenly
matters. Secondly, the Tit 1.15 Ephesians 4.18, 19 Isai 57.20
conscience is defiled, being always either benumbed with sin, or else
turmoiled with inward accusations and terrors. Thirdly, the Phil. 2.13.
will of man only wills and lusts after evil. Fourthly, the Gal. 5.24
affections of the heart, as love, joy, hope, desire, etc. are moved and
stirred to that which is evil, to embrace it; and they are never stirred unto
that which is good, unless it be, to eschew it. Lastly, the Rom 6.19
members of the body are the instruments and tools of the mind, for the
execution of sin.

Q What be those evil actions, that are the fruits of this corruption?

A. Evil Genesis 6.5
thoughts in the mind, which come either by a man's own conceiving, or by
suggestion of the devil: Joh. 13.2 Act. 5.3
evil motions and lusts stirring in the heart: and from these arise evil words
and deeds when any occasion is given.

Q. How comes it to pass that all men are thus defiled with sin?

A. By Romans 5.12 18, 19 Genesis 3.9
Adams infidelity and disobedience, in eating the forbidden fruit even as we
see great personages by treason do not only hurt themselves, but also stain
their blood, and disgrace their posterity

Q. What hurt comes to a man by his sin?

A, (...), 10
He is continually subject to the curse of God in his life time, in the end of
his life, and after his life.

Q. What is the curse of God in this life?

A. In the Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22, 27, 65, 66, 67.
body, diseases, ^ches pains: in the soul, blindness, hardness of heart, horror
of conscience: in goods, hindranances and losses: in name, ignominy and
reproach, Lastly, in the whole man, bondage under Satan the prince of darkness.

Q. What manner of bondage is this?

A. This Heb. 2.14 Ephesians 1.2 2 Cor 4.4 Luke 11.14
bondage is, when a man is the slave of the devil; and has him to reign in his
heart as his god.

Q. How may a man know whether Satan be his god, or not?

A. He may know it by this; if he give obedience to him in his heart, and
express it in his conversation.

Q. And how shall a man perceive this obedience?

A. If he Ioh. 8.44 1 John 3.8
take delight in the evil motions that Satan puts in his heart, and does fulfill
the lusts of the devil.

Q. What is the curse due to man in the end of this life?

A. Romans 5.12
Death, which is the separation of body and soul.

Q. What is the curse after this life?

A. Gal. 3.10
Eternal damnation in hell fire, whereof every man is guilty, and is in as
great danger of it* as the traitor apprehended is in danger of hanging, drawing
and quartering.

The third Principle Expounded.
Q. If damnation be the reward of sin, then is a man of all creatures most
miserable: A dog, or a toad, when they die, all their misery is ended; but when
a man dies, there is the beginning of his woe.

A. It were so indeed, if there were no means of deliverance, but God has
showed his mercy in giving a Savior to mankind.

Q. How is this Savior called?

A. Mat. 1.21
Jesus Christ?

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. Heb. 2.16 John 1.14
The eternal Son of God, made man in all things, even Heb. 5.7
in his infirmities like other men, save only in sin.

Q. How was he made man void of sin?

A. He was Mat. 1.28
conceived in the womb of a Virgin, and sanctified by the holy Ghost at his
conception.

Q. Why must our Savior be both God and Man?

A. He 1 Timothy 2.5, 6
must be a man, because man had sinned, and therefore a man must die for sin,
to appease Gods wrath: he must be God, to sustain and uphold the manhood, to
overcome and vanquish death.

Q. What be the Offices of Christ, to make him an all sufficient Savior?

A. He Psalm. 45.7 Luke 4.18 Deu 18.15, 18 Lu. 1.33 Psalm. 110
is a Priest, a Prophet, a King,

Q. Why is he a Priest?

A: To work the means of salvation in the behalf of man kind.

Q. How does he work the means of Salvation?

A. Mat 10.28 Heb 7..25, 26
First, by making satisfaction to his Father for the sin of man: Secondly, by
making intercession.

Q. How does he make satisfaction?

A. By two means: and the first is by offering a Sacrifice.

Q. What is the Sacrifice?

A. Isai. 35.10
Christ himself, as he is a man, consisting of body and soul.

Q. What is the Apoc. 8.3 Heb. 13.10
Altar?

A. Christ, as he is God, is the Altar on which he sacrificed himself.

Q. Who was the Priest?

A. None Heb. 5.5, 6
but Christ, and that as he is both God and man.

Q. How often did he sacrifice himself?

A. Never but Heb. 9.28
once.

Q. What death did he suffer, when he sacrificed himself?

A. A death upon the Cross, peculiar to him alone; Isai. 53.5. Joh. 12.27 Rev.
19.15 Luk 22.44
for besides the separation of body and soul, he felt also the pangs of hell,
in that the whole wrath of God due to the sin of man, was poured forth upon him.

Q. What profit comes by his sacrifice?

A. Gods Heb. 9.26
wrath is appeased by it.

Q. Could the sufferings of Christ, which were but for a short time,
countervail everlasting damnation, and so appease Gods wrath?

A. Yea, for seeing Christ suffered, God Act. 20.28 2 Cor. 5.15
suffered, though not in his Godhead: and that is more then if all the men in
the world had suffered for ever and ever.

Q. Now tell me the other means of satisfaction?

A. It is the perfect fulfilling of the law

Q. How did he fulfill the Law?

A By his 1 Cor. 1.30 Romans 3.25 2 Cor. 5.21
perfect righteousness, which consists of two parts: the first, the integrity
and pureness of his humane nature: the other, Romans 5.19 Romans 4.1
his obedience in performing all that the Law requires.

Q. You have showed how Christ does make satisfaction; tell me likewise how
does he make intercession?

A. He does alone continually Romans 8.34 1 Pet. 2.5
appear before his Father in heaven, making the faithful and all their prayers
acceptable unto him, by applying of the merits of his own perfect satisfaction
to them.

Q Why is Christ a Prophet?

A. To Joh. 6.45 Mat. 3.17
reveal unto his Church the way and means of salvation: and this he does
outwardly by the ministry of his Word, and inwardly, by the teaching of his
holy spirit.

Q. Why is he also a King?

A. That Isai. 9.7
he might bountifully bestow upon us, and convey unto us all the aforesaid
means of salvation.

Q. How does he show himself to be a King?

A. In Act. 10.40. Ephesians. 4.8 Act. 1.9
that being dead and buried, he rose from the grave, quickened his dead body,
ascended into heaven, and now sits at the right hand of his Father, with
full power and glory in heaven.

Q. How else?

A. In Isai. 9.7 and 30.21.
that he does continually inspire and direct his servants by the divine power
of his holy Spirit, according to his holy Word.

Q. But to whom will this blessed King communicate all these means of salvation?

A. He Mat. 20.16 John 1.11 1 John 2.2 Gal. 3.27 Col. 2.12
offers them to many, and they are sufficient to save all mankind; but all
shall not be saved thereby, because by faith they will not receive them.

The fourth Principle expounded.
Q. What is Faith?

A. Faith is John 1.12 and 6.35 Gal. 3.27 Col. 2.12
a wonderful grace of God, by which a man does apprehend and apply Christ and
all his benefits unto himself.

Q. How does God bring men truly to believe in Christ?

A. First, he prepares their hearts, that they might be capable of faith, and
then works says in them.

Q. How does God prepare men's hearts?

A. Ezekiel 11.19 Hos. 6.1, 2
By bruising them, as if one would break an hard stone to powder: and this is
done by humbling them.

Q. How does God humble a man?

A. By working in him a sight of his sins, and a sorrow for them.

Q. How is the sight of sin wrought?

A. By the Rom 3.20 and 7.7.
moral Law: the sum whereof is the ten Commandments.

Q. What sins may I find in my self by them?

A. Ten.

Q. What is the first?

A. Com. I.
To make something thy God which is not God: by fearing it, loving it, and so
trusting in it more then in the true God.

Q. What is the second?

A. II.
To worship false Gods, or the true God in a false manner.

Q. What is the third?

A. III.
To dishonor God, in abusing his titles, words and works.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. IV
To break the Sabbath, in doing the works of thy calling* and of the flesh: and
in leaving undone the works of the Spirit.

Q. What be the six latter?

A. To do any thing that may hinder thy neighbors V.
dignity, VI.
life, VII.
chastity, wealth, IX.
good name, X.
though it be but in the secret thoughts and motions of the heart, VIII.
unto which thou give no liking, or consent.

Q What is sorrow for sin?

A. It is Act. 3.37, 38.
when a man's Conscience is touched with a lively feeling of Gods displeasure
for any of these sins, 1 Timothy 1.5 Luke 15.21 Ezra 9.6, 7
in such wise that he utterly despairs of salvation in regard of any thing in
himself, acknowledgjng that he has deserved shame and confusion eternally.

Q How does God work this sorrow?

A. By the terrible curse of the Law.

Q. What is that?

A. He Gal. 3.10.
which breaks but one of the Commandments of God, though it be but once in all
his life time, and that only in one thought is subject to, and in danger of
eternal damnation thereby.

Q. When men's hearts are thus prepared, how does God ingraft Faith in them?

A. By working certain inward motions in the heart, which are the seeds of
faith, out of which it breeds.

Q. What is the first of them?

A. When a man humbled under the burden of his sins Isai. 55.2 Joh. 7.27 Luke
1.53
does acknowledge and feel that he stands in great need of Christ.

Q What is the second?

A. An Mat. 5.4
hungring desire, and a longing to be made partaker of Christ and all his
merits.

Q. What is the third?

A. A Heb. 4.16
flying to the Throne of Grace from the sentence of the Law pricking the
Concience.

Q. How is it done?

A. By Luke 15.18* 19. Mat. 15.21 23, etc. Act. 8.22 2 Cor. 12.18
praying, with sending up loud cries for Gods favor in Christ, in the
pardoning of sin; and with servent perseverance herein, till the desire of the
heart be granted.

Q. What follows after this?

A. God then Mat. 7.7 Isai. 6^.24 Job 33.2^
according to his merciful promise, lets the poor sinner feel the assurance of
his love, wherewith he loves him in Christ, which assurance is a lively Faith.

Q. Are there diverse degrees and measures of true Faith?

A. Romans 11.7 Luke 17.5
Yea.

Q. What is the least measure of true Faith that any man can have?

A. When a man of an humble spirit, by reason of the Isai. 42.3 Mat. 17.20 Luke
17.5
littleness of his faith does not yet feel the assurance of the forgiveness of
his sins, and yet he is persuaded that they are pardonable; and therefore
desires that they should be pardoned, and with his heart prays to God to
pardon them.

Q. How do you know that such a man has faith?

A. These To. 8.23, 26 Gal 4.6 Mat. 5.6 Romans 8.9
desires and prayers are testimonies of the Spirit; whose property it is, to
stir up a longing and a lusting after heavenly things, with sighs and groans
for Gods favor, and mercy in Christ, Ephesians. 3.7
Now where the Spirit of God is, there is Christ dwelling; and where Christ
dwells, there is true faith, how weak soever it be.

Q. What is the greatest measure of faith?

A. When a man daily increasing in Faith, comes to be To. 7.38, 39 Cant. 6.7
fully persuaded of Gods love in Christ toward himself particularly, and of
the forgiveness of his own sins.

Q. When shall a Christians heart come to this full assurance?

A. Not 2 Timothy 4.7, 8 Psa. 23.6 with 1, 2, 3, 4 verses
at the first, but in some continuance of time, when he has been well
practiced in repentance, and has had diverse experiences of Gods love to him in
Christ: then, after them will appear in his heart the ful^^ss of persuasion,
which is the ripeness To. 4.19, 20, 21
and strength of faith.

Q. What benefits does a man receive by faith in Christ?

A. Hereby 2 Cor. 1.30 Acts 15.9 Romans 4.3
he is justified before God and sa^^tified.

Q. What is this, to be justified before God?

A. Rom 8.33
It comprehends two things: the first, to be cleared from the guiltiness and
punishment of sin: the second, to be accepted as perfectly righteous before God.

Q. How is a man cleared from the guiltiness and punishment of his sins?

A. By Christ's Col. 1.22 1 Pet. 2.24 1 John 17.2
sufferings and death upon the Cross.

Q How is he accepted for righteous before God?

A. By the 2 Cor 5.21
righteousness of Christ imputed to him.

Q. What profit comes by being thus justified?

A. Hereby, Romans 4.17 Apoc. 21.17
and by no other means in the world, the believer shall be accepted before Gods
Judgment seat, as worthy of eternal life by the merits of the same
righteousness of Christ.

Q. Do not good works then make us worthy of eternal life.

A. No: for God who is perfect righteousness it self* will find in the best
works we do, more matter of damnation then of salvation* and therefore Psalm. 14
3 Isai 64.6 Job. 9.3
we must rather condemn our selves for our good works, then look to be
justified before God thereby.

Q. How may a man know that he is justified before God?

A. He need not ascend into heaven to search the secret counsel of God; Romans 8.
Joh. 3.^
but rather descend into his own heart, to search whether he be sanctified or
not.

Q. What is it to be sanctified?

A. It comprehends two things: the first, to be purged from the corruption of
his own nature: the second, to be endued with inward righteousness.

Q. How is the corruption of sin purged?

A. By the Romans 6.4
merits and power of Christ's death, which being by faith applied, is as a 1
Pet. 4.1, 2.
corrasive to abate, consume, and weaken the power of sin.

Q. How is a man endued with inherent righteousness?

A. Through the Romans 6.5, 6 Phil. 3.10
virtue of Christ's resurrection: which being applied by says, is as a
restorative to revive a man that is dead in sin, to newness of life.

Q. In what part of man is sanctification wrought?

A. In 1 These. 5.2
every part of body and soul.

Q. In what time is it wrought?

A. It is Rom 8.23 2 Cor. 5.2, 3
begun in this life, in which the faithful receive only the first fruits of the
Spirit, and it is not finished before the end of this life.

Q. What grace of the Spirit do usually show themselves in the heart of a man
sanctified?

A. The hatred Psa. 119.113 and 40.9 and 101 3 Rom 7.22
of sin, and the love of righteousness.

Q. What proceeds of them?

A. Repentance, which is Psalm 119.2 57, 113
a settled ^urpose in the heart, with a careful en^eavour to leave all his
sins, and to live a Christian life, according to all Gods Commandments.

Q. What goes with Repentance?

A. Gal. 5.17 Ephesians. 6.11, 12
A continual fighting and struggling against the assaults of a man's own flesh;
against the motions of the devil, and the inticements of the world.

Q. What follows after a man has gotten the victory in any temptation or
affliction?

A. Experience of Romans 5.3, 4 2 Cor. 1.5
Gods love in Christ, and so increase of peace of conscience, and joy in the
holy Ghost.

Q. What follows, if in any temptation he be overcome, and through infirmity
fall?

A. After a while 2 Cor. 7, 8, 9 Mat. 26.75
there will arise a godly sorrow; which is, when a man is grieved for no other
cause in the world, but for this only, that by his sin he has displeased God,
who has been unto him a most merciful and loving Father.

Q. What sign is there of this sorrow?

A. The true sign 1 Pet. 2.19.
of it is this; when a man can be grieved for the very disobedience to God in
his will, word or deed though he should never be punished, and though there
were neither heaven no^ hell.

Q. What follows after this sorrow*

A. Repentance 2 Cor. 7.11
renewed afresh.

Q. By what signs will this repentance appear?

A. By 1 Cor. 7.11
seven. 1. A care to leave the sin, into which he is fallen. 2. An utte^
condemning of himself for it, with a craving of pardon. 3, A great anger
against himself for his carelessness. 4. A fear lest he should fall into the
same sin again. 5. A desire ever after to please God. 6. A zeal of the same. 7.
Revenge upon himself for his former offense.

The fifth Principle Expounded.
Q. What outward means must we use to obtain faith, and all the blessings of
God which come by faith?

A. The Preaching Pro. 29.1, 8 Romans 10.14 Mat. 28.19, 20 1 Timothy 3.16
of Gods word, and the administration of the Sacraments and Prayer.

Q. Where is the word of God to be found?

A. The whole Word of God, needful to salvation, is set down in the holy
Scriptures.

Q. How know you that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and not men's
policies?

A. I am assured of it: first, Ephesians. 1.13
because the holy Ghost persuades my conscience that it is so: secondly, I see
it by experience; for the preaching of the Heb. 4.12 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
Scriptures have the power of God in them to humble a man when they are
preached, and to cast him down to hell, and afterward to restore and raise him
up again.

Q. What is the use of the Word of God preached?

A. First, it Romans 1.17
breeds, and then it increases faith in them which are chosen to salvation:
but unto them that perish, it is by reason of their corruption, an occasion of
their further damnation.

Q. How must we hear Gods Word, that it may be effectual to our salvation?

A. We Jam. 1.10 Act. 16.14. Heb. 4.2. Isai. 66.2. Luke 2.51. Psalm. 119.11
must come unto it with hunger-bitten hearts, having an appetite to the Word;
we must mark it with attention, receive it by faith, submit our selves unto it
with fear and trembling, even then, when our faults are reproved: lastly, we
must hide it in the corners of our hearts, that we may frame our lives and
conversations by it.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.11 Gal. 3.1.
A sign to represent, a seal to confirm, an instrument to convey Christ and all
his benefits to them that do believe in him

Q. Why must a Sacrament represent the mercies of God before our eyes?

A. Because we are dull to conceive, and to remember them

Q. Why do the Sacraments seal unto us the mercies of God?

A. Because we are full of unbelief, and doubting of them.

Q. Why is the Sacrament the instrument of the Spirit, to convey the mercies
of God into our hearts?

A. Because we are like Thomas, we will not believe, till we feel them in some
measure in our hearts?

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
and no more: Baptism, by which we have our admission into the true Church of
God; and the Lords Supper, by which we are nourished and preserved in the true
Church after our admission.

Q. What is done in Baptism?

A. Act. 2.38 Tit. 3.5. Act. 22.16. Mat. 20.18, 1^
In the assembly of the Church the covenant of grace between God and the party
baptized, is solemnly confirmed and sealed.

Q. In this Covenant, what does God promise to the party baptized?

A. Gal 3.27. 1 Pet. 3.22.
Christ, with all the blessings that come by him.

Q. To what condition is the party baptized bound?

A. To Mar. 16.16
receive Christ, and to repent of his sins.

Q. What means the sprinkling or dipping in water?

A. 1 Pet. 1, 2
It seals unto us remission of sins, and sanctification, by the obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Christ.

Q. How c^meth it to pass, that many after their Baptism, for a long time feel
not the effect and fruit of it, and some never?

A. The fault is not in God, who keeps his Covenant, but the fault is in
themselves, in that they do not keep the condition of the Covenant; to receive
Christ by faith, and to repent of all their sins.

Q. When shall a man then see the effect of his Baptism?

A. At Heb. 10.10 1 Pet. 3.21
what time soever he does receive Christ by faith, though it be many years
after, he shall then feel the power of God to regenerate him, and to work all
things in him, which he offered in Baptism.

Q. How if a man never keep the Condition to which he bound himself in Baptism?

A. His Deu. 3.21, 22 Eccl. 4.2.
damnation shall be the greater, because he breaks his Vow made to God.

Q. What is done in the Lords Supper?

A. The former Covenant, solemnly ratified in Baptism, is renewed 1 Cor. 1.23
24, andc. and 1^ 13.
in the Lords Supper, between the Lord himself and the receiver.

Q. Who is the receiver?

A. Every one 1 Cor. 11.2 31. Mat. 5.23, 24 Isai. 66.2, 3
that has been baptized, and after his Baptism has truly believed in Christ,
and repented of his sins from his heart?

Q. What means the bread and wine, the eating of the bread, and drinking of
the wine?

A. These outward actions 1 Cor. 17, ^
are a second seal, set by the Lords own hand unto his Covenant; and they do
give every receiver to understand, that as God does bless the bread and wine,
to preserve and strengthen the body of the receiver; so Christ apprehended and
received by faith, shall nourish him, and preserve both body and soul unto
eternal life.

Q. What shall a true receiver feel in himself, after the receiving of the
Sacrament?

A. 1 Cor. 10.17. and 11.24
The increase of his faith in Christ the increase of Sanctification, a greater
measure of dying to sin, a greater care to live in the newness of life.

Q. What if a man, after the receiving of the Sacrament, never find any such
thing in himself?

A. He may well suspect himself, whether he did ever repent or not, and
thereupon is to use means co come to found faith and repentance.

Q. What is another means of increasing faith?

A. Prayer.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. A Joh. 5.14.
familiar speech with God in the Name of Christ, 1 Timothy 2.1. Phil. 4.6.
in which either we crave things needful, or give thanks for things received.

Q. In asking things needful, what is required?

A. Two things; an earnest desire, and faith.

Q. Mat. 11.24.
What things must a Christian man's heart desire?

A. Six things especially.

Q. What are they?

A. Petition I.
That he may glorify God. 2. That II.
God may reign in his heart, and not sin 3 That III.
he may do Gods will, and not the lusts of the flesh. 4. That IV.
he may (...) himself on Gods Providence for all the means of this temporal
life. 5. V.
That he may be justified, and be at peace with God. 6. VI.
That by the power of God he may be strengthened against all temptations.

Q. What is faith?

A. A Amen.
persuasion, that those things which we truly desire, God will grant them for
Christ's sake.

The sixth Principle Expounded.
Q. After that a man has led a short life in this world, what follows then?

A. Death, which is the parting a sunder of body and soul.

Q. Why do wicked men and unbelievers die?

A. That their bodies may go to the earth, and their Luke 16.22* 23.
souls may be cast into hell fire.

Q. Why do the godly die, seeing Christ by death has overcome death?

A. They die for this end, that Luke 21.42. Act. 7.60. 1 These, 4.3. Heb. 2.14.
1 Cor. 15.51.
their bodies may rest for a while in the earth, and their souls may enter into
heaven immediately.

Q. What follows after death;

A. The day of Judgment.

Q. What sign is there to know this day from other days?

A. 2 Pet. 3.1.
Heaven and earth shall be consumed with fire immediately before the coming of
the Judge.

Q. Who shall be the Judge?

A. Jesus Christ the Son of God.

Q. What shall be the coming to Judgment?

A. He shall come 1 These. 4.16, 17.
in the clouds in great Majesty and Glory, with infinite company of ^^gels.

Q. How shall a man be cited to Judgment?

A. At the Mat. 24.31 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
sound of the Trumpet, the living shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye
and the dead shall rise again, every one with his Job 19.25
own body: and all shall be gathered together before Christ: and after this,
the good shall be severed from the bad, Mat. 2^.32, 33.
these standing on the left hand of Christ, the other on the right.

Q. How will Christ try and examine every man's cause?

A. The Rev. 20.21 Dan. 7.20
books of every man's doings shall be laid open, men's consciences shall be made
either to accuse them or excuse them, and every man shall be tried by the works
which he did in his life time, because they are open and manifest signs Job
31.8. and 5.24.
of faith or unbelief.

Q. What sentence will he give?

A. He will give Mat. 25.34* 41.
sentence of salvation to the Elect and godly, but he will pronounce sentence
of Damnation against unbelievers and reprobates.

Q. What state shall the godly be in after the day of Judgment?

A. They Mat. 25.34 Apoc. 21.2 -- 5
shall continue for ever in the highest heaven, in the presence of God, having
fellowship with Christ Jesus, and reigning with him for ever.

Q. What state shall the wicked be in after the day of Judgment?

A. In eternal perdition and destruction in hell fire.

Q. What is that?

A. It 2 These. 1.9 Isai. 66.14 Apoc. 21.8.
stands in three things especially 1. A perpetual separation from Gods
comfortable presence: 2. Fellowship with the devil and his angels. 3. An
horrible pang and torment both of body and soul, arising from the feeling of
the whole wrath of God, poured forth of the wicked for ever, world without end:
and if the pain of one tooth, for one day, be so great, endless shall be the
pain of the whole man, body and soul, for ever and ever.

FINIS.
THe foregoing Excellent Composure, (with his other Works) gave full occasion
for this Epigram on its famous Author, who was lame in his Right Hand, but like
another Ehud, did no small service to the English Israel.

Dextra quantumvis fuerat tibi manca, docendi:
Pollebas mira Dexteritate tamen.
Though Nature Thee of thy Right Hand bereft,
Right well thou writest with the Hand that is Left.

