SEVERAL LAWS and ORDERS Made by the General Court, Held at Boston the 7 th of
May, 1684.
Imposts on Wine and strong Liquors in force till June 10. 1685
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the Laws title
Imposts, and Impost on Wine and strong Liquors, with the Explanations and
Additions made also thereunto, shall be and remain in full force from the tenth
day of June next ensuing, until the tenth day of June, which will be in the
year one thousand six hundred eighty and five.

THere being Complaint made of great inconvenience by reason of Filth and Dirt
cast into the Streets of Boston and other Towns, and of the neglect of Butchers
to cleanse their Slaughter-houses and Yards of Blood and other Filth; Nusances
to be removed within twelve hours on penalty.
although such Houses and Yards are situate near Streets and Lanes much
frequented:

This Court does Order and Enact, that all Persons so offending shall forfeit
twenty shillings to the use of the Town except such Annoyance be removed within
twelve hours after Complaint thereof made to lawful Authority.

WHether Executions upon Judgments, How Executions are to issue forth
ought not to be issued forth according to the form of Process upon which said
Judgments are founded, viz. against the Goods and for want thereof the Person;
the Court resolves this Question on the Affirmative, as to personal Debts.

IN Answer to the Petition of Major Robert Pike; It is Ordered by this Court,
that Major Pike be allowed to List so many Men for Troopers out of the three
foot Companies of Haveril, Salisbury and Amesbury, in proportion to the number
of the said Company as to make his Troop forty eight men besides Officers;
Provided this Troop be under the Command of Major Robert Pike for their
Captain; and Major Pike is ordered to present to the next Sessions of this
Court the names of other Commission Officers to complete the said Troop.

And in Lysting the said Addition out of the Foot Companies; This Court does
dispense with qualification of the persons in point of estate paying in the
Country Rate, Provided they be otherwise qualified with ability of body and
sufficient Horse and Arms.

Whither it be not expedient for this General Court to appoint a Seal for the
Public Notary of this Colony, Quere
that so Writings Signed and Pas'd by him may find the more credit in foreign
parts.

In Answer to this Quere, the Court thinks fit, Public Notary Seal.
that a Buck with this Circumscription SIGIL. NOTAR. PUB. MASSACHUSET. be the
Seal for the Office of the Notary Public; and do accordingly Order the
engraving the same in Silver at the Countries Charge.

IT is Ordered that Benjamin Gerrish be the Officer for Salem and the Ports
annexed, instead of the late Mr. Hilliard Veren, to demand and receive the
Powder Money of all Masters of Ships and other Vessels, according to their
respective Burdens, the said Gerrish giving an Account to the Surveyor General
yearly or oftener as the Law directs.

IT is Ordered, that Nathaniel Clark of Newbury be the Naval Officer for the
Ports of Newbury and Salisbury.

FINIS,

