Sion in Distress OR THE GROANS OF THE Protestant CHURCH.

Lam.1.12. Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow? Ver.17. Sion spreads
forth her Arms, and there is none to comfort her. Ver.20. Behold, O Lord, I am
in DISTRESS. -- Quis talia Fando Temperet a lachrimis? -- Virgil

The Third Edition.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND, Printed by S.G. for Samuel Philips at the West End of
the Townhouse. 1683.

To the READER.
YOU are here presented with a Revived Poem, with such Additions and
Enlargements as makes it very different from the First Impression. It is suited
to the present State of the Protestant Church, showing the Causes of her
present Calamity, with an Enumeration of some prevailing sins; the Plots and
Contrivances of ROME against SION; the Marks of the Antiebrishi^^ Beast and
Scarlet Whore, with her Arraigument and Condemnation, (illustrated in difficult
places with Marginal Notes.) Also some probable Discoveries of the Churches
Redemption, and the approaching Glory of the Latter Day.

We have now a plain Prospect (by the Gracious Discoveries of Providence) of
those Horrid and Execrable Plots, which the restless Adversary has contrived
against the Peace and very Being of SION, and which were much in the dark when
my Muse first bewailed its Condition, and suspected, that this Epidemical
Mischief (now Revealed) was then a hatching.

In a Subject of Grief, a quaint and ornamental Method is not to be expected:
for an abrupt and s^bbing Delivery is more natural in the Delineations of
Sorrow, then a studied well poised and artificial Harrangue. The Subject is
Divine and too lofty for so weak a M^se, (...) the Generous Reader to a candid
and mild Construction. I have writ according to the measure of Light received,
and have contributed my Mite (in a well-meaning Spirit) to reduce us to our
selves.

Against the Reigning Evils which expose us to Temporal and Spiritual Enemies,
many wholesome Precepts from Scripture and Reason are given.

The Rise, Progress, and Persecutions of the Man of sin, are succinctly
delivered, with the Evidence of Approved Historians, (some of them Papists)
whose Evidence against Themselves ought to be convincing. There cannot be too
many Defendants against so Vigorous and Assailant as Rome is.

There are many Excellent Tracts that discover the Villainies of Popery, and I
wish they were more common. It is a great comfort that the Spirit of the Nation
is so much (and justly) incensed against it. And that our Parliament is so
Through and Resolved to crush that Interest, whose Principles teach them to be
(to all Heretics, for so they call Protestants) Traitorous Subjects, ill
Neighbors, and worse Sover^igns.

To promote the Just Odium of my Native Country against so destruction and
malignant an Enemy, is (in part) the Design of this Essay; (which being of
small bulk and price, may possibly come into more hands them larger Volumns.)
If it contributes any thing in order to that End, it answers the Expectation of
(...).

Your Souls Well-Wisher.

To his Friend the Author, ON THE First Impression.
WHat Muse is this, that thus inspires the Brain,
And leads thy Genius to so high a Strain?
Must thy Aspiring Fancy now rehearse
Thy Mothers Groans in an Elegiack Verse?
Is Prose too mean and unregarded now,
That still in Verse thou let'st the World know how
SION's abused by Rome's Infernal Crew?
How in her Blood they did their hands imbrew?
Let thy Endeavors prosper: Let them prove
To be Rome's shame: A Token of thy Love
To thy Distressed Mother, (now the scorn
Of black-mouthed Imps, who are of Satan born)
Aspiring Soul I What from her Sorrows climb
To a Prophetic Spirit in thy Rhime^
Foretelling how she shall delivered be
From all those Bloody Beasts, whom thou do see
God will destroy, and will thy Mother make
Heav'us Glory, and Earths Joy, for his Names sake^
Jehovah bless thy work this Book, though small,
And make it prove a Preface to Rome's Fall.
To my Friend the VTHOR; Upon His Revived Poem.
Here Is Grief in Raptures! who could thus infuse
All Strains of Sorrow? No Aonian Muse
Such Sacred Rhapsodies could ever inspire:
Now were thy borrowed from Apollo's Quire.
No Inspiration from th; Thespian Spring,
Does teach our Poet in this mode to sing.
He sucks no Hippocrene, nor feeds upon
The fancied Dew of Pagan Helicon.
He mounts no Pegasus, nor gathers Drops
Distil^'d by Clio from Paranssian Tops.
These are but Whimsits -- Some Serapbick Fire.
His Muse did with this Mourning Song inspire?
Who can but, in the highest Notes of Grief,
Weep Tears in Verse, when SION wants Relief?
Such as from Art their lofty strains do ^t
D^but describe an Artificial Sorrow:
But his is purely Natural: for we
Perceive it comes from perfect Sympathy:
His clear discerning Soul her danger sees
Approaching on by unperceived degrees.
He gives us Warning to prevent the stroke,
To leave our sins, and Mercy to invoke.
Here Is a Prophetic Glass, where we may view
The swift Destruction that will (else) ensue.
But Friend, we thank thee that thou have not left us
Without some hope, nor has thy Book bereft us
Of Consolation; for the SCARLET WHORE
Is there so Senten^'d, that She Will rise no more.
Sion in Distress: OR THE GROANS OF THE Protestant Church
What dismal Vapor (in so black a form)
Is this, that seems to Harbinger ^storm
What pitchy cloud invades our Starry Sky,
To stop the Beamings of the World Great (...)
What spreading Sables of Egyptian Night,
Would rob the Earth of its illustrious Light?
What interposing Fog obscures our Sun?
What dire Eclipse benights our Horizon?
Is Englana's Great and Royal Bridegroom fled?
Is its Auvora newly gone to bed?
That scattered Clouds make such prodigious haste^
Combine in one, and reunite so fast.
Clouds that so lately dissipated were,
Do now conspire to make a Darker Air!
I mourn unpitied, groan without Relief!
No bounds not measures terminate my grief
The Sluices of mine Eyes are too too narrow
To vent the Streams of my increasing Sorrow.
Ebbs follow swelling Floods, and vernal days
Adorn the Fields that winter disarrays.
All States and things have their alternate ranges,
As Providence the Scene of Action changes.
All Revolutions, hurries to and fro,
At length some Rest and Settlement do know.
But helpless I, have often looked about,
To find some Ease, or Soul-refreshment out;
Yet can I see no prospect of Relief,
But swift Additions multiply my grief.
As Pilgrines wander in their distress
Amongst the wild rapacious Savages,
(...) pat^^less De^arts, where the midnight howls
(...) hungry Wolves, mixed with the scriech of Owls,
And Rav^^nt dismal croaks, salute the Ears
Of (...) ertatick trembling Passengers:
So I Am surrounded, so the Beasts of Prey
Conspire to take my Life and Name away.
My glowing Soul does melt, my Spirits faint;
For want of vent; I Am pregnant with Complaint
No Age nor Generation but has known
Some part of this my just and grievous moan.
(...) now I,m far more dangerously charged;
By bolder Foes my sorrows are enlarged:
A hellish Tribe from black Avernus flew,
That Blood-hound like, me and my Lambs pursue,
Lord JESUS come! O let my Cries invoke
Thy sacred Presence to divert the stroke.
Are all my Friends withdrawn? what is there none
Steps in to ease me of my grievous moan?
SIONS FRIEND.
WHat doleful noise salutes my wondering Ear^^e
What grief-expressing Note is that I hear?
Methinks the Accent of this Dismal Cry.
Bespeaks some one in great extremity.
The shrilness of the mournful Voice bespeaks
A woman's loud and unregarded shricks.
The more her deep and piercing sobs I heed,
The more my heart in sympathy does bleed.
Ah! who can find her out? who can make known
The Author of this heart-relenting Moan?
Doubtless, though Grief now siezes thus upon her,
She is a Lady of high Birth and Honor;
Of Royal Stem, extracted from above,
Nursed in the Chambers of the Fathers Love;
Espoused to a most Illustrious Prince,
Who over all has just Pre-eminence,
Monarch of Monarchs -- Sion! Is it thou!
O mourn my Soul! O let my Spirit how!
Let all that love the Bridegroom sigh for grief;
For Sion weeps as one past all Relief.
But why, O Sion, since thou art beloved
Of Heavens Supr^^^ art thou so sadly moved?
Why Arms expanded, thus implore the skies?
Why streaming Rivulets, flow from thine eyes?
This makes me wonder --
SION.
MY forlorn Estate
Is poor unpitied, mean and desolate;
I long have wandered in the Wilderness
Involved in trouble, kept in sore Distress,
In Caves absconding from the horrid Rage
Of Savage Boasts, until this later Age
I made Attempts to look a little Out,
The Monster spyed me, and does search about;
The Roaring Blood-bounds, greedy on the scent,
To kill, or drive me back again, are bent.
No Interval of Peace, no rest they give,
Pronounce me cursed and not fit to live:
A Dragon fell, combined with the Beast
To gore my sides and spoil my Interest.
The Old Lion, Lioness, and Lions whelp,
With dreadful Jaws, the other Beasts do help.
Dogs Bulls and Foxes, Bears and Wolves agree
To rend, to tear, and make a spoil of me.
I that have been so delicately bred,
My Children at a Royal Table fed;
Am now exposed to the Infernal spite
Of such as do in Fire and Blood delight.
Plots hatched in Hell and Rome! that black design
To stab a Monarch; and to (...) nine.
Our Ancient Laws, subvert Religion, and
Bow England's Neck to Antichrists command;
Were but Prelndi^^s to that dismal Urn
(As martyred heaps in flaming Smith-field burn)
Designed for Protestants, and all the Rest
Who hate Romes Idol, the Image of the Beast.
I am the Mark the Monsters aim at: All
Their grand designs were to contrive my Fall.
If Friends or others any Favors show,
They straight conspire to work their Overthrow,
Ah vile Conspiracy! Ah cursed PLOT!
So deeply laid! how can thou be forgot?
Hells grand Intreignes ne'e^ introduced a Brat
Into the World, so horrible as that.
Since Rome the western cheated Monarchs rid,
A Rampant WHORE, the horned Beast bestrid.
Disgorging plots, employing hellish Actors:
May all our Offspring execrate such Factors
Sion forlorn! How very few regard
Thy cries and tears men's hearts are grown so hard
In Restless hurries, tossed with every wind,
No case, no peace, no comfort can I find.
The horrid Aspect of these Monsters do
Affright my Children, some they worry too;
On some they seize, like greedy Beasts of prey,
And to their Dens the Sacrifice convey.
Renowned GODFREY! (whose immortal glory,
Martyred for me, shall ever live in Story)
Let every Loyal Eye that sees it there,
Yield to his Name the Tribute of a Tear,
Brave Soul! Thy Love and Loyalty do claim
That King and People should proclaim thy Name,
As England's Victim, never to be forgot,
Fast'ning on Rome an everlasting Blot.
The Great Jehovah, who is only Wise,
Permits thy Fall as a Sweet Sacrifice,
Thy Barbarous Murder has made clearly out
That Plot which none but Infidels can doubt,
Those bloody Varlets, black Assassinates,
Cursed Executioners of Rome's Debates,
Drunk with Infernal Cruelty, made Thee
A Specimen of England's Tragedy:
By Thee we learn what Courtesy to hope
From Romish Bu^chers, Vassals to the Pope,
Thou led'st the Van, first fell into the Trap,
From whence they say no Protestant shall 'scape,
Pure Innocence trappan'd, amongst them came,
Without suspicion (like a harmless Lamb)
Whilst they, like hungry Tigers, ready stood
T^mbrue their Tallons in thy guiltless Blood.
Thou little thought such an Infernal Snare
Had been thus laid to trap Thee unaware!
It Is strange, say some, what Reason shall engage
Them to make Thee the Object of their Rage?
The cause was thus: The Babylonish Whore,
Big with a Bastard, longed (as heretofore
For Christian Blood, her Favorites made haste,
In her great need to help her to a Taste.
Of choicest Liquors this she calls the first,
To cheer her sinking heart, and quench her thirst,
Fearing Miscarriage, when her Spirits fai^,
She drinks the hearts-blood of some Martyred Saint.
Than Horse-leech more insatiable, she cries,
Give, give me that, or nothing will suffice
My Craving Paunch; my pleasure must be d^^^
This Heretic was a pragmatick one;
He^ knew my Secret Clubs, and would Reveal
My Tragic Plots: we must prevent his Zeal.
We Will Strangle him, before he gives a glimpse
Of our Designs, or countermines our Imps.
Ah Brutish Whore! of Cannibals the worse;
This Bloody Draught has brought an endless curse
On thee; And lasting Calandars we see
Records this Instance of thy Cruelty.
This Loyal Knight never injured you, but stood
Discharging Justice for his Countries Good.
Will naught but Blood of Protestants give case
Or quench your thirst? what mischievous Disease
Infects your Bowels? Must your Churches Food
Be flesh of Saints? your Mornings-draught, their blood
Fellonious Strumpet! Must you be so bold,
To steal by night into your Neighbors Fold^
Seize on my Lambs? thy Theft and Cruelty,
As well as Murder, shall revenged be.
But since he is gone^ and Justice does pursue
With eager Steps the Assassinating Crew,
We Will acquiess: for Heaven seems to call
For Tears Cessation at his Funeral:
Let Christians offer, through the universe,
Whole Hecatombs upon his bleeding He^se:
And could their Tears increase into a Flood,
'Twere no excess -- So much I price his Blood,
But other grounds of Grief are in mine eye,
Which cause my Sorrows to advance so high
That my over burdened heart can scarce express
The nature of my inward heaviness.
SION'S FRIEND.
SION, Thy sad and bitter Lamentation
Does move my very soul unto Compassion:
But Say, what Cause does aggravate your Fears,
And thus provokes to further Cries and Tears?
SION.
IF that my Head were Waters, and each Eye
A brim full Fountain, I could drein 'em dry.
I Am steeped in Brackish Floods, nay almost drowned
To see how Sin does every where abound.
Where e're I am, I naught can see or hear,
But that which does my Soul in pieces tear,
It breaks my heart that England thus should be
A Scene for Actors of Debauchery.
What perpretations of the blackest Crimes
Appear not barefaced in our present times?
Tho God (incensed) has fearful Judgments sent,
To humble men, and move them to repent;
Yet they proceed in foul Impenitence,
And aggravate their horrid Insolence;
Seeming to bid Defiences to Heaven,
Scorning to take the Warnings given.
The sweeping Plague (that Messenger of wrath)
In such as 'scap'd, small Reformation has
Produced! Nor has the desolating Fire
(A perfect Token of Gods flaming Ire)
Removed the Cities Pride; 'twas great before^
And now it seems to multiply much more.
Fantastic Garbs, and Antic Modes declare
How much from Pride their Souls reformed are;
Though want, though poverty, and loss of Trade,
Do many Men and Families invade;
Yet do they vaunt in pride and luxury,
As if they had vast Mines of Treasures by.
Some know not what to eat, nor how to go,
Yet on the Poor will no compassion show;
(Whose unregarded Cries, unheeded Moans;
Whose unreliev'd Distress, unpitied Groans,
Can scarce extort a Mite) such do not grudge
To purchase Hell at dearest Rates, and drudge
To please their brutish lusts, who void of measure
Consume Estates to wantonize in Pleasure,
Tumbling in Riot (as proud Dives sat)
Whilst Lazarus lies starving at the Gate.
A Complaint of Oaths.
Volleys of Oaths, with horrid Blasphemy^
And dreadful Cursings, in mine Ears do cry.
Mark but our impious Gallants when they meet^
Observe the mode how they each other greet.
What new coined oaths, what modish ^x^crations?
What damning, sinking, horrid Imprecations
Do they disgorge? The Serpents fiery hiss,
That belches Sulphur from the black Abyss,
Can scarce out do this Ranting Tribe, who count
The Man Genteel that is most paramount
In wickedness; he that Blasphemes aloud
Christ's blood and wounds, is Courtier alamode.
How can the abused Earth but gape again,
To swallow quick vile Wretches so profane!
Can Heavens great Artillery so long
Forbear the Treasons of a mortal Tongue?
Jehovah's Attributes so vilely used!
His sacred Essence and his Name abused.
Fresh Blasphemies they mint, new Curses frame,
And sins that never had before a Name.
Graduates in Courtship are preferred, who made
Most quick proficience in a hellish Trade:
Such rant and roar, such revel, domineer,
As if nor God, nor Devil they did fear.
Approaching dangers cannot disturb their pleasure
But still they sin until they fill their measure.
Judgments deferred, in evil makes them bold,
Despising such by whom they are controlled.
As if the avenging hand their lives did spare,
Thus to provoke him without dread or fear.
But poor Blasphemer, when thou art past by,
It Is not t'indulge thee in iniquity.
Think thou the God of Purity does like
Such ways, because he yet forbears to strike?
Do think a gloomy interposing Cloud,
From God's all-searching Eye can be thy shroud^
Or that because he is enthroned on high,
Thy Deeds of Darkness He cannot espy?
Or since his Judgments are so long delaid,
Will thou proceed, and be no whit afraid?
Will thou His Patience without end abuse,
Slight true Repentance, and His Grace refuse^
If so, thy Judgment hastens -- For a Rod
Will quickly reach thee from an angry God,
Because of Oaths the Land does greatly mourn,
For which my Soul much inward grief has born,
A Complaint of Drunkenness.
Do thou not see how filthy Drunkenness
Does reign in City, and in Villages?
Some reel and wallow in the street like Swine,
Whilst others boast their strength in drinking Wine,
Although to such, God does denounce a Curse,
They mind it not, but still grow worse and worse.
Dread not Examples of Gods wrath at all,
Nor what to Drunkards does so often befall:
Although God Word has dreadful warnings given,
That Drunkards never shall inherit Heaven,
But that their Lot shall with damned Spirits be,
In Chains of Darkness to Eternity.
They drink, carouse, and waste their jolly breath,
Upon the brink of Everlasting Death.
Whatever ensues, they are resolved they will
Carouse full Goblets, and be filthy still.
Thus Men by Pride, by Oaths, by Worldliness,
By daily swallowing Liquor to excess,
Defile the Land, and do the Lord provoke,
To cause his Vengeance on the Land to smoke.
Sin sets the door wide open and makes way
For all the sorrows of the approaching day,
These are in part the cause of Englands woe,
And will if (Grace prevents not) it undo:
But there are other heinous Sins behind,
Which pierce my Bowels, and perplex my Mind.
A Complaint of Whoredom, Adultery, etc.
Did filthy Lust and Whoredom ever rage
With more excess then in the present Age?
Abominations of so vile a Name,
That their bare mention is indeed a shame.
What Sin more hateful in Jehovah's Eye,
Then this of Whoredom and Adultery?
It Is ranked as Chief and marches in the Van
Of all the gross Debaucheries of Men,
In these black Muster Rolls God does record
Of grand offenses in his holy Word.
What more affronts the Second Table? or,
Provokes the Lord No fitter Metaphor
Could be produced t'express Idolatry,
Then that abhorred Name, Adultery.
Besides the terrors of Gods fiery wrath,
Which judges such to everlasting Death;
On Earth, amongst all sober men, they gain
So vile a blot so infamous a stain,
As all the waters in the Sea can never
Wipe off, nor can it be forgot for ever.
But O what dismal Consequences wait
For speedy entrance at the wretches gate!
For lewd Embraces of lascivious Dames
Will rot their bones, breed cankers in their names,
Beget consumption in Estate and Purse,
Produce Destruction, and a certain Curse:
The common ends that such arrive unto,
Are soul Diseases, Beggary and Woe.
They Are sottish Fools (says wise Demosthenes)
That buy Repentance at such Rates as these:
That Sin, to please an Enemy, that strives
To damn their Souls, and rob them of their lives. Levit.20. 10.
God in his Sacred * Ordinances has
Appointed such to an immediate death.
Would men but judge it as their greatest Foe,
They Would never love, nor hug it as they do.
Each Sex is bad, but Women seem to be
The very Brokers of Immodesty;
Which makes that passage to be born in mind,
A wise and virtuous Woman who can find?
Your City-Dames, and Ladies are on fire
With wanton passion, and unchaste desire;
Providing Meats on purpose to inflam^
Their pampered Gallants to their wonted shame.
Bare Breasts, and naked Necks, a Harlots Dress.
Are strong Temptations unto Wickedness.
All other sins (the Apostle does declare)
Which Men commit without the body are:
But this abominable Act alone,
Against his body by a Man is done.
Marriage to all, the Undefiled bed,
Is Honorable; he that will, may we^:
But Whoremongers God judges, and they shall
Be cast into the Lake, both great and small,
The Wiseman calls th, Adulteren, A fool;
And well he may, for he destroys his Soul.
No Sots like them, for branded still they show
The marks of Folly, wheresoever they go.
O how th'un clean and brutish man exceeds
Inferior Sinners in reproachful Deeds!
My Grievances are many, and my Fear
Is more then my distressed Soul can bear:
My panting Breast and aching Heart is sad,
To think of what I further have to add.
A Complaint of Atheism.
But O amazing master piece of wonder!
That Is like to rend my very heart asunder,
When I consider that an age of Light
Produces Monsters blacker then the Night:
A Cursed Tribe of wretched Atheists dare,
Without all Dread and Reverential Fear,
Strike at the Essence of the Great Jehove.
And all the Glories that reside above.
As if mere Fancies of a cloudy brain,
And all Religion and Intrigue of Man:
That dare pronounce all Evangelick Law.
A Trick of State to keep the World in aw.
Creating Idols in their Brains; that even
Make mocks of Hell, and a mere scorn of Heaven.
But can such Fancies challenge an abode
Within your hearts, to Disbelieve a GOD?
On the Universal Fabric cast an eye,
The Sea, the Earth, and expanded Sky;
Can so Sublime illustrious an Effect
Be formed without a glorious Architect?
If Reason be your Rule, true Logicks Laws
Pronounce Effects resulting from a cause,
Whose Order leads us to Infinity,
Sure Arguments of a Divinity.
Created Things must a Creator have;
And that Begetter who first being gave
To Essences produced, cannot be begot;
He Is therefore GOD, and other else is not.
This Causa prima, without time or date,
Is he that did all Entity create.
The first could not himself create; so he
Must have his Essence from Eternity.
Who can make Phoebus his swift course Reverse?
Or balance in his Palm the Universe?
Who can the Ocean in a Sieve confine?
If none can do it, then none can GOD define:
First Principles are beyond Definition;
No Logic reaches at so high a Vision:
It Is unreveal'd to Reason, for no strain
Of lofty Metaphysics can contain
Those Mysteries; true wisdom therefore has
Commanded Reason to give room to Faith.
If what we see had not a first Creator,
Then it is its own immediate operator;
If so, it acts before it had a being:
But such conclusions are too disagreeing
With Reasons Maxims: For all things that be,
May say they are their own Divinity,
If each can make it self, and that which can
Create it self, can so it self sustain
In Infinitum, and will never dissolve
Its self; for Natures principal Resolve
Is, That no Essence will forbear to be,
If it can keep up its own Entity.
The strain of Atheistick Sophistry
Makes all of equal Independency,
Without Subordination: It Is a Theme,
Without Inferior, making all Supreme,
FIRST CAUSE supposes Time and Time supposed
Some second Acts, which After-time discloses.
So view their Series, you may trace them all
(As Links in Chains) to their Original,
The great JEHOVAH, whose unfathomed Glory
Is Emblem'd in the Universe before ye.
There is a thing in Man called CONSCIENCE
Which of his Actions gives clear Evidence,
Whether he likes or not: that is ready still
To check the Course of his Disordered will:
It is Eccentrick to his Sensual part,
Arraigns his words, his deeds, his very heart;
And if it finds they be irregular,
It does pursue them with continual war.
What can this Just, this Inward witness (...)
But some bright Beam of a Divinity?
In former times was not Jehovah known
By Miracles which visibly were shown?
Can Reason brag that Causes Natural
Could raise the Dead? or that a word can call
An Entombed Carcass to behold the light?
Make sound a Cripple? give the blind their sight?
If not, then surely it will follow hence,
That it is an Act of some Omnipotence:
That such were done we have the Common Vote,
Of Pagans, Jews, and all the Men of Note,
Whose works are extant, whom we may believe, (hear,)
Because they had no Interest to ^eceive.
Whence come those Judgments which you daily
Of Wrath and Vengeance darted every where
Against Prophaners of that Sacred Name?
Whence come those Arrows, that consuming flame
Which terrifies the world? and whence the breath
That strikes Blasphemers with a sudden Death?
Which of these rare Philosophers can show
What makes the Spacious Deep to ebb and slow?
Let them produce their Maxims, if they can,
How scattered A^omes can compose a Man?
Who brandishes those blazing Signs of wonder?
Who frights the Earth with rapid Peals of Thunder?
Who did defear the Fatal Enterprise
Which Rome, by Devils counsel, did devise?
Who sets the Comet in the Angry sky,
Those dismal Harbingers of misery?
God does himself by many Ways make known;
Forewarning Men of what is a coming on:
Yet Senseless Mortals saulter more and more,
Though hovering Vengeance threaten at the Door;
Deceit, Soul killing-Errors, Perjury,
Injustice, Murder, Theft, Hipo^risie.
Do so abound through our enlightened Isle,
That Sodom hardly ever appeared more vile.
A Complaint against Hippocrites.
I am not only persecuted by
My Open Foes, but Lurking Snakes do lie
Within my Bosom, using all their Art
To seize my Vitals, and corrode my Heart:
Such seeming Friends, such Traitors in disguise,
Are more malignant then known Enemies:
For the Attaques of These, a man may ward;
Those, unsuspected, stand within our Guard.
How many seem to reverence my Name
For worldly ends, or to avoid the shame
Of Irreligion? frequently they go
To worship God, and so devout do show,
As if mere Saints; but, Hypocrites in grain,
Do all the while Intelligence maintain
With my declared Foes, who proudly join,
And all their Politics in one combine,
To root my Name from off the very earth,
And make provision that no more get Birth:
Botray'd by middle, and by low degrees,
But most of all by Capital Grandees.
Such as my Peace and Safety should procure,
Contribute most to make me unsecure:
Such seem their purpose by soft words to smother:
So Beats men look one way, but row another.
Such perjured Statesmen have the Art to smile
Upon my Face, but cut my throat the while.
But grant, Dread Sovereign of the Universe,
That whilst I weep my grievances in Verse,
Thy Sion's Interest may not be betrayed
To Rome, by Protestants in Masquerade.
O let me hear the joyful Trumpet sounded,
That does proclaim their Babylon confounded.
Rome's black Militia is all up in Arms,
Annoying Europe in unusual Swarms.
This critic moment they expect and hope
To thrust Me out, and introduce a Pope,
To plague this Noble Nation, that has been
A Wall, a Fort, a Counterscarp between
Their bauling Canon's most impetuous shots,
And foreign Saints; that countermines their Plots.
The desperate Archers are aware of this,
They know that England the chief Bulwark is,
To check their growth: if they could make it sup
Th'invenom'd dregs of th'antichristain cup,
They judge it easy to subdue the rest
Of my European Gospel I^ ^est
But O my melting Soul-tormenting Fears!
Burst into Sighs, and bubble into Tears!
Observe the Heavens! view that dreadful Mark
Of flaming vengeance, that precedes the dark
Approach of night! can this vast Comet be
Ought hut the Prologue of Calamity?
Prodigious Meteors, blazing fiery Stars,
Are Heralds sent to menace open Wars
Against rebellious and polluted Coasts,
By Him who is the mighty Lord of Hosts.
Awake O England! this Lethargick steep
Is out of season, it is a time to weep;
If guilty Children tremble at the Rod,
Can you be stupid when the Angry God
Sets up this dreadful Ensign of his wrath?
Rouse up Repentance, let a lively Faith
Now go to work; See how the Preaching Air
Instead of Sinning, does exhort to Prayer;
For thy Fantastic Garbs, Perfumes and all
Thy other Trash, it does for Sackcloth call:
From Carnal spirits it bids thee quickly get,
Calls from the Taverns to the Mercy seat.
From that accursed Rendezvonze of Lust
It bids thee hasten, and repent in Dust.
Have not The Experience of past Ages given
Their sad Remarks upon those Signs in Heaven?
What followed still, but certain Spoil of Nations?
Plagues, Fire and Sword, and other Devastations?
The sure Eversion of some Potent Crown;
The Death of Her^^s, Monarchs tumbled down.
But thou Illustrious Architect of Wonder,
Remove the Sorrows which I labor under.
Does this Amazing Prodigy betoken
That Rampant Babel shall be quickly broken?
Does it protend that Antichrist shall break
In pieces, striving to destroy the weak?
Remains that on this blessed Name (...) Call?
Or dos't presage, that (trembling) I shall fall?
Lord, can thou see thy pleasant Vineyard Tore,
And rooted up, by this ra^acious Boar?
Or have my Childrens crying Sins provoked
That dismal Sentence, not to be revoked?
(Gods Methods were to chasten, not destroy
Those striping Souls in whom he once took joy)
O give thy sinking Church a true discerning
What thou do mean by this prodigious warnings;
That by thy Spirits sacred Flame calcined,
By Scourges mended, and by heat refined
We may find Grace. But oh! My Spirits saint
Under the Pressure of my great Complaint!
My panting Soul another grief does feel,
My feeble Knees beneath their burden Reel.
SION's Children.
AH Mother! who can disallow your moan?
The Cause is just, for every one must own
Our failings great, and that our sins provoke
Impending Judgments, and a future stroke,
If interceeding Mercy steps not in
To ward the blow, and cancel out our sin.
But since unthought-of Providence gives light^
And calls the Sun to see the Acts of Night;
Since Heaven exposes the Results of Rome
To Public Notice; since the Traitors come
To Legal Exe^^^ion; since the grand
Contrivers of this Mischief dare not stand
To test of Law, or due Examination;
Since such brave Heroes represent the Nation,
(...) clear sagacious penetrating Eyes
Dive into Rome's abhorred Mysteries;
Whose Noble souls, whose Loyal English Hearts,
The closest slights of Antichristian Arts
Can never deceive; whose brave Resolves defeat
Those cursed Delinquents, whether small or great:
Whose freeborn Courages do scorn to stoop
To be the Vassals of a Rascal-Pope,
An Upstart Imp, whose title never was given
By binding Laws of either Earth or Heaven,
We therefore the dearest Mother, do conclude,
That what has past of Romish Interlude,
Is near an Exit; that the Scene will be
Changed from a Tempest to Serenity.
SION.
O That Is a Cordial! But my grief does borrow
Some fresh Objections to renew my sorrow:
For some that wish me well, do yet, in spite
Of Gospel Beamings, and the clearest Light,
Retain some Romish Fragments, which displease;
The meek, the humble, self-denying JESUS.
His way of Worship, Scripture does express;
No useless Pomp, no Artificial Dress
Becomes Religion: Chastity abhors
The Garb, the Painting, and the Gate of Whores.
Why should my Friends a Virgin-Church pollute
With any Relics of that Prostitute?
Why Gaudy things, that never had a Name
In sacred Records, our Profession shame?
Why are our Rites enameled with their Gloss?
Why must our Gold be mingled with their Dross?
Why father Reformation is suppressed,
T'uphold a Grandeur that is Usurped at best?
Why Doors and Windows must be shut up quite,
To stop the Radiance of a further Light?
And why must such as disallow those Tricks,
Be branded as the vilest Schismatics?
But that is not all: My Children more refined
From those Corruptions, do afflict my mind.
O depths of Sorrow that disturb my rest!
O racking Grief that rends my woeful breast!
Some are so Carnal, some so swiftly hurled
Into the Labrinths of th'inticing World,
That in the hurries of that crowded Road,
They find small leisure to attend their God;
Preferring filthy Gain, and ill got Wealth.
Before the means of their Eternal Health.
Some that in words respect me, I behold
In that ^ad posture, betwixt hot and cold.
Sometimes they seem for Sanctity; sometimes
Slide with the current of prevailing Crimes:
Their Pulses beat with an alternate Motion;
Now for the World, then for some faint Devotion^
Some that unto my Tabernacles were
Admitted, left me for Egyptian Fare:
These not content with my Celestial Diet,
Do run with others to excess of Riot.
(...) to be popular, away would give
Those Gospel-duties that are positive:
From such as these, my Sorrows do increase,
That sell Gods Order for a seeming Peace;
Such open Gaps that do pervert the Laws
Of my just Right, and well-defended Cause.
But O! how many easy Christians take
Their Rest in Forms, and no distinction make
'Twixt Shell and Kernel, that rely on Duty
As if it were the sole adorning Beauty?
Such give the Lord the more invalid part,
Present their body, but deny their heart.
Are not some Pastors careless to provide
A Word in season, for the Flocks they guide?
Some are too backward to supply the need
Of painful Lab'rers, that their souls do seed;
Discouraged by close fisted Avarice,
Despised, neglected, through this Hellish Vice.
My Workmen Languish, and have cause of moan;
To see their toil so ineffectual grown.
The most Pathetick Preaching scarce can ^^^ve
Some Rocky Hearers to the Grace of Love.
Must Hag-fac'd Envy, and foul-tongu'd Detraction,
Invonom'd Malice, and unfaithful Action^
Ill grounded Slander, and uncertain Rumor^^
Ba^k biting Quarrels, and the worst of Huthors
Be practiced thus? Ah grief of griefs to see Wives
Prosessing People act iniquity
To such a Pitch! -- Some Husbands and some
Do lead such shameful, such unfavoury Lives;
Whilst mutually at strife, they do impeach
That Name that should be very dear to each:
Such Pride, such surly, dogged reprehension
For every toy, such sharpness and contention
As does disgrace Religion, and does lay
Blocks and Offenses in a Converts Way.
Ah! why cannot Saints in Families eschew
That which mere Heathens are ashamed to do?
Their Houses are the Scene of Civil Wars,
Of Brawls, of Discord, and Domestic Jars.
In grace or comfort can they find increase,
Or Heavenly Blessings, who are void of Peace?
How often do Parents ill Example draw
Their tender Children to infringe the Law
And Sanctions of the everlasting God:
Do they not spoil them when they spare the Rod?
To strict Extremes some Parents do adhere,
Check not at all, or else are too severe:
On Back and Belly they bestow much cost,
But care not if their precious Souls be loft:
Are they not guilty of Prodigious Folly
That teach them Cour:ship, and neglect what is holy?
A Child untutored, (a mere lump of sin,)
May justly curse its cause of having been.
Such as instruct, do doubly them beget,
By timely Lessons laboring to defeat
Their growth in ill; such mold their better part,
By wise prevention of a Cankered heart.
O! then is the time to give 'em Form and Mold;
For Trees admit no bending that are old.
(...) timely sow such seed they would have grow,
Will surely reap according as they sow.
Some like the Ape, that does by hugging kill,
Prompt on a Child to tip his rongue with ill
In his first prattle: But it is less pain
To form good Habits, then reform the vain.
On the other hand, how many Children do
Prove vain, rebellious, disobedient to
Their godly Parents? Slight their careful teaching
Makes Games of Prayer, and a mock of Preaching
Contempt of Parents, of what kind so ever,
Contracts a bitter Curse, which every where
Will find them out. But O my a king Soul
Beats sad Alarms of Grief! I must condole
The dismal Fate of Youth! Alas how few
The ways of God and Holiness pursue!
But very eager to obey the Devil,
In quickly learning every reigning Evil.
Here you may see, if you survey the Nation,
Our Youth grown old in vile abomination:
Such early Graduates in the Hellish Science,
Setting both Heaven and Hell at loud defiance.
Let Grace and Virtue grovel in the Dust,
Their Youth and Strength they will sacrifice to Lust.
That sacred Precept in the Word of Truth,
To mind their Maker in the days of Youth,
They scorn to heed: Ah fools! that would begin
Conversion, when they can no longer sin.
But know, prepo^^^ (...) ^ots, the day of Doom
(That dreadful (...) of Accounts) will come.
How dare you run this vile Carter, till Deam,
Like a Grim Serj^ant, comest'arrest your breath,
When Tongues do faulter, and your Eye strings crack
When stings of Horror do your Conscience rack,
When Hells Abyss sets open its spacious Gate,
And Troops of Devils round about you wait,
When naught but Horror and Confusion seizes,
Upon your Senses, when those foul Diseases
You got by vile Debauches, have at length
Destroyed your Person, and subdued your strength,
Is this a season to detest your Lewdness,
To talk of Virtue, or pretend to goodness?
Egregious Fools! how dare you to delay
Your Souls affair to that uncertain day!
O! Can you trust so grand a work to that
Moment of Anguish? when you know not what
(When Sound) your end will be, nor yet how soon
Though brisk at Morning, you may die ere Noon!
And if unchanged, your certain doom will be
To lie in Hell to all Eternity.
SION'S Children.
O Dismal State! O miserable Case!
Enough to daunt all that are void of Grace?
And crush the bragging of the stoutest mind!
But are there still mere grievances behind?
SION.
STill more behind? O that there were no more!
Since they are too many that l've told before:
Masters and Servants, Kings and Subjects err
In their Relation: does not each prefer
Base, selfish Ends to gratify a Lust,
Before what is honest, and supreamly Just?
Ah! how much time, among the Saints, is spent
In fruitless, idle Talk? how negligent
In holy Conference! strange to each other;
How dull is each to quicken up his Brother
In Gospel-duties: O! how few do nourish
That Love and Zeal which heretofore did flourish^
A Love whose flaming Heat and generous Rays
(Replete with Spirit) famed the former days.
Pious Discourses may reclaim the Vile;
But they are hardened in their sins the while
Saints do converse like them, and rather learn
Their vicious Tricks, then teach them to discern
The dismal snares and perils that do lurk
In sinful Words, and every evil work.
Some are so covetous, that they would grasp
The World in Arm-fulls, till their latest Gasp.
Some full of Envy: others do express
Their Lust on Dainties, feeding to excess:
So nice and delicate, in choice of Meat,
Whilst their poor Brethren scarce have bread to eat.
Merchants and Traders have a nimble Art
To sum their Shop books, but neglect the Heart;
For that they think there is time enough, and look
But seldom to the Reck'nings of that Book.
How many come for Fashion sake to hear?
(What one receives, goes out at the other Ear)
How many loyter in their Christian Race,
Profusely squandering the day of Grace?
Many like Drones, on others Toil do live,
Though it is less honor to receive than give.
What Lying, Cheating, Couz'ning and Deceit.
Do Traders use? O! how they over rate
What they would sell? but if they be to buy,
They undervalue each Commodity.
But why should Pride, that vile Abomination,
Be found in Saints? must every Apish fashion
Bewitch their minds, when God is so Express
In strict forbidding of so vile a Dress?
Prayer, that sacred Ordinance, that holds
An intercourse with Heaven, which beholds
The Fathers Glory, and on high does mount,
Is made by many but of small account;
It Is that that carries our desires to God,
And comes down fraighted with a blessed Load
Of sweet Returns; yet it is much disrespected,
And Closet-duty too too much neglected.
Scriptures themselves are slighted and dis used,
And often, when read, perverted or abused:
Helping the Weak, is turned into a slighting;
Gospel Reprooss perverted to back biting.
Many that do of God their Mercy crave,
Yet on the Needy little Mercy have;
All owe their Blessings to the God of Love,
Yet too too many do unthankful prove.
Some follow Whimsies that do nearly border
Upon Confusion, and despise all Order:
Such on all Sacred Institution's trample,
(Though sor^i^y'd by Precept and Example)
As if 'twere low for an exalted mind
To be, to God's declared Will, confined;
But can these Men of Rapture make pretense
That they have more divine Intelligence
Then all the illustrious Saints, as Prophets, Priests,
Apostles, Martyrs, and Evangelists,
That were the Scribes and Messengers of Heaven,
And strictly practiced all the Duties given
Unto the Church, which are without Repleal?
But if they are disanul'd, who did reveal
Their Abrogation to these bold Pretenders?
Gods Laws are sound, and need no Cob^ing-members.
But Oh! that dismal Evil that is behind
Disturbs my Reason, and distracts my mind!
It is DIVISION, that unhappy word
Has done more mischief that a Bopish sword
Could ever do, if that a sweet Communion
(At least of Love) did but complete our Union.
Why shoul Licentious heat, my Children hurry
To those Extremes? must they each other worry
For trivial things? do they not all agree
In Fundamentals of Divinity?
Is there no room for Love? or must that Grace
Among my Children, have no proper place?
Why must one Saint be angry with his Brother
If not so tall as he? or with another,
Because his Face is not so white as his?
Or that his Habit not so gaudy is?
Alas! no Folly can be more absurd,
Nor more exploded in Gods Holy Word.
All should to Gospel-purity adhere;
But to calumniate, vilify and jeer
All such as are not of their very pitch,
Is Anti Gospel, and a practice which
The Lord abhors: If causes of dissent
Evert not Truth, and shake the Fundament
Of true Religion, why such angry brawling?
Such odious Nicknames? and such vile Miscalling?
Who dares intrude into the Judgment Seat
Of God Almighty? who is only Great,
And only Judgment gives; to him belongs
To pass the Sentence, and to punish wrongs.
Why cannot Christians with each other bear?
Among Apostles some dissenters were;
But did they therefore persecute each other?
These Mortal Conflicts, Brother against Brother,
Destroys our safety, for they set a Gap
Open for Rome, that would us all entrap
In Fatal Snares: their Maxim is, we know,
Divide and Rule; Distract and Overthrow.
Their Crafty Agents do creep in among
Our heedless Parties, and divide the throng,
That with more Ease they may us all devour,
Destroy our Nation, and subvert our power.
Why therefore do not Protestants agree
As One against the common Enemy?
Who waits with bloody hand, t'involve 'em all,
In one Destruction Epidemical.
SION's Children.
AH Mother: who c^^remedy your-grief?
For this Disease admits of no Relief.
SION.
OF no Relief? O then my heart must break!
Unless my Sons, their Mothers counsel take;
Which will those fatal flaming heats allay,
Obstruct their Growth, and take 'em clear away.
O can a Mothers Tears and woeful Cries
Be dis-regarded in her Childrens Eyes?
Can English Protestants, who do prosess
To serve one God in Truth and Holiness,
Slight all my Wishes, and Requests despise?
O! Hearken to my Counsel, and be wise.
Let wrathful Pride, and foolish self-conceit
Let Quibbles and sophistical Deceit
Be quite exploded? let a cool debate
All Fundamentals of Religion state^
In such you all, will certainly agree;
(O happy Model of sweet Unity:)
Let none that to those Principles do stick,
Be branded with the Name of Heretic;
It glads my heart to hear 'em call each other
By that sweet Title of a Christian Brother:
Next if you would not Charity explode,
Abuse the guiltless, and affront your God,
Judge not your Brethren at a distance, neither
Give easy credit to the Tales of either
Hotheaded Scriblers, or li^^^tious Tongues,
That often load the innocent with wrongs:
So hellish Monks did serve Waldensian Saints
With horrid Clamor, and unjust complaints:
So Popish Impudence spews out its Gall
To make us odious, and bespatter all
The Reformation; sure that cause is bad
Whose chief support from Railing must be had.
If giddy rumor, or uncertain same
Should raise a slander on your Brothers Name,
Repair to him, and in converse you will see
Whether he guilty, or not guilty be:
If he be faulty, tell him of his sin;
Be mild and secret, and you may him win.
Admonish gently, let your whole Discourse
Be full of savor, love, and Scripture-force.
This is the way to bring him to a sense,
And Gods prescribed Method to convince;
But if you fail, then leave him to his God,
Who can reform, or punish with a Rod,
Your work is done, you have discharged the part
Of Friend or Brother, of a Christian heart.
Before Belief, examine what is vented,
Good Men by Malice may be represented
In Monstrous Shapes: Some that to God are dear,
Hatred will paint like a misshapen Bear;
Believe not therefore distant imputation?
No Censure's Just, before Examination.
In all Debates be fure to lay aside
All prejudice, and let the Scriptures guide.
Your calm, s^nate Disputes, let Truth be scanned
With cool Resolves: O! let that great command
Of Love take place! for that should moderate
All eager Sallies in a warm Debate.
Who loses Error, truly gains the Field;
And he is Victor, that to Truth do ^^eld.
Where e're you find it, though in mean array,
Subscribe, and win the glory of the Day.
O! what is the World, but Shackles to the Mind?
What Is Reputation, but a sleeting Wind?
Why should those Bawbles which the Lord abhors,
Become the Sacred Truths Competitors?
Away with all such Rubs, let Truth take place;
And then the Springs of Everlasting Grace
Will drop down Blessings, Unity increase,
Among my Children, as the fruits of Peace.
SION'S Children.
Our Common Danger, and the Real Sense
(which we have got by dear Experience)
Of those Advantages, our Cruel Foe
Gets by our Factions, will unite us so,
As that our Enemies shall never prevail
To break our League, or make our courage fail:
But tell, dear Mother, has some new affright
So dis-compos'd you, that you fear our Light
Is near Extinction? tell your Sons, we pray,
What are the Symptoms of th'expiring Day.
Why do you judge, that England's Day of Grace
Draws to an Evening, and declines apace?
Show some Prognostics of that dismal Night,
That Threatens to succeed our Gospel Light.
SION.
WHen S^l once touches our Meridian Line,
It straight descends, does by degrees decline;
Its heat grows less, its disappearing Light
Yields to the Sable of approaching night:
Just so the Gospel in its Altitude,
Once shot such Beams, that in this Isle ensued
So great Conversion, that those former days
Did feel its blessed and universal Rays.
A general Heat did warm this happy Nation,
From its benign and powerful Operation:
But now it falls! and from our Horizon
Its vigorous influence is almost gone.
Thousands of Sermons lately have been Preached,
But very few (if any) sinners reached:
How ineffectual is the quickening word?
It shines, but warms not; its but like a Sword
That Is fair to sight, but has no Edge at all;
Few pricked at heart, and scarce do any fall
A^ Jesus feet, or have a since of Sin.
Confessing how rebellious they have been:
It is a dismal and apparent sign
That night comes on, when Phoebus does decline,
When heat and fervor fail, our Hemisphere
Will quickly see its Glory disappear.
The Evening of the natural Day is come,
When Harvest-work-men are repairing home:
So when quick Summons of Omnipotence,
Removes the Dressers of this Vineyard hence;
We may conclude the Gospel-morning past,
Because Gods Servants disappear so fast,
Can I, when Gap-defenders fall asleep,
But like old Israel, for my Prophets weep?
How can the naked and unguarded Flock,
Sustain the brunt of an invading Shock?
When of its Sh^ph^ras it is thus bereft,
When scarce a Moses or a Joshua's left,
How many active Guides, most dearly loved
By Me, have been in little time removed;
Scarce can I dry mine Eyes for loss of one,
But News arrives of many others gone:
If that my Head were waters, and each Eye
A well of Tears, I could distill them dry.
Bright Lamps extinguish't; and no other Lights
Appear to chase the horror of our Nights!
Shook by concussions of my Foes I stand,
Whilst few are raised to hold my trembling hand!
It thus my Horsemen, and Commanders dye,
What will become of the poor Infantry?
Who can support the bur^^^ of the Day,
When such brave Hero's o^^ly drop away?
Is Summer past, or is the Harvest done?
That such presages of a Storm come on!
Sure God (as Monarchs do) intends wars,
When he recalls his choice Ambassadors.
Ah too licentious World! come, look about,
Before the Lord, the bloody Flag puts out:
When God from Sodom, righteous Lot did call,
Sulphurous Flashes did consume them all.
Another ground of my prevailing fear
That England's black Catastrophe is near,
Is that, as in the closure of the Day,
The Evening Wolves do range abroad to Prey:
So Romish Beasts in monstrous Swarms do peep
From their black Caverns, to destroy my sheep:
Such hate the tell-tale-light, and therefore hide
Themselves in Dens, untll the Evening tide.
Their cursed products are resolves of Night,
Like silent Currs, that in the dark do bite.
Another symptom of the days declension,
Is when the shadows do increase dimension:
So when I look about, I plainly see
Our Evening shadows very long to be.
In Humane Bodies when the Head grows hoary,
It notes decay of Vigor, Strength and Glory.
Gray hairs are thick upon our Ephraim's Head,
His strength decays, his Face is withered.
When joints grow Palsy'd, and the Blood's congeal
Into a Jelly, can the Man be healed?
When Limbs grow stiff, and feeble Age does plo^
Its wrinkled Furrows (...) the Patients brow;
When heat gives place to a benumming cold,
When doting Fancy cares not to be told
Of its approaches to a certain Grave;
When it rejects the Physic that would save,
The case is desperate, for the Patient's just
Upon the Point to be intomb^d in Dust:
E^^n so (Alas!) this Gasping Nation lies
Under the pressure of sad Maladies:
It Is sick at heart, yet seems a verse to take
That sacred Physic, whose Ingredients make
Diseases Vanish, and would ward the blow
Which will (I sear) produce its overthrow.
Ah! must our Glory (like a brittle Glass
Reduced to Fractions) into Atoms pass:
So Rude a Chaus! an unformed confusion:
Threatening the whole with utter dissolution.
Once Happy Isle, I grieve at thy condition:
Where Is thy Repentance? where is thy Contrition
Thou have been counted our Emanuel's Land,
The Gospel seems on Tip toe now to stand,
To bid thee farewell: Must thy Sun so soon
Be set! before it did approach to Noon!
Must that illustrious Morning light be gone,
That spread its Beams through all our Horizon?
Must wretched Malice, and prodigious Lust,
Must barefaced Pride, and impudent Distrust,
Rob thee of this inestimable Jewel?
How can thou be so pittl^^^^ so cruel
Unto thy self? Sin is the flaming Dart
That cuts thy Veins, and wounds thy very heart.
Can Sion choose but send out mournful Cries?
And weep thy downfall in sad Elegies?
Within thy Bounds my Tabernacles were
Built up, and I did long inhabit here.
Thy Gospel-glory, and Renown's gone forth
Into all Parts and Corners of the Earth.
Thou may be justly styled the place of Vision?
(Though made by Foes an Object of Derision)
The joy of Saints, the ^^otestant's delight,
The Mark and Bu^t or Antichristian spite.
But if the Crown be ^avi^^^ from thy Head,
And Romish Clou^s (...) ^ustre over spread;
What heart so braw^y, but thy doleful Cry
Must move to pity^ what re^^^tless eye,
Can see thy fall, and not dissolve to drops?
O fleeting joys! O disappearing hopes!
O hastening horror! O invading s^^ts!
Had I a S^n of (...) empti^d tears,
My boundless, helpless grief wide open sets
The Sluices for its streaming Rivulets.
The very Air dressed in prodigious Forms,
Must groan in Thunder, and must weep in Storm^
Nature, of strong Convulsions sickned is,
To see this horrid Metamorphosis!
Where Gospel Pastors did some Millions seed,
Must blind and sottish ignorance succeed?
Must all their throats be cut that will not adore
The hateful Carcass of a Rotten Whore?
Must all that execrate Rome's Superstition,
Be murdered by a bloody Inquistion?
Must such as will not to Idols bow, be broke?
Must flaming Smithfield, belch out fire and smoke
Of Martyrd Saints? must all that will not turn
(With Bibles and good Books) together burn?
Must Monkish Torys, mere Incarnate Devils,
Possess our Land, and pester it with Evils.
Of such an odious and abhorred Grain,
That but to name 'em is a lasting stain?
Must our Renowned Ministers give place
To Romish Block-heads? O the vile disgrace
Of such a Change! Must an Adult'rous Priest
Belch out his Mass, where they have Preached (Christ)
Must that absurd and irreligious Tribe
Who ^etter Conscienes, and regard a Bribe
Beyond their Souls, be Leaders to our Flocks?
Must paultry Non sense, and those Apish Mocks,
Mis called Devotion, s^^l the House of Prayer?
Must Pestilence insect our Purer Air.
Must Sodom be translated to our Isle,
And filthy Priests our chastity defile?
Must satan's Factors in a humane shape,
On modest Virgins perpetrate a Rape?
Must all our painful Ministers be driven
To fiery Stakes, if they renounce not Heaven?
Must our dear Infants lose their harmless lives
In flaming Faggots, or with Popish Kinves?
Must guiltless blood through all our streets rebound
A mournful Echo? must the horrid sound
Of Axes, Whips, and dreadful Scourges tear
Our aching hearts, and pierce the yielding Air!
All this will be, if Rome can but prevail!
Amazement stops my Speech! my Spirits fail!
I only can in Interjections cry,
I sink in Trances! O! I die! I die!
SION'S Children:
AH! how can we with any patience hear
This sad Complaint? can any Children hear
Their Mother deluged in a Sea of Grief,
And not step in to give her some relief:
Cheer up, Illustrious Spouse, and be not cast
Into despair, by this approaching blast:
Christ is our Captain, then we may be hold,
In all our storms, he is our Anchor hold.
But what is this Beast, of whom thou do complain?
Whence came he first? and of what date's his Reign?
Give us his Marks, that we may surely know him,
Repel his Pride, and quickly overthrow him
With Universal and United Force,
Our Armed Legions shall impede his Course.
If God commands (who does the Scepter wield)
Wet'l fight his Battles, and dispute his Field.
In Martial Sylogisms our Arms shall speak:
Wet'l storm his Wall, and make his Pillars quake^
A raging Anger in our Bosom burns,
Patience provoked too much, to Fury turns.
SION.
THis Beast above The most diligent and industrious Searchers into the the
Epoch, or beginning of Antichrist, as the learned Mede, Alstedius, Mr.T.L. in
his Book entitled A voice out of the Wilderness, Mr. Brightman, Tillinghast,
with several other Eminent Men, seem harmoniously to agree that the Beast began
his forty two Months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty (Prophetical) Day
or Years, between the years 365. and 455. and therefore must consequently and
in a short time. See Mr. Mede, Page 600. and 601. To confirm which, the witness
of the best Chronologers, Historians and Antiquaries concur; as also the
posture of the Worlds Affairs, the unusual working of things, and the awakening
Providence of God; which makes us hope, as Mr. Withers affirms, That that
glorious Revolution will be in this present Age. And though famous Du Moulin,
and some others, speak not of the Popes claiming the Title of Universal Bishop,
till about the year 604. or 606. when the Traitor Phocas by the help of
Boniface the 3d. mard^red the Emperor Mauritius, (in requital of which the
Usurper Phocas gave the said Boniface that blasphemous Title, and decreed that
the Roman Church should be head of all Churches; which Platina a Papist, and a
writer of the Popes Lives agrees to; as Beda, de 6. AEtat. Mundi, Paul. Diacon.
rer. Romans 18. Histor. Longob. Lib.4.11. Anast. Bibl. Vit. Bon.3. Ado. AEtat. 6.
Reg. Chron. I. Aimon de gest, Franc. Lib.4.C.4.) Yet the same Du Moulin seems
positively to affirm, that the Persecution of the Church under the Pope, shall
have an end in (or about) the Year, 1689. See his Book extituled, The
Accomplishment of the Prophecies, Page 412. this term once expired (says he)
the truth that was oppressed shall lift up her head afresh, and the Witnesses
shall be seen to stand up again, who shall astonish the Church of Rome, etc.
twelve hundred years has bin
My Mortal Foe, he is called 2 These.2.3. Man of sin, is an He^raism, and imports
a person given up to Impiety and Wickedness as Pro.24.5. vir scientiae, a man
of Knowledge, that is, very knowing, 2 Samuel 16.8. Vir sanguinum, A man of
Blood, that is, one arrived at a non ultra of impiety.
The Man of Sin,
This Introducer of blind Superstition,
Is styled in Holy Writ, Son of Perdition, is also an Hebraism, and denotes,
One designed for destruction, as a hopeless and graceless Wretch. C^rysost. on
2 ThesHom.3.tells us, he is cal'ed so because he shall be destroyed. Piscator
and Erasmus think it may be expounded, one desperate, and past all hope of
honesty -- the perfect Copy of his Original Judas, who is called the Son of
Perdition, Joh. 17. 12. for he seemed an Angel, yet was a Devil -- he was no
Heathen, quitted Judaism, followed Christ, was an Apostle, seemed to pity the
poor, pretended great affection to his Master, yet betrays him with a kiss,
loved the Bag, hatched a Villainy able to rend the Rocks, and make the Earth
quake -- In which let all impartial men consider whether the Romish Antichrist
does not exactly parallel him.
Son of Perdition.
From Hell's Ab^ss, at first he did proceed,
As in the Revelations Rev. 11.7. The Beast that ascends out of that
bottomless Pit, etc.
you may read:
It Is he whom Daniel calls Du Moulin, P.379. amply demonstrates that the
portion of the Roman Empire, which the Pope has under him has such proportion
in respect of the whole extent of the Roman Empire, as there is of 3 to 10.
that is little less than the third part, agreeable to Dan.7.8.
the little Horn,
By whom three more up by the Roots were torn,
The Marks of the Beast.
First MARK.
THe Spirit aptly does Characterize
This Mushroms growth, This is one way whereby we may know who the Man of Sin
is, viz. He shall not be revealed until there come a falling away first, as 2 Thessalonians.2.3. The Revelation of Antichrist was then to be, when there should
appear some eminent Defection in the Church. Now antiquity clearly makes out
when that Apostasy was; it began very early: it is affirmed by some, The Church
did not continue a pure Virgin, nor retained her Primitive Purity, longer then
one hundred (...) But however, all approved Historians agree, that about the
beginning of the Fourth Century, the Apostasy of which the Apostle speaks,
was visible, and fully manifested: Joan. Wolfius, out of Jerome, says, That
about the year 390. the Law perished from the Priest, and the Vision from the
Prophet; Avarice and Corruption crept into the Church; they condemned Meats and
Marriage, and yet gave themselves up to luxurious Banquets and Uncleanness. In
the Year 326. it was endeavored in the Council of Nice, to cause Bishops and
Elders to refrain from their Wives. See Alsted in Chronologia testium
Veritatis. Also the said Wolfius alleges a saying out of Augustine, applying
it to the Year 399. who speaks thus: That Religion about that time was
corrupted with Traditions and humane Rites; That the condition of the Jews
under the Law, was easier then that of Christians under the Gospel. Dionysius
in an Epistle hinteth that they were burdened with Ceremonies and Traditions
that were obtruded and laid upon Christians; and that the Sacraments both of
Baptism and the Lords Supper, suffered great mutation, and was grievously
corrupted. Also we find Chrysostom declaiming against the Bishop of Rome,
concerning Purgatory; which thing is applied to the Year 410. or thereabouts.
Besides, we find mention made of worshipping of Images, which is reprehended by
one Amphilocus Bishop o^ Iconium, as also by Epiphanius, whom we find speaking
thus: Whence is this Image Worship, and Design of the Devil? And a little after
he says. Be mindful, my beloved Children, that ye bring not Images into the
Church, but bear about God in your hearts.
declares he shall arise
Not till a day of great Apostasy
Corrupts true Faith, and Gospel Purity:
Just so it happened at that very time,
When Romes proud Prelate did attempt to climb
To that Prodigious Grandeur which devours
Both Regal, Princely and Imperial Powers,
That such a Fall as then predicted was,
Did ever his rising, truly come to pass,
Some Learned Writers of their own confess,
With detestation of their wickedness.
The Second MARK.
WHen Romes great Empire to its Period came,
The Papal Hierarchy The second thing that was to precede the coming of
Antichrist, was the taking away of the sixth head, viz. the Heathen Empire,
which in the Apostles time * did let or hinder his Rise; he that now lets
will let, until he be taken out of the way, and the^ shall that wicked one be
revealed, etc. The Empire ( says Du Moulin) which did bear rule, must be
abolished, and out of the Ruins thereof the Son of Perdition is made manifest,
and exalts himself: the Emperors hindered him, but the Empire being decayed in
the West, and diminished in the East by the Saracens, the Pope found means to
seize upon the chief City of the Empire, together with great part of Italy, and
to devour the Neighboring Churches and Realms at his pleasure. Du Moulin, ubi
supra, p.119. That this was the general Opinion of Antiquity, may be seen in
Tertu^^ian, Lib. de Resurrect. Cap.24.Chrysostom. 4 Sermon on 2 These. The Greek
Scholiast. in loc. August de civita^ D^i. lib.20.cap.19. Iren.11. quest to
Algasia, Lipsius, etc. He that would see more particularly how the Bishop of
Rome has made his Market by the ruin of the Empire, let him read Sig^^nius
his History of the Kingdom of Italy: In the beginning of his third Book he
shows how Pope Gregory the Second, because the Emperor opposed his setting up
of Images in the Church, forbad the People to pay Tribute to him, and not so
much as once to name him in their Public Service, Du Moulin P. ^57. This then
being out of question, to wit, That the Roman Empire whereof St. Paul speaks,
is already ruined, and that the Bishop of Rome thereupon rose to that height of
Pride and Blasphemy, it must needs follow that the Son of Perdition is
revealed, and that this is he.
usurpt the same,
By hellish Craft he makes that Seat his own,
And forms Regalia's to a Tripple Crown.
This Man of Sin in * Gospel Times we know
Was but a hatching, and in Embrio;
And ever he could come to maturity,
The Roman Empire must dissolved be;
Upon whose Ruins he has built his Nest,
And raised his Rampant Domineering Crest.
The Third MARK.
AT first from mean estate This Beast (says Du Moulin) rose from a small
beginning and mean estate, signified by a little Horn in Deniels Prophecy, and
in the Revelations of St. John by his rising out of the Earth, according as the
Latins call such as get up ^^^m a little Terroe Filios, as Mushroms or
Toad-stools, page 259. Now who is there but knows how mean and poor the Bishops
of Rome were, before they came to be Earthly Monarchs? then when they had not
one foot of ground, that the Emperor caused them to be whipped, imprisoned,
banished, etc. but by degrees to what a mighty height did he rise? he exercised
the power of the first Beast by little and little, he took the Empire upon him,
this Beast arose,
Came from the Earth, and did at length oppose
The former Beast, the Roman Empire, he
By help of Lombards chased from Italy,
^^surpt his Seat, appropriates his Power,
And does the Saints (as bad as he) devour.
PopesTragicks are the second part of his.
As if that Soul by Metempsychosis sat down in his very Seat, assumed his Habit
and Shoes of Scarlet, and counter feited the actions and rights of the Roman
Empirer casting off his Crosier-Staff, he takes to himself a Crown, and is
clothed in Scarlet, which was proper to the Emperor: the Emperor had a Senate
clad in Scarlet, and he has a Senate of Cardinals clad in Cloth of the same
color, and in many other things by seemed to represent the First Beast.

Survived, and were translated into this,
Now let all judge if Antichrist be come.
That sees these Marks upon the Beast of Rome.
The Fourth MARK.
This is notorious to the World, though the brevity of Notes admit not room for
many Examples.
HE does exalt himself above all those
Called Gods on earth, does by his Pius the fifth, sent a Bull to depose Qu.
Elizabeth, see Jewel's View of Sedition, and Cambden'^ Eliz. 1570.Tom. 1.
Gregory the 13. labored secretly to ruin her, Id. Ibid. Anno. 1378. Tom. 1.
Sixtus 5. gave her Kingdom to the King of Spain Anno. 1588. Ibid, Clement. 8.
strictly comman^^ that (...) should inherit the English Crown, ho^ good soever
his Title be, unless they be sworn and resolved Papists, his words are thus:
^^isi ejusmo^^ di esset, qui fidem Catholicam non modo toleraret, sed omni open
and studio promoveret, and more majorum jurejurando se id praestiturum
susceperet. Camb.Ann.1600.Tom.alter.
Bul^ oppose
All Regal Edicts, that receive not their
Oblinging Sanction from his Papal Chair.
He like a Peerless Potentate does now
Make Sovereign Thrones, and Crowned Monarchs bow
Pope Adrian 4. made the Emperor Frederick 1. to hold his Stirrup, and child
him for holding the wrong one, Balaus in Act. Romans pont. in vit. Adrian 4.
Some hold his Stirrup, Gregory 7. made the Emperor Henry 4. his Empress and
Child, to wait three days and three nights, in a Frosty Season, barefooted,
and barelegged, before his Gates, before they could get Audience. Id in vit.
Gregor.7.
some are made to wait
Three Frosty Nights barefooted at his Gate.
Alexander 3. Made the Emperor fall upon the ground, in the Temple of St. Mark
at Venice, the whole People being present, and puts his Foot upon his Neck,
uttering the Psalmists words, Psalm.91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and
the Adder, the young Lion and Dragon shall thou trample under feet, Id in vit.
Alex. 3. see 40 Examples of this in the Learned Dr. White's Way of the Church.
P. 13,19,20,21.
Imperial Heads lie prostrate at his beck,
And to his trampling feet submit their Neck.
The Fifth MARK.
ANother Mark, He in Gods Temple fits,
Boasting himself a God, and counterfeits
True Holiness; when he assumed the Throne,
There was a Temple (*) of the Holy One
In Rome, and did continue so, till they
Displaced Christ, () and flung his Truth away.
It Is expressly laid down by the Apostle, as an undoubted Mark of the Man of Sin,
viz. That he should sit in the Temple of God. Chryso^t; is very express, Hom.
3. 2. These.8. that is, not in Jerusalem but in the Church, so Occumenus, d^
RomansLib. 3. Cap. 13. and Theop^^. Theodor. Ambros. Primus Anselm. Severian.
apud ipsum. Besides it was to be in a City with 7 Hills, and where 7 Kings or
Supreme Magistrates were or had been, which agrees to no City but Rome, as is
demonstrated by Peter du Moulin and others; if it be objected, that the Church
of Rome at the time of Antichrist's Rise, could not be the Temple of God,
because upon the great Apostasy that denomination ceases^ it is Answered, It
might be called the Church and Temple of God then, though the Presence of God
and the true Religion and Power of Godliness was gone, it might retain the
Name; as Royal Palaces keep their Names when ruined; it is said, Isai.1.21. How
is the faithful City bec^me an Harlot? Could she be a faithful City and a
Harlot too? The meaning is, she was so, but now thus; so Mat.11.5. Mark.7. ult.
it is said The blind see, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the lame walk, etc.
that is, they were so, but now otherwise; a Woman keeps her Husbands Name
though Divorced for Whoredom; so Rome (*) was Gods Temple and Christ's Church,
but when ^he espoused another Head, and cast off her first Husband () and the
true Faith, she became an Harlot and Synagogue of Satan, though bearing still
the name of Church and Christian also. See an excellent Treatise, Entitled,
The man of Sin, Printed 1677.page.40. etc.

The Sixth MARK.
THis is the Beast upon whose Back the great
Enticing Strumpet rides in Pompous State So he carried me away in the Spirit
into the Wilderness, and I saw a Woman set upon a Scarlet colored Beast, full
of Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns, Rev. 17,4. I will show
the Mystery of the Woman, and the Beast that carries her, ver.7.

By him she was supported all along,
By his Imposture she was rendered strong.
This Mark that It has been a received Opinion of some Christians of late
times, that the B ast who is the Antichrist of Man of Sin, shall not arise till
the Who^^ is destroyed, and that when he comes he shall only Reign 3 Years and
a half. Which Notion may see^ strange to all considerate men; because that
(...) who is of the 7 th. and an 8 th all confess is the Man of Sin: and how
evident is it that this very bea^^ bears up, and carries the Whore from first
to last besides, consider it is said, the 10 Horns of this very Beast's shall
hate the Whore, and make her desolate how could the Horns hate or hurt her, if
the Beasts rise not till she is destroyed? can there be Horns and no Beast? And
besides, should this Notion be received, it might seem strange that the holy
Spirit passed by in silence, and takes no notice of th^^ horrid Monster, or
succession of Popes, that have continued so long, having all the Marks and
Characters so clearly upon him of Antichrist. If any should say, he does not
deny Christ come in the flesh. I answer^ in a Mystery he does, and
particularly, in his ordaining of Sacrifices, as it was under the Law, which
cease all when the Antityp^ came and by assuming the place of Christ's Supremacy
and Government.
Notion throws quite out (...) door
That says the Beast shall not arise before
The Desolation of the Scarlet Whore.
The Seventh MARK.
THe Holy Spirit most expressly says,
In later (...) some shall renounce the Faith^
That by the Spirit of Seduction led,
Doctrine of Devils through the Earth shall spread^
That belch out Fa^shood in Hypocrisy
And many Thousands do deceive thereby;
Forbidding Marriage, This is an undeniable Mark of the Son of Perdition, viz:
That he shall forbid Marriages, and command to abstain from meats, and who it
is that commands to abstain from meats, and who it is that suffers not his
Clergy to marry, and forbids the eating of flesh on some certain days and
seasons of the Year, is known to all. The Council of Chalcedo^ says (
Cannon.Cap.16.) ^t nec Deo dicata Virgo, nec Monachus nuberit; That no Nun or
Monk shall marry. Bell^rmine in his 34 Cap. of the Book of Monks, styles the
marriage of Clarks and Monks by the name of Sacr^^edge; and affirms, That they
sin less which commit Fornication after they have once taken a Vow, than they
do which marry, nay, and in the 19 Chapter of the first Book of Clarks, he
says, That the marriage of Saints is not with out some Sin, Pollution and
Uncleanness. The (...) General Council assembled at Trullo, to make Canons,
tell us plainly in the 13 Canon, that in the Church of Rome, whosoever will be
a Deacon (...) Priest, must first protest that he will never any more after
that have to do with his Wife, etc. -- If a Man be ^ound to have broken the
Ordinance o^ the Church, by eating Flesh in Le^t, especially i^ the week which
they call the Holy Week, the Priest, says my Author, has no power to absol^^
him, etc. This Doctrine of the Pope, as it is a Man of Antichrist, so it is
expressly called the Doctri^^ of Devils.
and the use of Meat,
Which God ordained for every man to eat.
The Eighth MARK.
He Is not content to be Supreme below,
And make all Scepters to his Crosier bow;
But th'impious Wretch is grown so bold that eve^
He dares affront the Majesty of Heaven.
What God commands, this lmp of Hell controuls,
Condemns the saved, and saves condemned Souls;
Himself he places in Jehovah's He shall oppose and exalt himself above all
that is call^^ God, or that is worshipped, showing himself that he is Ge^ 2 Thessalonians.2. He shall speak great things against the most Hig^ Dan.7.25. That the
Pope is guilty of opposition to, a^ exaltation of himself above the Majesty of
God, is made appear by diverse worthy Writers; the very life and soul (...)
Popery seems to run in this vein. The Lord Jesus (says one) is made a very
Lacquey to the Pope, he changes times and Laws at his pleasure God says, Thou
shall make to thy self no graven image. etc. The Pope takes away that
Commandment, and declares it is lawful to worship Images. The Lord bids us
search the Scriptures; the Pope opposes this, and forbids the reading of them,
nay burns to death those that do read them; and to prevent it, looks them up in
an unknown Tongue. God pardons sins upon Repentance, the Pope without, for a
sum of Money. The Pope can invest a sorry Priest with power by uttering a few
words to make a God, to turn bread into the real body of Christ, and have power
over him to do with him what he pleases when he has done, and he cannot deliver
himself out of his hands.
Throne,
(...) chief of all, as second unto none.
A brace of Keys he carrys in his hand;
To shut and open at his own Command.
He Curses and Absolves, he Binds, Releases;
Puts down, Advances whomsoe're he pleases.
This is the Apocalyptick Beast, that claims
Sublimest Titles, and Blasphemous Names,
With Matchless Pride, and Peerless Impudence,
He does for Money with Gods Laws dispense
To fill his Purse (O shameless Avarice!)
All sorts of Sins he values at a prince. What sin is it but the Pope takes
upon him to pardon for Money; besides he makes the detestable sins of Treason
and Murder, if it be done in Zeal, and by his Authority, for the promotion of
the pretended Holy Church, meritorious, Canonizing black and brutish sinners
for saints, in his Calendar; he exalts himself above the Word of God, he usurps
Gods seat, by giving what Interpretation to Gods Law he pleases, which he makes
of equal Authority with it,

The Ninth MARK.
FAlse Miracles and Lying Wonders too
This grand Deceiver does pretend to do Even him whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, 2 These.2.9. B
ellarmine (de not Eccl. 1.4.cap.14.) makes Miracles one infallible sign of the
true Church; and certain I am, the false and lying wonders of the Roman Church,
clearly shows the Pope to be the Antichrist, or Son of Perdition. I have not
room here to enumerate many of them, only take one of two, by which you may
judge of the rest. One B ecanus's Head being off, St. Itas Prayers made it come
posting through the Air, stand by the Body, and she joined them fast again, so
that in one hours space the Man became as lively as ever he had been in all his
life.

St. Anthony's Arm, that precious Relick at Geneva, was kissed and worshipped
with great Devotion, whilst Popery kept its ground; but when the Gospel came,
and the Relick was produced, 'twas found the pisle of a Stag, Calv. de
reliq^prop.initiam. Possibly you may have heard of the Wonders that Relick had
done; and of St. Decumanus, who carried his own head after it was cut off, to a
Spring, and there washed off the blood from it. A Country Curate, says
Erasmus getting Crabs, and fastening Candles to their backs, set them a
crawling up and down the Churchyard at night, and in the Morning after he had
taken them in again, persuaded the People that they were poor distressed Souls
in Purgatory, you must think such that wanted Masses and Alms, says my
Author; ye know the Proverb, No Penny, No Pater Noster: a fit Miracle to pick
the Peoples Pockets. Lib.22.^0. Epist. P 1529. in Epist. Edit, Basil. A Maid
coming into a Garden and taking a Lettice to eat it, crushed the Devil between
her Teeth in the Lettice; and this poor Devil, says Du Moulin, whom she belike
swallowed down together with the Lettice, being commanded to go out, and checked
by Equitius, excuses himself, saying, Alas! What hurt did I? I was sitting
quietly upon the Lettice, and she came and bit me, the fault was in her for not
making the sign of the Cross when she gathered the Lettice. Moreover, these
ridiculous Impostors affirm, that when the Body of Pope Formosus was carried
into St. Peter's Church, all the Images of the Saints that stood there, did him
obeisance; but above all, the Miracle of the Ass that lest his Provender to
worship the Host, seems most ridiculous to King James: see his Apology, etc.
Many of their pretended Miracles were wrought, as Writers intimate, about the 4
and 5 Century, and were contrived to confirm the Popes Head-ship and universal
Supremacy, together with their idle stories of Purgatory, Images, Praying for
the Dead, etc. Those that would see more, let them read Du Moulin, also a late
Book entitled, the Man of Sin.



He fain would make the abused World believe,
That he with Ease can make a Dead Man live.
They do such things, their Sottish Legend says,
As far exceeds all Truth or Humane Faith;
Their Nature, Number, Circumstances all,
Done by Achievements Diabolical;
Their senseless Fables, arrant Fopperies,
Are mere Impostures and apparent lies.
This is an Engine which the Graceless Wretch
Does spread abroad, the Sons of Men to catch:
And God less such those horrid lies believe,
Who Gospel Truths would not in love receive,
That they might perish and be damned thereby,
The just desert of such Iniquity!
The Tenth MARK.
HIS out Side's smooth, he is garb'd in Sheeps array,
But inwardly a ravenous Beast of Prey.
He has a Mouth And there was given unto him a Mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies, Rev.13.5. And he opened his mouth against God, to blaspheme his
Name and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, ver.6. He shall speak great
words against the most High, Dan.7.25. This mark of the beast is apparently
seen in the Pope, in those insolent and blasphemous Titles be assumes to
himself; he is called Christ's Vicar, or his Viceroy and Lieutenant. Bellarm. de
Romanslib,2 Cap.31. Foundation, Head and Husband to the Catholic Church; his
Holiness, that can be judged by no Man; though he draw an innumerable number to
hell who shall say to him, what do thou? What would you think to hear him
called, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David? so Begnius one of
his Bishops Courted pope Leo the Tenth, and thereupon bad the Daughter of Sion
not to weep, saying, God had raised to her a Savior. See Council Later, sub
Leon.10 Sess 6.^p sur.

He is frequently called by those of the Romish Church, Our Lord God the Pope,
Exter.Joan.22. Tit.14. C.4.

And as touching his Blasphemies against those that dwell in Heaven, to wit,
The Saints of God, it is evident that they are continually branded for Heretics
Schismatics, and what not.


wherewith he speaks great things,
Blasphemes the Glory of the King of Kings.
The Eleventh MARK.
It Is He that aims at th'utter Dissolution
Of precious Saints, by Bloody Persecution,
That does pronounce no Christian fit to live,
Unless they do his Beastly Mark receive.
Forbids all Traffic, none must sell or buy,
Except th'adorers of his Hierarchy.
This Mark the Pope does in his Forehead bear
Of which full proof, is extant every where,
The Numbers he has He shall wear out the Saints of the Most High, Dan.7. and
caused as many as would not worship the Image of the beast should be killed,
Rev 13.5. We find upon Record, that Pope Innocent the 3. within the space of a
few Months, made more than 200000 of the faithful to be slain, who they called
Albigeans, he had made all Europe to stream with blood; in St. Bartholmews
Massacre, in the Year, 1572. more than 80000 were slain in cold blood: see Du
Moulin p.246.247 The Duke de Alva (says he) played the Butcher in Flanders and
under the show of Catholic Zeal, slew Millions of people, in recompense
whereof the Pope sent him a holy Sword and Consecrated Gloves; besides the
infinite numbers slew in other places, by Wars, bloody Massacres, and
otherwise, of which you will hear more hereafter; so that by this time sure all
may conclude Antichrist is come, and that this is he in whom all the Marks and
Characters do so fully meet, which the Holy Ghost has given of him.
murdered do surmount
The strictest of Arithmeticks account.
They stained each Nation with a Crimson Flood
And swelling Current of my Childrens Blood.
SION'S SONS.
THese Marks are so notorious that we can
Say of the Romish Pope, He is the Man^
For these Characteristicks truly are
To him (and only him) peculiar.
This raging Monster is that Beast of prey:
Shall we arise to take his strength away?
That has so long time tyrannized thus
(With hellish Fury) over thee and us?
Self-preservation is, by every Creature
Esteemed a Sacred Principle in Nature.
Each Free born mind, must at those Tyrants spurn
That would infect their Souls, their Bodies burn,
Why should this Beast still rage and domineer
As he has done, without control or fear?
SION.
YOu are to wait for Gods great Dispensations,
At whose disposal is the fate of Nations;
His time is best, and in due Season he
Will bring this Beast to his Catastrophe.
He sits in Heaven, and beholds with Scorn,
This Rebels Pride. His glorious Son that is born
Heir of the World, and Prince of Kingdoms too,
Shall surely Reign because it is his due:
For all to him the Sovereign Rule must yield;
He shall the Crown and Royal Scepter wield:
Nations shall serve him: Kings that have abhorred
His Name, shall pay him homage, as their Lord.
To JESUS all shall bow, he shall be King,
And to poor Sion shall Redemption bring.
Till this Beasts month, and latest hour be spent,
No Humane Weapon can his Rage prevent.
To suffer Persecution I Am appointed,
Till Instruments are chosen and anointed
For my Deliverance; your work's to pray,
And be prepared for that blessed day;
When Babel falls, and Sion is restored
To height of favor, with her blessed Lord.
The day approaches, and if you would win
Renown by Fighting, then encounter Sin;
That home bred Foe, which in your Bosom lurks,
And like the Venom of an Aspick works
Through all your Vitals; it is the Capital
And grandest Foe, that would betray you all;
It corresponds with those that do expose
To torments, all that with the Bridegroom close;
Till this is conquered, I shall not arise,
Nor be delivered from mine Enemies.
This Traitor makes my very heart to faint,
And does occasion most of my Complaint;
For by's conspiring with the Beast and Devil,
I am surrounded with the present evil.
Besides these Foes of my forlorn Estate,
There is another strong Confederate,
The Proud, Imperious and Insulting Whore,
Of whom I made a sad Complaint before;
She with lascivious Looks and Wanton Eyes
Prompts on to Lust and all Debaucherits;
By her fallacious and be witching Charms
She does entice Great Men into her Arms,
Corrupting Princes by her Incantations,
Destroys the brave Nobility of Nations.
Great God assist me, e're my Spirits fail ^
That I the State of Monarchs may bewail,
Who to her Yoke yield their Illustrious Necks.
And move (like Vassals) at her saucy becks.
Oh! they that should My Nursing Fathers be,
Are Executioners of Cruelty,
By this Whores Influence, the Civil Power
Is made a dreadful Engine to devour
The Saints of God, and kick at the Creator;
But let them know that Sovereign Arbitrator
Of all their Destinies, is Great and Just,
And can, at pleasure, tumble them to Dust.
What pity is it that Dukes and Noble Peers,
With other Heroes, should for many years
Thus truckle to that Proud, Usurping Where,
And for her sake inslave themselves? nay more,
Exhaust their Treasure, and debase their Name,
And bring themselves to such reproach and shame,
By thus ing^ging in her Hellish 'Plots,
Which fastens on them Everlasting Blots.
That shameless Strumpet, whose accursed wiles
Trappans the Conscience, and the Soul beguiles,
When she involves them in the deepest guilt,
She does pretend to wash away the filth,
By impious Pardans! Yea, to such an height
Does the (...) (...), that the very sight
Of T^bu^n, cannot move them to confess,
Their load of guilt and horrid wickedness;
It is her Art, when they are parting hence,
To steel their Fronts with shameless impudence.
When they are drawn to a deserved Death,
With lies she makes them to resign their breath.
She makes them drunk till they forget their fears,
Her Agents buzzing in their doubting Ears;
Who (like i^ Angels round about them hover,
For fear they should her Rog^eries discover.
When some are stretch^ upon the fatal block,
And Justice ready to discharge the stroke,
Such is the strength of her Inebr^ation,
That they (Oh horrible!) on their Salvation,
Protest they are innocent! when a^ the while
No Treason ever did appear more vile.
Then that for which Impartial Justice has
Judged them (as Traitors, to deserved Death^
Rome (by their frantic Resolutions) would
Outface the Sun, and baffle) if she could)
The clearest Proofs, and solid'st Evidence
Produced by Heavens unerring providence.
Ah! cruel Mistress of deluded Souls!
That Is not content to make them arrant Fools
To lose Estates and lives, but must thereby
Make them stab Conscience, when they come to Dye.
She to encourage Treasons, does prefer
Those Traytor-Martyrs in her Calender.
SION'S SONS.
THis Whore and Beast in Interest are so joined
That many puzzled are, which way to find,
Wherein they differ, pray tell us therefore,
How is the Beast distinguished from the Whore.
SION.
1. Because the Beast is expressed in the Masculine Gender, the Man of Sin, the
Son of Perdition, and the Beast that was, and is not even HE, is the Eight and
of the Seven, i. e. He came up by means of the Liberty and large Revenues. The
seven Heads, viz. The Christian Emperors gave to the Church and Churchmen,
though a different and distinct sort of Government to all before it but Mystery
Babylon is expressed by the Feminine Gender, a Woman, a Whore, Mother of Harlots;
I saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, etc. And when I saw her I
wondered, etc.

2. The Angel describes them distinct, the one from the other, a Beast and
Whore, I John saw them as clearly distinct as a Beast is from her that sits
upon him, and I saw a Woman set upon a Scarlet-colored beast, Rev.17.3.

3. If the beast and Whore were one and the same, then the Whore sets up and
rides epon herself; than which nothing can be more absurd and ridiculous.

4. There is as real a difference between the Man of sin, and the Whore or
false Church, as is between Christ and the true Church: the beast or
Antichrist is the Head, the Whore is the body; and indeed it was by renouncing
the Headship and Government of Christ Jesus, and espousing, owning, and
swerving to the Headship and Supremacy of the Pope, that first gave the Church
of Rome, the denomination of a Whore; for a woman that has two Heads, two
Husbands can be no other.

5. Moreover it is evident that the beast shall remain though in Captivity, his
power being taken away after the Whore is destroyed. And burned with fire,
Rev.19.19,20.D^^.7,26


THe Pope's the Beast, usurping over all;
A Power Supreme and Magistratical;
This Scarlet Beast does in the strictest fence
Lay claim to Secular Pre-eminence.
The Roman Empire lost the Ruling Seat,
The Pope usurpt it, and from thence grew great,
All Kings that he could by his craft allure,
Receive their Power; and Investiture.
This Whore cannot be the Beast.

From him: the Whore's the Though it is granted the Magistratical Power of
Popish Kings in large sense is signified by the beast who do support the
Ecclesiastic state or false Church, yet Originally it more strictly resides in
the Pope, for by a voluntary submission to him: he is become their Master, as
Du Moulin page 161. Observes their Crowns being at the Popes disposal, who
takes it, and gives it (says he) to whom he thinks good, which things have
been noted by Buicciardine, that famous Historian in his History of the rises
and advancements of the Pope.
Ecclesiastic State,
Or Romish Hierarchy, that take's her Seat
Upon the back of this Ten horned Steed,
(Which gores my side, and makes my Children bleed.)
SION'S Sons.
SHall we (endangered by her Plots) arise.
To curb this Whore, that our great God defies
Why should her Treasons any more annoy
Thy precious Saints and Nations thus destroy,
Lets make her Drink in that envenomed Cup
She fills for us shall she not swill it up;
Will none fall on, provoked by flaming ire,
To eat her Flesh, and burn her in the fire?
SION.
WHo instrumental in that work shall be;
Read well the sacred Scriptures, you may see
Rev. Esa. Jerome.
And since the matter you do understand,
It brings me comfort on the other hand:
As 'twas foretold in sacred Scripture story
You are inlightn'd with the Angels glory;
As for my Children who before did live,
Light from this Angel they could not receive.
My Children brought forth in the latter days,
Shall do great matters to Jehovah's praise.
I see some good men do desire to know
The time when they this Whore shall overthrow;
I cannot blame them for this very thing,
To the whole World it will much glory bring.
Then shall the Gospel through the Earth be spread
And Men instead of Husks shall seed on Bread;
God's Worship shall its freedom then enjoy,
Rome's Locust then shall you no more annoy.
There shall be then a wonderful increase
Of Sion's glory and of Israel's peace;
Then shall my Children in sweet consort sing
Anthems of joy to the Eternal King.
No names then of Distinction more shall be,
But speak one Language all they shall agree
In peace and oneness and blessed Harmony.
But to reply to what you have required,
At present you must keep your selves retired
Make no attempts until the Lord on high,
Does give you strength this Babel to defy.
You now do seem to lie as persons dead,
As being unable to erect your head:
But then you shall appear to be alive,
The Spirit of the Lord shall you revive:
God has (I know) set down the time exact,
When he will begin this strange and dreadful Act,
To the confusion of your Enemies.
When God shall call his Witnesses to rise;
Then from the Heavens, they shall hear a voice,
Which shall make all their spirits to rejoice.
Then shall they have so evident a call,
That they straight way shall on this Strumpet fall.
With patience therefore wait upon the Lord,
Until his saving strength he does afford:
To him you are to make your supplication,
For from him only is my expectation.
O sigh with me, and in your Spirits groan,
And send strong cries up to his gracious Throne:
Give him no rest till, (in those glorious days.)
Of all the Earth, I Am made the only praise.
And I Will lift up my voice to God on High,
And make my moan to him, and thus will cry.
SION'S PRAYER.
O Lord of Hosts, consider my Estate,
Let me remain no longer desolate.
Have I not been most precious in thy sight?
O do not therefore my Petition slight;
O let thy Bowels to thy Children move,
In tender token of Parental love.
Shall Sion totter? and the Beast grow steady
In his proud Seat? have thou not tried already?
What some advantage, or what Gospel good,
Is to be hoped for, from the wicked Blood?
Can thou expect they will serve thee better Now?
Are they mo^e like to bless the World below,
Then thy poor Sion? if their measures be
Repleted brimful of Iniquity,
Then by just for feiture, their right is gone,
To Earthly power, and Dominion,
Will these thy saving Gospel Truths preserve?
Or in pure Worship at thine Altars serve?
Will these protect the Innocent and good,
And not provoke thee with their crying blood?
Will they make Judgment in right channels go!
Extirpate Vice? Make Righteousness to flow
Like mighty streams? are they in Covenant
With Thee? Or were thou ever pleass'd to grant
Them any Promises that they should wear
The Sacret badges of thy Name? and bear
The Sovereign Rule? will Fathers, and young men,
Within thy Church be prized and honored then?
Shall they not rather, by their Barbarous hands,
Be butchered, for obeying thy Commands?
Will not thy Childrens Souls in danger be
Of swift Damnation, by Rome's blasphemic?
If Laud on Earth and Praises will be given,
If Hallalujahs will be sung in Heaven,
To thy great Name, for raising Babylon,
And bringing Sion to destruction:
If then the Door of Grace be opened more,
For Men's Salvation, then it was before.
If Sinners access unto the blessed Jesus,
Be made more free; if cure of Soul Diseases
Be then more easy, then let Sion fall.
And Rome usurp Dominion over all.
But if in sight of thine all-seeing Eye,
Their Monstrous Crimes are of so black a Dye^
If from their very springing they have been,
The vilest Wretches, and the worst of men:
If for the future they intend to be
The Perpetrators of all Villainy.
If their black sins, of gross Idolatry,
Pride, horrid Mu^thers, and Adultery,
Mount up to Heavens great Imperial Throne,
If thy Oppression makes thy Churches groan^
If they will burn thy Scriptures and suppress
All Books that treat of Gospel holiness?
If guiltless souls of every sex and age,
Will be made sacrifices to their Rage;
If they are Foes, without thy Covenants,
If they will trample on thy precious saints;
If they (because thou did not hear and save
Thy praying Sion, from a sinking Grave)
De^de thy Glory, and blaspheme thy Name,
And put thy faithful ones to open shame. Deu 32.26
Then hear O Lord, thou see my power is gone,
In thee I trust, besides thee there is none,
That can thy Sion, from her Foes deliver;
O draw some flaming Arrows from thy Quiver
To quell the pride of this oppressing Crew,
Thy mighty Arm alone can them subdue.
On thee I fix an absolute Reliance,
Do thou but help, I Will bid them all defiance.
Hear and consider, for thy Mercy sake,
On gasping Sion some compassion take.
I have been ransomed with the precious blood
Of thy dear son, and filled with heavenly Food,
O Lord, I pray, thy Churches sins forgive,
And In sweet concord let thy Children live;
Teach them true saving knowledge from thy word
That they may worship Thee with one accord.
Thou can the Prostrate raise, and cure his wound
For nothing difficult for thee is found.
Thou know my grief, O Lord, incline the (...)
Revive my hope, and chase away my fear.
In Achors Valley open thou a Door,
And make me sweetly sing as heretofore;
I pray Thee break the Bonds of my distress,
And lead me from this dolesome Wilderness,
O let me shine like Sots illustrate light,
And be's and Army terrible in fight.
Pull off that Vail that does thy Sion cover,
Those clouds, O scatter that I may discover
What thou do mean by this thy dispensation,
And what my work is in this Generation.
Its time for thee to plead thy Peoples cause,
When wicked men make void thy righteous Laws.
Thou can destroy them with their brim-full Cup,
And lofty Cedars, by the roots pull up;
But Lord remember for to spare thy Vine,
That spreading Plant which thou have chosen thine,
Make that to flourish and be ever green,
And full of clusters as before't has been.
From Egypt thou have brought it heretofore:
From thence I pray deliver it once more,
Let thine hand plant it, give it steadfast root,
That all the Land may feast upon its Fruit;
O let its Cordial Juice the Nation fill,
And let its boughs o'reshadow every Hill:
From Sea to Sea do thou her branches send,
And her, from all her Enemies defend,
Make up her Hedge, her Fence, be thou a Wall,
To keep her from the violence of all
Rapacious Bears, and from the greedy Boar
That would destroy it, and its fruit devour.
Lord from on high thy lovely Vine behold,
Thine own Plantation, valued more than Gold;
Can thou deny thy helping hand the while
Wild Beasts thy Vineyard ravage thus and spoil,
I am Christ's Spouse, his undefiled One.
Can thou permi^me to be trod upon;
(...) by thy Grace I am entitled so,
Great God relieve me, and divert my woe,
I am surrounded on all sides with pain.
O let me see thy lovely smiles again.
Thou have withdrawn the beamings of thy grace,
And wrapped in Clouds the splendour of thy Face;
O this has caused such anxious grief and smart,
As tears my Soul, and rends my very heart
To tears of blood, whilst thou the glorious Sun
Of light art hid: O whether or shall (...) run.
For Beams of comfort in this dolesome hour?
Whilst I lie deluged in the brinish shower
More would she speak, but her great passion ties
(...) mournful tongue: the Blood-gates of her eyes
In crystal Streams do represent an anguish,
That makes her vital operations languish.
Sank in dispairing sounds, she scarce appears
It breathe our live, but by her sighs and tears.
SION'S Sons.
MOurn mouth O Heavens, and thou, O Earth
And weep ye Saints until your spirits fail,
For the that is the glory of the Earth.
Of the most Noble and illustrious Birth,
Lies sadly wel^^ing in a deep despair,
Her grievous sorrows, can no tongue Declare,
O that our Brethren would, but hasten hither
That in Gods fear we may confer together
You must needs grieve, when her Complaints you hear
Do not your hearts dissolve into a tear?
Do not your eyes like to a Fountain stream?
And all your Joys, turn to a mourning theme?
Does not your nightly rest from you depart?
Are you not pierced to the very heart?
Are you not in the depth of bitterness,
Because of Sion and her sore distress?
How can your hearts delight in things below?
How can you sleep in peace as others do?
How can we comfort have, or pleasure, find?
Or how can we the Worlds concernmen^s mind?
How can we eat or drink with hearts content,
And not with grief poor Sions state lament?
How can we bear our Mothers doleful cries,
She sighs, she sobs, she la^guishes, she dies,
In dreadful Agonies, in bitter pain,
How can we brook her Enemies disdain?
She is reproached by every Drunken Sot,
And thrown away like to a broken Pot.
She is despised and trod upon like Dung,
The Drunkard on her makes his daily Song:
But Christ will turn and will expostulate
The Case with Sion, touching her Estate.
Why art thou sometimes up, then down again?
Sometimes at ease, sometimes in bitter pain?
They Are doubtless throws, cheer up and do not fear
For thy deliverance is very near.
Those laboring pangs shall speedily be over,
Fear not thou shall not dye, one, or two more
Shall bring that Child into the World, which thou
Have traveled with in bitter pangs till now.
Address thy self to God, for surely he
From these thy Tortures will deliver thee,
It Is he alone that brings unto the Birth,
And does give strength and vigor to bring forth:
Then stay thy self upon this blessed Lord,
His gracious help he will to thee afford,
Upon his Promises do thou depend,
And thou shall see deliverance in the end.
These words of comfort like a Cordial wrought
And to her senses, mourning S ion brought^,
With languish^d looks, she casts a weeping Eye
Upon her Children, and renues her cry.
SION.
I Am afraid my God has me forsook,
My sighs he minds not, scarce bestows a look.
His former pity, he has quite forgot,
His anger's kindled and his wrath is hot;
When that burns sore, how can I choose but mourn?
How am I spoiled, how am 'rent and torn?
I Am like a Ship with raging Tempest tossed
Midst Rocks and Sands, just ready to be lost:
Where every Billow does present a Grave,
And Death in triumph rides on every wave.
Ah! but I am, engraven on his hand,
And in his sight for evermore shall stand.
Awake, O Arm of God, and do not stay,
My sorrows are so great, O say not nay,
Hear me, de^r Jesus, unto thee ^^crie,
Unless thou save me, I must surely die.
CHRIST.
IN glorious Regions of approachless light
Where Joys unmixt with perfect love unite:
There do I sit there do I see and hear
What Kings and Potentates consulting are,
Resounding in m^ne Ears continually,
I hear a bitter, and complaining cry.
I feel my Bowels with compassion move,
And therefore it is the voice of one I love,
She whom I purchased with my dearest blood,
Seems ^rencht in tears and drowned in a flood.
Some grievous sorrow, or great tribulation,
Extorts from her this doleful lamentation,
Enough to pl^^ce my tender heart again.
And make the Temple rend once more in twain.
Alas poor Sion! thy sad voice I hear,
(...) come and help thee, for I know thy fear,
And what occasions these thy lanquid Moans,
I know thy sorrow, and I hear thy Groans.
It Is I can still the blustering Winds and Seas,
And in thy greatest Anguish give thee ease.
It Is I can wound, and curo; I build, I break,
I kill, I make alive; I give and take
And can (if I think fit) make Nations shake,
And Kingdoms totter, reeling to and fro:
I for thy sake, strange things will quickly do.
In thy affliction, great distress and pain,
Of which thou do so grievously complain,
I am afflicted: what they do to thee,
Of hurt or wrong I take as done to me;
I tender thee as the apple of mine Eye,
Fear not therefore, thy proudest Enemy.
Although with Foes thou art environed now,
All power and wisdom's mine; and I know how
To strengthen thee, and make them all to bow.
I will arise and show my Sovereignty;
I Will make them to the Rocks and Mountains fly;
Though with the powers of hell they have combined
I will pursue them, and they shall not find
A hiding place my vengeance to avoid,
Till by my fury they be all destroyed
I will bring down each high and lofty head,
Their mighty ones like Mortar I will tread.
Thy cause ^le plead, though silent I have stood.
He be revenged for all the righteous blood,
That has run down like to a mighty flood.
And therefore now, He make no long delay,
What Is due to Justice, they shall surely pay;
Besides the bloody wrongs thou do repeat
The crying Martyrs loudly do entreat
Me to av^nge their blood, therefore I will
Come down in fury, and those Monsters kill;
Then, thou before me very strong shall wax,
For ^^e make thee my dreadful Battle ax.
Thy Horn shall Iron be and thy hoof Brass,
With which thou shall tread down the Serpents race,
Thy Sons that scattered over the Earth throughout,
I will soon gather with a mighty shout.
The mighty they shall overcome with sl^ngs,
And bind in Fetters persecuting Kings,
He lay thy stones with Colors fair and sure,
Thy strong Foundation shall be Saphyrs pure:
Although I seemed to have forsaken thee,
Yet from all bondage I will set thee free,
Though I have thee afflicted heretofore,
He turn my hand upon the bloody Whore;
Because thou do my holy Name profess.
He break in pieces them that thee oppress:
Armed with Commission from the great Jehove,
I will come down and all thy Griefs remove.
All Weapons formed against my Sion, shall
Unprosp'rous prove, for I will break them all.
I Will teach thy Children, give thee lasting Peace,
Converted Gentiles shall the Church increase.
Though wicked Men with words do thee deride,
Thy Borders I Will enlarge on every side.
Each hungry Soul with plenty I will feed,
The Earth I will divide among thy Seed.
I Have promised that they shall the World possess,
And will perform it now in righteousness.
I will descend unto my Holy Hill,
The Earth with knowledge I will quickly fill.
I will suppress all Luxury and Riot,
The Heathen in my presence shall be quiet.
Above all Kings I shall exalted be,
And rule the Earth with Sovereign Majesty.
When all the Kingdoms in the World are mine,
Then thou in Beauty like a Queen shall shine;
And with thy Children in sweet consort sing,
Triumphant Hallelujahs to your King.
SION.
O Matchless Grace, and Love beyond degree!
Now I am certain there is none like Thee,
In Heaven or Earth, were there ten thousand more
For thou have found a Salve for every Sore.
Transported by thy Love, with joy I cry,
My Ravished Spirit must exalt the high
And mighty Lord, by whose unbounded grace,
My hearts enlarged to run the blessed Race;
Thou shall conduct me to thy Living Springs.
From thence I Will mount up, as with Eagles Wings,
Unto the Heavenly Mount of Faith's desire,
Where I thy Grace and Glory will admire:
Then I Will descend from those Abodes above,
To be embraced in the Arms of love.
I Will hold thee fast, and never let thee go,
For by thy loss, O what a Depth of Woe
Did I sustain! in what a dreadful case
Was I, when thou did hide thy glorious face!
Thee having, though naught else, what have I not?
Without thee, though all else, what have I got?
Lord having all things, and not thee, what have I?
Let me enjoy but thee, what further crave I?
Without thee nothing is of worth to me:
All things are vile -- when once compared to thee.
To be thy portion, Lord, thou did me choose,
And thou my Portion art: I Will never refuse
So rich a Grace: thou art my Heritage,
Thou art a God of Love from Age to Age,
And therefore evermore I Will d well with thee,
For thou alone, my hiding place shall be,
In time of trouble and of fury great,
I will unto thy holy Name retreat;
Which is a sure defense to all that fly
With care and speed from their iniquity.
When I was down, thou list'st me up on high,
and I thy Name will therefore magnify.
^^ Lord, with Patience I will undergo
Their indignation, for I well do know
I have provoked thy great and glorious Name,
Which is the cause that I do suffer shame:
Although at present I am low and mean,
Poor and despised, and so long time have been;
Thou can all Sorrows to thy Sion bless,
I therefore in thy pleasure acquiesce;
I Will wait upon thee till thou do arise
To break in pieces all mine Enemies:
My precious Cause then I do leave with thee,
Which thou, O Lord, wi^t surely plead for me;
Thy Voice is, to my ravished Soul so sweet,
That I Am revived, and set upon my feet:
I Will speak thy Praise in Songs, because I see
That Glory near, which thou have promised me.
And now thou bloody Whore, that art my Foe,
My tim^'s at hand, which thou shall quickly know.
My God has not forsaken me, for now
He will advance me, and make thee to bow:
Then shall thou hide (for shame) thy filthy head,
Whilst I, in Triumph, shall upon thee tread;
Because so long, thou have upon me trod,
And in Contempt have said, Where is thy God:
He will therefore in Right retaliate,
And bring just Vengeance on thy cursed Pate.
BABYLON.
POOR Sion! thou art much mistaken:
I Am mounted high, thou art forsaken:
Sure thou art Frantic, when thou do
Make such a vain and groundless boast:
The final Conquest must be mine,
And swift D^struction must be thine.
For all my Wounds I Have got a Cure,
From all your Darts I am secure.
I am arrived at height of Bliss.
My Glory in its Zenith is.
I am a Queen, and shall remain
Supreme on Earth, I only reign
In glit^'ring Grandeur over all.
Great Monarchs Me their Mistress call:
How can I fall, when such a Prop
Supports, as my Lord God the POPE?
All Men on Earth, his Vassals are,
Who sits in Peter's holy Chair:
The Empire of the World he has,
He keeps the Keys of Hell and Death.
Do think he fears the little tricks
Of thy small brood of Heretics?
He can make use (when he does please)
Of Peter's Sword, as well as Keys.
His Canons ro^r, as loud as Guns,
To crush thy feeble Pigmy-Sons.
Let but his Bull s give an Alarm,
He Will make all Christendom to Arm
Themselves in my defense, and work
Thine Overthrow; did thou not lurk
Some hundred Years, that none could see,
Or know, what was become of thee?
He that could rend thy force asunder,
Has still the Strength to keep thee under;
He will thee in subjection keep,
So that thou shall not dare to peep.
Am I not armed with the power
Of all the Earth? I can devour
Your Interest at a single Mess,
I have fit Cooks such Meals to dress;
The Imperial and the Regal Sword
Are brandished when I give the word;
Great Princes, Dukes and Nobles will
With all their force My Mind fulfill:
My Gentry who brave Heroes are,
Resolved be no pairs to spare,
Their Very Lives they will freely spend
To bring my purpose to an end:
My Brisk Mounsieurs, My Spanish Dons
Will over match thy silly Sons:
My Rogue; in Grain, I ready have,
Obedient like a Turky-Slave:
If bid to thrust their bloody Knives
In throats of Fathers, Children, Wives,
In any's but their (...) they will do it,
And lay them sprawling at my Foot.
I Have Teagues and Torys at my beck,
Will wring their heads as Chickens Neck:
Tried Villains! that will never start
From Mothers Womb to tear the heart
Of Unborn Infants; they will D^flour,
Then rip her up in half an hour:
Faint Rogues will melt with qualms of fears
At Fathers Groans, or Mothers tears:
But mine are void of any sense,
Not plagued with bawling Conscience.
To some I give no constant pay,
Yet they can bunt and live by Prey.
Your Infant, that (like Carps) are stewed
In their own blood, their Chops have chewed.
The Fathers Cawls shall make a light
For those sweet Banquets of the Night.
What ere my greedy S^^ack craves,
But Nod, it is done, by ready Slaves:
They know no Scruples nor dispute,
But act just like a Turkish Mute.
Besides all these, I could describe
Vast Musters of my Sacred Tribe:
My Clergy makes a numerous Host,
That wait in Swarms in every Coast.
Yea, even in all Rebellious Regions,
I have in secret Armed Legions:
A Great Grandee my Ensign carries,
The Jesuits are my Janisaries.
Thou see what Troops do guard my Chair,
What can thou do then but Despair?
Thou s^est me loag'd in safe abode,
Whilst thou're forsaken by thy God.
He Is doubtless pleased with my behavior,
For I alone have got his Favor.
The Apocalyptick Prophecy
Tou falsely do to me apply;
For I from Sin am washed clean;
Thou art the Whore, be there does mean:
I am the Church, and therefore I,
Thy Threats, thy GOD, and Thee, Defy.
SION.
LEave off, leave off, thou Bloody minded Whor^
Imagine not that thou shall Evermore
Thus Dom^neer in Pomp and saw^y Pride,
For God e're long, thy Rulers will divide.
Those Mighty Ones, in whom is all thy Trust,
Long shall not hold, but into pieces must
Be surely broken: thou shall quickly see
The swift beginning of thy Misery.
Those that did love thee most, will hate thee so,
That they will seek thy utter Overthrow;
As was their Love, their hatred then will be,
And to destroy thee they will all agree.
Thou have inslay'd them to thy brutish Lust,
Whilst they (like simple Fools) in no wise durst
Offend or cross thy base and bloody mind;
That they have been b^witcht, they then will find.
By thine alluring Voice, and lustful Eye,
To join with thee in black iniquity.
Thy Flatterys shall then no more deceive;
Nor thy base Whoredoms, Thousands more b^rev^
Of inward peace, and outward riches, so
As they have been, to their eternal Wo^
Then shall they see thy Villainous intent,
In setting them against the innocent.
To Glut thy base Adulterous Desire.
Their sinful hearts were in a flaming Fire.
And through the instigation of the Devil,
Became partakers of this monstrous Evil.
But, what approaches? Hark! methinks I hear
Some Dreadful Noise! see how the Mountains tear
And Mighty Hills do into pieces fly;
Whilst Lig^ining flashes through the angry sky;
The Stars and Planets in Confusion hurled,
Have banished Natures Order from the world.
See how the melting Orbs of heaven sweat, (heat,
Like Parchment Parcht, and shrivel'd up with
Loud Thunder-cracks through the enraged Air,
With frightful Aspects Meteors do appear,
To usher in the Day of heavens dreadire
On those, who do against the Saints conspire.
Gods (long incensed) Majesty is come
To judge the Whore, and pass her final Doom.
Of Treason she is under an Attainder,
For which impartial Justice will arraign her.
She Is seized upon, and in the Jaylors hands,
Who only waits for Justices Commands.
Jehovah bids, that Babylon the great
Be forthwith brought before his Judgment Seat.
JUSTICE:
MOst Sovereign Lord, who is it dares gainsay
What thou command'st? I must and will obey,
^o here I bring the Scarlet Strumpet forth
Before the who createdst Heaven and Earth:
Thy Judgment Seat she seems to slight and scorn,
Says she is as guiltless as the Child unborn.
JEHOVAH.
H Er Crimes lay open, and her Facts declare,
Turn up her Skirts and let her Faults appear:
Let th'Universe by her Indictment see
The Cause of my most just Severity.
JUSTICE.
DRead Sovereign of the World! I will proceed,
And will her black Indictment loudly read.
Come forth great Whore! and hear your dismal charge
Which shall by proofs be evidenced at large.
By th'Name of BABYLON, you are hither cited,
And by the Name of Whore, thou stand'st Indicted.
Thou void of Grace, and Gods most ^oly Fear,
To ^atans Mach^^ations d^^st adhere;
With him to p^ot against thy Sov'e^gn Prince,
To whom thou oug^^' toy (...) Pr^h^m^n^nce.
In (...) (...) was thine only (...)
(O^ Holy Law no B^g^^^ a^ows)
Yet thou have him pe^f^^iously fo^look,
And to thy self another H^^band took;
And with a graceless Impude^c^ ar^ (...)
By thy l^wd ^rain to an (...) (...).
Thou have d^thron'd him and thy B^az^n face
Sets up a monstrous Trai^or in his place,
To whom thou have Blasphemous T^tle^ given,
Exalting him above the God of Heaven.
Thou have not only played the A^ulteress,
B^t pl^in Ia^latry thou d^^^ pro^ess;
O^ Treason, ^ur^er, Th^^t, (^^horred things!
O^ burning Cities, poisoning of Kings,
Of undermining States, and furthermore,
Of spoiling ^rade, and making Kingdoms poor;
Of hor^id Plots, of causeless bloody Wars,
And of contriving cruel Massacres
Thou guilty art; thy bloody Rage has hurled
Millions of Innocents out of the World:
Prodigious Numbers have in diverse Lands
Been Sacrificed by thy blood-thirst^ hands,
Insatia^e B^^cheries that know n^ end!
Thou flab^'st men when thou Pity did pretend.
In times of Peace thy horrid rage has shed
Blood without Measure, thou have murtuered.
(Perfidious Wretch!) thy nearest Neighbors when
They thought themselves the most secure of men,
Thou have made Currents of their guiltless blood
To run like Waters of a mighty Blood;
So void of Pity, your inhumane Rage
Destroyed the Saints, and spared no Sex nor Age.
Speak Bloody Whore, hold up thy Graceless Head,
Guilty or Not? By Law thou art to Plead.
BABYLON.
Look down, Blessed Virgin! and bid Justice stay:
Speak to thy Son to drive my Foes away:
You Glorious Saints, who near St. Mary stand,
In my distress, lend me your helping hand.
All Angels, and Arch-Angles I invoke,
To strengthen me, and to divert the stroke:
These Heretics will work my Overthrow,
I am amazed, I know not what to do!
BRLZEBUB.
WHat needs my Darling thus to stand and pause
Thou know the Custom of out Romish Laws,
Though black as Hell, yet be not so forlorn;
Swear, that thou'^t guiltless, as the Cild unborn.
What Violence to Heretics you do,
Is lawful, honest, and your Duty too.
JUSTICE
PLead Vile Delinquent! or thou shall receive
The Fatal Sentence which I am to give.
BABTLON
I Do affirm the Charge is false, and I
All Points of this Indictment do deny.
Produce your Proofs, I Will stand in just defense
Of my apparent, spothss Innocence.
JUSTICE.
THat like a Harlot, of thine own accord,
^h^u have forsaken thine Espoused Lord,
Will be made evident (to thy disgrace)
By clear probation in its proper place.
You say, that you your God can daily make,
Which is an Idol of a Wafer c^^e.
If thou do Shrines, and Images adore,
And proved to be the Apocalyptick Whore;
If thou upon the Scarlet Beast does sit,
And Lewdness with so many Kings commit;
It clearly follows from these Marks, that thou
Art a mere strumpet, and have broke thy Vow.
If thou art by the Papal Edicts led,
Disowning Christ, and making that thy Head:
The consequence is clear, for thou must be
Guilty of Whoredom and Idolatry.
And to examine thy notorious Deeds:
This great Tribunal out of hand proceeds:
Call in the Witnesses --
Waldenses. Albig^nses. Protestants of Piedmont. Savoy, etc.
D Read Lord! we are here,
And with our just Complaints do now appear.
That bloody Whore, the Prisoner at the Bar,
Has followed us with a perpetual War,
Because we would not to her Idols bow,
Nor her cursed Edicts and base pranks allow.
About the dismal year of Fifty five,
A dreadful Massacre she did contrive
Within the Territories of Savoy,
Where thirty thousand Souls she did destroy
In three days time cursed Edicts bid them turn
To Popery, or they must hang or burn.
Which when those Innocents refused to do,
Most horrid Execution did ensue;
Our Brethrens Brains out of their heads were beaten
And by her Imps were fried and after eaten:
Our Children rent to pieces, thrown to Dogs,
And our dear Pastors flung (as Meat) to Hogs;
Others on Pikes into the Air were tossed,
An^ many others they alive did roast;
Some ^y'd with Ropes they piere'd unto the hearts,
And hung up others by their Secret parts.
Houses and Barnfulls they have burnt, so that
Our Sufferings are beyond an Estimate.
Bohemia. Germany. Poland. Lithuania, etc.
TO satisfy this cruel Strumpets Lust,
Some thousands have been turned unto du^^
Our Towns and famous Cities of Renown
She has dis-peopled, burnt or broken down:
The Ruins still appear, and desolations
In many places of our spoiled Nations.
Great Multitudes un numbered were our Slain
Which in the Field unburied did remain:
Our Brethren they have hung upon a Beam
And then consumed them in a lingering flame.
Some she has into boiling Cauldrons put,
And many others into pieces cut,
Without respect unto the Hoary Head,
Into their Throats they poured down melted Lead;
And many other deaths she did contrive:
Some burned were, and others flead alive.
into deep Mines, three thousand Souls and more,
At several times were tumbled by this whore,
Because they would not their Religion leave,
And unto Romish Superstitions cleave,
That worthy Man John Hu^s, was burned to death,
For owning of the Apostolic Faith;
Ferom of Prague to fill her Measure up,
She made, soon after, drink of the same cup,
'I were endless to enumerate our grief;
From thee, just Judge, we do expect Relief.
FRANCE.
AH! How shall I my inward grief disclose!
What Tongue is able to recount my woes?
Prodigious Numbers of my Natives have,
By this whores means, sound an untimely Grave.
The barbarous Harlot would not be content,
To kill or drive them into Banishment,
But with unheard of Cruelties she must
Their Bodies mangle, to assuage her Lust;
Some hanged in Water, yield their strangled breath;
Some brained on Anvils, some were starved to death;
Some hall'd with Pullies, till the top they meet
With heavy weights and loads upon their feet.
Rap's Maidens ^^ab'd, poor in ants yet unborn,
From Mothers wombs by blooay hands mere torn
How many thousand guiltless Christians were
Butchered in the Parisian Massacre?
Some broke on Crosses, some were cut in twain,
Whilst others languish in a lingering pain,
Our worthy Kings have lost their Noble Lives
By Jesuits Poisons, and by Monkish Knives.
I can produce an uncontrolld Record
Of many Thousands Murdered by the Sword.
It would require whole Volumes to transcribe
The bloody acts of this Infernal Tribe.
Deep dolor hinders what I would say more!
O glorious Judge! avenge me on this Whore.
Italy, Spain, Portugal, Low Countries, etc.
REnowned Judge! those witnesses that have
Their Grief presented and do Judgment crave,
Save us much labor, sor we heretofore
Have felt the same, from this blood-thirsty Whore.
Besides, being next her Seat, and near her power,
Her greedy Jaws our Brethren did devour
With cruel Spite, and without intermission,
We have been tortured with her Inquisition.
No Tongue can speak the unexampled terror
Of that cursed Pattern of Infernal horror.
They count it mild, when they our Persons burn,
And wives and children into ashes turn;
They say they are courteous when our throats they cut
Or when in Dungeons (vile as H^ll) we are put.
They say they favor us, when they employ
Their Daggers, Pistols, A^es to destroy.
In ^in^ting flames they did our Brethren roast,
On Ha berts tops we saw our Insants tossed:
All this we have suffered, and a thousand more,
And that by means of this Infernal Whore.
IRELAND.
Could deepest grief receive Additions, I
Wou^d give examples of ^er Cruelty.
I can her in more mon^trous colou^s draw,
T^an bloody Nero, o, C^^^ula.
Th^e horrid ^ortures which my Brethren say
She exer^s'd on them, the ^am I may
Affirm to have suffered, by the in^tigation
Of this vile S^rumpet, who^e abomination
Stinks in the Nostrils' of each civil Nation.
Her cur^ed Priests, when first they did begin
Our Mass cre^proc^aim'd it was a sin
Unpardon^ble, if they durst to give
Quarter, or our necessities relieve;
Some they stripped naked, then they bid them go
Through Bogs and Mountains, in the Frost and Snow.
Men, W^m n, Children, then were butchered,
And all that spoke our Language punished;
The very Cattle, if of English breed,
They ^li^^t and mangled, that they could not seed.
With joy, that Romish, and rebellious Brood
Have washed their hands in Martyred English blood.
Thousands of naked Protestants that fled
From these Barbarians have been famished.
Their faithless Gentry, that pretended love;
Persuaded the English that they would remove
Their Goods to them; Yet (once possession got)
They (like persidious wretches) cut their Throat.
Numbers of naked Women they did drive
Into a Barn, and burnt them all alive.
Each Sex and Age, that could not from them fly,
Did by these Blood ho^nds, without mercy die.
Once at the fatal Bridge of Portladown,
A thousand Souls these Mil^reants did drown;
A couple (with five Children) first they hung,
And in a Hole th'expi^ing bodies slung;
The youngest on the Mothers breast d^d stick,
Cries, Mammy, Mammy, yet is buried quick.
Some hack to pieces, travailing Women strip, d,
And half born infants from their bellies ripped!
Which (with their Mothers) ^ungry Dogs did eat
And Swine sed on them, as on common meat.
When some poor Souls in burning houses cry,
The V^llains said, How sweetly do they fry!
When holy Scripture in the flames did cast,
They cry, It Is Hellfire, and a lovely blast;
That blessed Book, when some have trampled on,
They cry, Plague on it that has the mischief done.
They made poor Wives, their Husbands blood to spill
And trembling Youths, their aged Parents kill.
They forced the Son to stab his D^arest Mother,
And then one Brother to destroy the other.
Some they put fast in Stocks, then teach a Brat
To rip them, and make Candles of their Fat.
How many Virgins did they Ravish first?
Then with their Hearts-blood quench their eager thirst^
Some they did bury just unto the head,
And left them on surrounding Grass to feed.
Stuck fast on Ten^er-hooks; grave Matrons were;
And Virgins hanged up in their Mothers hair.
Some, with their small Guts, forced were to run
About a Tree, until their Life was gone.
The Mouths of godly Ministers they cut
Unto their Ears; betwixt their Jaws they put
A monstrous Gag, then with a Romish scoff
They bid them Preach, their mouths were large enough.
In these furies bragged, (that to their joy)
They did two hundred thousand Souls destroy,
We therefore pray, as others did before,
For a just Sentence on this bloody Whore.
SCOTLAND:
O Monstrous horror! Oh abhorred sink
Of Villainy! O bloody Throats that drink
The Bloods of Innocents! which ost they quaft
As freely as a common Mornings Draught!
Thousands of mine were butchered by this Whore;
In that poor Nation, that has spoke before:
The sufferings of my guiltless Natives, were
Equal with theirs in every tittle there.
^et this blood thirsty Curtezan of Rome,
^as not content, but tortured me at home,
^ome burnt, some hanged, some scourged, some banished,
^ome drowned, and some in Dungeons murdered,
^ sinking G^^et forbics me to enlarge,
^r e ^e with ease l'd aggravate^e change.
Since Gospel light did in my Borders shine,
^he thirsted to destroy both me and mine.
^er lmps all parts, like filthy Locusts fill.
And such as they cannot delude, they kill,
Her Wolves put on the habit of my Sheep,
And in their Folds destroy them as they sleep.
They have an art to work upon the weak.
That they Gods Order should in pieces break,
Under pretenses of reformed Devotion,
They instigate the Rabble to Commotion;
That in those troubled Waters they may fish,
And bring about their long expected w^sh.
Their cursed Politics have been employed,
To ruin those that they have so decay'd^^^
A thousand Forgeries they do invent,
To charge their Plots upon the innocent,
That (whilst they act the Rogues in Masquerade)
Poor guiltless Saints the Victims may be made.
Thus have I opened something of my Grief,
And from the Judge expect a quick relief.
ENGLAND.
HAD I as many Tongues at my commands,
As Argus Eyes, Briareus Hands;
I fearce could in a Century express
One half of my unspeakable distress!
In every Age I had some Sons of Light.
That would discover Romes Egyptian Night;
Yet they no sooner on the Stage appear,
But that her Setting Dogs, like Blood hounds, were
Upon the scent, and never left pursuit,
Until to death they did them persecute,
My Royal Edicts this bold Whore has broke,
And on my neck clapped her Tyranick yoke.
Vast Treasures from my Natives were extorted,
And to enrich her Exchequer transported.
Prodigious Sums she yearly squeezed hence,
For Pardons, Obits, Annals, Peter Pence.
And though each Land where she her triumphs led
Whose swarms of Locusts, Priests and Friars were ^ed.
These (as the Fanizaries to the Turk)
Were faithful Slaves still to promote her work:
Whilst to maintain these Drones, she swept away
The Fat and Wealth of Nations for their prey.
Such as would not be by her Witch craft led
Were tortured, murdered, burnt or Massacred.
The Papal Beast could in a Frolic tell,
I was his Fountain inexhaustible.
^he planted Priests, and Ganimedes she rooted,
Within my Bowels, which the Land polluted;
With such a pest of vile Debaucheries,
As Pagans, Turks, and Infields outvies.
She crushes any that her Acts opposes;
My Kings she Poisons, Murders or Deposes.
Some she deludes her Sov'raignty to own,
And does instruct them to betray the Crown.
Her lurking lmps do menace me with storms,
Like Egypts Frogs in pestilential swarms.
She is so greedy nothing will suffice,
Unless I Am more a general Sacrifice.
It Is known to all the Earth, how many ways
She martyred Protestants in Marian days.
Then was I made a dismal Field of Blood,
Which ran like currents of a swelling flood.
She stirs the Spaniard in a great bravado.
For to invade me with his proud Armado.
The hellish powder Treason she prepares,
At once to blow up Commons, Kings and Peers.
Her hellish Brands (without a spark of pity)
Consumed to ashes my Imperial City.
Naught but my Ruin her can satiate,
My Justices she does assa^sinate.
For many years she has been carrying on
A damn d intreague for my Destruction.
And all the ways that Satan prompts her to
Contrive my fall, she is ready still to do.
Her spite and malice nothing will abate,
Its still more deadly and inveterate.
Dread Providence shall ever have my thanks;
That has discovered her infernal pranks;
Yet I am still in danger, and therefore
Do b^g just sentence on this bloody Whore,
The Evidence Summed up.
O Gulf of horror! O profound Ab^ss!
Was ever mischief half so black as this!
Thou monstrous Whore, what language can express
The boundless measure of thy wickedness.
Throughout the Earth thou have such mischie^ wrought
As is amazing to a humane thought.
It would compel a heart of stone to melt,
When it revolves what Protestants have felt.
Thy bloody fury and infernal rage,
Has persecuted them in every age.
Thou m^d'st the Magistrates their Enemies,
And all the tortures which thou could devise,
Thou did inflict as testimony shows,
Some thou did hang by the Head, some by the Toes,
Some Millions thou did burn and broil on Coals,
And others starve to death in stinking holes.
Some thou did cut to pieces very small,
And Infants Brains did dash against the wall.
Upon their bodies thou did tread like dung,
Thou had no mercy upon old or young.
By thy cursed crew were Women ravished,
Who then (like Butchers) knocked them on the head.
Some had their Eyes and Tongues by thee pulled out
Some were made harborless, and forced about
To wander, till in Woods and dismal Caves
They found their wosul and untimely Graves.
What rocky heart but justly may admire
Thy rage, that made poor Children to set fire
To fatal piles in which their Parents dear
In cruel ^lames consumed to ashes were.
Thy wicked Agents have some Millions slain,
Who did endure the most inhumane pain,
Thy Bishops, Monks, and Friars could devise.
Whose blood to me for speedy Vengeance cries.
The ways thou took'st to run a Soul from error
Was unexampled flesh-amazing terror
Of horrid R^cks whereon a Man must lie,
Tortured to death, and dying cannot die.
Accursed wretch, did thou not give Commission
For to erect thy bloody Inquisition?
That loathsome Dungeon and most ghastly Cell,
A place of horror representing Hell,
Where nothing is so plentiful as tears,
Where Martyred Protestants can find no ears
To hear their cries and lamentable moans,
Nor hearts to pity their extorted groans;
Where Saints in Torments all their days must spend
Not knowing when their sufferings will have end.
Thousands by thee were in Bohemia slain.
Whose Carkassos unburied did remain.
Thou made thy Vassals fall upon that Nation,
On no less penalty than their Damnation.
Did thou ^ot promise upon that condition
To give them full and absolute remission,
The vilest wretch that on the Earth has stood,
You ^ully pardoned, if he would shed the blood
Of one Bohemian; O stupendous rage!
Not to be paralleled in any age,
But by thy self, 'twas judged De Alva's Crime
That he destroyed no more in six years time
Then eighteen thousand Souls; were they so few
In the account of this blood-thirsty crew!
But if the Wretch ( De Alva's) bloody bill
Come short in numbers, yet his hand did fill
It up with torments; dreadful to rehearse,
The very mention cannot choose but pierce
A M^rble heart, make ^nfidels relent,
Torments that none but Devils could invent,
But it all this was over little still,
His Predecess^rs did enlarge the Bill;
For from the time thy hellish Inquisition
Did from the Devil first receive Commission;
^y cruel torments (which they still retain)
There were a hundred fifty thousand slain,
From that black Season when the hellish rage
Of Jesuits acted on the European Stage.
In England, France, in Italy and Spain,
By thy accursed bloody hands were slain
Nine hundred thousand Souls, or thereabout,
(E're many years had run their circuits out)
O^ poor Americans by cruel Spain
In fifty years were many Missions slain.
The poor Waldenses whose enlighted eye
Thy filthy Whoredoms quickly did espy.
Thou have with raging Persecutions rent
And murdered Parents with their innocent
And harmless Babes, thy more than barbarous crew
Their cursed hands did in their blood imbrue;
At once were eighty Infants famished,
And many thousands basely Murdered.
When some have fled unto obscurest Caves,
Thy Villains made their hiding place their Graves.
What part of Europe now can make their boast,
And say they have not tasted (to their cost)
Of thy malignity? What shall I say
Of Germany, whose Martyred Spirits pray
For speedy Vengeance on thy cursed head?
That Sea of blood thou have in Ireland shed,
C^ies night and day for Justice; now I fix
My serious thoughts upon black sixty six,
Thou bloody Strumpet, how can thou repair
The loss of England's great Imperial Chair,
How many rich men were to Beggars turned,
When that brave ^sles Metropolis was burned
By thy accursed lmps, Firebrarnds of Hell,
Inc^rnate Devils without parallel.
Brave Merchants of their great Estates be^est,
To day Rich Men, tomorrow nothing left;
Their Wives and Children h^rbourless became,
Their Substance all consumed in the flame.
But to conclude, I have not yet forgot
Thy Powder Treason, nor thy Modern Plot:
Nor all thy dismal Villainies that were
Done ^n the Marinaolian Massacre.
Should I but recapitulate thy charge,
And speak of all thy Rogueries at large
'Twould fill vast Volumes; Often did I see
The Lord of Life was Crucisy'd by thee
When his dear Members blood by thee was shed,
Millions unnumbred ^afely Murdered.
Yet still thou have the impudence to say
That thou art innocent unto this day.
Thou shameless Courtezan, did thou not run
With filthy Panders, and renounced the Son
Of Glory, this did thine Espousals break;
Can thou deny it, shameless Strumpet, speak.
BABYLON.
I Am the Mother Church, and hence deny
That filthy Name I am Indicted by.
The odious Epithets of Scarlet whore,
Is daily laid unjustly at my door.
I am Christ's Church, his Spouse, and only Love,
His undefiled one and spotless Dove.
Pray then forbear the Sentence, look about
To find that Whore and Grand Delinquent out.
Bold Heretics, who never would adhere,
To the true Faith and Apostolic Chair.
Have born my just rebukes, some more, some less,
As was their Pride, Rebellion, Wickedness.
JUDGE.
THOU graceless Wretch, thou art b^rest of shame
How durst thou thus deny thy proper Name.
Christ's Church, his Members never did annoy,
Nor persecute, and Millions thus destroy.
It Is to no purpose for thee to dispute,
For all thy Forgeries I can confute.
I am thy Judge, and never will pass by
Thy horrid Acts, and bloody Villainy.
The time's at hand when I Will fulfill my word,
And in just fury draw my glittering sword:
My frown shall make thy proud foundation quake;
And all the Pillars of thy House I Will shake.
Do think because I did forbear so long,
That I Will revenge not my dear Childrens wrong.
What I resolve to do or will command,
No Pope nor Devil can the same withstand.
He that presumed great Monarchs to depose.
Shall soon be tumbled down by some of those
Whom he so crushed; from Hell he did ascend,
And thither shall be slung down in the end.
He Will surely fall and never rise again;
The hope thou have of him is th re^ore vain.
There Is no recalling of the Sentence gone,
Thy Execution day approaches on;
Thy Pardon-Merchants then shall cry and bowl
And thy Destruction (in this sort) condole.
'Illustrious City thou were great and sair,
'Most brave and sumptuous, even beyond compare.
'Alas! how quickly are thy Judgments come,
' Thy fall, thy ruin, and thy final Doom.
'Our Trade is gone, our gainful Merchandise
'Is lost, and no Man does regard our cries.
'O sad Destruction! we are all undone,
'What shall we do, or whither shall we run?
'O that the Mountains and the Hills would cover
'Ils, till the Vengeance of the Lord be over!
TRUTH.
MOst glorious Judge, since this bold Whore denies
Her filthy lewdness, and Adulteries,
Let me but prove it, and proclaim her shame,
It Is known that (...) a faithful Witness am.
It has been Evidenced by vision clear
That some strange Monster should on earth appear;
Which by imperfect views did first amaze
Sagacious minds when they on it did gaze;
Which made men's Judgments to divide asunder
To see an Object of unusual wonder:
A Woman! City! and a Scarlet Whore!
The like on Earth was never seen before.
A Woman in her pompous glory dressed,
And sitting on a Monstrous horned Beast,
Who is decypher'd by prodigious things;
His ve! Horns (explained) are Crowned Kings.
And then this mighty wonder to complete,
She Is placed on a Seven hilled Seat;
She Is stil^d a Woman, and a Whore, because
She once submitted to Enacted Laws,
As other Women do, when they do wed
A Husband, and enjoy a Marriage Bed.
And who this Woman is, shall now be known,
Her proper Title is ( Great Babylon:)
Who in great Pomp and Royal State does ride,
Excelling haughty Jezebel in Pride:
Who in our modern times has boasting been,
That she rules all men as a mighty Queen,
Trampling on Kings and Crowned Potentates,
Commanding Kingdoms, Common Wealths, and States,
Requiring Subjects blindly to obey,
Pressing the Beast, and Horns to kill and ^lay
At such a rate, as that all Christendom
Like Butchers bloody Shambles are become.
If by this Mark she is not understood,
Neither by Garb, Beast, Actions, or by Blood,
To other ways of proof I Will quickly come
And show this Whore to be the Church of Rome.
The Woman which the Apostle John beheld
Arrayed in Purple, and in Pompupheld
By that Blasphemous, Scarlet colored Beast
That was with Gold and Stones of value dressed;
Holding a Cup full of Abominations,
And black pollutions of her Fornications;
That with great Kings Adultery commits,
And on a Sev'n hill'd Habitation sits,
Re. 17. 18
The holy Angel of the Lord explains
That it is that City which so proudly Reigns
Over the Kings of The Earth; but all these Notes,
And what besides the blessed Spirit quotes,
With Papal Rome exactly do agree,
She therefore must this bloody Strumpet be.
If all the Marks that of this Whore are given
Will not meet any where so plain and even
As on the Church and People I did name,
Then certainly she is the very same;
First, then it is evident that there is none
May be so fi^ly stilled Babylon.
Was Babylon a People of Renown
To that same height the Church of Rome is grown,
Had Babylon a great and peerless King?
This Church can show an Image of that thing:
Did Babylon poor Israel invade?
This Church on Sion the same invades made.
Did Babylon make Salem desolate?
This has brought Sion near to that estate.
Did Babylon make Prophets drink their Tears,
Shake Kingdoms, and fill Peoples hearts with fears?
This Church has done so; yea, and far out done
Her Arch-type and so beyond her run.
Did Babylon the Prophets bear away
Into Captivity, and make a prey
Of all the treasure that her hand could find?
This Papal Church is not a whit behind.
On th'a blessed guides she laid her hellish hands,
Confining them to Prison under Bands;
As if 'twere not enough for her to do,
She seized their persons, and their substance too.
Did Babylon Gods Worship over throw,
Set up anldel, and command to bow?
This Church has done the same, yea, and much more,
Filled heaped Measure, and much ru^n^ng over.
'Twas she that took the Word of God away,
And by a string of Beads taught Men to pray.
She robbed the Laiety of the blessed Cup,
And spoiled the Feast where Children come to Sup,
At the Lords Table where they used to mind
The blessed things the^r Savior le^t behind.
She did set up her Superstitious Mass,
As rank an Idol as yet ever was,
Commanding adoration to be given
Of equal honor with the God of Heaven;
Imposing Vows, unwarranted Traditions,
Implicit Faith, and thousand Superstitions,
Pretended Miracles, apparent Lies,
Damnabl^ Errors, and ^ond Fopperies;
She clogs the Conscience, and to make all well,
Boasts all her Dictates are infallible.
Did Babylon the burning work begin?
Make a hot Furnace? Thrust Gods Worthies in?
This Church herein has driven such a Trade,
That thousands, broiling Martyrs she has made,
She sets the Pope above the holy one,
The great Jehova^ and his blessed Son.
It Is she declares him Universal Head,
It Is she forbids the Bible to be read.
It Is she that first did from the Faith depart,
It Is she that wounded Sion to the heart:
It Is she has been the occasion of all evil,
It Is she advanced the Doctrine of the Devil.
It Is she that taught her Sons to Swear and Lie,
To vouch great Falsehoods, and plain Truths deny.
It Is she that did ^orbid the Marriage Bed,
Whilst her vile Clergy such ill lives have led.
Was it not she that Canon did create.
Commanding plainly to abstain from Meat,
Which God gave license unto all to eat.
If from this charge she can her self defend,
Then may she make the Judge and Law her friend:
Or if she can produce another tribe,
To whom we may this Character ascribe;
With greater clearness than we do to her,
We will consent her Sentence to defer.
JUDGE.
Rome, since thou can not make a fair defense,
And show to all the World thine innocence.
It Is very eviden^^ that all these things,
Have been fulfilled on Kingdoms and their Kings
And now is there no other People be,
That did the like, then thou alone art she.
Let thy denials trouble men no more,
Thou only art the bloody Scarlet Whore.
Therefore in Justice (...) at length am come,
(Being long ^ovok't) to pass thy final doom.
THE SENTENCE.
ROME, Thou have been Indicted by the Name of Mystery, Babylon, Mother of
Harlots, Scarlet colored Whore, and False Church, or pretended Spouse of Jesus
Christ. And found guilty of all these horrid and prodigious Crimes, following:

Thou did first fall from the Holy Religion of God and his Son, which were
established and professed in the Apostles time. Thou did set up the vile
Monster the POPE, the Man of Sin, that soul Blasphemous Beast. Thou did most
sacriligiously give those Attributes and Titles to him, that belong to Jehovah
and the Great Emanuel. Thou made his Decrees in, Wicked Counsels, above the
Laws of God, (the Universal Sovereign) Thou have made void the Laws and
Constitutions of the Gospel, forming whole Nations into Churches, though the
greatest part do she^ themselves the worst of Men. Thou have made Nurseries of
Priests and vile Men, and empowered them to take Confessions for Money, and
forgive sins. Thou have hypocritically abused all sorts of People, by
persuading them that thou have power to hea^ their Souls here, and help them
hereafter, by which cursed frauds thou have drawn a great part of the Riches of
Europe into thine unhallowed hands. Thou have laid Close Siege to the Courts of
Princes, and drawn them into the highest strains of Wickedness, ness, to commit
Fornication, promote Idolatry, and take away the lives of Innocents. Thou have
lay^ in wait (where they would not fulfill thy bloody and barbarons L^sts) to
contrive Treasons, Sedition and Rebellion against them, to Depose and Murder
them by Excommunications, Poisons and Powderplots. Thou have corrupted all
Countries and Kingdoms (where thy power extended) by such down right and
abominable Idolatrys, that Heathens themselves were never guilty of worse. Thou
have not only countenanced Stews and Brothel-Houses, where abominable Sodomy
and Adulteries are practiced, but even thy very Nunneries are become
Habitations of Whoredom and Filthiness, the bottoms of whose M^tes and Ponds,
have showed the Murders of new born Babes. Thou have killed the best Men; thou
have not spared delicate Women, and sucking Children. Thou have made away many
Millions both of Christians and poor Heathens. And after so hellish a sort,
that the best learned Heart and Tongues want Rhetoric to set it forth; thou
have cut them to pieces in ^e^l Blood, thou have chained to Stakes and burnt
them. Thou have ripped up Women with Child, and Ravished Women and Maids -- and
then have barbarously slain them -- Thou have been guilty of burying alive,
Roasting upon Spits, scalding mith burning O^l and boiling Lead -- Blowing
their Heads in pieces with G^^ powder; thou have made Women Widows, Children
Fatherless; Houses and Villages Towns and Cities without Inhabitants. Thou have
destroyed by Fire and Sword and all manner of Hostilities and Outrages. Thou
have fomented Wars he^ixt Kingdoms and Nations. Thou have done thy ^ndeavour to
make all men slaves, but thy own accursed tribe of Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, etc: Thou have Murdered multitudes of Souls, as well as destroyed
multitudes of Bodies. In short, thou have filled the Earth with Corruption, and
loaded it with Oppression, and stand in the way of its promised Deliverance
and Restitution. And for all this Apostasy, Oppressions, Adul^eries,
Fornications, Rebellions, Treasons and Blas^^emies, with the guilt of a mighty
Mass of Innocent blood, which bath been proved against thee, and from which
thou can not defend thy self; and for which, both by the Law of God, Nature
and Nations, thou ought to suffer, thy Sentence therefore is --

Thou shall continue in safe Custody till the 1200 Years be expired, ( which is
now very near) and then thou shall be taken from off the Beast, where thou are
imperiously mounted, thy Golden Cup ( with which thou have deceived the
Nations) shall be taken out of thy hand, and by the Ha^^ of God, the Horns of
the Nations, and Sword, of good Men, thou ^hal^ have these Judgments come upon
thee in one day, Death, Mourning and Famine, and thou shall be utterly burnt
with Fire, like a Woman that has broken Wedlock, and slain her Sovereign; At
which all the Host of Saints and Angels, shall say Amen: Hallelujah.

The Authors Request.
I
Some things, Great God, my Soul does long to have,
Before these transient days of mine be over;
Which things in deep humility I crave,
Before I go from hence, and be no more.
Till my Requests I can of thee obtain,
I shall be filled with sorrow, grief, and pain.
II.
Alas my Griefs are now increased double!
O that thou would be pleased to hear O Lord!
Then should my Soul be freed from inward trouble!
If what I humbly ask thou would afford
Until thy Grace allows me my Request,
I cannot cease, nor give thee any rest.
III
It Is not for fading Riche^^r this World,
Nor empty Honor, ^^at to thee I cry;
Such with a puff are ost to nothing hurled,
They get them wings, and from possessors fly.
All sublunary things uncertain be;
I ask them not, some better things I see.
IV.
It Is not for Pleasures that are transitory,
Which fill vain Fancies with a foolish Joy;
But for some Glimpses of Diviner Glory,
Which my transported Soul longs to enjoy.
Can Riches, Honors, fading Pleasures give
The things I want, whilst on the Earth I live?
V.
The things that I am longing to receive,
Most precious are; O let me humbly urge,
That thou thy presence unto me would give,
My heart from sin that thou would also (...)
These are the things my never ceasing Cry
Petitions for; Lord grant them ever I die.
VI.
Thy presence does more consolate my heart,
Then sweetest Honey, or the Honeycomb:
I will (with Mary) choose the better part;
' It Is Sin my Soul would be delivered from;
Then I thy Name in Songs will magni^^e,
And happy be, when ever I come to die.
VII.
Let thy good Spirit be my blessed Guide,
And in thy House let me for ever dwell;
From Gospel Truths O let me never slide,
Nor find my Conscience like another Hell:
And I thy Name for evermore shall praise
And happy be when I shall end my days.
VIII.
Lord whatsoever my Estate is here,
With sweet Submission let me be content,
When I Am most troubled, then be thou most neat,
And never from me thy dear self absent:
This will my prostrate Spirit highly raise,
And if I suffer, to thy Name be praise.
IX.
(...) me, I pray thee, that Celestial Skill,
My days to number, as thy Saints have done;
Let me still yield unto thy blessed Will,
And wait upon thee till my Glass be run:
So shall my raptured tongue thy praise proclaim
And sing Hosanna's to thy glorious Name.
X
O regulate my tongue, and make me see,
How few my days are, and how short their length,
Let all my tru^^ be still reposed in thee;
Relax thy scourge, or add unto my strength;
Be thou my way, my strength, my light, that I
May learn to live, and in thy favor die.
XI.
When hungry, let thy Manna be my meat,
When circled in the dark, enlighten me;
When I am weary, O! be thou my Seat:
And when imprisoned do thou set me free:
So filld, enlightened, after sweet repose,
Enlarged from Bonds, I will thy praise disclose.
XII.
In time of wrath, when fury waxes great,
Be thou my Bulwark and securest Tower:
To thy transcending Name let me retreat,
And be defended by thy mighty Power.
Secure me till thy Vengeance is past over,
That I thy praises may to all discover.
XIII.
Let me with patience run that blessed Race,
And from my weights, which very sore have bin,
Be now set free, that with a swifter pace
I may the prize of lasting Glory win.
Be thou my Guide, do thou direct my path,
Lord give me patience, and with patience Faith.
XIV.
Thy Children are as (many) Members joined
Which make one body, whose blessed Head thou art,
O cause them with an undivided mind
And perfect Union, to have all one heart:
Then shall I hope to see a blessed increase
Of Sion's Glory, and of Israel's Peace:
XV.
Thy Children have in many things provoked
Thee, but in Mercy pass Offenses by.
By Grace, O Lork, let Judgment be revoked
That they may live thy Name to magnif^e;
And I thy goodness will proclaim to all,
And warning take, lest I my self do fall.
XVI.
Remember Sion in her aching grief,
She mourns, she weeps, and is in inward pain,
Do thou in mercy, send her such relief
That she (with cause) may never more complain;
Then (not till then) my sorrows will be over,
And I thy goodness will to all discover.
XVII.
O let thy Gospel through the Earth be spread!
Rome's black design, O let thy Grace prevent!
Permit not them to grow into a Head,
As they have purposed, with a full intent.
Then shall I (quickened by a holy Flame)
Ascribe the Glory to thy blessed Name.
XVIII.
I pray thee scatter our enraged Foes,
And baffle all who proudly have combined
Against thine Heritage, do thou expose
Them to be tossed as Chaff before the Wind;
Preserve thy Flock from bloody Babels hand,
Establish Truth and Quiet in the Land.
XIX.
O God whose dreadful Judgments are severe.
And whose great Mercy's full of sweet compassion,
Destroy thy Churches Foes both far and near,
And grant to me the joy of thy Salvation;
Then will I spend the remnant of my days.
In Psalms of thanks to thee, and Hymns of praise.
XX.
Make have to judge the Persecuting Whore,
Thy righteous Judgments quickly execute;
Let her so fall that she may rise no more.
O Lord be pleased to grant my earnest suit,
That I may see her fall before I die.
That I thy Name may therefore magnify.
XXI.
O Lord, establish thine own interest,
And set thy Son upon his blessed Throne;
Destroy the Kingdom of the Scarlet Beast,
Let Christ his Foes to conquer now go on,
That on the top of Sion I may sing
Aloud, Hosanna to the Highest King.
XXII.
What thou, O Lord, have to thy Sion told
Of Blessings that thou have for her in store;
Them once fulfilled, O let mine eyes behold,
And then let me go hence and be no more
In this disturbing World, but let me be
Translated to a blessed Eternity.
XXIII.
In all the course of my short Pilgrimage,
Be thou my Load star, let my heedful Eye
Be fixed on the^, that when I leave the Stage,
I may be fitted and prepared to die;
That when this transitory life is over,
With Angels I may sing for evermore.
XXIV.
Whatever of any Suit thou do deny,
Grant me true Faith that I may still believe
That through Christ's Ransom, when I come to die
A Glorious Crown from thee I shall receive,
O Lord of Hosts, vouchsafe me my request,
Let me enjoy but thee, and I will rest;
For having thee, all precious things I have,
And in the World there is nothing else I cr^^s.
An Alarm to the Wise and ^^olish Virgins.
I.
ALL you that fear the Lord give ear
to what I d^ indite,
There is a cry, the Bridegroom's nigh,
it is near the midst of Night.
II.
Rouse up, awake, your Lamps to take,
and longer do not slumber;
You must them trim, to rend on him
into the Wedding Chamber.
III.
You Virgins all, to you I call,
what Oil have you in store?
If you have none, you are undone,
then look to it therefore.
IV.
Watch then always, Our Lord does say,
none knows the day nor hour
Watch carefully, for you are nigh
the day of his great Power.
V.
With speed arise, lift up your Eyes,
the Day Star does appear,
Rise from your Bed, raise up your Head,
Redemption's very near.
VI.
Such as are wise, their time do prize,
preparing for their Lord,
To them he will his Word fulfill
and his sweet smiles afford.
VII.
But Fools do have, their time to wast
In sleep and slothfulness;
Yet such presume, they shall assume
his Glory never the less.
VIII.
But they indeed on fancys ^eed,
'will come to such an Ebb,
That they shall see their hopes will be
like to the Spiders Web.
IX.
They still do keep themselves asleep,
and know not where they be,
Were they awake, how would they quake
their wosul State to see?
X.
You who remain so very vain,
and in a formal state,
And all the wh^le have got no Oil,
you will mo^^ ^en it is too late.
XI.
You who profess, and not possess
the Truth in Life and Power;
Your state is bad, and will be sad
before this day be over.
XII.
You have the Shell, but no Kernel,
the Chaff but not the Wheat
The Husks you take, and do for sake
your Souls most precious Meat.
XIII.
It Is the last Day, O! therefore pray,
and faithful now abide
Unto the Lord with one accord,
and be on the Lambs side.
XIV.
Still have a care, and do not dare
In Babel^o remain;
For it you do, then must you know,
with her you shall be ^^^in.
XV.
Come, have away without delay,
with all speed and endeavor,
Her end is come, her fatal Doom,
therefore your Souls deliver.
XVI.
You now do hear, her Ruin's near,
your Sins therefore forsake,
And you will prevent the punishment
of which she must partake.
XVII.
All her Pleasures and rich Treasures
hate as monstrous evil,
Gods Word does show, who love them do,
shall go unto the Devil.
XVIII.
You must remove, your dearest Love
from Earth, and things thereof;
For this has bin a crying Sin,
now cast it therefore off.
XIX.
On things above, set all your love,
Affections and desire;
These things below, God will o'erthrow
with his consuming Fire.
XX.
Alas poor Souls! be not such Fools
to labor for the Wind,
The Wealth you heap, you shall not keep,
as you e're long will find.
XXI.
You must not rest on Self-Intrest,
but wholly for the Lord,
He Will else at last you surely blast,
according to his Word.
XXII.
There are some Men, cry loud, When, w^^^,
Will thou in Glory come?
But few repent, or do relent,
and pray for his Kingdom.
XXIII.
But such shall see, with them 'twill be
as when one escapes a Bear,
Which being gone, Lions come on,
which do in pieces tear.
XXV.
Subdue your Sin; for it has been
your greatest Enemy:
If that does reign, you strive in vain,
you must it Cru^ifie.
XXV.
(...) Land, there is none shall stand
(...) happy, be indeed,
The (...) those whom God has chose,
(...) on Christ Jesus feed.
XXVI.
(...) therefore cry continually
for Christ and precious Grace
(...) being blessed, you all may rest
when you have run your race.
XXVII.
The great Bridegroom when he does come,
will all such entertain,
And you shall then be happy Men,
and with him ever Reign.
XXVIII.
He Will place you high in Majesty,
your honor shall excel;
^^d so I Will end, who am your Friend
and bid you all farewell.
FINIS.

