THE CROWN and GLORY OF A Christian, Consisting in a Sound CONVERSION And Well
Ordered CONVERSATION.

The Third Edition.

Psalm. 50. 33. To him that orders his Conversation aright will I give to see
the salvation of God. Luke 12.23. Make the tree good, and the fruit will be
good also. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, Printed by Samuel Green for John Griffin:
1684.

Courteous Reader;
T He Authors design was to reduce the whole of Man's Being, Business, and
Blessedness, into as few lines as might be, thereby to invite a sober perusal
of them; as also to let men see, That the Christian Religion is Plain, its
Precepts clear, and its Practice easy, to them on whom God has wrought a
saving Change, or true Conversion; which is the first thing treated of; the
next is, to show the Christian how to carry himself in Natural, Civil and
Religious Duties. If thou read it with a desire of spiritual advantage
(which was the end and prayer of the Author) God may bless it to thee; and both
thou and the Author have cause (as for all his blessings) to praise him for
this.

Farewell.
First, Of Preparation to Christianity.
1. YOu must look upon true Christianity to be of absolute necessity, and an
indispensable duty: you cannot live without it, and you dare not die without
it. Woe to you, if you die before you live; if you die to the world, before you
live to God; and if you go out of the World, before Jesus Christ come into your
heart: be sure that Christ be in you, so may he bring the hope of glory, Col.
1. 27. and that you be in Christ, so must be broke off from the wild olive of
the old Adam, Romans 11. 24. which two makes up the true Christian.

2. You cannot attain to true Christianity, until you be born again, [or from
above] Joh.3. 3,5. until you can experience the death and burial of the old
Adam, and the Resurrection of the New. You must be unmade to sin, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
and then made up again for God. It Is not scraping the walls of the house of the
fretting Leprosy, that will serve the turn, Lev, 14. 14, 44. but all the
Timber, and all the Stones thereof must be thrown down to the ground that a new
building may be ercted in its stead.

3. Be sure, this can never be attained until you come to a sound and saving
knowledge, both of your self and Christ: (1) Of the emptiness and vileness of
your self, so as to deny, abhor and abandon your self; and (2) Of Christ's
excellency and all sufficiency, so as to value him your all, and above all;
Indeed a full Christ and a vile nothing creature agrees best together.

4. 'Twill be both your prudence and advantage to forbear the searching after
the knowledge of other things, until you come to a solid knowledge of your self,
which is the one thing needful in Christianity, and whereof Heathenism had some
rude notion; to know your self to be lost in your self, and never found again
till you be [Found] in Christ, Phil. 3.9.

5. The more that you know your self, the greater will your self-abhorrency be,
Job 42. 6. This will make you cry out with Augustine, [a malo homine [me ipso]
libera me domine:] From that evil man (my self) Oh Lord, deliver me. You will
find that though Satan be your great Enemy, yet your own sinful self is the
worst: for Satan might strike fire long enough without success, if your own
evil heart did not find him Tinder: the Tempter may besiege the City long
enough to no purpose, if there were not a treacherous party within, that lets
down the Drawbridge, and sets open the Gates to his Troops of Temptations.

6. This knowledge of your self will bring also greater dis-satisfaction with
your present state and standing in ways of unregeneracy, with your being
without God, and- without Christ in the World; making you cry out not only
Unclean, unclean; but also Undone, undone; give me Christ or I die, and that to
all Eternity: I am condemned already, John. 3. 18. and the wrath of God abides
upon me, v. 36. Oh, who dares live in an House that is haunted with evil
Spirits! or lodge in a Cave that abounds with noisome Toads and venomous
Serpents! such and far worse is your lying in an unrenewed estate.

7. When you behold the avenger of blood, to wit, Divine Justice pursuing you
at the heels, his heart being hot within him, as Deuteronomy. 19. 6. then it is high
time for you to hasten to that blessed City of Refuge the most excellent and
all-sufficient Lord Jesus, who was purposely provided of the Father, to be a
Savior and Sanctuary to save us both from present wrath, and from wrath to
come also, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. He is that Name of the Lord which the righteous run
[into] and are safe, Prove. 18.10.

8. In so doing, know for your encouragement, that the gates of the Sanctuary
and City of Refuge shall not be shut against you. First, the place of Christ's
birth encourages, which was an Inn: He was born in one of Bethlehem's Inns, a
place that receives all comers; all guests that come are bid welcome.

2. The posture of his death; Christ died upon the Cross with his Arms spread
wide asunder, as in a posture ready to embrace all penitent sinners that come
unto him, and fall into his arms. Him that comes unto me, I will [in no wise]
cast out, or keep out, Joh.6.37.

9. And though you cannot run, or come fast enough to Christ, yet Christ will
come and run to you, and meet you better half way. While the penitent Prodigal
did but [come] toward his Father, his Father ran to meet him, and had
compassion upon him, and fell on his neck and kissed him, Luk.15 20. Christ
will be much better to you, than you will or can be to your self; for he [can]
have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, Heb. 5.
2. and though you cannot bring your self to grace, yet grace is [brought] to
you by Christ.

2. Of Carriage under the first workings of Christianity.
1: When the Lord Jesus comes and stands knocking at the door of your heart,
with the hammer of his word, and with the hand of his Spirit, then bow your
self with all your might (as Samson did) Judge. 16. 30. to pull back every bolt,
and to draw in every bar, that would keep the door shut against this blessed
and bleeding Redeemer. The duty indeed is yours, but the ability is his: as
much as in you lies, cause every lust of your heart to make room for your dear
Jesus.

2. Welcome Christ into your heart with joy. Say to him as Laban did to
Abraham's Servant, Come in thou blessed of the Lord, [thou art welcome]
wherefore stands thou without? Gen.24.31. Christ will come to you with a
blessing in his hand to bestow on you, as he did to Jacob. Genesis 32.26, etc.
David literal says to his Son (that invited him to his house) Why should we be
chargeable to thee, my Son? 2 Samuel 13. 25. But this David spiritual will not be
chargeable: wheresoever he comes, where he comes to sup with any soul, he
brings his supper with him, Rev.3.20. and eats but of his own honeycomb, and
of his own honey, Cant.5.1. This blessed Guest brings his blessing with him, as
the Ark did to the house of Obed Edom.

3. When Christ is come into your house to dwell in your heart by faith, Ephesians.
3. 17. be careful to keep his habitation quiet and comfortable; to this end you
must adjure your corruptions by the roes and by the hinds of the field, that
they stir not up nor awake your beloved until he please, Cant.2.7. It Is pity
such a blessed Guest should meet with any disturbance; lay Gods charge upon
your lusts, saying to them as Lot did to the Sodomites, Gen.19.8. Only unto
this Angel of the Lord, and this Lord of Angels, do nothing [of disturbance]
for therefore came he under the shadow of my roof: and as the good old man to
the men of Gibeah, Judge,19.23. Nay, I pray you do not so wickedly, seeing this
man (Christ Jesus) is come into my house, do not this folly to disturb him.

4. Be often admiring that blessed state of Grace which God has brought you
into, out of the cursed state of sin, and say with Peter at Christ's
transfiguration, Master, it is good being here; let us build Tabernacles, one
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias; not one for himself, for he was
so pleased with his present condition, that he could be content to lie out of
doors, so he might enjoy the vision of his Masters glory, Mat:17:5:etc: Say you
with the Hebrew Servant, I love my Master, he shall bore me through the ear,
and I will stay with him for ever, Deuteronomy:15:16,17: and with David, you must
resolve to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm:23:6: The purpose of
your heart must be to cleave unto the Lord.

5: Be often searching your heart in the sense, I: Of the state of sin, out of
which ( as Israel out of the house of bondage, and out of the Iron furnace,
Deuteronomy:4:20:) your God, your near kinsman, the Lord Jesus has delivered you. 2:
Of the remainders of sin, from which you are not cleansed to this day, you
cannot chide it out of doors as Sarah did Hagar; you cannot shake it from off
your heart as Paul did the Viper from off his hand; it is as Daniel's Beasts,
whose dominion was taken away, but their lives were prolonged for a time and a
season, Dan:7:12: this will ballast your newfound joy.

6. Let your own self-righteousness stink and be abhorred by you, when the
Righteousness of Christ is brought to clothe you: The father brings forth the
best Robe for his ragged prodigal, Luk:15:22: When the first Adam had made
himself naked by his sin, he sowed fig leaves together, and made himself an
apron; this was both too thin and too scant a covering, but the Lord made a
coat of skins (of the Sacrifices) and clothed them, Gen:3: 7, 21: alas your own
righteousness is but a fig-leaf covering, no better than dogs-meat, or dung in
Paul's (...) Phil:3:8: in comparison of that coat made of the skin of the Lamb
of God, which is called the righteousness of God, and therefore a better
righteousness than that which Adam had, or that which Angels have; a garment or
robe that covers the whole sinner from the angry eyes of offended Justice.

7 Hunger after a taste and touch of Christ in the purest and powerfullest way
of revealing himself to you in his ordinances; set your self under no means of
Grace, without begging of God to speak to your heart with a strong hand, as he
did to the Prophet Isaiah, Isa: 8: 11: think it not enough that the Ministry
(you sit under) is a lovely song to you, as Ezekiel:33:32: but it must be a lively
song also, that you may say with David, Gods word has quickened me,
Psalm.119:50: A divine touch in Gods Ordinances does quicken us in Gods way,
Psalm. 119.37. You must know that Christ has many followers, and but few
touchers; when the multitude thronged him, he had but one that touched him, so
as to receive healing virtue from him, Mat 9.20. Luk.8.43 -- 46.

8. Get solid proof of your interest in Christ: build not upon sandy
foundations, such as 1. On general mercy, as if he that made you, will
undoubtedly save you: If so, then Devils would be saved as well as men, for God
made both, and both are his creatures, 2. Nor on good meanings; if those would
save you, then the Word of God, and the blood of Christ are two superfluous
things. Nor 3. On an external Profession, for the house of the foolish builder
was (for ought we know to the contrary) as fair a Fabric to look upon in
externals, as that of the wise: and the main difference lay in the differing
foundation, Mat.7.24.26. The Rock of ages (the Lord Jesus) was not the
foundation of both, but loose earth, loose notions and principles, such as
those beforementioned.

9. Be not poring and puzling too long about laying your foundation; but having
once laid Christ (alone) your foundation, go then on to build upon it, [ strato
superstruitur] God says to the Children of Israel, they must go forward, Exodus
14,15: you must neither stand still, nor step backward, Non progrediest
regredi, not to go on is to go back: It Is undoubtedly one of the wiles of
Satan, and his devices, (which we are not to be ignorant of) to gravel gracious
spirits about that foundation-truth of their Election, to keep them from making
passage and progress in ways of Christianity; our Lord himself was thus
buffeted, in Satan's saying to him, once and again [ If thou be the Son of
God.] If this were done to that green tree, what can the dry expect? Whereas,
if you can make your calling sure (in the witnessings of the Holy Ghost) you
must take your Election for granted, seeing that Election-love is the cause and
vocation-love the effect; now the effect is the manifestation of the cause; do
but make your calling sure; and therein you make your election sure also, 2
Pet. 1.10.

10. Take heed you blot nor blur not your Evidences for Heaven by any loose and
extravagant Actions; for suppose you cannot (if you be a true Christian) lose
your Salvation, yet may you lose the joy of your Salvation, as David did, Psalm:
^1:12: This indeed is the blessing of the Covenant of Grace, that though it
does permit a fall, yet always ensures Repentance after the fall:
notwithstanding, you may get such falls as may break your bones, and it may
cost you both much pain, and much pains, before the Lord make you to hear of
joy and gladness, that the bones which are broken (by your fall) may rejoice,
Psalm;51:8:

3: Of the Exercise of spiritual Life.
1: Walk close with God in your general and particular calling, and be careful
that the one do not justle out the other; as there is a time for all things, so
there is a time for both those: your general calling must not thrust out your
particular; that is but a temptation, and not a duty; neither must your
particular calling thrust out your general, for that is to love the world more
than God, and to serve your self altogether and not the Lord Christ at all. It
was the sin of Cain, that he did not divide aright for God, the duties of your
general calling (faithfully performed) must sanctify all the duties of your
particular calling.

2. Be often at home communing with your own heart, Psalm.4.4. and propounding
questions to it, such as these. 1. Whose am I? Am I one that belongs to God, or
do I belong to Satan? 2. Whom serve I? do I serve Christ, or do I serve Sin?
The blessed Apostle could answer both these questions, Act.27.23. There stood
by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve. And 3. What am
I? am I a vessel of wrath, or am I a vessel of mercy? am I a child of God, or
am I a child of the devil? 4. Where am I? Adam where art thou? as God said so
to Adam, so you must say to your own soul. Where art thou Soul? art thou in the
broad way that leads to death and damnation, or art thou in the narrow way that
leads to Salvation? and if at any time you find your spirit loose etc.
extravagant in broad ways of the World, then cry to your self, as God to
Elijah, What do thou here Elijah? 1 King.19.13. so gird up the loins of your
mind again, Luke 12.35.

3. Know that your heart will be backward to this communing work, Fugitivi
sumus acordibus nostris, says Augustine; we flee from our own hearts, and our
own hearts flee as fast and as far from us. It Is pity we should carry hearts
about with us in our bosoms for twenty, thirty, forty or fifty years, (some
more if some less) and yet be such strangers to them, and they to us; account
it therefore your great loss that you know your own heart no better, that you
commune with it no oftener; alas, we know not our own hearts, Am I a Dog,
(says Hazael) that I should do so and so? 2 King. 8.13, Yet such a Dog was he
in wickedness when he came to his opportunity; you must tremble to be left in
the hands of your own counsel, as Hezekiah was left to himself, to try him (not
the strength of his grace, as Abraham was, Genesis 22.1. but his frailty and
proneness to sin) and to let him know all that was in his heart 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
When Satan's Temptations has an opportunity to draw out your corruption, then
and there is your most eminent danger.

4. Seeing your heart will not stand to parley, do you bind it to good
beheavour, and lay God's charge upon it that it stir not in this parleying
work, till you have made some work of your work, and brought it to some blessed
issue; know, that never did the Sacrifice (under the Law) stand more in need of
binding with cords to the horns of the Alter, than your loose and slippery
heart does with all obligations (and all little enough) unto holy duties; hence
is it that self-examination is so hard a duty; no sooner are we in it, but ere
ever we be aware, we are out of it again.

5. When ye have, through grace, fixed your heart, and are able to say with
David, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7: which
undoubtedly is as hard to fix to good, as quicksilver is, that has a
principle of motion ^n it, but not of rest, then fall upon Consideration-work,
which is the excellency of a man above the beast; then consider, and better
consider the four questions aforesaid and the tendency of all your ways:
Ponder the path of thy feet, Prove.4.26. to wit, by the weights of the Word of
God, do you often poize them; Consideration is the stay of our thoughts, which
are as swift as any Ship. Consideration is as an Anchor to them. God bids his
People Consider their ways, twice over, Hag. 1.5,7. do it once and again.

6. You may know where you are, if you seriously and thoroughly consider the
frame of your own spirit; the way to hell is a broad way; and he that is all
for elbow room, and for a wide way to be extravagant in, and likes not the
strict way of Religion (which is so called from its strict binding up our
hearts from looseness a religando) is a broad-way man, that says with Jeroboam,
It Is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, 1 King.12. 28. It Is too much for
you to be so much precise, and so strait laced; Let us break those bands
asunder, and cast away those cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3 Medice vivere, est
misere vivere, to live strictly by a Rule, is to live miserably, both for soul
and body. Spiritus Religiosus est spiritus melancholicus; Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall die, Isa.22. 12, 14, 1 Cor. 15. 32.

7. You have this exemplified in Noah's Raven and Dove, Gen 8: 7,9, 11: You may
not be as the Raven that was accustomed to live at large, becomes weary of
being caged up in the Ark, and likes not such strait limits any longer,
therefore she flutters about the Ark, but went not in, as not willing to be
confined to the Ark either for diet or lodging any more, but chooses rather to
fly abroad, and feed upon the carcases of the drowned.

8. You must be like the Dove which did not dislike her confinement, nor the
diet and lodging of the Ark, and therefore returns to it as the place of her
rest, and best repose, not finding better repast any where else. Thus those are
unclean Ravens, that are all for fleshly liberty and licentiousness, and can
feed upon stinking carrion of wickedness; but you must be Christ's Dove, Cant:
2:14: that can find no rest for the soles of your feet but in him; you must
(with others) flock to the Temple, Isa: 60. 8, Christ your Noah, your
Comforter, will put forth his hand to take you in; and there think his service
your wages, as well as your work, and not your weariness.

9: Thus must you be serious in inquiring of your self, whose you are, and whom
you serve; Yea, and what you are, as well as where? whether in the broad or
narrow way: If consideration be needful in all our undertakings, how much more
in that for Eternity! Oh, be not slight herein, but dwell with your thoughts
upon it. You know, he that rides post through a Country, can never draw a
distinct Map of that Country, which requires many pauses for viewing every
particular boundary, etc: So if you ride post with your swift thoughts in your
circuit thorough the Isle of Man, you cannot take a distinct account of your
self in order to those four grand Questions: You must walk round about your
self, and go round that little world, as they did about Sion, Psalm. 48. 12,13.
That they might tell the towers thereof, and mark well her bulwarks; yea, and
[consider] her Palaces, etc.

10. Then has your spiritual consideraon, a blessed issue, when you dwell upon
it with your fixed thoughts, until Christ appear your chiefest good, and sin
your chiefest evil: David did turn [his] ways upside down, as the Hebrew word
[ chishabli daraki] signifies, Psalm. 119. 59. In his own secret thoughts and
consideration. The Noun of which Verb, to wit chesheb, signifies, opus
phrygionicum, an embroidered garment, which is the same on both sides, they
that work them must often turn them, first on one side, and then on the other
Thus David would turn [his] way every way, and must have them both sides alike,
both that side toward God, and that side toward man; for the ways of many
men have a shining outside toward man, and yet their inside is rugged, uneven,
and uncomely toward God. Sordet in conspectu judicis, quod fulget in conspectu
operentis (says the Father) but Christ says better, That which is highly
esteemed among men is an abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15.

11. As you must turn [your] ways every way, and upside down, according to the
Hebrew reading of that, Psalm. 119. 59. So must you make a Dialogue with your
self according to the Greek reading. The Septuagent reads it [(...)] I made a
Dialogue with my self about my own ways; I argued this point to an issue,
whether the ways of God, or the ways of Sin were better; and when I
understood that the paths of Sin go down to death, I turned my feet from the
ways of Sin to the ways of God. Thus must you upon sound consideration, and
deliberation find out Sin to be the way to God's curse, but Christ the way to
God's blessing. He is [the] way, Joh: 14. 6. Walk in him, Col. 2.6.

12. When Sin appears to you the greatest evil (as Christ the greatest good)
then you cannot let any Sin live peaceably in you, no nor come peaceably to
you, be it little or great; you must have tenderness of spirit: Josiah had a
tender heart, 2 King.22. 19. 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Such as are of tender
constitutions cannot endure the least cold wind to blow upon them, therefore
they cry [shut the Casement, and bolt the Door] I shall catch cold; thus to a
tender heart, the least cold air of Sin is irksome: The door of your heart must
be shut against Sin (the greatest evil) yet open for Christ, the chief good,
Ezekiel. 44. 2, 3. That door is for the Prince, the Prince of Life, no other guest
must enter in.

4. Of your Conversation respecting both others and your self.
1. In respect of others, both those without and within.

1. To those without.

1. You must walk wisely to them, and honestly with them, Col. 4. 5: Neither
giving offense carelessly, nor taking offense causelessly, 1 Cor: 10 32. Giving
no offense to any, either Greek or Jew, walking handsomely (as the word (...)
signifies) (...) These. 4:12. That by your well-doing, you may not only put to
silence the Ignorance of foolish men, stopping their mouths from speaking evil
of you, 1 Pet. 2: 15: But also by your convincing life cause them to open their
mouths in commending you, that all which see you, may acknowledge you that you
are (...) seed which the Lord has blessed, Isa. 61: 9.

2. You may not be conformed to the corrupt customs and courses of this present
evil world, Rom:12: 2: Especially those that are set down, Romans 13:13: Ephesians:
4:18,19, 20: 1 Pet:4:3: Plain Jacob can never be comely in the rough garments of
profane Esau: But you must be transformed (or metamorphosed) by the renewing
of your heart and life; the old frame must be dissolved, and a new one
acquired, that you may prove (by your practice) what is good, that perfect and
acceptable will of God, and show to all men, that [ Ego non sum Ego] I am not
the same man I was, (as the Convert did to the Harlot soliciting him again to
leudness) that all may behold an heart-changing, and a life-changing work
wrought effectually in you:

3 Be careful that the World outstrip you not in any moral action; you may not
do less than others, when your Lord commands you to do more than others,
Mat:5:47: as Christ has done singular things for you (in showing you singular
grace and mercy) so he both expects and requires singular things from you; you
must be eminent in good works, Tit: 2:14: and get above others, having your
feet where other men's heads are; The way of the righteous is above to the wise,
Prove: 15:24: He goes an higher way to work than the ordinary frame of the
world; he knows, that more than the common stint is required of him, he must do
that which the world will never do, and that is, he must walk accurately,
endeavoring to get up to the very top of godliness, as the word in the
original signifies, Ephesians:5:15:

4. Let your righteousness and innocence be as a breast plate and brazen wall
to you against all reproaches; knowing assuredly, that there will be a
Resurrection of Names as well as of Bodies at the last, Psalm.37.6, God will
bring forth your Righteousness as the morning light; though the earth be
covered with darkness while night lasts, yet the morning drives it away; while
your life gives your reproachers the lie, God will clear up your wronged
innocence; dirt may stick upon a mud-wall, but it will not do so upon Marble.

5. Evermore account it better for you to suffer an hundred injuries, rather
than to offer one; the latter will bring guilt on you, but the former comfort.
Had David shed the blood of Nabal, etc. (from which he was prevented by Abigals
prudence) it would undoubtledly have been greater grief, and offense of heart
to him (as she told him, 1 Samuel 25. 31: Than all his sorrows and sufferings
from bloody Saul. Abigal argued thus with him, As thou never took revenge
heretofore, so thou may not now; and David blesses God for preventing him,
verse. 32.

6: Beware the society of such persons from which you cannot come off without
either guilt or grief, and amongst whom you must either countenance Sin, or
contract sin: while Peter was warming his hands amongst the enemies of Christ
in the Hall, Luk:22: 55,56, etc: Alas, his heart froze into a stupefaction,
which melted not till a look of love from the Son of Righteousness kindly
thawed it again, verse: 61: As the Sun of the Firmament does when it looks upon
a bank of snow. Evil company is contagious, and Sin is more catching than the
plague; Peter out of curiosity (to see the issue of Christ's Captivity) sat
with the servants of Christ's murderers, and so tempts Satan to tempt him; no
doubt but the damosel was set on by the devil to occasion Peter's denying Christ.

7: Be not too talkative amongst those where providence casts you. Consider God
has given you two ears, and but one tongue; Yea, and that shut up with a
double door, the one of flesh, and the other of bone, to wit, your lips and
your teeth; this should teach you to speak sparingly, and to hear twice as much
as you speak; and when you speak, let your speech be savory, seasoned with salt
(of a gracious spirit) Col: 4:6: the salt of which grace must preserve your
common communication from putrefaction and rottenness; leave you the favor of
Grace in all companies where you come.

2: Your Conversation to those that are within.

1: As you may not be blind in charity, so neither must you be rash in censure;
it is better to be over credulous, than over suspicious, and over censorious.
God puts a charitable construction upon the case of the betrothed Damosel,
Deuteronomy: 22:27: As there was none to save her, so there was none to hear her; yet
it is taken for granted there, that in such a case, she cried out, therefore she
shall not die: This shows us that always in doubtful cases, we should put on
the best construction:

2: Be sure you see Grace where Sin is, as well as Sin where Grace is: keep
warm your love to those that truly fear God, because of those graces that shine
forth in them; and take heed of lessening your love to them, because of those
infirmities that do attend them; it is pity the worst part should be seen, and
the best part either not seen, or (at least) not acknowledged; the Lord,
himself, would not see iniqnity in Jacob, nor sorcery in Israel, Number.23: 21.
When there was [ non peccatum flammans] no flaming sin at that time among them
in his eye and therefore Balaam councelled their enemies to entice them to
Fornication, which would be a flaming God-provoking Sin; enormities indeed
cannot, but infirmities may and ought to be covered with a Mantle of Love; God
is a good Copy to write after.

3. Take heed of imitating of the greatest favorite of heaven in any of his
failings; you are compassed about with a great cloud of Witnesses in the sacred
Scriptures, He.12:1: Yet know that this cloud, like that cloud in the
Wilderness, has a black side as well as a bright; to wit, their infirmities
are recorded, as well as their graces; you may not imitate Joseph in his
swearing, but you must in his chastity; you may not follow Job in his passion
and impatiency, but you must in his patience and piety; and so of the rest. The
frailties of those eminent Saints are registered in Holy Writ, just as dangerous
Rocks are marked out at Sea, not to run upon them, but to shun them: they are
penned down as examples of caution, but not of imitation. You must know, that
they which followed the dark side of the Cloud (in the Red Sea) were Egyptians,
and were drowned; but they that followed the bright side of it, were
Israelites, and passed safe, not only over the Red Sea, but into Canaan.

4. Have not the Faith of Christ with respect of persons, but be careful to
love Grace in rags, as well as in robes: Grace may, indeed, commend Gold, but
Gold can never commend Grace; the lesser must be the blessed of the greater: It Is
true, that Gold may beautify the Temple, but it is still the Temple that
sanctifies the Gold. Persons, though never so rich, or never so richly arrayed,
are at the best but silken dust, and they may be no better than golden
damnation.

The second part of your Conversation is that which respects your self, etc.

1. Be not quick sighted abroad, and blind at home; this is to be a Benzoma, as
the Hebrews phraise it, to be extravagant, or seldom at home (as the Harlot,
Pro:7:11:) seldom communing with your own heart; you must hate Sin in others,
but especially in your self; know that your heart is full of Harlotry; and if
you seek your self too much abroad, you will (at last) find your self but lost
at home; but if you be much at home, as indeed the greatest part of the work of
a Christian lies within doors, then Sin will not dare to haunt your house or
heart; or however neither sins little or great can then live peaceably within
you.

2: Be sure you give not place to little sins, for they will wear away the
tenderness of your Conscience, and like little thieves, (creeping in at the
window) they will open the door for great ones; little wedges do make way for
the greater, and so your soul may be cloven asunder thereby: Every Sin, be it
small or great, should be a stranger to you, and not an home-dweller in you.
Thus David's Sin was but a traveller, that came only to visit him, but not to
take up any continuing lodgings within him. Thus it is said in Nathan's Parable,
There came a Traveller unto the rich man, 2 Samuel.12.4. It is Christ (and not
sin) that must lie all night between the Spouses breasts, Cant.1.13. she will
have no home-dweller but Christ.

3. Live not at random, but square your life by the rule of Righteousness, to
wit, the Word of God, in thought, Word and Deed; and account every
transgression of that rule to be your sin; at night call your faithless heart
to a faithful account how often and how much you have come short of that rule the
day past; a sensible frame of spirit will easily find out, that Gods
Commandments are exceeding broad, Psalm. 119. 96. but your obedience is
exceeding narrow; and that your sins are more in number than the hairs upon
your head, Psalm. 40.12. so innumerable, that you cannot reckon them, ( who can
tell the errors of his life? Psalm.19.12) and if you cannot reckon them sure I
am, you can never be able to reckon for them, that must be the work of your
blessed Surety, our dear Lord Jesus.

4. Let not any one transgression of that divine Rule, live peaceably in you,
not so much as a vain thought must take up lodgings in your heart, Jer.4.14. as
water that is sprung into a Ship, is presently pumpt out again in leaky
Vessels, for fear of sinking; So when any soul-sinking sin springs in upon you
(which certainly will come faster in than water into a vessel at Sea) then be
sure you ply the Pump of Prayer and Repentance, and never give over pumping,
till your Vessel be cleansed, and till you have some sense that your sin is
pardoned; you will not go to bed with a bone out of joint, but it must be set
right with expedition; it is pity that the soul (disjoynted with sin) should be
so long neglected.

5. It Is a blessed frame of spirit to nourish in you both the sense of your own
sin, and the fear of Gods wrath for your sin: the heavier that your sins are to
you, the lighter will your afflictions be on you; it is wind and rain coming
both together, that makes the storm in our souls; when your sin is your burden,
it is then repented of, and so pardoned; this will make your affliction a far
lighter burden.

6. Take heed of putting holiness upon you as a loose Garment, to cast off or
on at pleasure (according to your differing companies and occasions:) but be
sure that you gird it close to you with the golden girdle of truth, Ephesians.6.14.
that in all places you may be what you seem to be; that you be to God, what you
seem to be to man; etc. that you be to God at all times* what you seem to be to
man at any time.

7. Take heed of grieving the good Spirit of God, wherewith you are sealed to
the day of Redemption, Ephesians.4.30. and which is a delicat a thing, as some read
Psalm.143. 10. res delicata est spiritus tuus; and therefore loves to live in a
clean house, in a clean heart. It Is a foul fault to grieve an earthly Father;
but it is far greater to grieve this holy spirit: If you grieve the Holy Ghost,
how can you expect that he should comfort you? when you are grieved, you cannot
do your work as you are wont, and neither can the holy Spirit do his work in
and for you: a Guest that is grieved, may leave the house that grieves him; so
this delicate thing (the Spirit of God) may leave your house desolate, when
grieved with your sins, Mat.23:38. and then woe to you if God and his good
spirit depart from you, Hos.9.12.

8. But above all, take heed of quenching the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians.5.19. to wit, in
his motions and graces: If God have kindled from heaven the holy fire upon the
altar of your heart, be careful that it be kept burning there continually (in
your love to Christ, and zeal for him) it must never go out, Lev.6:12,13. You
must stir up this fire (as the Apostle counsels, 2 Timothy.1.6. and not despise
Prophesying; for the Priests lips blows it up into a flame, it may be quenched
either by withdrawing of fuel to wit, neglect of Ordinances; or by casting on
water, to wit, by falling into foul courses: you must beware of both.

9: Be not ashamed to become a fool for Christ, 1 Cor.3.18. Self conceit,
self-will and self-love, (like Noah's three Sons) has spread themselves over
the whole world; you must deny your own self-conceit and carnal wisdom: you
must account your self more brutish than any man, (with Agur, Prove:20.2,3.)
when you come to Ithiel and Vcal (which is Christ, both goodness and power) to
be instructed in Christ's School, Act.4:13. Remember it was the Devil that spoke
in the subtle Serpent, Genesis 3:4: and it was God that spoke in the silly Ass,
Numb.22.28. Remember also how it was an Ass that carried Christ to Jerusalem
Mat:21:5:

10 Yet, though you must be as silly as Doves, you must also be as wise as
Serpents, Mat:10:16: You must have the silliness and the meekness of wisdom,
Jam: 3: 13: As you must be wise to Salvation, so you may be wise to safety in
Gods way, and not cast your self upon needless dangers; Christianity allows you
as much of the Serpent as of the Dove; the Dove without the Serpent is easily
entangled, and the Serpent without the Dove is venemously hurtful; the head of
the Serpent, and the heart of the Dove, make up the best and the most blessed
composition; piety without policy is too simple to be safe; and policy without
piety is too subtle to be good.

11 You must choose any suffering rather than the least sinning; you must not
choose iniquity rather than affliction, Job 36:21: for there is more evil in the
least sin than in the greatest sufferings, in as much as Moral Evil is far
worse and greater than that which is merely natural: Quas non ergo oporet
mortes praeeligere, says, Zuinglius, therefore what deaths ought not a man
rather to make choice of, what torments not rather undergo; yea, into what
deepest gulf of Hell it self not rather enter, than wittingly and willingly to
sin the least sin against God? The ancient Martyrs would not accept of
deliverance upon ignoble and sinful terms, Heb. 11. 35. They would not throw so
much as one grain of frankincense to the Idol, though it would have saved their
own lives; hence Daniel chose rather to be cast to the Lions, than to violate
his Conscience, and so to have a Lion roaring in his bosom; he knew that in an
angry Conscience he might feel the unbearable strokes of an angry God; and a
man had better anger all the Witches in the world; yea, and all the Devils in
hell, than anger God.

12. You may not do the least evil, no, not for the procuring of the greatest
good, Romans 3. 8: Do no evil, that good may come. If a lie would save your life,
you must not tell it: Gods People are Children that will not lie (as there
Father is a God that cannot lie) Isa.63. 8: they will rather die than lie. Non
ideo negare volo, ne peream; sed ideo mentiri nolo, ne peccem: I will not
therefore deny, lest I perish; but therefore will I not lie, lest I sin, said
the good woman upon the Rack, of whom St. Jerome writes. And Austin says,
that a man ought not to tell a lie, though he might save the whole world from
hell thereby; for there is more evil in one lie, than there is good (says he)
in the salvation of all the World: and he would choose Hell rather than Sin, if
set before him for choice. Thus the primitive Christians cried [ Ad leones
potius quam ad Lenones] Throw us to your Lions, rather than to your Harlotry;
though this would save our lives, yet would it destroy our souls. The Armenian
Mouse will die, (some write) rather than be defilled with filth; insomuch that
if her hole be besmeared with dirt, she rather chooses to be taken than
polluted. Such ought all the servants of God to be.

13: Examine your call from God for every action you undertake; be often crying,
[ Quo warranto?] What warrant have I for this or that from the Lord, whom I
ought to obey in all things? And for this end, mind those four voices, 1: Of
Providence how it calls you: 2: Of Conscience, what satisfaction you find there
both concerning the lawfulness and the expediency of the on: 3: Of the word,
which ought to warrant all our actions, as it is the Rule of all Righteousness:
And 4 ly: of the Spirit, which gives its testimony to all the aforesaid (the
fruits of the Spirit is in all, goodness, and righteousness, and truth,
Ephesians:5.9.) and witnesses with our spirits that we are in Gods way, and in our
own duty: The voice of Providence alone may deceive you as it might have done
David, had Abashai's apprehensions prevailed with him, as 1 Samuel 26: 8: God has
delivered mine enemy (Saul) into thine hand this day; he would not have David
to tempt God any longer by letting slip this so fair an opportunity; but holy
David had the three other voices to hearken unto, as well as the voice of
Providence Verse: 9,10,11: Neither the Word would warrant him, nor his own
spirit, nor the spirit of God; which last hindered Paul and Silas from going
into Asia and Bithynia, Act:16:6,7:

14, In things wherein self may sway, it is safest for you to be passive; in
such case you will be strongly tempted (both by a subtle devil, and by a
deceitful heart) to outrun God both in his Promises, and in his Providence,
as Israel in Numb:14:40: We will go up to the place which the Lord has
Promised: They must needs go up that very morning, for self swayed their hearts
that way, though the pillar of Providence (which was their guide by night, and
by day) did not go before them; and though they pleaded Gods promise, yet they
did not consider, Gods promises are sealed, but they are not dated: You must
wait therefore (in such cases of self) Gods time; your time will be always
ready, when Gods time is not yet, John:7:6.

You would have your water of affliction turned into the wine of consolation at
your time; but Christ says to you as he said to his Mother, What have I to do
with thee woman? mine hour is not yet come, Joh:2: 4: The day you set down in
your Calendar is not the same that God sets down in his; We are all exceeding
prono to postdate the divine threatenings, and to antidate the divine promises.
We all put the evil day far from us, Amos,6: 3: Ezekiel: 12:27: When God comes in
his threatenings, we think he has leaden feet, and is slow in pace, 2 Pet:3:
49. But when we expect him to come in his promises, then we look upon him as a
Roe, and as a young Hind in the Mountains of Bether.

5. In watching your heart in natural, civil, and religious actions.
First in General.
1: Concerning our Natural Actions, as laboring, resting, feeding and
clothing, etc. you had need keep your heart with all diligence in respect of
these, Prove. 4. 23, lest you sin in them; for the adversary has some
advantages over gracious spirits in them all: as first that being satisfied
about the lawfulness of these actions, Satan will make you overlook the
expediency of them. 2. He may (at some time or other) cheat you with divine
permission for divine approbation: And 3 ly, he may likewise deceive you in
putting no just difference 'twixt the use and abuse of your Christian liberty.

2. Touching the first of these, let satan tempt you to any gross sin, your
heart will rise with indignation against such a foul temptation, and 'twill be
a torment to to you to be attempted to it; yea, as much torment to your soul,
as sawing asunder, and being slain with the sword is torment to the body,
Heb.11: 37: to be tempted, is there placed betwixt those two kinds of death, as
if it were equally dolorous with either or both of them, so that foul sins do
not so much endanger your soul, as it is in those lawful actions, wherein Satan
may slily and insensibly beguile you out of a lawfulness, into an expediency.

3; Touching the second of them, you must learn this distinction from God's
Word, that though God permitted polygamy and divorces under the Jewish
Poedagogy, yet it was only for the hardness of their hearts, Mat.19. 8. But it
was not so from the beginning, says Christ; that Divine dispensation (for
better an inconvenience than a mischief) makes but little for the lawfulness of
it, neither can it amount to a Divine approbation.

4. Touching the third of them, those ly employment with an heavenly frame of
heart, setting God always before you, Psalm 16. 8. and being in the fear of God
all the day long, Prove: 23:17: evermore sending forth spiritual Ejaculations,
as Nehemiah, and David did; this is, to pray always, Ephesians 6. 18. and to pray
continually, 1 These:5:17 viz. keeping your heart in a continual praying frame;
your leaky vessel (as aforesaid) requires you to ply continually this pump of
Prayer.

Direct. 4. Depend upon God for a blessing upon your daily labors. Abraham's
servants prayed for success in his Enterprise, Gen: 24: 12: And Moses prays,
Lord prosper the work of our hands, Psalm: 19. ult. It Is true, God may give
success without it, but never so sweet as with it; Except the Lord build the
house, etc. Psa: 127: 1: It Is not your diligence alone, but God's blessing that
enriches, Pro: 10:4 -- 22. You may not ascribe to your own power, Deuteronomy: 8: 17:
nor sacrifice to your own Net, Hab. 1:16: As that proud Prince did, Ezekiel: 29:
2: Alas all your policy and power without prayer, is but Arena sine calce, Sand
without Lime; Man's diligence must be subordinate to Gods blessing, then your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. God will bless your basket and store,
Deuteronomy:28: 5: Though you gather little, you shall have no lack, the blessing of
God will make it up at Homer, viz. sufficient for you, Exodus: 16: 18: and your
little shall be better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm: 37: 16.

The second Natural Action is Rest or Recreation.
1. You may look upon Rest and Recreation as lawful upon a twofold account: 1:
Rest from Labor, and refreshing the Body and Mind, are necessary, because
Man's nature is like the Bow, which being always bent, is easily broken:
Therefore did the Lord appoint the Night to succeed the Day, and the Sabbath to
succeed the Week, as fit seasons for Man to rest from his labors in; now that
which is necessary is also lawful (for God never necessitates a Man to sin
against him; and if Rest be lawful, then is some Recreation (which is called so,
as a second Creation) in due time and place; there must be Otium as well as
Negotium. The second account is, your Christian actions that be of themselves
and in their own nature lawful, yet throw your corruption they are capable af
excess and inordinateness: The sly and subtle insinuations of Satan (under a
pretense of your own Christian liberty in going as far as you may) will carry
you sometimes a little further than you should. Excessive, and immoderate, and
inordinate delight is sinful, although it be in objects that are not sinful in
themselves. This in the general concerning all those actions.

2 ly. In particular 1. Of Labor.

1. Touching the Natural Actions in particular; as first of labor, whether it
be done in the sweat of the brow, or of the brain, (indeed a Ministers labor
consists of both) you must (at least) own one of those; God made the Leviathan
to sport in the Sea; but never any man to sport on the earth: every man must go
forth to some work or other till the evening, Psalm. 104.23,26. there must be
either manual or mental labor.

2 Take those few Directions to managa your heart in your honest employment and
labor. Dir: 1: Beg of God for ability of body in your labor: 'twas part of
the Serpents curse, Gen:3:14: [ Upon thy belly shall thou go] some think that
God cut him shorter by the feet, because he is ranked among the beasts of the
field, verse: 1: and not among creeping things: Have you the use of your limbs
for your liberty? Oh! bless God for it, especially if you be strong to labor:
If it be a privilege in Oxen, Psalm. 144. 24. Much more in men.

Direct. 2. Pray that your mind may be suitable to your labor as well as your
body; when there is unsuitableness 'twixt the mind of man and his employment,
then the work never comes kindly off, nor goes it comfortably end-wayes; either
your chariot wheels are taken off, and then you drive heavily; or they want
Unction, and then they make a creaking repining noise, much unlike the chariots
of Aminadab, or of a willing People, as the word signifies. It Is the Lord that
qualifies Bezaleel (that was but a poor Brick-maker in Egypt) for working all
curious work, Exodus.21:3: And the Husband-man's God does teach him, and instruct
him in all his points of Husbandry, Isa. 28.26.

Dir. 3. See that thou pursue your worldly(...) (...)stian liberty (which
Christ has purchased for you) extends himself not only to use the Creatures of
God for necessity, but also for meet and convenient delight; you may delight
your self in God's great goodness, Neh, 9.25. You may be Righteous over much in
denying your self such a free use of the Creature (yea, and condemning it too)
which you are allowed to have by the purchase and promise of Christ. Thus Isaac
(who was the most loving Husband in holy Writ, for it is said of him, and of
none else, that he loved his Wife, Gen.24:67:) Sported with Rebeccah his Wife,
Genesis 26. 8: And the Jew was commanded to cheer up the heart of his Wife the
first year, Deuteronomy: 24: 5, And Solomon bids the Husband be always ravished with
her beauty, Prove:5:18, 19: Thus Ezekiels Wife was called the desire of his
eyes, Ezekiel: 24: 16: Assuredly men ought to take singular Complacency in their
Wives company, and yet without all uxoriousness: None questions Parents
dandling their Children upon their knees, as old Joseph did his Grandchildren,
Genesis 50: 23: Isa: 66 12.

2: But then you must take the following Directions for managing your heart
aright in your Rest or Recreations.

1. Direct. You must take heed of wasting too much precious time therein:
Indeed we do not so much want time, as wast time; a vain expense of that time,
(which either your general calling requires in holy duties, or your particular
calling calls upon you for in necessary employments) is not only unlawful, but
abominable? you are commanded to redeem time, Ephesians.5.16. but never to pass time:
the loss of time is such a precious thing that God commands satisfaction for
it, Exodus 10.19. It will be but a poor reckoning at your Lords returning, in
your account for expense of your talent of time; Item, spent so many days or
hours in Recreation: Oh what would the damned in Hell give for but one of those
hours which we have wilfully wasted! Time is like the Urchion or Hedg-hog that
must not be handled by the head, but by the heels, in its going from you; take
time while time serves.

2. Dir. The second Direction is, be sure you be moderate in your Recreation;
it is compared to honey, it must be taken upon the tip of the finger only, and
not whole handfuls of it, for fear of surfeiting: Omne nimium vertitur in
vitium; alas man's weak heart is soon overcharged, Luke 21.34. and soon grows
frothy, foolish, if not sensual and sinful in it; you must know, that the holy
end of Recreation is to fit you the more for the duties of your general and
particular calling (in case of weariness of body, or tiredness of mind) but if
it indispose you to either or both, your heart does deceive you; such as spend
their lives in sports, and their livelihood too, will prove but bad
accomptants, when they bring in the broken Accounts of their Stewardship to
their Lord and Master at the last day.

3. Direct. The third Direction is, choose your Recreations that are of best
report, and of least offense, Phil. 4.8. 1 Cor: 8: 13. You may not make any of
Gods Judgments or punishments for sin (either in man or beast) the matter or
object of your sport and recreation, as the folly of the natural fool, the
antipathy of beasts (whereby they tear and destroy one another) which are
fruits of the Fall, and of man's Rebellion against God; it should be rather
matter of mourning than of rejoicing. Neither may you choose (for your sport)
whatsoever moves troublesome passions, as fear, anger, etc. nor those wherein
is a lot (which is a religious act and an ordinance of God) which ought not to
be sported with:

4. Dir. The fourth Direction is; having pitched upon such Recreations as are
harmless and sinless, yet may you not stain them with bad Companions, such as
you cannot consort with, but you must either countenance sin, or contract sin;
such as you must contract either guilt or grief, as before. All Tares must be
bundled together; such as spend their time together in sports on earth, may
howl in hell together to all eternity.

5. Dir. The fifth Direction: notwithstanding all, yet must you account it
safer not to trust your heart with any Recreation at all, any further than is
plainly necessary: get (therefore) up your heart to live without them, and take
up your whole delight in God, Psalm: 37:4. Then if at any time you be
constrained to use them you will be as if you used them not, 1 Cor. 7.29. and
as not having, yet still having, 2 Cor 6.10. that is, your heart will not be
engaged to any thing but to God, and your affections will keep uppermost for
Jesus Christ: the truth is, were but our affections more mortified, and
spiritual duties more natural to us, we might better live without those, than
the Philosophers (as they said) could dine and sup without music; therefore as
Joshuah haughed the Canaanites Chariots-horses, Josh.11: 6 -- 9: and David
Zobah's, 2 Samuel.8.4. so entreat thy Joshuah, thy Jesus the Son of David, to
hough thy carnal affections, that as Phaetons Chariot-horses, they set not all
on fire; then delight in God, and thou wilt need less the delights of the world.

The third natural Action is feeding your belly
1. The 3 d. Natural Action is feeding your belly, which is daily work, for our
tottering tabernacles of clay stand in need to be supported with the staff of
daily bread, and therefore is our life called the life of our hands, Isa.
57.10: as our hands are daily (yea hourly) administering something either back
or belly, to support our life. Those common actions (of feeding and clothing
us) are steps in our Christian conversation, and therefore ought not to be
despised, but are rather to be regulated and reformed to their supreme scope.
to wit, Gods Glory.

1 Dir. Hence your first Direction is, Be sure you eat and drink with an aim at
the Glory of God, 1 Cor.10.31. You must eat for God, and drink for God;
Quicquid agas propter Deum agas, do all in reference to God; receive not any of
Gods blessings with a carnal frame of heart; but look upon all your temporal
mercies (set before you on the Table) with a spiritual eye, and improve them
with a spiritual heart. Good old Isidore wept at his Table, crying out, I am
ashamed that I should feed on corruptible beasts, whereas I was created to be a
companion of Angels, and to feed upon heavenly food with them. A worthy
Minister of Scotland was said to eat, drink and sleep eternal life, for in
those earthly and natural actions he still kept an heavenly and spiritual
heart. The main weight of his meditations was laid upon God (the giver of them)
and his glory. Oh could you but eat to his glory, and drink to his glory, you
would not so easily fin in them.

2 Dir. The second Direction: Feed your self with a God-blessing heart, which
is the true spiritual heave offering, Numb.15.19. When your heart is heaved or
lifted up to God, and in every thing gives thanks saying, Oh what charges do
you put God to, in consuming his Corn and his Cattle, Hos.2.8,9. As Jacob calls
GOD the God that fed him all his life long, Gen.48.16. Yet what an unprofitable
servant are you, and what an undutiful Son? even such as God complains of Isai.
1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against
me. You must admire and adore God that is so good, and does so good to you, who
are so evil, and do so evil to him; cry, I am less than the least of all thy
mercies, Gen.32.10. Have high thoughts of God, and low of your self; the same
Jacob that had pleaded his merit with Laban, Gen:31:38 -- 41. yet here sets a
low rate on himself to God.

3 Dir. The third Direction: whatever sweetness you find in any creature (you
feed upon) let it lead you to the springhead of that sweetness; do you say, Is
there so much favor in those derivative gifts? there must needs be much more
in the original giver: Labor to swim up those streams till you reach the
spring; crying, If mercy be so good, Oh what is the God of mercy? Oh that I may
come at him, as well as at his mercies! and learn to love God for himself, as
well as for his benefits; delighting your self in Gods goodness as well as in
that of the creatures, Neh:9.25.

4 Dir. The fourth Direction: You may not feed your self without fear, as those
in Jud.12, 1. But first, sanctify it by Prayer, 1 Timothy:4:4,5. Look on that
bread which is not got in an honest Vocation, and sanctified by an holy
Invocation, to be no wholesome bread, but such as may prove diseases to your
body, and sin to your soul: If wicked men say, we will neither eat nor drink
till we have killed Paul, Act.23.12. then godly men must say, we will neither
eat nor drink till we have called on God, as 1 Samuel 9.31. Mark 6:41. Act.27.
35. That God may command his blessing, Deuteronomy.28. 8. upon your Table that you
have your mercies not only with his leave, but also with his love; not only
from his hand, but also from his heart; not only out of the Court of Christ's
general providence, but also out of the Court of special favor. 2. Feed
soberly: Sobriety will reclaim you from being either unseasonable in time, or
unreasonable either in matter or measure, either in quantity or quality: 1. Not
unseasonable as to time, Eccl.10,16. not as luxurious persons, that serve their
bellies in the morning (that golden hour for Prayer) before they serve their
God; nor as those in Amos 6.4.6. that Feasted riotously, without laying to
heart the afflictions of Joseph; while Joseph was in the Pit; alas, his
Brethren pitied him not, Gen: 32:23: 2. Neither must it be unreasonable either
for matter or measure; 1. Not for matter or quality, as the rich Glutton, that
fared deliciously every day, Luk:16:19: as Purple and Silk was his daily
clothing, so costly delicacies was his daily Food; but (alas) it was all his
Heaven he had, as Abraham told him when he was in Hell. You must set a knife to
your throat, that is, to your concupiscible appetite (which stands more in need
of a bridle than a spur) as to those things, Prove:23:2,3,20: and say with David
Let me not eat of their dainties, Psalm: 141:4: and with Daniel, refrain from
them for fear of a snare, Dan:1:8: Nor 2. Must it be unreasonable for measure
or quantity: fullness of bread was Sodoms sin, Ezekiel. 16.49: her Food was fuel
for her lasciviousness; you may not make provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof, Rom:13: ult. then is your fullness and excess when it overcharges
you, Luk:21:34: and disenables you for the duties of either your general or
particular calling. 3: When you have eaten and are full, then bless the Lord
your God, Deuteronomy:8:10. when you are as Napthali, satisfied with favor, and
filled with the blessings of the Lord, Deuteronomy:33:23: then give God solemn thanks
for all, and be not like profane Esau, that sat down to eat and drink, and
rose up and went his way; never reflecting upon himself, nor blessing God for
his mercies; nor like the hog under the Apple Tree, that gluts himself with the
Fruit that falls, but never looks up to the Tree from whence they fall. This is
not to eat every morsel as dipped in Christ's blood, and is strained through the
Covenant to take off the curse inflicted on all creatures for the first sinner.

The fourth Natural action is clothing your body.
The fourth natural action is clothing your body, wherein the pride of your
heart may deceive you, Obad. 3. Therefore take these Directions.

1. The first Direction: Ponder the Original of your clothing; it was not in
the state of innocence, for then was there neither parching heat, nor pinching
cold; and nakedness was then no shame but a glorious comeliness; shame is the
daughter of sin, which brought in the first clothing as well as distemperature
of air (in heat and cold) the fruits of the fall: Remember that nakedness of
the soul brought in the first clothing for the body; so that it is but the badge
of man's shame, and the token of his rebellion against his Maker; it carries
along with it a secret confession of his own guilt. You may not then be proud
of your Apparel, for that is to be proud of your own shame; no man is proud of
a plaster on his sore, for that demonstrates there is a wound; no Thief is
proud of his Fetters, for they declare he he has offended the law, and that
heinously; neither must you be of your garments, which are the cover of your
shame, and the sign of your sin.

2. The second Direction: Take notice that all your clothing are but borrowed
things; how do you borrow the skin, hair and wool of bruit beasts, to cover
your nakedness withal, and what are your silks, but the spittle and excrements
of a poor worm? All (as it were) the very cast-apparel of unreasonable
creatures: Man lives on borrowing, and that from things that are worse than
himself in respect of their nature. Therefore you may not be proud of these
things that you borrow; no creature so begarly, so needy as man is, in point of
clothing; for every creature brings its clothing into the world with it, but
you were born a naked creature, and must borrow all to cover you, Ezekiel. 16.4,6:
And will you be proud (as the Crow in the Fable) of your borrowed Feathers? you
may well know, that your God does not cover you for any such end.

3. The third Direction: Instead of proud reflections on your self, use holy
Soliloquies with your self; saying; 1 I have a naked Soul to cover (as well as
a naked body) and therefore must look out for the wedding garment, to wit, the
righteousness of Christ (both imparted and imputed) I must put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 13,14. that I may not be found naked, Rev. 16.15. but that I
may be comely to God as well as to man. 2. The putting off your clothing at
night, should mind you of putting off the old man, etc. Ephesians.4.22. and of
putting off your Tabernacle of corruption, 2 Pet: 1:14. 2 Cor:5:2,3,4. and then
must you go down to the bed of the grave, there to sleep till the morning of
the Resurrection. 3. When you put on your clothing again in the morning, it
should mind you, that you must be raised out of the bed of the grave, and then
corruption shall put on incorruption, and mortality shall be swallowed up of
life, 1 Cor.15.53. 2 Cor: 5.4. if you have put on the new man, the image of God
in Christ.

The second sort of Actions are Civil, as your Commerce and Trading with others.
The second sort of Actions are Civil, as your Commerce and Trading with others.

1. Direction the first: That you may be kept from sinning herein, get your
heart fraught with the fear of God, as Joseph, Gen.42.18. and Neh.5.9,15. those
good men had a curb upon them to restrain them from wronging others; and where
this curb is not, men will not stick at any sin, as Gen.20.11.

2 Dir. Lay your souls under that command of God in the Old Testament, Lev.
25.14. [ In buying and selling ye shall not oppress one another.] And under
that in the New, 1 Thessalonians:4:6: [ Defraud not one another] and fall down before
that authority of those commands, as one that must give an account of all.

3 Dir. As you are to observe Gods Precepts, so must you [ godly presidents]
especially that of Father Abraham, Gen:23:15: The land is worth 400 shekels, if
so then Abraham cannot be cozened; here is fair dealing from heathens; the
seller does not ask too much, nor the buyer bid too little; only one which are
either private or public; The first of which will discover your state best to
you; for every man is, what he is in private; and a truly pious soul will be
found is Religious actions as well in the shade, as in the sun; he will make
conscience of duty, as well when no body sees him (for he knows he is always
under the all-seeing eye) as when any or many see him; you must go beyond the
hypocrite in the practice of secret duty. As, 1: In hearty bewailings of your
own imperfections; 2: In hearty bleeding acknowledgments of your unkindnesses
to Christ, and to his gracious Spirit; 3: In partings and inquietations of Soul
after Union and Communion with God; 4: In hungrings and longings after
spiritual refreshment, and transforming of soul in every duty.

The unsound heart is a stranger to those addresses to God (or at most, but
slight in them, if found in that work at all) he is careless in
self-examination, cursory in meditation, faint in heart-watchings, and feeble
in mortification; but nothing at all in loving and walking with God, and
delighting in him. Do you more than he in all these; and be but a good
Christian in private duties, and you cannot be a bad one in public.

1 More particularly concerning Religious Actions: And,

1: Of Meditation, that most necessary and much neglected duty; this must be
(1) your spiritual Ladder (as Jacob had his) whereon you ascend in divine
Contemplations of the excellency of your blessed and bleeding Savior, till
your heart be ravished therewithal.

2: Meditation must be (2) your spiritual limbeck, whereby the choicest and
noblest spirits may be extracted. Oh how this divine limbeck will cause tears
to distill and drop down into Gods bottle as their receiver, Psalm: 56:8:

3 The great book of nature (with its three leaves of Heaven, Earth and Sea) as
well as the blessed Book of Scripture, may hereby afford you a rich spirit and
quintescence. The first leaf of that Book, to wit, heaven, may afford you many
divine Lectures; as first the purity of Heaven may teach you the purity of its
Maker, who made it of such pure matter as you behold; and the purity also that
ought to be in your heart that this pure God may dwell in it as in his palace,
temple, and lower heaven; yea, and the purity of your life likewise, as
becomes one that expects to live for ever in that pure heaven into which no
impure thing can ever enter.

4. When you behold; 2. The glory and splendour of Heaven, both by night and by
day; 1. By night, how is it bespangled with glittering and glorious Stars, then
think with your self that this splendid firmament (which I behold) is but the
outside of the palace of God, and the under-seiling only thereof; and if that
have so much luster and beauty, how much more has the inside, where the divine
transcendent Majesty of the Trinity (with innumerable both of glorious Angels,
and of glorified Saints) shines forth!

5. And 2. by day; when you behold how one Sun makes a most glorious Morning
when it arises; and when you arise out of your bed, then meditate; O what
shall the morning of the Resurrection be! 'twill be ten thousand times more
glorious when the Sin of righteousness shall arise, and with him Myriads of
Saints and Angels (which shall be all seven times brighter than the Sun of the
firmament. If it be a pleasant thing (as Solomon tells you) to behold the
Sun, then think how it is more pleasant (yea and profitable too) for you to
behold the Son of Righteousness; that in his light you may see light, Psalm.36.9.

6. When you view the changeableness of the face of Heaven, and its outward
appearance unto you; this may teach you in the third place, that as the Heaven
is sometimes bright, and sometimes clouded, not all night, nor all day; the Sun
sometimes over-cast with a black cloud, and sometimes breaking out in its
splendour and glory; and as the Moon has her changes and her borrowed light,
ruling the night, as the Sun the day, so you may not expect any fixed constancy
in any condition upon earth, while there is such changeableness in the face of
heaven.

7. When you consider 4. the firmness of the body of heaven, how it has
continued firm and unworn (notwithstanding its motion (which wears all other
things) is with incredible swiftness) from the creation of the World, then did
the Lord spread out that heaven like a curtain, and it has continued spread
for almost six thousand years, yet not one hole can be discerned in that
curtain to this day: Oh how may this teach you the unchangeableness of God who
was the Creator and is the upholder of Heaven, and what a safe place heaven is,
to lay up your treasure in, so far cut of the reach of all rust and robbery.

The second leaf in the book of nature is,

1. The Earth, which the heaven often hear^, and waters with showers of
blessings; sometimes God stops up close bottles of heaven, and sometimes he
opens them. Speak to the Earth and it shall teach you, Job 12. 8. How the
clouds are Gods watering pot, and his spunges which he squeezes with a gentle
hand, that the rain may softly descend and drop fatness upon the furrows of the
earth. Consider, Oh what dependency has man upon God! the Rain has no farther
but God; the vanities of the Gentiles cannot give rain, Jer.14.22.

2. Meditate how the air blows upon the earth, yet is invisible; and although
it be so; yet is it the preserver of your life, which is nothing but a vapor,
and a little warm breath turned up and down the nostrils: how may this put you
in mind of the invisible God, who fills all things; and in whom you live,
move, and have your being?

3. When you consider how the Earth hangs in the midst of the air (poized
equally every way) and yet not reeled out of its place this five thousand years
and upward, notwithstanding the hidious Tempests that has been upon it, and
the dreadful Earthquakes that has been within it, Psalm.104 56. God laid the
foundation of the Earth, that it cannot be removed for ever. And he hangs the
earth upon nothing, Job 26.7. Now if the whole massy body of the earth hang so
steadily and steadfastly upon the powerful precept of God; O then bethink your
self, how firmly you ought to hang upon the precious promise of God, both for
your safety in this World, and for your salvation in the World to come.

4 Behold the fruits of the Earth, and consider, that a woman when about fifty
years of age is past childbearing; yet this great Mother (the Earth) though
she be above five thousand years old, is not past fruit-bearing still; and
whence comes it but from he word of the great Jehovah? Seed time and harvest
shall not cease, Gen.8.22. You see the earth is yearly laden with fruit, Oh
then consider what are the riches of the Throne of God, if there be so much
upon his Footstool; say also within your self, does your ground and your
garden answer your expectation, and shall not you the expectation of your God;
he will have his visiting time, Cant.6.11. and will come with his basket upon
his arm to gather the fruit of his Vineyard; if he find none to fill his
basket, he will lay down his basket, and take up his axe and cut you down, that
you may not cumber the ground any more.

5. Your beholding of the Grass of the field (while you are walking to meditate
there as Isaac did, Gen.24.63.) may mind you of your mortality, and of your
withering condition; All flesh is grass, Isai. 42.6,7. that grass which the
sithe cuts not down in Summer while it is young and juicy, the sharp frosts of
an hard winter will wither away; so though you escape the sy the of death in
the summer of your youth (while your bones are full of marrow, and your veins
of blood) yet the winter of old age will wither you.

6: When you behold that variety of tree it may teach you the difference among
men; some are wild trees, trees of the wood (that is out of the Church) whose
fruit be crabs and acorns, mask for hogs, not meat and medicine for men, as
Ezekiel:47:12: Others are trees of Righteousness, planted and watered by the Lord,
Isa.61.3. As the other by the Devil; and thus ordinary objects (as birds and
beasts, etc.) may be hallowed to an heavenly end. The Ox knows his Owner, the
Swallow her season.

1. The third leaf in the book of Nature is the Sea, the great and wide Ocean,
which yet is but as a babe in the hands of the great God, and as a little
infant in swaddling bands, Job 36:9: If you or any that are near and dear to you
be concerned at Sea, Oh, how may this consideration comfort you, that your God
can as easily rule and repress the unruly Ocean, as the Mother does her tender
suckling, when it is swadled up by her hands; it is the work of the Almighty to
set bounds to that raging Element, Job 38:9,10:

2: Thus also it may mind you, that though the Dragon cast forth floods to
drown the man-child, Rev: 12: 15: And though the waters of affliction do rise
and rage against the Church and Children of God, yet at the rebuke of your God
the waters shall be abated, and the dry land shall appear, Gen: 1:9: and 8:3:
and the Ship (the Church) shall come safe to shore, whatever contrary wind she
meets with in the world, Mat:8:26: and 14:24:

3: The continual fluctuation of the Sea in its being tossed with tempests to
keep it from stinking like a standing pool, which, if so, would destroy the
Earth: This may teach you the wisdom of God in ordering all things, in sending
tides and winds to toss the waters, and to make them foam out their mire and
dirt, Isa: 57:20: and so keep them from corruption; and likewise, how needful
it is for you to be afflicted, and to be poured from vessel to vessel, that you
may not settle upon the lees as Moab did, Jer:48.11

4: Oh the Divine Meditations that holy David had on this subject of the Sea,
in Psalm 107: 23,24. etc: (although his concernments lay very little in that
Element, as he had done before in looking upon the heavens, Psalm: 19:1: and 8:
3: look upon all with David's spectacle and spirit, and the Sea (as well as
heaven and Earth) will (...) you many divine Instructions.

It will teach you 1. That your heart (like Reuben) is as unstable as water for
for God, and God (...) Gen 49 4. 2. That the Lord sits upon the floods,
Psalm. 29.10. and rules for ever all the fluctuations of your and the Churches
afflictions; God sits when they float and fly away. 3. That Merchants and
Mariners (in their Trading and Trafficking by Sea) hang both their safety and
success upon a few Ropes, or rather upon a special immediate hand of Gods
providence. 4. That they which go down into the deep see such wonders of the
Lord as may convince the worst Atheist in the world; first, as the ebbing and
slowing of the Sea, which (should it always flow) would soon over-slow this
Island, if the hand of the Lord did not command it back by its ebb: 2. As that
it should not swell above its banks, and break its Swaddling bands, by the
falling and flowing of so many great Rivers into it. 3. As the saltness of its
waters, although all those mighty Rivers that flow into it be fresh, and the
innumerable company of fish in it be all fresh also. 4. As those trade-winds
that lie upon the lace of the Sea, to further Navigation every way, with many
other wonders.

1. Thus far of occasional Meditation upon the book of nature; there is also
Meditation appointed upon the book of Scripture, which you must be acquainted
with, as far exceeding the other; for the book of nature, though never so
diligently read over, yet will it not bring you to the saving knowledge of God
in Christ, nor thoroughly furnish you for every good work but the book of
Scripture is a larger field, furnished with all sorts of spiritual and fragrant
flowers, whereupon you may freely feed your best thoughts without ever
nauseating. If you can but unclasp the tables of your own heart (when you
unclasp your Bible) a praying heart can never want a profitable subject; Oh let
it not please you that carnal hearts can think of things below, not only an
hour, a day, a week, a month, but even a whole year without weariness, and
that to think on Gods name Mal.3.17. should weary you so soon. 2. This second
sort of meditation is a set and solemn acting of the soul upon some chosen
subject, till you can extract some sweet and soul-ravishing thoughts out of
your own heart thereby; your subject or matter of meditation must be some
scriptural truths, such as are summarily comprehended in Phil.4.8.(that little
Bible) Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things. In that one Verse is contained the whole duty of
Man, the good and the All of man, Eccles. 12.13. Mic. 6.8.

The second Religious Action is Prayer, which well follows Meditation; for as:
1. Meditation is a blessed beginning to prayer, so prayer is a blessed
conclusion of meditation, and therefore is the double reading of Genesis 24: 63:
Isaac went out to meditate, or he went out to pray. So then when your heart is
weell warmed with the Angelical duty of Meditation, then fall upon the
Evangelical duty of Prayer, then tender and render your homage to the God of
all your mercies, crying with David, Oh the God of my mercies, Psalm.59.10.

2. You must know, that Prayer is the pouring out of the heart to God, Psalm.
62.8. It Is not the pouring out of your speech but of your spirit unto the Lord.
God looks not so much at what you do, as with what spirit you do for him; you
must serve God with your spirit in the Gospel of his Son, Rom 1.9. not resting
in a bare gift of Prayer, without the grace of Prayer, Zech. 12.10. you may not
fetch materials or abilities for this work from your self, but you must pray in
the Holy Ghost, Jude. v.20. Romans 8.26: The lifting up of your own tools upon
Gods Altar, will not polish, but pollute it, Exodus: 20: ult. That earnestness in
prayer which flows merely from a natural spirit, is but the cry of the creature
and not the groans of that holy spirit which helps our infirmities; but
expressions without impressions.

3. You must pray that God may rebuke Satan that resists you in prayer; watch
the adversary that watches you, and watch your own heart likewise, which will
not only hang off from this work, but will also conspire with Satan to give you
disturbance when you are breathing out your desires into your Father^ bosom,
and send by this winged Messenger to him you will (...) it hard to serve the
Lord ((...) this duty) without distraction, as 1 (...). No enemy like one
treacherous within.

4. Take heed of formality in (...) duty; as a Musicians finger will (...) a
song as he has often played, (...) his mind all the while be employed about
out other things; so many run over such a prayer as they have often used, yet
their hearts are roving (all the time) about other things. God requires the
strength of your affections in his service; every offering must be made by
fire, if of a sweet savor to the Lord, Lev. 1.9.13,17. yea your self, as well
as your sacrifice, must be falted with fire, Mark 6. 49. David prayed and cried
with his whole heart, Psalm. 119,58,145. Samson bows himself with all his might
at the Pillars of Dagons Temple, Judge.16.30. and have not you the strongholds
of sin in you to be pulled down by Prayer. You must go to prayer as the Sun in
its strength, Judge. 5.31. and come to God as a Prince, Job 31.37. the Sun in
his might does disperse clouds that would darken it; and a princely spirit to
wrestle with God, as Jacob has power with God, and prevails for the
blessing: to put off God with cold formal devotion, is the epidemical disease
of all Christendom.

5. Be not regardless about the returns of your prayers, nor careless of the
events and issue of them; be not like those Archers that shoot not at a mark,
but at rovers, at random, never observing where their arrows fall. Spiritual
prayers are the arrows of Gods deliverance, 2 King 13. 16,17. Prayer is like
the Bow of Jonathan, 2 Samuel.1.22. It never returns empty. If you dare be
careless in asking, how can you wonder that God is careless in answering?

6. Be clothed with Humility while you are in prayer to God: He that resists
the proud, gives grace to the humble. In order hereto, get the Majesty of the
great God (with whom you have to do therein) wrought kindly upon your heart,
till you know (aright) your distance, not only your natural distance 'twixt God
and you, as you are a creature; but especially your mortal distance 'twixt God
and you as you are a sinner

In the third place I shall add but one Religious action more, viz. 1. The
Observation of the Sabbath, which yet is, instar omnium, wherein all religious
actions are summarily comprehended. You must look upon the Sabbath as the
Epitome and Compendium of a Religion, having all the privileges that commend
the most substantial precepts in Scripture to us, as 1. Its frequent mentioning
(almost) in every book of the Bible. 2. God's interest (after a special manner)
in it; it is frequently called [ His] Sabbath. And 3 ly. It Is called a special
gift and favor of God to his People, Exodus 16.29. Ezekiel.20.12. Neh. 9.14. It Is
a great favor for God that it is given to you.

2. Therefore you must remember to keep it holy, Exodus.20.8. (it may be read
thus) Remember to keep holy a day of rest unto me: Six days shall thou labor,
but a seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. The very Preface [
Remember] which none of the other Commands have, instructs you, how weighty and
necessary this duty is, which you are prone to forget.

3. That you may keep it holy, you must (in the first place) have an high and
holy estimation of it; the phrase is, He that esteems a day, and he that
regards a day, Rom.14. 5,6. You must have an high regard for it, and esteem
it honorable, Isa. 58.13. As the day which the Lord has made, Psalm.118.12.
(This Christ applies to the day of his Resurrection, Mat.21.24) How can it but
be an honorable day to you which the Lord your God has sanctified for you? 2
ly. As you must have an holy estimation of it, so you must make an holy
preparation for it; you must prepare to meet your God, Amos 4. 12. As the Bride
prepares her self to meet her Bridegroom; how did Ruth wash her self, and
anoint her, and put on her best raiment, that she might become amiable, and
accepted to Boas? Ruth 3. 3. How much more should you be purified for the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords! The Jews had a preparation for the passover, Joh.
19.42. you must make preparation for the Sabbath, the want of which may hinder
your soul of a Sabbath-blessing, as (no doubt) it has done. 3 ly. You must keep
it holy by an holy observation of it, in using all holy means, and doing all
holy duties (both private and public) all the whole day.

4. Be sure it be a desirable day to you, as well as holy and honorable; it
should be the desire of days. You should cry (with that good man) to it in the
morning of the Sabbath. Come my bride of days, thou art welcome; and with
David say, Oh when shall I come and appear before my God, Psalm. 42.2, Where are
your pantings and palpitations of heart after an enjoyment of Gods Sabbath? You
have six days to provide for the worser part, and but one for the better: how
careful are you all the six days for the beast in you? Oh, be not careless
upon that one day for the Angel in you.

5. Let not your hold go of any one precious Sabbath, without some sweet
refreshment to your soul, as well as rest to your body; it is said, Exodus 31.17.
The Lord rested and was refreshed; is it so with you? do you find any rest for
your wandering thoughts, and any refreshing for your feeble spirit? Account it a
very great loss to lose one Sabbath day without some advantage and growth: Oh
what a God-blessing heart should you have, that God should give you such a day,
and call upon you also (and that often) to observe that day: and that not for
any advantage to himself (for your goodness extends not to God, Psalm.16. 3.
though his does to you) but all for your own good. This obliges you to be
careful and conscientious in the improvement of the day, and honoring the Son
with his day under the Gospel, as they honored the Father with his day under
the Law, Joh. 5.23.

6. You shall assuredly be blessed, if you keep the Sabbath which God blessed,
Isa. 56.2. 1. With Holiness here; the power of godliness lives and dies with
the keeping of the Sabbath. 2. You shall be blessed with Happiness hereafter;
such as keep holy this Temporal Sabbath, shall be made happy in the Eternal
Sabbath; but such as profane it, shall never enter into God's rest, Heb. 3.
ult. and 4. 9,10.

FINIS.

