THE HIGH ESTEEM Which God has of the Death of his SAINTS.

As it was Delivered in a SERMON Preached October 7. 1683. Occasioned by the
Death of the Worshipful John Hull Esquire Who Deceased October 1. 1683.

By Samuel Willard Teacher to a Church in Boston.

Numb. 23.10. Let me die the Death of the Righteous and let my last end be like
his.

De Imperatore Theodosio fertur magis se gaudere quod membrum ecclesiae Dei
esset, quam caput imperii. Aug. Boston in New England Printed by Samuel Green
for Samuel Sewall: 1683.

PSALM. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his Saints.


THis Psalm is wholly Eucharistical; the Psalmists scope being to profess his
endeared love to God, and to excite himself to a grateful acknowledgement of
all those Engagements which were lying upon him to express this Love of his in
true Thankfulness for all those Kindnesses which he had made him the Subject
of: Hence there are two things which he here endeavors.

1. A summary recital of the grounds and reasons of this Profession, or, what
it was that God had so deeply obliged him by, Expressed, Enlarged, Aggravated
to ver. 12.

2. An earnest Endeavor to Affect and Engage his heart unto suitable
gratitude, from hence to the end of the Psalm; wherein he studies and promises
to let it be seen that he was not stupidly regardless of, but sutably affected
with these wondrous benefits of God toward him: where, while he is binding of
himself to the payment and performance of sacred and solemn expressions of
Thanksgiving, and particular Testimonies of a thankful heart, he draws the knot
close, and makes it more indissoluble, by reviving the Arguments or Obligations
lying upon him, or by chewing upon the consideration of the endeared Love of
God discovering it self, both to his People in general, ver. 15. and to himself
in particular, ver. 16.

So that the Words of the Text are a lofty Expression of the deep Interest
which the Saints have in Gods affection, or the high esteem which he conceives
of them, who dearly loves them, and that not only whiles living, but when dying
too.

In the Words there are two parts,

1. The Subject about which the Assertion is; The Death of Gods Saints: such a
Subject is presumed, for the Scripture does not pronounce or express the
condition of non-entities. And hence we gather these three Conclusions.

^. God has his Saints in the World; as evil and degenerate as the World is
grown, yet there are some Holy Men in it. It is true there is none so holy here
as to live without sin; but there are some that are so pure, as to be undefiled
in God's eye and esteem, Numb. 23.21. God has seen no iniquity in Jacob. Psalm.
119.1. Blessed are the undefiled: The Word used in our Text, for Saints
signifies properly one that is precious, kind, bountiful and merciful. The
Substantive is most commonly used for Mercy, or pity; and this Word in our Text
is Translated Merciful, Isai. 57.1. and so diverse read it here, his merciful
ones: others read it, his beneficent ones, much to the same purpose: But the
Septuagint for the most part translate the Word by (...) which signifies a
Saint or an Holy one, and so they do in this place, Hence, as some observe, the
Posterity of Ionadab, the Son of Rechab, were, by reason of their strictness or
severity of Life, called Hassidim, which is the Word used in the Text.

2. God's Saints must dye. It were superfluous to decipher their happiness in
Death, if they were not appointed to be the Subjects of it: the most strict,
holy and Exemplary Life of the People of God is no Bail against a bodily death,
although Gods Love be such to them, that he will take effectual care about
their dying well; yet it is his holy pleasure that they shall taste of that Cup
and meet with that common Lot of the children of Men; Psalm 89.48. What Man is
he that lives, and shall not see Death? shall he deliver his Soul from the
hand of the Grave? and hence we learn, that Death is not in itself a thing so
formidable as Men think it to be, but only the manner of dying; it is no hurt
to die if we die Saints.

3. The Saints have a privilege above other Men in their Death: what this
privilege is will follow; that there is such a thing, the limitation of the
general Subject, Death, to this particular Subject, Saints, in disposing of it
to be capable of the ensuing predication, evidenceth. When the Psalmist has
something worthy and excellent to say about Death, he restrains and bounds it
in the Saints, q. d. all Men die, but all do not thus die, this is not a common
privilege which I am speaking of, but it is appropriated to the Saints of God.
Hence, all that would have any advantage above other Men in their dying, must
make it their great care and endeavor whiles they are living to be Saints.

2. The Predicate of this Subject: It is precious in the sight of God; and here
is a double excellency of the Saints Death discovered, viz.

1. Innate or real; in it self it is precious: for God does not esteem of
things otherwise then they really are; when we hear that he reckons them so, we
may conclude that they must be so indeed: the word signifies, weighty,
honorable, precious, dear and rare. Death which is in it self an evil thing,
when it befalls a Child of God, becomes a thing of very great worth.

2. In Estimation, and that of him who best knows what esteem to put upon
things, viz. God himself; he does not tell us that it is so in the sight of
Men; for their judgment and verdict would not sufficiently determine the
question; for, as for wicked men, they account the Saints lives to be
contemptible, and their Death inglorious: and as for good men they are
fallible, liable to mistakes; and hence their judgment is not by it self
satisfying to Faith, nor may we build any conclusion upon the credit of the
best of men: but God judges aright, he knows and speaks the truth, and his
testemony is to be taken: the Phrase [ In the sight] signifies the judgment,
knowledge, and account: q. d. thus it is to God, he who sees all things, and
discerns their issues, he reckons it to be so: There are diverse thoughts among
Interpreters about the meaning of this Expression, or in what sense the
Psalmist intends that their death is precious in the sight of God, which what
it is most likely to be, will follow to be considered: Hence;

Doct. The Death of God's Saints is in his account or esteem a thing very
precious:

God sets an high price, not only upon the Lives, but upon the Deaths too of
his Children: they are dear and honorable to him, not living only, but dying
also.

For the clearing up of this Truth we may consider: 1. Who are those Saints of
God of whom this is asserted? 2. What is implied in their Death, being precious
in Gods sight? 3. Whence it comes to pass that it is so?


1. Who are those Saints whose death is thus precious?

A. I have already hinted the meaning of the Word, and shall not need to make
many Discourses upon the thing, or enter a treatise about the quality and kind
of Sanctity. There is none on this side the Grave is so holy, but to have in
him some defilement, none so clean but there may be some spots and blemishes
found in him, Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just Man upon Earth that does good
and sins not: But a Saint in a Gospel sense may be described to be One who
being powerfully wrought upon in effectual vocation, and therein converted
thoroughly unto God, has the Grace of Sanctification wrought in him, and the
Spirit of Holiness given to him, to dwell in him, and to purge his Heart and
Conscience. There are Saints in Heaven, and they are just Men made perfect; and
there are Saints on the Earth too, Psalm. 16.3. To the Saints that are in the
Earth: and these though not at present perfected, are yet perfecting. They are
such whom the Grace of God has taught in part, and is daily further teaching
those Lessons, Tit. 2.11, 12. To deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to
live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present world. They do not ly
wallowing in the mire of Sin, nor delighting themselves in such courses as are
provoking to God; but are in heart, soul and spirit devoted unto him and his
service, seeking his honor, studying his glory, contriving how they may best
serve their Generation to his praise. In a word, every one that by the power of
Gods Spirit is taken out of the World, and made a true Believer, is also a
Saint in an Evangelical account: Conversion and Sanctification go together
inseparably: Effectual vocation both designs and produces Sanctification, 1
Cor. 1.2. Called to be Saints, and such as these are, are therefore called the
Saints of God.

1. Because God has chosen and separated them for himself, and his own
service: Psalm. 4.3. Know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for
himself: He has taken them out of the World, and consecrated them to an higher
and more noble Employment than such as the rest of Mankind are engaged in: now
whatsoever is devoted to any special service of God, is therein said to be
Sanctified; for to sanctify, is to separate from common, and dedicate to
special, divine use and services: upon this account the Tabernacle and Temple,
the Altar, the Vessels, the Priests, the Levites, the People of Israel were
accounted Holy, and the more separated they were, the more holy were they
reputed to be.

2. Because they stand nearly related to Christ's Holiness; not only Christ's
Righteousness, as it stands to answer the Law for them in way of Justification,
is imputed unto them; but his Holiness also is imputed unto them for
Sanctification; there is a relative Sanctity upon every true Believer; and
hence Christ is said to be made unto them Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. the
precious Priests Robes of their elder Brother are put upon them. In the
Ceremonial Law, the Water of Purification, by being sprinkled upon the persons
and instruments that were for the service of the Sanctuary, Sanctified them:
thus the blood of Christ sprinkled upon a Child of God, renders him pure in
God's Holy Eyes.

3. Because they have the inchoations of inherent Sanctity in them: there is a
real formal Holiness in every true Believer, and though imperfect in degrees,
yet perfect in parts: the Holy Spirit of God given to, and dwelling in the
People of God, works them up to a Conformity to himself, and renders them like
unto the Holy God; and hence it is, that Believers are said to be partakers of
the divine nature, 1 Pet. 1.4. the Lord Jesus Christ has wrought them up unto
Holiness, Hence that 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. For this is the Will of God, even your
Sanctification, and that verse 7. For God has not called us unto Uncleanness,
but unto Holiness.

4. Because they are growing up to, and designed for perfection of Holiness:
Grace inherent is Holiness begun, and founded in the Believer, but they grow in
it, Psalm. 92.12, 13. The Righteous shall flourish etc. and as the Lord Jesus
Christ has laid the foundation in them by effectual vocation, so his intention
is to fit them up for himself, so as that they shall be every way like unto
him, and this is by making them to be without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.

2. What is implied in their Death being precious in the sight of God? or
wherein he makes it appear so to be?

A. 1. Negatively; we are not to suppose that God takes delight in putting of
his Servants to Death; or that their Death, as such contents him, or is a
pleasure to him; Death in its own nature is an evil; it is the fruit of the
Curse brought in by sin, and for God, to will Death as so to his People, were
not an expression of his Love, but Displeasure; But,

2. Positively; and here Observe,

1. Some read the Word here [ Heavy] and take the meaning to be, that God takes
the Death of his Saints, especially; when it is procured by the means of their
Enemies, very grievously or heavily; it is such a thing as he cannot tell how
to bear: and that David speaks this of his own experience: for when Saul, when
Absalom, when Achitophel, had contrived his Death, and sought ways how they
might effect it, God was very angry, and would not suffer it; yea, manifestly
discovered his deepest displeasure against them, in that by signal judgments
he destroyed each of them.

2. Others read it [ Rare and Dear] and understand it, that, because such
things as are dear to us, we are not wont to leave or commit to the dispose of
others; therefore David intends, that God does not easily or often grant Wicked
Men their desires upon his Saints, or suffer them to take away their lives; and
that David draws this general Conclusion to comfort others withal, from the
great Experience which he had had of manifold and strange Deliverances: But,

3. The most comprehensive meaning of this Expression may be this, viz. That
God takes as special and weighty care about the Death of his Saints, as men are
wont to do about those things that are of greatest worth and value in their
esteem: the Septuagint Translateth it by (...), Honorable, intimating that God
puts great honor upon his dying Saints; And this esteem discovers it self:

4. In his all-wise and careful timing of their Death: He takes order that his
People shall always die in the best time for them: it may be a bad time for
the World to lose them in, but it is a good time for them to leave it in. Hence,

1. Till the fit time is come, He secures their Lives for them, and that
oftentimes almost miraculously: so that all the Malice, Rage, Spite and Power
of their Enemies shall not be able to effect it, and whiles they are thus
laying their heads together plotting and contriving how to bring it about, God
laughs at them, Psalm. 37.12, 13. The Wicked plots against the Just -- The Lord
shall laugh at him. How many consultations and endeavors were there against
the Life of Athanasius of old, and of Luther in later times, and yet they could
not obtain to cut short one of their days appointed.

2. When their fit time is come, and they are prepared for it: God mercifully
takes order about their dying, and makes their Death to be such, as it shall
be a (...) witness of his dearest respect unto them; and hence we may observe a
threefold circumstance of the time of the Saints dying; one of which is always
accommodable thereunto: God therefore takes them away, either,

1. When they are despised or undervalued in the World: when Men grow weary of
them, and their company is a trouble to them; now God will not suffer them to
be troubled with them any longer, but sends to fetch them away to a place where
they are better thought of, and shall meet with more worthy entertainment. It
is Recorded of those Worthies, Heb. 11.38. That the World was not worthy of
them; they were too good for them, and they did not know their Excellency, and
therefore thought meanly of them; and now God will not let them enjoy them any
longer, he calls them home.

2. When there are evil and (...) ti^es hastening upon the place where they
(...) they (...) taken away from the wrath to come, Isai. 57.1. God now takes
them of^, and this he does not only to make a way for his wrath* by taking them
out of the Gap, where they stood to prevent ruin; but also to free them from
those Sorrows and distressing Calamities which else they must needs undergo:
this was a mercy promised to tenderhearted Josiah, 2 King. 22. ult* Thou shall
be gathered to thy Fathers in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil
which I will bring upon this place.

3. When they have done the work of their Generation: God has in his holy
Decree laid out what work every one of his Saints shall do for him in this
World; and a Saint would not desire to be here any longer than he has some
work to do for God; Hence, when they have finished their course, he brings them
to the Crown: thus we read of David, Act. 13.36. When he had served his own
Generation, by the Will of God, he fell asleep. When a Believers work is done,
its his privilege to go to rest.

2. In his special care about the manner of their Death: For,

1. He affords them his special presence to carry them through all the
conflicts which they have with Death, and with all their Enemies, who in that
hour assault them. He makes all their Bed for them in their sickness, he visits
them with his Holy Spirit, comfort and refreshes them against all their
fears, bruiseth Satan for them under their feet, sends his Angels to strengthen
them against all their Temptations, and support them under all their Agonies,
and is very careful that they shall in no wise be tempted above what they are
able.

2. He takes order thet they shall die in peace; whatever Troubles they have
been which they have met with in their lives, yet they shall meet perfect peace
in their Death, Psalm. 37.37. Take notice of the perfect man, mark the upright,
for the latter end of that man is peace. Death comes not armed with a sting
against them, but the sting is taken out, and the poison of it removed, 1 Cor.
15.55. Oh Death! where is thy sting? it comes not as an Officer of Justice to
Arrest them, but as a friendly Messenger to invite them into their Fathers
presence, to the Court of a reconciled God, and tenderhearted Father, and the
kind embraces of a loving Redeemer.

3. He orders them so to die as to leave a sweet remembrance behind them.
Wicked men possibly may endeavor, by throwing dirt at them, to blemish their
Names, and yet God often makes them speak well of his dead Saints, and to build
the Tombs of the Prophets whom they have killed: But however, in the hearts of
the faithful they have an honorable esteem, a worthy Monument, Psalm. 12.6. The
Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. Prove. 10.7. The memory of of the
just is blessed.

3. In the care which he takes of them after their death: those that were dear
to us in their lives, are not easily forgotten by us when they are dead, nor
are the Saints by God, but effectually taken care for; For,

1, Their dust is not reputed by him as common dust, but they are laid up by
his care, kept under his eye and preserved by his powerful providence, as
precious Relics, till they be brought forth again in the day of Resurrection.
He lays them to rest in peace and safety, Isai. 57.2. They shall rest in their
Beds; their Bodies which were made Temples of the Holy Ghost, and Members of
Jesus Christ, are not now rejected as worthless things, but are laid up in
God's Cabinet, and that with far more tender care then we do the most estimable
jewel; and Hence their Flesh rests in hope, Psalm. 16.9. dying Believers can
in Faith recommend their dead Bodies to the Grave in joyful expectation of an
happy return, and all the rage of Men and Devils shall never be able to prevent
this.

2. Their precious Souls, dearly beloved of the Lord Jesus, are safely guarded,
and surely transported to a place of eternal honor and rest: The Saints die to
go to, and to be with Christ which is best of all; they die that they may live
for ever. When a Saint of God dies, there is a glorious Convoy of blessed
Angels; sent from Heaven to attend his departure, the Angels carried Lazarus
into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16, 22. and this is done both for their honor, and
their safety; they carry their Souls out of the reach of Men and Devils, into
the presence Chamber of the great God, to him in whose presence is fullness of
joys, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, to receive an
incorruptible and never fading Crown of Glory; and though Legions of Devils
enterpose, and seek to stop up the way, they shall never be able to obstruct
their passage, nor from that time for evermore do them any the least
displeasure. Thus precious in Gods account is the death of every one of his
Saints.

3. Whence it comes to pass that it is so?

A. It Flows not from any merit of theirs; a Saint aspires not to challenge any
favor from God upon the score of his own deservings, but when he has done
all, acknowledges himself an unprofitable Servant, and his best Righteousness
to be but as filthy Rags: but it proceeds from Gods infinitely free Grace, and
if we look upon that, we shall find manifold reason why the Saints Death is
precious in God's sight: viz.

1. Because he has loved them in Christ with an everlasting Love: where there
is love, it renders that object beloved, precious to him that loves it; though
another can discern no excellency or worthiness in it, and may thereupon wonder
what he loves it for, yet love apprehends it to be of worth: now God has loved
his Saints from everlasting, Jer. 31.3. and inasmuch as that which is
everlasting, is by consequence immutable; hence this love of his abides to, in,
and after death, and makes it precious.

2. Because they are his: Propriety and Peculiarity engage the care, and exite
the affections to a suitable proportion unto the Subject; the Saints are God's
Peculium, they are called his Anointed, and his Prophets, Psalm. 105.15. they
are firmly and closely united unto him through Christ, and Death does not
dissolve that indissoluble Bond; dead Believers continue in union with Christ,
and shall his own die then, and he not be deeply concerned in it? it cannot be.

3. Because they are Saints: They are Holy Ones, such as are sanctified by his
Grace, and so are made precious: there is a Worth put upon, and a Worth put
into a Believer that makes him more precious than the Gold of Ophir; it makes
him a Jewel, a Pearl of great price; and for that reason he must not be lost,
but bound up, Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine, says the Lord, in that day when I
make up my Jewels.

4. Because the Death of the Saints is of great and high concern: For,

1. There is much of the Glory of God is concerned in and about their Death:
they do not only glorify him in their Lives, but in their Death too. Joh.
21.19. This he said, signifying by what Death he should glorify God. Never
does the Box of their sweet Ointments give a better savor, than when the Case
is broken: the Saints do not go out like a Candle in a stinking Snuff, but they
ascend like Frankincense or sweet Incense, in a Cloud of fragrant Smoke.

2. Their eternal being in another World bears a Relation to their Death; Of
all the changes which they pass through, this is in some respect the greatest:
The Death of Believers is appointed to be the narrow passage through which they
are to be conducted from their Earthly Cottage to a Palace of Kingly Glory: It
is the Ceremony in which an honorable discharge is given to these faithful
Soldiers from their fore Warfare here below, to ride home to their City in
triumph: It is their dis-banding from the Church Militant, to go to and become
Members of the great Sanhedrim of the Church Triumphant, and this is a great
and a notable transaction and must needs therefore be precious, and taken such
care for, as that it may answer in glory to the great design of it.

USE I. For Information: We may hence collect,

1. That the Title of a Saint is a most honorable Title: or that it is the
greatest honor and privilege in the World to be a Saint; this is the honor
that all His Saints have, that their Death is precious in His sight: and there
is no Worldly Title, though never so glittering and glorious, that involves in
it such a privilege as this is: they that have them may live in great splendour
among Men, and be followed with the stately Solemnities of Funeral Pomp to
their House of Darkness: but in God's account (which is alone to be set by)
they are in their Deaths of no more value than so many Beasts, Psalm. 94.20. Man
that is in honor, and understands not, is like the Beasts that perish. This
Dignity is not annexed or appropriated to Imperial Crowns, to Robes of State,
or to the Thrones of Kingdoms, but only to a Saint* who then would not labor
to be of that number?

2. That God's Saints serve a good Master: Th^se that serve Earthly Potentates,
though for a while they may be had in high esteem with them, and be greatly set
by, yet seldom but they have their quietus est before they die; when they grow
unapt for Service, it is thought high time to lay them by: however when Death
comes they are then left and soon-forgotten: but the Servants of the most High
are never forgotten; God that loved them living, loves them dying too: It was a
lamentable, but true saying of a great, yet miserable Prelate; If I had served
God as faithfully as I have done my King he would not now have left me: what
Fools then and Madmen are they that relinquish the service of God, to serve
the lusts of Men, who care but to serve their own turns of them, and then will
relinquish them?

3. That Death cannot make a Believer miserable, but must needs render him
happy. Those precious thoughts which God has conceived in his own breast for
dying Saints, cannot choose but break forth into suitable operations for them;
if their death be precious in God's sight, it must needs bring forth precious
fruits for them, and such as shall fill them with perfect Felicity. Hence of
all the Men in the World the Saint is the Man that has the least need of being
afraid to die: this glorious promise is a Believers plentiful security against
all the frightful menaces of the King of Terrors; and it may light a Child of
God into and through this dark valley, Psalm. 16.9, 10. Therefore my heart
rejoices, and my Glory is glad* etc.

4. That the Death of a Saint calls for solemn and serious observation by the
living. It is an awful thing for a Righteous man to die, and no man lay it to
heart; for the Godly* to be taken away, and none consider it: if the Saints
death be so precious in the sight of God, then it is certain that there are
great and weighty reasons in the very circumstances of their dying which Men
ought to regard: there is a great change made in that place from whence the
poorest and meanest Saint is removed: there is no such desolation and
impoverishing brought upon a Land, as when Death comes commissioned by God, to
sieze, gather up, and carry away from us those Jewels; one of them is of more
worth than ten thousand of wicked Men, and a greater loss it is (whether Men
will believe it or no) to be stripped of one of them, then of a multitude of
those unprofitable things that cumber the Ground, and are a burden to the Earth
they tread upon.

USE II. For Exhortation: Learn we hence these Practical Lessons.

1. When the Saints die let us mourn: And there is no greater Argument to be
found that we should excite our selves to mourn by, then the remembrance that
they were Saints: it should more effect our hearts at the thoughts of this that
they were Saints, then that they were our Father, or Mother, or Brethren, or
nearest or dearest Friends, for this is that which makes their loss to be
greater than any other Relation does or can; others are natural, but these are
pious Tears that are shed upon this account: Another Man may be a private loss
when he is gone, his Family or his Neighbors, or Consorts may miss him; but a
Saint, though he be a private Christian, is yet, when he dies a, public loss,
and deserves the tears of Israel; how much more than when he has been a Saint
providentially put into a capacity of being, and by Grace helped and enabled to
be a public benefit by the Orb he moved in? when a Saint Dies there is
manifold ground of Mourning; there is then a Pillar plucked out of the Building,
a Foundation Stone taken out of the Wall, a Man removed out of the Gap; and now
it is to be greatly feared that God is departing, and Calamities are coming,
and are not these things to be lamented?

2. When the Saints die beware of irregular Mourning: though we are to lament
their Death, yet we must beware that it be after the right manner: a dying
Saint may say to his weeping Friends that stand round about, wringing their
hands, after the same Language that Christ did to those weeping Women, Luke
23.27, 28, 29. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your selves,
and your Children, etc. It is we and not they that are endangered and endamaged
by it: we may therefore weep for our selves, and there is good reason for it,
but to mourn for them is superfluous. Is their Death precious in Gods? let it
not be miserable in our esteem: and tell me you whose hearts throb, and eyes
run over with sorrow, is it not a precious thing to be asleep in Jesus? to ly
in the lap of his providence, and rest from the labors and sorrows of a
troublesome World? to be laid out of the noise of the whistling Winds, and feel
none of the impetuosity of those Storms and Tempests that are blowing abroad?
to be out of the sight and hearing of the rolling and dashing waves of the
roaring Sea? to sleep out the rest of the tempestuous night of this World,
standing in the inner Chamber of Gods Providence, in answer to that sweet
invitation? Isai. 26.22. Come my People, enter into thy Chambers, and shut
(...)hy doors about thee, etc. To ly in Christ's Bosom, and be (...)avished
with his dearest love, and most intimate Embraces? (...)o see none of those
sorrowful changes that are coming on (...)he places which they once lived in,
nor any more to be within the reach of the calumny and rage of their spiteful
Enemies? surely these Notes do not suit with an Elegiack (...)train; and yet
this is the comfort which is given them to (...)eed upon, whose dead Relations
and Friends were Saints upon (...)he earth.

3. Is the death of the Saints precious in Gods sight? let it be so in ours
too. They are not to be accounted for contemptible things which God sets an
high value upon; and it is our wisdom to think and speak of persons and things
as God does: we ought not to slight the death of the righteous, and speak
meanly of it, as of a thing that is little momentous: I am sure their arrival
at Heaven is there taken notice of as a thing worthy of observation; and shall
not their departure be regarded? they are welcomed into the Palace of delight
with Panegyricks; and shall then be hence dismissed with no more but a sorry
saying, there is now a good Man gone, and he will be missed in the Family, or
the Church to which he once belonged? we should embalm the memory of the Saints
with the sweet smelling Spices that grew in their own Gardens, and pick the
chiefest Flowers out of those Beds to strew their Graves withal; we should
remember and make mention of them with honorable thoughts and words: and
though it be now grown a Nickname of contempt among wicked and profane Men,
yet count it the most orient Jewel in their Crown, the most odoriferous and
pleasant Flower in their Garland, that we can say of them that they lived and
died Saints; all other Eschutcheons will either wear away, or be taken down,
every other monument will become old, and grow over with the Moss of time, and
their Titles, though cut in Brass, will be Canker-eaten and illegible: this
only will endure and be fresh and Flourishing, when Marble it self shall be
turned into common dust.

Such an one it is whom we have now lost; and Oh that we kn^w how great a loss
we have sustained in him! they are little things to be put into the account,
and weigh but light in the commendations we have to give him; to say, This
Government has lost a Magistrate; this Town has has lost a good Benefactor;
this Church has lost an honorable Member; his Company has lost a worthy
Captain; his Family has lost a loving and kind Husband, Father, Master; the
Poor have lost a Liberal and Merciful Friend; that nature had furnished him
with a sweet and affable Disposition, and even temper; that Providence had
given him a prosperous and Flourishing Portion of this Worlds Goods; that the
love and respect of the People had lifted him up to places of honor and
preferment; this, this outshines them all; that he was a Saint upon Earth; that
he lived like a Saint here, and died the precious Death of a Saint, and now is
gone to rest with the Saints in glory: this has raised those Relics of his
above common dust, and made them precious dust. When Conscience of duty
stimulated me to perform my part of his Exequies, and put me upon it to do him
honor at his Death; methoughts Justice required, and envy it self would not
nibble at this Character: and if the Tree be to be known by its Fruits, his
works shall praise him in the Gates: For his constant and close secret
Communion with God (which none but Hypocrites are wont to do with the sound of
a Trumpet) such as were most intimate with him, have known and can testify:
the care which he had to keep up constant Family Worship, in reading of the
Scriptures, and praying in his Family (from which no business public or
private could divert him) was almost now unparalleld; the honorable respect he
bore to God's holy Ordinances, by diligently attending upon them, and esteeming
highly of God's Servants for their work sake, and care that he used to live the
Truths which he heard from time to time, was very singular: the exemplariness
of his Life and Converse among Men, and the endeavors which he used to show
forth the Graces of the Spirit, not being ashamed of Christ, nor being willing
to be a shame unto him; let all that knew him bear witness of: his meek
boldness in reproving Sin, and gentle faithfulness in endeavoring to win
Sinners as he had opportunity, is known to such as lay in his way: His
constancy in all these whiles times have changed, and many Professors have
degenerated, when he strove to grow better as the times grew worse, will speak
the sincerity of his Profession: his living above the World, and keeping his
heart disentangled, and his mind in Heaven, in the midst of all outward
occasions and urgency of Business, bespake him not to be of this World, but a
Pilgrim on the Earth, a Citizen of Heaven: In a word, he was a true Nathaniel.

But God has taken him from us, and by this stroke given us one more sad
prognostic of misery a coming: when there are but a few Saints in the World,
and those die apace too, what is to be thought to be at the door? I dare say
his Death was precious in Gods sight, and he had some holy end in taking him
away just now, who might probably have lived many years, and done much more
service for God in his Generation: I shall not make it my work to Prophecy;
the Lord grant we do not all know it too soon to our cost. Mean time let us
have such in remembrance, and labor to be followers of them who through Faith
and Patience do now inherit the promises, and that will be the best way to
divert the Omen: Let us account the Saints precious whiles they live, and God
will not begrutch them to us: but if we by contempt, obloquy, and wickedly
grieving their Righteous Souls, make their lives a burden to them; if they
cannot live in honor among Men, they shall die in favor with God, and he will
make their death a precious gain to them, though it be a direful presage of a
great inundation of sad Calamities coming upon those whom they leave behind
them.

IN OBITUM LUCTUOSISSIMUM VIRI VERE GENER OSI PII, PLURIMISque ALIIS NOMINIBUS
HONORANDI JOHANNIS HVLL ARMIGERI, Cum Dignitate pari degentis, in Summo
Dynastarum NOV-ANGLORVM ordine, dum vixit, Pius.
NEc ver perpetuum voluit Deus esse; perennem
Noluit aestatem: sed and Autumni quoque tempus
Cedere; quo jussit ver, aestatemque, coronam,
Flores and fruges, deponere; cumque nivali
Vinclo ut tristis Hyems coustringeret omnia: Quo me
Fert animus vereor, ne Tu quoque terra Nov'Angla,
Experiare vices Anni; cui praeteriere
Floribus ornatum ver, and tua frugibus aestas.
Quamque diu Autumni nobis inimica fuere
Tempora! dum Proceres divos, sanctosque Prophetas,
Innumerosque pios, messem nec adhuc satis amplam,
Ipse Deus reputans demessuit: Vnde Nov'Angli
Nostratem hunc Procerum comitem, sociumque fidelem
Lugent; (Quem Deus hinc, jam nunc subduxit in altum
Aethera) conclamant; merito lugendus es, HVLLI:
Vnus de fulcris, ad propugnacula fixis,
Fixus eras: populi suffragia de meruisti;
Tot tantisque tuis virtutibus emicuisti:
Moribus a puero ingenuis te novimus omnes;
Signa dedit pubes, jam tum, virtutis adultae,
Cumque annis succrevit: and hinc praelusit honori.
Gratus honos populi: sed long gratior illo
Est virtutis honos: hoc te celebravit honor
Plebs pia; quem norunt vitiorum labe carentem,
Correptumque sacrae studii virtutis amore;
Sollicitum, siquis, fidei, populique salutis.
Sed quid ego? quod iners ausim, sine divite vena
Ingenii, etc. cedo: sed non sine crimine cedam
Ingratae mentis, sua si praeconia laudis
Supprimo; cum mihi per quasi ter duo lustra fuisset
Dulcis amicus; and hinc rerum rutela mearum:
Quique bonos alios mihi conciliavit amicos:
Vestibus and nummis animum relevavit egentis:
Sic cymbam prohibens, tenuem mihi mergier undis.
Sed tamen ingratus, mihi dulcis (...), videbor,
Si tua in angusto, rerum benefacta mearum
Limite concludam. Tua facta benigna fuere
Pauperibus, Viduis, charisque parentibus orbis
Subsidio ingenti. Ah quanto Res-publica damno
Mulctatur! quantis haec tristia tempora damnis,
Rebus in angust^s mul^tantur! cum Deus ipse
Nostris infensus vitiis, hunc sustulit ad se,
Hunc justumque piumque piis Christoque fidelem;
Vt sit in aeternum, cum sanctis, incola coeli.
Sic fuit Autumni facies tibi* Terra Novangla,
O si non nobis concrescant ^rigore brumae,
Res sacrae and celebres! sed nob^s gratia Christi
Perpetuo servet sanas, atq, inviolatas.
ELIJAH CORLET.

FINIS.

