SEVERAL Laws and Orders MADE AT A GENERAL COURT Held at Boston, February the
4th 1679./80. EDWARD RAWSON Secretary.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that for the future
there shall be annually chosen according to our Charter, eighteen Assistants,
besides the Governor and Deputy Governor, in manner following, viz. The
Constables of each Town shall give timely notice to, and warn their Freemen to
meet upon the second Tuesday in April next, who being so met, shall put in
their Votes for Governor, Deputy Governor, and twenty Assistants, with Major
General, Secretary Treasurer and Commissioners of the united Colonyes, all in
distinct papers fairly written, the whole number of twenty for Assistants being
to be put into one List, cut almost asunder betwixt each name, which Votes
shall be received by the Deputyes chosen for the next General Court, Order for
Nomination and Election of Governor, Assistants, and public Officers.
or some other meet Person chosen by the Freemen where no Deputy is, and sealed
up in the presence of the Freemen and the Deputyes, or other persons chosen for
that end, are to bring the said Votes to Boston so sealed up, to the Court
house by one of the clock, on the Monday before the Election day, on the
penalty of ten pounds for every Person that does neglect so appearing; where in
the presence of the Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants, or so many of
them as shall be then present the Proxyes shall be opened and sorted forthwith
by the Persons so assembled, and so kept distinct, sealed up and numbered, with
the name of the Party on the backside with the number of Votes enclosed till
Wednesday, when all the Freemen that have not Voted by Proxy are required to
appear at the Court House in Boston aforesaid, by seven of the clock in the
morning, to bring in their Votes for Elections of Governor, Deputy Governor,
Assistants and other Officers that are then to be chosen according to Charter,
in Papers a aforesaid: all which Votes are to be sorted and numbered with the
Proxyes. And the Governor and Deputy Governor being chosen and proclaimed,
the eighteen that have most Votes, are to be proclaimed Assistants for the Year
ensuing, and other general Officers to be chosen as formerly. Also it is
Ordered, that every Person admitted to be present as above, at the opening and
numbering of the Votes, shall before they enter upon the said work, or be
admitted to be present thereat, take their Oaths to deal truly in the trust
committed to them as abovesaid; this Law or Order to stand for this year only,
as to be manner of Choice.

WHereas you A B. C. are appointed and betrusted for the opening the Proxies
sent in by the Freemen, and receiving sorting and numbering the Votes for the
choice of Governor, Deputy Governor, Oath to be administered to those that
sort and number the Votes.
Assistants, and other public Officers of this Jurisdiction, to be chosen on
the Election day; You do now swear by the Name of Almighty God that you will
deal truly and uprightly therein as also that you will not either directly or
indirectly discover either the persons or number of Votes until the Election be
ended, So help you God.

The Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. To A. B.
Captain.
WHereas you are appointed Captain of a Foot-Company for the Service of his
Majesty in the Town of B. in the County of E in the Colony of the Massachusetts
Bay. These are in his Majesty's Name to Authorize and require you to take into
your care and conduct the said Company, Form of Military Officers Commission
(...)
and diligently to intend that service by leading and exercising your interior
Officers and Soldiers in peace and war, commanding them to obey you as their
Captain, and you to observe and obey all such Orders and directions as from
time to time you shall receive from your Major, or other Superior Officer, In
Testimony whereof, etc.

IT is Ordered by this Court that every person legally chosen in any Town
within this Jurisdiction to serve in the Office of a Tything man according to
Law, Addition to the Law of Tything men.
and do refuse to take his Oath shall pay as a Fine to the Town forty
Shillings, and another to be chosen in his room for that year, and so from time
to time the same course is to be observed in all Towns. And further, It is
Ordered, that the Constable of each Town from time to time shall Assist the
Tything-men in the Execution of their Office, being thereunto desired by the
said Tything men or any two of them.

FINIS.

