HEAVEN'S ALARM TO THE WORLD OR A SERMON, wherein is showed, That Fearful
Sights And Signs in Heaven, are the PRESAGES of great CALAMITIES at hand.

Preached at the Lecture of Boston in New England; January, 20. 1680.

By Mr. INCREASE MATHER.

The Second IMPRESSION.

Rev. 8.10. And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from
heaven, burning as it were a Lamp, etc.

Rev. 11.14. -- behold, the third Woe comes quickly.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND, Printed for Samuel Sewall. And are to be sold by Joseph
Browning at the Corner of the Prison-Lane Next the Townhouse. 1682.

TO THE READER.
COncerning those admirable; and amazing works of God, which are by us called
Comets, as under a Physical and Mathematical Consideration, there are many that
have published their Sentiments, and some to good purpose and edification. The
scope of the ensuing discourse, is only (that being most proper for one under
my circumstances) to make a Theological Improvement thereof. There are that do
propound this inquiry, How many Comets has the world taken notice of since the
first Creation? Which is indeed a Question that no mortal living is able to
give a full and certain answer unto. It is true that sundry learned and worthy
Writers (especial Lavater and Alsted) have attempted to give us the History of
Comets, nor has their labor been wholly in vain or unprofitable. In the
Authors but now mentioned (though others give us a larger account) We do not
read of above eleven Blazing Stars, in those Ages (for about four thousand
years) that were before the Incarnation of the Son of God: Doubtless there were
more; but the Records of those times are very imperfect, so that we cannot say,
when they appeared, or by whom observed. The number of Comets seen these last
1680. years, is judged to be about 158. Some speak of a far greater number,
but oth^^s question whether there have been so many, inasmuc^ as diverse
appearances of the same Comet have been set down by Historians as if they had
been so many distinct Comets* Such Stars (for so rather than Meteors have the
Observations of later times evinced them to be) have ever been accounted
Ominous Presages of great mutations and miseryes coming upon the world. So did
the wise men amongst the Gentiles of old Ab ultima antiquitatis memoria notatum
est Cometas semper calamitatum praenuncios fuisse. Cicer. de not. Deor. Lib. 2.
-- diri toties arsere Cometae.
Virg. Et terris nunquam spectaclum impune Cometae.
Claudian. -- Quando nocte Co^^^^.
Sangiunei lugubre rubent. --

their Orators, Poets, Philosophers ever esteem of them. And the observation
has been sadly verified, by the experience of latter Ages; consonant to the
holy Scriptures of Truth, where (both in the Old Testament and in the New)
Prodigious Sights and Signs in the heavens are mentioned as the presages of
great Calamityes. Some object that after the blazing Star, Anno, 1097. A very
fertile prosperous year followed, but they forget that the next ye^r a direful
Plague raged in the World. Others object that Wickliffs and Luthers
Reformations, had Comets to proceed them. But (to say nothing of the Wars and
fatal changes which in those days happened in diverse parts of the World) two or
three exceptions do not invalidate the truth of a general Assertion. If such
signs are commonly Presages of sore Calamityes, that is enough to awaken men out
of their Lethargyes, though now and then, once in an hundred times it should
happen to be otherwise, which yet remains to be demonstrated. As for their
notion who think that Comets are signs that the light of the Gospel shall be
further dispersed in the world, or that they portend mercy to the Church, and
Judgment to others only; it is to be wished that there were a solid foundation
for such a conceit: But alas* Divisions amongst the Lord's professing People
themselves, and great Persecutions have oftentimes been the fatal consequents
of such portentous signs. And if public calamities come upon the world, it is
not to be expected but that the Lord's People, whilst they are mixed amongst
others (and too much partaking with them in their sins) living in an evil
world, will have their share therein. It has ever been so, and is ever like to
be so, until the sign of the Son of Man appear.

As for the Blazing Star, which has occasioned this present Discourse, it was
a terrible sight indeed, especially about the middle of December last, the
stream of such a stupendous magnitude, as that few men now living ever beheld
the like. That in the year, 1618. was looked upon as very prodigious History of
great Britain, Page 128. Clark's Example, Vol. 2. p. 256.
yet the radiant Locks of it were not at first though at last extended above
45. degrees in length, whenas this was about 60. degrees. Yet I cannot say
there never was any so dismal since the world began, for I have read of diverse
no less fearful. Seneca Not. Quest. Lib. 7. C. 15, 16.
speaks of a Comet whose magnitude was equal with that of the Sun: And of
another that prodigiously diffused it self over the Via lactea; and of another
very formidable, after which Helice and Buris, Cities in Achaiae perished by a
fearful Inundation. That which appeared Anno Christi, 1452. Test Nauclero.
was above 50. degrees in length. Writers speak of some Blazing Star that has
been attended with a much longer stream; Yea, of one that was 90. and another
that was 130. degrees. Nevertheless, one so fearful to behold as this, has
rarely been known: And without controversy some great thing is portended
thereby. I see little reason to conclude, that it is an Omen of happy days to
the world until God has made way for mercy by great Judgments. Especially
considering, that we are fallen into the dregs of time, wherein the days must
and shall be perilous. It was long since Keckerm. Phys. ubi de Cometis. p. mihi
1697.

Magius de exustione Mundi. l. 3. c. 10.


conjectured, that in the Ages more immediately preceding the day of Judgment,
Comets and other fearful Sights should be more frequent than formerly, as
intimations of the great and amazing Revolutions in those Ages to be
accomplished. It will not be long before the second Woe Trumpet has done its
work, and then the third Woe will come quickly. The Lord grant that we may be
accounted worthy to stand before the Son of Man at His coming.

The learned and judicious Hospinian De Origin templorum. p. 59.
writes that Anno, 729. There was a Comet seen first in the East, in the
Morning, and after in the West in the Evening (just as with our present Blazing
Star) Quasi Orienti simul and Occidenti magni alicujus mali Praesagi. We have
cause to fear that this Comet so appearing does presage and portend great
Calamityes both to the East and the West, h. e. to the World in General. That
some notable day of the Lord is at hand, when such Signs appear, we may
believe: Hence are they called V. Melchior Jun Orat Par. 1. p. 425.
Prodigia a Praeostendendo, because they show before hand that something
Remakable is a coming. Further then this I would not go about to determine;
only we may modestly conjecture as to particular events like to happen. I have
ever thought it unwarrantable, for men, not acted by an extraordinary Spirit,
to make particular and positive determinations concerning the Judgments (or
the Persons eminently concerned therein) by such Prodigies menaced. The great
Melancthon has been thought (by some great Voetius in Disp. de Sign.
Authors) to proceed something too far in applications of this nature. Peucerus
(Melancthon's Son in Law) expresses himself more warily, in his Teratoscopia,
or Discourse about Divination from fearful Sights. Yet he affirms that when
ever great changes in the world have been near, prodigious Sights have been the
forerunners thereof; and that unusual Sigh^^ are seldom or never known to have
happened without great and miseserable changes attending them. Only it is
possible for particular Persons and places through faith in Christ, and in a
way of humble Repentance, to obtain a lengthening out of their tranquillity. The
Gentiles of old Alexand. ab Alex. l. ^. c. 27. Coelius Rodogi. l. 3. c. 27.
when they beheld fearful Sights in Heaven, would presently betake themselves
to their Prayers and Piacular Sacrifices (in imitation of whom idolatrous
Papists have been wont in like cases to go to their Relics, Amulets,
Processions, etc.) that so evils Ominated thereby, might (if possible) be
averted. And shall not Professors of the true Religion, be awakened by such
awful works of God, to go unto Jesus Christ (our only Sacrifice) and to pray
earnestly that impending wrath may be removed, and the mercy of Heaven
obtained? Shall we not be humbled, as for other Sins, so for that, of not
harkening to His Word? The contempt whereof provokes him to speak by fearful
Sights and Signs from Heaven, which seems to be the Strigelius and Tossanus ad
Locum.
meaning of that Scripture, Act. 2.19. The Lord is many ways calling upon men,
to repent, and pray, and get into the Ark before the Flood come. Indeed we
should not be dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, nevertheless (as that Emperor
said) We ought to fear that God who has made this bla^ing star. Surely, we
have cause to speak, as sometimes the Psalmist did, My flesh trembles for fear
of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

Boston, N-E. Febr. 16. 1680. 1. INCREASE MATHER.

HEAVEN'S ALARM TO THE WORLD.
Luke 21.11. -- Fearful Sights, and great Signs shall there be from Heaven.


THE Lord Jesus Christ, having told his Disciples that great Calamityes were
hastening upon Jerusalem, and upon the Jewish Nation; they enquire when those
things should come to pass, and what Signs should precede and presage the
Judgments predicted. This we see in the 7 th. Verse of this Chapter, They
asked Him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be: and what Sign will
there be when these things shall come to pass? In Answer unto which Enquiry,
the Lord Christ does in this Context mention several things, some of which were
to be more remote, and others more immediate Signs of that miserable
Destruction, which the sacred and unerring lips of Christ had foretold. 1.
False Christ's would arise, V. 8. Many shall come in my Name, saying, I am
Christ, etc. The Jews had rejected the true Messiah, therefore God would punish
them with false Christ's, as an intimation that the days of vengeance were
coming upon the Nation for that Sin of theirs. The Apostle John (Christ's
beloved Disciple) does imitate his Master in mentioning the same thing as a
Sign that the Jewish World was near unto its end, 1 John 2.18. There are many
Antichrists b h. e. false Christ's, such as came Mede 's Works, I. 818, 872.
in Christ's Name, i. e. that pretended unto his Office, Dignity, and
Authority; and thereby, (says the Apostle,) we know that it is the last time;
sc. the Jewish State, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, was come unto the last
hour: The Period of the Jewish World was at hand. And the Historyes of those
times speak of one Theudas, and others, that pretended to be Christ's, and that
the River Jordan should give way to them as once it did to Joshuah; so that a
multitude of silly Jews were seduced, and persuaded to follow them, unto their
own destruction. 2. Another Sign mentioned, is that of Wars, and Commotions,
V. 9. When you shall hear of Wars and Commotions, be not terrified: for these
things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by. This may be
understood of those Intestine Wars and Commotions, which happened in the Land
of Judea. The Galileans took up Arms against the Samaritans. At Joseph. Antiq.
L. 20. C. 4, 5. De Bello Jud. L. 2. Cap. 11.
one time, in a Mutiny there were twenty Thousand slain. These were Commotions,
which caused great noise and consternation amongst men (especially amongst
those of the Jewish Nation) in those days. Hence that which is by Luke
expressed by Wars and Commotions, is by Mark called Troubles; and by Matthew,
Wars and Rumors of Wars. And these things happened about twenty years before the
final destruction of Jerusalem, and fatal overthrow of the Jewish Nation;
therefore was it said, The end is not by and by. 3. Another Sign is that
mentioned in the 10 th. V. Nation shall rise up against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom. Joseph. de Bello Judaico. Lib. 2. C. 19.20, 21.
So indeed it came to pass, when the Jewish Nation rose up against the Roman
Nation; and their Neighboring Nations, Syrians, Samaritans, etc. rose against
them. In those days the Land of Judea was divided into several Provinces,
which did bear the names of Kingdoms, and the chief Governors of them are
according to the Hebrew Style, called Kings, being the Viceroys which the
Roman Emperors did substitute to be over those places.. See 1 King. 22.47.
Hence we read of King Herod, King Agrippa, etc. Grotius, and Lucas Brugensis in
Matthew. 24.7.
Now the people of these Provinces were set one against another; therefore it
is said, Kingdom shall rise up against Kingdom. All these troubles were
forerunners and Intimations of the fatal Calamity a coming, and did help to
make way thereunto. 4. There were to be great Earthquakes in diverse Places. In
the beginning of this Verse. Such things are usually signs of Divine Anger, and
so portentous of great Changes and Calamityes: the Intimations of State-Quakes,
yea of Nation-Quakes. Historians speak of very tremendose Earthquakes which
happened in diverse places Sex circiter annos, ante Vrbis excidium, tres Asiae
clarissimas urbes, Terrae-motu eversas esse, testatur Orosius. L. 7. Tacitus
scribit, sub Tiberio Nerone, duodecim civitates in Asia Terrae-motu collapsas
esse: Ac denuo in quinto ejus regni anno, tredecim urbes Terrae-motu cecidisse.

Vide Bertram. in Matthew. 24.7.
whereby several famous Cities perished, not long before Jerusalem was
destroyed. 5. Famines. Probably that Prediction does respect the same Famine
which Agabus prophesied of, Act. 11.28. Under which the Land of Judea suffered
deeply. Whence it was that the Apostle Paul was very sollicitous to obtain some
Relief for the Christian Jews then at Jerusalem. 6. Pestilences. These two
Judgments, ( Limoi kai Loimoi, as in the Greek it is elegantly expressed) of
Famine, and Pestilence, do often go together, the latter following at the heels
of the former, and being occasioned thereby. 7. Fearful Sights and great Signs
in Heaven: which are the words now before us to consider of. Fearful Sights]
Gr. Phobetra [Terriculamenta:] Such Sights as strike a terror into the hearts
of men that are the Spectators of them. Signs from Heaven] viz. Prodigious
Signs. These things are mentioned as the more immediate Presages of those
Miseryes that were coming upon Jerusalem, with the whole Jewish Nation.

Doct. That Prodigious awful Sights and Signs in Heaven, are oftentimes, the
Presages of great Calamity coming upon the World.

For the further clearing of this Doctrine, three things may be enquired into.
1. What Sights and Signs are the Presages of Calamity? 2. How it does appear
that they are so? 3. What Calamityes such Signs do commonly presage?

Q. 1. What Sights and Signs in Heaven are Presages of Calamity?

Ans. 1. There are Signs in the starry Heaven. The great God, when he made the
World, placed the Stars in Heaven, to be for Signs as to Events that in the
ordinary Course of Nature should come to pass. Genesis 1.14. God said, Let there
be lights in the Firmament of heaven, and let them be for Signs. They are for
Signs of Heat and Cold, wet and dry Seasons, and the like. Hence the Lord spoke
to Job, as in Chapter 38.31. Can thou bind the sweet Influences of Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion? The Pleiades are the same with those which men call
the Seven Stars. When the Sun is in that Constellation with the Pleiades, it
has great power and Influence upon the Earth. It is Springtime then. As for
Orion See Mr. Caryl on Job, 38.31.
it is a Winter-Constellation, causing Cold, whereby the pores of the earth are
bound. It binds the Earth from bearing Fruit, and as it were binds the hands of
Men from labor in their particular Callings. When that Constellation appears
in the Evening (as it does in the ninth Month) it is a sign that the Earth
shall be bound, as has bin expressed. Yea, and it is a sign that Storms and
tempestuous seasons are to be expected. Therefore was it by the Poet called
Nimbosus Orion. And hence the Stars are called by the name of the Signs of
heaven, Jer. 10.2. Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the
Signs of heaven. Which words may well be understood concerning the Stars and
Constellations in the heavens. Ita locum interpretantur Rab. Solomon Jarchi,
and exillo Lyranus.

Voetius Disp. select. Par. 2. P. 923.
For the Heathen, the Chaldeans especially (among whom the Jews were then going
to dwell) superstitiously imagined that the Stars were Rulers of the World, and
did therefore stand in fear of them, and worship them; which heathenish
Idolatry the Lord does caution and charge his People against. The Stars of
Heaven are for natural Signs. Their Motions and Appearances are significations
that such and such things, will according to that Course of Nature which God
has settled, come to pass in the World. There are also extraordinary Stars,
sometimes appearing in the Heavens. God in his Providence does so order, as
that sometimes, Blazing Stars are seen in heaven. Such Stars are called Comets,
from the stream like long Hair, which uses to attend them. Such a Star is
Prodigious, and a Fearful Sight. And of this may the words of the Text be
understood. The Jewish Wars of Jews, l 7. c 12
Historian reports, that not long before the destruction of Jerusalem, there
was a Blazing Star in form of a Sword, which seemed to impend over the City,
for a Year together: This now was a fearful Sight, and a great Sign from Heaven.

2 There are fearful Sights and Signs appearing in the Air, sometimes in the
lower heaven, which we move and breathe in. Prodigious Meteors are sometimes
seen there. And strange Appearances, which are either seen, or heard speaking.
Of these fearful sights and signs, is the Text likewise to be interpreted.
Josephus relates, that before the Roman Army destroyed Jerusalem, there were
seen in the Air, Iron Chariots, and Soldiers in battle array; and in the night
time, a great Light appeared in the Temple, for half an hour together, with as
much brightness as if it had been noon day; and a Voice was heard saying, Let
us be gone from hence.

Qu. How does it appear that such Fearful Sights are Presages of Calamityes
coming upon the World?

Ans. 1. The Scripture is clear for this. The Text before us does expressly
declare no less. And the Prophet Joel foretelling the same Calamityes which
this Text has reference unto, says also, that prodigious Signs in heaven
should presage and portend them. Joel, 2.30, 31. I will show Wonders in the
heaven. Truly, Blazing Stars are Wonders in the heaven. And in the Earth,
blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke before the great and the terrible Day of
the Lord come. When Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Jewish state dissolved,
that was a great and notable Day of the Lord, a Type of the great Day of
Judgment. Wonders, even prodigious and amazing Signs should precede it. A very
learned Mede Discourse. 6. P. 37
and judicious Interpreter conceives that the Hebrews of old did use to call
Comets, or Blazing Stars by that name of A Pillar of Smoke; because sometimes
they appear like Pillars of smoke, and that therefore when it is said, there
shall be Pillars of smoke before the terrible Day of the Lord, the true meaning
and intendment of those Expressions is, that Comets should precede and presage
the miseryes coming upon the Jewish Nation. Yea, the Scripture informs us, that
Fearful Sights and Signs in heaven, shall precede the Great and General Day of
Judgment, as Presages thereof. Luke 21.25. There shall be Signs in the
stars: meaning that such things should be observed among the Stars in heaven,
as would be a Sign that Christ's coming to Judge the World, did approach.
Wherefore in Verse 28. it is said, When these things come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. The Day of
Judgment, is a Day of Redemption, and is so called in other Scriptures, Ephesians.
4.30. Then shall the Bodies of the Saints be redeemed from the power of the
Grave; and both Bodies and Souls, redeemed from all Evils of sin and of
suffering. Romans 8.23. 1 Cor. 1.30. At the Resurrection, in the last Day, will
the great Redemption be to the Saints of God, and the greatest Miseryes to the
Wicked that ever were thought of. And Signs in heaven shall precede them. And
hence it is, that Fearful Sights are called Signs in the Scripture; it is
partly on this account, in that they are Signs that the Lord is coming forth
out of his holy habitation, to punish the World for their Iniquityes.

2. The Experience of many Ages does bear witness to the truth of this
Doctrine. If the Scripture were silent about this matter, the Experience both
of former and later Ages does sufficiently and sadly confirm the Truth in hand.
Hence an Cum Deus puniturus sit gentem vel urbem, Prodigijs id prius solet
significare, Herod. l. 6. Lege Melchioris Junij Orat. Par. 1. p. 425.
heathen Writer could say, If God be about to punish a City or a Nation, He is
wont first to give warning of it by Prodigyes, by Signs from heaven. And
commonly it is so, that when stupendous Signs go before, stupendous Judgments
follow after. Some Conradus Lycosthenes Librum edidit in quo omnia collegit
Prodigia, quae ab exordio mundi ostensa sunt.

Zanch. de natura Dei, p. 414.
have written large Volumes concerning the Fearful Sights, which have at
several times and places been observed in the World; and the Judgments and
Miseryes which have followed.

3. Many times such fearful Sights are tokens of God's Anger; which is another
Reason why they are called Signs, as being Signs of the Anger of God. Signs
that flaming Vengeance is kindled, and burning in Heaven against a sinful
World. Now when God is angry, then Public Judgments come, as Testimonies of
Divine Displeasure. Personal Afflictions are not always Evidences of God's
Anger, as we see in Job: but Public Judgments are ever wont to be so. It Is
thought that the ninetieth Psalm was penned by Moses on occasion of a public
Judgment, the Plague which broke in upon the Children of Israel, and swept
away many Thousands of them: And says he, We are consumed by thy Anger, and by
thy Wrath are we troubled, V. 7. So that if Public Judgments come, God is
angry, and his Wrath kindled: He does by them testify, and power down his
righteous Displeasure from Heaven. Inasmuch then as fearful Sights are Tokens
of God's Anger, they are Presages of great and public Calamities. As the
Rainbow (though a natural Sign) is a token of Divine Favor; so are prodigious
Sights Tokens of Divine Anger.

4. These fearful Sights are many times Presages of those things which make way
for great Changes and Calamityes to come upon the World. They are oftentimes
(Blazing Stars Damascen. l. 2. c. 6. Isidor. l. 3. Etymol.

-- (...) timendi
Syderis, and terris mutantem regna Cometam.
Lucan. Anno 1471. ardet Cometa: Hoc anno multi Principes moriuntur. Anno 1477.
multi Principes obierunt.

Alsted.
in a more special manner are so) the Presages of the death of great; yea, and
of worthy Men. Is not the fatal downfall of Augustulus (the last Roman Emperor)
in the Scripture emblematically set forth, by that of a Blazing-Star Mede in
Apoc. 8.10.
falling to the ground? Rev. 8.10. There fell a great star from heaven, burning
as it were a lamp. It is conceived, that the ruin of Augustulus, dethroned by
Odoacer the Herulian, was signified by those words, and that he is resembled to
that sort of Comets, which is called Lampadias. And when there is a Star
burning and blazing in heaven, commonly it proves fatal to some Augustulus;
whence great Changes and miseryes ensue. Yea, the Death of worthy (as well as
great) Personages, is sometimes portended by such Signs. A little before great
Constantine's death, a blazing Star appeared, and infinite miseryes followed.
In the Year Alsted. Chronol. C. 49 ubi de Cometit. See Spotwood 's Hist. Scotl.
p. 94.
1556. a Comet (then vulgarly called a fiery Beesom) was seen; and soon after,
many learned, useful, worthy Men dyed; whose death was an unspeakable loss and
misery to the places where they had lived.

Quest. 3. What Calamityes do such fearful Sights and Signs in heaven presage?

Ans. We must not be particular and positive in Interpretations of things of
this nature. When a fearful Sight appears in heaven, which the whole World
cannot but take notice of, now to make a particular and absolute determination
V. Voet. in Disp. de Signis. P. 919, 930.
, that such a Place, or such a Person, such a Judgment, is certainly intended
thereby, is too much boldness. In general, we may safely say, that there is
just cause to expect that great Calamityes are at hand: but what Persons or
Places shall more eminently fall under those Judgments, is not for us to
determine; but we must leave that with God, who best knows what himself intends
to do.

This being premised, we proceed in Answering the Enquiry before us.

1. Sometimes such Signs are Presages of great Persecutions coming upon the
Church of God. The Lord in mercy to his People, gives them such Warnings, that
so they may prepare for what is a coming, or make haste to enter into the
Chambers of safety, as it were for a little moment, till the Indignation be
overpast. Nero's bloody Persecution had a Blazing Star to precede it. The same
is true concerning the Arian Heresy and persecution* that flood spoken of in
the Revelation, which the Dragon cast out of his mouth, and whereby the Woman,
the Church, fled into the Wilderness, was in eminent danger of being swallowed
up and devoured. Rev. 12.15.

2. Sometimes such Signs in heaven are Presages of miserable Dearths and
Scarcity. That Blazing Star impending over Jerusalem, which the Text has
reference unto, was attended with a terrible. Famine, whereby multitudes
perished In the Years after Christ, 876. 948. 964. there were Blazing Stars
seen, presaging Famines and other Judgments. In Annis 674, 675, 676. Comets
appeared, and sore Droughts followed: In some Countries it rained not for 3
Years together. The like Miseryes followed the Comet Anno 1477. In Annis 594.
1527. 1542. Comets were seen, and Armies of Locusts followed, devouring the
Fruits of the Earth.
. And therefore such Signs are frequently portentous of those Judgments, which
cause Want and scarcity* e. gr. of sore Droughts and Blastings, and the
multiplication of noxious Creatures that destroy the Fruits of the Earth. All
which particulars I could confirm unto you by approved History, which declares
how they have all been presaged by Blazing Stars in heaven.

3. Lamentable Deaths and Destructions amongst Men, have been oftentimes
presaged by such Sights in heaven. Sudden and amazing Ruins, by In the Years
66, 78. 79, and 668. Comets appeared, after which terrible Earthquakes happened
in many Places. Annis 377, 912, 1530. there were blazing stars appearing; and
Inundations followed in diverse places. Quickly after the Comet Anno 882. the
famous City of Triers was burnt to the ground. Alsted. ubi supra. Memorabile
fuit Portentum Terrae-motus Anno 1618. quando ruina montis, qua totum Oppidum
plurium, and Vicus Schilanus cum 900 Hominibus oppressa.
Earthquakes, by Inundations, by Fire, and the like awful Visitations, have
been thereby portended. Especially destructions by mortal and contagious
Diseases. That strange Disease, known by the name of Sudor Anglicanus, which in
a peculiar manner pursued those of the English Nation, even when in strange
Lands; whence they were dreaded in all places where they came, there was a
Blazing Star that did precede it. Especially that which is, of all Diseases
miserable Mortals are subject unto, the most terrible, I mean the Plague of
Pestilence, Anno 1457 Cometa quem nigrum app^^hant, apparuit, secuta est Pestis
diuturnior. Anno 1472. Duo Cometae: Pestis adeo savijt, ut Cognati proximi
desererent suos. Idem eodem Libro. Anno 1006. Cometa, quem Pestis excepit, ut
vivi cum mortuis sepelirentur: multa Oppida plane exhausit.
it is frequently thus presaged. Such Sights are Heaven's Alarm to a sinful
World, to give notice that God has bent his Bow, and made his Arrows ready,
and that if Sinners turn not, the Arrows of Pestilence and Death shall fall
down upon them speedily. This might be confirmed by a multitude of Instances;
but it needs not. Our own Experience is enough. We cannot but rememember the
Blazing Star that was seen but 16 Years ago, and a terrible Plague followed;
so that in our own Nation, near upon an hundred thousand were swept away in one
City, and in one Year. And it is reported, that immediately after that great
Blazing Star, which appeared above threescore years ago, God sent the Plague
See Mr. Gorge 's Description of New-Engl. Page 27.
amongst the Natives in this Land, which swept them away in such multitudes, as
that the living were not enough to bury the dead. So did the Lord cast out the
Heathen before this his People, that the way might thereby be prepared unto our
more peaceable settlement here, The Lord in mercy grant, that we may never, by
becoming like unto the Heathen in Profaneness and Irreligion, provoke Him to do
unto us, as He has done unto them.

4. Such fearful Sights and Signs in heaven, are usual Presages of War among
the Nations, and so of those Devastations and Desolations which the Sword
leaves behind it. Prodigyes on the Earth do sometimes betoken War and
Bloodshed, 2 King. 3.22. And Signs in Heaven do no less. Thus in my Text, the
Roman Sword, which made the Jewish Nation desolate (according to Daniel's
Prophesy Chapter 9.27.) was portended by a fearful Blazing Star in heaven. -- Belli
mala signa Cometae.
Tibul. Stella ^elucebit Gladij mortalibus index.
Sibyl. Or. l. 3.


And when Alaricus the Goth made such a terrible Irruption upon the Roman
Empire, like a storm of Hail, and Fire, and Blood, Rev. 8.7. Blazing Stars in
heaven preceded those Calamityes. When Attila, who they say, called himself
Flagellum Dei, God's Whip, to scourge the World for their Wickedness, when he
was armed to be the Executioner of divine Vengeance upon the Earth, destroying
Cities, and laying Nations waste before him, Blazing Stars were seen preceding
and portending those miserable Times. In like manner, when the Saracens (the
first Wo-Trumpet) and the Turks (the second VVo-Trumpet, prophesied of in the
Revelation) were let loose upon the Apostate Christian World, Blazing Stars,
and Fearful Sights in heaven did precede those woeful Days. And are there not
some alive, and here before the Lord this day, that can remember the blazing
Star which appeared in the 9 th. and in the 10 th. Months, in the Year 1618.
and the next Year began that unhappy War in Germany, which proved so fatal to
the Protestant Interest there.

Thus have we seen what Judgments and Calamityes, Fearful Sights in heaven are
commonly the Presages of. As for that SIGN in heaven, now appearing, (which
has occasioned me to speak this Word at this time) what Calamityes may be
portended thereby, which of the Judgments mentioned, or whether all of them be
not thereby presaged, I shall not say; but leave it unto God and Time to
discover. Only in general, we have cause to fear, that sweeping Judgments are
thereby signified; that the Lord is coming down from Heaven with a long Beesom
of Destruction, which shall sweep away a world of Sinners before it.

I conclude with a word of Application: Nor would I speak any thing, but the
words of Truth and soberness, as becomes a Messenger of Christ to do, when
speaking in His Name.

USE. Let us hence be Exhorted to approve our selves as those that are under
the solemn, awful Warnings of God, ought to do. I need not say (for every one
knows it) that there is a Fearful Sight and Sign appearing in the heavens: Such
a formidable Blazing-star, as that the like has seldom been observed. It
concerns us then, to hearken to the voice of the Lord therein; who by such
tremendous Sights is speaking awfully to the children of Men. Hear then
Heaven's Alarm this day. You will say, But what should we now do? What does the
Lord expect from us, when there are such dreadful Presages of Evils coming upon
the World?

Answ. 1. It now concerns us to be awakened out of all Security. That Is one of
God's ends (his declared end) in causing such Fearful Sights to be taken notice
of, that so he might awaken a secure sleeping World. And indeed the Lord
manifests his Goodness and Compassion toward sinful Creatures therein. It was
a pious Speech of that Ejus Clementiam laudare tenemur, qui nostram inertiam,
talibus monere dignatur indicijs. Carolus Magnus; vel ut alij volunt, Ludovicus
I. Caroli Magni filius.
Emperor, who being somewhat terrified at the sight of a Blazing-starre, said
to those about him, Let us admire the Clemency of that God, who before He
smites us, causes such Signs in heaven, that so He might awaken us out of our
Security. O let us beware of crying Peace, Peace, when the Day of Destruction
is at hand. O take heed of sleeping, and dreaming of nothing but worldly
Prosperity at such a Time as this. When the Lord Jesus Christ had told his
Disciples, that calamitous Times were a coming, and mentioned the Signs and
Presages thereof, He bids them Watch therefore, Luke 21.36. Let us not then
please our selves, with imagining that such Fearful Sights are Signs of Mercy
only, and not of Judgment. The contrary unto which Opinion, has been
confirmed by more than two hundred Instances Consulatur Heidfeld, Sphynx
Philosoph. p. 1087.

Universally Experientia, and hominum consensu, praejudicatum est, Cometas
magnas mutationes portendere. Voet. Disp. de signis p. 929.
. Men are exceeding apt to interpret such things in a way of favor to
themselves, when nothing less is intended thereby. So when these Fearful Sights
and Signs in heaven; which my Text speaks of, were seen at Jerusalem, the
Jews did interpret them as good Omens to themselves; and as ominous of
Destruction to their Enemies. The Prodigies in Germany Vid. Clark 's
Martyrology p. 311. etc.
were looked upon by the Protestants as Signs of Deliverance unto them, and of
Destruction to their Enemies. But alas! the Event was quite otherwise. And let
us not make our selves secure, by saying or thinking, that the Lord by such
fearful Sights speaks to others only, and not unto us. As Vespasian the
Emperor, when Testante Suetonio.
there was a long hairy Comet seen, he did but deride at it, and make a Joke of
it, saying, That it concerned the Parthians that wore long hair, and not him,
who was bald: but within a Year, Vespasian himself (and not the Parthian) dyed.
Such fearful Sights are usually Signs, that those Judgments, which are (as
Tertullian speaks) Tonsurae humani generis, God's sharp Razors on Mankind,
whereby He does poll, his Sithe, whereby He does shear down multitudes of
sinful Creatures, do draw near: In which respect, there is no doubt to be made
of it, but that God by this Blazing-star, is speaking to other Places, and not
to New England only. And it may be, He is declaring to that generation of
hairy Scalps, who go on still in their Trespasses, that the day of their
Calamity is at hand, and that the things which shall come upon them make haste.
A strange Sight does betoken strange Punishment coming upon those that have
been prodigious workers of Iniquity. Yet let not us promise to our selves
nothing but Prosperity in the doleful and the bitter Day, when there shall be
Lamentation generally. I am persuaded, that the floods of great water are
coming. I am persuaded that God is about to open the windows of heaven, and to
pour down the Cataracts of his Wrath, ere this Generation (wherein Atheism and
Profaneness are come to such a prodigious height) I say, ere this Generation is
passed away. But what reason have we to think that no drops of the fatal Storm
shall come near to us? If we so conclude, we may provoke the Lord to say, The
Sinners of my People shall dye by the Sword, who say, The Evil shall not
overtake us nor prevent us. To be awakened out of Security, and tremblingly to
wait for the good Pleasure of God, whatever it may be, is the most likely way
to find Rest in the day of Trouble. So did the Prophet find it, Hab. 3.16. When
I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered, I trembled in my self, that I
might rest in the Day of Trouble. When the thundering voice of Judgment was
heard, his heart trembled at it, so did he find Rest in the Day of Trouble.

2. This should put us upon preparing for another Day of Trouble. And this
should we do the rather, since the Changes portended by this Comet, are like to
come speedily as well as certainly. Joseph said to Pharaoh, For that the Dream
is doubled, it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly
bring it to pass. Genesis 41.32 Does not the doubled Appearance of this Fearful
Sight in the heavens speak as much? Let us then prepare for Trouble. We should
not only expect it; but so expect it, as to prepare for it. Certainly we have
reason so to do. If there had been no Blazing-star, yet upon other accounts, we
have cause to expect and prepare for another Day of Trouble, which seems to be
hastening upon thee O NEW ENGLAND, and upon thee, O BOSTON! The Sins which are
amongst us, are surer and blacker Signs of Judgment, than any Signs in heaven,
that we may think of. I say the Sins, the Pride, the Profaneness, the
Worldliness, the general Security and Iniquity that prevails amongst us.
Especially considering how little good all former Judgments and Dispensations
have done upon us. What Fiery Desolations has the Lord made amongst us? The
Lord has been roaring out of Sion. Such roaring Judgments have been amongst
us, as that the Report of them has been heard afar off. Sword, Death, and
Fire. But (alas! O Lord God) may it not be said concerning the generality of
men, They return not to Him that has been smiting of them? They are the same
since the War, since the Smallpox, since the Fires* that they were before. Ah!
what will come next? We have cause to expect, and it will be our wisdom to
prepare for another Day of Trouble seven times greater than the former. It
grieveth me to speak thus, but I cannot forbear. I feel that the Word of the
Lord is like a fire in a man's bones, and it will break out. The Lord God has
spoken, who can but prophesy? And now know for certain, that if destroying
Judgments and Death overtake any in their Sins, and sweep them away to Hell,
their blood shall be upon their own heads. For the Lord has fired his Beacon
in the heavens, among the Stars of God there; the Fearful Sight is not yet out
of sight. The Warning-piece in heaven is going off, now then if the Lord
discharge his Murdering-pieces from on high, and men be found in their Sins,
unfit for Death, their blood shall be upon them. They had Warning given them
that the Sword was a coming: Lo, the Lord himself gave them the warning; but
they would not take warning, their blood shall be upon them. Moreover, if
Troubles should not come, yet it will be wisdom to prepare for them. If the
Lord, after He has sent his Angel to stand with a drawn Sword over Jerusalem,
should be entreated to spare us, yet it will never do us hurt to prepare for
the most deadly Arrows of Affliction that may light upon us, whilst in this
Vale of Tears.

3. We should do what in us lies to divert those Judgments, which seem to be
impending, and blazing over our heads. This word of Comfort, I may safely
speak, The Lord's Threatenings are not absolute; but conditional. So far as we
in these ends of the Earth, these goings down of the Sun, are spoken unto, by
this Sign in the heavens, it is possible we may escape the Evils threatened
thereby, if we duly hearken to the Voice of God therein. Jer. 18.7, 8. At what
time I speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to
pull down, and to destroy it: if that Nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought to do unto
them. So that when desolating Judgments are threatened, either by the Word, or
by the awful Works of God, those denunciations of Wrath are not absolute, but
conditional. If Repentance intervene, the Evils which otherwise must be looked
for, may be diverted. See therefore Jer. 36 3, 7. It may be the house of Judah
will hear all the Evil which I purpose to do unto them, that they may return
every man from his evil way. Ay, a general Repentance is that which will do, if
every man turn from his evil way, that I may forgive their Iniquity and their
sin. It may be they will present their Supplication before the Lord, etc. This
is that which the Lord would have; therefore He says, I Will stir up the spirit
of my Ministers and Ambassadors, that they shall declare and denounce my
Judgments against a sinful Generation. It may be they will hear. And I Will
speak by awful Signs from heaven, that may be as Heralds to proclaim Wrath and
Woe to the World, It may be they will hear, and then shall their sins be
forgiven. You will say, But what shall we do, that so the Judgments which are
blazing over us, may be diverted from us? Answ. Pray, and cry mightily to
Heaven. For this let every one that is godly pray unto the Lord in a time
wherein He may be found, and before the Floods of great waters come nigh unto
us. Our Lord Jesus Christ, having warned his Disciples of approaching
Calamityes, He concludes with an Exhortation unto Prayer, Luk, 21 36. Pray
always, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall
come to pass. Prayer may do much toward the averting of wrathful Judgments and
Desolations. When the Lord threatened to bring Famine and Destruction upon his
People, Amos fell to praying; and God said, This shall not be, this Judgment
and threatened desolation shall not be. Amos 7.3, 6. O then, let us deprecate
impending Judgments. Do we see the Sword blazing over us? Let it put us upon
crying to God, that that Judgment may be diverted, and not return upon us
again so speedily. Do we see the Arrows of Pestilence and Death blazing over
us? Oh! Pray that the destroying Angel may not be sent to walk in darkness,
and to waste at noon day. Does God threaten our very Heavens? O pray unto Him,
that He would not take away Stars and send Comets to succeed them. Pray that
the Lord Jesus, who holds the Stars in His right Hand, may continue those in
the Firmament of his Churches (the Heaven which his own Hand has planted) who
are indeed Stars, vvilling to impart the Light which they have received from
Christ, unto his People: and that wandering Stars, blazing Stars, seducing
Spirits may never come in their room. I am not without fear, that this will
at last be the Judgment of God upon New England and upon these Churches. Pray
that it may never be. And our Supplications should be attended with deep
Humiliation, Zeph. 2.2, 3. Gather your selves together, h. c. Come before the
Lord in a way of public, solemn Humiliation, before the decree, i. e* the
Judgment written and threatened, bring forth, before the fierce anger of the
Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you: seek the
Lord -- It may be you shall be bid in the day of the Lord's anger. Thus then
should we do in this day, when there are such dark and angry Clouds hanging
over our heads; and we know not how soon they may break upon us. And truly, if
our Lectures, were, some of them, turned into days of Prayer, at such a time
as this, it is no more than what there is cause for. And there is one thing
more, that should in special be remembered by us; a thing that has been much
tal'kd of; but little has been done in it, that is, Reformation! Reformation!
When the Prophet Jonah was sent of God to preach and say, Yet forty days, and
Nineveh shall be destroyed: that was a more awful Sign of Desolation, than if
they had seen a Blazing star hanging over the City, menacing the Ruin thereof:
Yet when they repented, and reformed (though it was but an external
Reformation) the Lord spared them forty years longer. Ah! New England, will thou not do more than Nineveh? shall there not be so much as an external
Reformation of those things that provoke the glorious Eyes of Heaven? Will not
the haughty Daughters of Sion, reform their Pride in Apparel? Will they have
the Attire of an Harlot? Will they lay out their Hair, and wear their false
Locks, their Borders, and Towers like Comets, about their heads? Will they do
so, until God send his Arrows from Heaven, to smite them down into the Grave,
where the days of Darkness shall be many? And shall there be still such a
multitude of Licensed Drinking-Houses (and Town-dwellers frequenting them) to
the Shame of Boston, and to the Infamy of New England; notwithstanding the
Testimony which God, and his Servants have given against it? How then shall we
think to escape in the Day of the Lord's Anger; if a Reformation, so much as in
these Externals, which it is so easy to reform, will not be obtained? O Return,
Return unto the Lord. And in that way let us betake our selves unto the shading
Wings of the Lord Jesus! Do we not hear Him speaking to us, as sometimes unto
Jerusalem? Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered
thee, as an Hen her Chickens under her wings. Says the Lord, The Roman Eagles,
those birds of prey, are hastening upon you: But if you would have come under
My Wings, you should have been safe enough. Even so, does not the Lord say, O
New England! New England! do thou not know that the birds of prey are
designing to devour thee But my Wings are broad enough to secure and shelter
thee, when the black and stormy tempest shall break (...) the World. If we be
found a praying, an humble, a reforming People, we need not doubt but that
Under the shadow of His Wings, we shall make our Refuge, until the Calamity be
overpast.

(...)
