At a GENERAL COURT Held at Boston the 16th of March 1680./1.
THE solemn Consideration of those awful threatenings that are in the face of
divine Providence, both toward the world in general, in respect of that fearful
Sight and Sign from Heaven, which has of late been taken notice of; and
toward our selves more particularly, for that the Lord has this last year
manifested his holy displeasure against us, having by an unusual Flood, by the
Blast, and by worms, which his own own hand (who is able by the most
contemptible of his creatures to stain our glory) has sent among us,
diminished the fruits of the earth. Having also dilivered some of our
New England Vessels with those in them, into the hands of such as are enemies
to the Christian Name, and more lately frowned upon (...) Shipwracks, and
considerable losses at Sea; and visited some amongst us by sudden and
unexpected Deaths. Being also sensible, that there are in other respects, dark
clouds impending over us. And that the present state of the Protestant interest
abroad, and more especially in the land of our Fathers Sepulchers, does call
for earnest Prayer before that God unto whom salvation belongs. The
Consideration of all these things calling aloud upon us for more then ordinary
seekings of the Face of God in Jesus Christ:

This Court does therefore appoint the 21 st. day of April next to be observed
as a Day of Fasting and Prayer, hereby prohibiting all servile labor upon that
day, and exhorting all the Ministers, Churches and People throughout this
Colony, religiously to observe the same; and to entreat that the favor of God
through Jesus Christ may be toward his People in other parts of the world. And
that if it may stand with his good pleasure, we may be hid in the day of the
Lords anger, our public Peace, Health, Libertyes still continued. That Seed
time and Harvest may not sail. And that a good success may be to the endeavors
of this Court, and particularly for our worthy Agents in their negotiation. And
to pray unto him, that he would order a perfect Lot for us, with respect unto
those that are in the approaching Election, to be chosen as Rulers over this
his People.

By the COURT, Edward Rawson Secr'.


