SEVERAL LAWS MADE AT THE General Court Called to Sit, and Held at Boston,
Sept. 10th. 1684. And Published by their Order, Edward Rawson Secr.
WHereas it is found by Experience that the Provision made by the Law tit.
Addition the Law Attaints.
Jury's May 1672. for relief in case of apparent Corruption or Error in the
Jury's giving in their Verdict contrary to Law and Evidence is perverted to the
burthening of the Country with unreasonable trouble, Party Attainting to give
in writing the cause of Attainting before it be allowed.
the great wrong of Parties concerned with unjust reflections made thereby upon
the Jury's.

It is Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; that in all Attaints before
the Entry or Allowance thereof, that the party Attainting shall give in writing
under his hand for what cause, and show how the same does appear so to be. And
in case upon a due Trial as the Law provides, the Verdict of the former Jury be
confirmed; (...) to the ^^untry 10. li. (...), and to the former (...) etc. 40
s. a^eice.
such party so Attainting shall pay to the Country as a Fine for unnecessary
trouble to the Court ten pounds in money, and to the Jurymen that gave in the
former Verdict forty shillings a piece.

And in case the charge be for corruption, and also double Costs and interest
to the ^arty, etc. in (...)
It shall be lawful for the Jury so Reproached, jointly or severally to
prosecute their Action of Slander as to them shall seem meet: And the
Plaintiff reproaching shall also be liable to such further Fine to the
Country as the Court shall judge meet; Also in all Cases where the former
Verdict is confirmed, the party concerned shall have double Costs, and also
double Interest for being detained of his just Debt according to former Verdict.

Form for Execution.
To the Marshal of S. or his lawful Deputy,
YOu are Required in His MAJESTY'S Name by Virtue hereof to Levy in Execution
of the money of A. B. of B. the Sum of (...) with two shillings more for this
Execution, and deliver the same unto C. D. of (...) or his order, which is to
satisfy a Judgment the said C. D. recovered against the said A. B. for so much
in Money (including the Costs of Court) upon a Trial between them before the
County Court holden in B. the (...) of (...) Anno. and in want of the Money, or
other Estate of the said A. B's to the satisfaction of the Creditor, you are
alike Required to seize the Person of the said A. B. (...) for Executions:
and him commit unto the safe keeping of the Prison-keeper in B. until he make
payment according to this Execution, or otherwise be released by the Creditor,
or by order of Law, hereof fail not, as you will answer the contrary at your
peril, and make return of your doings herein under your hand, as the Law
directs, for which this shall be your sufficient Warrant; Dated in B.

Percuriam.
Mutatis mutandis. According to the tenor of the Judgment.



THis Court being informed that the number of Persons allowed to be Licensed in
Boston for keeping of Houses of Entertainment and Retailing Wine and Liquors,
etc. without doors, are not sufficient for the accommodation of the Inhabitants
and Trade of the Town, by reason whereof sundry Inconveniences do accrue.

Do Order, that the County Court of Suffolk may License five or six more
Public Houses in Boston; the Select Men of the Town of Boston yearly approving
of the Persons as meet and fit for that Employment.

AS an Addition to and Explanation of the Law Regulating the size of Bricks,
made at the General Court, May 28. 1679.

It is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; That ^^^^eforth all
Bricks shall hold out, Addition to the Law for sizing Bricks:
and be of the full size and dimention expressed in the aforesaid Law, even
after they be sufficiently Nealed or Burnt; And to that end all Moulds for
Bricks shall henceforth be made of such a convenient size or scantling, that
the said Bricks may and shall hold out, and be of the full Dimention prescribed
when they are sufficiently Nealed or Burnt, as aforesaid; which shall be so
judged and accounted Merchantable, when as at least three quarters of every
parcel of Bricks be hard and through Nealed Ware, and not Samnell Bricks: and
for the due observation hereof, every Town (where Bricks shall be made or sold,
shall annually choose and appoint two or more able men, each of which shall
have power to view, Two Cullers to be annually chosen, their Recompen^^^
divide, and cull all Bricks from time to time, that shall be exposed to sale;
who shall be Sworn to the faithful Discharge of their Office, and shall be
allowed four pence for every thousand of good and merchantable Bricks they
shall so Cull, one half thereof to be paid by the Seller, and the other half by
the Buyer; And no Bricks shall be sold or made use of before they have been
viewed and culled, as aforesaid, upon the penalty of paying twenty shillings in
Money per thousand, one half thereof to the Town where such Bricks are made or
sold, and the other half to the Informer.

FINIS

