THE NECESSITY OF A WELL EXPERIENCED SOLDIERY. OR, A Christian Common Wealth
ought to be well Instructed and Experienced in the Military Art.

Delivered in a Sermon, upon an ARTILLERY ELECTION June the 10th: 1675.

By J. R.

Psalm. 144. 1. Blessed be the LORD my strength, which teaches my hand, to
War, and my fingers to Fight. Jer. 48. 10. Cursed be he that does the Work of
the LORD deceitfully, and Cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from Blood.
CAMBRIDG Printed by Samuel Green 1679.

2 Samuel 1. 18. Also he bade them teach the Children of Judah the Use of the
Bow.
AFter a long Scene of Peace, Wars ever enter the Stage; Wars are in the same
nature with Offenses, necesse est vt veniant, they must be; though there be a
(...), a woe to him that is the unjust cause of them:

Neither is there any particular place in the World (though at present never so
quiet and secure) that can plead any exemption from such a Visitation, till the
Lord has created his universal, everlasting Peace in the world; till then the
Church of God upon Earth is Militant, in a Civil as well as in a Spiritual
sense, While Sin and the Sons of Ana^ are unsubdu^d, while the Philistims are
in the Land, they will be bidding Defiance to the Host of the Living God, and
Israel shall not be without her daily Annoying cares and fears. Thus while the
Church has her Enemies in the world, men ought to be in a readiness, not only
to Pray with their hearts and tongues, but to fight with their hands for the
Peace of Jerusalem.

The likeliest way to prevent an evil, is to be prepared for it, forewarned,
fore-armed, when the Army of the uncircumcised are in the field, especially
when they grow skillfull to destroy, it is time for David to Command, to teach
the Children of Judah the use of the Bow.

A through dispatch of these words will not allow the expense of much time in
speaking to the Analysis of the Chapter it self; yet for our better
understanding and profiting by this text, I shall briefly speak a few words
concerning the Context: to this end you may note, that this Chapter divides it
self into these two Principal parts, viz.

First. A Narration brought to David, Concerning the Death of Saul and
Jonathan, those former Victorious Champions of Israel.

Secondly. The Effects which this Sad Relation produced, which were these two,
viz.

1. A mournful Poem, or Song, or a Funeral Elogium upon the loss of those two
Skillful and excellent Warriors, v 17. And David Lamented over Saul etc.
David's afflictions produced us many a Song, and this is one among the rest.

2. A studious Care for their own Defense and safety, employed in the words of
the Text; He bad them teach etc. Saul and Jonathan's Death, Isreal's defeat, and
the Philistims Victory, made David not only mournful, but also careful how to
prevent the like disaster, when occasion should be for another on set.

The words of the Text are contained in David's Funeral song, and are inserted
(if you observe) in a Parenthesis, in which respect there is something worthy
of notice:

In the former Verse, David [you see] had just began to compose his mournful
Song; The sad and unexpected news of Isreal's Overthrow, Saul, and Jonathans
Death, those expert and valiant Commanders, who [under God] had been Judah's
safety and the Defense of the Country; the loss of the these made David bread
out into a deep Lamentation. And David Lamented etc.

Now least David's mourning should make others either heartless and fearful, or
give them any occasion of suspicion concerning his own Valor and Courage, I
say, least any should draw up this disheartning Conclusion. viz. seeing the
Philistims have stain our Mighty and skillful, and David himself hereupon
becomes thus dejected and sorrowful, it will now be in vain for us to think of
resisting or prepare for further engaging; wherefore to remove this damp of
daunting fears, before he proceeds any further to Lament, he inserts this
solemn charge, that they should learn experience how to Fight, cause of sorrow
should be no cause of Cowardice, David had good Courage in his great grief,
Also he bad them teach etc:

David's Apostrophe from Lamenting to bid them prepare son fighting, is an
Argument both of his Prudence, and constant Care and Courage. And David
Lamented etc. But [left any hereby should judge David become either Careless or
Cowardly] before he goes on which his Lamentation, he makes this Pause in a
Parenthesis. Also he bad them teach the Children of Judah the Use of the Bow.
It was by this Instrument (we heard in the former Chapter) Saul was wounded,
and so also Jonathan, and many others.

The Bow was a principal Instrument then used in their wars, by the more
acute, nimble and skillful managing whereof the Phi listims [very likely] then
gained their Victory over Israel;

Wherefore David makes this good use of it, viz. That for she better dealing
with the Enemy, it was very expedient to teach the Children of Judah the exact
using and skillful handling of that Weapon, q. d Our best Policy now is,
(knowing where our Enemies skill and advantage lies) to Labor to match, or
rather excel them in their own Art, and so we shall beat them with their own
Weapons.

Skill is a great spur to Courage, and Warriors skillful and Courageous, are
most probable to be Victorious. A skillful head or hand and a cowardly heart
are most unequal Mates, pity it is they should ever meet in one person.

I shall speak but a word or two more to the Text, and so proceed to the
Doctrine. He bad them Teach etc:

The Bow was a principal Instrument then used in War; and it is here
figuratively to betaken for all kind of Martial Weapons: and so their learning
the right and exact use of that, implies their learning the skill in the whole
Art.

Many Doctrines worthy our notice, and very pertinent to this Days design may
be deduced from the Words, I shall briefly name them, and center upon one of
them chiefly.

He bade. i. e. David bade, Whence Observe.

Doctr. 1. It is the great Duty and Prudence of those Supreme Power and
Authority, to Order that their People be Trained up and Experienced in the
Military Arts, or in the right and skillful Managing of Martial Weapons.

David bade etc: We have here an Example of David's Kingly Care and Prudence,
who (from the overthrow of Saul etc:) does Command his Subjects (for the safety
of themselves and preventing the like defeat) to exercise themselves to the
skillful managing of that weapon; now every good example is binding. David as
King accounting it his place or Duty to look after the Ordering of that
Affair, shows it to be a Duty incumbent upon all Christian Rulers in Place
of like Authority or Power; and they that are Rulers over others, are chiefly
accountable for any neglect in this great Duty.

He bade THEM, i. e. his Chieftains, Lieutenants, or other under Officers that
were experienced professors of that Art, and so able to teach, Whence Observe.

Doct. 2. It is very necessary in all Military Exercises, and for the making a
true Proficiency therein, that there should be such experienced persons that may
be able, skilfully and expertly to Train up others in the expert knowledge of
that Art. If there be none to teach, how can any be taught: that Body is a mere
Chaos where all is alike. But again, He bade them Teach the Children of Judah,
Whence Observe.

Doct. 3. Martial Weapons and Military skill and Exercise do well become and
truly belong to a Christian Common Wealth. Contrary to the Tenent of that
abominable Sect, who would persuade us to a Stoical Apathy or stupidity, and
never to use any means of defense against wrong or injury: such Armor they
allege is unbecoming a Christians Coat; And therefore their only word of
Command is, Lay down your Arms, that so they might have the advantage to take
them up. But again, The use or skill of the BOW. Whence Observe.

Doctr. 4. The Art or skill of a right and Exact Using or handling of Martial
Weapons, is that which a Christian People ought to be carefully and diligently
Instructed in. A Christian people ought to be Conscientiously Trained up and
experienced in Military skill. There is a Civil as well as Spiritual Warfare
that a Christian must be exercised in. This is the Point which I intend to
handle, and that which I judge may be most useful at this time. In the
handling of which, I shall only concern my self with these two things, viz. to
Confirm and Apply; As for Explication, I know not almost what should be said,
I say that Martal skill is that which a people ought to be taught and
experienced in. Now as to the number or quality of persons that ought to be
Instructed in this Science, is none of my business to discourse, but theirs
whose duty it is to Inspect the Ordering of that Affair; Neither shall I now
spend any discourse de Jure Belli, concerning the right or Lawfulness of War,
the proof of the Doctrine will of necessity infer the Truth of that: If it
appear that Military skill is that which ought to be taught, it will certainly
follow that it is that which may (when occasion calls) be lawfully practiced,
since this is the very and of that: that Art or scieroe is altogether vain
which may not admit of a practical part. Neither again can it be expected that
I should explain the Nature of Military skill and the manner how men should be
disciplined in that science, that is a work neither within my sphere nor
belonging to my place: But is the bussines proper to the field, not the Pulpit:
and the explanation of it to be learned of those who have arrived Artists in
that Profession, and are designed to instruct the unexperiencd therein. It is
none of my busyness to teach that Art, but to show that it is a peoples Duty to
be carefully and diligently Instructed in it, I now preach matter of Duty,
which ought to be practiced, especially more diligently and conscientiously
then it is or has been. That it is an Art or skill which is not Natural, but
acquired with much Instruction, Industry, Practice, that men do not naturally
or very easily come to be Artists in that profession, I suppose, will be
readily granted by all that have any experience therein;

Besides the teaching and learning of it which the Scripture in many places
does attribute to it, does employ that there is an art, skill or slight in it,
which does require study, discipline and Instruction, for the attaining to it.

But, that the Truth of the Point may appear, we may First, Look into the
Scripture it false, and fee what that may afford in order to the confirming of
it. And this we shall find not at all to be scant but rather to abound with
such examples and presidents as do fitly testify to the truth of this
Assertion; though that in the Text being it self of Divine Authority, may be
sufficient to confirm the duty alleged.

That it was the practice (Commended and allowed by God) of the people of God
in former ages, the scripture does plentifully hold forth; Now seeing what is
written is written for our instruction, it is our duty to follow those patterns
till God shall be pleased wholly to remove all occasion for the like practice.

I know before I proceed, that all that can be Objected by any it, the Promise
of peace in the Gospel times, that Jerusalem shall be a quiet Habitation, and
that the Nations shall learn War no more etc: But how ever (as one answers
well) we must not Antidate Gods work, all Gospel Promises are not yet
fulfilled; That time shall come, but in the mean time [so long as there is War
and rumors of War in the World] we must stand upon our Watch and Ward,
always in a Posture or defense for the peace of Zion. While that spirit in man
that Lusts to envy, to fewds and Quarrels, especially with that and those
that are good, be more then it is at present Curbed and suppressed, it is both
duty and prudence to arm our selves against the cruel invasions that may we
know not how soon from thence arise.

I will never believe that our Privileges under the Gospel are now more narrow
then theirs were under the Law: If that were a duty and privilege then for the
people of God to prepare for War, and to fight for their Lives and Libertys, I
cannot believe but that we especially under the Gospel ought rather to be duly
prepared against those bloody attempts. I cannot believe that the people of God
are bound to sit with their hands in their pockets and give themselves up as a
prey to their Enemies, and Cowardly to part with those Privileges which Christ
has so dearly purchased. The Law of Nature, which is Gods Law too, does ever
bind us, so far as we can in a just way, to prevent any evil unjustly offered.

In the Latter days, we are told there will be bloody times, Nation shall rise
up against Nation etc: from hence it will follow that we under the Gospel ought
to be more expert and fitted for Battle, then those in former ages; For God you
know then did immediately and miraculously fight for his people, often times
giving them very great Victorys, by very mean unlikely means.

But we in these days have no promise of such a miraculous and immediate
assistance; God works now by men and means, not by miracles: Neither can we
expect that the walls of Rome as the walls of Jericho shall fall with the sound
of a Rams-born:

The Man of sin (no doubt) when his time is come, shall be overcome with the
sword of men as well as the sword of the spirit. To her that has shed the
blood of the saints, shall blood be given to drink, now God alone knows whose
Lot it will be to be called to that work, but yet he expects that his people be
fitted for such a design, when he shall be pleased to call them to it. God
has his work for his Militia on Earth as well as for that in Heaven. War is
an Ordinance appointed by God for subduing and destroying the Churches Enemies
here upon Earth.

But this discourse is almost a Digression. I say, as yet we have no assurance
of freedom from War, and therefore still to be prepared for it; Times are now
most dangerous, But to return from whence I have thus digressed.

Abraham we read was the most renowned for Faith, and if that alone without the
use of means would have done it, Could have believed his Enemies into the
dust; Besides we read that he is called the Friend of God, and so had the
better grounds to expect to live in Peace, and yet we find, he thought it both
Reason and Prudence to be prepared for War; Thus the Scripture tells us that he
kept his men both Armed and Trained, he provided them not only Weapons of War,
but also taught them the Art and skill to use them; as appears soon after, by
the great execution he did, and good success that he had thereby. Genesis 14. 14.

Again, the great Commendation that the Scripture gives of the Benjamites
skill in slinging Stones at an hairs breadth, shows that it is a thing very
likeing to God, and that which he requires as a Duty in his people, to be very
exact and expert in the right using of Warlike Weapons; The Sling was an
Instrument of War, much used in the times of Old, and the Benjamites we read,
were the most renowned for their exact skill in handling the same; They could
sling to an hairs breadth: This plainly shows that it is the duty of
Soldiers now to learn to be wonderful expert, Benjamite like in the use of
their Martial Weapons and Military Exercise.

Again, what other use do you think can we make of all those places in
Scripture, which do so often mention the skill and Valor of all those Worthies
of Old, why are they so Renowned in Holy Record, and so much commended for
their Martial skill, endowments and exploits, as you may find in that [and
many other places] 1 Chronicles: 5. 18. and Chap. 12. 8, 33. verses. Yea how many
Pages in Sacred Writ are wholly taken up in mentioning of those who have been
renowned for the Art of Soldiery; now to what purpose should all this be, but
chiefly to instruct us in these two things, viz.

1. That it is an Art Commended and allowed by God.

2. That by these Patterns we should learn to practice, that as it is said,
they were expert in War and handling their Weapons; So it is the Duty of a
people now to be. And this still confirms the truth of the Doctrine, viz. That
therefore a people ought to be instructed and trained up to the knowledge of it.

Certainly it requires good teaching and diligent learning to sling a stone at
an hairs breadth, i. e. to be an exact and expert Soldier, to be acute in
that Calling.

Again consider, what a Blessing David counted to be well experienced in that
Art. 144 Psalm. 1. and think you then, so long as there may be use for it, that
it is not the duty of a people to be blessed with the knowledge of it.

Again Lastly as to Scriptural proof, The Soldiers that we read of in the
Gospel time were not disbanded or discharged, but indeed allowed and
encouraged, as those that came to John the Baptist, we find not one word of
Reproof as to their Calling, but only good counsel how to behave themselves in
it, Luke 3. 14. q. d. go on still, but do not so and so, be content with your
wages, which implies indeed be content to be Soldiers.

So the Centurion that came to Christ, was good Christian and an excellent
Believer although a Captain in that profession, Mat: 8. 8, 9. Surely Christ
that commended him so much for his faith would have reproved him for his
Office, had it not been that which was in it self commendable and requisite.
But then for our further satisfaction, I shall now give you the Reasons of the
Doctrine, why it ought to be so.

Reasons.
First, Because this Military way is the way which God does appoint, and the
usual means whereby he defends and works deliverance for his people; He
forbids indeed ye should trust in, yet looks that we should make use of an Arm
of flesh. Look through the Scripture, and ye shall find that the general and
usual way of Gods delivering his people from or defending them against their
enemies, Has been by this means, viz. by the use and help of Arms; Some here
and there, one particular instance of Gods miraculous way of defending or
delivering his people, does not at all invalidate the force of this Reason, nor
excuse us from the duty propounded; Gods sometimes sending an Angel to fight
for his people and destroy their enemies army, as it was not to them so neither
is it now any warrant to us from being prepared to defend our selves; we have
no promise to assure our selves of any such miraculous way of deliverance or
defense: Now seeing this is Gods way, and he being a Wise God and a God of
Order, he will therefore have things to be done in the most orderly and
artificial way or manner. War is his Ordinance, and he has ordered a certain
Art or skill in warring, and hence Commands that his people be trained up or
exercised to the knowledge of it; Gods work must be done wisely, artificially
and in the best manner, so as may be suitable to the glory of his own Nature;
to be able to war or fight according to Art, gives much glory to him, who is
the Author of every commendable Art or Science.

Reas. Second. From the great dependence that the safety and preservation of
men's lives and libertyes bath thereupon, and upon their so being, viz.
Experienced Soldiers. I told you before, it was Gods usual way of defending us
to make us Isntrumental to defend our selves; Now when I speak of Dependence,
I speak in subordination to him who is Independent. The Art Military [faith one
of your own Instructors] being the highest profession as to the preservation of
our Countries [ non nobis nati Sumus] wherein our Lives, Barrif
Libetries and Estates are included, we ought to be more studious thereof, and
exercised therein, but especially Christians who are betrusted with the Oracles
of God, and the pleasant things of his house, ought conscientiously and
carefully to furnish themselves with skill and ability to defend and maintain
those precious things that are of more worth than the whole world; Yea this is
one great part or duty of our Christian warfare to be skillful to defend and
preserve the true Religion; I say that God has Ordered a kind of Dependence as
aforesaid, yea was it not in a Military or Martial way that the Saints in
former ages did preserve and defend themselves, theirs and their Religion,
against those that would have robbed them of all; yea were not others also by
them turned out of house and home, and that because of their great Security and
wilful ignorance in the Military Science, Judges 18. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Do you not count your Lives etc: worth defending or preserving, and is it not
rational than to endeavor the most artificial and safest way of accomplishing
it? One, and a great Sense wherein God is your Walls and Bulwarks, is when he
makes you so unto your selves, viz. experienced Soldiers, expert to defend
your selves: I say, a Countries safety depends much upon an experienced
Militia; yea is it not therefore reckoned as the curse, confusion and undoing
of a place, when their Mighty and skillful men of War are taken away? Isai 3.
1, 2.

Because Skill is one of the greatest helps to Victory, especially, where other
accomplishments do also meet; Victory is the Mark that skill aims at; Skill of
hand, Strength of body, and Courage of mind do make a complete Champion, and
seldom it is that ever they do miss of Victory; yea good skill is more
needful than great strength: Skill many times overcomes strength; A skillful
though a weak Arm, has many times given a Fatal blow to an unskilful though
a strong man. David's skillful hand fetched great Goliath to the ground, he fights
blindfold, or like a mad man, that fights not according to Rule.

Because Security, Ignorance and want of experience in the Military Art, is the
way not only to invite an Enemy to invade a people, but also renders them very
liable to become a Prey, when they shall so do; See that Instance, Judge. 18. 7,
8, 9, 10. This tempts God to leave you, and let the Enemy take you, whereas the
report of a warlike people and their fame for Martial skill many times strikes
fear into an Enemy, and so is one means to prevent War. Invasions are judged
far more dangerous than, pitched Battles; because they are sudden, and usually
take men unprovided, the unskilful man is an unprovided man: times of, of
Peace are times to prepare for War.

APPLICATION
Use I. Hence Learn, that the Commanders and Officers in a Militia, who stand
for Examples and Teachers to others ought in a special manner to be well
qualified and accomplished for those places. Leaders should strive to be
excelling persons; If they are to teach others to be Soldiers, then certainly
themselves should be Artists (...) A certain Author in his miscellaneous
discourses occasionally speaks how Martial Leaders should be qualified, faith
he, the Commanders in War and [as near as can be Commanders in Tray ning
Companyes) ought to be built upon these three Virtues.

They should be Wise, Valiant, Experienced.

Wisdom in a General oftentimes Ends the War without War; of all the Victories
the Romans, thought the best, which was least Stained with Blood, and they were
content to let Camillus Triumph although he had not fought. In these times it
is especially requisite since Stratagems and advantages are more in use then
open and daring Valor: Yet,

Valiant he must be, else he g towes Contemptible, loses his Command, and by
his own Fear infects his Troops with Cowardice. To the eternal Honor of
Caesar, Cicero reports that in all his Commands of the field, there was not
scuad an Ito, but a Veni, as if he had scorned in all his Onsets to be any
thing but still a Leader, always teaching by the strongest Authority his own
Forwardness, his own Example: And though these be Excellencyes, they be all
Lame without

Experience; Let him be never so Learned in a Paper plot where his eye has all
in View, he will fall in a Leager where he sees but a Limb at once: Besides,
Experience puts a Credit upon his Actions, and makes him farmore Prompt in
undertakings.

Use II. Then this should teach those that are or may be (...) Leaders and
Commanders of others (as much as in them lies) to be Careful, Duigent and
Conscientious in the performance of their Duty to wards them that are to be
Instructed by them: Believe it, the work is the Lords, it is his Ordinance, and
you have a great account to give, or you are greatly accountable according to
your well or ill management thereof; The Lord is your Supervisour, You that are
in the Front, have not only (...) but Gods eye upon you; and if there be as
has been proved so great a Dependence upon a well Ordered and Instructed
Militia, consider that you will have but a bad and fore account to give for
your neglect and (...) in the discharge of your Duty: (...) and Calamity may
come upon a Common (...) defect will chestly center upon you in the End (...)
to a greater share in the Curse then other Inferior Soldiers.

It behooves you in some sense more than others, ever to remember and keep in
mind that dreadful sentence against Deceitful dealers in Gods service, Jer.
48. 10. God who is a man of War has a Curious and a skillful eye. Labor then
as always in his presence to do your Duties carefully and skilfully.

The Duties of your places, I hope you know, (or I wish you did) better than I
can tell you:

Labor (as indeed your places require) to be Grave, Serious setting good and
edifying examples; especially keeping a good Command over those that are to be
Commanded by you; and when you are upon the Exercise and Instructing them, be
conscientious in spending those times and seasons to their best advantage and
edification in that Science: Quicken such as you observe backward, lazy and
Idle, let them be ashamed out of their Duncery, or be severely punished for it;
Of all men you that are Officers and Commanders, FOREMEN, do you see to it,
that you be always Foreward and never backward in this great and solemn work.

Use III. Another word may be of Exhortation, and that unto all that are Lifted
under Discipline and Command. Be Exhorted (in Obedience to God and safety to
your selves) to put this Doctrine into practice, viz. Labor now with all
Diligence (while you have the time and means for Instruction) to approve your
selves skillful and Expert Soldiers. It is the Duty of others to teach and it
is as much your Duty to learn, therefore make progress:

Dread to be among the number of those that are ever learning and never come to
the knowledge of this Truth; Loath to be low in the knowledge of that which is
thy Profession. Oh! Press forward, strive to become Expert, Renowned.

DIRECTION
1. Be Conficentious and Diligent in (...) spending these times and seasons
that now present, for the getting more and more Art and skill Spend them I say,
to that very end: Look at this as thy Duty, and do it with all thy Might; Spend
it not in a mere show of thy glittering Armor, neat or gaudy dress: Spend it
not (as too often it is spent) in Licentiousness, Revelling, Rioting, Ranting,
but in the Solemn business of the day, be all in these things: Thou that go
under the Name of a Soldier, be not (as one Cautions thee well) so much a Boy,
as to turn Training days into playing days.

Hearken Diligently to and then keep in mind the Instructions of those that are
thy Teachers and Commanders; Learn so as to be able to do: Consider the Way and
Method and Reason of things, that so thou may be a Soldier not only by
Rote, but according to Art.

3. Be much and as often as yon can upon these Exercises; Use makes perfectness
or Expertness: Thou can not be too exact in this Art, make David thy Pattern,
never leave till thou have it ad unguem at thy fingers ends, as we may infer
from those words of his, Psalm. 144 1. So, Benjamite like, endeavor to be exact
and expert to an hairs breadth: You that are of this Company of the Artilery,
are indeed Volunteers, which intimates your great desire to become expert in
this Art, in that you have been so forward as Voluntarily to List your selves
into a Military Body; So that more may justly be expected from you than from
others, who spend not so much time in these Exercises: therefore be Constant
and Diligent in this great and weighty work.

4. Be Orderly and Obedient, willing to be Commanded: Soldiers of all men in
the world should be willing to Obey: Though every one should labor for such
Experience as to be able to Command. A Soldier is under absolute Command; He
must not dispute the Orders of his General, but Obey them: therefore Soldiery
is well defined, the Obedience of a Stout and Valiant mind, out of his own
dispose; he must move upon direction having a Charge or Word from his Commander
for every step he treads or action he undertakes, Mat. 8. 9. There is so much
keeping of Order in War or Battles, that a Soldier Commanded to stand such a
ground, must not stir though he die for it, and if he stirrs by Martial Law he
shall die. Confusion may soon bring destruction upon an Army. Order is the Soul
of Common Wealths and Societyes, it matters not who goes first, strive rather
who shall March best: he can never well Lead, that knows not well to Follow.
Experienced Generals hold this Military Maxim, that it is as honorable in Wars,
exactly to Obey, as it is exactly to Command.

Last Direct Strive every one to Excel the (...) this I am certain is a Ikely
way to make some expert indeed: That Is a dull stupid, or a slothful Spirit
that has nothing of Emulation in it: you may lawfully strive who shall be best
in that which is good.

Motives, some to Draw and others to Drive.
1. Consider that it is thy Duty to be thus skillful and Expert: For it is thy
Calling, is it not thy Duty to be Expert in thy Calling? what should thou be
so must knowing in as in that which is thine own business.

2. Consider that thou art not only Liable to, but under a Curse for thy
neglect, carelessness or wilful ignorance in this work, for this work is the
Lords; and see what the Lord faith of such as are negligent in it, Jer. 48. 10.
What a shame is it, yea what a plague is it for a man to be a Bungler at his
own Calling?

3. Consider, [as was said before] that there is a great and solemn dependence
upon an Experienced Militia, as to the safety and preservation of our Lives,
Libertyes etc: And if all should be as Careless, Ignorant and unexpert for
defense as thou art, all should quickly become a Prey to the Enemy.

4. Consider, the Enemy grows skillful to destroy, therefore thou should
grow skillful to defend, upon this account it was that David in the Text
Commands them to Teach etc.

5. Consider, That through thy un-expertness and wilful ignorance in this Art,
thou may be guilty of thine own blood, and it may be of the lives of many
others; Thou art a mere deceit and cheat to the Country or Body wherein thou art.

6. Consider, that though your present Exercise be a matter of Delight and
Sport in a sense, yet it tends to a solemn Execution; i. e, you may be called
to be in good earnest; thou know not how soon Orders may come from the Lord
of Hosts for thy sudden March, and then there will be no time to get any skill
to defend thy self, You are now as it were in Garrison, but you may very quickly
be in the Field, not in a naked field, but in a field of War, yea perhaps in
Acheldama, a field of Blood, where thou shall not want for an Enemy, but find
one, not one it may be, but many.

7. You are most likely, having followed Gods Order to have his Presence with
you and Protection over you, he delights in those that are like himself; He is
the Lord of Hosts, the Man of War, And this is one part of his Image, viz.
Wisdom and Experience in these Affairs: Study than to Quit your selves like
Men, and to become the Bulwarks of the places where you Live, that so we may be
able to say truly of you, what Tertullus said flatteringly concerning Foelix
the Governor of Judaea, By You we enjoy great Quietness, which we cannot but
Accept always in all places with much Thankfulness.

FINIS.

