The Dying Speeches of several Indians.

Here be But a few of the Dying Speeches and Counsels Of such Indians as dyed
in the Lord.
It is an humbling to me that these be no more, it was not in my heart to
gather them, but Major Go^kins hearing some of them rehearsed, He first moved
that Daniel should gather them, in the Language as they were spoken, and that I
should translate them into English; And here is presented what was done that
way.

These things are P^ined, not so much for Publishment, as to save charge of
writeing out of Copyes for those that did desiere them. John Eliot.

Waban.
WAban was the first that received the Gospel, our first meeting was at his
house; the next time we meet, he had gathered a great Company of his friends to
hear the Word, in the which he has been ^tedfast* When we framed our selves in
Order in way of Government, he was chosen a Ruler of fifty, he has approved
him self to be a good Christian in Church Order, and in Civil Order, he has
approved himself to be a Zealous, faithful and steadfast Ruler to his death.

His speech as follows, I now rejoice though I be now a dying, great is my
affection in this world, but I hope that God does so afflict me, only to try my
praying to God in this world whether it be true and strong or not, but I hope
God does gently call me to Repentance, and to prepare to come ^^to him;
therefore He lays on me great pain and af^^^ction, though my body be almost
broken by sickness, ^et I desire to remember thy name Oh my God, until I die I
remember those words Job 19.23, to 28. Oh that my, ^^rds were now written, oh
that they were printed in a book that they were graven with an iron pen and
lead in a rock for ^^er. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin, (...)*
destroy this body, yet in my flesh I (...) see God. etc.

I desire not to be troubled about matters of this world, a little I am
troubled, I desire you all my brethren and you also my children, do not greatly
weep and mourn for me in this world, I am now almost dying, but see that you
do strongly pray to God, and do you also prepare and make ready to die, for
every one of you must come to dying: Therefore confess your sins, every one of
you, and believe in Jesus Christ, I believe that which is written in the Book
of God Consider truly, and repent and believe: Then God will pardon all your
great and many sins.

God can pardon all your sins as easyly as one, for Gods free mercy and glory
do fill all the world. God will ^n no wi^e forget those that in this world do
syncerely repent and bel^ive: Verily this is love Oh my God.

Therf^re I (...) that God will ^oe this for me, t^ough in my body I (...)
pain: As for those that d^ed af^re (...) I have no hope about them, now I
believe (...) G^d in (...) Heaven: and there in Heaven are many beleivers
som^^s ^b^^ing. Ther^f^^e I pray you do not overmuch greive for me, when I die
in this world, but make ready your selves ready to die, and follow me, and there
we shall see each other in Eternal glory* in this world we live but a little
while; therefore we must be always preparing, that we may be ready to die.

Therefore Oh my God* I humbly pray, receive my Soul by thy free mercy in Jesus
Christ my S^aviour and Redeemer, for Christ has dyed for me and for all (...)
sins in this world committed.

My great God has given me long (...), and therf^re I now am willing to die.

Oh Jesus Christ help my s^ul and save me soul, I believe that my sickness does
not arise out of the dust, n^r c^meth at perad^enture but God sends it. Joh.
5, 6, 7.

By this sickness God calls me to repent of all my sins, and to belive in
Christ* now I confess my self a great sinner, Oh pardon me and help me for
Christ his sake.

Lord thou call me with a double calling sometimes by Prosperity and mercy,
sometimes by affliction. And now thou call me by sickness, but let me not
forget thee Oh my God. For those that forget thy Name, thou will forsake them,
As Ps^lm. 9.17. All that forget God shall be cast to Hell, therefore let not me
forget thee O^ my God.

I give my soul to thee Oh my Redeemer Jesus Christ: Pardon all my sins and
deliver me from Hell: Oh do thou help me against death, and then I am willing
to die: and when I die Oh help me and receive me.



in so saying he dyed.

Piambohou,
HE was the Second man next Waban, that received the Gospel, he brought with
him to the second meeting at Wabans house many, when we formed them into
Government, he was chosen Ruler of ten, when the Church at Hassenam^ssi^ was
gathered, he was called to be a Ruler then in that Church, when that was
scattered by the war, they came back to Natick Church, so many as survived,
and at Natick he dyed.

His speech as follows, I rejoice and am content and willing to take up my
sorrows and sickness: many are the years of my life: long have I lived,
therefore now I look to die. But I desire to prepare my self to die well. I
believe Gods promise, that ^e will forever save all that belive in Jesus
Christ. Oh Lord Jesus help me, deliver me and save my soul from Hell, by thine
own blood, which thou have shed for me, when thou did die for me, and for all
my sins: Now help me syncerely to confess all my sins, Oh pardon all my sins:
I (...) beg in the Name of Jesus Christ, a pardon for all my sins: for thou Oh
Christ, ar^ my Redeemer and deliverer, Now I hear Gods w^rd and I do rejoice
in what I hear, (...) not see, yet I hear and rejoice that God has c^nfi^med
for as a minister in this Church of Natek, he is our watchman. And (...) you
people deal well with him, both men* women and children, hear him every Sabbath
day, and make strong your praying to God, and all you of Hasso^^^mesut, restore
your Church and praying to God there.

O^ Lord help me to make re^dy to die, and then recieve my ^^ul, I hope I shall
die well by the help of Jesus Christ: O^ Jesus Christ deliever and save my soul
in everl^st^ng life in heaven, for I do hope thou art my Savior. Oh Jesus
Christ.



so he dyed.

Old Jacob,
HE was among the first that Prayed to God, he had so good a memory, that he
could reher^e the whole Catechize, both Questions and Answers, when he gave
thanks at meat, he would sometimes only pray the Lords Prayer.

His speech as follows, MY Brethren: now hear me a few words, stand fast all
you people in your praying to God, according to that word of God 1 Cor. 16.13.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men and be strong in the Lord.
Especially you that are Ru^ers and Teachers: Fear not the face of man, when you
judge in a Court together, help one another, agree together: Be not divided one
against another, remember the parable of ten brethren that held together, they
could not be broken, nor overcome: but when they divided one against another,
then they were easyly overcome: and all you that are Rulers, judge right
judgment, for you do not judge for man, but for God in your Courts. 2 Chronicles.
19.6, 7. Therefore judge in the fear of God.

Again, You that are judges, see that ye have not only humane wisdom, for man's
wisdom is in many things contrary to the wisdom, of God counting it to be
foolishness. Do not judge that right, which only seems to be tight, and
consider Matt. 7.1* 2. Judge right, and God will be with you, when you so d^e.

Again I say to you all the people, make strong your praying to God, and be
constant in it. 1 These. 5.17. Pray continually.

Again Lastly I say to you Daniel our Minister be strong in your work. As Matt.
5.14.16. You must bring Light into the world, and make it to shine, that all
may see your good work, and glorify your heavenly Father.

Every preacher that makes strong his work, does bring precious perles: As
Matt. 13.52. And thou shall have everlasting life in so doing.

I am near to Death, I have lived long enough, I am about 90 years old, I now
desire to die, in the presence of Christ. Oh Lord I commit my soul to thee.



Antony.
HE was among the first that Prayed to God, he was stud^ous to rea^ the
Scriptures and his Catechize, so that he learned to be a Teacher, but after the
wars, he became a lover of strong drink, was often admonished, and finally
cast out from being a Teacher.

His dying speeches follow, I am a sinner, I do now confe^se it, I have long
prayed to God, but it has been like an Hip^crite: tho I was a confessing
church member, yet like an Hip^crite, the I was a Teacher yet like a
backsliding Hipocrite, I was ^fte^ drunk, Love of strong drink is a lust I
could not over come; tho the Church did often admonish me, and I confessed, and
they forgive me, yet I f^ll again to the same sin, the Major Gookins and Mr.
Eliot often admonished me: I confessed, they were willing to forgive me, yet I
fell again.

Now Death calls for me, and I desire to prepare to die well. I say to you
Daniel, beware that you, love not strong drink as I did, and was thereby undone.
Str^ngthen your Teaching in and by the word of God; t^^e heed that you defile
not your work, as I did, for I defiled ^y Teac^ing by Drunkenness.

Again I say to you my Children, forsake not praying to God, go not to
strange places, where they pray not to God, but strongly pray to God as long as
you live: both you and your Children.

Now I desire to die well, tho I have been a sinner, I remember that word that
says, that tho your sins be many and great, yet God will pardon the penitent,
by Jesus Christ our Redeemer O^ Lord save me (...) di^iver me by Jesus Christ,
in whom I believe: send thy Angels when I die, to bring my poor soul to thee,
and save my poor sinfall soul in thy heavenly Kingdom.



Nehemiah.
THis very hopeful young man was going out to hunt, with a companion, who fell
out with him, and stabbed him mortally, and killed him. A little was gathered
up spoken by him, as follows; I am ready to die now, but kn^w not of it even
now when I went out of my door; I was only going to hunt: but a wicked man has
kill^d me* I see that word is true, He that t^is well to day, may be dead to
m^rrow, He that laughed yester day, may sorr^w to day

My misery overtook me in the woods. No man knows the day and time, when his
misery comes.

Now I desire patiently to take up my cross and misery. I am but a man, and
must feel the cross. Oh Christ Jesus help me, thou (...) my Redeemer, my
Savior, and my deliverer: I confess my self a sinner; Lord Jesus pardon all
my sins, by thy own blood, when thou dyedest for us, O Christ Jesus save me
from Hell: Save my soul in heaven, Oh help me, help me.



so he dyed, the wicked murderer is ^led.

John Owussumug sen.
HE was a young man when they began to pray to God, he did not at the present
join with them, he would say to me, I will first see into it, and when I
understand it, I will answer you, he did after a while enter into the Civil
Covenant, but was not entered into the Church Covenant before he dyed, he was
propounded to join to the Church, but was delayed, he being of a quick
passionat temper, some vitty littigations prolonged it, till his sickness, but
had he recovered, the Church was satisfied to have received him (...) finished
well.

His speech as follows, NOw I must shortly die* I desired that I might live, I
sought for mediciens to cure me, I went to every Engl^^h doct^r, at Dad^am,
Me^feil^, Concord, but none could cure me, in this world.

But Oh Jesus Christ, do thou heal my soul, now I am in great pain, I have no
hope of living in this world a whole year I have been afflicted: I could not
go to the Public Sabbath worship to hear Gods word; I did greatly love to go
to the Sabb^^h worship.

Therefore I now say to all you men, women and children^ love much, and greatly
to keep the Sabbath* I have been, now long hindered from it, and (...) I (...)
all, my (...) and children (...) among (...) Love and Obey the Rulers, and
s^bmit unto their judgment, hear diligently your menisters: be obedient to
Major Go^kins and to Mr. El^ot* and Daniel.

I a^ now almost dead, and I exhort you strongly to love each other, be at
(...), and be ready to forgive each (...).

I desire now ^^ghtly to prepare my self to die, for God has given me warning a
whole year, ^y ^y sickness, I (...) I am a (...): my heart was proud, and
thereby all (...) were in my heart, I knew that by birth I was a (...)* I (...),
and ^art, and p^oug^ like an English man, and by all these things my heart was
proud.

Now God calls me to repentance, by my sickness this whole year. Oh Christ
Jesus help me, that according as I make my (...), So through thy grace I may
obtain a pardon of all my sins: for thou Lord Jesus did die for us, to
deliver us from sin. I ^eare and belive, that thou have dyed for many:
Therefore I desire to c^st away all worldly hindrances, my Lands and Goods, I
cast them by, they cannot help me now, I desire truly to prepare to die: My
sons, I hope Christ will help me to die well: Now I call you my so^s, but in
^^aven we shall all ^e Brethren, this I learned in the Sa^^ath wors^^p, all
miserys in this world upon B^l^vers* (...) onl^ joy and blessing in Jesus
Christ: Therf^re Oh Christ jesus help me in all my miserys, and deliver me for
I trust in thee, and save my soul in thy heavenly kingdom, n^w behold me and
look upon me who am dying.



so he dyed.

John Speen.
HE was among the first that prayed to God, he was a diligent Reader, he became
a Teacher, and carried well for diverse years, until the Sin of strong drink
did infect us, and then he was so far infected with it, that he was deservdly
laid aside from Teaching, His last speeches were as follows, NOw I die, I
desire y^u all my friends, forgive him th^^ ^urt me, for the word of God says
in Matthew 6.3, 4: For give them that have done you wrong, and your heavenly
Father will forgive you, but if you do not forgive them, your heavenly Father
will not forgive you, Therefore I entreat you all my fr^nds, f^rgive (...) that
did me wrong, (for John N^^usqu^^it beat him and hurt him much a little before
his sickness) now I desire to die well, now I confess all my sins, I am a sinner,
especially I loved strong drink too well, and Some times I was mad drunk,
though I was a Teacher, I did offend against praying to God, and Spoiled my
Teaching; all these my sins and drunkness Oh I pray you all forgive me, Oh
Jesus Christ help me now and deliver my soul, and help me that I may not go to
Hell, for thou O Christ art my deliverer and Savior, Oh God help me, Lord
though I am a sinner, Oh Lord do not forget me.

and so he dyed.

Black James.
HE was in former times, reputed by th^e English to be a Pawaw, but I cannot
tell, this, I know he renounced and repented of al^ his former ways, and
desired to come to Christ, and pray to God, and died well, as appears in what
follows.

NOw I Say, I almost die, but you all my sons, and all you that pray at
Chaban^kongko^^k take heed, that you ^eave not off to pray to God, for praying
to God is exceeding good, for praying to God is the way that will bring yo^ to
the heavenly kingdom; I belive in Christ, and we must follow his Steps.

Especially you my sons, beware of drunkness, I desire you may Sand ^ast in my
room, and Rule well, I almost now dead, and I desire to die well, Oh Lord Jesus
Christ help me, and deliver my Soul to die well*

so he dyed.

FINIS.

