THE Temple of Wisdom FOR THE Little world, In TWO Parts.

The First Philosophically Divine, treating of The Being of all Beeings, And
whence every thing has its original, as Heaven, Hell, Angels, Men and Devils,
Earth, Stars and Elements.

And particularly of all Mysteries concerning the Soul; and of Adam before and
after the Fall.

Also, a Treatise of the four Complexions, with the Causes of spiritual
Sadness, etc.

To which is added, A Postscript to all Students in Arts and Sciences.

The Second Part, Morally divine, contains First, Abuses stripped and whipped, by
Geo. Wither, with his description of Fair Virtue.

Secondly, A Collection of divine Poems from Fr. Quarles.

Lastly, Essays and Religious Meditations of Sir Francis Bacon, Knight.

Collected, Published and intended for a general Good, By D. L.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia, Anno 1688.

A few words to the Reader, by way of PREFACE
MY intent is to say little, either of the Book it self, or by what impulse I
took the pains to compile and publish it, but rather let nimble Time, that
over-runs all things, manifest the Effects of both* even so also let it
manifest my Opponents, which has been the fate of public Writers heretofore.

And lest that in this promiscuous Generation of men, this little Book might
appear as a promiscuous Composition of Authors* it is therefore distinguished
in two parts.

Now then as to the first part I say, that most of what the diligent Searcher
and Enquirer shall find dispersed in the whole Works or Writings of Jacob
Behme, he will here find collected, contracted and comprised in a little room,
it being chiefly the^ substantial or affirmative part that is here delivered,
and not the circumstantial; for otherwise it could not be contained in so few
Sheets. For Jacob throughout his Writings has much used Tautology as himself
confesses, by reason (as he says) of his slow and dull Apprehension.

And yet what is here immitted to thy view is his own words and sentences, in
his own phrase and sense, as I found them dispersed as aforesaid; for no
otherwise durst I deal by him; God forbid I should: only this know, that I have
in about half a dozen places added a Parenthesis instead of Margent, which yet
is his own expressions of the same thing elsewhere, thereby the more unfolding
the matter to the understanding. All which [considering my many years
acquaintance with his Writings] may very well be, notwithstanding the wonderful
Revelation and deep sight and knowledge this man had in heavenly Mysteries; for
in his time the eternal day was but, as it were, dawning, and the day star
beginning to appear; but now the glorious Sun is arisen and arising, and shines
forth in its splendour, and gives a clearer discerning of things that differ.

Not that I boast my self so greatly illuminated thereby, or so highly
graduated in discerning more than others: O no, I am as subject to be obscured
by the clouds of Sin and Error as other men, and am so frail and subject to
fall, that no man needs the hand of divine Protection more than I; and never
had more need than now to call to mind and retain a lively sense of the day of
my first inward Visitation, which I once knew, which was a Day of Anguish and
Sorrow, and that from no external cause, when I sought secret places to bewale
my woeful state, because of inward Sin (for no man could outwardly accuse me of
evil) and yet that day, even that day of Mourning was a day of Love and
Rejoicing, in which I can in Truth say,

As Showers of Rain do cause the Earths Increase,
So streams of Tears did bring my Soul true Peace.
And in that day of my first love and zeal for Holiness, the reading all Books
was a burden to me, yea, even the holy Scriptures also, and instead of
receiving comfort therefrom, I was only wounded in spirit by them, witnessing
that saying, The Letter kills, but it is the Spirit that quickens. But now I
shall come to the matters themselves.

Jacob Behme to the Doctors and Scholars, and Readers of his Writings
COme on ye Doctors, if ye are in the right, then give answer to the Spirit;
What do you think stood in the place of this world before the time of the
World? 2 ly, Out of what do you think the Earth and Stars came to be? 3 dly,
What is that in man that displeases God so much, that he tormenteth and
afflicts man so, being he has created him? And 4 thly, That he imputes Sin
to man, and condemns him to eternal punishment? 5 thly, Why has he created
that wherein or wherewith Man commits sin? 6 thly, What is the cause or the
beginning, or the birth and geniture of Gods fierce Wrath, out of or from which
Hell and the Devil are come to be? 7 thly, Or how comes it that all Creatures
in this world do bite, scratch, strike beat and worry one another, and yet sin
is imputed only to man? 8 thly, Out of what are the venomous and poisonous
Beasts, and Worms and all manner of Vermin come to be? 9 thly, Out of what are
the holy Angels come to be? 10 thly, What is the Soul of man? And lastly, What
is the great GOD himself, and how is he in Love and Wrath?

If you can demonstrate that God is not in the Stars, Elements, Earth, Men,
Beasts, Worms, Leaves and Grass, also in Heaven and Earth; also, that all this
is not God himself, and that my Spirit is false and wicked, then I will be the
first that will burn my Book in the fire, and recall and recant all whatsoever
I have written, and will accurse it, and in all obedience willingly submit my
self to be instructed by you.

I do not say, that I cannot err at all; for there are some things which are
not sufficiently declared, and are described, as it were, from a g^impse of the
great God, when the Wheel of Nature whirled about too swiftly, so that man with
his half dead and dull capacity or apprehension cannot sufficiently comprehend
it.

Now it concerns every one that will speak or teach of divine Mysteries, that
he have the Spirit of God, and know in the Light of God those matters which he
will give forth for true, and not suck or draw them from his own reason, and so
without divine knowledge run upon the bare Letter in his opinion, and drag the
Scriptures (as it were) by the hair of the head, to prove it, as is usually
done by reason.

From this, so exceeding many Errors are arisen, in that the divine knowledge
has been sought in men's own wit and art, and so men are drawn from the Truth
of God in their own Reason.

And though I search sublimely and deep, and shall set it down very clearly,
yet this must be said to the Reader, that without the Spirit of God it will be
a Mystery to him and hidden from him: Therefore let every one take heed how he
judges, that he fall not into the judgment of God.

Every one will not understand my Writings according to my meaning and sense,
but every one according to his gift for his benefit, one more than another,
according as the Spirit has its property in him.

For the spirit of God is often subject to the spirits of men, if they will
that which is good or well, and sees or looks after what man wills, that
his good work be not hindered, but that every where above all, Gods will or
willing, or desiring be done.

Of the two Qualities in one.
Two Qualities, a good one, and an evil one, are in one another, as one thing
in this World, in all powers in the Stars and the Elements, as also in all the
Creatures; and no Creature in the Flesh in the natural Life can subsist, unless
it has the two Qualities The understanding of the thing here called Quality,
is the Foundation of the whole Revelation of Jacob Behme's, and all Mystries of
which his Writings are only a description; for all along the seven Qualities
are called sometimes 7 Sources, 7 Species, Powers, Operations or Faculties of a
thing; also the qualifying or fountain Spirits, which give* Model, Image or
Frame, the Power, Virtue, Figure, Constitution, Substance, Essence and distinct
Being of all things that ever were or can be, in* from, and to all Eternity in
God, and all Creatures in Heaven, Hell, or in this World. Also the Forms or
Properties of Nature, which is the solliter or power of God. And so they are
the seven Spirits of God* as in the Revelations of John c. 1.


2. For from the two fold Source every thing has its great mobility running,
springing, driving and growing; for meekness in Nature is a still Rest, but the
fierceness in every Power makes all things moveable, running and generative;
for the driving Qualities cause a Lust in all Creatures to evil and good.

3. In every Creature in this World is a good and evil Will and Source, which
is caused by [or proceeds from the Stars; for as the Creatures in the Earth
are in the^r Qualities* so are the Stars; there is nothing in Nature wherein
there is not good and evil in Men, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes*, Worms, and in all
that which is upon the Earth, or in the Earth, or Gold* Silver, Copper, Tinn*
Lead, Iron, VVood* Herbs and Grass in the Earth* in Stones, in the Water, and
all whatsoever can be thought upon: Every thing moves and lives in this
double impulse working or operation, be it what it will.

4. But the holy Angels, and fierce wrathful Devils, are here to be excepted;
the holy Angels live and qualify in the Light and Meekness in the good
Quality, but the Devils live and reign in the fierce wrathful Quality in
fierceness, destruction and perdition.

5. And though Moses writes, I am an angry zealous God; Yet the meaning of it
is not that God is angry in himself, and that there arises a Fire of Anger in
the holy Trinity: No, that cannot be, for it is written Against those that hate
me: In that same Creature the Fire of Anger rises up.

For if God should be angry in himself, then the whole Nature would be on fire,
which will come once to pass in the last day in Nature* and not in God. But in
God the triumphing Joy will burn; it was never otherwise from Eternity, nor
will it ever be otherwise.

6. Now the elevating* springing* triumphing Joy in God, makes Heaven
triumphing and moveable, and Heaven makes the Stars and Elements moveable, and
the Stars and the Elements make the Creatures moveable; out of the Powers of
God are the Heavens proceeded, out of the Heavens are the Stars, out of the
Stars are the Elements, out of the Elements are the Earth, and the Creatures
come to be.

Thus all had its beginning, even to the Angels and Devils, which before the
Creation of Heaven, Stars and the Earth, were proceeded out of the same Power,
out of which the Heaven, the Stars, and the Earth were proceeded.

Now Hell and the dark World, or the anger of God, is a Gulf of desperation,
devoid of the Hope of God* and all good, ^t is the first ground to the eternal
Nature, the place is between the Kingdom of God and this World, and makes a
peculiar Principal dwelling in it self, and has neither place nor local abode,
and is every where inhabiting it self only, and yet it gives Essence to the
Light and outward World; that is, it is the cause of the Source, viz. the
Fire, and is the whole Being of all God's Beeings.

7. In the Darkness he is an angry zealous God, in the fire Spirit a consuming
Fire, and in the Light he is a merciful loving God, and in the Power of the
Light he is, especially above all other Properties called God, and yet it is all
but God manifested, who manifests himself through the eternal Nature in
ingredient Properties.

8. The Essence of this World consists in evil and good, and the one cannot
be without the other. But this is the great Iniquity of this World, that the
evil-over-powereth the good, that the Anger is stronger then the Love, and this
by reason of the Sin of the Devils and Men, who have disturbed Nature by the
false Desire, that it mightily and effectually works in the wrath as a Poison
in the Body.

9. We see very clearly, that there is nothing in this World so evil, but it
has a good in it; the good has its rise originally out of the heavenly
Property, or light World, and the evil has its Property out of the dark
World, for both Worlds are in each other as one.

Of the Seven Forms or Properties of the Eternal Nature which make three
Principles or Worlds.
I. Form Astringent, Desire.
IT is the beginning of the eternal Nature; the cause of Essences, as also of
harshness, sharpness, hardness, Cold and Substance; a Mother of all Salts.

II. Form Bitter, Compunctive.
The motion of the Desire, it cutteth asunder the hardness and attracted
Desire, the true Root of Life, a cause of the stirring, so also of the Senses,
and the ground of the bitter pain.

III. Form Anguish, Perceivance.
It is a cause of the Mind, wherein the Senses are moved and acted, the ground
of the natural Will, wherein the eternal Will desires to be manifested, that
is* it will be a Fire or Light; In these three first Properties consists the
foundation of Anger, and of Hell, and of all that is wrathful.

IV. Fire, Spirit, Reason, Desire.
In the Fire the unity appears, and is seen in the Light, that is in a
burning love; and the wrath in the Essence of Fire. In Fire and Light
consists the Life of all things [ viz. in the Will thereof] let them be
insensible, vegetable or rational things, every thing as the Fire has its
ground, either from the Eternal, as the Soul, or from the Temporary, as Astral
Elementary things; for the Eternal is one Fire, and the Temporary is another.

V. Form, Light, Love.
This Property is the Fire of Love, or world of Power and Light, which in the
Darkness dwells in it self, and the Darkness comprehends it not; in the
Light the eternal Unity is substantial, that is* an holy spiritual Fire, an
holy Light, an holy Air, which is nothng else but Spirit, also an holy Water,
which is the overflowing Love of the unity of God, and an holy Earth, which is
all powerful virtue and working: It is the true spiritual; angelical world of
the divine Joy, which is hidden in this visible world.

VI. Form, Sound, Voice, Word.
Proceeding from the divine Powers, which is formed in the Love; the Sound is
the understanding, wherein all the Properties understand one another.

VII. Form, Essence, Being, Mansion.
This seventh Property is rightly and truly called the ground or place of
Nature, wherein the other Properties stand in one only ground, the (...) the
other six, in which they work as the Life does (...) the Flesh, also it is a
Food of the Fire, (...) the Fire draws Essence for its sustenance, wherein it
burns, and the seventh is the Kingdom of the divine Glory. Not that the
seventh Property is the Tincture, but it is the Body of it; the Power and
Virtue of the Fire and Light is the Tincture in the substantial Body.

It is especially to be noted, that always the first and seventh Properties
are accounted for one, and the second and sixth, also the third and fifth, and
the fourth is only the dividing, mark or bound. And yet all seven are but one;
the last is the Body of the first; They are altogether only the manifestation
of God, according to Love and Anger, Eternity and Time.

In the Desire is the original of Darkness, and in the Fire the eternal Unity
is made manifest with the Light in the fiery Nature. Out of the fiery Property,
and the property of the Light, the Angels and Souls have their Original.

The Darkness becomes substantial in it self, and the Light becomes also
substantial in the fiery Desires; these two make two Principles, viz. God's
anger in the darkness, and God's love in the Light, each of them works in it
self, and there is only such a difference between them, as between Day and
Night, and yet both of them have but one only ground, and the one is always a
cause of the other.

The visible World is the third Principle, that is, the third ground and
beginning, this is out-breathed out of the inward ground, viz. out of both the
first Principles, and brought into the Nature and Form of a Creature.

But according to the manifestation of the Trinity of God, there are but three
Properties of Nature, the first is the Desire, which belongs to God the
Father, yet it is only a Spirit; but in the seventh Property the Desire is
substantial.

The second is the divine Power and Virtue, and belongs to God the Son; in
the second Property it is only a Spirit, but in the sixth it is the substantial
Power and Virtue.

The third belongs to the holy Ghost, and in the beginning of the third
Property* it is only a fiery Spirit* but in the fifth Property the great Love
is manifested therein.

Now these are the seven Properties in one only ground, and all seven are
equally Eternal, without beginning; none of them can be accounted the first,
second third or last, but are equally Eternal.

We must represent this in a Typical way, that it may be understood, how the
one is born of the other.

The Seven Forms of Spirits, mentioned Revelations Chap. 1.
I. Harsh, desiring will. 1. Dark World, a Similitude of it is a Candle. II.
Bitter or stinging. 1. Dark World, a Similitude of it is a Candle. III. Anguish
till the flash of Fire. 1. Dark World, a Similitude of it is a Candle. IV. Fire
dark Fire. light Fire. 2. Fire World, a Similitude of it is the Fire of a
Candle. V. Light or Love, whence the Water of Eternal Life flows. 3. Light
World, a Similitude of it is the Light of a Candle. VI. Noise* Sound Mercury.
3. Light World, a Similitude of it is the Light of a Candle. VII. Substance or
Nature. 3. Light World, a Similitude of it is the Light of a Candle.
The first Principle.
The dark World, or Fire of Wrath, hence God the Father is called an angry*
zealous jealous God* and a consuming Fire.

The second Princple.
The Light World, or Fire of Love, hence God the Son, the Word; the Heart of
God is called a loving and merciful God.

The third Principle.
This World of four, Elements, which is produced out of the two inward Worlds
[above said] and is a Glass of them, wherein Light and Darkness, Good and Evil
are mixed, it is not Eternal, but has a beginning and an end.

Of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
WHen we consider the whole Nature, and its Property, then we see the Father.
When we behold Heaven and the Stars, then we behold his eternal Power and
Wisdom. So many Stars as stand in the whole Heaven, which are incomprehensible
to Reason; so manifold and various is the Power and Wisdom of God the Father.

If a man would liken the Father to any thing, he should liken him to the round
Globe of Heaven. Thou must not conceive here that the very Power, which is in
the Father* stands in a peculiar severed part or place in the Father, as the
Stars do in Heaven. No, but the Spirit shows that all the Powers in the
Father are one in another as one Power.

When I think with my self what (...) many hundred thousand Miles above the
stary Firmament, I find the eternal, unchangeable Unity is there, the only
Eternal God, or that only Good, which a man cannot express -- His immensenes^
highth and depth no Creature* no, not any Angel in Heaven can search into it.
But the Angels live in the Power of the Father very meekly, and full of Joy,
and they always sing in the Power of the Father.

In the Fire God is called an angry God; but in the Light or Love-fire, he is
called the holy God; and in the dark Nature he is not called God. We must make
distinction, each world has its Principle and Dominion: and indeed all is from
one eternal Original; but it severizeth it self in a twofold Source; a
Similitude whereof we have in the Fire and Light, where the Fire is painful and
consuming, and the Light, meek and giving: And yet one were as nothing without
the other.

Of God the Son.
YOu must not think that the Son is another God then the Father, or that he is
without or besides the Father. No, the Father and Son are not of such a
Substance; he is eternally in the Father, he is the Heart in the Father, and
the Father generateth him continually from Eternity to Eternity, and the Father
and Son is one God, of an equal Being in Power and Omnipotence.

Now the Heaven and Stars, and the whole Deep between the Stars signify the
Father -- And the seven Planets signify the seven Spirits of God, or the
Princes of the Angels, among which Lord Lucifer was one before his fall; which
all were made out of the Father in the beginning of the Creation of Angels,
before the time of this VVo^ld.

Now as the Sun stands in the midst betwixt the Stars, and the Earth,
enlightening all Powers, and is the Light and Heart of all Powers, and is all
the Joy in this World -- Even so the Son of God in the Father, is the Heart in
the Father, and shines in all the Powers of the Father, his Power is the
moving springing Joy in all the Powers of the Father, and shines in the whole
Father as the Sun does in the whole World.

Of God the Holy Ghost.
THe holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is the third
self-subsisting Person in the Deity: As the Elements in this World go forth
from the Sun and Stars, and are the moving Spirit, which is in every thing in
this world: So the Holy Ghost is the moving Spirit in the whole Father, and
goes forth from Eternity to Eternity continually from the Father and Son, and
replenisheth the whole Father; he is nothing less or greater then the Father
and Son.

Here we cannot say with any ground, that God is three Persons; but he is three
fold in his eternal Generation, he begets himself in Trinity, having three
manner of workings, and yet but one only Essence, as may be seen in the
over-flown Power and Virtue in all things, but it is especially represented to
us in Fire, Light and Air, which are three several sorts of workings, and yet
but in one ground and substance.

And as we see that Fire, Light and Air arise from a Candle [though the Candle
be none of the three, but a ^ause of them] so likewise the eternal Unity is the
cause and ground of the eternal Trinity, which manifests it self from the
Unity, and brings forth it self in (first) Desire or Will, which is the
Father; secondly, Pleasure or Delight, which is the Son; and thirdly,
proceeding or out-going, which is the Holy Ghost.

Of the Creation of the holy Angels: and how an Angel and a Man is (...) Image
of God.
THe Powers in God do operate or Qualify in that manner as in Nature, in the
Stars and Elements, or in the Creatures -- No* (...) must not conceive it so,
for Lord Lucifer in his Elevation made the Powers of impure Nature thus
burning, bitter, cold, astringent, sower, dark and unclean.

But in the Father all Powers are mild, soft, like Heaven, very full of Joy;
for all the Powers triumph in one another. The quality of the Water is not of
such a condition or man^ner in God as it is in this world.

The bitter Quality qualifieth in the sweet astringent, (...) harsh and sower
Quality, and the love rises up from Eterni^^ to Eternity. As all the Powers of
God the Father rise (...) from Eternity to Eternity; so all the Powers rise up
also (...) an Angel and a Man into the Head; ^or higher they cannon rise, for
they are but Creatures, which have a beginnin^ and an^ end -- And in the Head
is the divine Council-Sea or Throne, and it signifies God the Father. And the
fiv^ Senses are the Counselors which have their Influences out o^ the whole
Body out of all Powers.

Now the five Senses always sit in Council in the Power of the whole Body, and
when the Council's Decree is con^cluded, then the compacted or concruted Judge
speaks (...) out into its Center or midst of the Body, as a word into the
Heart; for that is the Fountain of all Powers, from which also it takes its
rise.

Now it stands there in the Heart, as a self subsisting Person, composed out
of the Powers, and is a VVor^ and signifies God the Son; and now it goes out
from the Heart into the Mouth, on to the Tongue, which is the sharp^ness, and
that so sharpneth it, that it sends forth, and is distinguished according to
the five Senses.

From what Quality soever the Word takes its original (...) that Quality it
is thrust forth upon the Tongue, and the power of the destruction or difference
goes forth from the Tongue, and that s^gnifieth the Holy Ghos^.

The Mouth signifies that thou art an unalmighty Son of thy Father, whether
thou art an Angel or a Man; for through the Mouth thou must draw into thee the
power of thy Father if thou will live.

An Angel must do so as well as a man, though indeed he needs not to use the
Element of Air in that manner as a man does; yet he must a^tract into himself,
through the Mouth, the Spirit, from which the Air of this World e^isteth.

For in Heaven there is no such Air, but the Qualities are very meek and
joyful, like a pleasant cheering breath of Wind. And this the Angel also must
make use of, or else he cannot be a moveable Creature; for he must also eat of
the heavenly Fruit through the Mouth.

Thou must not understand this in an earthly manner, for an Angel has no Guts,
neither Flesh nor Bones, but is constituted and composed by the divine Power,
in the shape, form and manner of a man, and has all Members like man, except
the Members of Generation and the Fundament, or go^ng out of the Dross; neither
has an Angel need of these. For man got his Members of ^eneration first in his
doleful and lamentable fall.

An Angel sends forth nothing but the divine Power, which he takes in at the
Mouth, wherewith he kindles his Heart, and the Heart kindles all the Members,
and that he sends forth from himself again at the Mouth when he speaks and
praises God.

But the heavenly Fruits which he eats are not Earthly; and though they are
of such a form and shape as the Earthly are, yet they are mere divine Power.

Indeed it is most certain and true, that there are all manner of Fruits,
Plants and Flowers in Heaven, as in this World, and not merely Types and
Shadows: As the Angels are, so are the Vigitation and Fruits, all from the
divine Power.

These heavenly Sprouts and Springings thou must not wholly liken to this
World; for there are two Qualities in this world, a good and an evil, and many
things grow through the Power of the evil Quality, which does not so in Heaven.

For Heaven has but one Form or manner, nothing grows there which is not
good; only Lord Lucifer has deformed and dressed this World in that manner.

Of the Place and Government of Angels.
WHen God Almighty had decreed in his Counsel that he would make Angels and
Creatures ou^ of himself, then he made at first three Kingly Govern^ments or
Dominions answerable to the number of the holy Trinity, and each Kingdom had
the order or ordi^nance Power and Quality of the divine Being.

First, Prince Michael, signifies the great Strength and Power of God, and is
created according to God the Father, that circumference, or space Region, or
Province, wherein he and his Angels are created, is his Kingdom which is above
the created Heaven.

Secondly, Prince Lucifer this high and mighty glorious beauteous King lost his
right Name in the fall* He was created according to the quality, beauty and
condition of God the Son, and was bound to and united with him in Love, and his
Heart also stood in the center of Light, as if he had been God himself, and his
Beauty and Brightness well transcended all For his circumference Conception or
chiefest Mother was the Son of God -- his Court, Province, Place or Region
wherein he dwelt with his whole Army or Company, and wherein he is become a
Creature, and which was his Kingdom, is the created Heaven, and this World
wherein we dwell with our King Jesus Christ.

For our King sits in divine Omnipotence, where King Lucifer did sit, and on
the kingly Throne of expulsed Lucifer, and the Kingdom of King Lucifer is now
become his. O Prince Lucifer! how do thou relish that?

Lucifer had still been an Angel, if his own Will had not introduced him into
the Fires Might, desiring to domineer in the strong fiery Might.

Thirdly* VRIE^ is a gracious aimable blessed Prince and King, he has his Name
from the flash, or going forth of the Light, which signifies rightly God the
holy Ghost.

For as the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Light, and forms, figureth, and
imageth all, and reigns in all; such also is the power and gracious aimable
blessedness of a Cherubim, who is the King and Heart of all his Angels, that
is, when his Angels do but behold him, they are all then affected and touched
with the Will of their King.

These three Kingdoms together contain such a deep, as is not of any human
number, nor can be measured by any thing; yet you must know, that these three
Kingdoms have a beginning and end; but that God that has made these three
Kingdoms out of himself, is infinite and has no end.

And the three Kingdoms are circular, round about the Son of God, neither of
them is further or nearer to the Son of God, for the one is equally as near
about the Son of God as the other.

From this Fountain, and from all the Powers of the Father goes forth the Holy
Ghost, together with the Light and Power of the Son of God, in and through all
Angelical Kingdoms or Dominions, and without, beyond, and besides all the
Angelical Kingdoms, which no Angel or man is able to search or dive into.

Neither have I any purpose to consider of it further, much less to write; but
my Revelation reaches even into the three Kingdoms, like an Angelical
Knowledge.

Here you must know, that the Angels are not all of one Quality, neither are
they equal or alike one to another in Power and Might: Indeed every Angel has
the Power of all the seven qualifying or fountain, Spirits. But in every one
there is somewhat of one Quality more predominant and strong then another, and
according to that Quality he is glorified also.

As the Flowers in the Meadows do every one receive their Color from their
Qualities, and are named also according to their Qualities; so are the holy
Angels also But the King is the Heart of all the Qualities, and has his Court
or Residence in the midst or center, like a Fountain; and as the Sun stands
in the midst among the Planets, and is King of the Stars, and the Heart of
Nature in this World, so great also is a Cherubim or King of Angels.

We are not to understand, that the holy Angels dwell only above the Stars
without the place of this World: Indeed they dwell without the Dominion and
Source of this world, but in the place of this world; albeit there is no place
in Eternity, the place of this world, and also the place without this world is
all one to them.

We men see not Angels and Devils with our Eyes, and yet they are about us,
and among us, the reason is because they dwell not in the Source and Dominion
of our world.

We understand that evil and good Angels dwell near to one another, and yet
there is the greatest immense distance [between them] for the Heaven is in
Hell, and the Hell is in Heaven, and yet the one is not manifest to the other;
and although the Devil should go many Millions of Miles, desiring to enter into
Heaven, and to see it, yet he would be still in Hell, and not see it; also the
Angels see not the Darkness, for their sight is mere Light of divine Power; and
the Devils sight is mere Darkness of God's Anger: The like also is to be
understood of the Saints, and again of the Wicked.

Their agillity or nimbleness is as swift as the Thoughts of a man yea as the
divine Power it self is, yet one Angel is more swift then another, and that
answerable according to their Quality -- Now upon the seventh Spirit of God
their Foot does stay, which is solid like a Cloud, and clear and bright as a
Christaline Sea, where they walk upward and downward which way soever they
please.

In that seventh Spirit also rises up the heavenly Fruits and Colors, and
whatsoever is apprehensible.

Antiquity has represented the Angels in Picture, like men with Wings; but
they have no need of any Wings, yet they have Hands and ^eet as man have but
after a heavenly manner and kind -- At the day of the Resurrection from the
dead, there will be no difference between Angels and men, they will be of one
and the same kind of Form, and our King Christ clearly testifies the same; To
whom shall I liken the Angels, they are like to little Children that walk in
the Fields among the Flowers, and pluck them, and make curious Garland of them;
they take one another by the Hand, and walk together, and rejoice together.

Here is nothing but a cordial, meek and gentle Love* a friendly courteous
Discourse, a gracious, aimable and blessed Society, where the one always
delights to see the other, and to honor one another. They know of no Malice,
cunning Subtilty or Deceit, but the divine Fruits and pleasant Loveliness is
common among them.

And know, that we speak from a true ground, and not from conjecture, that God
created Angels and men to his own Joy.

Of the Mystery of the Creation, and of the outward World.
SEeing the Prince of the Hierarchies [when he sat in the heavenly Essence in
the Rest] did fall, and aspired for the center of the eternal Nature, he was
cast into the darkness, and God by his motion created him another Prince out of
this place [but without divine understanding] for a Ruler in the Essence, and
that is the Sun.

From this place proceeded in the divine motion the seven Properties of Nature
[understand the Planets] which govern the essential Being in good and evil [in
which [Essence] Lucifer sat* and whence he was cast] and lost his dominion in
the Essence.

Now observe.
The Sun has its own Royal Place to it self, and does not go away from that
place where it came to be at first; as some supp^se, that it runs round
about the Globe of the Earth in a Day and a Night, and some of the Astrologers
also write so: ^ere I shall have Adversaries enough that will be ready to
censure me, and say* Astrologers understand it better, who have writ of such
matters; and they will look upon this great opening as a Cow locks upon a new
Barn-door.

But that I write otherwise then Astrologers in some things, I do it not out of
supposition, doubting whether it be so or no: I dare make no doubt herein,
neither can any man instruct me herein: I have not my Knowledge by study.

Now this Opinion or Supposition is not right, but the Earth roveth [or
turneth] it self about, and runeth with the other Planets as in a Wheel round
about the Sun: The Earth does not remain staying in one place, but runeth round
in a Year once about the Sun, as the other Planets [viz. Venus and Mercury]
that are next the Sun; but Saturn and Jupiter* as also Mars, by reason of their
great Orb circumference, cannot do it, because (...) stand so high above, and
far distant from the Sun.

The other Planets are peculiar Bodies of their own, which have a Corporeal
Propriety of themselves, and are not bound to any fixed place, but only to
their Circles, Orb or Sphere, wherein they run their Course; but the Sun is not
such a Body, but is only a place or Locality kindled by the Light of God.

Understand* the place where the Sun is, is such a place as you may choose or
suppose any where above the Earth, And if God should kindle the Light by the
Heat, then the whole World would be such a mere Sun, for the same Power where
the Sun stands is every where all over, and before the time of Wrath it was
every where all over the place of this World, as light as the Sun is now, but
not so intolerable.

For that Heat was not so great as in the Sun, and therefore the Light also was
very meek -- So that man should not dare to say, that the Sun is an open Gate
of the Light of God, but is as the light in a man's Eye, whereas also the place
of the Eye belongs to the Body, but the Light is distinct from the Body.

The Stars are the Powers of the seven Spirits of God, for when the Wrath of
God was kindled by the Devil in this world, then the whole House of this world,
in Nature, or the outermost Birth or Geniture, was as it were benumed or
chilled in Death, from whence, the Earth and Stones came to be.

The Stars are arisen or proceeded out of the kindled House of God's wrath, for
the whole House is benumed in Death as the Earth is, whence the Stars also
subsist in Wrath and Love.

Before the times of the created Heavens, the Stars and Elements, and before
the creation of Angels, there was no such Wrath of God, no Death, no Devil, no
Earth nor Stones, neither any Stars, but the Deity generated it self very
meekly and lovingly, and formed, figured, and framed it self in Ideas, Shapes
and Images, which were incorporated according to the qualifying or fountain
Spirits in the generating.

Of the Earth, etc.
THe Earth is come from the corrupt Saliter of the outermost Birth or Geniture
-- For on the first Day God drove together [or compacted] the corrupt Saliter
which came to be so in the kindling of the Wrath.

In this driving together, or compaction of the corrupt wrath Saliter, was King
Lucifer also as an impotent Prince, together with his Angels driven into the
hole of the Wrath-Saliter, into that place where the outward half dead
Comprehensibility is generated, which is the place or space, in, upon, and
above the Earth, up to the nature Goddess the Moon -- So far reaches their
extent now till the last Day, and then they will get a House in that place
where the Earth now is and stands [that is in the outermost Birth in the
Darkness] and this will be called the Burning Hell.

For Nature was very rarefied and thin, or transparent, and all stood merely in
Power, and was in a very pleasant ho^ temper; But as soon as the Fight began in
Nature with (...) proud Devil, Nature got a twofold Source, and the outer most
Birth or Geniture in Nature was kindled in the wrath Fire, which is called the
Wrath of God, or the Burning Hel^

But Now when this was done, the Deep became clear, an^ with the hidden or
concealed Heaven, the Light was seperate^ from the Darkness, and the Globe of
the Earth in the great Wheel of Nature, was roled or turned once about, and
ther^ passed the time of one Revolution, or of one Day.

In the duration of the second Day began the sharp separa^tion, and the
incomprehensible cliff between the Wrath an^ the Love or Light was made: And so
King Lucifer firmly strongly, or fast bolted up into the House of Darkness, and
was reserved to the final Judgment.

And so also the Water of Life was separated from the Water of Death, yet in
that manner as that they hang together in this time of the World as Body and
Soul, and ye^ neither of them comprehend the other; the Firmament is the cliff
or gulf between Time and Eternity.

But that God calls it Heaven, and makes a division o^ the Waters gives us
to understand, that Heaven is in the world and the world it not in Heaven, the
Water above the Firmament is in Heaven, and the Water under the Firmament is
the external material Water; the palpable water is Death, and the impalpable is
the Life.

Moses says, God created Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures in six days, and
rested on the seventh; yet God needed no Rest* for he has wrought from
Eternity, and he is a mere working Power and Virtue; the understanding lies
hidden in those Words; could not he have made all his Works in one day? Neither
can we properly say, there was any Day before the Sun was; for in the Deep
there is but one day [in all.]

Therefore the meaning lies hidden; he understands by each days workings,
the manifestation of the seven Properties: for he says, In the beginning God
created Heaven and Earth.

This visible World is sprung from the spiritual World, and is only an
Effluence of the seven Properties, for it, proceeds out of the six working
Properties, but in the seventh [that is in Paradise] it is in rest, and that is
the eternal Sabbath of Rest, wherein the divine Power and Virtue rests; for
the seventh day was the true Paradise [understand it spiritually.]

That is the Tincture of the divine Power and Virtue, which is a temperament;
this pierced through Properties, and wrought in the seventh, that is in the
substance of all the other.

Now it may be asked, Why did not God bolt up the Devil instantly, and then* he
had not done so much Mischief?

Answer; This was Gods purpose, and that must stand, which is, he would
re-edifie out the corrupted Nature of the Earth, or build again to himself an
angelical Host or Army, viz. a true Body, which should subsist eternally in God
-- It was not God's intention at all to let the Devil have the whole Earth for
an eternal Dwelling House; but only the death and fierceness of the Earth,
which the Devil had brought into it.

Now if he should have instantly left it to the Devil for an eternal dwelling
House, then out of that place a new Body could not have been built: Now what
Sin had that space, place or room, committed against God, that it should stand
in eternal shame? Sure none: and therefore that was unequal to be so. Also the
purpose of God was to make a curious excellent Host or Army out of the Earth,
and all manner of Images, Ideas and Forms* for in and upon that all should
spring, and generate themselves anew, as we see in Minerals, Oars, Stones,
Trees Herbs and Grass, and all manner of Beasts after a heavenly Form -- And
though these Imagings were transitory, being they were not pure before God, yet
God would in the end of this Time extract and draw forth the Heart and the
Kernal out of the new Birth or Geniture, and separate it from Wrath and Death.

But the Death of the Earth, and the Wrath therein should be Lord Lucifer's
eternal House, after the accomplishment of the new Birth or Geniture, in the
mean while Lord Lucifer should lie captive in the Darkness in the deep above
the Earth; and there he is now, and may very shortly expect his portion.

Of the Divine Manifestation.
GOd is the eternal immense incomprehensible Unity, which manifests itself,
in it self, from Eternity to Eternity, by the Trinity, and is Father, Son and
holy Ghost in a threefold working.

The first Effluence and manifestation of this Trinity is the eternal Word or
out-speaking of the divine Power and Virtue -- The first out-spoken Substance
from the Power is the divine Wisdom, which is a substance wherein the Power
works.

The Angels and the Soul proceed from God's Essences from the whole Tree, the
Angels from two Principles; and the Soul with the Body of the outward Life from
three Principles; and therefore Man is higher then the Angels, if he continue
in God.

The inward eternal working is hidden in the visible world, and it is in every
thing, and through every thing, yet not to be comprehended by any thing in the
things own Power; the outward Powers and Virtues are but the Passive, and the
House in which the inward do work.

All the other worldly Creatures are but the Substance of the outward world,
but man, who is created both out of Time and Eternity, out of the Being of all
Beeings, and made an Image of the divine manifestation.

The eternal manifestation of the divine Light is called the Kingdom of Heaven,
and the habitation of the holy Angels and Souls. The fiery Darkness is called
Hell, or God's anger, wherein the Devils dwell together with the damned Souls.

In the place of this world Heaven and Hell are present every where, but
according to the inward ground. Inwardly the divine working is manifest in
God's Children; but in the Wicked, the working of the painful darkness.

The place of the eternal Paradise is hidden in this world, in the inward
ground, but manifest in the inward man, in which God's power and virtue works.

There shall perish of this world only the four Elements, together with the
stary Heaven, and the earthly Creatures, viz. the outward gross Life of all
things. The inward Power and Virtue of every Substance remains eternally.

Of Man, who is made after the Image and Similitude of God.
THe whole Body, with all its parts, signify Heaven and Earth.

The inward hallowness in the Body of man, with the Windpipe and Artaries,
wherein the Air qualifieth or operateth, signifies the Deep betwixt the Stars
and the Earth, wherein Fire, Air and Water qualify in an Elementary manner,
and so the warmth of the Air and Water qualify also in the Wine-pipe and
Arteries, as they do in the Deep above the Earth.

The Flesh signifies the Earth, and is also from the Earth -- The Blood
signifies the Water, and is from the Water -- The Breath signifies the Air,
and is also Air.

The Veins signify the powerful flowings out from the Stars, and are also the
powerful outgoings of the Stars; for the Stars, with their power, reign in the
Veins, and drive forth the form, shape and condition of men.

The Entrals or Guts signify the operation of the Stars, or their consuming of
all that which is proceeded from their Power; for whatsoever themselves have
made, that they consume again, and remain st^ll in their virtue and power; and
so the Guts also are the consuming of all that which man thrusts and stuffeth
into his Guts, even all whatsoever grows from the power of the Stars.

The Heart in man signifies the Heat, or the Element of Fire, and it is also
the Heat; for the heat in the whole Body has its original in the Heart.

The Feet signify near, and afar off: for near and afar off are all one in
God; and so man by means of his Feet can come and go near, and afar off; let
him be where he will, he is in Nature neither near nor afar off, for in God
these are one thing.

The Hands signify God^s Omnipotence: for as God in Nature can change all
things, and make of them what he pleases, so man also can with his Hands
change all that which is grown in Nature, and can make with his Hands out of
them what he pleases: he rules with his hands the Work, and being of the
whole Nature, and so they very well signify the Omnipotence of God.

The whole Body to the Neck signifies the round Circle or Sphere of the Stars,
as also the Deep within or between the Stars, wherein the Planets and Elements
reign.

The Head signifies Heaven, it contains the five Senses, viz. Seeing,
Hearing. Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling, wherein the Stars and Elements
qualify, and therein existeth the Syderial, or heavenly stary or astral and
natural Spirit in Men and Beasts; in this, flows forth Good and Evil, for it
is the House of the Stars.

Such power the Stars borrow from Heaven, that they can make in the Flesh a
living and moving Spirit in man and Beast. The moving of the Heaven makes the
Stars moveable, and so the Head also makes the Body moveable.

Note, The Syderial Body is the highest, excepting the Divine in man; the
Elemental Body is only its Servant or Dwelling House, as the four Elements are
only a Body or Habitation of the dominion of the Stars.

The elemental Spirit and Body is inanimate, and void of understanding, it has
only Lust and Desire in it. Vegetation is its right Life: the inward Light, and
Power of the Light, gives in man the right divine understanding: But there is
no right divine apprehension in the Syderial Spirit: The Syderial Body dwells
in the Elemental, as the light world in the darkness, it is the true rational
Life of all Creatures.

Of the first Man Adam, before, and after the Fall.
ALl things of this world have a twofold Body, viz. an Elemental, from the
Fire, Air, Water and Earth, and a spiritual Body from the Astrum; and likewise
a twofold Spirit, the one Astral, the other Elemental.

Man only among all the earthly Creatures has a threefold Body and Spirit;
for he has also the internal spiritual World in him, which is likewise
twofold* viz^ Light and Darkness, and also corporeally and spiritually this
Spirit is the Soul, but this Body is from the Water of the holy Element, which
dyed in Adam, that is, disappeared as to his Life.

Now when God created the Earth, he founded its time when he would keep the
Judgment, and sever the evil from the good, and give the evil for an Habitation
to the apostate Prince; but being the good in the Occluse Earth was without
heavenly Creatures [seeing its Prince was cast out] God created Adam another
Hirarch out of this good Ens, to be a ruler of this place, and hence came the
Devil's envy against man, and all good Creatures of this world.

The first Free Will which was breathed into Adam* was good; indeed it was both
from God's love and anger, viz. from the center of the eternal pregnatress of
the eternal spiritual Nature; but it had the understanding in it to rule and
govern it self, so as it might stand and subsist eternally.

But the crafty distemper or infection, introduced by the Devil, was in the Ens
of the Earth, whence [or whereof] Adam's outward Body was framed: Into this
earthly Ens the Devil brought his desire by the Serpents crafty Ens. So that
the Lubet arose in the Ens of the Body, whereinto the first free will of the
inspired Soul entered, and assumed the Lubet of the Body, and introduced this
Lubet into a Desire or Substance.

And out of this Substance another self-ful Will did now arise, viz. a
Bastard, a false Serpent-Child; and this Bastard Adam did originally propagate
to his Eve, and Eve to her Son Cain, and so one man to another; thus we have
now in this earthly Flesh this same false will, proceeded from the Serpent's
substance, whereunto the Devil introduces his Desire, and tempts us, and
continually makes us lust and long after the devilish Property, viz. Pride,
Covetousness, Envy and Anger.

Thus the Devil rides in and upon Body and Soul [of man] but now the first
introduced Free Will which, God breathed into Adam, lies yet in all men. For
it is the true real Soul, the center of the Fire and Light, a spark of the
divine Power and Omnipotence, but wholly hemed in, and captivated in this
wicked introduced Bastard.

For Prince Lucifer by his false Imagination had tainted the Limus of the Earth
before the Compaction [or Creation] it was the place of his Hirarchies; now the
outward Body of man was taken out of the Limus of the Earth, in the Verbum
Fiat, and formed according to the property of the human Life, which was in the
Word.

Thus Adam's Flesh was half Earthly, and half heavenly, whence he lusted
against the Command and Will of God; this is, as Paul says. The Flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh -- Adam's Spirit also by
the Imagination has brought a Power into the Earth, and so the Matrix of
Nature gave him what he would have.

He must be tempted to try whether he would stand an Angel instead of Lucifer;
and therefore God created him not barely an Angel, so that if he should fall,
and not stand, he might help him* So that he might not perish in the fierce
Wrath, as Lucifer did, therefore he was created out of Matter, and his Spirit
introduced into the Matter, viz. into a Sulpher of Water and Fire, that God
might again exgenerate a new Life unto him, as a fair pleasant smelling Blossom
springing out of the Earth.

For God saw very well, according to the property of his Wrath, that man would
fall, but he would bring him again through, and in the Name Jesus, through the
corruptible Death into the royal Kingdom, whence Lueifer was fallen, in whose
stead the man Christ, God and Man in one person, should sit as Hirarch,
High Priest, or the great Prince of men.

Poor man did not fall out of a resolved purposed Will, but through the
poisonous venomous Infection of the Devil, else there had been no remedy for
him. Neither has man brought the Malignity and Venom into the Birds, Beasts,
Worms, Stones, Vegetables, and all Creatures* but Lucifer has made the house
of Love to be a house of eternal Enmity, the house of Light to be a house of
Darkness, etc. otherwise, if man^ had brought Malignity and Wrath into all
Creatures, then he could never have looked for Mercy at God's hands, no more
then the Devil.

Adam did not desire to prove the first Principle, as Lucifer had done, but his
lust was only bent to taste, to prove Evil and Good, viz. the vanity of the
Earth, the outward Soul was awakened, so that the hunger entered into its
Mother, where (...) it was drawn, and introduced into another Source.

And when this Hunger entered to eat of Evil and Good, then the desire in the
Fiat drew forth the Tree of Temptation, and set it before Adam, then came the
severe Command from God -- Thou shall not eat of the Tree of the Knowledges of
Good and Evil, in that day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the Death.

But that Moses says, The Tree of Life stood in the midst of the Garden; and
presently next after sets down, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil:
Her^ lies the Vail before Moses his Eyes, and the earthly sinful man cannot
behold him. The precious Pearl lies in the [knowledge of] the difference of
these two Trees, and yet it is but only one, but manifest in two Kingdoms -- He
says the Tree of Life, thereby he understands the Property of the eternal
Life in the Tree, viz. the second Principle; and by the Words, of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil* he understands the wrath of the Anger of God,
which was manifest by the Essence of the outward World, in earthliness, in the
Tree of which Adam should not eat; for he should have eaten with the inward
Mouth, and not with the earthly Desire, but with the heavenly, for he had such
Fruit growing for him, which the inward Mouth could enjoy; indeed the outward
Mouth did also eat thereof* but not into the Worms Carkess* for as the Light
swalloweth up the Darkness, so the Celestial swallowed up the Terrestrial, and
changes it again into that whence it proceeded.

Adam was a man* and also a Woman, and yet none of them [distinct] but a Virgin
full of Chastity, Modesty and Purity, viz. the Image of God he had, both the
Tinctures of the Fire and Light in him, in the Conjunction of which the one
Love, viz. the Virginal center stood, being the fair Paradisical Rose-Garden of
delight, wherein he loved himself; as we also in the Resurrection of the Dead
shall be such as Christ tells us* That we shall be like the Angels of God*
yet not only pure Spirit, as the Angels, but in heavenly Bodies, in which the
spiritual angelical Body inhabiteth, even such a man as Adam was before his Eve
shall arise again, and eternally possess Paradise, not a man or woman, but as
the Scripture says, they are Virgins.

Ad^m before his Eve, had not such a beastial Body as we now have. For if God
had created him unto the earthly cor^uptible naked sick toilsom Life, then he
had not brought him unto Paradise; if he had desired or willed the beastial
Con^ulation and Propagation, then he would in the beginning (...) created Man
and Woman, and both Sexes had come forth in the Verbum Fiat, into the division
of both Tin^^^res, as it was in other earthy Creatures.

Every Creature in its arival to this world, brings its clothing from its
Dam, but man comes miserable, naked, shiftless in deepest Poverty and
Inability, and cannot help himself, which does sufficiently show unto us, that
he was not created of God unto this Misery, but in his Perfection, as all other
Creatures were, which Perfection the first man fooled away [or lost] by false
Lust.

Now Adam [ if he had stood] should have generated or brought forth after a
Magical manner, which had been thus [effected] not by a sundry peculiar issue
from Adam's body as now. But as the Sun thorow-shineth the Water, and reads it
not, even so to the spiritual Body, viz. the Birth had been brought forth, and
in its coming forth had been substantial without Pains, Care and Distress in a
great joyfulness and delight.

Which after when Venus 's Matrix was taken from Adam, and formed into a Woman,
must be done through sorrow, pangs and distress, as God said to Eve, Thou shall
now bring forth Children in Sorrow, and thy Will shall be subject to thy
Husband. Wherefore? because it was sprung forth from the man's Will. Eve was
half the Adam, viz. the part wherein Adam should have loved and impregnated
himself* the same, when as he stood not, was taken from him in his Sleep, and
formed into a Woman.

But that the fall might not proceed [or come] from the divine appointment, God
made man perfect, and created and ordained him unto Paradise, and forbad him
the false Lust, which the Devil stirred up through the Limus of the Earth in
Adam's outward Body, with his false Imgination and hungry desire.

And Adam was forty days in Paradise [before his Eve was made] in the
Temptation, if he had stood steadfast, (...) God had so confirmed him to
Eternity.

But the breaking [or dividing] of Adam, when (...) woman was taken out of him,
is the breaking or bru^^sing of Christ*s Body on the Cross, from the sixth
(...) unto the ninth, for so long was the Fiat in Adam* Sleep, in the
seperating of the Man and Woman, (...) in such a space of time the Woman was
compleatl^ finished [or brought forth] out of Adam into a Femal^ Person [or
image] She is not taken only and wholl^ out of Adam's Flesh, but out of his
Essence, out o^ the Female part, she is Ad^m's Matrix.

Now when the pregnant Matrix was taken from Adam, the woman was every way
formed with suc^ Members for propagation as she is at this day, and so Adam
also; for before, when Adam was Male and Female, he needed no such Members, for
his Birth was Magical, his Conception moving in the Matrix [was to be] done
through Imagination.

And the beastial worms Carkess of the Bowels, with the formation of other
inward principal Members, pertaining to the earthly Life, was hung upon Adam
instead of the Female Matrix, and the like worms Carkess was also hung upon the
Woman, instead of the heavenly Limbus; of which the poor Soul is to this day
ashamed, that it must bear a beastial Form on the Body, and propagate as the
Beasts do.

Now then Adam and Eve standing thus, as man and wife in Paradise, and having
yet the heavenly Source and Joy, though mixed, the Devil could not endure that*
for his Envy was too great: and seeing he had brought down Adam's Angelical
form, he looked now upon Eve, viz. the Woman out of Adam, and persuaded her to
the evil Fruit, and she did eat and gave to Adam.

This is the Bit upon which Heaven and Paradise departed, where the Cherubim,
viz. the cutter off with the naked Sword came, and stood before the Door -- His
Sword was that of the destroying Angel, which now cutteth man with Heat, Cold,
Sickness, Necessity and Death, and at last cutteth off the earthly Life from
the Soul.

But though the outward Figure was just so, yet it has far another A, B, C,
internally; the natural man without God's Light, understands nothing thereof.

This Sword is in man, when man converteth and enters into Sorrow for his
committed Sins, and casts away Vanity, and stepeth into the Infants Shirt --
In this Anxious sorrowful Gate of true Repentance the Angel stands with the
Fire-flaming Sword, and the Virgin-Bud forces quite through this Sword into
Paradise, viz. into the Life of Christ, and grows forth through this Sword.

And now the Virgin-Child stands with its fair Rose in the new Plant in
Paradise, and the poor Soul which begets this Child, stands the whole time
of this Life under the reach and swing of this Fire-Sword, and is fast bound
with a Band to the gross Beast in the outward World [ viz. this worms Carkess]
where the Virgin-child is sufficiently thrust at, and wounded with this Fire
Sword: For the Fire-Soul, which in the Fire-Sword of God's anger, is bound to
the Serpent-Monster, does daily amuse it self upon the Serpent-Monster, and
sins, and even then this Fire-Sword does cut away the Sins, and devours them
into God's anger, where they are examined and judged.

Now God has cursed the Earth for man's sake, so that Paradise springs no
more through the Earth, for it is become a Mystery, and yet it is continually
there; and into that Mystery the Souls of the Saints depart, when the earthly
Body seperateth it self from the Soul.

It is in this world, and yet is out of this world; for this world's Quality or
Source touches it not: the whole world would have continued to be Paradise, if
Adam had continued in Innocence; but when God pronounced the Curse, then
Paradise departed.

For God's cur^ing is fleeing, not departing away [but a fleeing, or] a going
into another Principle, viz. into himself.

Adam said, I am naked, and afraid; Of what was he afraid? he felt in himself
the world of God's anger, and feared that it would wholly enkindle it self, and
devour him, as happened to Lucifer: therefore he trembled at the Call of the
holy Voice, as the Anger trembles at the Love.

Indeed he was naked, but knew it not, till they did eat the earthy Fruit, and
then their Eyes were opened, for the heavenly Virgin of God 's wisdom departed
from them, and then they first felt the Kingdom of the Stars and Elements.

Man had no such beastial Flesh before the Fall, but heavenly Flesh; no heat,
nor frost, no sickness, nor mishape, or mischief, also no fear could touch or
terrify him, his Body could go through Earth and Stone uninterrupted by any
thing; for that could be no eternal man which earthliness could limit.

The Devil was indeed an Angel, and Adam an Image of God, they had both the
Fire and the Light, as also divine Wit, Ingenuity or understanding in them: Why
did the Devil imagine according to the Fire, and Adam according to the Earth?
They were free: The Light and Power drew not the Devil into the Fire, but the
fierce wrath of Nature. Why did the Spirit assent to be willing whatsoever the
Magia makes it self that he has? The Devil made himself Hell* and that he
has; and Adam made himself Earth, and that he is. But can a man make of
himself what he will? he has both before him the Fire and the Light; Will he
be an Angel in the Light? then God's Spirit in Christ helps him to the
Society of the angelical Quire. But will he be a Devil in Fire? then God's
anger helps him into the Abiss to the Devil.

Now observe further.
God said to the Serpent, the old Devil, Seeing thou have done this, cursed art
thou. And to the creaturely Serpent, which must now become a Creature; for the
Devil had turned himself into the form of a Serpent, therefore must the Serpent
also continue, to it he said, Thou shall go upon thy Belly, and eat Earth.
Seeing it had seduced man, so that he was become earthly, therefore should also
the Devil's Image be earthly, and devour the fierce wrathful Source or Quality,
viz. Poison that should now be its Source or Quality.

And here we are to know, that the Devil figured or framed to himself the
Serpent's Image from the Constellations and Elements through his Imagination;
for he had great Power till the Lord wholly cursed him, and set the dear Name
Jesus for a mark, or limit of separation, and there his great Power was laid.

Adam was the only man that God created, Eve his Wife God would not create;
Generation was to be out of one only -- But seeing he fell, so that God must
make him a Wife, then came the Covenant and Promise again upon one only, that
all should be regenerate and new Born again out of one only, viz. out of the
second Adam, not out of the Virgin Mary, but out of Christ the heavenly Adam.

God set his purpose in Adam's Child, and brought his Imagination into the
perished Image, and impregnated the same with his divine Power and
Substantiality, and converted the Soul's will out of the Earthliness into God,
so that thus Mary became impregnated with such a Child as Adam should have been
impregnated with -- Which Self-ability could not effect, but sunk down into
Sleep, viz. into the Magia, where then the Woman was made out of him, which
should not have been made, but Adam himself should have impregnated in Venus's
Matrix* and have generated Magically. But seeing that might not be, therefore
was Adam divided, and his own Will of great might and power was broken in him,
and shut up in Death.

But now [ Adam being divided] the Man longs after the Matrix of the Wife,
and the Wife after the Limbus of the Man -- The woman has a watery Tincture,
and the man a fiery, the man sows Soul, and the woman Spirit, and both sow
Flesh, viz. Sulpher, therefore is Man and Wife but one Body, and make together
a Child.

And therefore ought to continue together, if they once mix -- Whosoever
mixeth with another, or seperateth from one another, they break the Ordinance
of Nature, and such a one is like the brute Beasts, and considers not that
in the Seed the eternal Tincture lies, wherein the divine Substantiality lies
hid. Also that is a work which will follow after man in the Shadow, and its
Source or Quality will one day be made stirring in the Conscience.

Of the Soul's original, with its Essences, Substance and Property.
THe Soul is a Life awakened out of the Eye of God, it^ original is the Fire,
and the Fire is its Life -- This is the greatest wonder that the Eternity has
wrought, that it has made the eternal a corporeal Spirit, which thing no Sense
can find out, and it is unfathomable to us.

For no Spirit can found it self, it sees well the Deep, even into the Abiss*
but is comprehends not its Maker; it beholds and diveth into him indeed,
but it knows not its own making; this is only hidden to it, and nothing else,
therefore here we are commanded to be silent, and dive no further.

The Essences of the Soul came out of the center of Nature, out of the Fire,
with all Forms of Nature, all the three Prin^iples lie in the Soul. All that
God has and can do, and that God is in his Ternary, all this is in the Essence
of the Soul, as the virtue of a Tree is in the Twig that grows out of it.

The Substance of the Soul is heavenly created, created out of the divine
Essentiality, yet the Will of it is free either to demerse it self, and esteem
it self nothing, and so eat of the Love of God, as a Twig feeds upon a Tree,
or to rise up in its Fire, and be a Tree of it self, and eat of that, and so
get Essentiality, viz. a creaturely Body.

The Property of the first Soul was created according to both Mothers, but all
Properties lie i^ it, it may awaken, and let in what it will* and whatsoever it
awakneth and lets in, is pleasing to God, if its Will be in the Love of God,
in humility and obedience.

Of the breathing in of the Soul, and of its peculiar ^ashion and Form.
EVery Spirit without a Body is empty, and knows not it self, and therefore
every Spirit desires a Body for its Food, and for its Habitation -- Hence the
outward Image, according to the Spirit of this World, with the outward Fiat*
was conceived, and a Body was created out of the Matrix of the Earth; a ^ass or
red Earth, consisting of Fire and Water.

The inward man was in Heaven, and his Essences were Paradisical* his glance in
the inward Eye was Majesty, an incorruptible Body, which could speak the
Language of God, and of Angels, and the Language of Nature; as we see in Adam,
that he could give Names to all Creatures, to every one according to its
Essence and Property, he was also in the outward Image, and yet kne^ not the
outward Image, as inde^d the Body has no knowledge.

And in this two fold Body [which was created in the sixth Day, in the sixth
Hour of the Day, in the same Hour which Christ was hanged on the Cross] after
the Body was finished the royal Soul was breathed in from within by the holy
Ghost into the Heart, in the holy man, into its Principle, like an awakening of
the Deity.

And the outward Spirit [viz. the Air] and the whole outward Principle, with
the Stars and Elements* did cleave to the inward, and the outward Spirit
breathed its Life in the same manner with the Soul, through the Nostrils into
the Heart, into the outward Heart, into the earthly Flesh, which was not then
so earthly.

The Source of the Wrath insinuated it self with the breathing in, viz. with
the original of the Soul, so that the Soul could not remain God's Image, unless
it remained in Humility and Obedience, and yielding its Will into God's Will,
or else it were very difficult for a Creature to rule such true Principles, as
the wrathful and the outward are, the outward being also born out of the
wrathful.

Therefore sure its Temptation was not only the biting of an Aple, nor did it
continue only for some few Hours* but forty Days, just so long as Christ was
tempted in the Wilderness [and that also by all the three Principles.]

When a Twig grows out of a Tree, the form of it is like the Tree; indeed it
is not the Stock and the Root; but yet it is like the Tree: So also when a
Mother brings forth a Child, it is an Image of her.

So we must understand that the Soul is in the form of a round Globe according
to the Eye of God, through which the Cross goes, and which divides it self in
two p^rts, viz. into two Eyes, standing Back to Back, viz. a holy divine Eye,
and a wrathful hellish Eye in the Fire; this it should shut and secretly reign
therewith through the Anguish [viz. through Death] in the second Principle in
Love.

We mean the Soul in the (...) Principle, according to the original, has the
form of an Eye, and yet twofold like a Heart, wherein there is a Cross -- And
in the second Principle it is a Spirit, and a whole Image, as the outward man
is -- And in the third Principle it is a Glass of the whole World, all
whatsoever is contained in Heaven and Earth, every Property of every Creature
lies therein; for that Glass is like the Firmament and Stars.

Of the Power and Ability of the Soul.
WE know that whatsoever comes out of the Abiss and is the ground of it self*
can in it self do all things -- But though the Soul be a Twig out of the Tree,
yet now it is become a Creature, and is its own, it is an Image of the whole;
for when a Child is born, then the Mother and the Child are two -- We mean
thus* God's Spirit, and the Spirit of the Soul are two Persons, each is free
from the other, and yet both stand in the first beginning, each has its own
Will.

The Soul originally is greatly powerful, it can do much, but its Power is only
in that Principle wherein it is, for the Devil cannot reign over God.

The First Power of the Will of the Soul is, it frames its own form in the
Spirit; also it can frame another Image in the Spirit out of the center of
Nature; it can give another Form to the Body, according to the outward Spirit;
for the inward is Lord of the outward; it can change the outward into another
Image, but not durable.

For Adam's Soul having let in the Turba of this VVo^ld, that if the Turba see
a strange Child* it rises up against it instantly, and destroys it; it
continues to endure only so long as the inward Spirit can subdue and overpower
the outward.

And this Form is called Negromancy, a Transmutation, where the inward
over-powereth the outward, for it is natural, and we understand that when we
shall be changed* that change will be made thus by the same Turba, which has
the first Fiat in it.

Secondly, if the Spirit were an Angel* the similitude of God, yet the Will
can make it a proud Devil; and also make a Devil an Angel, if it sink it self
into Death, into Humility under the Cross, and cast it self into the Spirit of
God, and so submit to his Government, then it sinketh into Eternity, out of the
Source* into the still nothing* which is yet all:

Thirdly; The Spirit of the Soul has power to enter into another man, into his
Marrow and Bones, viz. into the Sulpher, and to bring the Turba into him, if he
be false; so far as every one is not armed with the Spirit of God, but is found
naked in the Spirit of this World, as may be seen by Witches.

Fourthly; It has such power, if it be the Child of God, that it can lead the
Turba captive, and can pour it out upon the House of the Wicked, as Elias did
the Fire, and Moses before Pharaoh; for it can throw down Mountains and break
Rocks.

This you must understand to be so far as that thing is capable of the Turba,
by awakening the Wrath, then it is possible, but if not, and that the Spirit of
God be in a thing, then it cannot be, for it would pour Water upon the Turba of
the Fire, which would then be as it were dead, and its power would lie in
Derision: And therefore Heaven is a middle between God and Hell, viz. between
Love and Anger, and was created out of the midst of the Waters, so that the
Devil cannot rule with his Turba, the Water* turns his purpose into
derision, as the false Magic, and blinded Enchantment are drowned in the
Water.

The Fifth Power of the Will, or Spirit of the Soul, is, that it may or can
seek all Wonders that are in Nature, viz. all Arts, Languages, Buildings,
Plantings, Distraction, Knowledge; it can command the Starry Heaven, as Joshua
did, when he commanded the Sun to stand still, and Moses the Sea, that it stood
up; also he commanded the Darkness, and it came; it can make an earthly Life,
as Moses made the L^ce and Frogs, also Serpents, and other Wonders.

It has Death in its Power, so that it can overpower that* if it ride in the
Chariot of the Bride [ viz. the Will of the holy Ghost] it can bridle and
overcome the Devil if its [VVill] be in God, there is nothing can be named that
it cannot subdue.

The Soul^ power was so potent before the Vanity, that it was not subject to
any thing; and so it is still powerful, if the understanding were not taken
away from it; it can by Magic alter all things whatsoever are in the world's
Essence, and introduce them into another Essence; but the vanity in the outward
A^^s dominion has b^ought a Darkness thereinto, so that it does not know it
self; it must in this Life time be its own Enemy, that it may learn to be
humble, and continue in the divine Harmony, and not become a Devil.

And so the Devil can do nothing to it, for he is a proud Spirit, and would be
above the Wonders of God, but an humility can bind him; after this manner
every man may escape the false Magitian* (...) also the N^g^omancer; for no
Power can touch him (...) whom God dwells.

Whether the Soul be Corporeal, or not Corporeal?
THe Tincture is the true Body of the Soul, for the Soul is ^ire, and the
Tincture arises from the Fire, and draws it again into it self, and allayeth
it self therewith, so that the wrathful Source is quenched and then the
Tincture subsisteth in meekness. For the Soul has no Essence nor Power in it
self, but the Fire; and thus Water proceeds from the meekness of the
Tincture; The Fire is desirous, and where there is a desiring of the original,
there is a finding of the original: Thus the ^ire finds Water in the
Tincture* and turns it into Sulpher, according to the Power of all the seven
Spirits of Nature* and this is a Water of Life: And so we see that the Blood
is the House of the Soul, but the Tincture is its Body.

The Soul only* beside the Spirit* is a Globe of Fire, with an Eye of Fire, and
an Eye of ^ight, which turn themselves backward into one another, as the Wheel
in Ezekiel, that could go on every side* though ^^bel has contrived another
meaning about it, but a blind one without a Spirit.

But the mere Soul is not corporeal, but in its Tincture, a Body grows,
whether it be a heavenly or a hellish Body, and yet is not a Body which can be
comprehended outwardly, but a virtual Body, the divine Body, Christ's heavenly
Body, the heavenly ^lesh, which he gives us to eat in his Testament.

But the outward Spirit [if the Soul do not hinder it, but let it in] brings
its Imagination into, and spoileth it, ^o that another strange ^mage comes to
be in the Spirit, in the Tincture, according to the contents of the L^st, as
the covetous come to be a Wolf, the envious a Dog, the proud a Horse, Peacock,
or other Beast, also ^o^ds, Adders, Serpents, and other Worms and creeping
things. Now ^ods Spirit receives not their Images so long as they continue
such.

Of the Propagation of Soul [viz.] how it comes into a Child in the Mother's
Womb.
THe Woman has gotten the Matrix, viz the Tincture of Venus [or Tincture of
Light] and the Man has the Tincture of Fire, which you may perceive by the
eager Imagination of both toward one another: For the Seed in the Essence
eagerly seeks the Life, the Man's in the VVoman^s in Venus, and the Woman's
in the Fire, in the original of Life.

For they must now propagate as Beasts do, in two Seeds, the Man sows Soul*
and the woman Spirit, and being sown in an earthly Field, it is also brought
forth after the manner of all Beasts.

Nevertheless, all the three Principles are in the Seed, but the inward cannot
be by known the outward, for in the Seed the Soul is not living, but when the
two Tinctures come together, then it is a whole Essence; for the Soul is
essential in the Seed, and in the Conception it becomes Substantial.

Thus the Soul comes not at all into the Body, or is breathed into it from
without, but the three Principles have each of them its own Artificer* one
working ^ire in the center, and the other makes Water ^n the Tincture, and
the third makes the earthly Mistery^Magnum, and yet it is no new thing, but
the very Seed of Man and Woman, and is only conceived in the mixture* and so
only a Twig g^oeth out of the Tree.

The Soul is not every time new created and breathe^ in* but is propagated
after a human manner; as a Branch grows out of a Tree, as I may better render
it, as a man sets or sows Seed, and so a Spirit and Body grows out of it.

And this is only the difference that the three Principles are always in
strife about Man* each would (...) have him: So that many times a wonderful
Turba is brought in, while yet he remains in the Seed.

But if the Parents both Father and Mother have their Souls* clothed with
Christ's Flesh and divine Essentiallity, then it cannot be; for Christ says, A
good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit; yet the Turba in time can enter in
with the Reason.

So also an evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit* that is, if both the
Parents be evil, and held captive by the Devil, then an evil Soul is sown, but
the Principles cannot yet judge it, nor the Turba neither; it is indeed an evil
Child, yet if it turn, it may with the Imagination enter into the Word of the
Lord.

Consider this, ye evil Parents, ye gather Money for your Children; get them
good Souls, that is more necessary for them,

How and where the Soul is seated in man; also of its Illumination.
THe Soul is in God conceived in the Heart, and the Word which conceived it
was in the Heart, viz. in the center, and so it continues in the Figure, and
in the Seat, as it was comprehended by the Fiat, and so it is still at this day.

It dwells in three Principles, but the Heart is it^ original, it is the
inward Fire in the Heart, in the inward Blood in the Heart, and the Spirit of
it which hat^ a glance from the Fire is in the Tincture, for it is clothed
with the Tincture, and burns in the Heart.

The Soul is indeed seated in the inward Principle but it rules even in the
outward, viz. in the Stars and Elements; and if it be not an Ape, and suffer it
self to be captivated, it has power enough to rule them* and if the Soul
deme^se it self into God, the outward must be obedient to it.

The outward Essence reaches not the inward into the Soul, but only by the
^magination; There is nothing else in this world* no Fire nor Sword that can
touch the Soul, or put it to death, but only the Imagination, that is its
Poison, for it originally proceeds from the Imagination, and remains in it
eternally.

The Soul is thus enl^ghtned, it is in this world, and also in God: here in
this Life it is a Servant of God's wonders, which it should open with one Eye,
and with the other bring them into the beginning before God, and set and cal^
all its doings into God's will, and by no means say of any thing in this* This
is mine, I am Lord of this; for it lies if it say so: All is God's, thou art a
Servant, and should walk in Love and Humility toward God, and thy Brother,
for thy Brother's Soul is a fellow-Member with thy Soul thy Brother's joy in
Heaven with God is also thy Joy, his Wonders are also thy Wonders.

For in Heaven Go^ is all in all* he fills all, the holy Ghost is the Life of
all, there is mere Joy, there is no Sorrow* there a^l is God's; one rejoices
at the Power, Brightness and Beauty of another; there is no Malice nor Envy,
for all that remains in Death and Hell.

O how cheerful i^ the Soul when its anguish, source of Fire tastes God's
Light! how exceeding courteous it is! O how it b^ (...) it self before God.

Whether is the Soul of a newborn Child without Sin?
HOw can a Soul be born pure, it cannot be, it brings the Turba with it into
the World, and is sinful in the Mother's Womb.

Yet the Soul is not wholly forsaken of God, so far as the Father and Mother
are honest, and in God, for it comes from the Soul of the Father and Mother:
And although a Child dye in the Mothers womb without Baptism, yet it is
baptized with the Spirit of the Father and of the Mother, viz. with the holy
Ghost, which dwells in them, and the Turba is destroyed in Death* for the
Faith's part passes through to God.

But the matter is far otherwise with wicked Parents, if the Child dye in the
Mother's Womb, the Soul of it falls into the Turba, and reaches not God to
Eternity, it also knows nothing of him, but it is a Life, according to the
Essence and Property of the Parents.

And yet it does not by this reach to the Inflammation, for that Soul it self
has not yet committed Sin, but it is a Spirit in the Source, quite void of
Self-desire; it is like burning Brimstone, like the Ignus Fatui, and cannot
reach God, but remain between Heaven and Hell in the Mystry, until the Judgment
of God, which will at last put every thing apart in its own place.

Thus no Soul is born into the World without Sin, be it begotten by holy or
unholy Parents; for it is conceived in the earthly Seed* and brings the Turba
of the Body with it, which also has begrit the Soul.

And as the Abiss, and the anger of God, and also the earthly Life depend
wholly on God the Father, and yet cannot comprehend and touch his Heart and
Spirit; so it is also with the Child in the Mother's womb, if it be begotten by
godly Parents, then each Principle stands in its own part.

When the Turba takes the earthly Body, then the Heaven takes the Spirit, and
the Majesty fills the Spirit, and then the Soul is in God, it is free from
pain. But while the Soul remains in the earthly Life, it is not free, because
the earthly Spirit does with its Imagination always bring its Abominations into
it, and the Spirit must be continually in Strife against the earthly Life.

How the outward Spirit is profitable to the Soul.
ALthough the out^ard Spirit be beastial, yet the inward understanding [Spirit]
is able to keep in, and tame the outward, for it is Lord over it; but he that
suffers the beastial Spirit to be lord, he is a ^east* and has also a
beastial Image in the inward Figure in the Tincture.

And he that lets the Fire-Spirit, viz. the Turba be lord, he is an
essential Devil in the inward Image: Therefore he^e it is necessary that the
outward Spirit pour Water [ viz. Humility] into the Fire, that it may hold that
strong Spirit captive, and that seeing it will not be God's Image, it may
remain a Beast in the inward Image.

Now the outward Spirit is very profitable to us, for many Souls would perish*
if the beastial Spirit were not, which holds the ^ire captive, and sets
before the Fire Spirit earthly beastial labor and joy, wherein it may busy it
self, till it be able by the Wonders in the Imagination to discover somewhat of
its noble Image, that it may seek it self again.

My beloved Children* who are born in God. I tell it you, it was not for
nothing that God breathed the outward Spirit [ viz. the outward Life] into
Adam's Nostrils, for great danger did attend this Image; God knew how it went
with Lucifer, and also what the great eternal Magic could do; yea A^^m might
have been a Dev^l but the outward Glass hindered that* for where Water is, it
quenches the Fire.

Also, many a Soul by its Wickedness would become a Devil in a moment, if the
outward Life did not hinder it, (...) Soul cannot wholly inflame it self.

How the Soul departs from the Body at the Death of a Man.
THe Soul departs not out of the Mouth, for it did not come in at the Mouth,
but ^t only leaves the earthly Life, the Turba snatcheth away the earthly
Life, and then the Soul remains in it^ own Principle.

For the beginning [ viz. the Soul] continues to the limit, and lets the
body perish* there is no complaining about it, neither does the Soul desire it
any more; it must go into its limit* viz. into the wonders of that which it
has been; for sickness unto death is nothing else, but that the Turba has
enflamed it self, and would destroy the Essence; and this is also the cause
that the Body dies; the Turba thrusts it self into the fire, and so the
outward life is extinguished.

And if the fire of the soul has not the divine body in the spirit, nor in the
will in the desire* then it is a dark fire, which burns in anguish and great
horror; for it has nothing but the first four forms of nature in anguish.

For the Turba is the exceeding strong harshness and bitterness; and the
bitterness continually seeks the fire, and would evaporate it, but the
astrengency holds it captive; so that it is only an horrible Anguish, and
continually turns it self like a wheel, and imagines, but finds nothing
but it self, it eats it self, and is its own substance.

It has no other substance but that which the spirit of the Soul continually
made in the outward life, viz. Covetousness, Pride, Cursing, Swearing,
Revi^ing* Backbiting, Murder, Hatred, Wrath, Falsehood; this is its food, for
the Turba in the will takes the substance with it; its works follow it: And
although it has done some good, yet that is done only in a glistering show and
appearance, from an ambitious mind.

Yet if it had comprehended any purity of Love in its will (as many a one that
is converted at last in his end) then it thus sinketh into its self through the
anguish. For the humble spark falls down through death into life, and then
the Source of the Soul ends: yet it is a small Twig budding forth into the
Kingdom of God. It cannot sufficiently be described what refining the Soul
has* and how it is hindered and plagued by the Devil, ere it can get this Spark
into it self; but this wise world will not believe this. O that none might feel
this by Experience, and then we would gladly hold our peace.

The four Forms of the original of Nature, are the common plagues which every
one feels, according to his own Turba, but one far otherwise then another;
the Covetous has cold, the Angry, fire, the Envious, bitterness, the Proud, an
high aspiring* and yet an eternal sinking and falling into the Abiss, the
Scorner swalloweth down the Turba of those abominations, which he here belched
forth; the false slandering Heart has the forth form, viz. the great Anguish.

Thus the condition of Hell is far otherwise then Babe^ teaches; the Devil is
not at odds with his own Children, they must all do his Will* the anguish and
horro^ of Hell plagueth every one of them sufficiently in their own
Abominations; every one has his own Hell, there is nothing but his own Poison
that appreh^ndeth him.

Whither the Soul goes when it departs from the Body, be it saved, or not
saved.
WHeresoever the Soul is, it is in the Abiss^l world where there is no end nor
l^mit* though it should go a thousand Miles off* yet it were then in the sa^^
place, from whence it went; for in God there is n^ limit, near and afar off is
all one; it is as swift as ^ thought, it is magical, it dwells in its
Wonders, the^ are its House.

The Body retains it not, no Wood, no Stone can retain it, it is thinner then
the Air, and if it have the divine Body, then it goes straight as a Conqueror
through the Turba* v^z. through the anger of God, and quite through Death into
God's Essence; it remains in its Wonders and Essences, which it wrought here;
it beholds the Majesty of God, and the Angels face to face.

The heavenly Body of the Soul is from the pure Element [whence the four
Elements are brought forth] and that gives Flesh, and the tincture gives
Blood: But all in this world have not Christ's flesh in them hidden in the old
Adam; yea, among very many, not one, but the regenerate who are departed from
their own w^ll into God's will, in whom the noble Grain of Mustard Seed is
sown, but of which a Tree is grown.

Most Souls depart from the Body without Christ's body, yet they hang as by a
Thread, and are at last in their Faith gotten into the will, these Souls indeed
are in the Image, in the Spirit, but not in the Flesh; such as these wait for
the last Day, when the Image, viz. the Body shall come forth out of the Grave,
out of the first Image; for God will raise it up by the Voice of Christ, even
that Image which Adam had in his Innocence.

But the earthly Body shall not touch it, that must come before the Judgment in
the Turba, but after the sentence of the Judgment, the Turba shall swallow it
up, and the wonder [of it] shall only remain.

Understand, these Souls that must wait till the last Day for their Bodies,
they remain with their Bod^es in the still Rest till the last day, without
feeling any pain, but in another Principle; they have neither Darkness nor
Majesty in the Earth, but are at Rest without pain, in the eternal still
liberty without touching the Body.

Yet they see their wonders, but they effect nothing in them, for they expect
God, and are in humility; for they are sunk down through Death, and are in
another World, yet there is a great space between them and the holy Souls that
are in Christ's Flesh and Blood, but not a Principle, they are in one and the
same Principle.

But a Spirit without a Body has not that might, which the Spirit i^ the B^dy
has, therefor they rest and are under the (...) of God* when the last Day
shall come forth, and eat of the Bread of God, and put on the divine Body, as
is mentioned in the Revelations of John.

But the Souls of the Wicked have another place, viz. in the most innermost,
which is also the most uttermost of all Darkness* they dare not go up and down,
they remain merely with the Body in their Substance, yet not in this world,
neither do they touch the Earth.

It has indeed power enough over the Earth, it can open it without Substance
and Preceptibility: But it has not the outward Principle, it has not power
enough over the outward Spirit, yet it can for a time make Apparitions in the
Syderial spirit, as many appear again in the Austral spirit, and seek
Abstinence, and make many afraid with keeping a racket in Houses, all which
they do by the Austral spirit till that it be consumed, and then their T^icks
lie i^ the Darkness, and they expect the last Judgment.

Thus there is a difference of places, where Souls are, according to that
wherein the Soul is entered; if it be holy and regenerate, then it has a Body
which expects only the wonders of the Body at the last Day; for at the Day of
Judgment all Souls good and bad shall every one receive their Sentence and
Reward.

And you must know, that the Souls of the Wicked have no ease [before the Day
of Judgment] their best ease and joy is, when they climb up in the Will in
their Works, which they did here, and continually desire to do them more still;
it grieveth them that they did not afflict the Honest more then they did; their
Will is just so as it was here, they are Spirits of Pride like the Devil, a
covetous devouring Spirit^; when but the least thought of the last Day enters
them, then fear and horror stirs in them, they rather let that though,
alone, and recreate themselves in Haughtiness.

This is a great Wonder, that an Angel should become such a furious Devil: And
so the power of God's anger comes to be manifest in God; for God has
manifested himself according to both Eyes, in Love and Anger, and it is left
free to man, he may go into which of them he will. God throws none into
Wrath, the Soul (...) it self into it.

But you must know that the Wrath has set its Throat wide open, and draws
mightily, and de^^reth to devour all for it, the Covetousness and the Pride
insulting over Humility.

And so also Love and Humili^y have opened their Mouth, and draw with all their
Powers* and would draw man into Love, into Heaven: Now into which of these the
Soul enters, in that i^ remains, whether in Lov^ or in Anger; in that Tree
it stands, and there is no deliverence in Eternity from thence.

Whether men's VVishes do profit them any thing or no?
THe Prayer and Wish of the Righteous (...) into Heaven* and not into Hell. No
good wish enters into Hell; but if the wicked leave behind him much Falsehood
and Deceit, so that the hellish Torment is wished to him in the Grave* such
wishes come to the wicked Soul; these wishes come to pass with them, for that
Soul must swallow down i^s Abominations, which it committed here, and that is
its Food which the Living send after it.

But it is altogether unfit, and does not become the Children of God at all,
for thereby they s^w into Hell, into the Anger of God; they had need beware
lest they also reap that which they sow, if they do not recall themselves, and
repent, it will fall out no otherwise.

Furthermore, we give you to understand, according to our Gift, that those
Souls [which as it were hang by a Thread, and but at last enter into Repentance,
and so comprehend the Kingdom of Heaven as it were by a Thread, so that doubting
and faith are mixt] are in such a condition, that a hearty Prayer and Wish
redoundeth to their profit, and pierces into the poor captive Soul, into its
Source, if it be made with all earnestness.

For it is neither in Hell nor in Heaven, but in the Gate in the middle Source
of the Principle, where Fire and Light sever themselves, and is held by its
Turba, that always seeks the Fire: But then this small Twig which it has
conceived, viz. the weak Faith deeply demerseth* it self, and earnestly
reaches after the Mercy of God, and yields (...) self patiently into the
death of that, sinking down, and so gets out from the anguish, and sinketh
down from the pain into the meekness of Heaven.

And although many a Soul is held a sufficient while, yet the Anger cannot
devour that small Faith, but must at last let it go: But I leave it to him to
try what this is, who wilfully persevereth in Sin till his end* and then first
desires to be saved, and then the Pope forsooth, must save him, he shall find
it by woeful experience.

In Popery much juggling has been invented about this, in saying Mass for a
Soul, and that for Money only, but this has been a great Cheat of the Pope, of
Babel, for there is earnestness required to wrestle with the anger of God; and
overcome it.

Yet we confess, and acknowledge readily, that the Church of Christ has great
power to ransom such a Soul, if with fervency and earnestness it do it as it
was done in the Primitive Church, when they had holy People, and holy Priests,
who performed their Ministry in real earnestness.

They indeed effected somewhat* but not in such a way as the Pope boasts of,
saying, That he has the Key and that he can let out a Soul with his Blessing
when he will, if a man will give him Money; This is a Lie.

Whether separated Souls take care of human matters.
FIrst, those Souls which yet have not attained Heaven, and so stick in the
Source* in the Principle in the Birth, those have yet the human Essence, with
the Works in them, they diligently search out the Cause of their retention.

And therefore many of them come again with the Astral Spirit, and wander up
and down in their Houses, and places of abode and appear in a human Shape, and
desire this and that, and often times take care about their Wills or
Testaments, and also think to procure the blessing of the Saints, that they may
rest; and if their earthly Affairs do still stick in them, they take care many
times also about their Children and Friends.

This condition of theirs continues so long, till they fall into their Rest,
and till their Astral Spirits be consumed, then all such doings, cares and
perplexities are at an end, and they also have no more knowledge thereof, but
(...) they see them in the wonders in the Magic.

After this sort are once received into G^^^e, they take no care purposely
about human earthly Matters but beholds the heavenly Matters* which are
brought to it by the Spirit of man, and rejoices in them. But there is
somewhat still behind, which is this:

A living man has such power, that his is able with his Spirit to go into
Heaven to the separated Souls, and stir them up about some Question by a hearty
desire; but it must be earnest, it must be Faith that must break open a
Principle.

And this we see in Samuel the Prophet, whom the King of Israel raised up, that
he might make his Will known to him, though it seem otherwise to some, of whom
we may well say, that they are blind, and void of Knowledge, for they speak but
their own scholastic Fables, and frame Opinions about that they have no
knowledge of in the Spirit. And these are Babel.

Now secondly, the other sort which sink into Death, without a Body, they are
wholly in one and the same place of the Principle, in which the first sort are,
which afterward did sink down in themselves; All these take no evil Affairs
upon them, wherein the Turba sticks.

But when the honest Souls which are alive, send them their Works, with their
Spirit and Will, they rejoice in them, and are so affable, that they appear to
men angelically in Sleep, and show them good ways, and many times reveal Arts,
which lie in secret, viz. in the Abiss of the Soul.

Thus know, that no Soul separated from the Body* enters into any wicked
matter, except it be a damned Soul, which indeed enters in magically, and has
its joy therein, and teaches most notorious vile Pranks in Dreams; for it is a
servant of the Devil; and whatsover a wicked man desires, that the devil
readily helps him to; for he can do it better by the Soul of a man, then of
himself, for he is too crude, and terrifieth the Magia, so that the elementary
Spirit is astonished, and awakneth the Body.

Also, this you must know, that all is done magically in the Will, without
awakning of the Source. No Soul arises with its Ess^nces of its own accord to
please man, unless man (...) and disturb it himself.

There are many Villainies in Negromancy, which can many times vex and torment
the Spirits of men, but it can do so to no Soul that is clothed with Christ's
essentiality, for that Soul is free.

The third sort of separated Souls, which are in Abraham's bosom in Christ,
having the heavenly essentiality, none can stir except they will themselves, as
when they have a favor to a Soul that is like themselves; also they take no
earthly thing upon them, except it make for the Glory of God, and then they are
restless to reveal something in a Magical way.

But then they let no Turba into them, neither do they intercede with God for
us, but whatsoever comes to them they rejoice in it with the Angels; for the
Angels rejoice at a Sinner that repents, then much more the Souls.

Why should they pray to God for us? it lies not in their Prayer, but in man's
entering into God, when he strongly turns his Will to God, then God's Spirit
helps him without Prayers.

Of the Resurrection, and also of the end of Time.
WHen the last Day shall begin to dawn, then the Deity manifests it self once
more [and that is the third time] in all Forms, in Love and Anger; and then all
things together at once shall be plainly laid open in the sight of all
Creatures.

Now here is the End of Time, for then the beginning has found the end; and
the end is then the beginning, and passes again into that which it was from
Eternity.

If we knew certainly the Hour of the sixth Day, wherein the Creation was
finished, we could then set you down the Year and Day [we mean the last Day]
for it goes not a Minuit further, it has its limit hid in the inward Circle.

Therefore know for certain, that the Time is near, for in the sixth day
Afternoon the Rest of the eternal Day began, and therefore God instituted the
Sabbath of the seventh Day for a Rest, and an everlasting Remembrance.

And as the Rest began on the sixth Day, toward the Evening, and the entrance
to the manifestation of the Works of the Creation [the end then takes in the
beginning again, and the six Days stood thus in the Circle as a wonder] so know
that ye were created in Paradise, and yet are gone out from it into the spirit
of wrathfulness, into Death, which has now wrought its Wonders in you these
5500 Years, and upwards.

And now the End has found the Beginning again, and ye shall see, also feel
and find what Paradise has been, even every one of them that shall be born in
God.

But the middle, with the Wonders, which were manifested in the time,
continues forever more, in the beginning and in the end, as an eternal middle,
with its Wonders, viz. with the Angels and Men, and their Essences; as also the
figures of all Creatures, and all that has been essential at any time; the
Earth with its Metals, also Stones, and all material Substances, as Trees and
Herbs: All these stand in the Figure in the middle, but quite void of such
Essences and Life.

For no Beast comes again, but its Figure continues in the Magia, for it
arose out of the eternal Glass [so that now when the outward Glass breaketh] it
must remain in the eternal, as a wonder to God's honor and glory forever more.

Here the Spirit of God will manifest himself forthwith in all the three
Principles, and stir up the center of Nature, so that it shall burn in the Fire
of anger; for all both Heaven, Earth, and the Firmament shall be set on fire
together, and the Turba will swallow up the earthly world in the Fire, and
restore it to that which it was before the Creation; only the Wonders remain
st^ll in two Princip^es, the third Principle does vanish quite away all but the
wonders.

And then the earthly Life, and the earthly Body will fall away, and the Fire
will consume them, and the glorious bright Paradisical body of the Righteous
shall pass through the Fire with its wonders, which shall follow it, and
whatsoever is false shall remain in the Fire.

The Wicked also must go into the Fire, and their earthly Life will also fall
away, and their monstrous Image will appear in the Spirit, according to the
shape of all hideous abominable Beasts like the Devil.

And in that Hour also the wrathful Fiat of the darkness shall bring forth the
Devils, who shall then receive their wages and lodging, at the hearing of which
they tremble.

All the Dead, both good and evil, shall arise every one in his twofold Body,
and shall have the Soul, with the Spirit in the Body; one shall have the
outwar^ earthly Life [or Body] and therein a beastial Imag^ in the spirit of
the Soul, and in the inward Image h^ shall have the essentiality of the
wrathful Anger; ano^ther shall have the outward Body, and Christ's image there
in, and the divine Spirit of Love shall shine in the Sp^^rit of his Soul* which
Body, the word Fiat cloathet again with the true and pure Adamical Image.

For the first Body which God created, and Christ r^^deemed with his Blood*
that will bring the Wonder with it, and enter again into Paradise, and be
cloath^^ with the Majesty of God, and then the Tabernacle Go^^ God is with men.

For the noble Image was destroyed in Adam, when ^he Woman was taken out of
him, so that he retained only the Tincture of the Fire, and the woman had the
Tincture of the Spirit, but now they return to them wholly again.

For the woman shall receive the Tincture of the Fire, so that she shall be as
Adam was, neither man nor woman, but a Virgin full of Chastity, without the
members of man or woman.

And then they shall no more say, Thou art my Husband, or thou art my Wife, but
they are Brethren: Indeed there shall some remaining tokens of the difference
be in the divine Magical wonders, but none will regard that, for they are all
of them merely the Children of God, living the Life of Children in the
delighting sport of Love.

All the Words which the Mouth has spoken, which the Air has received, these
the Air shall bring again forth; for it is the Glass of the eternal Spirit, the
Spirit sees them in the Glass: And so man shall be judged according to his
Heart, Mind and Thoughts, for the Turba is in all malice or wickedness, which
is contrary to Love; here will be no making of excuse, for every one will
accuse himself, his own Turba will accuse him.

We direct you to the Scripture, for it shall come to pass just according to
the holy Scripture. Note, this world will be no more regarded, for all earthly
Knowledge and Cogitations shall remain in the Turba of the earthly life in the
Fire; we shall have no knowledge more of our Parents, Children or Friends who
are in Hell.

We shall have some knowledge of Hell, but see nothing of it* save only in the
Magia in the Mystery, for the Devils must dwell in darkness, the wrathful Fire
which is in them is the^r light; they have Eyes of Fire to see withal* all Fire
besides is gone, for the Majesty has swallowed it up, that it may burn in love.

We shall all know one another among our selves by Name; though the earthly
Name shall remain in the Turba, we shall have a Name according to our first
name in the Language of Angels, which here in this life we do not understand;
in the language of Nature we understand something of it, but here we have no
Tongue to speak it with.

Here Note; The inward Ens of Christ [which the Soul puts on it for an
heavenly Body out of Christ's Spirit, and out of his Flesh and Blood] is
spiritual, it is a spiritual Body which dies not at the death of the outward
man; yea, it is not buried, neither does it rise again; but it is dead and
buried, and risen again in Christ for all, and in all, and lives eternally,
for he is passed from Death to Life.

What kind of Matter our Bodies shall have in the Life to come.
THus we tell you, we shall have a Body consisting of Flesh and Blood, such a
Body as Christ had, for Christ by his Incarnation is become Man in us: When we
are born a new of the Water, and of the Spirit, then in Christ's Spirit we are
born anew of Christ's Flesh and Blood; we put on Christ.

Christ becomes born in the converted Sinner, and he in Christ becomes the
Child of God; this is the Body we shall have in Heaven.

No gross beastial Flesh as we have in old Adam, but subtle Flesh and Blood,
such Flesh as can pass through Wood and Stone, they remaining whole still; as
Christ came in to his Disciples, the Door being shut: It is such a Body as has
no Turba or Fragility, Hell cannot retain it, it is like Eternity, and yet it
is real Flesh and Blood* which our heavenly Hands shall touch and feel, and
take hold of* also a visible Body, as that is which we have here in this world.

Of Paradise; and where Henoch is [as also Moses and Elias.]
WE are able to say with good ground, that Paradise is still upon Earth. Henoch
is in it, [as also Moses and Elias] and yet he has the Body of the Turba in
the Mystery; and in the heavenly Mystery he has the divine Body, which is
capable of Paradise.

Henoch is not gone out of this world, he is entered into the Mystery in the
Wonders, he is God's Preacher, and after the Turba has overcome the World,
he must be silent till the six Seals have ended their wonders, and till the
Angels of the Turba have poured out the^r Vials* then the wonders of the Anger
are finished; then Henoch comes out of the Mystery again, and enters into the
Ministry, and relates what has been done.

But Noah goes into the other world through the Water, and calls Moses with
his Wonders, and he comes, for he has the wonders of God.

For he passed through death, and brought his Bod^ through death, when the
Turba desired to consume (...), and the Devil contended for it, and would have
the Turba which was in Moses, because he had been an angry man, and carried the
Turba in him.

But it was told the Devil, that the Turba in the Fire did not belong to him,
for it belonged to the Majesty of God, and contained the wonders, and the Turba
in the Darkness in the wrath only belonged to him, who is without the City, he
must not dwell in the City, in the Principle, but without it.

Also Moses his Body is passed through Death, his unfadable Body which had the
Wonders* has swallowed up that which was earthly in the Turba, and yet not
consumed it to putrefaction, but it also is in the Mystery* and his Turba which
killed the firstborn in Egypt, drowned Pharaoh in the water, slew them that
worshipped the Calf, and swallowed up Corah, Dathan and Abiram into the Earth,
continued in death; For when he dyed his Spirit and Soul departed from the
Turba, and he remained in the Wonders in the Mystery; and now he is become a
Lamb.

But though the Body of Moses be d^livered from the Turba, it must be tried in
the Fire at the end of Days.

At the last Day we shall not ascend above the place of this world, but make
our abode here in our own native Country, and go into our home in another world
in another Principle, of another Property.

When this outward dominion shall pass away, in the very place where the world
now stands, there will be mere Paradise, for the Earth will be of an heavenly
Essentiality, so that we shall be able to dwell any where, and be able to pass
through and through it.

There will be no Cold or Heat any more, also no Night; there is no Death any
more, also no Fear, no Sorrow, no Sickness* the Earth will be like a
Christaline Sea, and all the Wonders of the World will be seen wholly
perspicously, and the Brightness of God shall be the L^ght thereof, and the
holy Jerusalem, the great City of God, shall be therein.

The whole world would have been a mere Paradise, if Lucifer had not corrupted
it, who was in the beginning of his Creation an Hierarch in the place of this
world. But seeing God knew well that Adam would fall, therefore Paradise sprung
forth and budded only in one certain place, to introduce and confirm Man
therein, whom [albeit ^od saw that he would again depart thence] he would again
introduce him thereinto by Christ, and establish him anew in Christ to Eternity
in Paradise.

For Lucifer poisoned the first Paradise with his false and wicked Desire;
therefore God promised to regenerate it anew in Christ: For the seventh Day
which God appointed for Rest, is nothing else but Paradise regenerate anew in
the Spirit of Christ, in the human Property, wherein the poor Soul shall rest
eternally from the source of the six days Works, viz. of the six Properties of
the Life.

A short summary Appendix of the Soul, and of the Turba, which is the destroyer
of the Image; and of Virgin Sophia.
THe Soul is an Eye in the eternal Abiss* a similitude of Eternity, a perfect
Figure and Image of the first Principle, and resembles God the Father in h^s
Person, as to the eternal Nature.

The Essence and Substance of it [meerly and purely as it is in it self] is
first the wheel of Nature, as to the first four Forms, viz. 1. Astringent; 2.
Bitter; 3. Fire; 4. Anguish -- Fire is a similitude of the Soul.

The Soul is an essential Fire, and the flash of Fire is the life of it; it
resembles a Globe, or (...) Eye of Fire: The burning Fire in the Source
signifies the first Principle and the Life; yet the Fire is not the Life, but
the Spirit of the Source which arises from the Fire, and goes forth from the
Fire like Air. That is the true Spirit of the Source of the life of the Fire,
which continually blows the Fire up again, and makes it burn.

Now the Fire shines and gives light out of the Source where it shines, and
the source comprehends at the light; and this signifies the second Principle
wherein God dwells.

For we know that the Power is in the Light, and not in the Fire, the fire only
gives Essence to the light, and the life or the light produces meekness and
substantiality, viz. Water.

Now we understand, that there is a meek life in the light without Source, and
yet it self is an insensible Source, it is nothing but a longing or desire of
Love.

Which Source we account a Tincture, in which the budding and blossomings has
its original, yet the fire is the cause of it, and the meekness is a cause of
the Substantiality; for the desire of Love in the Light, atracteth it, and
keeps it, so that it becomes a Substance, but the desire of fire consumes
the Substantiality.

Indeed the Image dwells in the fire of the Soul, as Light dwells in the
fire, but it has another Principle, as the Light is such a Source, as is
different from the fire.

And so the true Image of God dwells in the Light of the fire of the Soul;
which Light, the fiery Soul must create in the Fountain of the Love of God, in
the Majesty, by putting and yielding its Imagination into it.

But if the Soul do not so, but puts its Imagination into it self, into its
wrathful form of the Source of the fire, and not into the fountain of Love,
into the Light of God, then its own Source of forceness, astringency and
bitterness rises up, and the Image of God becomes a Turba, and swalloweth up
the similitude of God in the wrath.

And then the astringent Fiat in the fiery Essence of the Soul figureth for the
Soul an Image of the imagination, that is, in its Will: Whatsoever the
essential fire of the Soul desires, that will be the figure in the Soul, viz.
earthly Figures, that which the will of the Heart casts it self into, that
image the Fiat of the Soul will make, that is, as far as the third Principle,
and the spirit of the Stars and Elements has power.

So that if the will of the Soul do cast it self into the Kingdom of this
world, then the outward Kingdom has power to bring its imagination into the
inward Principle, and if the inward Fiat perceive that in the fire of the Soul,
then it becomes pregnant with it, and keeps it.

And then the Soul has the image of a Beast in the third Principle, and that
cannot be destroyed forever, except the will of the soul return again out of
the earthly Lust, and pierce into the Love of God again, and then it gets
the image of God again, which may be done only in this Life, while the Soul is
essentially in its Either, in the growing of its Tree, but after this Life it
cannot be done.

Thus you may understand what the Soul, Spirit, Image and Turba are; the Soul
dwells in it self, and is an essential Fire, and its image stands in it
self in the imagination* in the light of the Soul, if it cleave to God, if not,
then it is an Anxiety in the wrath of darkness, and is an abominable Image, or
an image of the Devil.

The Turba of the Soul which destroys the divine Image, is the essential
wrathfulness, and ^s caused by the imagination, or false love and
representation, and therefore all lies in the Imagination, the Image
consists in that which we suffer to come into our desire.

If the will of the Soul, change it self, then its form will be also changed:
For if the source of the Soul be fiery, then it has also a fiery Image, if the
Soul turn its imagination into the center, into the strong Astringency and
Bitterness, then its fair Image is also captivated in the dark Astringency, and
infected with astringent wrath. And then this wrath is a Turba, which
possesses the Image, and destroys the similitude of God; for in God there is
Love, Light and Meekness; but in this Image there is darkness, astringency and
bitterness.

Again, the Soul in its real Life and Understanding, consists in three
Kingdoms: The 1 st is, the eternal nature, viz. the potent Might of Eternity,
the dark and fire-world, according to which God calls himself a strong
zealous angry God, and a consuming Fire, in which the Devil has wholly plunged
and diabolized himself.

The second is the holy light world, where the eternal understanding has
displayed it self through the Fires sharpness, in the light of the great fiery
Love-desire, and turned the wrathful Darkness and fiery Property, to a Kingdom
of Joy, which is the true manifestation of the Deity, and is called the holy
Heaven of the angelical delight and bliss.

The third Kingdom is the outward Astral and Elemental Kingdom, viz. the Air,
with its dominering Constellations, wherein all the five outward Constellations
rule, viz. Super^or and inferior of the four Elements, out of which
[Constellation] the five Senses take their original, wherein the ^^^table and
reasonable Life consists; this is the Animal [or beastial] Soul, which rules
over all the Creatures of this world.

The ^ire-Soul must subsist in the Fire of God, and be so pure as the clear
refined Gold, for it is the Husband of the noble Virgin Sophia, viz. [Christ's
Humanity, which is] from the woman's Seed, it is the Fire's tincture, and
Sophia the Light's tincture, if the tincture of the Fire be wholly and
thoroughly pure, then its Sophia will be given it, and so Adam receives again
into his Arms, his most precious and endeared Bride, which was taken from him
in his Sleep, and is not any longer Man or Woman, but a Branch on Christ^s
Pearl-Tree, which stands in the Paradise of God.

To the description whereof we need an Angels tongue* and yet we are understood
well enough by our School-fellows: we have not written this for Swine.

Of the Eternal Predistination, and Election of God.
WHen the Scripture speaks of God's eternal purpose, or Predistination, it
speaks not of a purpose or predistination that has been long before, for i^
God there is no beginning, but there is an eternal be^ginning, where the
beginning and the end is all one, the first is continually the last, and the
last first: whatsoever God has begun from Eternity to foresee that he
begin^neth now also at this day always every moment to foresee*

I can say with good ground thus, that if I were in my Mother's Body or Womb
comprehended in his Anger then God has from Etern^ty seen me and apprehended
me in his Anger, and I were from Eternity elected in his anger*

But if I convert in Repentance* so that God's love apprehends me then I am
from Eternity foreseen ou^ of the Anger into the Love; for in God all (...)
eternal whatsoever at this day begins to alter in the eternal, that is from
Eternity to Eternity, equally in the Eternity, the matter consists only in the
Conversation of the Will.

And though it stands written, that it stands not in man^s willing, that is
only concerning those that desire God, and yet will not go forth out of their
sinful Will, they keep their Sin, and yet will be saved; therefore it lies not
in his willing, but in this, that man go out from Sin into God's Grace, and
then it lies in the mercy, and that God does readily, for he has promised it.

Therefore men should better consider the Scripture, as to such Terms or
Expressions; for it often speaks out of the eternal Mouth, which begins
every moment.

For when the Scripture says, he hardneth their Hearts that they believe not,
and so come not to be saved*, then it speaks of those who would be saved by
their own Ability, and their evil Will and Life, those he suffers to go on in
their purpose or predistination, for they will do it.

As also Adam did, he would not be resigned into God, as a Child, but be his
own, and apprehend and know Good and Evil, and live in all the three
Principles; for he went out from God's will into his own off-set purpose, and
God left him, and then he fell down and slept.

And when he had eat the forbidden Fruit, then God's anger elected him to the
damnation of Death, and God's love spoke against it, saying, The Seed of the
Woman shall bruise or crush the Serpent's Head; and that was also the eternal
Election, and yet it was also a beginning temporary Election; for how can an
Election pass upon a thing when as yet it has no Root?

God's Anger has from Eternity continually, and still at this very day,
electeth it self to be a Darkness, that God's Love and Light might in the Anger
become manifest or revealed.

Of Free Will.
NOw that which is out of the Eternal, as the Soul of man, that has also
free will to manifest it self in the Light or in the Darkness; not that it has
the Light or Darkness in its power, but it has ability to work in good or
evil, that is in the power of the Light or of the Darkness, and in which soever
it works, that manifests it self in it.

The might or power is God's, and the Soul is his Child, a branch in the Tree,
proceeded out of God's Mouth, out of Love and Anger; all that lies in it, and
is its own property; who will then take away the Free Will from it, being it is
a branch of the eternal Tree, and has Love and Anger in it self?

For the Fire-Soul is a Root proceeded from the divine Omnipotence, and
therefore it has Free Will, and nothing can deprive it, and therefore it may
conceive either in the Fire or Light.

The Souls free will is as thin as a nothing, and though it be in its Body
indeed, encompassed with the something, yet its amassed or conceived something
is in a false distinguished Essence by reason of the original of Sin.

Now if the free will would approach to God with the Desire, then it must
depart out of its false something; and if it now does so depart, then it is
bare and impotent, for it is again in the first nothing: For if it would come
to God then it must dye to its false self-hood, and forsake it, and if it
forsakes the same, then it is barely and merely as nothing, and so it cannot go
work or move: if it will show its Might, then it must be in something wherein
it does imaginate and form it self. But when a man will say, man cannot turn
his Will toward that which is good, viz. toward Grace, that is groundless;
Grace indeed stands in the Abiss of the Creature in all wicked m^n, and the
Will need only stand still from wicked working, and then it begins as to its
self-will, to dive down into the Abiss. For that which stands still stands
still together with the eternal One, and becomes one Substance therewith.

Can the Will be obedient to a worldly Lord and Master, and for that end stand
still for which he would have him? wherefore not also to God, especially when
the Ability is as soon given, as a man does but incline his Will to stand still?

It is better to know nothing, then to Will according to self, for that which
knows nothing, the will of that passes away, with the Creaturely Life, and
its strife has an end, and has no more source of Torment, as we may
understand in irrational Creatures.

For it is the Source and Torment of all the damned that are wishing and
woulding, viz. they would that which is Self, and in their woulding they
generate Ideas, Species and Formations, viz. contrary Wills and Desires, the
Will being at strife, so that one thing is manifested in multiplicity, wherein
it is at enmity with it self; but when it is one with the eternal One, then can
no enmity be therein.

Therefore it is man's last proof or trial when he stands still to God in all
things, then in him Light proceeds out of Darkness, Life out of Death, and Joy
out of Sorrow, for God is in, and with him in all things.

Of the becoming Man, or Incarnation of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
WHen God created Man as an Image, according to his substance, a similitude of,
or according to God, then he created him out of the Mother of all things, or
Substances* and all the three Worlds; his Body he created out of the outward,
and also the inward Substantiality, viz. out of the earthly and heavenly, and
inbreathed into him through his Spirit a living Breath, that is himself,
according to the divine World, and also according to the outward World.

For the Spirit of God is the Spirit of all, and every Life but distinguished
into three Principles* or three Worlds -- As first* according to the dark wor^
^^^ording to the first Principle, according to which God (...) himself an angry
zealous or jealous God, and a consum^^^ Fire, which is the eternal Nature.

Secondly, According to the Light-world, viz. according to God's love and
meekness, according to which he is called the holy Spirit.

And Thirdly, according to the outward World, the Air-Spirit, with the Quality
or Source of the Stars and Elements -- Thus has man received a threefold
Life, the Spirit of all the three Worlds.

Therefore we should rightly consider man what he is, and not made an earthly
Beast of him; and also make no Angel of his (...) part; he has the inward
Spirit out of the first Principle but he should not rule therewith, also not
with the outward, but give up himself to the holy Spirit in the second
Principle, and in the outward Life be as a Child in the Mother's Bosom or Lapp.

The Soul stands in three Principles, viz. in the eternal ^ine's Nature, and
in the eternal Light's Nature, viz. in the Love Fire, which extinguished in
Adam, for which cause ^t present the strife is, And thirdly, it stands in the
Kingdom of this World* viz. in Mortality and Restoration.

When the inward soulish ground, viz. the eternal Soul from the Father's
property of the Word of God, turns back again and (...) about after its
little Pearl, viz. after the second Principle* then it perceives that it was
lost in Adam, from (...) arises its misery, and return again, and as soon as
it returns again, God gives his Grace into it again, but unknown and not
understood by it.

This great unquiteness arises in the Soul, that it thus (...) into
Repentance, when it sees that it has lost its ability, neither may* nor
shall, nor can it any other way again (...) first Pearl which it had, and come
to divine Salvation, unless i^ turn with its Fires Might wholly again into the
ground of the incorporated Grace, and give it self up thereto.

We necessarily find (...) clear, that there is yet another Substance in our
Flesh, (...) groaneth* sigheth and pa^teth after that which yet (...) not;
being then it sigheth and pa^teth after that (...) now is not, therefore it
must needs (...) been so in (...) ^eginning of its Being and Substance, else
there would be no sighing, or longing after another thing.

For we know that every Substance sigheth after that out of which it had its
first Original; and so our Will sigheth after such a Flesh as God created.

So we clearly understand that we are gone forth out of the Eternal into the
Corruptible: For Adam's imagination has drawn the earthly Quality of the Stars
and four Elements into the Limus, and the Stars and Elements have drawn in the
longing Malady of the Earth. And thus the heavenly Matter of the heavenly Flesh
became earthly.

The true Ens of the Soul, which the Word assumed in the Name Jesus, was of
(...) men from the Female tincture, viz. from the true Adamical Soul, yet from
the Property of the Light, which was severed from Adam and put into the Woman,
that this Property of the Light might transmute or change the fiery Masculine
property again into the Love and divine Humility, and that the Masculine and
Feminine property might be quite changed into one Image again, as Adam was
before his Eve, when he was neither Man nor Woman, but a Masculine Virgin.

Therefore Christ took his Soul from a Woman, viz. from a Virgin, and yet was a
Man; so that he rightly stood in the Adamical Image, and brought the averted
severed Properties of Life, in which our Will had broken it self off from God,
again into the temperature and union, viz. into that one.

For Adam turned his Will from the only Will of God, and Jesus Christ took our
Soul again into the only Will of God, and turned the will of our Soul in our
Humanity, which he assumed into the only will of God again.

We poor Children of Eve should not in Eternity, as to the Body, have returned
again, but our Soul would have eternally continued in God's anger, source or
quality with all Devils.

But the becoming Man, or Incarnation of Jesus Christ is become a powerful
Substance or Matter to us; for, for our sakes is God become Man, that he might
bring our Humanity out of Death into himself, and redeem or release our Soul
out of the Fire of God's anger.

And we now with good ground of truth say, that the possibility of the
New Birth is in all men, else God were divided and not in one place as he is in
another. And herein we exactly know, that man is drawn by the Fire and the
Light, to which he inclines into* that he falls; and yet he may in this
Lifetime rise aloft again. Also we say* the^ the true Temple wherein the holy
Ghost preaches, is in the new birth.

The Spirit also testifies clearly, that Angels and Men have one and the same
Image, for God has made another Angel instead of expulsed Lucifer, and his
Legions, out of the same place where Lucifer sat* and out of which he was
made, which Angel was Adam: But seeing he stood not, therefore God generated to
himself a second Adam out of the first, the same is called Jesus Christ.

Also it is plain and clear enough, that [as Jesus ascended to Heaven, so] he
will come again in the same Form at the last Day with a divine and glorified
Body, as a Prince of the holy Angels, which shall be the men Angels.

Also, we know the becoming Man, or Incarnation of Christ to be natural, as of
all the Children of men, the Lord gave himself to be under the Servant, that
the Servant might became living, and is in like manner in nine Months become a
perfect man, and also continues a true God -- become born into the world
through that (...) and passage as all men are.

Had he not had a natural Soul, then he had not in the Person had all the three
Principles: What should he then have committed into the Hands of his Father at
that present when he dyed on the Cross? Or what had suffered on the Cross, if
he had not been natural?

The earthly part which he took to himself out of his Mother Mary, that is, to
or upon the divine Substance, dyed away on the Cross.

Thus was the Soul in the Substantiality of God, and as a victorious conquering
Prince went into the Hell of Devils, that is into God's Anger, and quenched it
with God's Love and Meekness of the divine Substantiality.

For the Love-Fire came into the Anger-Fire, and drowned the Anger, wherein the
Devil would be God; thus was the Devil taken captive with the Darkness, and
lost his dominion: The Spirit of Christ took the Devil captive, and drove him
out of the Fire of the Soul, and cast him into Darkness, and shut him up under
darkness out from the Fire of the Soul, and out from God's fire into the
wrathful harshness and bitterness in Cold.

Consider the first four Forms of Nature, and you will understand what the
Devil's Mansion is; for before Christ came, he kept the Soul captive in the
Turba with the Fire, and though he had not the Spirit of the Soul, yet he had
the Root of it in the Turba, but then he was commanded to cease.

While the earthly man lives, the Soul is continually in hazard or danger, for
the Devil has enmity with, who continually casts forth his streams, with
false and wicked Imaginations into the Stary and Elementary Spirit, and
reaches or graspeth therewith after the Soul's fire, and wills continually
to infect the same with earthly Devils longing and malady.

There must the noble Image defend it self against the Souls fire, and there it
costeth striving and fighting for the Angels Garland: there rises up often in
the old Adam anguish, doubting and unbelief, when the Devil sets upon the Soul.

O thou Cross of Christ! how heavy art thou oftentimes! how does the Heaven
hide it self, but so the noble Grain is sown, when that is sprung up, then it
brings forth much fair Fruit in Patience.

Thus every little Sprout grows in the Soul out of the divine Wisdom: It must
all press forth out of the Anguish-Chamber* as a Sprout out of the Root of a
Tree, it is all generated in the Anguish.

If a man will (...) knowledge, he must very many times go into the
Anguish-Chamber, into the center, for every Sparkle of the divine Wit; Skill or
^nderstanding out of God's wisdom, must become generated out of the center of
(...), else it is not (...) or eternal* Thus we must all dye in Christ's Death,
if we will possess his Glory.

God and Man is become one Person, one Christ, one God, one holy Trinity in the
Humanity, and also in like manner everywhere, so that when we see Christ, we
see the holy Trinity in one only Image.

He is not strange or tyrable to us, but is our Love* Tincture, he is with his
Power the quickening of our Souls our Life, and our Souls delightful Habitation.
When we find him, we find our Help or Salvation, as in like manner Adam should
have found him, but he suffered himself to be seduced, and found at length a
Woman -- Then said he, She is Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone of my Bone, and took
her unto him for a Companion.

So when our Soul finds him, it says, That is my Virgin which I had lost in
Adam, when an earthly Woman came to be out of it: I have now again found my
Love-Virgin out of my Love, I will never more let it go from me again. O! it is
a friendly qualifying or co-working Beauty, Brightness, Fruit, Power, Virtue.

For in the Wisdom the Fall was known ever man became a Creature, and that
according to the* Fire's property, not according to the Light's property, but
according to the first Principle.

And we say of Mary, that before the time of the opening and message of the
Angel, she was such a Virgin as Eve was when she went out of Paradise, ever
Adam knew her.

Of Metals, and of the Metaline Tincture, and Philosophers Stone.
THe Metals have the same substance, condition and birth, or geniture as the
Vegetables upon the Earth have: in Earth, in Stones and Metals, there is a
twofold Essence, viz. one from the original of the fire-dark World, and one of
the original of the holy light World.

All this was given [man] for his play, he had the knowledge of all Tinctures:
All was subject to him, he ruled in Heaven and Earth, and over all the
Elements, so also over all the Constellations.

But Metals are in themselves nothing else but a Water and Oil, which are held
by the wrathful Properties, viz. by the astringent austeer desire, that is, by
a saturnine martial fiery Property in the compaction of Sulpher and Mercury to
be one Body [or congealed bulk] but if I wholly destroy this Body, and severize
each into its own Property, then I clearly find therein the first Creation.

Gold, Silver and precious Metals, are indeed out of the heavenly Magia thus
enclosed and shut up, by or with the kindling: They are another thing then
Earth, man loves that well, and uses it for his Maintenance, but he knows
not its ground and original; it is not in vain loved by the Mind, it has a
high original, if we would consider of it.

But we are justly silent of it here, seeing man without that, loves it too
much, and thereby withdraws himself from the Spirit of God: One should not
love the Body more then the Spirit, for the Spirit is its Life; this we give
you to understand in a Similitude, and are silent of the matter, with the
ground and original thereof.

But know this* that it was given to man for his Sport and Ornament, he had it
by the right of Nature, it was his understanding the outward Bodies; for the
outward Body with its Tincture, and the Metalline Tincture are near a kind.

When the Tincture of the outward Body was destroyed by the Devils evil
longing* then the Metalline Tincture hid it self from the human, and became an
enemy to it; for it is purer then the perished in the outward Man.

Let this be manifest to you, ye seekers of the Metalline Tincture; If you
would find the Philosophers Stone, then apply your selves to the new Birth in
Christ, else it will be hard for you to apprehend it, for it has a great
agreement with the heavenly Substantiality, which if it were released from the
fierce wrath, would be very well seen.

Its luster signifies somewhat, so that if we had Paradisical Eyes we should
well apprehend it.

A collected Appendix for the clearer opening the former Mysteries.
THe Being of all Beeings, is but one only Being, but in its generation it
severs it self into two Principles, viz. into Light and Darkness, into Joy and
Sorrow, into Evil and Good, into Love and Anger, into Fire and Light; and out
of these two eternal Beginnings [or Principles] into a third beginning, viz.
into the Creation to its own Love play and Melody, according to the Property of
both eternal Desires.

Death is the bound mark of all, whatsoever is temporal, whereby the Evil may
be destroyed.

If God^s Anger be omnipotent to destroy, then is his Love also omnipotent to
preserve, if this contrariety were not, there would be no Life; and there would
be no good, also no evil; for if there were no fierce wrath, there would be no
moving: Thus the Substance of all Substances is a continual working, desiring
and fulfilling; the Fire desires the Light, that it may get meekness and
substance for its burning or life; and the Light desires the Fire, else there
would be no Light, and it would have neither Power nor Life; and they both
desire the dark anguish, else the Fire and Light would have no Root, and all
would b^ a nothing.

Therefore I say, God's Love is as great as his Anger, his Fire as great as his
Light, and his Darkness as great as either of the other; it is all alike
eternal, without beginning* and it begins it self from Eternity with or by
the Darkness, and brings it self from Eternity to the darkness into the
Source or Quality, even into the Fire, and in the rising up of the Fire is the
eternal Death, where the Darkness and Light separate themselves each into a
Principle in it self, and the Light also it self posesseth it self, one
dwells in the other unapprehended by the other; there is in Eternity no
parting asunder: Those that dwell in the Darkness, see not the Light, and those
that dwell in the Light see no Darkness: God would not be manifested or
revealed, and there would be no Nature nor Creature without the darkness.

Observe now, God's anger makes the dark mind full of God's Love, makes the
Light mind full. For whosoever has, to them it will be given.

But now all stands in Strife, the Light against the Darkness, and the Life
against the Death, and the Death against the Life: But Man is out of the great
Substance of all Substances, and in him is the Strife.

Do thou say, God can make of me what he will, he is Omnipotent: He makes of
thee what thou will, his Love is omnipotent, and also his Anger; that which
gets thee, holds thee. The Wicked is to God a good savor to Death; and
the Saint or Holy is so to the eternal holy Life as thou growest; so thou art
such Sap as thou drawest into thy self, such Fruit thou bear: It is not
said, God will not be mine, but thou will not be his, and so you are parted.

But he cannot make himself a Child, he goes only with the Will into the
Matrix, and then the divine Fiat apprehends him, and makes him one; indeed
he cannot make himself a Devil, the hellish Fiat, according to the dark world's
Property makes him one, when he does but give his Will up thereto.

Therefore rightly says the Apostle. To whom you give your selves Servants in
obedience, his Servants you are whether of God's Love or Anger. Here the
Apostle speaks of man's Election, that man can give up himself, and be given
up; and though indeed of himself he cannot take or receive, yet God gives him
the taking or receiving, for he has promised it him.

We believe a Resurrection of our Bodies which we had here; it is not the
earthly Body that is the Image, which shall live eternally, but the Heavenly,
which the earthly body here holds captive in Death; but if Christ become born
therein, then it is no more in death, but lives in Christ, and is only covered
with the earthly body.

It is not the Husk, viz. the beastial Flesh that shall arise, but the Life in
the outward Mystery with the wonders, that shall be comprised in the holy
Element, and be united with the Body of Christ [even] of the new man, and in
Eternity stand with its wonders in it.

Seek not Christ's flesh in the four Elements in the Spirit of the outward
world, but in the Root of them, viz. in the holy Element, a Principle deeper
then this world is; not absent from the outward body.

Let no man think it will come to pass, that men will come, who will teach or
compel the holy Spirit with Authority or Power into men: No* it is said, To day
when you hear the Voice of the Lord, harden not your Hearts and Ears: Expect
not another time, for this is the time of your Visitation; incline your ^ars
and Hearts into the Temple of Christ in you.

Let none wait for a golden Time, wherein the holy Spirit out of, or from the
outward Month, will cry into the hardened into his beastial Will, who will live
only in the Lust of the Flesh: O! No that is not to be done; The time is
already come that Henoch teaches, and Noah declares the Deludge of Sin.

Let none wait for the outward Prophet, he appears or shines inwardly in the
Spirit, the outward man will not know him; the right way into the eternal Life
is in man: Whosoever will enter in with Sion, and praise God in Jerusalem,
has now the acceptable time, the sound of the seventh Trumpet is already
sounding, the Fountain of Israel is open; let none think that the sound of the
Trumpet will come from this or the other place: ^or as the lightning breaks
up in the East, and shines to the West; so from the beginning to the end is
the coming of the Son of Man.

that now are the Christians, so called, better than Tu^ks and Heathens, if
they live Turkishly, and more then Turkishly and Heathenishly? Where ^s the
Christian and Evangelical fruit? My dear ^rethren, seek but the Pearl all you
that intend to avoid the anger of God, look not one upon the Life of another,
but upon his own; for it is no more disputing, but either convert or perish;
the time of disputation and babbling is out, you will get no further with
Disputation, but with the Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ, you will reach
and obtain the Pearl, so that you need never to dispute more.

Christ, viz. the anointed of God, penetrateth only, or presses upon the
Humanity, not upon all Creatures; he uniteth himself to no Creature but man; he
has also with his Incarnation, Suffering, D^ing and R^surrection delivered no
Creature but man. With the Name Christ he is become manifest only in the
Humanity; not in the earthly or heavenly Creatures; the earthly and heavenly
Creatures need no Christ, and the hellish have none.

The man Christ is the first that arose from the dead* in the anointing, and is
also the first, who in the anointing dyed to the human l-hood: He is only and
alone the Lamb of God, in whom God brake his wrath in pieces; Abel and all
Martyrs are his Members, upon whom the breaking Death in pieces pressed or
penetrated out of this Lamb Christ: when Christ arose from the Dead, then Abel
also arose in Christ's anointing in Christ's humanity, out of Christ's death,
and lived in the anointing of Christ.

The Christ in the woman's Seed was manifest in ^o Saint before Christ's birth,
but only in the Spirit of the Deity, in a prophetic manner, and not in a human
manner: By the woman's Seed is always understood the Paradise which faded or
disappeared in Adam, viz. the heavenly Corporiety from the pure Element, and
not the four Elements; this was manifest neither in Adam nor Abel, till the
Savior Christ became manifest in the Seed.

In all men lies the heavenly Image, which disappeared in Adam, but it lives
in one, and in another it is unlively. When the wicked turns himself to God,
and turns the will of the Soul to God, then is Christ out of the disappeared
Seed born a man and is set before the Devil in the outward Flesh, for a crusher
or bruiser of the Serpent, which hinders and breaks the Will of the evil
Flesh, so that Sin is not committed.

And then there is a constant enmity, Christ governs in his heavenly Flesh
through the outward, and strikes the out^ard Lust to the ground; then comes
the anger of God into the center of the Soul, and will also have its fierce
wrathful Government, and the Devil with the false or wicked Lust crowds himself
thereinto.

The three horrible Chains wherewith our Soul is fast bound, during the time of
this earthly Life, is first the severe anger of God, the Abiss and dark world
which is the center and creaturely Life of the Soul; the second is the desire
of the Devil against the Soul, whereby he cont^nua^ly sifteth and tempts the
Soul, striving to thro^ it from the Truth of God into Vanity, viz. into Pride,
Covetousness Envy and Anger, and with his desire ^loweth up and kindles those
evil Properties in the Soul, whereby the will of the Soul turns away from*
and enters into Self. The third and most hurtful Chain, is the corrupt and
altogether vain, earthly and mortal Flesh and Blood, full of evil Desires and
Inclinations.

It is then necessary that we convert with our Wills, and enter again into the
New Birth, and Christ gives us his Body to eat, and his Blood to drink, but
not to the man of Sin, but to the man in Christ new born to Life, viz. that
from the divine world's substance to the Paradisical man, which has a heavenly
Mouth to partake with.

For Christ dwells in Heaven, and feeds us with his Body and Blood in the
Heaven, this Heaven is in man, Adam eats of the four Elements, and is fed
with evil and good; Adam the outward Flesh man sins the inward man wills
not the Sin, therefore says Paul, Now if I sin, it is not I that do it, but it
is the sinful desire which dwells in the Flesh: Now therefore with my mind I
serve God, and with my Flesh the Law of Sin; for I do that which I would not,
but if I now do it, it is not I that do it, but Sin in the Flesh.

Therefore let the Christian Reader that loves truth, he warned according to
my bounden duty and love will, not to esteem himself perfect, and to set
himself in the omnipotent power or virtue of God in the Omniscience, and to say
he is without Sin, and cannot sin.

Our whole Life should be a continual Repentance, for it is even a continual
sinning; and though indeed the noble Lilly-branch new generated or born in
Christ's spirit sins not; yet the earthly man in Soul and Body sins, and
wills continually to break or destroy the noble Rose-bud again, and
altogether obscure it.

Here is the Field where the Fruit grows, let none be persuaded to such
slugishness, and to lie on such a soft Bed, as to think he is fairly grown, and
quite or full blossomed: O No! no, by no means, but continually without ceasing
draw divine Essence to thy self, in the greatest Humility, from and out of Gods
Love, as a Be does Honey out of the fair blossom of Flowers; for as soon as
man is secure or careless, and thinks he is holy Honey, then the Devil
brings to him poison in the Vanity, which the own self will in own self lust
or longing s^cketh into ^t self.

As soon as the Soul eats of it self, and of the Light of Reason, it goes on
in its own Opinion, and then its doings which it sets for divine, are but from
the outward Constellation, which presently then lays hold on the Soul, and
makes it dry, and then the Soul goes on in Errors, till it yield it self up
again into resignation, and acknowledging it self anew to be a defiled Ch^ld,
resists Reason, and so gets the Love of ^od again, which is harder to do
now, then it was at first* for the Devil brings in strong doubts, he will no^
easily leave h^s ^ort of prey.

This may be seen clearly in the Saints of God from the beginning of the world,
that many who have been driven by the Spirit of God, have yet often-time
departed from Resignation into Self, viz. into their own Reason and Will, in
which Satan has cast the^ into Sins, and into the anger of God. The will of
the Soul must therefore continue close to resigned Humility and sink into
nothing, viz. into the deepest Humility (...) the sight of God.

Also a man in this world should not desire to kno^ his Holiness, but
continually draw Sap out of his Tre^ Christ, and commit and leave it to the
Tree what kin^ of Branch or Twig that will generate out of him.

Why do we so long contend about Knowledge? In^deed knowledge is not alone the
way to Blessedness (...) Salvation: The Devil knows more then we, but wha^
does that avail him? For that I know much, affords (...) no Joy; but that I
love my Savior Jesus, and co^^tinually desire him, that affords me Joy; for
the d^^siring is a receiving.

Let not the dear and worthy Christendom think, being now it does seem as if
she should go to wrack and rui^ that it is utterly undone; no, the Spirit of
the Lord (...) Hosts has out of his Love planted a new Branch in (...) human
Property which shall root out the Thorns of the Dev^l, and make known his Child
Jesus to all Nations, Tongues and Speeches, and that in the Morning of the
eternal Day.

A Christian is of no Sect, he can dwell in the midst of Sects, and also appear
in their Services, and yet adhear and be addicted to no Sect; he has but one
knowledge only, that is, Christ in him, and he puts all his knowing and
willing into the Life of Christ.

John, as the Teacher of Christ, in Christ's stead, must provide for the
outward Mother, according to the outward man, and feed and teach the Lambs of
Christ with Christ's Spirit: And it does exactly show us how the outward man is
not God's Mother; for Christ does separate himself from his outward Mother, and
gives her unto John, and therefore they do very ill that honor and worship the
outward Mother of Christ for God's Mother. The whole true Christendom is
Christ's Mother, which bears Christ in her, and John, viz. the Servants [and
Ministers] of Christ are his Nurses, which take care for the Mother of Christ,
as John did.

All whatsoever the Jews did to Christ outwardly, the same was a Type of the
inward, viz. how it went between God and the Humanity, viz. between the
Eternity and Time; the Jews gave him Gall and Vinegar in his thirst, both these
Properties are a Mercury in the Sulpher of Saturn, viz. in the impression; this
is even the Type and full resemblance of the Souls property, as it is in it
self alone devoid of the other Love-properties.

God gave this Property of the Soul again into his love, the Death into the
Life* whereupon the Soul-like fire and dark world became an exceeding
triumphant joyful Paradisical Life* and here the Champion upbraided Death and
Hell. viz. the dark world in the Soul* and said* Death where is thy Sting now
in man? Hell, where is now thy Victory in the wrath of thy poyson-source? in
the expressed Word or Mercury all is now dead: O death (...) am to thee a
Death; Hell I am to thee a Conquero^ thou must serve me for the Kingdom of Joy:
Tho^ shall be my Servant and Minister to the Kingdom (...) Joy: thou shall
enkindle the flames of Love with the wrath, and be a cause of the spring in
Paradise.

The dear Love-Humility and Meekness did suffer it self (...) be scorned
mocked, spit upon, and judged by the Anger, tha^ is, the Jews must execute the
justice of God, for by man^ self-action Sin was committed, and by man's
self-action death and sin must be blotted out. Adam had introduced his Will
into the Poison of the outward Mercury; even so must Christ viz. the Love,
freely give up its Will also into the same poysonful Mercury: Adam did eat of
the evil Tree, Christ must eat of God's anger; and as it went inwardly in the
Spirit* so likewise outwardly in the Flesh.

Upon the mount of Olives the heavenly World in the Love did wrestle with the
Anger in the human World, viz. with the self-hood, so that the Person of Christ
did sweat bloody Sweat; even there the one was dismayed at the other, the Love
at the horrible Death whereinto it should and must wh^lly yield and give in it
self with the divine essentiality, and be swallowed up by the Anger, and the
Anger [was dismayed*] at its Death, in that it must lose its Might in the Love.

Hence the whole Person of Christ said, Father if it be possible* let this Cup
pass from me; yet not as I will, but thy will be done. The Love-world in Christ
said, Can it not be but that I must drink down the Cup of thy Anger? then thy
Will be done. And the Anger said, If it be possible, let this Cup of Love pass
from me, that I may revenge my self, and rage in the wrath of man for his
disobedience sake, as God said to Moses, who stood in the Spirit of Christ as a
Type of Christ before God, Let me alone, that I may devour this disobedient
People: But the name Jesus which had incorporated it self in Paradise, with the
promise of the woman's Seed in the Aim of the human and divine Covenant would
not suffer him; for the Humility of the name Jesus has always interposed
against the wrath of the Father, against his Fires property, that his Fire
might not enkindle the half poysonful Mercury in man, save only at some times,
when Israel walked wholly in the wrath and disobedience, as is to be seen by
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and by Elias.

Now from the trial of the combat of the Love and Anger against each other
proceeded also the temptation of Christ; it was tried in the temptation, of
which Property man would live, whether of the Father's in the Fire, or of the
Son's in the Light of Love; here the whole Property of Christ's Person was
tempted, the Devil said, as he had also said unto Adam* Eat of the Evil and
Good: Have thou not Bread? then make Bread of Stones: Why do thou hunger so
long in thy own property? Then said the divine desire, Man lives not of Bread
alone, but of every Word of God.

When the Devil saw that in this he had no success, that the Humanity would not
give way to depart out of the Resignation out of God's Will he carried the
Humanity upon an high Mountain, and showed it all the Riches of the world, all
whatsoever does live and move in the express word, all the Dominions and Might
in the outward Nature, over which he calls himself a Prince, but has only
the one part in the wrath of Death in possession, and said unto it [understand,
to the human property] If thou fallest down and worship me, I will give thee
all this.

Here it was tried, therefore said the Devil, viz. the Organist in God's anger
unto Christ, That he should fall down and worship him* and then he would give
him all Dominions, Power and Glory, he should and might do what he please: he
should live and delight in his own self-will* and fore-go resignation; and if
this had come to pass then had the fair Instrument been once again broken, and
the human melody in God's Love and Deeds of Wonder had ended, but Christ said,
Get thee hence Satan, it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
serve him only. Then the Devil left him, and the Angels came and ministered unto
him.

Christ called the Devil a Prince of this World, but the Devil has neither the
Kingdom of God, nor the Kingdom of this world in possession, this world is not
his own, but he is the poorest Creature in this world, and has only the wraths
part in possession, the other profits him nothing; thus he is in the world,
and also not in the world; he thought to be Prince, and is so in the same
property in the Wicked, and also in the Government in the world in the wrath:
He must lo^k where Turba Magna is enkindled in the wrath, and there he is busy
so far as Turba Magna goes in the wrath, further his Courage is cooled.

Of outward Government and Dominion.
WHen God blessed Noah through the O^^-spring, proceeding from the Covenant,
and had them be fruitful; he gave them again the whole World with all its Hosts
in possession, and gave them all*Beasts, Fishes and Fowls in common, with no
distinction, restriction or prohibition, save only that they should not eat
their Life in the Blood, lest they should become monstrous in their Life, with
eating the Life of the Beast.

God commanded them to rule over all the Beasts and Creatures, but in this
place he gave them no peculiar Domination or ruling Power over one another; for
all domina^ion lordly Rule and Authority, whereby one man rules over another,
does arise from or through the order of Nature* according to its Properties,
according to the Constellations and outward Dominion of the Princes under (...)
Constellations or Astrum.

The true Image of God has no other Dominion in its Members, then the Body
has in its Members, or the Tree in its Branches; but the beastial Image from
the Stars and four Elements makes it self a Dominion and Government, according
to its Mother, whence it takes it rise, and wherein it lives.

Here note, All War and Contention arises from (...) dominion of God's anger;
the Warrior is a Servant of God's anger; he is the Ax wherewith the angry
Husbandman cuts up the Thorns and Briars from off his Ground: God's anger
according to his Fire's property, will have it so, and not his love; And he
that suffers himself to be made use of thereto, he serves the anger of God,
according to the dark and fire-world's desire and property, which in the heavy
fall of Adam, has manifested it self in the human Property, and brought man,
viz. the angelical Image into an half devilish Vizard and likeness.

Of human Propagation.
ALthough honest married People beget Children, and join themselves together
with Love-desire* yet it has not this meaning or understanding, that the
Imagination or Desire of Man and Wife is holy, and that Christ's Spirit drives
on the Imagination.

The Imagination arises out of the Tinctures, which kindle the Mercury with
their Lust, and the Mercury kindles the Spirit of the Life, and now existeth
the Lust and Will in the Heart, viz. a vehement desire; the tenderer the
Complexion is, the nobler also is the Tincture in its sweet desire.

But if also it be shot with a fiery Dart in Venus's desire, then is the life
kindled, so that it is as it were more then half mad with Love-thoughts; and
yet knows not what has happened to it. Must all this be holy? then would the
secret Whoredoms also be holy; whereas indeed the Dart often goes forth in
false or wicked Lust.

And though it be at best, yet it is a thing that is in all Beasts, it is
natural; and when men will give it the best and rightest Name, then it is
called an Abomination before God's Holiness, being a thing existed out of Sin,
through Adam's fall; which indeed is born withal under divine patience, seeing
is cannot be otherwise, of which we could take many Examples in the holy
Scriptures.

Look upon the people of Israel, when God would give them the Law on Mount
Sinai, and manifest or reveal himself with his Voice, then he commanded the
young People which were laden with such burning Lusts, to abstain from their
Wives; and that pointed not only at the Marriage-work, but also at the
Imagination.

Christ therefore b^^ame a Man without the helping or co-working or concurrence
of any man or Husband, that he might bring us forth out of this abomination
before God, through his holy Incarnation or becoming man: he became such a
Virgin-like Child, with both the Tinctures one in another, with own self-love,
that he might bring our rent in himself into one.

And this is the Abomination, in the Marriage-work, that the Seed is unclean in
the conjunction of both the Tincture^, when they are brought together into one;
[indeed] it is the property of the eternal joyfulness, when the Seed goes
forth, viz. of the highest d^^ring and fulfilling; if that might be done
without abomination, then it were holy; but the Sulpher in the Seed is an
abomination before the Holiness.

It is not in the power of the Imagination of the Flesh, but in the pure Love
desire of Chastity and Faithfulness where two join their Minds together in the
Marriage-band, and give up their love and faithfulness one to another to be
their own, and desire to be one Heart and Will; there the Spirit of Christ is
the Love band; and here now is rightly that thing, Increase or multiply, and be
fruitful.

The marriage-work, according to the outward man, is not holy, but according to
the inward, it is holy, in the Children of the Saints, but not in beastial
Vessels; the marriage-work in it self, if it be done ordinately, is not sinful,
for it is driven on by God's officer, Nature, and bor^ withal under divine
patience.

Of the Serpent that deceived Adam, and of all created Things.
WHen God said* Let all sorts of Beasts come forth* each according to h^s
property [ or kind] the^ came forth Beasts out of every property of Nature, as
it was manifest in the severation [of the two Kingdoms, viz. Time and Eternity]
when God moved himself to the Creation; for the Devil would domineer over the
Love and Meekness of God, and put his desire also into the Anger, that is, into
the austeer Might, where the poyson-Life arises, viz. into the Fiat of the
wrathful Property, out of which Form are proceeded Vipers, Serpents Toads, and
other venomous Worms; not that the Devil has made them that he cannot; only as
the De^^re was in the Impression of the Fiat, such also was the Creature in the
evil and good. For in those poysonful Beasts the highest Tincture is to be
found, if they be reduced into an oily Substance, and the wrath of Mercury
separated* For all Life both external and internal consists in Poison and
Light, as we understand that the wrath and anger-fire of God is a cause of the
divine Joyfulness: The like also we are to know externally; Hence what may be
thought of Ireland, where no Venomous beast can live?
for all Life devoid of the poysonful Mercury, is amor^ and abominate, and
accounted as dead: Now Mercury is the kindler of the Fire, and every moving
Life consists in the Fire; and albeit some Creatures live in the Water, yet
Fire is their Life.

In the highest Mercury is the highest sharpest proof of all things; the more
poyonful a thing is, the more sharply it proves a thing; for the sharpest
taste and smell cons^sts in the greatest Poison* viz. in a dying Source.

Now we are to consider of the Serpent which deceived Adam with his craft; the
Kingdom of Wrath and also the outward Kingdom was manifest in the Serpent, for
i^ was more subtle then any Beast of the Field, and this subtilty Eve desired.

The Devil was a fair Angel, and the Serpent the subtle Beast, and Man the
likeness of the Deity: Now all three were corrupted by Imagination and Pride,
and got the Curse of God for their false Lust [or cunning.]

All whatsoever is eternal* proceeds originally from one ground, as Angels
and Souls; but the Serpent is not out of the eternal ground, but out of the
beginning of Time; all things were good in the beginning, also the Devil was
good while he was an Angel; so also the Serpent [was good in it^ Creation
before the Curse.]

But being the Devil went into the highest Fire's desire, God parted from him
as a light that is put out, or extinguished in a Candle, and afterward he
lived according to his own desire.

But seeing he knew that there was such a Tincture in the Serpent, and the
Serpent being created out of the beginning of Time; therefore he insinuated
with his desire into the Serpent* and took possession of the Serpent's
Tincture, and wrought forth his desire through the Serpent against Man, to
introduce him to long after the Serpent's property; for the Serpent's tincture
was from both Originals, viz. out of the deadly Mercury* from the dying in the
Fire, viz. from the coldness in the Impression, and then also from the wrathful
[fiery property in the impression] the cold Impression is earthly, which
arises from the Wrath, viz. from the dying in the Wrath in the Impression; and
the fiery [Impression] arises from the quick poison of Mercury, in which
property the Spirit's life consists.

Thus Adam and Eve was infected with the Devil's desire through the Serpent,
viz. through the earthly deadly property, and also [through] the wrathful
living property of God's wrath, according to the Devil's own property, and was
inflamed in his divine Oil, that is, in the heavenly Essentiality; even then
the divine Light which shone out of the divine Body of the heavenly
Essentiality was extinct in him, for the Curse seized upon the Soul. Now God's
cursing is a withdrawing, viz. the divine Power which was in the Body departed
into its own Principle, and his holy Oil [wherein the Power of God dwelt, and
had made a Kingdom of Joy, viz. the Paradise] became a Poison.

Thus Adam dyed unto God, and lived to Death; here it was necessary that God
should regenerate him, and therefore the Serpent was cursed, because it had
served and willingly obeyed the Devil.

We declare with good ground, that there is nothing so bad, but there lies a
good therein, but the badness is not capable of the good: Also, there lies in
the most poysonful Mercury the greatest Pearl and Jewel, if his poyson-will may
be introduced into the same* then he himself manifests the Pearl, for he
changes himself.

The Power of the Most-high has given to all things, even to every one
according to its property, a fixed Perfection; for all was very good, as Moses
says, but with the Curse the Turba is introduced, so that the Properties do
stand in the Strife of Mercury, yet in each property in every Herb, or
whatsoever is [I say] in whatsoever does grow, or arise out of the walm of the
four Elements, there is a fixity hidden; for all things which are in the four
Elements, are originally sprung forth out of the eternal Element, in which
there is no Strife, neither heat nor cold, but all things were in equal weight,
of all the Properties in a Love-play, as it is even so now in Paradise; and the
same Paradise sprung forth in the beginning of this World [before the Curse]
through the Earth: thus it is also yet hidden in all things, and may be opened
by Understanding and Art, so that the first Virtue may overcome the inflamed
Malignity.

Albeit we men have not full power to do it in self-might, yet it may be done
in God's permission, who has again turned his Mercy toward us, and again
opened Paradise, and its comprehension in man: Has God given us Power to
become his Children, and to rule over the world? wherefore then not over the
Curse of the Earth? Let none hold it for impossible, there is required only a
divine understanding and knowledge thereunto, which shall blossom in the time
of the Lilly, and not in Babel, for whom we also have not written.

Whatsoever grows, lives and moves in this world, consists in Sulpher,
and Mercury is the life in Sulpher, and the Salt is the corporeal Being of
Mercury his ^anger.

Sulpher is the Mother of all Spirituality and Corporality, Mercury manageth
the dominion therein, and Sol is the House of its habitation, which Mercury it
se^f makes in Sulpher, Reason arises in the Oil of the Sulpher, wherein the
Constellation gives its desire, viz. the Essence of its property, whence
forthwith the Senses and Thoughts do ari^e.

There are especially seven Forms or Properties in Nature [which are before
described] both in the eternal and external Nature; for the external proceeds
from the eternal: The ancient Philosophers have given Names unto the seven
Planets, according to the seven Forms of Nature, but they have understood
thereby for another thing, not only the seven Stars, but the sevenfold
Properties in the Generation of all Essences: There is not any thing in the
Being of all Beeings, but it has the seven Properties in it, for they are the
Wheel of the center, the cause of the Sulpher, in which Mercury makes the
boiling in the anguish-source.

These seven Forms or Properties make in themselves a threefold Spirit, viz. a
Vegitative, Sensitive and Rational; the Vegitative consists in the four
Elements, the Sensitive in the seven Forms of Nature, and the Rationative in
the Constellation, but the understanding proceeds only from God, for ^t arises
out of the eternal Nature; all Life whatsoever which has its limit in the
expressed Word, does consist in Sol* Sulpher and Mercury, for therein consists
the seven Properties of every life of this world; and also the Spirit of
Vegitation, Sensation and Reason.

When I speak of Sulpher, Mercury and Salt, I speak of one only thing, be it
either Spiritual or Corporeal, all created things are that one thing, but each
thing in its difference of the first beginning, according as the property in
the Verbum Fiat has imprinted it self in each thing; so is that kind in its
Propagation, and all things stand in the Seed a^^ Procreation; and there is not
any thing but it has a fixity in it, be it either hidden or manifest, for all
shall stand to the g^ory of God.

Whatsoever is arisen from the eternal Fixity, as Angels, and the Souls of men,
does remain undestroyable in its fixed Being; but whatsoever is arisen in the
unfixt Being, viz. with the motion of Time, that does again enter into the
first motion, whence it has taken its original, and is a Map of its form,
which it had here like a Picture, or as in an Image in a Glass without life;
for so it was from Eternity before the times of this world, which the Most-high
has introduced into an Image into the comprehensible natural Life in time, to
behold the great Wonders of his Wisdom in a creatural being, as we plainly
see.

For we cannot say, that this world was made out of something, it was only and
barely a desire out of the free Lubet, that the Abiss, viz, the highest good or
being, viz. the eternal Will would behold it self in the Lubet as in a Glass,
therefore the eternal Will has conceived the Lubet, and brought it into a
desire, which has impressed it self, and figurized and corporized it self both
to a Body and Spirit, according to the same impress^on's propery.

This Impression is the only manifestation of the Mystery, and is called Nature
and Essence, for it manifests what has been from Eternity in the eternal Will.

A few Words showing how lovely and graciously the noble Virgin Sophia in the
inward ground of man, [viz. the Spirit of Christ in the new Birth out of his
Humanity in us] presents her self to her Bridegroom, the Soul, when it
enters into Repentance; and how the Soul behaveth it self toward her, when
Virgin Sophia appears to it.
The Gates of the Paradisical Garden of Roses.
WHen Christ the Cornerstone stirs himself in the extinguished Image of man
in his hearty Conversion and Repentance, then Virgin Sophia appears in the
stirring of the Spirit of Christ in the extinguished Image in her Virgins
attire before the Soul, at which the Soul is so amazed and astonished at its
uncleanness, that all its Sins immediately awake in it, and tremble and shake
before her: For then the Judgment passes upon the Sins of the Soul* so that it
even goes back in its unworthiness, and is ashamed in the presence of its fair
Love, and enters into it self, denying it self as utterly unworthy to receive
such a Jewel. This is understood by them who are of the Tribe, and have ^asted
this Jewel, and to none else.

The Soul says to its noble Sophia, its Love, that is born again in the Soul;
O my noble Pearl and opened Flame of my Light in my anxious fiery Life! O how
thou changest me into the Joy! O beautiful Love! I have broken my Faith with
thee to my Father Adam, and with my fiery strength have turned my self to the
pleasure and vanity of the outward World, and have fallen in love with a
Stranger, and had been constrained to walk in the Valley of Darkness in this
strange Love, if thou had not come to me into the House of my Misery ^n ^hy
great faithfulness, by thy pierceing thorough and destroying God's Anger, Hell
and dark Death, and restored thy meekness and love to my fiery Life.

O sweet Love! thou have brought the Water of Eternal Life out of the Fountain
of God with thee to me, and refreshed me in my great Thirst: I behold in thee
the Mercy of God, which was hidden from me before by the strange Love; in thee
I can rejoice, thou changest my anguish of Fire to be great joy to me. O
aimable Love! give me thy Pearl, that I may continue in this Joy forever.

Upon this the noble Sophia answers the Soul, and says;
My noble Bridegroom, my Strength and Power! why have thou forgotten me so
long, that I have been constrained in great grief to stand without the door and
knock?

My dear Love and faithful Treasure, thou highly rejoycest me in thy beginning!
I have indeed broken into thee through the deep Gates of God, through God's
Anger, through Hell and Death, into the house of thy Misery, and have
graciously bestowed my Love upon thee, and delivered thee from the Chains and
Bands wherein thou waft fast bound; I have kept my Faith with thee: but thou
desire now an exceeding great thing of me, which I will not willingly venture
with thee. Thou would have my Pearl as thy proper ow^: remember, I pray, O my
beloved Bridegroom! that thou did carelessly lose it before in Adam* and
besides, thou stand yet in great danger, and walk in two dangerous
Kingdoms, viz. in the original Fire, thou walk in that Country, wherein God
calls himself a strong zealous God, and a consuming Fire. The other Kingdom
thou walk in, is in the outward world, the Air, wherein thou dwell in the
vain corrupt Flesh and Blood, where the pleasure of the world, and the assaults
of the Devil pass over thee every hour, thou may perhaps in thy great Joy
bring earthliness again into my Beauty, and darken my Pearl: thou may also
perhaps, grow proud as Lucifer did, when he had the Pearl in his possession,
and so may turn thy self away from the harmony of God, and then I must
afterward be deprived of my Love forever.

I will keep my Pearl in my self, and dwell in the Heaven in thee, in thy
extinguished, but now in me revived Humanity, and reserve my Pearl for
Paradise, until thou put away this Earthliness from thee, and then I will
give it thee to possess. But I will readily afford and present my Countenance
to thee, and the sweet Rays of the Pearl, during the time of this earthly
Life. I will dwell with the Pearl in the inner Quire, and be thy faithful
loving Bride: I will not espouse my self with thy earthly Flesh, for I am a
heavenly Queen, my Kingdom is not of this world, yet I will not cast thy
outward Life away, but visit it often with my rays of Love, for thy outward
Humanity shall return again; but I will not have the Beast of Vanity, neither
did God create it in Adam, with a purpose to have it so gross and earthly, but
in Adam thy desire through Lust formed this beastial groseness from, and with
all the Essences of the awakened Vanity of the earthly Property, wherein Heat
and Cold, Pain, Enmity and Desolution consists.

Now my dear Love and Bridegroom, yield but the self up into my Will, I will
not forsake thee in this earthly Life in thy danger, though the anger of God
should pass upon thee, so that thou should grow afrighte^ and disheartened, or
should think that I had forsaken thee* yet I will be with thee and preserve
thee, for thou thy self know not what thine office is; thou must i^ this
time work, and bear Fruit; thou art the Root of this Tree, Branches must be
produced out of thee, which must all be brought forth in anguish: but I came
forth together with thy Branches in their Sap, and bring forth Fruit upon thy
Boughs* and thou know it not; for the Most-high has so ordered that I
should dwell with and in thee.

Involve thy self therefore in patience, and take heed of the pleasure of the
Flesh, break the will and desire thereof, bridle it as an unruly Horse, and
then I will often visit thee in thy fiery Essence.

O noble Bridegroom! stand still with thy Countenance toward me, and give me
thy rays of Fire, bring thy desire into me, and kindle me, and then I will
bring the rays of my Love from my Meekness into thy fiery Essence, and kiss
thee forever.

I will bring a Garland for thee out of Paradise, with me, for a token of my
Love, and put it upon thee, in which thou shall rejoice: But I give thee not my
Pearl for a possession during this time: Thou must continue in Resignation, and
hearken what the Lord plays in thy Harmony in thee: Moreover thou must give
Sound and Essence to thy tune out of my strength and virtue, for thou art now a
Messenger of his Mouth, and must set forth his praise and glory.

O kiss me with thy desire in thy Strength and Power, and then I will show thee
all my Beauty, and will rejoice and delight my self with thy sweet Love and
shining Brightness in thy fiery Life; but the Crown of Pearl wherewith I
crowned thee, I have laid that aside for thee, thou must wear it no more till
thou art become pure in my sight.

The Soul says further to the noble Sophia;
O thou fair and sweet Consort! what shall I say before thee? let me only be
commended unto thee, I cannot preserve my self; If thou will not now give me
thy Pearl, I leave it to thy Will; give me but thy rays of Love, and carry me
through this Pilgrimage. I am satisfied now that I know thou art with me in all
my Troubles, and will not forsake me.

O gracious Love! I turn my fiery Countenance to thee* O fair Crown! fetch me
quickly into thee, and bring me forth from unquietness: I will be thine
forever, and never depart from thee.

CONCLUSION.
MAn is the greatest Arcanum, or secret Mystery that God ever wrought, he has
the figure and is the similitude, showing how the Deity has exgenerated it
self from Eternity out of the fierce Wrath out of the Fire, by the sinking
through Death into another Principle, of another Source or Quality.

For thus is he also exgenerated out of Death again, and grows out of Death
again into another Principle, of another Source and Quality, and Virtue, or
Power, wherein he is quite free from Earthliness.

And it is very good that we are with the earthly part fallen home to the
Earth, inasmuch as we also retain the divine part; for so we are wholly pure,
and come wholly perfect without any Lust, Suggestion or Infection of the Devil
into the Kingdom of God again; and are a much greater Arcanum, or secret
Mystery then the Angels.

We shall also, as to the heavenly Substantiality, excel them, for they are
flames of Fire thoroughly illustrated with the Light, but we attain the great
Source or Quality of the Meekness and Love, which flows forth in God's holy
Substantiality.

Therefore they do very wrongfully* and fasly, who say, God wills not to have
all men in Heaven; He wills that all should be saved or helped, the Fault is
in man himself, that he will not suffer himself to be saved or helped.

And although many be of an evil Inclination, that preceedeth not from God, but
from the Mother of Nature; if they lay the blame on God, they lie, God's Spirit
with-draweth it self from no man.

The noble Jewel in them stands hidden in the noble center in the divine
Principle; and they can very well with their willing, go forth out of the
earthly Substance and Malice, or Wickedness, into the willing of God.

But they wilfully and obstinately let the fierce Wrath hold them; for the
proud stately self-honouring Life pleases them ^oo well, and that holds them
also.

After this time there is no remedy more; but in this time, while the Soul
swimeth and burns in the Blood, it may well be, for the Spirit of God goes
upon the Wings of the Wind, God is become Man.

The Spirit of God goes with the willing into the Soul, it desires the Soul,
it sets its Magia toward the Soul, the Soul needs only to open the Door,
and so it goes voluntarily in, and opens the noble Grain to the Tree of the
Christian-Faith.

Cast away your Evil or Wickedness, and enter into meekness, press into the
Truth and Love, and yield thy self up to God, and so thou will be saved or
helped.

Thou will say, I am kept back that I cannot. Yes indeed, that is right, thou
willest to have it so; the Devil also would have it so.

Art thou a Champion? why do thou not strive or fight against the Evil? But
if thou strivest or fightest against the good, thou art an enemy to God. Art
thou an Enemy? then thou art no Friend; if thou be a friend, then forsake thy
enmity and hatred, and go to the Father, and so thou art a Son.

If thou say, I am of an evil Source or Quality, and cannot, I am kept back.
Very well, let the ^vil Source or Quality be as it is, but go thou with thy
Will-Spirit into God's Love-Spirit, and give up thy self into his Mercy: Thou will once well be freed from the evil Source, or Quality.

Concerning the evil Body, which sticks full of evil Affections, there is not
much to be done; if it be inclined to evil, do it the less good, give it no
occasion to wantonness.

To keep it in subjection, is a good Remedy; to be sober, and to lead a
temperate Life, is a good Purgation for the evil Ass; not to give it that it
lusts after, to let it fast often, so that it may not hinder Prayer, that is
good for it; it is not willing, but the Understanding must be Lord* for it
bears God's Image -- This Latin does not relish well to the rational world
in the Lusts of the Flesh.

Reader, who love God, know that a man is the true similitude of God, which
God highly loves and manifests himself in this similitude, as in his own;
God is in man the middlemost.

But he dwells only in himself; and if it be so, that the Spirit of man
become one Spirit with him, then he manifests himself in the Humanity, viz.
in the Mind, Thoughts and Desirings, so that the mind feels him.

Else in this World he is very much too subtle to be beheld by us, only the
Thoughts behold him in the Spirit, understand, in the willing Spirit; for the
Will sends the Thoughts into God, and God gives himself into the Thoughts.

And then the Thoughts bring the Power of God to the Will, and the Will
receives them with joy, but with trembling [or quaking] for it acknowledges
it self unworthy, seeing it proceeds out of a rough Lodging, viz. out of a
wavering mind; and therefore it receives the Power in the sinking down before
God.

Thus out of its triumph, comes a soft gentle Meekness to be, that is, God's
true Substance, and it apprehends that very Substance: And that conceived or
apprehended Substance is in the willing, the heavenly Body, and is called the
true and right Faith* which the Will has received in the Power of God, the
same sinketh or demerseth it self into the mind and dwells in the Fire of the
Soul.

Thus the Image of God is entire or total, and God see^^ or finds himself in
such a similitude.

And so ^ow Faith is not an historical Knowledge, for (...) to make Articles of
it, and to depend only on them, and to force his Mind into the works of his
Reason: True Fai^^ is the Might of God* one Spirit with God; for the (...)
Spirit moves in the Spirit of Faith.

We would have the Reader, that loves God, faithfully warned from our Gifts
and deep Knowledge: and we have very earnestly and faithfully presented you the
way of the Truth, and of the Light, and we admon^^^ you all Christianly to
consider of it, and to read it diligently, it has its Fruit in it self.
Hall^lujah, (...)*

THus [Christian Reader] have I in part* according to my Gift, answered the
wish and desire of one of the Laborious and worthy Translators of Jacob Behem
's Writings, who speaking thereof, says, -- It were well that all were brought
into one, and the rest laid aside, for the multiplicity causes Strife and
wrong confused apprehensions, by reason of the catching Conceits and
Conjectures of Reason, which is not able to discern or look into the center and
depth of the Mystery, so that Reason supposes many times it is contradictory,
whereas it is not all contradictory, but fully agrees in one in the depth. Yet
know, there is but a glimpse of the Mysteries in these Writings, for a man
cannot write them: He that is found worthy of God to have the Light enkindled
in his Soul, he shall see, taste, smell, hear and feel unspeakable things
concerning this knowledge.

He that this Author's works does read,
A divine Light in's Heart does need,
Or else his Reason will but stray,
And grope for Light in the midday.
But none will him censure or scorn
That is truly of Sophia born.
Wise Solomon says, Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that
gets Understanding; for the Merchandise of it, is better then the
Merchandise of Silver, (...) the Gain thereof than fine Gold, etc.

A Treatise of the Four Complections; and of the Causes of Fear and Sadness;
what the Astonishment and Anguish is [about Spiritual things.] Also of the two
Kingdoms or Qualities. Written by Jacob Beheme, 1621.
ALl Sadness and Fear wherewith a man terrifies and amazeth himself, is in his
inward man, from the Soul; for the outward Spirit, which has its Origin^l from
the Stars and Elements, is not in this sort troubled, because he lives in his
Mother which bore him: but the poor Soul is with Adam entered into a foreign
Harbor* viz. into the Spirit of this World, wherewith the beautiful Creature
is veiled and captivated, as in a darksom Prison.

Now the Spirit of this world has four sorts of Lodgings, wherein the precious
Jewel is shut up; of these four there is but one principally manifest to one
man, as it is with the four Elements, which every man has in himself, and is
himself the same being, except his Soul, which is not of that Essence, though
it lie as a Prisoner in it: And of these four Lodgings or Image^ one only has
the predominance in his Life, the Names of them are; 1. Cholorick; 2. Sanguine;
3. Phlegmatic; 4. Melancholy.

The first, viz. Cholorick, is of the Fire's propert^ causes a stout Courage,
hasty Anger, swelling Pride* Self-willedness, mindlesness of others. This Image
shin^s after the outward world in a fiery light, labors after the Sun, and
will always be a Lord.

Is the Soul's life clothed [encompassed] with the Choleric Complexion, then
is it fiery, furious, h^ughty and fretting, subject to Fury and ^rath; and if
the Soul imagine therein, then does it yet more veheme^ly kindle and inflame the
Complexion, the Soul it self being of a fiery Nature. Then become these
follo^ing Disposiitons operative in such a man, viz. Anger, Pride, an ambitious
Desire to br^ng all men in subjection under him; he is an insulter over
[despiser of] those that be in misery, and a Tyrant over those that are in
subjection to him; he cares not though he dye in Anger, except it come to pass
that the Stars hinder, which often joining themselves with the Complexion lay a
bar in the way, and hinder many things.

There is great danger in this Complexion, if the Soul live according to the
outward Imagination, and the band is the harder [stronger] there being one
fiery Essence linked to another.

The fierce Devil has a powerful approach to this Complexion, for the Fire's
property is his Servant; the Devil is also proud and envious, so is this
Comp^exion. O! how hardly is the Soul freed, if it be once thoroughly kindled
and enflamed in this Property, the Devil needs not assaut it with temptation,
it dan^eth willingly after his Pipe; it is not easily sad, because it has a
fiery light in its Complexion, and thinks always that ^tis the divine Light,
and its ways are holy and good; but as long as the Soul goes no higher then the
Complexion; it is a proud envious wrathful violent oppressing Will or Spirit.

The Soul desires in its Pomp to make a glorious show out of its fiery
Complexion, and in the height of its Pride and Arrogance will be reputed holy O
thou Devil in an Angel's shape! how dark art thou when the fiery glance of thy
Complexion comes to be put out by Death.

Now here Observe;

The Soul eats spiritual Meat* namely of the Spirit, of the Image of the
Complex^ons* not altogether their Essence, but magically; it is the kindl^ng of
their Fire. The Complexions in the Soul's fire became soulish [or of a Soular
property] they are as Wood and Fire to each other^ understand by Wood, the
Complexion* by Fire the Soul. Now the Fire must have fuel, viz. either the
outward Complexion, or a divine Essentiality of God's Nature* of one of these
must it eat or dye, but it is not possible for it to perish, seeing it is a
desire, and where there is a desiring there is also a being, the desire makes
a being to it self.

By this we understand, whence arises such a differrence in the Wills and
Actions of men: For what the Soul eats, and wherein its Fire-life is kindled
th^reafter, does the life of the Soul exercise its Regiment.

If the Soul goes out of its Complexion, into God's Love-fire into the heavenly
Essentiality [which is Christ^s corporiety, according to the Angelical
light-world] then it eats of Christ's heavenly Flesh, of his eternal
Essentiality, of the mildness of the majestic Light, in which the Fire of God
the Father in the glance [resplendance of the Light] makes a Tincture in the
same Essentiality in the Water-fountain of everlasting Life* whereof Christ
speaks, saying, that he would give us such water to drink.

When the Soul eats of God's word, the Complexion, according to the outward
Life, becomes powerful, and as it were captive, though it live in it self. But
the Soul is so steadfast and faithful before God's love, which alone comes to
help it [in the combat] that often when it eats of God's love and essence, then
it induces a triumph* and a divine taste into the Complexion it self, that the
whole Body begins to be rouzed up into a trembling, and height of Joy, as if
Paradise were now approaching; but his condition proves not durable, for the
Soul is shortly after over-shadowed with something of another Nature* which is
insinuated into the Complexion by the outward imagination* by the Spirit of the
great World* whereof the Soul makes a Looking-glass and begins to contemplate
in it with its outward Imag^nation. Thus goes the Soul out from the Spirit of
God, and is often bemired in the Dirt, were it not that the Virgin Wisdom of God
should call her again to Conversion, which is here set down for a Looking-glass
for Souls. But to return:

2 dly; The Sanguine Complexion is mild, lucid and cheerful after the Airs
property, easy, gentle and lovely, and resembles much the [inward] Life
[whence these Properties flow into the outward man.]

If the Soul be clothed with this Complexion, and will fix its Imagination and
Life in it then does it demean it self friendly, is also subtle, ^^^^rous to
try many things. It likewise comes to pass, whatsoever the Constellations
models forth, it experiments it in its Complexion; it is naturally cheerful,
yet soon amazed at the terrors of the Fire's power, but in it self it is great
in its own conceit without advice; the Complexion gives it a sharp
understanding, according to the outward Spirit: It does not ordinarily
transgress through Anger: It is soon lifted up into a height of Spirit, and as
soon cast down, as the Air, easily moveable: It must look well to it self, the
Devil is much enraged against it, being not able to get much advantage on it
[but] he endeavors to perplex it with variety of Imaginations, that it may not
fix its thoughts upon God's Kingdom; he represents strange things to its Fancy,
for it to spend its time in: and it self delights in various Studies. The Stars
inject their Imaginations into the Air, and from hence her Fancy is filled with
many strange wide wandering thoughts: it receives naturally the Starry property
and knowledge into its Essence.

The man converseth humbly, friendly, heartily and peaceably with all men; yet
does the Devil set on his Enemies against him, whence he must suffer much, but
glides easily like the soft Air through all, and seldom is he troubled with
much Sadness.

For he having no fiery Complexion burning within his Heart, the fiery Terrors
cannot much corrode his Vitals, only let him be careful to preserve himself
from (...) and Idolatry, for else by their ^eans the Devil will (...) an
ingress into his Complexion.

3 dly; When the Soul is clothed with the Phlegmatic Complexion, and swells
up the principle of its life with it. It is of a dull, heavy swinish and rude
temper of Life and Conversation, most perverse and careless; Knowledge must be
infused into it by teaching* for it finds it not in its own Root. It takes all
in good part, troubles not it self with Grief, has a glance of Light; is
neither extremely sad or merry.

A man may make any thing out of this Complexion, the watery Spirit takes any
Tincture to it self, be it good or bad; this Complexion makes likewise a
hypocritical pretense to Holiness, and arrogates to it self the repute of an
honest righteous Life, but it is not without mixture, and in this it resembles
the glittering property of the Water. The Soul in this Complexion is not prone
to take much notice of God's wrath and the dark world that lies hid in its
center, but rather bites greedily on the worldly Abominations, and hides it
self under the Water-glance, supposing it to be the resplendence of the divine
Light.

The Devil can introduce all the Villainies he exercises i^ Hell it self into
this Complexion; and if the Stars hinder not, and the Soul will give away to
it, he gets as much advantage here, as he does in the Fire of the Choleric
Complexion; for Sin here is little regarded* as the water-streams that pass
away. He has power likewise to assault this Soul with Sadness, whenever it
goes about to oppose him; for he darkens the water-glance with the Sins
foulness* which the Soul had brought ^n, and shuts in the Soul in this dark
Prison, that it cannot behold God: but when the Soul with a strong resolution
storms the Prison-Gates, it delivers it self* the Devil can subsist here no
longer* the Complexion is too weak a hold, the Fire is his stronger Fortress.

4thly; Of the Melancholy Complexion, and the Nature of the Sad mind.

THe Melancholy Complexion resembles the sad Earth, which stands in perpetual
fear before the wrath of God, which came into her in the Creation; rema^ns
constantly in the House of Mourning, and even when the Sun shines in it, yet it
is in it self sorrowful, it receives indeed some refreshment from the Sun's
glance, but in the dark; the Melancholy nature is always in fear and horror of
God's Judgments.

It gives a moderate understanding, yet of deep Cogitations: The
Complexion-Chamber stands open* and is capable of much knowledge, if the way be
not blocked up by too much Sadness.

Is the Soul clothed with this Complexion, and takes nourishment from it? then
does its Fire burn extreme dark; then it is likewise exceeding sad, esteems not
much of any worldly Pomp, and is by reason of the Complexion always in
heaviness; the Devil mightily assaults it* being desirous to throw it headlong
into the full possession of his Kingdom of Darkness.

For he enters there gladly where Darkness has the predominance; he makes
strange Representations to the Soul, and frights it with the thoughts of its
own Wickedness, that it may despair of God's Grace.

If the Soul once turn aside from God, and give it self over to the obedience
of the Complexion, then all whatsoever the Stars work in the Complexion, is put
in execution, and the Devil mixeth his Imagination therewith. But while it
remains in the combat against the sadness of the Complexion, there is none
among all the four Complexions, whereinto less Wickedness is introduced; for it
is always in combat against the Devil, knowing him to be very near Neighbor;
for the Darkness is his Habitation. Therefore does he so willingly assault the
Melancholy Soul, striving always to keep it either in Darkness, or else to
throw her down Headlong from the Hope in God, that it may despair, and make
away it self.

For he knows well what the Soul can do, if it once kindle God's light in it
self, for then it fires his Garrison over his Head, whereupon he remains in
great Ignominy, and his Deceit is made manifest.

There is no Complexion wherein the Devil's will, with all his sly Suggestions,
lie more open to the clearest discovery [if the Soul be once kindled in God's
Light] then in the Melancholy, as they that in the storming his Fort have felt
his onsets, well know. For they then in their enlightened Complexion see quickly
what a shameless impure Harpy he is. After that he desires not to come near the
Soul, except he finds it secure, and returning to feast it self [again] in the
house of Sin* then he comes as a fawning Spaniel, so as the Soul knows him not;
strows Sugar upon its Viands* holds forth to it nothing but shows of
Friendliness and Piety, till he can bring it back again out of God's Light into
the Complexion, that it feed upon its unwholsom sad-making nourishment.

O how cunningly does he lay his Nets for the unwary Soul, as a Fowler for the
Birds! often he frights it in his Prayer* [especially in the Nightime, when
it is dark] injects his Imaginations into its, that it thinks now God's wrath
seizes upon it, and will throw it into Hell: Then he makes semblance to have
power over the Soul, as if it were his, though indeed he has not power to
touch one Hair of the Head, except it disappearingly yield it self over into
its hands; he dares neither spiritually take possession of it, nor touch it,
only darts his Temptations into its Imagination, through the Complexion.

For this is the reason why he so assaults this Soul* viz. because the
Complexion-chamber is dark, for into the Light he cannot intrude his
Imaginations; it is man's Sin must give him entrance: but into this Complexion
he finds an easy and most natural entrance, it being of a nature so near that
of his own most desired home* because its dark desire produces (...), in which
fear is an Inhabitant by reason of the wild Earth, except in this respect, he
has not one spark more of right to, or dominions in this, than the other
Complexions.

He can accomplish in the Imagination than only to affright the man, and make
faint-hearted, if the Soul through despair do not give over it self to him,
then he induces the man at last to make away himself; for except the man first
cast away himself, he dare not lay Hands on him.

The Soul has its free choice or will, and if it with-stand the Devil, and
refuse consent, however des^rous he be, ^et has he not so much power as to
touch the outward sinful Body; he boasts himself indeed* as if he had this
power, but he is a Liar; for had he such power, he would soon show it; but it is
not so, Christ by his entrance into Death, and Hell's darkest Dungeons, set
upon the Gate of Heaven for all Souls, each one has now a free entrance; the
Devil's strong Cords where with he fast bound the Soul in Adam, is broken
assunder by the Cross. O how unwillingly does he hear the Cross mentioned,
which serious^y applied [in the work of Mortification] is his most deadly
Pestilence.

The Devil is ever objecting to the Melancholy man, the haniou^ness of his
Sins; and thereupon seeks to persuade him there is no possibility of attaining
God's grace and favor: Therefore that it only remains, he disappearing, stab,
drown or hang himself, or murder another, so that he may gain an approach to
the Soul, otherwise he neither dare, nor can touch it.

He dare not force thee* nor indeed has he any power to touch the Soul during
this Life. For Christ has unlockt the Door of Grace; it now stands open, wide
to the poor Sinner, while he lives upon the Earth, this Door of Grace stands
open in the Soul.

Christ has in his Soul broke open the ^^or-gate that was fast shut up in
God's wrath. Now all S^uls have a communion and correspondance with this S^ul,
they all come from one, and are altogether one Tree* with ma^y Branches; his
breaking open of that Prison is from him (...) forth upon all Souls from Adam
till the last men, the Do^r of Grace stand* open to them all, God has shut it
up to none, but those that will needs exclude themselves. The sign or work of
his ingress into the Manhood, is manifest to all Souls* the same will be a
witness over all ungodly men, in the Judgment day which they have despised.

Though our Sins (says Esaias) were as red as Blood, yet stands the Door of
Mercy still open, for in the Sinners conversion they shall be made as white as
the snowy Wool.

Therefore let no Soul think the measure of mine Iniquities is full, God has
forgotten me, I cannot be saved: No, it cannot be so, he has engraven it in
his Nail-pierced-hands, it is a Sprig of the great Tree of all Souls, and has
an invisible commerce and communion with all, as the Branch with the Tree,
while it lives in this world, so long as it is clothed with Flesh and Blood,
it remains yet in the Tree.

Of the Temptation arising from the Complexion and Influence of the Stars.
IF the inward anguish or terror of Soul be not accompanied with a kind of
(outward) terrifying astonishment, then is the Devil not there present, but
it is the Souls amazement which is affrighted at the inward risings of the dark
Abiss* or Principle of God's wrath in it. It thinks often, when the Melancholy
Complexion is kindled by some angry sower Influence of the Stars, that the
Devil is there, when indeed there is no such matter. When he comes it is either
with vehement astonishing Terrors, or in an Angels behavior, or rather in a
flattering posture like a fawning Hound.

All Temptation comes not from the Devil, especially with Melancholy men; but
the most part of that afflicting Sadness comes from the Imagination of the
Soul, which being necessitated to dwell in dark Melancholy Habitations, no
wonder if it be easily surprised with heaviness, so as to think God has
forgotten it, and will have none of it.

For the Melancholy Complexion is dark, and has no light of its own, as the
other Complexions have; yet is not this Darkness essential to the Soul, but is
only its lonesom Tabernacle during its Pilgrimage here on Earth; nor does the
Soul's Holiness and Righteousness consist at all in the Complexion, but in the
inward heavenly Principle where God dwells: For as St. Paul says, Our
Conversation is in Heaven. Now this Heaven wherein God dwells* is not manifest
in the outward Complexion, but only in it self, viz. in the second Principle.

It often happens that the holiest Souls are in this manner overwhelmed with
Sadness, and this not without Gods special permission, to the end they may be
proved, and strive the more earnestly after that heavenly Crown of Victory,
which is given them in this Life as a pledge of their everlasting Felicity.

For when the Soul takes Heaven as it were by Storm, and wins her Crown [the
Gift of the holy Ghost] after a constant persevering stedfastness in the fiery
Conflict, her Crown of triumph is much more noble and precious then that which
is not obtained till after the bodily Death; for the Revelation of Jesus Christ
says, To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me upon my Throne, as I
have overcome, and am seated on my Father's Throne.

Therefore let no man thus tormented with anguish, imagine with himself in the
assaults of the Complexion, that it comes from God's wrath, and want of mercy
in him, which is a mere fancy of his own Complexion in the Stars. For we well
see, that the vilest fatted Swine of the Devil's herd, that wallow and bathe
themselves day and night in the filth of Sin, are not so full of Sadness, not
so assaulted with this kind of Temptations, the reason is because they have an
outward light in the Complexion, wherein they dance before the Devil in an
Angels likeness. So, as long as there is but one little spark of Light
glimmering in a man's Heart, which desires God's Grace, and would gladly
partake of Salvation, the Door of Gods Grace stands yet open. For he who is
given over by God, whose Sin is come to the full measure, he is not at all
solicitous after God, Man or Devil, but is stone-blind, runs on carelessly in a
course of lightness without fear, rests himself upon a customary practice of
some outward Service of God, goes a Beast into the Sanctuary, and (...) again a
Beast out; there is in him no true divine (...) but all his Religion is a mere
outward Custom and (...) of man's Brain, which he sets up to himself as an
Idol, and embraces it as his Holiness.

The sorrowful Soul troubles and torments it self, because it cannot presently
in the point of its desire, dig up in it self the Fountain of the greatest Joy,
it sighs and bewails its sad condition, thinks God will have none of it, when
it cannot palpably feel his presence; it sees other men that walk along with it
in God's fear, that yet are cheer^ul enough, and supposing this cheerfulness of
theirs proceeds only from a divine Fountain of Love and Light in their Souls*
is conceited that it is not accepted with God, but rather rejected by him*
because it does not presently upon its Conversion, which it expected, feel in
its Heart the like comfortable effects of the refreshing presence of God.

Before the time of my enlightening it went even thus with me, I stood out a
hard conflict before I obtained my precious Crown of Victory, and then did I
first learn out this experimental knowledge, that God dwells not in the outward
fleshly Heart, but in the Soul's center in himself; then was I also first aware
of it, that 'twas God which had laid hold on me, and drawn me to him in my
first desire, which before I was ignorant of, thinking the good desire had been
my own Property, and that God was indeed far from me: But afterward I saw him,
and rejoiced at the unspe^kable Grace and Love of God, and now write the same
for a Caveat, that they by no means faint or despair when the Comforter delays
his coming* but rather think of that of David; Heaviness may endure for a
Night, but Joy comes in the Morning.

Have a cer^ain assured confidence upon Gods promise, and bowever thy
mis-giving Heart say, No, yet let not this affright thee. For to believe is not
to be filled with Joy in the fleshly Heart and outward Complexion, that the
fleshly mind and spirit be so jocond, that the very Heart and Reins leap for
joy; this is not Faith, but these are only some Love-emanations from the holy
Ghost within, a divine lightning which has no stability, but after a short
resplendance disappears. For God dwells not in the outward Heart or Complexion,
but in himself, in the second center, in the Jewel of the noble Image of God's
likeness, which is hidden in this outward world.

Dear Soul, think no other, when the anxious property of thy Complexion, thus
kindled by the Stars begins to move, but that thou then stands as a Labourer in
God's Vineyard; thou must not stand idle, but b^ working; thou do God herein
a great and very considerable piece of Service, and thy labor is this, that
thou overcome the Temptation by an unmovable Faith, however no comfort appear
in the outward Heart to support it; be not deceived, it is not Faith to give
assent to what I see and feel; but this is Faith, to trust the hidden Spirit,
and believe the truth of its words, maugre all the Contradictions of blind
Nature.

The Soul that is locked up in the dark Chamber of the Melancholy Complexion,
should not dwell long or scarce at all in Speculations about the wrath of God,
nor give it self much to, solitude, but rather spend its time in Godly
Conferences. For so the matter of those friendly and profitable yielding
sufficient entertainment to the working Fancy; it is by this means handsomely
diverted from its torturing Cogitations. For no deep speculation is in this
state profitable for it, which seeing it cannot turn it to its health and
comfort, it is better let it alone.

Also, the Melancholy Mind should with great care avoid Drunkenness: for when
the Body thus loads it self with Drink, then the earthly power of the Drink
takes the Complexion Chamber totally in; then does the Soul, with the
Imagination, to its great hurt, feed upon the earthly Property, kindles its
Fire therewith, and rejoices for a short time in it.

But when that man becomes sober again after his Drink. then stands the poor
Soul as most desolate, and more then ever forsaken of God, for it loses in the
overflowing of the earthly Property the divine Imagination and Desire; for the
Spirit of God will not have his dwelling in the earthly Imagination: I speak it
as a most certain truth which I have a well grounded knowledge of in the center
of Nature, and deepest Principle of Life.

The Soul must be content to remain in Sorrow for a little time: for while it
sits contentedly in the House of Mourning, it is not in the House of Sin. But
alas! what is it? How soon will it be at liberty from its sorrowful Prison, and
have the victorious Crown of everlasting Joy set upon its Head? O Eternity! thy
duration is of vast extent! What is it for a Soul to be a small moment in
sadness, and after that to rejoice everlastingly? For God will wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes.

Lastly, let a man behave himself as becomes a man, giving the dominion of his
Life to the manly Reason and Light of God shining therein, and not suffer
himself to be hurried on by the brutish Instincts of the Complexion: For there
is no Complexion so noble and pure in Nature, but if a man live according to
the Stars, the Devil has his pleasure and pastime therein. Therefore it is
rightly said by St. Peter* Be sober and watchful, for the Devil your Adversary
goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

A short, yet plain touch of the two Kingdoms, viz. Heaven and Hell Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil, Love and Anger, etc. Also the [words] Tincture and
Turba explained.
EVery Creature must know, that it should continue in that [condition] wherein
it was created, or else it does run on in a contrary will, and into enmity to
the Will of God, and brings it self into pain. For a Creature which is
created of darkness, has no pain in the darkness, as a venomous Worm has no
pain in its Venom; the Venom is its Life, and if it should lose its venom, and
have some good thing instead thereof brought into it, and be made manifest in
its Essence, this would be pain and death to it; and so also the evil is pain
and death to the good.

Man was created of, for, and in Paradise, of, for, and in the Love of God; but
if he bring himself into anger, which is as a poisonous pain and death, then
that contrary life is a pain and torment to him.

If the Devil had been created of the wrathful Matrix for and in Hell, and had
not had the divine Ens, he could have no pain in Hell; but he being created for
and in Heaven, and yet did stir up the source and property of Darkness in
himself, and did bring himself totally into Darkness, therefore the Light is
now a pain to him, viz an everlasting dispairing of God's grace and a continual
enmity, being God cannot endure him in himself, but has spewed him out; and
therefore the Devil is angry and wrathful against his own Mother, of whose
Essence and Being he has his original. viz. the eternal Nature, which keeps
him prisoner in his own place, as a revolter or fallen Spirit, and supporteth
it self in him with its property of Anger and Wrath. And seeing he would not
help forward the delight of the divine Joy, therefore he must now do the
contrary, and be an enemy against all Goodness.

For of God, and in him are all things, Darkness and Light, Love and Anger,
Fire and Light, but he calls himself God only, as to the Light of his Love.

There is an eternal contrariety between Darkness and Light, neither of them
comprehends the other, and neither of them is the other, yet there is but one
only Essence, Being or Substa^^ wherein they subsist; but there is a
difference in Quality and Will, and yet the Essence i^ not divided, but a
Principle makes the division, s^ that the one is a nothing in the other* and
yet it is there

For the Dev^^ continues in his own dominion or pri^^cipality, but not in that
wherein God created him, but in the property of Wrath, in the property which
begets Darkness, Anguish and Pain: Indeed he is a Prince of this world, yet
in the first Principle in the Kingdom of Darkness in the Pit.

But not in the Kingdom of the Sun, Stars and Elements, he is no lord or pr^nce
therein, but in the wrathful part [thereof] viz. in the root of the Evil of
every thing, and yet he has no power to do what he pleases with it: For there
is some good in all things, which holds the evil captive, and shut up in the
thing, there he can walk and rule only in the evil, when it stirs up an evil
desire in it self, and brings its desire into wickedness, which the inanimate
Creatures cannot do, but man can do it through the inanimate Creature, if he
bring the center of his Will with the Desire, out of the eternal center into
it, which is an Enchantment and false Magic. The will of the Devil can also
enter into that whereinto man brings the desire of his Soul [which is also
from the eternal] in wickedness.

For the original of the Soul, and of Angels, out of the Eternal is the same.
But the Devil has no power more over the time [or temporary condition] of this
world, but in the great Turba; wheresoever that kindles it self in the eternal
and* natural wrath, there he is busy, as in Wars, Fighting and Strife, as also
in great Tempests without Water: In the Fire he proceeds as far as the Turba
goes in great Showers, and Tempests of Thunder, Lightning, and Hail, but he
cannot direct them, for he is not Lord or Master in them, but Servant.

Thus the Creature stirs up, with the desire, good and evil, life and death.
The human angelical Desire stands in the center of the eternal Nature [which
is without beginning] and wherein it kindles it self, whether in good or evil,
it accomplisheth its work in that.

Now God created every thing for, and in that, wherein it should be the Angels
for and in Heaven, and Man for and in Paradise. If therefore the desire of the
Creature go forth from its own Mother, then it enters into the contrary Will,
and into Enmity, and it is tormented with the contrariety therein, and so a
false will arises in a good, and thence the good will enters into its nothing
again, viz. into the end of Nature and Creature, and so leaves the Creature in
its own [evil or] wickedness, as appeared by Lucifer, and also by Adam; and had
not the will of the Love of God met with him, and of mere mercy entered into the
Humanity again, there could be no good will in man.

Therefore all speculation and searching about God's will is a vain thing,
without the mind be converted: For when the mind stands captivated in the
self-desire of the earthly Life, it cannot comprehend [what] the will of God
[is] it runs on but in self, from one way to another, and yet finds no
rest; for self-desire evermore brings disquietness.

The Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends not the Light,
and yet they both dwell in one another. The four Elements is also an example of
this, which in their original are but one Element, which is neither hot, cold,
dry nor moist, and yet by its stirring severeth it self into four Properties,
viz. into Fire, Air, Water and Earth.

Who would believe that Fire produces Water? and that the original of Fire
could be in Water, if we did not see it with our Eyes in tempests of
Thundering, Lightning and Rain: And did not find also that in living Creatures,
the essential Fire in the body dwells in the Blood, and that the Blood is the
Mother of the Fire, and the fire the Father of the Blood.

And as God dwells in the world, and fills all things, and yet possesses
nothing: And as the fire dwells in the water, and yet possesses it not:
Also, as the Light dwells in Darkness, and yet possesses not the Darkness:
As the Day is in the Night, and the Night in the Day, Time in Eternity, and
Eternity in Time; so is man created a^cording to the outward Humanity, he is
the Time, and in the Time, and the Time is the outward world, and it is also
the outward man.

The inward man is Eternity, and the spiritual Time and World; which also
consists of Light and Darkness, viz. of the Love of God, as to the eternal
Light, and of the Anger of God, as to the eternal Darkness, which soever of
these are manifest in him, his Spirit dwells in that, be it Light or
Darkness; for Light and Darkness are both in him.

Now if the Light be made manifest in the Darkness, then the Darkness loses
its darkness, and is not known or discerned. Also, on the contrary if the
Darkness arise in the Light, and get the upper-hand, then the Light, and the
power thereof is extinguished; this is to be considered also in man.

The eternal darkness of the Soul is Hell, viz. an a^ king Source of anguish,
which is called the anger of God: But the eternal Light in the Soul is the
Kingdom of Heaven, where the fiery anguish of Darkness is turned into Joy; thus
the Soul has Heaven and Hell in it self.

Of Tincture.
BY the word Tincture is meant the power and virtue of Fire and Light; and the
stirring [up or putting forth like a Bud] of this virtue is called the holy and
pure Element [the virtue of the Sun is the Tinctu^e of all things that grow in
the visibility of the world; so also the Color is the Tincture of the Ground,
Christ is the Tincture of the Soul] in brief, the Tincture is the Life, and the
perfluent and informing Virtue, by which any thing does subsist; for without
the Tincture that proceeds from the Sun, Gold were no Gold: And so also the
Image of God in the Soul, without the true Tincture [the eternal Son of
Righteousness] were not the Image of God.

Of the great Turba.
THe great Turba [or Turba Magna] is the stirred and awakned wrath of the
inward ground, when the foundation of Hell is made manifest in the Spirit of
this world, from whence great Plagues and Diseases arise; and it is also the
awakned wrath of the outward Nature, as may be seen in great tempests of
Thunder and Lightning, when the Fire is manifested [or generated] in Water: In
brief, it is the effusion of the anger of God, by which Nature is disturbed.

Often, times the Children of God have been forced to carry the Sword of the
Turba in them; a great example whereof we see in Sampson, and also in Joshua
with his Wars, and likewise in Abraham [and many other Prophets] how the zeal
of God did enkindle it self in them, that they in the Spirit of Zeal have
oftentimes awakned the Turba Magna in the anger of God, and raised great
Rebukes, Judgments and Plagues upon whole Countries, as Moses in Egypt did with
his Plagues upon the Egyptians.

But we must here distinguish; if the Zeal of God should awaken it self in an
holy man, without his purposed Will, and give him the Sword of God's Anger,
such a one desires much from those who in their own thoughts contrive and plot
in the wrath, and introduce the conceived or purposed Will into the Serpent's
Ens, and make it to Substance, for that is Sin; yea, though the most holy man
[Prophet or Apostle] should do it. Therefore Christ so empathetically, and
punctually teaches us in the new birth. Love, Humility and Meekness, and would
that a Christian should not at all Revenge, also not be Angry; for he says,
Whosoever is angry with his Brother, is guilty of the Judgment. For anger is a
conception in the Serpent's Ens, which must be cut off by the Judgment of God
from the good being.

All War, howsoever blanched over, and under what pretense soever, takes its
original out of God's Anger. It does not belong to any true Christian, born of
Christ, to raise the Sword of the Turba, unless the zealous Spirit of God do
stir it up in him, who often will rebuke Sin: whatsoever exalts its self in the
wrath about its own Honor and Pride, and brings it self to Revenge [or
Blood-shed] is from the Devil -- Earthly Dominion and Government has its
original from the fall in the Serpent's craft.

All War and Contention does arise out of the nature and property of the dark
world, viz. from the four Elements of the Anger of God, which produces in the
Creature Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Anger; these are the four Elements of
the dark world, wherein the Devils and all evil Creatures live, and from these
four Elements arises War.

For although God bad the People of Israel drive out the Heathen, and wage
War; yet the command was wholly from the angry zealous God, viz. from the
Fire's Property; for the Heathen had stirred up the Wrath and Indignation,
which would devour them. But God so far as he is called God, wills not any
War, but the kingdom of Nature in Gods Anger wills it.

SOund Sion, sound the Praises of thy King,
Let thy well tuned Instrument honor bring
To him; for Sion thou right-well do know
The Gentiles and their Idol-Gods must bow,
And bend unto thy King* or broke must be,
For none's like Sion's God in Majesty.
Then Sion's Sons your Instruments prepare,
With strained Strings most exquisitly rare*
And sweetly tuned with Muses whet most sharp*
Our God's renown and praise thereon to harp,
Since from his Hand abundantly your Souls
Have drunk Salvation up like Wine in Bowls,
And made you eat of Mercies numberless,
And clothed you with Compassions in distress,
And let his Glory be your Meditations,
And his high Honor all your Contemplations;
For such effects will sure produce increase
Of joy and gladness joined to endless peace.
For how can Stones but speak,
With Iron, Steel and Brass,
And Adamants but break
At what is come to pass,
And sound in one set Hour
Forth shouts of his renown,
Whose Glory and mighty Power
Eternity does crown?
For has not he m^de Owls,
With Moles and Bats to sing
Like as the chanting Fowls
Harmonious tunes in Spring,
And Eagles he and she
Made both to loath their Pey
Two Turtle Doves to be
In Shiloa's shining day?
And has not he the Bear,
The Panther, and the Lion,
In substance made appear
Like Lambs in holy Sion?
And by his Mercy rich
Transformed the Serpent's sting
Into a virtue, which
From Death to Life does bring,
And made of Rocks a Fountain,
And Stones refreshing Streams,
And of a Grain a Mountain,
And darkness Orions Beams,
And made of puddie-mire
A limpid Pond of pleasure,
Where Fishes joys as Fire
Ascend exceeding measure.
He turned the hideous Night
Into a glorious Day,
And cut through Clouds a Light,
And Hills a level Way;
And made a Seed a Sheaf,
The Sick sound, and Strong weak,
The Blind to see, and Deaf
To hear, and Dumb to speak,
And Wine did purely sever
From Mud, which man did mingle,
Which is enough forever
To make all Ears to Tingle.
His virtuous Breath like Brooks does overflow
His own Plantation in the Valleys low.
POSTSCRIPT. To all Students in Arts and Sciences; and to Astrologers in
particular.
MY first design here, was to be only pa^^^cular of Astrology: But in respect
to a more general Service, I shall in the first place set down the incertainty
and vanity of worldly Arts and Sciences in general, from that learned and
illustrious Penman, Henry Corn^lious Agrippa, Counselor to Charles the fifth,
Emperor of Germany, of whom it is written; His Head was Europe's University,
A second Solomon, that mighty he,
That tried all Arts, and found them Vanity.


It is an old Opinion, and the concurring and unanimous judgment of almost all
Philosophers, whereby they uphold, that every Science adds so much of a
sublim Nature to man himself, according to the capacity and worth of every
Person, as many times enables them to translate themselves beyond the limits of
Humanity, even to the Caelestial Seats of the blessed. From hence have
proceeded those various and innumerable Encomi^^s of the Sciences, whereby
every one has endeavored in accurate, as well as long Orations to prefer, and
as it were to extol beyond the Heavens themselves, those Arts and Mysteries
wherein, with continual labor, he has exe^cised the strength and vigor of his
Ingenuity or Invention. But I, persuaded by Reasons of another nature, do
verily believe, that there is nothing more pernicious* nothing more destructive
to the well-being of men, or to the Salvation of our Souls, than the Arts and
Sciences themselves -- all Sciences are as well evil as good, and they bring no
other advantage to excel as Deities, more than what the Serpent promised of
Old, when he said, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Let him
therefore glory in this Serpent, who boasts himself in Knowledge, which we read
the Heresy of the Ophites, not a little unbeseemingly to have done, who
worshipped a Serpent among the rest of their Superstitions, as being the
Creature that first introduced the knowledge of Virtue into Paradise -- But
suppose there were no other inventors of Arts than men themselves, yet were
they the Sons of the worst Generation, even the Sons of Cain, of whom it is
truly said, The Sons of this World are wiser than the Sons of Light in this
Generation -- But if God and just men be the professors of Knowledge* than Arts
and Sciences may probably become useful to the publick-weal, though they render
their professors nothing more happy. Nor does it follow that the Sciences
themselves have any thing of Virtue, any thing of Truth in them, but what they
reap and borrow from the Inventors and Professors thereof; for if they light
upon an evil Person, they are hurtful, as a perverse Gramarian, an ostentatious
Poet, a lying Historian, a flattering Rhetori^ian, a litigious Logi^ian, a
turbulent Sophister, a lotterist A^ithmatician* a lacivious Mu^^tian, a
boasting Geometrici^n, a wandering Cosmographer, a pernicious Architect, a Pirat
Navigator, a fallacious Astrologer, a wicked Magician, a perfidious Cab^list, a
dreaming Naturalist, a wonder-^e^gning Metaphasitian, a treacherous Politician,
a tyrannical Prince, an oppressing Magistrate, a schismatical Priest, a
bargain-breaking Merchant, a pilling Customer, a sloathful Husbandman, a
careless Shepherd, an envious Fisherman, a murtherous Ph^^tian, a poisoning
Apothecary, a gluttonous Cook, a deceitful Chimist, a juggling Lawyer, a
perfidious Notary, a bribe-taking Judge* and a heritical and seducing Divine.
So that there is nothing more omnious than Art and Knowledge, guarded with
^mpiety, seeing that every man becomes a ready Inventor and learned Author of
evil things -- True beautitude consists not in the knowledge of good things,
but in good Life, not in understanding, but in living understandingly. Neither
is it great learning, but good will that joins men to God -- It shall not then
be needful so violently to labor to season our Minds with the so long, so
tedious, so difficult, so unattainable learning of all sorts of Sciences, but
only to give our self to what is more easy and common to all, the
Contemplation of the most noble object of all things, God; which common act of
Contemplation, so easy to all men, is not obtained by Syllogism and
Contemplation, but by Belief and Adoration. Where then is the great Felicity of
enjoying the Sciences? Where is the praise and beautitude of the wise
Philosophers, that make so much noise in the Schools, sounding with the
Encomiums of those men, whose Souls perhaps in the mean time are at that
instant suffering the Torments of Hell? This St. Agustin saw, and feared, while
he exclaims with St. Paul -- The unlearned rise and take Heaven by force, while
we with all our Knowledge are cast down into Hell. So that if we may be bold to
confess the truth, the Tradition of all Sciences are so dangerous and
inconstant, that it is far safer to be ignorant then to know: Adam had never
been ejected out of Paradise, had not the Serpent been his Master, to teach him
Good and Evil. And St. Paul would have them thrown out of the Church that would
know more than they ought -- The knowledge of all Sciences is so difficult, if
I may not say, impossible, that the Age of man will not suffice to learn the
perfection of one Art, as it ought to be: Which Ecclesiastes seems to intimate,
when he says, Then I beheld the whole Work of God, that man cannot find out,
the work that is wrought under the Sun, for the which man labors to seek it,
and cannot find it; yea, and though the wise man think to know it, he cannot
find it. Nothing can happen more pestilential to man than Knowledge: This is
that true Plague that invades all mankind with so much Confusion, that subverts
all Innocence, subjecting us to so many Clouds of Sin and Error, and at length
Death. This is that that has extinguished the Light of Faith, casting our
Souls into profound Darkness, which condemning the Truth, has mounted Error to
a Throne -- To a Commonwealth there can be nothing more pernicious than
Learning and Science, wherein if some happen to excel the rest, all things are
carried by their determination, as taking upon them to be most knowing, who
thereupon laying hold upon the Simplicity and Unskilfulness of the multitude,
usurp all Authority to themselves, which is often the occasion of the changing
popular States into Oligarchy, which dividing into Factions, is at length
easily oppressed by single Tyranny. Furthermore, all Sciences are but the
Opinions and the Decrees of private men, as well those that are of use, as
those that are prejudicial; as well those that are wholesome* as those that are
pestiferious; as well the bad as the good, being never perfect, but both
doubtful, full of Error and Contention.

Of Astrology.
NOw as it may appear by particular instinct, so it does appear by the Writings
of this divine Philosopher, Jacob Beheme, that by Adam's fall, all his
Posterity are thereby fallen under the power and influence of the Stars and
Constellations, and that this beastial Body, with the Animal Spirits, are
proceeded from the Stars and Elements, to which again they must return; and
into the Starry and Elementary Spirit the Devil casts forth his wicked
Imaginations, to infect the Soul, and keep it from rising with its will above
the Stars again out of his dominion, and hence is the original of the evil
Influence of the Stars.

But in brief, this Syderial or Starry influence is called Astrology, of which
many desire to be satisfied of the effects, but he is wise that knows them: For
so manifold are the Configurations, so perpetual the Mixtures, so various the
Motions and Scituations of the Stars, that as they are placed at this or any
other moment of time, so they never were, nor never will be again, whence their
operation upon Mankind is the same: So that it is impossible for an Astrologer,
by the Rules of Art [though founded upon the truest ground] to give any certain
Judgment of their Effects, but only in a general way.

But of Astrology in a more per^^^^lar manner, I may well say something
[especially of the Genith^i^cal part thereof] inasmuch as the desire of the
foreknowledge of my own Fate or Distiny has caused me to be well acquainted
therewith: For having by the best approved Rules of Art calculated and
rectified my own Nativity [with the Nativities o^ many others too] directed the
several Significators to their respective Promittors, made use of Revolutions,
Transit* Pro^ections, and what not: being thereby able [by Rules (...) Art] to
foreknow and predict both good and evil Accident and whatsoever is contingent
to the Life of man. Now (...) i^ to be noted* that when I had, according to
Art, point ^ut the time of any future Accident, with the nature a manner how it
should operate, it was very rare that it fell according to Prediction: As thus*

When an evil direction, not obstructed by any other cause, the Accident ['tis
tru^] many times fell out to be evil, but in such a way* or in such things as
was least expected, and sometimes greater or less powerful, as also sooner or
later then was predicted; the like I have observed in good directions* and
therefore could give no certain cautions to the Native, how he might endeavor
to augment the good, or withstand or hinder the evil, that by the Stars in his
Nativity was promised or threatened: Nay, I have sometimes known eminent
directions pass without any effect, when there could be no cause found to
interveen; and on the contrary, very great and notable Accidents have happened,
when no cause thereof could be found in the Nativity.

But that which might non plus the most accute Inquisitor in referrence hereto,
was, that after the ^rue moment of Birth gained, I found the Rules and
Aphorisms of the Art to fail* much in the general Judgment of the twelve
Houses; as instance; When Judgment has been given by me and others of the
Ascendent [or other of the Houses] of one and the same Scheam of Shape, Form,
Complexion, and the like, time has often manifested the Judgment for the most
part false. Considering all this, caused me to suspect the truth of the Art,
and had very little esteem or love for it: But my Inclinations being prone
thereto, I fell to examining the ground and foundation on which the Rules and
Axioms of the Art were laid, and coming to the four Elements, which answers to
the four Triplicities of the Signs, I perceived a vast difference in judgment
among Philosophers, about the nature of the Element of Air; for although the
Ancients, and from them our modern Astrologers, determine the Air to be hot and
moist, and so, and being Signs of the Airy Triplicity, are so too; yet that
accute Philosopher Van Helmont, notably proves the Air to b^ cold. Here Reader,
thou may reconcile this opposite Judgment of these wise men, if thou can,
for from hence *, must be cold, which nevertheless pass in the Practice of
Astrology for hot.

Next, I con^^dered the twelve Constellations or Signs of the ^od^ak, and
finding eac^ Sign to be made up by a certain numbe^ of Stars which Stars,
though fixed in respect to the distance from each other, yet they in general
have such a motion as moves them a Degree in about 70 Years [as I remember] by
means of which motion the Signs consequently are much altered from what they
were in the time o^ the An^ients, and yet Astrologers in this Age retain the
same limits, for the beginning and end of each Sign, as the Ancients ^id, for
they now begin the Sign at the Vernal Equinox* though it is apparent to all
Astronomers, that the Sign, viz. the Ram, is removed near the length of a whole
Sign from the said Equinox, and the Sign Pisses, viz. the Constellation of the
Fishes is got into the place of the Ram [or limits of aforesaid.] Now viz. the
Ram is termed hot and dry* Choleric Masculin^, and Pisces the Fishes cold and
moist, Phlegmatic Feminine [two opposite Qualities] hence that place in the
Heavens limited for the Sign, must be cold and moist, because the Fishes, from
whence the said limi^ assumes its Nature, is got into the limits of the Sign,
and yet Astrologers following Tradition, or something else as bad, call it hot
and dry; the like is to be understood of others of the Signs: Here I began to
perceive the cause of the manifold Errors of Astrologers.

But while I was searching learned Authors, to find whence this Art did arise,
I found Cornelius Agrippa [in his Vanity of Sciences, before mentioned] to
assert that the twelve Signs, with the Northern and Southern Constellations got
all into the Heavens by the help of Fables and Fictions, invented by the Poets;
which assertion of Agrippa, because I cannot disprove, I will now leave* and
come next to the Table of essential Dignities of the Planets, invented ['tis
said] by Ptolomy, King of Egypt, and acknowledged for rational by our English
Astrologers; he there places the Planet (...) in the watery Triplicity, and
therein he is allowed three essential Dignities more then he has in any other
Triplicity, and yet I know no reason for it; for Reason tells me, that is m^^e
essentially strong in fiery Signs, as being agreeable to his own Nature* ^ther
perticulars I could instance of this Table, as being groundless; but let these
motions stir up the more Judicious to a further search and consideration.

No it is very probable that hence might arise those frivolous Inventions of
consulting the ^igure of Conception with Revolutions, Pro^ect^ons, etc which
have no rational Foundation; for finding their Judgment fail, they fell to
inventing those diversities of D^ctrines and Methods, which instead of clearing
and confirming the Rules of Art, did more cloud and obscure the same.

For as to that highly esteemed Doctrine of Revolutions, if considered in its
right ground, will be found of no validity or certainty, as I could
experimentally prove; and as for Pro^ections there is so little show of Reason
for it, that it is not worth mentioning.

Then again, there are some things that does even confound Astrology, and
overthrow the Rules thereof* one of which is, in Wars or other Accidents, there
sometimes perishes thousands of People in one day. Now from the^e peoples
Nativities, we might find by rules of Art some to dye natural death, some
violent, some after one manner* and some after another, some by one Distemper
or Disease, and some by another, some to be long lived, and some short, some to
dye in one Year* and some in another, yet nevertheless they all come to an end
in one day: Another is, by the burning of a City, or the like, many Persons are
ruined, as to outward Estates in a moment, when if we examine their Nativites,
we should find some of them to be promised increase of Wealth that Year by one
means, and some by other means, some to suffer loss one way, and some another,
and some it may be neither to lose nor gain, and yet all in one instant partake
of one and the same Fortune.

Much I could instance of this nature in Astrology, but my intent at first was
only to hint in short, that others more deeply affected may make a more
diligent inquisition, if they please.

Yet notwithstanding all this [through the affection I have had for this Art of
Astrology] I am not willing to be numbered among the Revilers thereof, nor do I
think it to be more unlawful or false in it self then other Arts, but do
believe it is as yet unknown, and that there is none that practice it, who
rightly understand it, the Rules being partly founded upon a false and
uncertain ground, as is before demonstrated.

But now since it is so difficult a Road to travel in, and no end of the
Journey to be yet found, so hard a work to labor in, and no profit does
thereby acrew: And that the best use we can make of it, brings no advantage to
us, neither in divine nor human things* therefore I Will take leave to wave it;
And

Let them whose Brains are sick of that Disease,
Be Slaves unto an Ephemerides;
Search* Constellations, and themselves apply
To find the Fate of their Nativity.
I Will seek within me, and if there I find
Those Stars that should give Light unto my mind*
Rise fair and ^imely in me, and affect
Each other with a natural Aspect,
If in Conjunction there perceive I may,
True Virtue and Religion every day,
I fear no Fortunes whatsoever they be,
Nor care I what my Stars do threaten me.
Lastly, To this pure heavenly c^rtain and exceeding advantageous Astrology, I
shall rather, yea, much rather recommend my self, and all those that desire to
be made Inhabitants successively of the twelve heavenly Houses thereof, which
are these,

The first is the House or Judgment and Fearfulness. The second, Humility and
Lowliness. The third, Meekness and Mercifulness. The fourth, Temperance and
Savouriness. The fifth, Patience and Settledness. The sixth, Hope and
Resolvedness. The seventh, Faith and Perseverance. The eighth, Peace and
Quietness. The ninth, Thanksgiving and Remembrance. The tenth, Prayer and
Watchfulness. The eleventh, Glorification and Praises. The twelfth, Content and
Fullness.
Of which twelve Houses of the Heavens, that we may be all learned
Experiencers, and true Witnessers, but above all, that we may look well into
that House, in which we are made ^nhabitants, which by virtue of covenant is
ours, as a proper Possession, that we may see the Glory of the Sign thereof,
which shows us the Signs of the Times; Even that is the desire of

D. L. Amen.

The great Jehovah's standing Precepts Ten,
Which show ^hy Duty both to God and Men.

1.
O^n thou no other Gods but only me,
For the Lord from Bondage set thee free.
2.
Unto no Image bow, or image make,
I on that Sinners Hou^e will vengeance take.
3.
^alse and vain Oaths forbear; my Sacred Name
Dishonor not, that thou incur no blame.
4.
Keep well the Sabboth-day both thou and thine,
All servile ^o^ks and Wickedness decline.
5.
Unto thy Parents all due Honor give,
That ^od may bless thee long on Earth to live.
6.
^rath and rash Anger shun; shed no man's Blood,
But love thy Neighbor and promote his good.
7.
(...) filthy L^st, the cause of cruel Strife,
Be not Obscene, touch not thy Neighbors wife.
8.
Thy Neighbor of his Goods do not bereave,
Rob, Spoil* Purloin, or any way deceive.
9.
No evidence against thy Neighbor ^ear,
Nor as a VVitness shall thou falsely Swear.
10.
Thy Neighbors Goods desire not: Learn to be
Thankful to God for what he ha^h g^ven thee.
O Lord! These Laws to keep do thou incline.
And still assist me with thy Power divine.
The End of the First Part,
Books Printed and Sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia.
NO Cross, no Crown, or a discourse upon the holy Cross of Christ; by W. P. A
Persuasive to Moderation. The Testament of the twelve Patriarchs, the Sons of
Jacob. Conductor Generalis, or a Guide for Constables Overseers of the Poo^,
Surveyors of the Highways, etc. A guide for the Grand and Petty Jury. The
Indian Interpreter corrected, enlarged, etc. The Planters Speech to his
Neighbors and Countrymen in Pennsilvania, New Jersey, Goldman^s Dictionary.
Rider's Dictionary. Mason's general Practice of Physic. Anotamy of man's Body.
Fisher's Works collected into one Vollum. Isaac Pennington's Collection. George
Fox the younger's Collection. The Principles of Truth. The Spirit of the
Martyrs revived, etc. Bibles, Testaments, Psalters, Primmers, and other
School-Books. Also blank Bills, Bonds, Letters of Attorney, Bills of Lading,
Certificates for Marriage, Pocket-Books, Shop-Books, Writing Paper and Ink,
etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 5 line 8 for contents r contence, page 9 l 15 f overflown r outflown, p 9
l 15 read do not ^pera^^, p 10 l 15 f concruted r concreted, l ^7 f destruction
r distinction, p 11 l 12 f dross r draff. p 19 l 9 r the properties, p 33 l 12
f or r of p 38 l 30 r cannot be known by the outward, p 46 16 add then shall
they come, p 61 l 3 f conversation r conversion* p 63 l 10 r that they are
wishing* p 67 l 15 r enmity with it p ^8 l 6 f ^yrable r ^irible* p 71 l 13 f
of r and, p 74 l 33 r from God, p 86 f sol r sal, p 98 l 2^ f powerful r
powerless, p 103 l 3 r accomplish no more, l 14 f upon r open, l 2^ f
disappearing r dispairing, p 113 l 24 f desires r differs, p 115 l ^0 f pey r
prey, p 117 l 30 f God r good, p 120 l 24 r now hear it.

Abuses Stripped and Whipped, By GEORGE WITHER.

Treating in a Saterical vein of MAN, with his Passions, namely, Of MAN, 1 Of
^ond Love, 2 Of Lust, 3 Of Hate, 4 Of Envy, 5 Of Revenge, 6 Of Choler, 7 Of
Jealousy, 8 Of Covetousness, 9 Of Ambition, 10 Of Fear, 11 Of Despair, 12 Of
Hope, 13 Of Compassion, 14 Of Cruelty, 15 Of Joy, 16 Of Sorrow, 17 Conclusion.
18


AS ALSO 1. Of Vanity, 2. Of Inconstancy, 3. Of Weakness, 4. Of Presumption,
etc.

To which is added, FAIR VIRTVE The Shepherd's Mistress.

With other Pathetick POEMS composed by G. W. in his Youthful days.

Also, Divine Poems selected from the Works of Francis Quarle.

The whole concluded with some excellent Essays, and Religious Meditations of
Sir Francis Bacon, Knight.

Philadelphia, Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Anno 1688.

To the Unprejudiced Reader.
READER;
TWo things especially I entreat thee to consider in these following Poems --
First, thou art to know that the Works of the Author G. W. are here very much
Abreviated [And although his own Words expressed for the most part upon
generals] nevertheless if thou art one that has been acquainted with his Works
at large, yet thou will find this small Abstract so pithily to express and
contain the whole matter [some particulars excepted] that thou may hereby
receive as much satisfaction, as by reading the Book at large.

Secondly, To let the Publisher hereof have Christian censures from thee; and
that too in respect to the latter part, the which although it may seem somewhat
too light in the Balance of the more serious modern Christian, yet he intends
it not to be a means to draw the mind from better, but rather from worse
things: And he doubts not but that will be the effects of it, considering the
Constitution of Youth, on whom it may have most influence; all which he hopes
thou will find ground enough to believe in the perusal hereof: And the rather
because as he has endeavored throughout to pass by particular Circumstances,
the more immediately to come to the Matter. So also has he every where omitted
what seems more Airy, and less consisting with the present time of Day.

Of MAN
MOunted aloft on Contemplations Wings,
And noting with my self the state of things,
I plainly did perceive, as on a Stage,
The confused Actions of this present Age.
I viewed the World, and viewing saw my fill,
Because that all I saw therein was ill;
And noting every Creature, there I found
That only Man was the chief spring and ground
Of all this uproare; yea, I soon did see
He there was all in all, and none but he.
The Mind is nothing but a Mint of Jarrs,
Or little World of mad domistick Wars:
Virtue's deposed thence, and Vice rule obtains;
Yea, Vice from Vice there by Succession reigns,
Expelling th^se whom Virtues presence graceth,
And in their stead these hurtful Monsters places;
Fond Love and Lust, Ambition, Enmity,
Foolish Compassion, Joy and Jealousy,
Fear* Hope, Despair and Sadness, with the Vice,
Called, Hate, Revenge, and greedy Avarice,
Choler and Cruelty, which I perceived,
To be the only Causes man's bereaved
Of quietness and rest; yea, these I found
To be the principal, and only ground
Of all pernicious Mischiefs that now rage,
Or have disturbed him in any Age.
These losing Reason, their true Prince began
To breed disturbance in the heart of man,
Each laid a several claim [forsooth] and he
Would be the Monarch of this Empirie.
Ruin had got the upper-hand, and they
Would be Commanders that were made to obey.
And here because I will not order break,
I will asunder of each Passion speak.
Of the Passion of LOVE.
FIrst, Love, the same I here the first do call,
Because that Passion is most natural,
And of it self could not be discommended,
Were not with many a foul Abuse attended:
God taught it sweetly how to move the mind,
Both for increasing, and preserving Kind.
But now the bound it had, contenteth not,
A Vein of domineering it has got,
Makes them set light by Reason's ^ound direction,
And bears them headlong by untamed affection;
Counsel's in vain, ^cause when this fit does take them,
Reason and Understanding does forsake them:
It makes them sometimes merry, sometimes sad,
Untamed men mild, and many a mild man mad.
To ^ools it Wisdom gives, and makes the witty
To show themselves most Fools, the more's the pity.
Such apishness it now has entertained,
That all the credit that it had, is stained;
Yea, it is as far from what it was, as we
From our more honored ancient English be;
And so unlike unto it self does prove,
We scarce dare give it now the name of Love.
True worth moves few: but sure I am, not many
Have for bare Virtues sake affected any.
Wealth wins the most, yet they by trial prove,
Though it breeds liking, yet it gains not Love.
He that brings Wealth, sure if he does not speed,
The VVomans worth the suing for indeed.
But now although this Passion I have tide,
To love of Women, it concludes beside,
All whats^ever kind of Love^ there be.
^nless they keep the Mind from troubles free,
And yield to Reason: but of such like Lovers
My muse hereafter other ^eats discovers.
Of DESIRE, or LUST.
LUst is presented in the second place,
Because it shrouds a foul deformed ^ace
Beneath Loves vizard, and assumes that name*
Hiding its own fault with the others blame.
Thus this is that which often caused public Strife,
And private discord between Man and Wife:
This spoils the Body, this does make the Face
Look wane, pale, yellow, and does much disgrace
The beauty of it; this bereaveth quite
The Bones of marrow, and the Eyes of sight.
And this way comes that foul Disease to us,
We call the French, so vile and odious:
It Is highly made of; yea, it is Lust does wear^
The richest Garments, and has curiest fare.
The softest Beds it has to take repose,
With sweet Perfumes, but sure there is need of those.
Of HATE.
But I have roused another here as bad,
They call it Hate, a worse I never had
Before in chase; I scarce can keep [in sooth]
My self in danger of his venomed Tooth:
This is the Passion that does use to move
The Mind a clean contrary way to Love.
It is an inspiration of the Devil,
That makes men long for one another evil;
But where it rules, they cannot well conceal it,
But either Words, or Deeds, or both reveal it.
The Wick^d they do hate beyond all measure
The righteous man, that contradicts their pleasure.
Yet they are more coorrupt than all the rest,
Who hate their Friends, they should account of best.
But let men strive, and study to remove
This Passion from their Hearts, and graft on Love.
Of ENVY.
NOw some are in the mind that Hate, and this
Still go together, and one passion is.
Indeed, they foul injurious Humors be,
So like they seem to have affinity;
And yet they differ, as often Kindred do,
Enough at least, I Am sure, to make them two
Hate many times from Wrongs received, has grown
Envy is seen, where* Injuries are none:
Yet envious men do least spite, such as be
Of ill report, or of a low degree,
But rather they do take their aim at such
Who either well-beloved are, or rich.
Some do not care how grossly they dispraise,
Or how unlikly a report they raise,
Because they know if it be so false and ill*
That one believes it not, another will:
And so their Envy very seldom fails,
But one way or another still prevails.
It makes some grieve, if any man be friended,
Or in their hearing, praised, or commended:
Contrariwise again, such is their spite,
In other men's misfortunes they delight.
Foul Hag of Envy, let thy snakie elves*
Keep Hell with thee, and there torment themselves.
O, that a man should so from Reason range,
To entertain a humor that's so strange
And so unprofitable! tell me why
Should we the honors, or the Wealth envy
Of other men, that we should grudge or fret
At every good thing that our Neighbors get.
But sure, mischief always does betide
To the envious, than to him that is envied;
But know, Envy is an apparent Foe
To Charity, and Friendship's overthrow.
Of REVENGE.
ROme for Revenge; he is no Comedian
That acts for Pleasure, but a grim Tragedian,
A foul stern Monster, which if we displease him.
Death, Wounds and Blood, or nothing can appease him.
That cruel Ruffin, that in vain does strive
His offspring from true Valor to derive
This most inhuman Passion now and than,
With Violence and Fury hurries man
So far from that sweet mildness, wherewith he,
Being himself, should ever tempted be,
That Man nor Devil can we term him well,
For part he has of Earth, and part of Hell.
Poor World! if these thy best Contentments be,
Seek Blood and Vengeance you that list for me.
Of CHOLER.
But now the cause of man's revengeful thirst*
Proceeds from rash unbridled Choler first;
Yea, those that are infected with this Crime,
Are in a manner mad men for the time.
It Is a short Fury wherewith man possessed*
Resembles most a wild untamed Beast;
Yea, those in whom I find this Passion reign,
I have often seen to storm at things, but vain,
And chafing, fret at poor halfpenny losses,
As if for some intolerable crosses.
They are not only ready to believe
The least report that may occasion give
Of discontent: But so does Anger blind them,
That if no Causes be, they will seek to find them.
This Anger is a wondrous headstrong Passion,
And has a beastly frantic operation,
From which how can we any man release,
When we must neither speak, nor hold our peace.
Of JEALOVSIE.
But though these angry Ones soon breed a braul.
And are perni^ions to converse withal.
Not one jot better is the jealous Head,
That ever fears his Wife has wronged his Bed.
Love is the highest, and the noblest bliss
That for mankind on Earth ordained is:
But when true measure it exceeds, and gets
Beyond the (...) bounds that Reason sets*
God turns it to a plague, whereby he will
Show them their Folly, and correct the ill:
He adds a fear of losing all their Joy,
In that they love which does their Peace destroy.
Yet none's so jealous, I dare pawn my Life,
As he that has defiled another Wife.
Of COVETOVSNESS.
But how mist I of Avarice to tell,
Whose longing is as infinite as Hell:
I muse it escaped so long, for I Will be plain,
I no where look, but there I see it reign.
I neither will excuse Sex nor Degree,
Young Folks, nor such as middle-aged be;
Nay, I perceive them given most to crave,
When they had need to dig themselves a Grave,
Like Earth-bred Moles still scrambling in the Dust,
Not for the Treasure that shall never rust:
No, all that they have with their labor bought,
If well considered, is not worth a thought.
But I often wonder, and do yet admire,
Men hunt for Riches, with such strange desire;
For being once possessed thereof, it fills
The owners of it with a thousand ills,
More than they can conceive; for first, we find
It choaks and mars the Virtue of the Mind:
Then by much business, it brings annoys
Unto the mind, and hinders true Joys,
That often the Rich are more in sorrow tossed,
Then those that have no Riches to be lost.
It makes to grow arrogant, unjust,
Draws unto Pleasure, and provokes to Lust.
O Gold, what mortal Godd is so divine?
What beauty so adored is as thine?
The fairest Creature never so much moved,
As that it was of every one beloved.
Fools that know nothing know the use of thee,
And for thy sake will often persuaded ^e*
The wise man of the world, that disapprove
Young men's affections, and make scoffs at Love,
Can play the Idiot twice as much himself,
By doting on a heap of dirty Pelf.
What he on Earth so great and mighty is,
Or who so proud that will not bow to this?
Where Is he, though Noble, that will now disdain
To be a suitor for his private gain?
And those that love Wealth, men their Vices deem
For to be Virtues, and so make them seem.
B^t as herein men often do amiss,
So are they in the opposite to this.
The prodigal runs out as far astray
From this absurdity another way:
As greedy men board Riches [God amend them]
So he does strive and hie, as fast to spend them.
Their humors diverse: Some vain glorious Asses
Consume't in gaudy Clothes and Looking-glasses;
Others there are [but few] who having store,
Neglect their Wealth, and rather would be poor,
For why, it stops the way to Heaven, they say,
Sure being, mis-imployed, so it may.
And therefore rather then they should abuse it,
'Twere good they had it, that know how to use it.
Of AMBITION.
AMbition's a proud Humor, that does search
The stout high-minded, and attempts to perch
In men of Spirit: It does far surmount
The force of Love, and makes but small account
Of Nature or Religion; it is not Law
Nor Conscience that can keep this Fiend in aw.
It is supposed that it has no bound;
For never was there limit in it found.
He that first was ruined by this Evil,
Was he that first was guilty often, the Devil,
Who did aspire so high, that higher powers
Wrought h^s just Fall, and now he seeks ours.
Of FEAR.
SEe you this Passion here, that follows next,
That shakes, and looks as with a Fever vexed:
Such is the nature of it, that I Have seen
Fear cause those Evils that else had not been.
To some it Sickness brings, and some beside
Even with the very fear of Death have died.
The fear of Evil more tormenteth some,
Then does the thing they feared, when it is come.
Men fear what is, what will be, and [alas]
Many a thing that shall never come to pass.
Sure, it is a plague the Devil did invent
To work in man a lasting discontent,
And taught it Adam, whereupon he said,
I saw my Nakedness, and was afraid.
Come, let us joy, and be as cheerful still,
With hope of good, as sad with fear of ill.
There is an honest Fear, that hinders Sin,
Which has of all good men allowed bin.
Those therefore that are wise enough to tell,
When they do any thing amiss or well,
Still in this Passion do observe a mean,
And not to fear, or to presumption lean.
Of DESPAIR.
NOw here is Despair, with gashly Look he stands,
And Prisons, Ropes, and Poinyards fills his Hands,
Still ready to do hurt, one step, no more,
Reaches from hence unto Damnations door.
This is that Passion gives man instruction,
To wrest the Scriptures to his own destruction;
And makes him think while he on Earth does dwell,
He feels the Tortures and the Plagues of Hell,
More monster-like, than man, only Damnation
Is in their Mouths, no Mercy, no Salvation,
Can they have hope of, but possess a fear,
Whence monstrous Shapes and Visions do appear
To their Imaginations, and the pain
That they in Soul and Body do sustain:
All earthly Tortures do so much exceed,
As if they had within them Hell indeed.
God also makes this Passion now and than
His Scourge to lash the proud presumptuous man,
And tame the Reprobate, who by his Rod
Is made sometimes to feel there is a God.
By this, strange Wonders brought to pass, I Have seen,
Those humbled that have once the proudest been.
O what repentant Lives some vow to live,
If God would but once more vouchsafe to give
Them Health and Hope again, then they would spend
Their Lives and Goods unto no other end,
Save wholly to his glory; yet there is now
Some living that have quite forgot that vow.
If such in time look not into their ^rror,
O they will one day feel a double Terror.
Some again despair of earthly things,
Which nothing so much disadvantage brings,
Yet like enough in little time to grow
Virtues main let, or overthrow.
Of HOPE.
THrice well-come Hope, the Devil keep the the other,
Despair and Fear are fitting for no other.
This is the Passion that of all the rest
We have most reason to esteem of best:
Hope is a blessing, but we so abuse it
As to our hurt, more then our good, we use it;
Yea, this that was of all the Passions best,
We have as much corrupted as the rest.
But we must note well, that this Passion's double,
One Hope is certain, the other full of trouble.
The Hope that is certain we through Faith do gain,
And it is sufficient to make any pain
Seem short and easy: It Is the Life of man,
And such a comfort as no mortal can
Live, if he want it, and yet sometime this
Each, nay, as idle as the other is:
For often times we see the same is found
To be erected on on other ground
But Ignorance, and mere Security,
Which ruin all that do on them rely.
Some praise their own Deserts, and on that Sand
They fain would have the divine Hope to stand.
The other Hope which is of earthly things,
That lasts not long, nor yet much pleasure brings,
And nothing worth to ground our Hope upon,
For in the turning of a Hand all is gone.
And therefore now I wish that every man
Would take upon him the best Hope he can
In all his outward actions; yet should he
Take care on honest grounds it builded be,
And therewith be so well prepared still,
That if his doubtful Hope do fall out ill,
He never repine, but take it as if the same
Had been expected long before it came
Of COMPASSION.
COmpassion, if Discretion guide, may be
Of near Aliance unto Charity.
He Will say that has sound judgment of his own
Tender Compassion may amiss be shown:
Come to our Courts of Justice else, and see
If there compassion not abused be*
Where, though that God himself says Kill; Reply,
With, No, alas! its pity he should dye*
Who for their weakness merit equal check
With him that spared the King of Amaleck.
Some Parents I have seen discreet and witty
Do mar their Children by their cockring pity,
He that will walk uprightly, ought to see
How far this Passion may admitted be.
Here I could much of this same Passion say,
If other Passions called me not away.
Of CRVELTY.
BUt now whilst we are seeking to beware
Of foolish Pity, we must have a care,
Left this over run us: For though men confess
It Is an inhuman hellish Wickedness,
Though Cruelty so odious does appear,
Unless men look to their Affections near.
It will become delightful, yea, and make
So deep impression in the Heart, and take
So sure a Root, 'twill hardly be displaced
Whilst that the Body by the Soul is graced.
Trust me, be it on a Beast, Nature denies
And God forbids, that we should Tyranize.
But now in short I Will here conclude with this,
As he is blessed that meek-hearted is.
So on the Cruel, lightly does attend
A heavy Curse, and a most fearful end.
Of JOY.
OF all the Passions handled hitherto,
With this that follows I had least to do;
By some small Trials, though that I have had,
I find it is better far, then being sad:
And that no greater good on Earth might be,
If it would last, and were from Cumbrance free.
But that can never be ours, state is such,
And distiny moreover seems to grutch
Ought should be perfect in Mortality,
Lest we should leave to seek Eternity.
Never could any yet that Joy obtain,
On which there followed neither Shame nor Pain*
But sure, the reasen why man's joy so soon
Is changed to Sorrow, is because there,s none,
Or very few, that do their gladness found
Upon a solid, firm, substantial ground.
Some in their Honor all their Joy do place,
Which ends by a frown, or some disgrace.
Take but away his Substance, you destroy
The miserable Rich man's only Joy,
And soon by Sickness that delight's defaced,
Which men in Beauty or in Strength has placed;
Yea, the best Joy in transitory things,
They being lost, at last a Sorrow brings:
All men should therefore make a careful choice
Of that wherein their meaning's to rejoice.
And I am of the mind, if every man
Would curb rebellious Passions what he can,
Not suffer any Mischief to annoy
His mind, through either too much Care or Joy;
But so the one should of the other borrow,
He might be sad with Mirth, and glad with Sorrow.
But when with Joy I am acquainted better,
I Will tell you more, or else remain your Debtor.
Of SORROW.
OF this sad Passion I may knowledge take,
And well say something for Acquaintance sake;
And yet I wonder Sorrow so should touch
The hearts of men, to make them grieve so much;
As many do for present Miseries,
Have they no feeling of Felicities
That are to come, if that they be in pain,
Let Hope give ease, it will not always reign.
But it is still bad, thou say; take it patiently,
An Age is nothing to Eternity:
Thy time's not here, envy not; though that some
Seem to be happy, their bad Day's to come.
We ought not for to murmur or to pine
At any thing shall please the power Divine
To lay upon us: For my mind is this,
Each Sorrow is an entrance into bliss.
But to be plainer, this our Life's a toy,
That has naught in it worth our (...)
(...) whatsoever our former (...)
Let us (...) more, but for (...) Si^.
CONCLUSION
NOw some men have in this Opinion stood,
That every Passion's natural and good;
But we must make a difference of it then,
And grant that twofold Passions are in men,
One sort unto the noblest things aspiring,
And such as what are merely good desiring.
But this is rather by Gods Inspiration,
Then bred within us at our Generation.
The other as the effects thereof does show,
Does by our own corrupted Nature grow;
For it is headstrong, rash, insatiate,
Wondrous disordered and immoderate.
Then lastly, these are the occasions still
Of all misfortunes, and of every ill.
PRECATIO.
THou that createdst all things in a week,
Great GOD! whose favor I do only seek.
O that my noting of man's humorous Passion,
May work within me some good alteration;
And make me so, for my own Follies, sorry
That I may lead a life unto thy Glory.
Let not Ambition, nor a foul Desire,
Nor Hate, nor Envy, set my heart on fire,
Revenge, nor Choler, no* nor Jealousy,
And keep me from Despair and Cruelty;
Fond Hope expel, and I beseech thee bless
My Soul from Fear, and too much Heaviness;
But give me special Grace to shun the vice,
That is, so common beastly Avarice;
And grant me Power I not only know,
But fly those Evils that from Passion flow;
And let my Muse also in things to come
Sing to thy Glory, Lord, or else be dumb.
A further Talk does still to me remain,
Some more of men's ill Customs to explain.
First, wanton and light headed Vanity;
Next that, C^melian like, Inconstancy,
Then miserable Weakness; lastly, this
Damned Presumption, that so daring is.
But think not, though I some where bitter be,
I count my self from all those Vices free;
Rather imagine it is to me well known,
That here with others faults I tell my own.
Then blame me not, it is out of much good will
I bear to you, and Hatred unto Ill.
Of VANITY.
NO^ I must needs declare their Vanity,
Who build their Treasure and Felecity
On things mere frivolous, as* Honor, Strength,
Pleasure, and Wealth, and Beauty, which at length,
Yea, in short time must fade; high Titles placed
Without desert, are often soon disgraced.
What Is Honor but even smoak*of idle fame,
A thing consisting only in an Name?
And why boast men of Strength, that lasts no longer,
And seeing the brute Creatures are far stronger?
A Woman may bind Sampson with her Charms,
And little David slay a man at Arms.
For God does make, as holy Scriptures speak,
Strong things to be confounded by the weak.
But why in Beauty should men glory so,
As well we may perceive there is many do,
Since there is scarce any, that enjoy the same,
Can keep unto themselves an honest Name?
For worthless matters some are wondrous sad
Whom if I call not Vain, I must term mad.
We see moreover men vainglorious grow,
In Building and Apparel, all is for show;
And yet the Prince that gorgioust in Array,
Must lie as naked as his Groom in Clay.
And though that men to build so curious be,
How worthy of Contempt it is we see,
In that the Arch-King of Heaven, Earth, and all
Was very well contented with a Stall;
Yea, truly I am driven to confess,
Man's Vanities are great, numberless,
Consisting not alone in Words and Works,
But has taken Root within, and also lurks
About the heart; and if it there be sought,
I know it also may be found in thought.
Of INCONSTANCY.
NOw this unconstant Creature, called Man,
Note him well, and tell me if he can,
What his Condition is; observe his deeds,
His Speech and Raiment, yea, and how he feeds:
Try him a Month, a Year, an Age, and when
You have so tried him, say what is he then;
Is his Heart proud or humble, know you where,
Or when he hates, or loves, or stands in fear?
Or who can say [in Conscience I think none]
That this man's words, and deeds, and thoughts are one?
Nay, he of whom you have most trial, when
You see him dying, will you trust him then?
Perhaps you may, yet questionless he leaves you
A mind mis-doubting still, that he deceives you.
Who is so sottish* as to build Salvation
On man, that feeble tottering Foundation?
Or that heeds his Soul's safety, that will lay
His confidence on that false piece of Clay.
Alas! how often had I got Intendments,
And with whole heart said and vowed amendments.
And yet for all my purpose and my Vow,
I am often altered e're my self knows how.
Let Us all confess our Frailty, and implore
Our never repenting God, that evermore
Remains the same, we may be as we ought,
More certain, both in word, and deed, and thought.
I might speak of the changes, which I see
In men's external Fortunes also be:
For this day he has Friends, to morrow none;
Now he has Wealth, and in an hour it is gone.
Some in their Youth there be, have all things store,
And yet do often live till they are poor.
Again, there is some in Youth at Beggars states,
Become in age to be great Potentates.
Of WEAKNESS.
WHat Creature is there born so weak as Man?
Or so unable; tell me, he that can.
Sampson there was, it is true, could fright whole Hosts*
He rent down Azath's barred Gates and Posts,
Whose mighty Arms, unarmed, could bring to pass.
Even with the rotten Jaw Bone of an Ass
A thousands ruin; and yet 'twill be long
Ever he shall thereby prove that man is strong,
Because the strength he seemed to have, was known
To be the Spirit of God, and not his own.
What Creature is there that can worse sustain,
Hunger, or Thirst, or Cold, or Heat, or Pain?
Sure none: and yet in Histories we find,
Till Luxury had weakened thus mankind,
They were much stronger, could endure the Heat,
Travel a long time without Drink or Meat;
And their best Dainties was no costlier thing
Then a wild Root, or water from the Spring,
With which small commons, Nature was content;
Yea, in our Climate people naked went,
And yet, no question, felt as little Cold,
As we, wrapped up in half a dozen fold.
They had no VVastecoats, Night-caps for their heads,
Nor downy Pillows, nor soft Feather-beds:
They scorned as much to have such thing about them,
As we in this Age scorn to be without them.
Gluttonous fare that so the Palate pleases,
Never fill*d their Bodies full of foul Diseases;
Nor strong and pleasing Liquors with excess,
Made them grow weak through beastly Drunkenness.
No lust provoking Meats made them unchaste,
Nor unto carnal Copulation haste.
And this the reason is, which made them be
More healthy, strong, and braver men then we.
'Twas not this strength, of which I meant to speak,
For we are yet another way too weak.
Our minds have lost their magnanimity,
And are grown weak through some infirmity.
Some know the Truth, but dare not to defend it,
[So weak they are] cause others discommend it.
Is there a man so strong, that he forbears
Choler or Envy, when by chance he hears
Himself reproach't, reviled and disgraced?
If there be such a one, he shall be placed
Amongst the Worthies with the foremost three;
For in my judgment, none more worthy be
To have renown for strength, then those that can
On their rebellious Passions play the man.
Is It not a weakness, when some petty losses,
Some hinderance in preferment, or such crosses?
Shall make men grieve? Is It not a weakness when
Adversity shall so disquiet men?
He Is weak too, that's not able to withstand
Any unlawful or unjust Command.
Moreover some, but foolishly precise,
And in my judgment far more weak then wise,
Mis-judge of Poetry, as if the same
Did worthily deserve reproach and blame.
For Poetry, although some, fooled, debase it,
I Am in the mind that Angels do embrace it:
And though God gave't but in part to some,
All shall hav't perfect in the World to come.
Against Posie, how e're the scruple rose,
Rhyme has expressed as sacred things as Prose:
When both in this Age, and in former time,
Prose has been made far more profane then Rhyme.
Yea, and moreover this full well know I,
He that is at any time afraid to dye,
Is in weaker case, and whatsoever he says,
Has but a wavering and a feeble Faith.
Of PRESVMPTION.
MEn in their own Conceits are grown so tall,
That for presumption they do out-pass all.
O what are they that dare for to aspire
Into Gods seat, and if it might be, higher,
That forgive Sins as fast as men can do them,
And make Jehovah be beholden to them!
I Have heard of such, what e're they would, I wist
They can make Saints, they say* of whom they list,
And being made, above the Stars can set them;
Yea, with their own hands make their godds, and eat them.
Man I do know, 'cause I have heard him vaunt,
He is an Elf so proud and arrogant,
That I want words of a sufficient worth,
To paint his most abhorred Vileness forth.
Some will be prying, though they are forbidden,
Into those secrets God meant should be hidden.
So do some Students in Astrology,
Though they can make a fair Apology.
And so do those that very vainly try
To find out Fortunes by their Palmestry;
These do presume, but much more such as say
At this, or that time, comes the Judgment Day.
In praying, men presume, unless they be
With every one in Love and Charity,
Or if in their pet^tions they desire
Such things as are unlawful to require,
Then those great Masters I presumptuous deem,
Who of their knowledge do so well esteem:
They will force others, as the Papists do,
For to allow of their Opinion too.
Others there are, who for because they have Faith,
For to believe it is true the Scripture says*
And do observe the outward Worship duly,
Do think that therein they have pleas^d God truly.
Now these are just, as far as the other wide,
For they Gods worship do by halfs div^de;
And for his due, which is even all the heart,
Do dare presume to offer him a part.
Also in this abominable time
It is amongst us now a common Crime
To flout and scoff at those which we espy,
Willing to shake off humane Vanity.
Who so reviled, scorned or misnam'd,
As some People which are Quakers termed,
That fear God most; but it is no marvel men
Presume so much to wrong his Children, when
As if they feared not his revengeful Rod,
They can blaspheme, and dare to anger God.
Now by these words to some men it may seem
That I the Quakers have in high esteem:
Indeed, if by that Name you understand,
Those whom the vulgar Atheists of this Land
Do daily term, so that is such as are
Forenamed here, and have the greatest care
To know and please their Maker, then it is true
I love them well, for love to them is due.
Then it is also a presumptuous act
With knowledge to commit a sinful fact,
Though never so small for Sins a subtle Elf,
Into our Souls insinuates it self.
And it is certain, that one Sin, though small,
Will make an entrance great enough for all.
In short* Presumption's such a hardening Sin,
That if it seize the heart, and once get in,
My mind is this, 'twill never be purged thence well,
No, not with all the fears and pangs of Hell:
So infinite is this for to unfold,
That should I write and speak till I were old,
I know that I should leave unspoken then,
Most of those humors I have seen in man,
And still confess in him there h^dden be
Thousands of humors more then I can see.
O MAN!
I mused a while, thou were so prone to sining,
But 'twas thy fault I see from the beginning:
And as the Lord himself once said, so still
The imaginations of thy Heart is ill,
That Is one main cause then to presume an Evil,
Thou have the proneness to the Flesh and Devil.
Then since thou art so subject unto Sin,
Shun all occasions that may draw thee in,
Thy flesh with labor, and with fasting tame,
And 'twill not be so subject unto blame,
Prevent the Devils Baits and his Temptations,
With earnest Payers and good Meditations.
So when thy God shall see thou have a will,
And truly do desire to mend what is ill,
He will except it for his Sons dear sake,
And thee more willing and more able make.
He Will make thy Soul, were it thrice more defiled,
As innocent as the new born Child.
But if thou without care or heed, do lean
Unto those Lust of Flesh that are unclean.
If thou take pleasure, and delight to do them,
Quite giving over thy desires unto them,
They both in Soul and Body too will make thee*
So foul a Leper that God will forsake thee,
His holy Angels and his Saints abhor thee,
And only Devils make entreaty for thee.
Fair Virtue the Shepherd's MISTRESS.
The Shepherd to his Mistress.
HAle thou fairest of all Creatures,
Upon whom the Sun does shine,
Model of all rairest Features,
And Perfections most Divine;
Thrice all-hale and blessed be
Those that love and honor thee.
By thy Beauty I have gained
To behold the best Perfections,
By thy Love I have obtained
To enjoy the best affections,
And my Tongue to sing thy praise,
Love and Beauty thus does raise.
What, although in Rustic Shadows
I a Shepherds breeding had,
And confined to these Meadows,
So in homespun Russet clad,
Such as I have now and then,
Dared as much as greater men.
On this Glass of thy Perfection,
If that any Women pry,
Let them thereby take direction
To adorn themselves thereby.
And if ought amiss they view,
Let them dress themselves anew.
Young men may by this acquainted,
With the truest Beauties grow,
So the counterfeit and painted
They may shun, when them they know.
But the way all will not find,
For some Eyes have, yet are blind
Those that Mistresses are named,
And for that suspected be,
Shall not need to be ashamed,
If they pattern take by thee;
Neither shall their Servant fear
Favors openly to wear.
Thou to no man favor dainest,
But what is fitting to bestow,
Neither Servants entertainest,
That can ever wanton grow;
For the more they look on thee,
Their desires still bettered be.
I am no Italian lover,
That will mew thee in a Goal,
But thy Beauty I discover,
English-like, without a vail:
If thou may be won away,
Win and wear thee he that may.
Yet in this thou may believe me,
So indifferent though I seem,
Death with tortures would not grieve me
More, then loss of thy esteem.
For if Virtue me forsake,
All a scorn of me will make.
The MISTRESS of the SHEPHERD.
NOw while other men complaining,
Tell their Mistresses disdaining,
Free from care I write a Story,
Only of her worth and glory.
And wh^le most are most untoward,
Peevish, vain, unconstant, froward,
While their best Contentments bring
Naught, but after sorrowing:
She those childish humors slighting,
Has conditions so delighting,
And does so my bliss endeavor,
As my joy increases ever.
Love she can, and does, but so
As she will not overthrow
Love's content by any Folly,
Or by Deeds that are unholy.
Dotingly, she never affects,
Neither willingly neglects
Honest love, but means does find*
With discretion, to be kind.
Goodness more delights her, than
All the mask of Folly can.
Fond she hates to appear,
Though she hold her Fr^end as dear,
As her part of Life unspent,
Or the best of her content.
If the heat of youthful Fires
Warm her Blood with those desires,
Which are by the course of Nature
Stirred in every perfect Creature:
As those Pass^ons kindle so,
Does heavens Grace and Reason grow,
Abler to suppress in her
Those rebellions, and they stir
Never more affection, then
One good ^hought allays again.
I could say* so chaste is she,
As the new blown Roses be,
Or the drifts of Snow, that non
Ever touched or looked upon.
Malice never lets she in,
Neither hates she ought but Sin.
Envy, if she could admit,
There Is no means to nourish it;
For her gentle heart is pleased,
When she knows another's eased.
And there is none who ever got
That perfection she has not;
So that no cause is there, why
She should any one envy.
Mildly angry she will appear*
That the baser Rout may fear
Through presumption to misdo,
Yet she often feigns that too:
But let wrong be whatsoever.
She gives way to Choler never.
If she ever craved of Fate,
To obtain a higher state,
[Or ambitiously were given]
Sure 'twas but to climb to Heaven.
Pride is from her Heart, as far
As the Poles in distance are,
For her worth; nor all this praise
Can her humble Spirit raise,
Less to prise me than before,
Or her self to value more.
Were she vain, she might allege
'Twere her Sexes Privilege.
But she is such, as [doubtless] no man
Knows less Folly in a Woman.
To prevent a being Idle,
Sometimes with her curious Needle,
[Though it be her meanest glory]
She then lines some antique story.
Other while again, she rather
Labors with delight to gather
Knowledge from such learned Writs,
As are left by famous Wits,
Where she chiefly seeks to know
God, her self, and what we owe
To our Neighbor, since with these
Come all needful knowledges.
She with Adam, never will
Long to learn both good and ill:
But her state well understood.
Rests her self content with good.
Avarice so hates she.
As the loathsom^st that be;
Since she knows it is an ill,
That does ripest Virtue kill;
And where ever it comes to rest,
Though in some strict Matrons breast,
Such are hired to any thing.
If that you but Gold can bring.
If you think she Jealouse be,
You are wide, for credit me,
Her strongest Jealousies naught are,
Other then an honest care
Of her Friends; and most can tell,
Who so wants that, loves not well.
Cruelty her Soul detests,
For within her Bosom rests
Noble p^ty, usher^d by
An unequal Courtesy.
And is grieved at good men's moan,
As the grief were all her own.
Just she is, so just, that I
Know she will not wrong a Fly,
Or oppress the meanest thing,
To be Mistress to a King.
If our Paint^^ could include
Temperance and Fort^tude
In one Picture, she would fit
For the ^once to pattern it.
Patient is the Lamb is she,
Harmless as the Turtles be;
Yea, so largely stored with all
Which we Mortals, goodness call:
That if ever Virtue were,
Or may be incarnate here.
This is she, whose pra^^^!
Offer to Eternity.
Though discreetly speak she can,
She Will be silent, rather than
Talk, while others may be heard,
As if she did hate, or feared
Their condition, who will force
All to wait on their discourse.
If she smile, or merry be,
All about her are as she:
For each looker on* takes part
Of the joy that is in her Heart.
If she grieve, or you but spy
Sadness weeping through her Eye,
Such a Grace it seems to borrow,
That you will fall in love with Sorrow.
And if you should mark again,
Her discreet behavior, when
She finds Reason to repent
Some wrong, pleaded argument,
She so temperately lets all
Her mis-held Opinions fall,
And can with such mildness bow,
As 'twill more enamour you,
Then her knowledge: for there are
Pleasing Sweets, without compare,
In such yieldings, which do prove
VV^t* Humility and Love;
Yea* by those mistakings, you
Her cond^tions so shall know.
As 'twill make her more endeared,
Then if she had never erred.
These are Beauties that shall last,
When the crimson Blood shall waste,
Or the shining Hair wax gray,
Or with Age be worn away.
If you truly note her Face,
You shall find it has a grace,
Neither wanton, nor over serious,
Nor too yielding, nor imperious;
But with such a Feature blessed,
It is that which pleases best.
Her perfection in each part,
I alone except her Heart;
For among all Women kind.
Such as here is is hard to find.
It Is not, it is not those rare Graces
That do lurk in VVomens Faces:
It Is not a displayed perfection,
Youthful Eyes, nor clear Complexion,
Nor a Skin smooth, Satten-^ike,
Nor a dainty rosy Cheek
That to wantonness can move
Such as victoriously do love:
Beauty rather gently draws
VVild Desires to Reasons Laws.
Beauty never tempts men
To Lasciviousness, but when
Careless Idleness has brought
Wicked longings into thought.
Nor does Youth, or heat of Blood,
Make men prove what is not good,
Nor the strength, of which they vaunt,
It Is the strength and power they want:
And the baseness of the mind
Makes their brint Desires inclined,
To pursue those vain delights,
Which affect their Appetites.
I have Beauties to unfold,
That deserve a Pen of ^old,
Sweets that never dreamed of were,
Things unknown, and such as Ear
Never heard a Measure sound,
Since the Sun first run his round.
Speak I can* yet think I more*
Words compared with thoughts are poor;
And I find, had I begun
Such a strein, it would be done
When we number all the Sands
VVash't o^e perjured Goodwins Lands;
For of things I should indite,
Which I know are infinite.
And besides, it seems to me
That your Ears nigh tired be:
I perceive, the Fire that charmeth
And inspireth me, scarce warmeth
Your chil Hearts: Nay, sure were I
Melted into Posie*
I should not a measure h^t,
[Thoug^ Apollo prompted it]
Which should able be to leave
That in you, which I conceive.
Now my Words I therefore cease,
Go my mounting Thoughts in peace.
The SHEPHERD.
TO woe my noble Mi^tress, (...) neither
Rings, Bracelets, Jewels, (...), nor Feather.
No place of Office or Command I k^^p,
But this my little Fl^ck of homely (...):
And in word, the sum of all my (...),
Is this, I am the Ma^ter of my (...).
When merry Birds, with Music strains
The Spring had well-com'd in,
And Flowers in the Woods and Plains
To deck them, did begin
My Love and I, on whom suspicion Eyes
Had set a many Spies.
To cosen all, we strove,
And seen of none* we got alone
Into a shady Grove.
With Hand in Hand, alone, we walked,
And of each other eyed;
Of Love and Passions, past, we talked,
Which our poor Hearts had tried.
Our Souls infused into each other were,
And what may be her care,
Did my more sorrow breed:
One mind we had: One Faith we said,
And both in one agreed.
Her dainty Palm I gently pressed,
And with her Lips I played,
My Cheek upon her panting Breast,
And on her Neck I laid;
And yet we had no sense of wanton Lust,
Nor did we then mistrust
The poison in the sweet.
Our Bodies wrought: So close we thought,
Because our Souls should meet.
But Kissing and embracing, we
So long together staid,
Her touches all enflamed me,
That I had almost straid.
My hands presumed ^o far, they were too bold,
My Tongue unwisely told,
How much my Heart was changed,
And Virtue quite: was put to flight,
Or for the time estranged.
Oh what are we! if in our strength,
We over boldly trust;
The strongest sorts will yield at length,
And so our Virtues must.
In me no force of Reason had prevailed,
If she had also failed:
But ere I further strayed,
She sighing, kissed: my naked Wrist,
And thus in Tears she said.
Sweet heart [quoth she] if in thy Breast
Those Virtues real be,
Which hitherto thou have professed,
And I believed in thee.
Thy self and me, oh, seek not to abuse,
Whilst thee I thus refuse,
In hotter Flames I frye;
Yet let us not: our true love spot.
Oh rather let me dye.
For if thy Heart should fall from good,
What would become of mine?
As strong a Passion stirs my Blood,
As can distemper thine.
Yet in my Breast this rage I smother would,
Though it consume me should,
And my desires contain.
For where we see: Such breaches be,
They sedom stop again.
Are we two, that have so long
Each others Love embraced,
And never did Affection wrong,
Nor think a thought unchaste?
And shall, oh shall we now our matchless joy,
For one poor touch, destroy,
And all content forego;
Oh no, my dear: Sweetheart forbear,
I will not lose thee so.
For should we do a deed so base,
[As it can never be]
I could no more have seen thy Face,
Nor would thou look on me.
I should of all our Passions grow ashamed,
And blush when (...) named;
Yes, [though thou (...) were]
I being naught: A jealous thought
Would still torment my Heart.
What goodly thing do we obtain,
If I consent to thee;
Bare Joys we lose, and what we gain,
But common Pleasures be;
Yea, those [some say] who are to lust inclined
Drive Love out of the mind,
And so much Reason miss,
That they admire: what kind of Fire
A chaste Affection is.
No vulgar bliss I aimed at
When first I heard thee woe;
I Will never p^is^ a man for that,
Which every Groom can do.
If that be Love* the basest men that be
Do love as well as we,
Who if we bear us well
Do pass them: as (...) men
In glory do excel.
Whilst thus she spoke, a cruel band
Of Passions ceased my Soul,
And what one seemed to command,
Another did control.
Twixt good and (...), I did divided lie,
But as I raised mine Eye,
In her me thought I saw
Those Virtues shine: whose rays divine
First gave desire a Law.
With that I felt the blush of shame
Into my cheek return.
And love did with a chaster flame
Within my Bosom burn;
My Soul her light of Reason had renewed,
And by those beams I viewed,
How slily Lust ensnares,
And all the Fires: of ill desires
I quenched with my Tears.
Go wantons now, and flout at this
My coldness, if you list;
Vain Fools, you never knew the bliss
That does in love consist:
You sigh, and weep, and labor to enjoy
A shade, a dream, a toy.
Poor folly you pursue,
And are unblest: Since every Beast
In pleasure equals you.
You never took so rich content
In all your wanton play
As this to me has Pleasure lent,
That chaste she went away.
For as some Sins, which we committed have.
Sharp stings behind them leave,
Whereby we vexed are,
So ill suppressed: begets rest,
And Peace without compare.
The Child's Apology, in case of Espousals.
CHildren owe much, I must confess it is true,
And a great Debt is to the Parents due;
But yet my Parents should not be so cruel.
As to take from me that high prized Jewel,
Of Liberty in choice, whereon depends
The main contentment that Heaven here lends.
For if my Parents, him I loath should choose,
It Is lawful, yea, my duty to refuse,
Else how shall I lead so upright a Life,
As is enjoined to the Man and Wife.
For I do think, it is not only meant,
Children should ask, but Parents should consent,
And that they err, their Duty as much breaking*
In not consenting, as they for not speaking.
Would Parents [in this Age] have us begin
To take, by their Eyes, our Affections in,
Who quite forgetting they were ever Young,
Would have us, Children, dote with them on Dung.
It is imposible it should be thus,
For we are ruled by Love, not Love by us,
Now with what follows, thus conclude we do,
And we have Reason for it* and Conscience too.
No Parent may his Child's just suit deny,
On his bare Will, without good reason why,
Nor he, so used, be disobedient thought,
If unapproved, he take the match he sought.
The precious time is short, and will away*
Let us enjoy each other while we may.
Care thrives* Age creeps on* men are but shades,
Joys lessen* Youth decays, and Beauty fades,
New turns come on the old returns never,
If we let our's go past, it is past forever.
A SONG.
NOw young man thy Days and thy Glories appear,
Like Sunshine and Blosoms in Spring of the year;
Thy vigor of Body, thy Spirits, thy Wit,
Are perfect and sound, and imtroubled yet.
Now then, O now then! if safety thou love,
Mind thou, O mind thou thy Maker above!
Mispend not a Morning so excellent clear,
Never [for ever] was Happiness here.
Thy Noontide of Life has but little delight,
And Sorrows on Sorrow will follow at Night.
Now then, O now then! if safety thou love,
Mind thou, O mind thou thy Maker above!
That strength and those Beauties that grace thee to day,
To morrow may perish and vanish away.
Thy Wealth, or thy Pleasures or Friends that now be.
May waste, or deceive, or be Traitors to thee.
No then, O now then, etc.
Mind thou, O mind thou, etc.
Thy Joints are yet nimble, thy Sinnews unslack.
And marrow unwasted does stregthen thy back:
Thy Youth from Diseases preserves the Brain,
And Blood with free passages plumps every Vein.
Now then, O now then, etc.
B^t [trust me] it will not forever be so,
Those Arms that are m^ghty shall feebler grow;
Those Legs that so proudly suppo^teth thee now,
With Age or Diseases w^ll stagger and bow.
Now then, O now then, etc.
Then all those rare Features now graceful in thee*
Shall [plowed with times Furrows] quite ruined be:
Those Fancies that lull with Dreams of delight,
Will trouble thy quiet the comfortless night.
Now then, O now then, etc.
Those tress^ of Hair which thy Youth does adorn,
Will look like the Meals in a winterly Morn;
And where Red and White intermixed did grow,
Dull paleness, a deadly Complexion, will show.
Now then, O now then, etc.
Thy Forehead imperious, whereon we now view,
A smoothnes, and whiteness, enalmed with blew,
Will loose that Perfection which Youth now maintains.
And change it for hollowness* for wrinkles and stains.
Now then, O now then, etc.
Those Eyes, which so many so much did admire,
And with strange Affections set many on Fire
Shut up in that Darkness, which Age will constrain,
Shall never see Mortal, no, never aga^n.
Now then, O now then, etc,
Those Lips, whereon Beauty so ful^y discloses
The color and sweetness of Rubie^ and Roses;
Instead of that here, w^ll a gashliness wear,
And none shall believe what Perfection was there.
Now then, O now then, etc.
Thy Teeth that stood firmly like Pearls in a row,
Shall rotten and scattered disorderly grow.
That gate, and those ^estures, that win thee such grace*
Will turn to a feeble and staggering pac^.
Now then, O now then, etc.
By these Imperfections, old Age will prevail,
Thy Marrow, thy Sinnews, and Spirits will fail,
And nothing is left thee, when those are once spent,
To give* or thy self, or another content.
Now then, O now then, etc.
That Lust which thy Youth can so hardly fore-go.
Will leave thee and leave thee Repentance and Woe;
And then in thy ^olly no joy can thou have.
Nor hope other rest, then a comfortless Grave.
Now then, O now then, etc.
For next, shall thy Breath be quite taken away,
Thy Flesh turned to Dust, and that Dust turned to Clay;
And those that thou have loved, and share of thy store,
Shall leave thee forget thee* and mind thee no more.
Now then, O now then, etc.
And yet if in time thou remember not this,
The slenderest part of thy Sorrow it i^.
Thy Soul to a torture more fearful shall wen^,
Has ever and ever, and never an end.
Now then* O now then* if safety thou love,
Mind thou, O mind thou thy Maker above.
A Passage taken out of Wither's Motto.
WHat if America's large tract of Ground*
And all those Isles adjoining* lately found,
[VVhich we more truly may a Desert call,
Then any of the World's more civil pale]
What then if there the Wilderness do lie*
To which the Woman and her Son must fl^e,
To 'scape the Dragon's fury, and there 'bide.
Till Europe's thankless Nations [full of Pride,
And all Abominations] scourged are
With Barbarism, as their Neighbors were.
The Verses before* are these
The Eastern Kingdoms had their Times t^ flourish*
The Gre^cian Empire rising* saw them perish*
That f^ll* and then the R^man Pride began,
Now scourged by the Race of Ottom^n.
Who live in Sin, are all but Thieves to Heaven,
And Earth they steal from God, and take unsiven.
Good men they rob* and such as live upright,
And [being Bastards] share the free man's right;
They Are all as Owners, in the Owner's stead,
And [like to Dogs] devour the Childrens Bread.
Lord! what I have, let me enjoy in thee,
And thee in it, or else take it from me.
DIVINE POEMS, selected from the Works of Francis Quarls.
I care not so my Kernel relish well,
How slender be the Substance of my Shell;
My heart being virtuous, let my Face be wane,
I am to God, I only seem to man.
MEDITATION.
HOw great's the Love of God unto his Creature
Or is his Wisdom, or his Mercy greater?
I know not whether. O! the exceeding love
Of highest God, that from his Throne above
Will send the brightness of his Grace to those,
That grope in Darkness, and his Grace oppose.
What thing is Man, that God's regard is such?
Or why should Heaven love rechless man so much?
Why? what are men but quickened lumps of Earth.
A feast for Worms, a buble full of Mirth.
A Looking-glass for grief a (...),
A painted Tomb with (...),
A map of Death, a burden of a Song,
A VVinters dust, a Worm of five Foot long,
Begot in Sin, in darkness nourisht, born
In sorrow, naked, shiftless and forlorn;
His first Voice [heard] is crying for Relief,
Alas! he comes into a world of Grief;
His Age is sinful, and his Youth is vain,
His Life's a punishment, his Death's a pain.
Death respects Kings and Beggars both alike,
Uncertain when, but certain she will strike.
Death is a minute full of sudden Sorrow;
Then live to day, as thou may dye to morrow.
The World's a body, each Man a member is,
To add some measure to the public bliss,
Wisdom is sold for sweet Pleasures, for Pain;
Who lives but to himself, he lives in vain.
Man in himself's a little World alone,
His Soul's the Court, or high imperial Throne,
Wherein, as Empress, sits the Unde^^^^nding,
Gently directing, yet with awe, commanding
Her handmaids will affections, Maids of Honor,
All following close, and duly waiting on her.
But Sin, that always envied man's condition,
Within this Kingdom raised up Division.
Vouchsafe [Lord] in this little World of mine,
To reign, that I may reign with thee in thine.
Heathen Godds.
THe Egyptians, God did implore;
Godd Assus the Chaldeans did adore;
Babel to the devouring Dragon seeks,
The Arabians, Astaroth; Juno the Greeks;
The name of Bellus the Assyrians hallow;
The Troyjons, Vesta, Corinth, wise Apollo;
The Arginians Sacrifice unto the Sun;
To light-foot Mercury bows Macedon;
To Godd Volumus, lovers bend their Knee;
To Pavor, those that faint and fearful be;
Who pray for Health and Strength, to Murcia those;
And to Victoria, they that fear to lose;
To Muta, they that fear a woman's Tongue;
To great Lucina, Women great with young;
To Esculapis, they that live oppressed;
And such to Q^ies, that desire rest.
Implore those Godds, that list to howl and bark;
They bow to Dagon, Dagon to the Ark:
But he to whom the Seal of Mercy^s given,
Adores Jehovah the great God of Heaven.
Mortality.
CAn he be Fair, that withers at a blast?
Or he be Strong, that airy Breath can cast?
Can he be Wise, that knows not how to ^ive?
Or he be Rich, that nothing has to give?
Can he be Young, that*s feeble, weak and wane?
So fair, strong wise, so rich, so young is Man.
Why brag'st thou then, thou worm of five F^^t long*
Thou Art neither fair, strong, wise, nor rich, nor (...).
Like to the Damask Rose you see,
Or like the blossom on a Tree.
Or like the dainty Flower ^n May,
Or like the morning to the (...),
Or like the Sun or like the shade,
Or like the Gourd which J^^as (...)*
Even such is man, whose (...) spun,
Drawn out, and out, and so is done.
The Rose withers, the blossom blast (...),
The Flower fa^es* the morning hastes,
The Sun s^ts the Shadow flees.
The Gourd (...), and Man he dies.
Like to the blaze of fond delight.
Or like a Morning, clear and bright,
Or like a Frost, or like a Shower,
Or like the pride of Babel's Tower,
Or like the Hour that guides the Time,
Or like the Beauty in her prime:
Even such is man, whose glory lends
His Life a blaze, or two, and ends.
Delights vanish, the Morn o'er-casteth,
The Frosts breaks, the Shower hastes,
The Tower falls, the Hour sp^nds,
The Beauty fades, and man's Life ends.
Of Charity.
IN loving God, if I neglect my Neighbor,
My love has lost his proof, and I my labor.
My Zeal, my Faith, my Hope, that never fa^ls me
[If Charity be wanting] naught avails me
Lord! ^n my Soul a Spirit of Love create me*
And I will love my Brother, if he hate me.
In Temptation.
ARt thou opposed to thine (...)
March bravely on* thy (...):
Thou Art Heaven^s Champion to (...)
Who calls thee forth, will give thee (...)
God seeks by conquest (...)
Will win enough, fight thou, or (...).
In Sla^d^r.
IF Winter fortunes (...)
And t^p their (...)
Thy t^nder Name (...)
Know Heaven (...) the (...).
Of Death.
ME thinks I see that nimble aged Sire,
Pass swiftly by, with Feet unapt to tire.
Upon his Head an Hour glass he wears,
And in his wrinkled hand a Sithe he bea^s,
Both instruments to take the Lives from men,
The One shows with what, the other shows when*
Methinks I see my dearest Friends lament,
With sighs, and tears, and woeful drysiment.
My tender Wife and Children standing by,
Dewing the Bed whereupon I lie,
Methinks I hear a Voice in secret say,
The Glass is run, and thou must dye to day.
Deceitful World.
WHat is the World a great exchange of Ware.
Wherein all sorts and Sexes cheapening are?
The Flesh, the Devil, sit and cry, What lack ye?
When most they fawn, they most intend to rack ye.
The VVares, are cups of Joys, and beds of Pleasure,
Plenty of choice down weight, and flowing measure;
A Soul's the price, but they give time to pay
Upon the deathbed, on the dying Day:
Hard is the Bargain, and unjust the Measure.
When as the Price so much out-lasts the Pleasure.
The Jo^s that are on Earth's are Counterfe^t^*
If ought be true, it is this, they are true Deceits;
They daily dip within thy Dish, and cry,
Who has betrayed thee? Master, It is I.
Hell Torments
ALl words come short t'express the pains of those
That rage in Hell, enwrapt in endless woes,
Where time no end, and plagues find no exemption;
Where cries admit no help, nor place redemption,
Where wretched Souls to Tortures bound shall be*
Serving a world of Years, and not be free.
There Is nothing heard, but yells and sudden cries,
Where Fire never slacks, nor worm ever dies.
But where this Hell is placed [my muse stop there]
Lord! show me what it is, but never where.
In Hell no Life, in Heaven no Death there is;
In Earth both Life and Death, both bal and bliss;
In Heaven's all Life, no end, nor new supplying;
In Hell's all Death, and yet there is no dying.
Earth like a partial Ambodexter, does
Prepare for Death, or Life prepares for both.
Christ's Death.
ANd am I here, and my Redeemer gone?
Can he be dead, and is not my Life done?
Was he tormented in excess of measure?
And do I live yet, and yet live in pleasure?
Alas! could Sinners find out never a one
More fit then thee for them to spit upon?
Did thy Cheeks en^ertain a Traitors lips?
Was thy dear Body scourged, and torn with Whips,
Till that the guiltless Blood came trickling after?
And did thy fainting Brows shoot Blood and Water?
Were thou [Lord] hanged upon the cursed Tree?
O world of grief! and was all this for me?
Burst forth my Tears into a world of Sorrow,
And let my Nights of grief find never a Morrow.
Heaven's Glory.
WHen I behold, and well advise upon
The wise man's Speech; There Is naught beneath the Sun
But Vanity; my Soul rebels within,
And loathes the Dunghill prison she is in.
But when I look to New Jerusalem,
VVherein'^ reserved my Crown, my Diadem.
O! what a Heaven of bliss my Soul enjoyes
On sudden, wrapped into that Heaven of Joys,
Where ravished [in the depth of meditation]
She well discerns with Eye of Contemplation,
The glory of God in his imperial Seat,
Full* strong in Might, in Majesty complete,
Where troops of Powers, Virtues, Cherubims,
Angels, Archangels, Saints and Seraphims,
Are chaunting Praises to their heavenly King,
Where Hallelujah they forever Sing.
Whoever smelt the breath of morning Flowers,
New sweetened with the dash of twilight Showers,
Or pounded Amber, or the flowering Thyme,
Or purple Violets in the proudest prime,
Or swelling Clusters from the Cypress Tree;
So sweet's my Love; aye! far more sweet is he.
Dismount you Quire of Angels* come,
With men your Joves divide;
Heaven never showed so sweet a Groom,
Nor Earth so fair a Bride.
Hark, Hark, I hear that thrice Celestial voice,
Wherein my Spirits wrapped with Joys, rejoice.
A Voice that tells me my Beloved's mie;
I know the Music by the Majesty:
Behold he comes, it is not my blemished Face
Can slack the swiftness of his winged pace:
Behold he comes, his Trumpet does proclaim*
He comes with speed, a truer Love never came.
The Imperfections of my present state.
Come forth my Joy, what bold affront of Fear*
Ca^ ^^^ght thy Soul, and I thy Champion here?
It Is I that calls, it is I thy Bridegroom calls thee;
Betide it me, whatever it befalls thee;
The Winter of thy sharp Affliction's gone*
Why fear thou Cold, and art so near the Son.
Heaven only knows the Bliss my Soul enjoyes,
T'and Earth^s too dull to apprend such Joys*
Then let thy Breath like Flaggons of strong wine*
Relieve and comfort this poor Heart of mine;
For I am sick, till time [that does delay
Our Marriage] being our joyful marriage day.
CONCLUSION.
GAsp not for Honor, wish no blas^ng Glory,
For these will perish in an Ages story,
Nor yet for power; Power may be carv^d
To Fools, as well as thee that have deserved.
Thirst not for Lands* nor Money wish for non;
For Wealth is neither lasting, nor our own.
Riches are fair Inticements to deceive us;
They flatter while we live, and dying leave us,
Nor House, nor Land* nor measured heaps of Wealth
Can render to a dying man his Heal^h.
And what is Life a bubble full of Care,
Which prik't by Death, straight enters into Air.
The Author's Dream.
MY Sins are like the Hairs upon my Head,
And raise their Audit to as high a score;
In this they differ, these do daily shed*
But ah! my Sins grow daily more and more.
If by my Hairs thou number out my Sins,
Heaven, make me bold, before the Day begins.
My Sins are like the Sands upon the Shore,
Which every Ebb lies open to the Eye;
In this they differ, those are covered over
With every Tide; my Sins still open lie.
If thou will make my Head a Sea of Tears,
O! they will hide the Sins of all my Years.
My Sins are like the Stars within the Skies,
In view, in number even as bright as great;
In this they differ, these do set and rise;
But ah! my Sins do rise and never set.
Shine Son of Glory and my Sins are gone,
Like twinkling Stars before the rising Sun.
ESSAIES AND Religious Meditations OF Sir FRANCIS BACON, Knight, Attorney
General to King JAMES the first.

Glory and Honor are the Spurs to Virtue.

As generally Mettel is more precious than Stone, and yet a Diamond is more
precious than Gold, so generally in warmer Climates [it has been noted] the
People are more Wise; but in the Northren Climate, the Wits of chief are
greater.

Printed in the Year 1688.

I. Of DEATH.
MEn fear Death, as Children fear to go in the dark; and as that natural Fear
in Children is increased with Tales, so is the other. Certainly, the fear of
Death, is Contemplation of the cause of it, yet the fear of it for it self, is
weak. You shall read in some of the Friars Books, of Mortification, That a man
should think with himself, what the the pain is, if he have but his Fingers end
pressed or tortured, and thereby imagine what the pains of Death are, when the
whole Body is corrupted and dissolved; when many times Death passes wi^h less
pain, then the torture of a Limb. For the most Vital parts, are not the
quickest of sense. Groans and Convulsions, and a discolored Face, and Friends
weeping and Blacks, and Obsequies and the like, show Death terrible. It is
worthy the observing, that there is no Passion in the mind of Man so weak, but
masters the Fear of Death; and therefore Death is no such Enemy, when a man
has so many Followers about him, that can win the combat of him. Revenge
triumphs over Death; Love esteems it not; Honor aspireth to it; delivery from
Ignominy, chooses it; Grief flies to it; Fear pre-occupateth it. It is no less
worthy to observe, how little alteration in good Spirits the approaches of
Death make: but they are the same till the last. It is as natural to dye, as to
be born, and to a little Infant, perhaps the one is as painful as the other.

II. Of CVNNING.
WE take Cunning for a sinister or crooked Wisdom; and certainly, there is a
great difference between a Cunning Man, and a Wise Man, not only in point of
Honesty, but in point of Ability. There are some that are good Canvasses, and
Factious, that are otherwise weak men. Aga^n, it is one thing to understand
Persons, and another thing to understand Matters: ^or many are perfect in men's
Humors, that are not greatly capable of the real part of Business, which is
the Constitution of one that has studied Men more then Books. Such men are
fitter for Practice, then for Counsel, and they are good but in their own
alley; turn them to new men, and they have lost their aim. Many are the
differences between Cunning and Wisdom, and it were a good deed to set them
down; for that nothing does more hurt in State, then that cunning men pass for
wife.

III. Of Marriage, and Single Life.
HE that has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune, for they are
Impediments to great Enterprises, either of Virtue or Mischief. Certainly the
best Works, and of greatest Merit, for the public, have proceeded from the
unmarried, or childless men, which have sought Eternity in Memory, and not in
Posterity; and which both, in Affection and Means, have married, and endowed
the publ^ck: Yet some there are, that lead a single Life, whose Thoughts do end
with themselves, and do account future times Impertinencies. Nay, there are
some others, that esteem Wife and Children but as B^lls of Charges. But the
most ordinary cause of a single Life, is Liberty, especially in certain
Self-pleasing and humorous Minds, which are so sensible of every Restriction,
as they will go near to think their Girdles and Garters to be Bands and
Shackles. Unmarried men are best Friends, best Masters; not always best
Subjects, for they are like to run away: and almost all Fugitives are of that
condition. Certainly, Wife and Children are a kind of Discipline of Humanity;
and single men are more Cruel and Hard-hearted; good to make severe
Inquisitors. Grave Natures led by Custom, and therefore constant, are commonly
loving Husbands. Chaste women are often proud, and froward, as presuming upon
the merit of their Chastity. It is one of the best Bands both of Chastity and
Obedience in the Wife, if she think her Husband wise, which she will never do,
if she find him jealous. Wives are Young men's Mistresses, Companions to middle
Age, and old men's Nurses. So as a man may have a Quarrel to marry when he will:
but yet, he was reputed one of the wise men, that made answer to the Question,
when a man should marry: A Young man not yet, an Elder man not at all -- But
hear Quarles, A woman's Rule should be of such a fashion,
Only to guide her Household, and her Passion,
And her Obedience never's out of Season,
So long as either Husband lasts, or Reason.
Ill thrives that hopeless Family* that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.
I know not which live most unnatural Lives,
Obeying Husbands, or commanding Wives.


IV. Of Parents and Children.
THe Joys of Parents are secret, and so are their Griefs and Fears: they cannot
utter the one, nor will they utter the other. Children sweeten Labors, but
they make Misfortunes more bitter: they increase the Cares of Life, but they
mittigate the remembrance of Death. The Perpetuity by Generation is common to
Beacts, but Memory, Merit and noble Works are proper to men. They that are the
first raisers of their House, are most indulgent toward their Children,
beholding them as the continuance, not only of their Kind but of their Work;
and so both Children and Creatures. The difference of Affection in Parents*
toward their several Children, is many times unequal, and sometimes unworthy;
especially in the Mother, as Solomon says, A wise Son rejoices the Father,
but an ungracious Son shames the Mother A man shall see, where there is a House
full of Children, one or two of the eldest respected, and the youngest made
Wantons, but in the middle, some that are as it were forgotten, who
nevertheless p^ove the best. The liliberality of Parents in allowance toward
their Children, is an harmful Error, makes them base, acquaints them with
Shifts, makes them sort with mean company; and makes them Surfeit more when
they come to plenty. And therefore the Proof is best, when men keep their
Authority toward their Children, but not their Purse.

V. Of Nobility.
NOw Nobility is but the act of Power, but ancient Nobility is the act of Time.
The first Ra^sers of Fortunes are commonly more Virtuous, but less Innocent
then their Descendants. For there is rarely rising but by commixture of good
and evil Arts. But it is reason the Memory of their Virtues remain to their
Posterities, and their Faults dye with themselves. Nobility of Birth commonly
abateth Industry; and he that is not industrous envieth him that is; besides,
noble Persons cannot go much h^gher; and he that stands at a stay, when
others rise, can hardly forbear motions of Envy. On the other side, Nobility
extinguisheth the passive Envy of others toward them, because they are in
possession of Honor, and Envy is as the Sun beams, that beat more upon a
rising Ground, then upon a level. A great Nobillity adds majesty to a
Monarch, but deminisheth Power, and puts Life and Spirit into People, but
presses their Fortunes. Certainly* Kings that have able me^ of their Nobility,
shall find ^ase in employing them and a better slide into their Business: For
People naturally bend to them, as born in some sort to command.

VI. Of Great Place.
MEn in great Place, are thrice Servants; Servants of the ^overaign of State,
Servants of Business, and Servants of Fame; so as they have no freedom, neither
in their Persons, nor in their Times, nor in their Actions. ^t ^s a strange
desire to seek Power, and to lose Liberty, or to seek power over others, and to
lose Power over a man's self: The rising unto Place, is laborious, and by pains
men came to greater pains, and it is sometimes base: And by Indignities men
came to Dignities: The standing is slippery, and the regress is either a
downfall, or an Eclipse, which is a Melancholy thing. Nay, retire men cannot,
when they would, neither will they, when it were Reason, but are impatient of
privateness, even in Age and Sickness, which require the Shadow. Certainly,
great Persons had need to borrow other men's Opinions to think themselves happy:
for if they judge by their own feeling, they cannot find it; but if they think
with themselves what other men think of them, and that other men would fain be
as they are, then they are happy, as it were, by Report, when perhaps they find
the contrary within; for they are the first that find their own Griefs, though
they be the last that find their own Faults. Certainly, men in great ^ortunes
are Strangers to themselves* and while they are in the puzzle of Business, they
have no time to tend their Health, either of Body or Mind. Power to do good* is
the true and lawful end of aspiring. Merit is the end of man's motion; and
Conscience of Merit is the accomplishment of man's Rest. For if a man can in
any measure be pertaker of Gods Theater, he shall likewise be pertaker of Gods
Rest. In the discharge of thy Place, set before thee the best Examples, for
Imitation is a Globe of Precepts. And after a time, set before thee thine own
Example, and examine thy self strictly, whether thou did not best at first
seek to make thy Course regular, that men may know beforehand what they may
expect: but be not too positive, and express thy self well, when thou
digressest from thy Rule. Embrace and invite Helps and Intelligence, touching
the execution of thy Place, and do not drive away such as bring thee
Information, as medlers, but accept them in good part. The Vices of Authority
are chiefly four; Delays, Corruptions, Roughness and Facility; For Delays give
easy access, keep times appointed, go through with that which is in hand, and
interlace not Business but upon necessity. For Corruption, do not only bind
thine own Hands, or thy Servants hand, that may take, but bind the hands of
them that should offer; for Integrity used, does the one, and Integrity
professed, with a manifest detestation of Bribrey does the other. And avoid not
only the Fault, but the Suspicion: For Roughness, it is a needless cause of
discontent. Severity breeds Fear, but Roughness breeds Hate. Even Reproofs
from Authority, ought to be grave, and not taunting. As for Facility, it is
worse then Bribery; for Bribes come but now and then, but if Imp^^tunity, or
idle Respects lead a man, he shall never be without. As Solomon says, To
respect Persons is not good, for such a man will transgress for a piece of
Bread. It is most true that was anciently spoken: A Place shows the man, and
it shows some for the better, and some for the worse. It is assured sign of
worthy and generous Spirit, whom Honor mends. For Honor is or should be the
place of Virtue; and as in Nature, things move violently to their place, and
calmly in their place; so Virtue in Ambition is violent, in Authority settled
and calm.

VII. Of Counsel.
THe greatest Trust between man, is the Trust of giving Counsel. For in other
Confidences, men commit the parts of their Life, their Lands, their Goods,
their Child, their Credit, some particular Affair. But to such as they make
their Counselors, they commit the whole; by how much the more they are obliged
to all Faith and Integrity. The wisest Princes need not think it any deminution
to their Greatness, or derogation to their Sufficiency to rely on Counsel. God
himself is not without, but has made it one of the great Names of his blessed
Son. The Counselor Solomon has pronounced* That in Counsel there is safety^
Things will have their first or second Cogitations: If they be not tossed upon
the Arguments of Counsel, they will be tossed upon the Waves of Fortune, and be
full of Inconstancy, doing and undoing, like the reeling of a drunken man.
Solomon's Son found the force of Counsel, as his Father found the necessity of
it. For the beloved Kingdom of God was first rent and broken by ill Counsel:
Upon which Counsel there are set for our Instruction, the two marks, whereby
had Counsel is forever best discerned, that is, young Counsel for the Persons,
and violent Counsel for the Matter. There is, that are in their Natures
faithful, and sincere, and plain, and direct, not crafty and invalued: Let
Princes above all, draw to themselves such Natures. The true composition of a
Counselor is to be rather skilful in his Masters business, then in his Nature;
for then he is like to advise him, and not to feed his Humor. It is of
singular use to Princes, if they take the opinion of their Council, both
seperately, and together; for private Opinion is more free, but Opinion before
others, is more reverent. In private, men are more bold in their own Humors;
and in Consort, men are more Obnoxious to others Humors. Therefore it is good
to take both; and of the inferior sort rather in private, to preserve Freedom:
Of the greater, rather in Consort, to preserve Respect. It is in vain for
Princes to take Counsel concerning Matters, if they take no Counsel likewise
concerning Persons; for all matters are as dead Images* and the life of the
execution of Affairs rests in the good choice of Persons. Books will speak
plain, when Counselors blanch. Therefore it is good to be conversant in them,
especially the Books of such as themselves have been actors upon the Stage.

VIII. Of Dispatch.
AFfected Dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to Business that can be.
Therefore measure not Dispatch by the times of sitting, but by the Advancement
of Business. I knew a wise man had it for a Byword, when he saw men hasten to
a Conclusion: Stay a while, that we may make an end the sooner. On the other
side, true dispatch is a rich thing; for Time is the measure of Business, as
Money is of Wares; and Business is bought at a dear rate, where there is small
dispatch, Give good hearing to those that give the first Information in
Business, and rather direct them in the beginning, then interrupt them in the
continuance of their Speeches: For he that is put out of his order, will go
forward and backward, and be more tedious by parcels, then be could have been
at once. But sometimes it is seen, that the Moderator is more troublesome then
the Actor. Iterations are commonly loss of time, but there is no such gain of
Time as to iterate often the state of the Question* for it chaseth away many a
frivolous Speech, as it is coming forth: Long and curious Speeches are as fit
for dispatch as a Robe or Mantle, with a long Trane, is for a race. There be
three parts of Business, the Preparation, the Debate or Examination, and the
Perfection. Whereof if you look for Dispatch, let the middle only be the work
of many, and the first and last the work of few.

IX. Of Love.
LOve is the argument always of Comedies, and sometimes of Tragedies, which
shows well that it is a Passion generally light, and sometimes extreme. Extreme
it may well be, since the speaking in a perpetual Hiperbole is comely in
nothing but Love: Neither is it merely in the phrase. For whereas it has been
well said, That the Arch-flatterer, with whom all the petty Flatterers have
Intelligence, is a man's self; certainly the Lover much more. For there was
never proud man thought so absurdly well of himself, as the Lover does of the
Person loved; and therefore it was well said, That it is impossible to love and
to be wise. Neither does this weakness appear to others only and not to the
Person loved, but to the loved most of all, except the love ^e Reciproque. For
it is a true Rule, that Love is either rewarded with Love again, or with an
inward and secret Contempt. By how much the more men ought to beware of this
Passion, that loses not only other things, but it self. This Passion has its
Floods in the very time of weakness, which are great Prosperity, and great
Adversity (though this later has been less observed) both which times kindle
Love, and make it more fervent, and therefore show it to be the Child of Folly.
They do best that make this Affection keep Quarter, and sever it wholly from
their serious Affairs and Actions of their Life; for if it check once with
Business, it troubles men's Fortunes, and makes men that they can be no way
true to their own ends.

X. Of Friendship.
THere is no greater Desert or Wilderness, then to be without true Friends. For
without friendship Society is but meeting. And as it is certain, that in Bodies
Inaminate, Union strengthens any natural Motion, and weakneth any violent
Motion: So amongst men* Friendship multiplyeth Joys, and divides Griefs. Live
not in continual smoother, but take some Friends with whom to communicate; it
will unfold thy Understanding, it will evaporate thy Affections it will prepare
thy Business. A man may keep a corner of his mind from his Friend, and it be
but to witness to himself that it is not upon Facility, but upon the true use
of Friendship that he imparteth himself. Want of true Friends, as it is the
reward of perfidious Natures, so it is an imposition upon great Fortunes; the
one deserves it, the other cannot escape it. And therefore it is good to retain
Sincerity, and to put it into the reckoning of Ambition, that the higher one
goes, the fewer true Friends he shall have. Perfection of Friendship, is but a
Speculation. It is Friendship, when a man can say to himself, I love this man,
without respect of Vtility: I am open hearted to him; I single him from the
general^ity of th^se with whom I live; I make him a portion of my own Wishes.
There is little Friendship in the World, and least of all between Equals, which
was wont to be magnified. That that is between Superior and Inferior, whose
Fortunes may comprehend one the other.

XI. Of Self.
AN Ant is a wise Creature for it self; but it is a shrewd thing in an Orchard
or Garden. And certainly, men that are great lovers of themselves, waste the
public. Divide with Reason between Self-love and Society, and be so true to
thy self, as thou be not false to others. It is a poor center of a man's
actions, Himself: It is right Earth. And certainly, it is the nature of extreme
Self-lovers* as they will set an House on Fire, and it were but to roast their
own Eggs*

XII. Of Regiment of Health.
THere is a Wisdom in this beyond the rules of Physic, a man's own
Observation what he finds good of, and what he finds hurt of, is the best
Physic to preserve Health. But it is a safer Conclusion to say This agrees
not well with me, therefore I will not continue it; then this, I find no
offense in this, therefore I may use it: For strength of Nature in Youth
passes over many Excesses, which are owing a man till his Age. Discern of the
coming on of Years, and think not to do the same thing still. Certainly, most
lusty old men catch their Deaths by that adventure; for Age will not be
edified: Beware of sudden change in any point of Diet, and if necessity enforce
it, fit the rest to it. For it is a Secret both in Nature and State, that it is
safer to change many things, then one. To be free minded, and cheerfully
disposed at hours of Meat, and of Sleep, and of Exercise, is the best Precept
of long lasting. Despise no new accident in your Body, but ask opinion of it.
In Sickness respect Health principally, and in Health Action. For those that
put their Bodies to endure in Health, may in most Sicknesses, which are not
very sharp, be cured only with Diet and tending.

XIII. Of Discourse.
SOme in their Discourse, desire rather Commendation of Wit, in being able to
hold an Argument in discerning what is true; as if it were a praise to know
what might be said, and not what should be thought. The honourablest kind of
Talk is to give the occasion, and again, to moderate and pass to somewhat else.
It is good to vary and mix Speeches to the present occasion with Arguments;
Tales with Reasons, asking of Questions, with telling of Opinions, and Jest
with Earnest. But some things are privileged from Jest, namely Religion,
matters of State, great Persons, any man's present Business of Importance, and
any case that deserves Pity; and generally men ought to find the difference
between Saltness and Bitterness. Certainly, he that has a Satirical Vein, as
he makes others afraid of his Wit, so be had need be afraid of others Memory.
He that questioneth much, shall learn much, and content much: So especially if
he apply his Questions to the skill of the Person of whom he asks: ^or he
shall give them occasion to please themselves in speaking, and himself shall
continually gather Knowledge. If you dissemble sometimes your Knowledge of that
you are thought to know, you shall be thought another time to know that you
know not. Speech of a man's self is not good often, and there is but one case
therein a man may praise himself with good Grace, and that is in commending
Virtue in another, especially if it be such a Virtue as whereunto himself
pretends: Speech of touch toward others, should be sparingly used; for
Discourse ought to be as a Field, without coming home to any man. Discretion of
Speech is more then Eloquence, and to speak agreeably to him, with whom we
deal, is more then to speak in good Words, or in good Order. Lastly, in a set
Speech in an Assembly, it is expected a man should use all his Reasons in the
case he handles; but in private Persuasions it is always a great Error.

XIV. Of Riches.
I Cannot call Riches better then the baggage of Virtue; for as the Baggage is
to an Army, so is Riches to Virtue: it cannot be spared, nor well left behind,
but it hinders the march; yea, and the care of it sometimes loses or
distributeth the Victory. Of great Riches there is no real use, except it be in
the distribution, the rest is Conceit. O, says Solomon, where much is, there
are many to consume it; and what has the Owner, but the sight of it with his
Eyes? The personal Fruition of any man cannot reach to feel great Riches; there
is a Custody of them, or a power of Dole or Donative of them, or a Fame of
them, but no solid use to the Owner. Do you not see what feigned Prices are set
upon little Stones and Rarities, and what works of Ostentation are undertaken,
because there might seem to be some use of great Riches? But then they may be
of use to buy men out of Dangers or Troubles. As Solomon says, Riches are as a
Strong-hold in the Imagination of the Rich man. But this is excellently
expressed, that it is in the Imagination, and not always in Fact. For
certainly, great Riches have sold more men, then they have bought out. Seek not
proud Riches, but such as thou may get justly, use soberly, distribute
cheerfully, and leave contentedly; yet have no abstract or Fryerly contempt of
them. Neither trust thou much others, that seem to despise Riches; for they
despise them that despair of them, and none worse when they come to them. Be
not Penny wise; Riches have wings and sometimes they fly away of themselves:
Sometimes they must be set flying, to bring in more. Men leave their Riches
either to their Kindred or to the Public, and moderate Portions prosper best
in both. Measure not thy Advancements by Quantity, but frame them by Measure;
and defer not Charities till Death; for certainly if a man weigh it rightly, he
that does so is rather liberal of another man's, than of his own.

XV. Of Young Men, and Age.
A Man that is young in Years, may be old in Hours if he have lost no time: But
that happens rarely* Generally, Youth is like the first Cogitations, not so
wise as the second: for there is a Youth in Thoughts, as well as in Ages.
Natures that have much Heat, an^ great violent Desires and Perturbations, are
not ripe for Action till they have past the meridian of their Years* But
reposed Natures may do well in Youth: As on the other side, Heat and Vivacity
in Age is an excellen^ composition for Business. Young men are fitter to
in^vent, than to judge; fitter for execution then for Coun^sel, and fitter for
new Projects then for settled Business ^or the experience of Age, in things
that fall within the compass of it, directs them; but in things merely new,
abuses them. The Errors of young men are the ruin of Business: But the Errors
of aged men amount to this, That more might have been done, or sooner.
Certainly, it is good to compound Employments of both* for that will be good
for the present, because the Virtues of either Age may correct the Defects of
both, and good for Succession, that young men may be Learners, while men in Age
are Actors: and lastly, in respect of extreme Accidents, because Authority
follows old men, and Favor and Popularity youth. A certain Rabby upon the
Text, Your young men shall see Visions, and your old men dream Dreams:
Infers, that young men are admitted nearer to God, then old, because Vision
is a clearer Revelation then a Dream. And certainly, the more a man drinks in
of the World, the more it intoxicateth: And Age does profit rather in the
powers of Understanding, then in the Virtues of the Will and Affections.

XVI. Of Beauty and Virtue.
VIrtue is like a rich Stone best plain set; and surely Virtue is best set in a
Body that is comely, though not of delicate Features, and that has rather
Dignity of presence, then Beauty of respect. Neither is it always seen, that
very beautiful Persons are otherwise of great Virtue, as if Nature were rather
busy not to err* then in labor to produce Excellency. And therefore they
prove accomplished, but not of great Spirit; and study rather Behavior, then
Virtue. In Beauty, that of Favor is more then that of Color; and that of
Decent and gracious Motion, more then that of Favor* That is the best part of
Beauty, which a Picture cannot express; no, not the first sight of the Life:
and there is no excellent Beauty that has not some strangeness in the
proportion. ^f it be true that the principal part of Beauty is in desent
Motion, certainly, it is no marvel though Persons in years seem many times more
aimable. For no Youth can be comely but by pardon, and considering the Youth as
to make up the Comeliness. Beauty is as summer Fruits, easy to corrupt, and
cannot last; and for the most part it makes a dissolute Youth, and Age a little
out of Countenance. But yet certainly again, if it light well, it makes Virtues
shine, and Vices blush. The Poet says, Virtue's a chaste Queen, and yet does
not scorn
To be embraced by him that is meanest born;
She is the Prop that Majesty's support,
Yet one whom Slaves, as well as Kings may court.
She loves all that bear Affection to her,
And yields to any that has Heart to woe her.
So Vice, how high so e're he be in place,
Is that which Grooms may spit at in Disgrace;
She is a Strumpet, and may be abhorred,
Yea, spurned at in the Bosom of a Lord.


The Epicures say to the Stoics, ^elicity placed in Virtue, that it is like
the ^elicity of a Player, who if he were left of his Auditors, and their
applause, h^ would straight be out of Heart and Countenance, and therefore they
call Virtue, Bonum Theatrale.

XVII. Of Deformity.
DEformed Persons are commonly even with Nature; for as Nature has done ill by
them, so do they by Nature, being for the most part [as the Scripture saith]
void of natural A^^ection; and so they have their Revenge of Nature. Certainly,
there is a consent between the Body and the Mind; and where Nature erreth in
the one* she ventr^th in the other. But because there is in man an Election
touch^ng the frame o^ his mind, and a necessity in the frame of his Body, (...)
Stars of natural Inclination are sometimes obscured by the sun of Discipline
and Virtue. Therefore it is good to consider of Deformity, not as a sign, which
is more deceiveable, but as a cause, which seldom failteh of the Effect.
Deformed persons are extreme bold; first, as in their own defense, as being
exposed to scorn; but in process of time by a general Habit. Also it stirs
in them Industry, and specially of this kind, to watch and observe the weaness
of others, that they may have somewhat to repay. They will, if they be of
Spirit, seek to free themselves from Scorn, which must be either by Virtue or
Malice; and therefore they prove either the best of People, or the worst, or
strangly mixed.

XVIII. Of Custom, and Nature in Men.
MEn's Thoughts are much according to their Inclination, their Discourse and
Speech according to their Learning, and infused Opinions; but their Deeds are
after as they have been accustomed. The engagement of Words are not so
forceable as Custom: A man would wonder to hear men profess, protest, engage,
give great Words, and then do just as they have done before, as if they were
dead Images and Engines, moved only by the Wheels of Custom. Therefore since
Custom is the principal Magistrate of man's Life, let men by all means seek to
obtain good Customs. Certainly, Custom is more perfect when it begins in young
Years, this we call Education, which is nothing but an early Custom. For it is
true, that late Learners cannot so well take the ply, except it be in some
Minds that have not suffered themselves to fix, but have kept themselves open
and prepared to receive ^ontinual Amendment, which is exceeding rare. Nature is
often hidden, sometimes overcome, seldom extinguished; Force makes Nature more
violent in the return: Doctrine and Discourse make Nature less importune, but
Custom only does alter and subdue Nature. Certainly, the great multiplication
of Virtues upon humane Nature, rests upon Societies, well ordained and
discip^ined.

XIX. Of Fortune.
IT cannot be denied, but outward Accidents conduce much to a man's Fortune,
^avour oppertune Death of others occasion, fitting Virtue; but chiefly the
mould of a man's Fortune is in himself. And the most frequent of external
Causes, is that the Folly of one man is the Fortune of another; for no man
prospers so suddenly as by others Errors. If a man look sharply and
accentively, he shall see Fortune; for though she be blind, yet she is not
invisible. Certainly, there be not two more fortunate Porperties, then to have
a little of the Fool* and not too much of the Honest. Therefore extreme lovers
of their Country or Masters, were never fortunate, neither can they be. For
when a man places his Thoughts without himself, he goes not his own way. All
wise men, to decline the envy of their own Virtues, use to ascribe them to
Providence and Fortune, for so they may the better assume them. And besides, it
is greatness in a man, to be the care of the higher Powers -- The Poet speaks
of Fortune thus, Fortune [that blind supposed Goddess] is
Still rated at, if ought succeed amiss.
When this man's Barn finds not her wonted store,
Fortune's condemned, because she sent no more.
If this man dye, or that man live too long,
Fortune's accused, and she has done the wrong.
Ah! foolish Dolts, and [like your Goddess] blind,
You make the Fault, and call your Saint unkind.
For when the cause of Evil begins in man,
The Effects ensue from whence the Cause began.


XX. Of Studies.
STudies serve for Delight, for Ornament, and for Ability; their chief use for
delight, is in privateness and retiring: for Ornament, is in Discourse: and for
Ability, is in Judgment. For expert men can execute men, but learned men are
fittest to judge and censure. To spend too much time in them, is sloth; to use
them too much for Ornament, is affectation. To make judgment wholly by their
Rules, is the humor of a Scholar: They perfect Nature, and are perfected by
Experience. Crafty men contemn them, simple men admire them, and wise men use
them. For they teach not their own use, but that it is a Wisdom without them,
and above them, ^on by observation. Read not to contradict, nor to believe, but
to weigh and consider. Some Books are to be tasted, and others to be swallowed.
Reading makes a full man, Conferrence a ready man, and Writing an exact man:
And therefore if a man Write little, he had need have a great Memory; if he
confer little, he had need have a present Wit; and if he read little, he had
need have much Cunning, to know that he does not. Histories make men wise,
Poets witty, the Mathematics subtle, natural Philosophy deep* Mor^al grave,
Logic and Rhetoricks able to contend. There is no stand or impediment in the
Wit, but may be brought out by fit Stud^es, like as Diseases of the Body may be
apropriate Exercises. Shouting is good for the Lungs and Breast, gentle walking
for the Stomach, Riding for the Head and the like. So if a man's Wit be
wandering, let him study the Mathematick; if his Wit be not apt to distinguish*
or find differences, let him study the Schoolmen; if it be not apt to bear
over matters, and to find out Resemblances let him study Lawyers cases. So
every defect of the Mind have special Receipt.

XXI. Of Ceremonies and Respects.
HE that is only real, had need have exceeding great parts of Virtue. To attain
good Forms, it suffices not to despise them, for so shall a man observe them
in others; and let him trust himself with the rest. For if he care to express
them, he shall lose their grace; which is to be natural and unaffected. Not to
use Ceremonies at all, is to teach others not to use them again, and so
diminishes Respect; especially they be not to be omitted to Strangers, and
formal Natures. Amongst a man's Peers, a man shall be sure of Familiarity; and
therefore it is good a little to keep state. Amongst a man's Inferiors one
shall be sure of Reverence, and therefore it is good a little to be familiar.
He that is too much in any thing, so that he gives another occasion of
Society, makes himself cheap. It is a good Precept generally in seconding
another; yet to add somewhat of one's own; as, if you will grant his Opinion,
let it be with some distinction; if you will follow his motion, let it be with
condition; if you allow his Counsel* let it be with alleging further Reason.
Men had need beware how they be too perfect in Complements. It is loss in
Business to be too full of Respects, or to be too curious in observing Times
and Seasons. Solomon says He that considers the Wind shall not sow, and he
that looks on the Clouds shall not reap. A wise man will make more
Oppertunities then he finds.

XXII. Of Suits.
SUrely, there is in a sort a right in every Suit, either a right of Equity, if
it be a Suit of Controversy, or a right of desert, if it be a Suit of
Pet^tion. If affection lead a man to favor the wrong side in Justice, let him
rather use his Countenance to compound the matter, then to carry it. If
Affection lead a man to favor the less worthy in desert, let him do it without
depraving or disabling the better deserver. To be ignorant of the value of a
Suit, is Simplicity, as well as to be ignorant of the right thereof, is want of
Conscience. Nothing is thought so easy a request to a great Person, as his
Letter, and yet if it be not in a good Cause, it is so much out of his
Reputation.

XXIII. Of Negotiating.
IT is generally better to deal by Speech, then by Letter, and by the mediation
of a third, then by a man's self; Letters are good when a man would draw an
Answer by Letters back again, or when it may serve for a man's Justification,
afterward to produce his own Letter, or where it may be danger to be
interrupted, or heard by pieces. To deal in Person is good, when a man's Face
breeds regard; as commonly with Inferiors, or in tender cases, where a man's
Eye, upon the Countenance of him with whom one speaks, may give him a
direction how far to go; and generally, where a man will reserve to himself
Liberty, either to disavow or to expound. It is better to sound a Person with
whom one deal afar off, then to fall upon the Point at first, except you mean
to surprise him by some short Question. It is better dealing with men in
Appetite, then with those which are where they would be. In choice of
Instruments [for dealing] it is better to choose men of plainer sort that are
like to do that that is committed to them, and to report back again faithfully
the Success, then those that are cunning, to contrive out of other men's
Business somewhat to grace themselves, and will help the matter in Report for
satisfaction sake. All Practice is to discover, or to work. Men discover
themselves in Trust, in Passion, at unawares and of necessity when they would
have somewhat done, and cannot find an apt Pretext. If you would work any man,
you must either know his Manner and Fashions, and so lead him or his ends, and
so persuade him or his weakness, or disadvantage, and so awe him, and so govern
them. In dealing with cunning Persons, we must ever consider their Ends, to
interpret their Speeches; and it is good to say little to them, and that which
they least look for.

XXIV. Of Judicature.
JUdges ought to remember that their Office is to interpret Law, and not to
make Law, or give Law, else will it be like (...) presumption of the Church of
Rome, which under pretext of Exposition of Scripture, usurpeth and practices
an Anthority to add and alter, and to pronounce that which they do not find,
and by color of Antiquity to introduce novelty. Judges ought to be more
learned, then witty, more reverend then plausible, and more advised then
confident. Above all things, Integrity is their portion and proper Virtue.
Cursed [saith the Law] is he that removes the Landmarks. The mislayer of a
Meerstone is to blame; but it is the unjust Judge that is the capital remover
of Landmarks, when he defines a miss of Lands and Property. One foul
sentenced does more hurt then many foul Examples, for they do but corrupt the
Stream; the other corrupts the Fountains. There be [saith the Scripture] that
turn Judgment into Wormwood; and surely there be also, that turn it into
Vinegar: for Injustice makes it bitter, and Delays makes it sower. The
principal duty of a Judge is to suppress Force and Fraud, whereof ^orce is the
more pernicious, the more open and Fraud the more close and disguised. Add
thereto contentious Suits, which ought to be spued out as the surfeit of
Courts. A Judge ought to prepare his way to a just Sentence, as God uses to
prepare his way by raising Valleys, and taking down Hills: So when there
appears on either side an high Hand, violent Prosecution, cunning Advantages
taken, combination Power, great Counsel, then is the Virtue of a Judge seen to
make Inequality equal, that he may plant his Judgment upon an even Ground.
Judges must beware of hard Constructions and stained Inferrences; for there is
no worse to turn then the torture of Laws, specially in cases of Laws penal;
they ought to have a care, that that which was meant for Terror be not turned
into Rigor; and that they bring not upon the People that Shower, whereof the
Scripture speaks: Piuet Super eos laqueo; For penal Laws pressed are as a
shower of Snares upon the People. In cases of Life and Death, Judges ought [as
far as the Law permitteth] in Justice to remember Mercy* and to cast a severe
Eye upon the Example, but a merciful Eye upon the Person.

Patience and Gravity of hearing, is an essential part of Justice; and an
over-speaking Judge is no well tuned Cimbal. It is no grace to a Judge to find
that which he might have heard in due time from the Bar, or to show quickness
of Conceit in cutting off Counsel or Evidences too short, or to prevent
Information by Questions, though pertinent. The parts of a Judge are four; To
direct the Evidence, to moderate length of Repetition, or impertinency of
Speech; to Recapitulate and Collate the material Points of that which has been
said, and to give the Rule and Sentence: Whatsoever is above these, is too
much, and proceeds either of Glory, and willingness to speak, or of
Impatience to hear, or of shortness of Memory, or of want of a staid and equal
intention. It is a strange thing to see that the boldness of Advocates should
prevail with Judges, whereas they should imitate God, in whose Seat they sit;
who represseth the Presumptions* and gives Grace to the Modest. But is more
strange, (...) the Custom of the Time does warrant Judges to have noted
Favorites, which cannot but cause multiplication of (...)* and suspicion of
By-ways. There is due from the Judge, (...) the Advocate, some commendation
and gracing, where Causes are well handled and fair pleaded, especially toward
the side which obtains not; for that upholds in the Client, the reputation of
his Counsel, and beats down in him the conceit of his Cause. There is likewise
due to the Public a civil reprehension of Advocates, where there appears
cunning Counsel, gross Neglect slite Information, indiscreet Pressing, or an
over-bold (...).

The place of Justice is an hallowed Place, and therefore not only the Bench,
but the Foot-place, and Precincts and Purprize thereof, ought to be preserved
without Scandal and Corruption. For certainly, Grapes [ as the Scripture saith]
will not be gathered of Thorns or Thistles; neither can Justice yield her Fruit
with sweetness among the Briars and Brambles of catching and pulling Clerks and
Ministers. On the other side, an ancient Clerk, skilful in Presidents, wary in
proceeding and understanding in the business of the Court, is an excellent
Finger of a Court, and does many times point out the way of the Judge himself.

Lastly, Judges ought above all, to remember the Conclusion of the Roman twelve
Tables; Salus populi Supreama lex; and to know that Laws, except they be in
order to that end, are but things Captious, and Oracles not well inspired.

And let no man weakly conceive, that just Laws and true Policy have any
antipathy. For they are like the Spirits and Sinnews that one moves within the
other. Neither ought Judges to be so ignorant of their own Right, as to think
there is not left to them as a principal part of their Office, a wis^ use and
application of Laws; for they may remember what the Apostle says of a greater
Law then theirs: Nos Scimus Quia lex bona est Jude Quia ea utatur legitime.

XXV. Of Honor and Reputation.
THe winning of Honor, is but the revealing of a man's Virtue and Word,
without disadvantage* for some in their Actions do affect Honor and
Reputation, which sort of men are commonly much talked of, but inwardly little
admired; and some darken their Virtue in the show of it, so as they be
undervalued in Opinion. If a man perform that which has not been attempted
before, or attempted and given over, or has been achieved, but not with so
good Circumstance, he shall purchase more Honor than by affecting a matter of
greater difficulty or virtue, wherein he is but a follower. A man is an ill
Husband of his Honor that enters into any action, the fa^ling wherein will
disgrace him more then the carrying of it through can honor him.

Honor has three things in it; the vantage ground to do good, the approach to
Kings and principal Persons, and the raising of a man's own Fortunes. He that
has the best of these Intentions when he aspireth, is an honest man; and that
Prince that can descern of Intentions, in one that aspireth, is a wise Prince.

Meditationes Sacra. XXVI. Of the Works of God and Man.
GOd beheld all things which his Hands had made, and lo, they were all passing
good. But when man turned him about, and took a view of the Works which his
Hands had made, he found all to be Vanity and vexation of Spirit: wherefore if
thou shall work in the Works of God, thy Sweat shall be as an Ointment of
Oders, and thy Rest as the Sabbath of God. Thou shall travel in the sweat of a
good Conscience, and shall keep holy day in the quietness and liberty of the
sweetest Contemplations. But if thou shall aspire after the glorious Acts of
men, thy Works shall be accompanied with Compunction and Strife, and thy
remembrance followed with distaste, and upbraidings; and justly does it come to
thee [O man] that since thou which art God's work, do him no reason in
yielding him well-pleasing Service, even thine own Works should also reward
thee with the like Fruit of Bitterness.

XXVII. Of the Miracles of our Savior.
He has done all things well
A true Confession and applause: God, the Word, in the Mircacles which he
wrought [Now every Miracle is a new Creation, and not according to the first
Creation] would do nothing which breathed not toward men Favor and Bounty.
Moses wrought Miracles, and scourged the Egyptians with many Plagues. Elias
wrought Miracles, and shut up Heaven that no Rain should fall upon the Earth;
and again, brought down from Heaven the ^ire of God upon the Captains and their
Bands. Elisha wrought also and called Bears out of the Desert no devour young
Children. Peter struck Ananias the sacrilidgious Hypocrite with present Death.
And Paul Elimas the Sorcerer with blindness: But no such thing did Jesus; the
Spirit of God descended down upon him in the form of a Dove, of whom he said,
You know not what Spirit you are of: The Spirit of Jesus is the Spirit of a
Dove, those Servants of God were as the Oxen of God* treading out the Corn, and
trampling the Straw down under their Feet, but Jesus is the Lamb of God,
without Wrath or Judgment. All his Miracles were consumate about man's Body, as
his Doctrine respected the Soul of man: The body of man needed these things*
Sustenance. Defense from outward Wrongs, and Medicine; it was he that drew a
multitude of Fishes into the Nets, that he might give unto man more liberal
Provision. He turned Water, a less worthy nourishment of man's Body, into Wine,
a more worthy, that glads the Heart of man. He sentenced the Fig Tree to
wither for not doing its duty, whereunto it was ordained, which is to bear
Fruit for men's Food; he multiplied the scarcity of a few Loaves and Fishes to a
sufficiency to Victual an Host of People. He rebuked the Winds that threatened
destruction to the Seafaring men: he restored motion to the Lame, light to the
Blind, speech to the Dumb, health to the Sick, cleanness to the Leprous, a
right Mind to those that are possessed, and Life to the Dead. No Miracle of his
is to be found to have been of Judgment or Revenge, but all of Goodness and
Mercy, and respecting man's Body; for as touching Riches, he did not vouchsafe
to do any Miracle, save only one, that Tribute might be given to Coesar.

XXVIII. Of the Innocence of the Dove, and the Wisdom of the Serpent
The Fool receives not the Word of Wisdom, except thou discover to him what he
has in his Heart.
THerefore it behooves him which aspireth to a goodness, [not retired, or
particular to himself, but a fructifying and begetting Goodness, which should
draw on others] to know those Points which be called the deeps of Satan, that
he may speak with Authority and true Insinuation. Hence is the Precept, Try all
things, and hold fast that which is good; which endures a discerning Election
out of an Examination, whence nothing at all is excluded; out of the same
Fountain arises that direction, Be you wise as Serpents, and innocent as
Doves. There are neither teeth, nor stings, nor venom, nor wreathes and folds
of Serpents, which ought not to be all known, and as far as Examination does
lead, tried; neither let any man here fear Infection or Polution; for the Sun
enters into Sinks, and is not defiled. Neither let any man think, that herein
he tempts God; for his diligence and generality of examination is commanded,
and God is sufficient to preserve you immaculate and pure.

XXIX. Of the Exaltation of Charity.
I have rejoiced at the overthrow of him that hated me, (...) took Pleasure
when Adversity did befall him.
THe detest^^^on or renouncing of Job; for a man to love again where he is
loved, it is the Charity of Publicans, contracted by mutual Profit and good
Offices, but to love a man's Enemies is one of the cunningest Points of the Law
of Christ, and an imitation of the divine Nature. But yet again, of this
Charity there be diverse degrees, whereof the first is to pardon our Enemies
when they repent, of which Charity there is a Shadow and Image, even in noble
Beasts: for of Lions it is a received Opinion, that their fury and fierceness
cease toward any thing that yields and prostrateth it self. The second
degree, is to pardon our Enemies, though they persist without satisfaction and
submissions. The third degree, is not only to pardon* and forgive, and forbear
our Enemies, but to deserve well of them, and to do them good. But all these
three degrees either have, or may have in them a certain Bravery and greatness
of the mind, rather then pure Charity: For when a man perceives Virtue to flow
from himself, it is possible that he is puffed up, and takes Contentment rather
in the Fruit of his own Virtue, then in the good of his Neighbors: But if any
Evil overtake the Enemy from any other Coast, then from thy self, and thou in
the inwardest Motions of thy Heart, art grieved and compassionate, and do no
ways insult* as though thy days of Right and Revenge were at last come; This
I interpret to be the height and exaltation of Charity.

XXX. Of Goodness, and Goodness of Nature.
GOodness I call the Habit; and Goodness of Nature the Inclination. This of all
Virtues is the greatest, being the character of the divine Deity* and without
it, man is busy, mischievous, wretched thing, no better then a kind of
Vermin: Goodness answers to the Theological Virture, Charity, and admits no
Excess but Error. There was never Law, or Sect, or Opinion, did so much
magnify Goodness as the Christian Religion does. Therefore to avoid the
scandal and the danger both, it is good to take knowledge of the Errors of an
Habit so excellent. Seek the good of other men, but be not in bondage to their
Faces of ^ancies, for that is but facility and softness, which takes an honest
mind Prisoner. Neither give thou Esop^s Cock a Gem, who would be better content
if he had a Barley Corn. The example of God teaches the Lesson truly; He
sends his Rain, and makes his Son to s^ine upon the Just and Unjust; but he
does not rain Wealth and shine Honor and Virtues upon men equal. Common
Benefits are to be communicate with all, but peculiar Benefits with choice. And
beware how in making the portraiture thou breakest the pattern: For Divinity
makes the love of our selves the patterns, the love of our Neighbor but the
portraiture Sell all thou have, and give it to the Poor, and follow me; But
sell not all thou have, except thou come and follow me, that is, except thou
have a Vocation, wherein thou may do as much good with little Means, as with
great; for otherwise, in feeding the Stream, thou dryest the Fountain. Neither
is there only a habit of Goodness directed by right Reason: But there is in
some men, even in Nature, a disposition toward it; as on the other side, there
is a natural Malignity. For there be that do not affect the good of others.

XXXI. Of Religion.
THe Quarrels and Divisions for Religion were Evils unknown to the Heathen. But
yet the bounds of Religious Unity are so to be strengthened, as the Bonds of
human Society be not dissolved. It is better that Religion should deface men's
Understandings then their Piety and Charity, retaining Reason, only as an
Engine or Chariot driver of Cruelty and Malice. One of the Doctors of Italy
had the confidence to put in Writing almost in plain terms* That the
Christian-Religion had given up good men in Prey to those that are Tyrannical
and Unjust.

It was a great Blasphemy when the Devil said, I will ascend, and be like the
highest; but it is a greater Blasphemy if they make God to say, I will descend
and be like the Prince of Dark^ess: And it is no better, when they make the
cause of Religion descend to the execrable actions of murdering of Princes,
butchering of People, and firing of States. Neither is there such a Scandal to
their Church as out of the Bark of St. Peter to set forth the Hagg of a Bark of
Pirates and Assassines. Therefore since these things are the common Enemies of
human Society, Princes by their Power, Churches by their Decrees, and all
learning Christian moral, of whatsoever Sect or Opinion, ought to join in the
damning to Hell forever these Facts and their Supports, and in all Councils
concerning Religion, the Counsel of the Apostle should be perfixed, Ira hominis
non Implet justitiam Dei.

XXXII. Of the Moderation of Cares.
Sufficient for the Day is the Evil thereof.
THere ought to be a mean, sure, in worldly Cares, otherwise they are but
unprofitable, as those which oppress the Mind, and astonish the Judgment, and
profane* as those which savor of a mind which promises to it self a certain
Perpetuity in things of this World; for we ought to be Days men, and not to
Morrows men, considering the shortness of our time; and as he says, Laying
hold on the present day; for the future things shall in their turns become
present, therefore the care of the present suffices, and yet moderate Cares
[whether they concern our particular, or the Commonwealth, or our Friends] are
not blamed. But there is a twofold Excess, the one when the Chain or Thread of
our Cares is extended and spun out to an overgreat length, and unto times too
far off, as if we could bind the divine Providence of our Provisions, which
even with the Heathen was always found to be a thing insolent and unlucky. The
second Excess is, when we dwell longer in our Cares then is requisite, for due
deliberating, or firm resolving; for who is there amongst us that cares no
more then suffices, either to resolve of a Course, or to conclude upon an
Implicity, and does not still chew over the same things, and tread amaze in the
^^me Thoughts, and vanishes in them without issue or conclusion; Which kind of
Cares are most contrary to all divine and human Respects.

XXXIII. Of Earthly Hope.
Better is the sight of the Eye, then the apprehension of (...).
HOpe seems a thing altogether unprofitable; for to what end serves this
conceit of Good? Consider and ^ote a little, if the Good fall out less then
thou hopest, good, though it be, yet less, because it is; it seeemeth rather
loss then benefit through thy excess of hope; if the good prove equal and
proportionable in event to thy Hope; yet the Flower whereof by the hope is
gathered, so as when it comes, the grace of it is gone, and it seems use, and
therefore sooner draws on Society; admit thy Success prove better then thy
Hope, it is true gain seems to be made: But had it not been better to have
gained the principal by hoping for nothing, then the increase by hoping for
less? And this is the operation of Hope in good Fortunes, but in misfortunes
it weakneth all Force, Constancy and Vigor of the Mind. Notwithstanding we see
that the greatest number of men give themselves over to their Imaginations of
Hope, and apprehensions of the Mind in such sort, that ungrateful toward
things pas^, and in a manner unmindful of things present, as if they were ever
Children and beginners, they are still longing for things to come. Wherefore
all our Hope is to be bestowed upon the heavenly Life to come. But here on
Earth the purer our Sense is from the Inflection and Tincture of Imagination,
the better and wiser Soul.

The sum of Life to little does amount,
And therefore does forbid a longer count.

XXXIV. Of Hypocrites.
I demand Mercy, and not Sacrifice.
ALl the boasting of the Hypocrite is of the Works of the first Table of the
Law, which is of adoration and duty toward God; whereof the Reason is double,
both because such Works have a greater pomp and demonstration of Holiness, and
also because they do less cross their Affections and Desires, therefore the way
to cenvict Hypocrites, is to send them from the works of Sacrifice to the works
of Mercy, whence comes that saying, This is the pure and immaculate Religion
with God the Father, to visit Orphans and VViddows in their Tribulations; and
that saying, He that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love
God, whom he has not seen.

Now there is another kind of deeper and more extravagant Hypocrisy; for some
deceiving themselves, and thinking themselves worthy of a more near access and
conversation with God, do neglect the duties of Charity toward their
Neighbor, as inferior Matters, which did not indeed cause originally the
beginning of a monastical Life [for the beginnings were good] but brought in
that Excess and abuse which are followed after: For it is truly said, That the
office of Praying is a great Office in the Church. And it is for the good of
the Church that there be Consorts of men freed from the Cares of this World,
who may with daily and devout Supplications and Observances, solicit the
divine Majesty for the causes of the Church. But unto this Ordinance, that
other Hypocrisy is a nigh Neighbor, neither is the general Institution to be
blamed, but those Spirits which exalt themselves too high to be refrained.

As to those others, who are so officious toward God, to them belongs that
Question: If thou do justly, what is that to God? or what profit does he take
by thy Hands? Wherefore the Works of Mercy are the Works of distinction,
whereby to find out Hypocrites. But with Heretics it is contrary, for as
Hypocrites with their dissemling Holiness toward God do paliate and cover
their Injuries toward men; so Heretics by their Morallity and honest carriage
toward men, insinuate and make away with their Blasphemies against God.

XXXV. Of Impostors.
Whether we be transported in mind, it is to Godward, or whether we be sober,
it is to you-ward.
THis is the true Image, and true temper of a man and of him that is God's
faithful work man, his carriage and conversation toward God is full of
Passion, of Zeal and of Transmises, thence proceed Groans unspeakable, and
Exultings, likewise in comfort, ravishment of Spirit, and Agonies. But
contrariwise, his carriage and conversation toward men is full of Mildness,
Sobriety, an applyable demeanor; hence is that saying, I am become all things
to all men, and such like. Contrary it is with Hypocrites and Impostors, for
they in the Church and before the People, set themselves on Fire, and are
carried as it were out of themselves, and becoming as men inspired with holy
Furies they set Heaven and Earth together: but if a man did see their Solitary
and separate Meditations and Conversations, whereunto God is only privy, he
might ^^wards God, find them not only cold, and without Virtue, ^ut also full
of ill nature, and leaven sober enough to God, and transported only toward men.

XXXVI. Of the several kinds of Impostors.
Avoiding profane strangeness or words and oppositions of Knowledge, falsely so
called, Avoid fond and idle Fables. Let no man deceive you by high speechss.
THere are three forms of speaking, which are as it were the style and phrase
of Impostors; the first kind is of them, who, as soon as they have gotten any
subject or matter, do strait cast it into an Art, inventing new terms of Art,
reducing all into Divisions and Distractions, thence draws Assertions or
Oppositions, and so framing Oppositions by Questions and Answers: Hence issues
the Cop-webs and Clatterings of the Schoolmen.

The second kind is of them, who out of the vanity of their wit [as
Church-Poets] do make and advise all varieties of Tales, Stories and Examples,
whereby they may lead men's minds to a belief; from whence did grow the Legends,
and infinite fabulous Inventions and Dreams of the ancient Heretics.

The third kind is of them, who fill men's Ears with Mystries, high Parables,
Allegories and Illusions, with mistical and profound Forms, many of the
Heretics also made use of. By the first kind of these the Capacity and Wit of
man is fettered and entangled: by the second, it is trained on and inveigled:
by the third, it is astonished and enchanted, but by every of them, the whole
it is seduced and abused.

XXXVII. Of Atheism.
I Had rather believe all the Fables in the Legend and Alcaron, then that this
universal Frame is without a Mind: And therefore God never wrought Miracle to
convince Atheists, because his ordinary Works convince them. Certainly, a
little Philosophy inclines man's mind to Atheism, but depth in Philosophy
brings men about to Religion. For when the mind of man looks upon second
Causes scattered, sometimes it rests in them; but when it beholds them
confederate and knit together, it flies to Providence and Deity. For it is a
thousand times more credible, that four Elements and one immutable fifth
Essence, duly and eternally placed need no God, then that an Army of an
infinite small Portions or Seeds unplaced, should have produced this order and
Beauty without a divine Marshal. The Scripture says, The Fool has said in his
Heart, There is no God: It is not said, the Fool has thought in his Heart. So
as he rather says it by roat to himself, as that he would have, then that he
can thoroughly believe it, or to be persuaded of it. For none deny there is a
God, but those for whom it makes that there were no God: But in vain does he
strive utterly to alienate or put out that sparkle of our Creation-Light,
whereby men acknowledge a Deity, burning still within -- Again, whosoever labors
earnestly to prove an Opinion to another, himself distrust it?

The Indians of the West have Names for their particular Godds, though they
have no Name for God; as if the Heathen should have had the Names Jupiter,
Mars, Apllo, etc. but not the word Deus, which shows yet they have the notion,
though not the full extent. So that against Atheists the most barbarous Savages
take part with the subtillest Philosophers. They that deny a God, destroy man's
Nobility: For certainly Man is of kin to the Beast by his Body; and if he be
not of kin to God by his Spirit, he is a base and ignoble Creature. It destroys
likewise Magnaminity, and the raising of human Nature: For take an example of a
Dog, and mark what a generosity and courage he will put on when he finds
himself maintained by a man, which to him is instead of a God, or Melior
Natura; which corrage is manifestly such, as that Creature without that
confidence of a better Nature than his own could never attain. So man when he
rests and assures himself upon divine Protection and Favor, gathers force
and faith, which human Nature in it self could not obtain. Therefore as Atheism
is in all respects hateful* so in this, that it depriveth human Nature of the
means to exalt it self above human Frailty. Lastly, Atheism seems every way to
be joined and combined with ^olly and Ignorance, seeing nothing can be more
justly allotted to the saying of Fools, then this, There is no God.

XXXVIII. Of Superstition.
IT were better to have no Opinion of God at all, then such an Opinion as is
unworthy of him; for the one is Unbelief, the other is Contumely: And
certainly, Superstition is the reproach of Deity. Atheism leaves a man to
Sense, to Philosophy, to natural Piety, to Laws, to Reputation, all which may
be guides to Virtue, though Religion were not; but Superstition di mounts all
these, and erecteth an absolute Tyranny in the mind of men. Therefore Atheism
did never perturb States, for it makes men wary of themselves, as looking no
further. But Superstition has been the Confusion of many States; and brings
in a new primum Mobile, that ravisheth all the Spheres of Government. In all
Superstitions, wise men follow Fools, and Arguments are fitted to practice in
reversed Order. There is no such Atheist as an Hypocrite or Impostor; and it is
not possible but where the gen^rality ^s Superstitious, many of the Leaders are
Hypocrites. The causes of Atheism are divisions in Religion* scandal of Priest,
and learned Times, especially if prosperous: Though for Divisions any one main
division adds Zeal to both sides; but many Divisions intro^uce A^heism. The
causes of Superstition are the pleasing Ceremonies, the excess of (...)
Holiness, the reverence of Tradition, the stratagems of Prelates for their own
Ambition and Lucre, and barbarous Times. And as wholesome Meat corrupts to
little Worms, so good Forms and Orders corrupt into a number of petty
Observations.

XXXIX. Of Heresies.
You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God.
THis Canon is the Mother of all Canons against Here^^e: The causes of Error
are two; the Ignorance of the will of God, and the Ignorance, or not sufficient
consideration of his Power: The Will of God is more revealed by the Scriptures,
therefore the Precept is. Search the Scriptures: The Power of God is more
revealed by the Creatures, and therefore the Precept is, Behold and consider
the Creatures: So is the fullness of the power of God to be affirmed, as we make
no imputation to his Will; so is the goodness of the Will of God to be
affirmed, as we make no derogation from his Power.

Of these Heresies which derogate from the Power of God, besides plain Atheism,
there are three Degrees, but they have all one and the same Mystery; for all
Anti-christianity works in a mystery, that is, under the shadow of Good, and
it is this to free and d^liver the Will of God from all Imputation and
Aspersion of Evil: And yet it is most truly affirmed, that God is not the
Author of Evil, not because he is not Author, but because not as of Evil.

XL. Of the Church and the Scriptures.
Thou shall protect them in thy Tabernacle from the contradiction of Tongues.
THe contradiction of tongues does every where meet ^s out of the Tabernacle of
God; therefore wheresoever thou shall turn thy self, thou shall find no end of
Controversies, except thou withdraw thy self into that Tabernacle. Thou will
say it is true, and that it is to be understood of the unity of the Church. But
hear, and note, there was in the Tabernacle the Ark, and in the Ark the
Testimony, or Tables of the Law: What do thou tell me of the husk of the
Tabernacle without the Kernel of the Testimony. The Tabernacle was ordained for
the keeping and delivering over from hand to hand of the Testimony; in like
manner, the custody and passing over of the Scriptures is committed unto the
Church. But the Life of Tabernacle is the Testimony.

The End of Fr. Bacon's Essays.
CONCLUSION.
A Life free from the Intermixture of Discontent is aimed at by all, but
impossible to be obtained by any; for Nature has so ordained it, that care,
trouble and molestation is interwoven with the web of our life; so that as our
more gross part, the body, is burdened with labor and toil, so our more
spiritual part, the mind, is disquieted with discontented Imaginations; nor
indeed can we tell how to relish Virtue, unless we first taste of Discontent;
for the Clouds of sorrow being over-blown (like rest after labor) the fruit of
Felicity is much more delightful and pleasing. Virtue is not a lady that love
to smother her self in Down, and lie at her ease, but she affects Industry,
triumphing in the midst of most emi^nent danger.

ERRATA.
PAge 7 line 1 add more. p 11 l 15 f prisons r poisons. p 12 l 12 add utter. p
18 l 8 add and. p 18 l 15 f well r who will. p 27 l 32 f lines r limns. p 30 l
34 f victoriously r virtuously. p 34 l 17 f bare r rare. p 34 l 31 add then. p
37 l 5 f imtroubled r untroubled. p 38 l 31 f here r heiw. p 40 l 2 f unsiven r
ungiven. p 41 l ^3 add Apis. p 43 l 6 f the r to. p 44 l 9 f drisiment r
dryryment, l 28 f it is I, r is it I. p 47 l 13 f T and r Fond, l 17 f being r
bring. p 48 l 7 f bold r bald. p 51 l 1 r good at canvasses and factions, l 32
add best servants. p 53 l 16 f now r new. p 54 l 12 and 13 f came r come. p 56
l 24 f invalued r involved. p 59 l 15 add is. p 60 l 7 add great. p 63 l 25 f
always r almost. p 64 l 16 f he r she. p 67 l 6 men dele, l 22 add seem, l 28 f
shouting r shooting. p 70 l ^4 r sentence. p 73 l 16 add these. p 76 l 2 add
if. p 79 l 7 f of r by, l 28 f society r faciety or satiety.

FINIS.

