A SERMON (Preached at the Lecture in Boston in New England the 18 th of the 1.
Month 1674. When two men were Executed, who had Murdered their Master)
WHEREIN IS SHOWED That Excess in wickedness does bring UNTIMELY DEATH.

The Second Impression.

By INCREASE MATHER, Teacher of a Church of Christ.

Prove. 10.27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened.

Ephesians. 6.2, 3, Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which is the first
commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live
long on the earth.

Poena ad paucos, Metus ad omnes.

Printed by R. P. for J. Brunning in Boston 1685

ECCLES. 7.17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish, why should
thou dye before thy time.?


Solomon being a man full of wisdom was very observant of the Providence of
God which happened in the Place, and in the Age wherein he lived. He does in this
Chapter give us an account of some of his observations that way. There is one
special Observation in this Context viz. in the 15 verse of this Chapter, where
we have the wise man saying, There is a Just man that perishes in his
righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his
wickedness. Now lest any one should abuse this Doctrine of the just man's
perishing in his righteousness, and the wicked man's prolonging his life in his
wickedness, He proceeds to a double exhortation.

1. He does exhort to beware of Errors on the right hand ver. 16. where there
are two Errors on the right hand mentioned.

1. Over much Righteousness, Be not righteous overmuch. Not that it is possible
for any man to have more of real Goodness in him than he ought to have: but he
may be more righteous in his own conceit, then he should be, and he may be
Superstitious, he may add to the Word of God which is the Rule of
Righteousness; Men may likewise be more severe in punishing offenders than the
Rule does allow of* the Corinthians did sometimes err on that hand. And that is
to be righteous over much.

2. Overmuch Wisdom, Neither make thy self overwise: Which must be understood
as the former particular; A man may be wiser in his own eyes then he ought to
be, he may be wise above what is written, He may pry into the secrets of the
Almighty, and endeavor to trace him whose ways, are past finding out, and
whose Footsteps are not known.

And this Exhortation is urged from the Consideration of the woeful Effect of
this overmuch Wisdom and Righteousness viz. Self destruction. Why should thou
destroy thy self? As the Moth that will venture too near to the Light,
destroys it self, so they that will be over-wise, and will needs know more
then God would have them to know, destroy themselves.

2. The other Exhortation is against Errors on the Vide Drusis Annot. in locum.
Left hand; of which there are two mentioned in this verse and in the words
which have been read in opposition to the 2 former spoken of in the verse
immediately foregoing.

1. Be not overmuch wicked. q. d. though you must not be righteous overmuch,
yet take heed of erring on the other extreme, which our nature is most prone
unto. The Hebrew word is [ do not wickedly much.] not that the Preacher does
allow of any wickedness at all, only his design is to show the evil of all
excess in wickedness.

2. Another Error on the left hand is Foolishness: Neither be thou foolish.
Heb. Noli esse stultus. Hieron.
[ neither be thou a fool.] because all wickedness is folly, and sinners are
fools, as afterward we shall show. And this exhortation is likewise pressed by
an argument taken from the miserable end that such sinners come to at last. God
in his righteous Providence does many times so order that they dye before their
time. Why should thou dye before thy time? It is as if it were said, Tametsi
ut improbi in suis sceleribus conscenescant, tamen epi to polu fit ut
improborum brevis et contracta vita fit, Cartwright in loc.
Though it be so that here and there a wicked man does prolong his life in his
wickedness, yet for-any one thence to-imbolden himself in sin, is the greatest
folly imaginable; for usually it falls out otherwise, that wickedness does
shorten the days of those that are guilty, of it*

The Doctrine therefore from the words is,

Doct. That the Providence of God does oftentimes so dispose, as that an
untimely death shall be the portion of him that has been wicked over much.

In the Doctrinal handling of this Truth, Three Things may be attended; 1. To
enquire how any one may be said to dye before his time. 2. What Overmuch
wickedness that is which is usually followed with untimely death, or when one
may be said to be wicked overmuch. 3. The Reasons of the Doctrine, why God in
his Providence does often so dispose as that an untimely death shall be the
Portion of such as have been wicked overmuch.

Q. 1. How can one be said to die before his time?

Answ. Not in respect of the Decree of God. No man shall dye before the time
which the Lord has determined be fulfilled. The time of every man's death is
appointed. Hence Job says Chap. 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will
I wait till my change come* and in the 15 verse of that Chapter it is said,
Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, th^^
^^st appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Not only the years but the
months, nay the days which every man shall live are determined by the Lord,
so as that he shall not live a day longer, nor die a day sooner than was before
appointed. But a man may be said to die before his time,

1. In respect of his own expectation. He may die before ever he does expect
death; Hence sinners are said to die suddenly, 1. These. 5.3. When they shall
say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon
a woman with child, and they shall not escape. SudSudden destruction comes
upon sinners, i. e. not only which is in it self sudden, but as to their
expectation so. Thus in the Parable concerning the wicked servant, Mat. 24.48,
49, 50. If that evil servant shall say, -- my Lord delayeth his Coming, -- the
Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an
hour that he is not aware of. So does he die before his time wherein he
expected death is come. It is often so with them that have been very wicked and
foolish; wherefore it is said in the parable concerning the Fool when he
thought he had many years to live Luke 12.20* God said unto him, thou Fool this
night shall thy soul be required of thee. -- Hence,

2. A sinner may be said to dye before his time, in respect of his preparation
for a dying hour. Death may come upon him before he is prepared to encounter
with that enemy: and then he dies indeed, In dying he shall dye, if death find
him unprepared, the second death takes hold on that soul. The Devils sometimes
said to Jesus Christ, art thou come to torment us before our time? Truly such a
soul goes to the place of Torment before the time There is many a sinner that
death finds without an interest in Jesus Christ, there is some sin that he has
not repented of, nay it may be he has not truly repented of so much as one
sin, and then he is not prepared to dye. It had been better for him that he had
never been been born, than that he should dye and go out of the world in that
condition.

3. A sinner may dye before that time be fulfilled, which according to the
ordinary course of nature he might have lived. And this is especially intended
here in the Text, why should thou die before thy time? Hebr. and not in thy
time, that is to say before that time which according to the ordinary course of
nature thou might have lived, be expired. Many times the Divine Providence
does so order as that they who have been wicked overmuch shall not live out
that time. Thus concerning the world of the ungodly which lived before the
flood, Eliphaz says, Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have
trodden, who were cut down out of time Job. 22.15, 16. See Mr. Caryl on Job.
22.16.
According to the ordinary course of nature, they might have lived a long time,
but they were cut down by the stroke of Death. Wicked men never dye before they
are ripe in sin, but they often dye before they are ripe in nature. They are
carried and chased out of the world by some violent death.

Sometimes this is brought to pass by the Lords immediate hand. If men be
generally wicked overmuch, the Lord sends public destroying Judgments
whereby Thousands dye before their time: So on the old world, so on Sodom and
Gomorrha, in the morning they were well and likely to have lived many a fair
day, but dead and damned before night. Those sore Judgments of Famine, Plague,
and Sword, come and sweep away multitudes before their time, when a people are
become wicked over much. And particular Judgments do hence come upon partiular
Persons, whereby they are cut off before their time. There was that wicked Er,
and his wicked brother Onan, did commit abominable uncleaness in the sight of
God, and therefore the Lord slew them that they dyed before their time. So
Nadab and Abihu were wicked over much, and there went out fire from the Lord
and devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord. Corah and his Accomplices,
wickedness was amongst them and in their Dwellings, and as the Psalmist
(alluding to that very Judgment) speaks, Death seized upon them* and they
went down quick into hell. Psalm. 55.15. Ananias and Saphira were wicked over
much when they committed Sacrilege, and also sinned and lied in a Church
Assembly, where there is a special presence of the Spirit of God and thence
became guilty of Lying to the Holy Ghost, wherefore first the one of them fell
down, and gave up the ghost, and then the other, and thence were both cast into
one grave, and this before their time. The Scripture is full of awful Instances
to this purpose. Again, sometimes Gods Vicegerents are improved as his
executioners of his wrath and justice upon such sinners. The Magistrate bears
not the Sword in vain, but is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil. Hence David speaks saying, I will early destroy all
the wicked of the land, that I may cut off the wicked doers from the city of
the Lord. Psalm. 101.8. I will early destroy them, in the Original it is in the
morning I will destroy them, because in those times Malefactors were executed
in the Morning, and that's his meaning, that he would see execution done upon
Capital Offenders. Thus Readiness cursed posterity was cut off by the hand of
Justice, because of the Murder which their Father had committed, and no doubt
but they had been some way accessory, in consenting or aproveing, or not duly
bearing witness against that iniquity.

Sometimes again, The Lord in a Judicial way gives up such sinners to the
power of Satan and their own Corruptions, so as that they become their own
executioners, as we see in Judas, who after he had brought himself under the
guilt of inocent blood, went to the Halter to let out his wretched soul.

But thus much may suffice to be spoken to the first enquiry.

We come to the second thing propounded,

Namely, What Overmuch wickedness that is which is usually followed with
untimely death? or when may a man be said to be wicked overmuch?

Answ. 1. When he does make himself more wicked than indeed he is. e. g. When
he does falsely accuse himself to be guilty of this or that which he was never
actually guilty of. There are such woeful foolish Creatures in the world that
glory in their shame, and take a pride in saying that they have committed this
or that abomination, which yet it may be they never did commit: It is just with
God that such should dye before their time, and that they should be dealt with
as if they were really guilty thereof; as we see in the instance of that
^^malekite who accused himself as having an hand in Saul's death, it is a
question whether he had so really or no, yet inasmuch as he accused himself,
David condemned him, 2. Sam. 1.16. David said thy blood be upon thy head, for
thy mouth has testified against thee saying, I have slain the Lords Anointed.
So when any poor Creature shall say that he has out-stood and sinned away the
day of grace, albeit the Holy Spirit is secretly striving with him still, or
that he has sinned against the Holy Ghost; or that his sin is greater than the
Mercy of God. As Francis Spira after his Apostasy uttered such desperate
Blasphemy as that, My sin (said he) is greater than the mercy of God. And thus
it was with despairing bloody Cain he said, mine iniquity is greater than can
be forgiven Genesis 4.13. Austin does well reply upon him mentiris Cain, that is a
lie Cain, thy sin is not greater than can be forgiven. Some have observed that
Cains desperation and Blasphemy was a greater evil than his Murder was, when
he shed the inocent blood of his own Brother. And indeed Despair lays the
Foundation for all excess in wickedness, it makes men to become no better than
Devils incarnate; and causes them to dye before their time; witness Judas who
in despair hanged himself And have not we in our days known or heard* of many
rueful instances of that kind?

2. When a man shall become guilty of such sins as are of a very heinous
nature, then he may be said to be wicked overmuch. There are scarlet sins,
Crimson abominations which the Heavens blush to behold. There are bloody
sinners whose souls lie bleeding under prodigious Guilt, even such as have been
guilty of evils, that by the Law of God and man are Capital Crimes, these are
they that have been wicked overmuch.

To mention only one or two Crimes,

Murder is a great and horrid Wickedness, and so Capital as that whoever has
been guilty of it may in no case be pardoned by man. Numb. 35.30 ^1. Whosoever
kills any person the murderer shall be put to death, moreover they shall
take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is guilty of death but
he shall be surely put to death. And they that have been guilty of this
wickedness, usually die before their time: according to that Scripture Psa.
55.23. But thou O God shall bring them down to destruction, bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days. It is thought by some that
Cain, (who was the first Murderer amongst men) dyed before his Time. The Jews
have a Tradition that Lamech killed Cain and a young man that was with him
hunting in the woods; To this purpose some understand that place (our Version
does evidently favor that Interpretation) Genesis 4.23, 24. Lamech said I have
slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. If Cain be avenged
seven fold surely Lamech seventy and seven fold. However the Providence of God
does usually so dispose as that they who have taken away the lives of others by
violence, shall themselves dye a violent and bloody death. Joab murdered Abner
and Amasa, and he (though an old man) dyed before his time, he that had shed
the blood of others, his own blood was shed for it at last. Joash conspired
against Zachariah and stoned him with stones, and afterward His own servants
conspired against him and slew him.

Many other instances are recorded in Scripture and in humane writings all
confirming the truth of this. Yea, God from Heaven does usually pursue this sin
with special signal testimonies of his righteous displeasure. Hence the Lord
has strange ways to discover this sin: Rather than the Murderer shall not be
found out the Heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up
against him. How often have the Fowls of heaven, and the dumb Beasts of the
earth brought Murder to light!

The Story Plutarch.
is ancient and famous concerning Bessus, who had murdered his own Father, and
sometime after the swallows making a noise in the Chimney (as it is the manner
of those birds to do) His guilty Conscience was afraid they had told of him,
whereupon he goes to kill the Swallows, and being asked the reason, why (said
he) the swallows do nothing but say Bessus has killed his Father, Bessus has
killed his Father: Whereby he was suspected, and upon Examination confessed the
fact.

It is also storied of a Clarks Examp. vol. 1. p. 380.
Soldier belonging to King Pyrrhus, that being slain, a dog which he had could
by no means be enticed from the dead body, but the King coming by, he fawned
upon Him, as it were craving help at his hands, whereupon he caused all His
Army to pass by in order, and when the Murderers came the Dog flew fiercely
upon them, and then, fawned upon the King the soldiers herehereupon examined,
confessed the Murder, and received condign Punishment. Many other instances to
this purpose I could produce, but I forbear.

Again, Rebellion is a Crime which they that are guilty of are wicked over
much. When inferiors shall wickedly rise up against Superiors. When Subjects
shall in a way of Rebellion rise up against the Authority which the Lord has
set over them: Such often dye before their time. Hence Christ says, All they
that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword, Matthew. 26.52. that is to say
they that take up the sword in a way of Rebellion against Lawful Authority.
That Doctor Gamaliel in his speech he made to the Council takes notice of two
examples concerning this: Act. 5.36, 37. ^heudas boasting himself to be
somebody, to whom a number of men, about four hundred joined themselves, were
slain, and all as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to naught:
after this man rose up Judas of Galilee, and drew away much people after him,
he also perished, and all even as many as obeyed him were dispersed. So when
servants shall rise up in Rebellion against their Masters, it is a wicked
thing. Wherefore even Jezebel could say, Had Zimri peace who slew his master?
2. King. 9.31. After he had slain his Master, had he peace in his own
conscience? Did he prosper after that day? Did not the hand of God follow him
till he himself was slain? Had Zimri peace who slew his Master?

So when Children shall rebel against their Parents their wickedness is
excessively great: And such Children do usually dye before their time, witness
the fifth Commandment where it is said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that
thy days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Therefore they that break this Commandment may expect that their days shall not
be long, but they shall dye before their time. We see it in Absalom, he was a
rebellious Child, and what came of him? was he not hanged at last? and three
darts thrust through his heart while he was yet alive: Travelers report that
in the same place where Absalom was buried, there is now a vast heap of stones
which is come to pass by this means; It is customary for every one that passes
by that place, to throw a stone upon Absalom, using these words, Thus shall it
be done to the son that rebels against his Father, Thus shall it be done to
the Child that rises up against his Parents.

3. When a man shall multiply transgression; then he may be said to be wicked
over much. When he shall commit the same sin over and over again. Once is too
much, but many times is over much indeed. Eccles. 8.12. Though a sinner do
evil an hundred times. Alas there is many a sinner that has done so: He has
made himself drunk an hundred times, He has been unclean and abominable in the
sight of God an hundred times, He has lied against his Conscience an hundred
times, then he has been wicked over much. So when a vile Creature shall add
sin to sin, as the Prophet complains of them Isai. 30.1. When he shall add
new transgressions to old sins, Sins of age to sins of Youth, latter to former
iniquities. What says the Scripture? 1. Pet 4.3. The time past of our life may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, etc. Therefore
when a sinner shall add new debts to the old score, it is more than suffices,
that is to say he is wicked overmuch.

4. They that are incorrigible in the ways of sin, are wicked over much. Who
sin against all means that can be used to reclaim them. There are such sinners
as do despise all means they will take no warning. Though God himself speaks
to them by awful Providence, taking some and hanging them up before their
eyes, yet they will go on still in their trespasses. And though they that are
the Lords Vicegernts on earth do establish and execute severe and righteous
Laws, and put sin and sinners to shame, yet they still continue to transgress
against the Lord: This does evidence a desperately wicked man. It is spoken
concerning a man that is beyond measure wicked, that he does run upon the thick
Bosses of the Buckler of the Almighty Job. 15.26. What is the Buckler of the
Almighty? It is the Word of God. And what are the thick Bosses of that Buckler?
They are the Threatenings and Sanctions annexed to that Word. When sinners shall
transgress in a Land where there are Laws established and regulated according
to the Word of God, and those Laws faithfully executed, they run themselves
upon the thick Bosses of the Buckler of the ALMIGHTY, and therefore are
desperately wicked. And there are that sin against the Light of the Gospel and
repoofs administered in the Word and Name of God: such are wicked over much, and
have cause to fear that they shall dye before their time. witness that awful
Scripture Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved and hardens his neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy. And there are that despise
reproofs, instructions, admonitions, exhortations, privately administered in
Families, by Masters, Parents; such are also wicked over much, and do often die
before their time: Witness the sons of Eli, of whom it is said, they hearkened
not to the voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them 1. Sam.
2.25. Does thy Father give thee good counsel? but will thou not hearken to him?
This is a sign that the Lord will slay thee. Remember those proud and profane
young men, the sons of Eli they regarded not what their Father said to them,
and therefore they dyed before their time. This comes of not harkening to the
voice of a Father.

5. They that mind nothing but the things of this world and the vanities and
lusts thereof, are wicked overmuch. Even they that live like Atheists without
God in the world. And this last particular suits with the scope of this
Context. For as they are righteous over much who under pretense of Religion
neglect their particular Callings; So they are wicked over much who neglect
duties of Religion out of respect to the world. There are that live in
continual neglect of God and of their own souls and Salvation; Hence no prayer
it may be not so much as in the Family, no Reading of the Scriptures, no
Meditation, no self-Examination. How do men live as if there were no world but
this! as if there were no God to serve, and they had no souls to save!
Certainly, all such are wicked over much.

And thus have we done with the second thing propounded in order to the
clearing of the Doctrine before us. We come to the third Particular, viz. To
enquire into the Reasons of this Doctrine,

Quest. 3. Why does God in his Providence oftentimes so dispose as that an
untimely death shall be the Portion of him that has been wicked over much?

For Answer, we shall only mention two Reasons, briefly.

Reas. 1. The Lord does this that He may manifest his righteous Displeasure
against sin. Hab. 1.13. He is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot
look on iniquity, that is to say with aprobation, or without detestation and
Indignation against sin. The Blessed holy God does bear an infinite detestation
and Indignation against Sin. Hence He leaves Marks of his Displeasure upon the
sinner. As God set a Mark upon Cain's forehead; so He sets a Mark of
Displeasure upon notorious Transgressors. Yea sometimes when he forgiveth the
sin, yet he does visit with tempoporal vengeance, that so the world might see
that sin is odious and abominable in the sight of God* Hence such sinners as
the Text speaks of, must dye before their time.

Reas. 2. That so others may thereby be warned and deterred from the Commission
of the like evils. Thus it was with Lot's wife, she dyed before her time, that
so others might be warned by her Example, to beware of becoming guilty of the
same sin, which she was so awfully punished for: therefore Christ said to his
Disciples, Luke 17.32. Remember Lot's wife: meaning so remember her, as that
you may for ever take heed of doing as she did. She was turned into a pillar of
Salt, that others might be seasoned thereby and preserved from the like evil.
God is wise and wonderful in his Providence, and knows how to order the
death of two or three so as to prevent the Destruction of many thereby. Hence
He has appointed that Justice shall be executed in a Solemn way upon Capital
offenders, that others may hear and fear and none may do any more so wickedly.
We find the Lord Himself gives this reason of this matter Deuteronomy. 13.8, -- 11.
Thou shall not hearken unto him neither shall thine eye pity him, neither
shall thou spare, but thou shall surely kill him: And all Israel shall hear and
fear and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you.

We come now to apply this Doctrine. There are two Uses to be insisted on, 1.
by way of Instruction or Information, 2. by way of Exhortation.

1. By way of Information.

Inform. 1. We may see by this, that Sin is the greatest Folly in the world.
Well might Solomon say as in the Text, neither be thou foolish, For to sin and
do wickedly, is the greatest Foolishness that ever was or can be. Sin is a
Departure from the Rule of Wisdom. For a man to part with his life for
nothing? is not that monstrous Folly? And thus does a wretched sinner do. Men's
sins are unfruitful works of darkness. What profit had you of those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? Sin is the most unprofitable thing in the world: It
is good for nothing, neither for body, nor Soul, nor Name, nor Estate, but
brings Death and Ruin upon all. A man by Sin (especially some sins) loses his
Name. A wound and dishonor does he get, and a reproach that shall not be wiped
away. And he loses his life, and that before his time as the Text shows;
yea and without Repentance will lose his soul for ever. Prove. 8.36* He that
sins against me wrongs his own soul. The Impenitent Sinner brings ruin upon
his own soul. Therefore Sin is folly, and the more sinful the more foolish: The
greatest sinners, are the greatest Fools in the world. Wherefore it is said
Eccl. 9.3. The heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in
their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead. Yea to the
damned! Oh what horrible madness is it, for any man, that so he may enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, to venture the eternal Damnation of his precious
and immortal soul.

Inform. 2. It follows from hence, that Shortness of days is in it self a
Judgment. For it is threatened as a punishment or wickedness. It is a fruit of
sin, and of the curse: If Adam had not sinned there would have been no short
lives, none of his Posterity should have had their lives shortened. And in the
times of the Restitution of all things, when the Curse shall be removed, it
will not be as at this day, Rev. 21.4. There shall be no more death. To be sure
there shall be no more such untimely death as our eyes do with sadness behold
this day. Look, as long life is in it self a blessing, and therefore is
promised as such in the Scripture Psalm. 91.16. With long life will I satisfy
him, Prove. 4.10. Receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many*
and 10.27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days. Whatever any true believer
has done or suffered for, or according to the will of God, whilst he was in
the world, shall come in upon the account at the last and great day, a glorious
reward of mercy shall be given for it; thence is it so great a mercy to live
long. So on the other hand, Short life is a great Judgment, and is often
threatened as such in the Scripture, Prove. 10.27. The years of the wicked shall
be shortened. Eccles. 8.13. Neither shall be prolong his days. And it is
mentioned as an heavy imprecation, Psalm. 109.8. Let his days be few. For when
a wicked man dies (dying in his sins) he is undone for ever: when once his
body is gone down into the pit of the grave, and his soul is gone down into the
pit of eternal Darkness, he cannot hope for the mercy of God, he cannot hope
for pardon of his Sin, he cannot hope for the salvation of his soul. Therefore
short life is in it self a judgment. Only as to the Elect of God it is turned
into mercy. As Afflictions are in themselves evil, and fruits of the Curse, but
to Believers they become the greatest blessings: So an untimely death is in it
self a great evil, but to one that belongs to the Election of Grace, it
becomes a wonderful mercy, for it hasteneth his eternal happiness and glory.

Inform. 3. Hence it likewise follows, that Righteousness is the way to obtain
Long Life. If Wickness bring untimely death, then Righteousness will deliver
from death. There is no righteous man but shall live in this world so long as
life shall be good for him to enjoy.

Object. But some one will say, do we not see that good men dye when they are
young as well as others?

Answ. Very true: As there are some that are too wicked to live long; So there
are others that are too good to live long, in such an evil wretched world as
this. Jeroboam's godly Son dyed in his youth. Josiah a most eminent servant of
the Lord, dyed in the midst of his days. Enoch, though the best man, and the
best Minister of God in all the world in his time, was taken out of the world
before he had lived half so long as men in those days were wont to live: but
then it would not be good for them to live any longer. God is only wise and
faithful, and therefore He takes his servants to himself when he sees that
life will not be best for them. Besides, a man may live long in a little time:
It is said the child shall dye an hundred years old Isa. 65.20. Though a child in
respect of years, yet he shall have the grace and gravity, the wisdom and
knowledge of a man that has lived an hundred years. And indeed that is most
desirable. It is a great Mercy in many respects, to be freed from the
prevailing Infirmities of old age, and therefore to live long in a little time
is most desirable. As I remember Mr. Cotton in an Epistle which he has
prefixed to one of Mr Norton's See Mr Cotton's Epistle before Mr. Norton's
Orthodox Evangelist.
Books takes notice of it with respect to Dr. Preston, that it was his
constant desire affectation and expression, that he might live long in a little
time, and the Lord granted him his desire of heart therein. Some live longer in
seven years, than others do in ten times seven years. They do more for God,
and more for his People in seven years, than others do in twenty, forty,
threescore, or in fourscore years. Moreover that promise of long life will be
fulfilled to the righteous in the life to come. As indeed all promises (and
threatenings too) are fully accomplished in the world to come. There the
righteous shall live for ever. It was promised to Christ, that he should be
satisfied with long life, Psalm. 91. ult. And that he should prolong his days,
Isa. 53.10. Yet we know that Christ was not in this world much above two and
thirty years: how then did he prolong his days? in the other world his days
are prolonged to Eternity, according to the Scripture Psalm. 21.4. He asked life
of thee, and thou gave it him, length of days for ever and ever.

Use. 2. Let it be a word of Exhortation. 1. Here is a general word of
Exhortation, 2. more particular.

1. Let us all be exhorted to make a right improvement of such awful
Providence as the Text speaks of. There is such a providence before us this
day, which has occasioned me to speak from these words at this time: For truly
I think God would not have us suffer such solemn awful Providence as these to
pass away without taking special notice of them, and making some good
improvement thereof.

You will say, But what use shall we make of this awful Providence?

Ans. It should cause us humbly to reflect upon our own vile natures. Have we
been kept from the like Evils that others have been guilty of? no thanks to our
own hearts, for we have the same nature that they have, and if God had given us
up to our own hearts lusts, we should have been as bad as they, or as any of
the Children of men that ever were in the world. Wherefore the Apostle in the
third Chapter to the Romans, discoursing of the state of men by nature, says,
Their feet are swift to shed blood ver, 15. Why; is every natural man a
murderer? Truly he has a murderers heart within him, and he would quickly
shed blood, he would actually commit murder, if God did not restrain him. How
should this thought humble us and make us vile in our own eyes! As I remember
it is storied concerning that Mr Bradford.
Blessed Martyr, that if he did hear of any that were condemned or accused on
the aceount of Witchcraft, Murder, Robberies, or any other Impiety. He would
smite upon his breast and say, In this breast of mine, is that which would have
caused me to have been guilty of the same evil if the Grace of God had not
prevented me. And it is recorded of one of the Ancients Bernard.
That he was never told of any great wickedness committed by others, but it did
him some good. It made him the more distrustful of his own heart; He would say,
Ille heri, tu hodie, ego cras: He committed that sin yesterday, thou did
commit the same sin to day, and I shall commit it to morrow, if the Grace of
God do not restrain and prevent me.

2. Another Use which we should make of this awful Providence is, To Consider
sadly whether there be not some prevailing evil, that the Lord does hereby
rebuke and seek to humble us for. I fear there is such an evil, I mean with
respect to those woeful breaches of the fifth Commandment which are to be found
amongst us. This is a prevailing evil, we may see it every where. How do
inferiors rise up against Superiors! Look into the Common wealth, and we shall
find that Magistrates are not honored and acknowledged in their places as
ought to be. Look into Churches, and how do some carry it there as if the
Scripture were Apochrypha! even that Scripture Heb. 13.17. where it is said
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves for they watch
over your souls. Look into Schools, and how do children contemn and despise and
disobey their Masters, contrary to the fifth Commandment! Look into Families,
and Oh what disobedient children* O what unruly servants may we find there! Nay
Look into the streets, and there we may find and observe (I have sometimes
beheld it, not altogether without grief and shame) the Child behaving himself
proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable: so that in
this respect New England is in a great measure become degenerate from the GOOD
MANNERS of the Christian world: If there be any prevailing iniquity in
New England this is it. And therefore no marvel that such an awful Providence
does come to rebuke and humble us: that servants have conspired together to
kill their Master. There has been no such deed done or seen in our Israel
before now. And mark what I say, If ever New-Enland be destroyed, this very sin
of disobedience to the fifth Commandment will be the ruin of this Land.

3. Another Use we should make of this Provicence is, to beware of those sins
which do oftentimes end in untimely death. Pride is one of those sins. Corah
was a proud man, he could not bear to be subject to that order neither in
Church nor Commonwealth, which God had appointed, and He dyed not the common
death of all men. Haman was exceeding proud and high minded, and his pride
brought him to the Gallows at last. But what need we go far for Examples? One
of these poor condemned Creatures that is here standing before the Lord this
day, says that he thinks his pride has been his ruin: I asked him the other
day in the Prison, what sin it was that he thought in his Conscience God was
provoked with him for, so as to leave him to that which has brought him under
this Condemnation? He told me he thought it was for his Pride. For he thought
much of it that such an one as He should be a servant, (and he sometimes used
such words as these) I am flesh and blood as well as my Master and therefore I
know no reason why my Master should not obey me as well as I obey him. did he
say, and now we see what his Pride has brought him to: therefore beware of
that sin.

And Idleness is a sin that does bring many to a miserable end at last. It was
one of those sins which caused Thousands in Sodom and Gomorrah to dye before
their time in a dreadful manner. As for one of those poor condemned creatures,
Idleness has been his Bane* he would not diligently follow the Calling which
he was set in, but lived an Idle vagrant life, and what is he now come to!
Therefore beware of that sin.

And Disobedience to Parents is a sin that is often punished with untimely
death. (as was partly intimated before) One of these that are to be executed
this day, does confess that his disobedience to his Parents has provoked the
Lord to bring this misery upon him. He says that when he was a child his
father gave him good instructions and prayed for him, but he regarded it not,
His father would have had him gone to School, but he would not, his father
would have had him gone to a Trade but he would not, and after his Father was
dead he would not be subject to those that had the care and Charge of him, but
ran away from them, and since that from time to time has run away from them
that have been his Masters. And now behold what all this Disobedience has
brought him unto! All you disobedient children that are here before the Lord
this day, hearken to the word of the Lord, there is a Scripture which methinks
should strike terror and trembling into your souls, it is that Prove. 30.17.
The eye that mocketh his father and despises to obey his mother, the ravens of
the valley shall pick it out and the young eagles eat it. The eye that mocketh
his father. Stuborness and contempt is to be seen in the eye, therefore the
meaning is, that he that is stubborn and rebellious against his father shall be
so dealt with. Well, a Father has many times that Wisdom and Authority with
him that the child dare not disobey him, but he cares not for his mother;
therefore it is added, he that despises to obey his mother. You children that
disobey your mothers, hearken to this, the Ravens are like to feed upon you:
that is to say such sinners shall come to an untimely death, and it may be not
have a decent honorable burial: it is to be feared that such children will
come to the Gallows, and be hanged up in Gibbets for the Ravens and Eagles to
feed upon them if they will. And it is greatly to be observed, that the most of
those that die upon the Gallows, do confess that they have been guilty of
disobedience to Parents. Yea, God is so provoked with such wicked children, as
that he does sometimes leave them against nature to destroy themselves, as a
just punishment of unnatural disobedience. There was an awful example of this,
which happened in this Country about fifteen years ago: I was not my self in
this Land at that time, but I have had an account of it from those that that
knew it. A young man * drowned himself, but before he did that he left a
writing directed to his Father, wherein he had such words as these, O Father, I
have kept my soul as long as ever I could, my ruin was the pride and
stubborness of my tender years, which should have been fetched out with sharp
Correction: and evil counsel and company has been my undoing. I have a youner
Brother* that follows my steps, he is going the wide way to destruction, I
beseech you take pains with him, and correct him as well as counsel him, that
he may not be undone soul and body as well as I. Words to this purpose did that
perishing young man (though the son of a Godly Father) write when he was going
into Eternity. You disobedient children, think of it. And the Lord strike it
home to your hearts.

Drunkenness is a sin that often brings those that are guilty of it to a
miserable end at last. A vile creature it may, be when he is drunk, he will go
and drown himself, and his soul go down into eternal darkness in that
condition, or he will commit some horrid sin, for which the Sword of Justice
will cut him off. When he is drunk he will commit Adultry, or a Rape it may,
Alas we hear that such a Villainy has been committed of late, in a Plantation
not far off; Or in his drink he will kill a man, and so dye before his time.
Therefore beware of that sin.

And Coveteousness is a sin, which many times brings untimely: death, it did so
upon Achan. The love of Money is the root of all evil. This has occasioned many
a bloody yea unnatural Murder. v. Clarks Examp. vol. 2. p. 458.
The story is famously known of a man in Cornwall, that his son having been many
years absent from him and coming home with a Portmantue full of silver and
gold, and his parents not knowing who he was, for the sake of his money conspire
together and in the night time cut his throat, the next morning when they knew
it was their own son whom they had murdered, they did in anguish and horror
both of them destroy themselves. And there is a Tragical story lately printed,
of Henry Jones executed at Munmouth in Wales March 11. 1671*
A profane young man that killed his own mother that bare him, out of hopes that
when she was dead, he should enjoy her estate. For which he was put to most
dreadful death: Weights of Iron and stone were laid upon him for 2 days
together until his life and soul were pressed out of his body. This Execution
was done about four years ago* Therefore take heed and beware of Coveteousness.

Also take heed of giving way to Passions, Revenge, Anger and the like. These
two condemned creatures, their Master corrected them, and as they thought dealt
hardly by them, and therefore in wicked passion, wrath and rage they would take
an ax and knock him on ye head for which now they must die.

Beware also of giving way to Discontents and sullen Melancholy, for that also
causes some to dye before their time. There is a lamentable story lately
published: Nicholas Fever, born in the Isle of Jersey* and Robert Driver born
in the Isle of Orkney in Scotl'd.
A Woman in pangs of Melancholy discontent went to destroy her self several
times, but was by the Providence of God prevented, but afterward giving way to
those temptations, and not humbling her self on the account of former
miscarriages, she embrewed her hands in the blood of her own child, for which
she was afterward executed near to the place where she had committed that
unnatural Cruelty and Murder. Therefore let us take heed of giving way to the
distemp'red workings of our own spirits.

But thus for the word of general Exhortation.

2. Let me more particularly exhort, those that have been wicked overmuch. You
that have bin guilty of great sins and provocations before the Lord, O repent
and turn to God in Jesus Christ. Return return O sinners, return return, Stop
sinners! stop, go no further, if you love your lives go no further* why should
you dye before your time? it may be repentance may save your lives. There have
bin some that have been guilty of capital crimes, yet when they have repented
and turned to God in Jesus Christ, he has covered their sins that the world
has never known of them. However if there be true repentance, the lives of
your souls shall be saved. In some cases repentance cannot prevent the first
but it will always (if sound and sincere) prevent the second death. O then
turn to God in Jesus Christ.

And I would apply this more particularly unto Nicholas Fever, born in the
Isle of Jersey* and Robert Driver born in the Isle of Orkney in Scotl'd.
these poor condemned creatures who are standing in the solemn presence of the
Lord, and whose naked souls must by and by appear before God the Judge of all,
to receive a sentence either of eternal life, or of eternal death: Hearken you
to the word of the Lord this once: I beseech you mind what I say because you
are now come to your last hour. It may be there are many here this day that
this is the last Sermon that ever they shall hear: but as for you the thing is
certain, you shall never hear another Sermon; and therefore let these words
sink down into your ears and hearts.

A few Considerations and Directions let me spread before you. Consider,

1. That you have been wicked over much. The sin which you are now to die for
is exceeding great, even Murder! the Scripture says that no murderer has
eternal life. And again, that Murderers shall have their part in that lake
which burns with fire and brimstone which is the second death. And no doubt you
have bin guilty of many other grievous sins, which have provoked the Lord to
leave you unto the commission of this horrid murder. This murder also is
exceedingly aggravated in respect of the person whom you have slain, even your
master! O how have you risen up in rebellion against the glorious Image of God,
not only in that you have shed the blood of a man who was made after the Image
of God, but such a man as had peculiar dominion over you, in that respect you
have offered fearful violence to the sacred Image of the blessed God. So that
you have transgrest the 5 th and 6 th Commandments at once in the highest
degree that you could do. and since your apprehension, yea conviction and
condemnation, you have told many lies (at least one of you, it is to be feared
both of you) against your conscience.

2. Consider that now you must die before your time. especially one of you a
poor young creature that has hardly lived 20 years in this world, and must this
day be turned out of it: yea both of you dye before your time. You might
according to the ordinary course of nature have lived many a year. You must be
cut off by a violent and dreadful death. For indeed the anger of the Lord would
fall upon this whole country where your sin has been committed, if you should
be suffered to live.

3. Consider that there is yet a possibility for you to escape the 2nd. death.
Though your sin be very great, yet God can pardon it. I remember a passage
concerning a poor creature that was condemned to dye for wickedness he had been
guilty of (I the rather mention it because he was Countryman to one of you)
but when he was in Prison gave good hopes of his unfeigned repentance, and when
he came to the place of execution, See Fulfilling of Scriptures, page 233.
he had this expression O! God is a great forgiver, God is a great forgiver. So
I say to you in his name the Lord is a great forgiver, it is His Name to
forgive iniquity transgression and sin. Yea and he has (upon deep and
unfeigned repentance) forgiven those that have committed this sin which you are
now to suffer for. Manasseh shed much innocent blood, yet when he humbled
himself greatly, the Lord was entreated for him. There are some in Heaven that
were once bloody sinners. David was delivered from blood guiltiness: upon his
repentance 'twas said to him, the Lord has put away thy sin thou shall not die
an to the 2nd death he did not dye. And Saul (afterward Paul) had once the
guilt of blood upon him and therefore he made his confession but (...) to the
Lord, saying, Lord, when the blood of the Martyr Steven was shed, I also was
standing by and consenting to his death* yet when he did repent and turn to God
in Jesus Christ, God forgave him his iniquity. Know therefore, that there is
Mercy enough with God to pardon and save as great sinners as you are. And know
that Jesus Christ the son of God, came to save the chief of sinners. There is
merit and righteousness enough in Jesus Christ. He was bruised for our
iniquities, and wounded for our transgressions. The wounds of Christ can make
amends for those wounds which you gave your Master, when you slew him. The
blood of Christ can satisfy for the blood which you shed, Jesus does deliver
from wrath to come. And he does not exclude you from salvation by him, if you
do not by impenitency and unbelief exclude your selves. Neither can the death
you suffer hinder the salvation of your souls, incase you truly repent and
believe. Jesus Christ has been made a curse, that so he might redeem from the
curse of the law. Yea He (the blessed son of God) was hanged upon a tree though
he never knew any sin, only for the sins of his people, and therefore has
sanctified all manner of Deaths unto those yt shall believe on Him. Oh consider
of it and let it break our hearts.

4* Consider. Presently it will be too late for you to think of these things.
when once you are dead, when once your souls are out of your bodies, it will be
too late for you to think of these matters. There Is no repenting in the Grave,
no believing in Hell. Behold now is your accepted time, now is the hour of your
salvation, If you do not now accept of Jesus Christ upon his own terms, you
will be undone and damned to all Eternity.

By way of Direction I shall speak 2 or 3 words.

1. Do what you can that God may have glory by you, that little time that you
have to live. Therefore see that you solemnly warn others, (especially young
ones) to take heed of those evils which your consciences tell you have made
way, for your destruction. And see that you be sincere and ingenuous in making
Confession of your sin. The Scripture says If we confess our sins, i. e. with
a penitent broken heart, desirous never more to Commit them, God is faithful to
forgive them* And again, He that confesses and forsakes shall find mercy, but
he that hides his sin shall not prosper. I charge you in the Name of God, as
you will answer it by and by before his Judgment seat, that you do not deny or
disown what you know is truth: and I urge this the rather, because you have not
been so ingenuous in confessing your evil as God and men have expected from
you. You accuse and impeach one another. The one of you says, that the other
killed his Master, and you only stood by and did not strike one blow, and so
does the other say; you accuse him and he accuses you. But deceive not your
selves, if you deny what you know is truth, though God be most merciful, yet God
that made you will not have mercy on you, and though Christ be a Savior for
great sinners, He then will not save you. The devil has brought your bodies to
ruin, and now his great design is to destroy your souls; He knows if he can
persuade you not to give glory to God by confessing, he shall have your souls
for ever. I tell you truly if you now disown the truth, when once your souls
are out of your bodies, they shall suffer the Vengeance of Eternal fire.

2. Look up to God in Jesus Christ, that he would give you Repentance and Faith
unfeigned. You cannot convert your selves, but God can do it: therefore look up
to him for that end, and cry mightily to him as for your lives. If the
Magistrate should say to you (they may not say so, for then the displeasure of
God would come upon them and upon this people) that if you would cry earnestly
for your lives you should have them, O how earnest would you be? Behold the God
of Gods says to you this day (and in his Name I proclaim it) that if you seek
unto him with all your hearts, it is possible that the sentence of eternal
death which is upon your souls may be revoked. Oh then pray for the lives of
your souls. I remember it is storied of a poor woman that being condemned to
dye, as soon as the sentence was past, she fell a crying and shrieking in a
lamentable manner, the Judge rebuked her and bad her hold her peace, but she
replied O my Lord it is for my life, it is for my life. So I say to you, O cry
to the Lord for Grace and pardoning Mercy, it is for the lives of your souls,
yea it is for the lives of your Souls.

And further to Awaken hereunto,

3. Think sadly of Eternity. O ETERNITY ETERNITY! It is an Amazing Meditation.
There was a man that said Mentioned by Dr. Preston in his Sermons on the
Attributes, Page. 165.
If I were to endure the wrath of God for a Thousand years only, methinks of
could bear it; but when I think of ETERNITY I am Amazed. I Beseech you think
seriously of this. I might Charge you, and I do so in the Name of God, but I
also beseech you, though you are poor, vile, Condemned Creatures, yet as I said
to you in the Prison, so I say in this solemn Audience. I could be content to
lie down at your feet, upon condition that I might be Instrumental of good to
your souls. So greatly do I desire (God is witness) your Salvation; Therefore I
pray you for the Lord's sake, I pray you for your immortal Souls sake, that you
would by these things to heart, and we will once more cry unto the Lord that He
would have Mercy and Compassion upon those precious and immortal souls of yours.

Tibi Domine.

