SEASONABLE MOTIVES.
To our DUTY and ALLEGIANCE, (by a Lover of the Peace of New England) offered
to the Consideration of his Neighbors and Countrymen.
WHat were the grounds and inducements that moved us to seize on the Governor
and other principal Persons concerned in the Government under King James, and
that we unanimously declared for the Prince of Orange shall not need here to be
mentioned, I Am sure our Intention was never to depart from our Loyalty and
Allegiance to the Crown of England, which now since it has pleased God to
place on the Heads of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary,
who are owned and proclaimed as such through out all their Majesty's Kingdoms,
Territories and Dominions, and perticularly by us; we are the more firmly
obleiged to testify and bear Obedience to them in the best and most dutiful
manner we can.

And therefore though upon misinformations or mistaken notions of things, we have
for sometime suffered many inconveniences (which have produced great loss and
damage to our Country and persons) in hopes of some Directions from England
for our firmer Settlement, yet since those hopes by the Circumstances of
Affairs in Europe, have hitherto failed us; and many things have by our search
and enquiry into matters of the Government and actions of several persons,
appeared to us much otherwise than they were represented, and since though we
have had in our hands and keeping all public papers, and acquainted our
selves with the Letters and Correspondency which those in Office and Government
had, both at home and in foreign parts; we cannot find any grounds to charge
the Plott or Design on them of endeavoring to sell the Country, or procure
any Violence to be done to, or acted upon the Inhabitants as was suggested: It
is highly necessary and propper for us (not regarding our past actions which
speedy Amendment may the easier pass by) to consider in what state and
condition we now stand with respect to our Duty and Allegiance to the King and
Queen of England, as becomes good Christians and loyal Subjects; and therein
these two things offer themselves propperly for our Consideration.

1. What is required of us by our Allegiance, and whether there be not a
lawful Authority, or Persons well and sufficiently authorized from that crown
to rule and govern us, and whom we ought to submit to, assist and obey, not
only for wrath, but for conscience sake.

2. Whether the seeming Government now imposed on us be any ways lawful, or
such as with our Allegiance and a good Conscience we ought to yield obedience
to, or whether it be not in the law mere usurpation and tyranny.

And in the first place we must know that it is required of us by our
Allegiance, that we bear a true and faithful obedience and subjection to our
Sovereign, This obedience is an incident inseparable to every Subject; for as
soon as he is born he owes by birth right Legiance and obedience to his
Sovereign. (...) vinculum (...). As the ligatures or strings do knit together
the joints of all parts of the body, so does Legiance join together the
Sovereign and all his subjects, and therefore subjects are bound to obey their
Sovereign, and he is called their Liege Lord, because he should maintain and
defend them.

We are not only to submit and yield obedience to the King as Supreme, but unto
Governors as them that are sent by him, and unto all other Officers and
Ministers lawfully placed in Authority under him.

It is very well known to us all that Sr. Edmond Andros is a Governor sent by
the King, appointed and Authourized by Letters Patents under the great Seal of
England, to exercise authority and Government over us in this their Majesty's
Territory and Dominion of New England. And we must also know for a certain
truth, That that power and authority given to him, cannot determine or be
superseded by the Death or Removal of the late King James, but by their
Majesty's express command, and the Grant of the Government by Letters Patents
to some other person. And though force and violence may restrain and hinder his
person from the Discharge of his duty, yet the power and authority vested in
him is not thereby lessened or diminished; it is we are only wanting in our duty
and Allegiance, and so far put our selves out of the Kings protection as we
deny or refuse the means or authority he has appointed for the same.

The King in his political Capacity never dies. Therefore is there no time
when it can be said there is no King, the inconveniency would be too great if
it were, and we never know the Death or Removal of one but by the proclaiming
of the other, and then our Allegiance becomes due to him that is seated on the
Throne: and so it is with Governors and other Officers in Government as well
as private subjects. Their Allegiance and Duty is transferred to the Successor
as well as ours, and they become servants of him who sits on the throne, and
want no new orders or authority to maintain the Government committed to their
Charge under the Successor, as well as under that prince who granted the
powers, for it must never be admitted that any place or people can be without
Government by Reason of the Succession of the Supreme.

It is he then only that is vested with lawful Power from our Sovereign, him
therefore we ought in duty and conscience to obey, and all Officers and
Ministers authorized under him: for they are not his but the Kings Officers and
ministers, the King being the Head of the Government, and the Governor only
his chief Officer or minister here entrusted and authorized to act in their
Majesty's name and behalf, and this we must do if we either regard Loyalty or
Conscience, which out of Love to you all, cannot forbear to press and move you
to.

In the second place, the seeming Government now imposed upon us, as it has no
foundation or Authority, so cannot be able to support it self: and if we
endeavor by force and Violence to keep it up, we both wrong our consciences
before God, and make our selves criminal to our Sovereign in the highest
nature, and at once divest their Majesty's of the Chiefest Jewel of their
Crown, which is Power, they having the command of all their People to rule and
govern, and not they them. Shep. grand Abridgem't.
Besides, another great mark of their Sovereignty, is Omnipresence, for they
are present in all their Courts and with all their Officers and Ministers in
their Offices, and therefore any abuse or contempt offered to them is done to
the King and Queen, in respect of the Authority they are clothed with.

The Pretense of power to govern by virtue of the Charter granted to the late
Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in N. England, is most weak and
groundless, for that Charter was several years since by due Course of Law in
the Kings Courts at Westminster, Condemned, made Null, and Cancelled, and on an
Exemplification of the Judgment against it under the broad Seal of England and
power of Government given to a President and Council, Anno 1686. The then
Governor and Company laid down the Government and left it to the President and
Council who took upon them the Government accordingly: by virtue whereof the
body politic of that Corporation was dissolved, and the Succession determined.
And there is no possibility by law for any that were formerly Members of that
Corporation, to take upon them that Government, until they are again lawfully
established into their former political Capacity, which they cannot be,
without their Majesty's new Grant, and so are now in no other capcity but as
private persons; and as such to take upon them the Government, and to make
Rates and Taxes upon the people, is but mere Ursurpation and Tyranny, which
none ought to submit to or obey but declare and protest against and endeavor
to apprehend and secure the Actors as the greatest Traitors and Criminalls to
their Majestyes and Country.

The Vote or Consent of Ten Thousand tho it may give greater force and
Violence, yet gives no more right or power in Law than the Vote or Consent of
one private person; and therefore there can be no color of Authority for
Government but such as is lawfully derived from the Supreme head.

It Is not too late to think of these things, for we have suffered enough already
for want of being in the right way and having a lawful power over us. If any
thing in the Governors Commission seem to absolute, or that which we
understand not well, or that possibly may be amiss, it is not our interests to
condemn the Whole for that for doubtless the power of Government is in the
King and Queen only, and all inferior Officers and Ministers ought to be
appointed by them, therefore we must not lay them all aside at once and (...)
without any Authority or (...). The worst Government is better than none; and
we had better support that which has real Authority, and may help to protect
us, than that which is only imaginary, without any Authority, and can only
hurt and ensnare us, and bring miseries on ourselves and posterity.

These Things are well worth our Consideration seasonably; and if well Resolved
and put in practice may help to gloss and excuse any past mistaken Actions,
save our Country from further spoil and Desolation, and in great measure
regaine our good names and Credit abroad, and put us and our Neighbors into a
firm Unity whereby we may be enabled not only to protect and defend our selves
against the French, but to Annoy them, of which never was greater need than at
this Time, when our Weakness in Government and Divisions expose us to imminent
Danger in case of an Attack, as we hear has been already made on other of
their Majesty's Dominions.

I have no other end herein than to bring you into the ways of God and Peace;
to which, Obedience to lawful Government and Authority, I Am sure is a
principal step, and which, in my Opinion (considering the face of things in
Europe, and the latest News we have from our friends there) can only give
present Ease to our injured and Distressed Country.

I am in all love etc. A. B.

Philadelphia. printed by Will. Bradford. Anno 1689.


