DECLARATION. Of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty at the Rendezvous at
Nottingham, November 22. 1688.
WE the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties assembled
together at Nottingham, for the defense of the Laws, Religion and Properties,
according to those free born Liberties and Privileges, descended to us from
our Ancestors, as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, (not doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will
represent us to the rest of the Nation in the most malicious dress they can put
upon us) do here unanimously think it our Duty to declare to the rest of our
Protestant Fellow Subjects the Grounds of our present Undertaking

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties and Properties are about to be rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent, 1: by the King's
dispensing with all the Established Laws at his pleasure. 2. By displacing all
Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing others in their
room that are known Papists, deservedly made incapable by the Established Laws
of our Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most Corporations in the Land. 4.
By discouraging all persons that are not Papists, Preferring such as turn to
Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and conscientious Judges, unless they would
contrary to their Consciences, declare that to be Law which was merely
arbitrary. 6. By branding all men with the name of Rebels that but offered to
justify the Laws in a legal Course against the arbitrary proceedings of the
King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By burthening the Nation with an
Army, to maintain the violation of the Rights of the Subjects. 8. By
discountenancing the Established Reformed Religion. 9. By forbidding the
Subjects the benefit of Petitioning, and construing them Libellers; so rendering
the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their arbitrary Ends. And many more such like,
too long here to enumerate.

We being made thus sensible of the Arbitrary; and Tyrannical Government that
is by the Influence of Jesuitical Councels coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our Posterity over to such a
condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions inevitably
threaten; we will to the utmost of our power, oppose the same, by joining with
the Prince of Orange, (whom we hope God Almighty has sent to rescue us from
the Oppressions aforesaid) will use our utmost endeavor for the recovery of
our almost ruined Laws, Liberties, and Religion; and herein we hope all good
Protestant Subjects will with their Lives and Fortunes be assistant to us, and
not be bugbear'd with the opprobrious terms of Rebels, by which they would
fright us, to become perfect Slaves to their tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpations; for we assure our selves, that no rational and unbyassed person
will judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have Sworn at their Coronations; which Oath, how well it has been observed of
late, we desire a free Parliament may have the Consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law; but he was always
accounted a Tyrant that made his Will the Law; and to resist such an one, we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense; and in this Consideration
we doubt not of all honest men's assistance, and humbly hope for, and implore
the great God's protection, that turns the hearts of his people as pleases
him best, it having been observed, That people can never be of one mind without
his inspiration, which has in all Ages confirmed that observation, Vox Populi
est Vox Dei.

The present restoring of Charters, and reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on Magdalen College Fellows is plain, are but to still the
people, like plums to Children, by deceiving them for a while; but if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, till this present storm that threatens the
Papists be past, as soon as they shall be resetled, the former Oppression will
be put on with greater vigor, but we hope in vain is the Net spread in the
sight of the Birds: For 1. The Papists old Rule is, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, though Popish Religion is the
greatest Heresy. And (2) Queen Mary's so ill observing her promises to the
Suffolk men that helped her to her Throne. And above all (3) the Popes
dispensing with the breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises, at his pleasure
when it makes for the Service of Holy Church, as they term it. These we say are
such convincing Reasons to hinder us from giving Credit to the aforesaid
Mock-Shews of Redress, that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved by a freely Elected Parliament, to whom
under God we refer our Cause.

The DECLARATION of the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, In and about the Cities
of London and Westminster, Assembled at Guildhall, 11th. December. 1688.
WE doubt not but the World believes that, in this Great and Dangerous
Conjuncture, We are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. And We did reasonably hope, that the King having issued his
Proclamation, and Writs for a free Parliament, We might have rested secure
under the Expectation of that Meeting: But His Majesty having withdrawn
himself, and as we apprehend, in order to His Departure out of this Kingdom,
by the Pernicious Councels of Persons ill affected to Our Nation and Religion;
We cannot, without being Wanting to Our Duty, be silent under those Calamities,
wherein the Popish Counsels which so long prevailed, have miserably involved
these Realms. We do therefore Unanimously resolve to apply Our Selves to his
Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great kindness to these Kingdoms, so
vast Expense, and so much hazard to his own Person, has undertaken, by
endeavoring to procure a free Parliament, to rescue Us, with as little
Effusion, as possible, of Christian Blood from the imminent Dangers of Popery
and Slavery.

And We do hereby Declare, That We will, with Our outmost Endeavors, assist
his Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein Our
Laws, Our Liberties and Properties may be secured, the Church of England in
particular, with due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the
Protestant Religion and Interest over the whole World may be Supported and
Encouraged to the Glory of God, the happiness of the established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom,
that may be herein concerned.

In the mean time, We will endeavor to preserve as much as in us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts Adjacent, by taking Care to Disarm all Papists, and
secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, who are in or about the same.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by Us, for promoting his
Highness's Generous Intention for the public Good, We shall be ready to do it
as occasion shall Require.

W. Cant. Tho. Ebor. Pembroke. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle. Craven.
Alesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkeley. Rochester, New port. Weymouth. P.
Winchester. W. Asaph: Fran. Ely. Tho Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. P. Wharton. North
and Gray. Chandos. Montague. T. Jermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Culpeper. Crewe.
Osulston.


WHereas His Majesty has privately this Morning withdrawn himself, We the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are Subscribed, being Assembled at
Guild Hall in London, having agreed upon, and Signed a Declaration, Entitled,
The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, Assembled at Guild Hall, 11 Dec. 1688. Do desire the
Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke, the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount
Weymouth, the Right Reverend Father in God Lord Bishop of Ely, and the Right
Honorable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend his Highness the Prince of
Orange with the said Declaration, and at the same time acquaint His Highness
with what We have further done at that Meeting. Dated at Guild Hall the 11 th
of December, 1688.

To Edward Jones Printer at the Savoy.
WE the Peers of this Realm, being Assembled with some of the Lords of the
Privy Council, Do hereby Order and Require You forthwith to Print and Publish
the Declaration herewith sent unto You. At the Council Chamger in White Hall,
the 12 th of December. 1688.

Tho, Ebor. Halifax. Kent. Anglesey. Carlisle. Alesbury. Sussex. Berkeley
Nottingham. P. Winchester. Tho. Petriburg. Tho. Roffen. North and Gray.
Chandos. T. Jermyn. Crow. Osuls^on.


Reprinted and Sold by Samuel Green of Boston, 1689.


