AN ELEGY ON The Much-to-be-deplored DEATH OF That Never-to-be-forgotten
PERSON, The Reverend Mr. NATHANAEL COLLINS;

Who After he had been many years a faithful Pastor to the Church at Middletown
of Connecticut in New England, about the Forty third year of his Age Expired;
On 28 th. 10. month 1684.

Testor, Christianum hic de christiano vera prefer Hier. Epist. Paulae. Sic
oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. Dignum laud viram musa vetat mori.
Horat BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND Printed by Richard Pierce for Obadiah Gill. Anno
Christi 1685.

Reader;
T O Lament the Dead in Verse, having been even from the Days of David until
Now, in some sort almost as Common as Death it self, an Apology for that thing
at this time is altogether superstuous: Nor have the Noblest Hands disdained to
scan Potetical measures on their Fingers, though an Annatus has derided a Twis^
for not counting that Exercise beneath him. But there seems more needful an
Excuse for the meaness of this Composure, which- is born before its Time from a
Brain disused to such Performances; in which I have been so far from the
accuracy of Virgil, who having laid out eleven years upon his AEneids, after
all judged them not polished enough to be published, that a few stolen hours
were all I had to shape them in, and to which I could never have been drawn, if
the Subject of these Rhythmes, had like the Gentleman in Thuanus upon his
Deathbed, given sufficient caution That his Hearse should not be burdened with
bad Funeral verses. For this, my utmost Plea is, That the sense of Duty,
awakened by the invitation of others hereunto, has produced this Rapsody, for a
Censure on which, I appeal from Curiosity to Candor, expecting no Laurel on
this occasion but what I merit by my good Affection to the Memory of a True
Israelite worthy to be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

C. M.

FUNERAL-TEARS At the Grave of The much Desired And Lamented Mr. NATHANEEL
COLLINS? Who changed Death for LIFE, December, 28. 1684.
-- But shall he unobserved steal away?
Or Israel not afford an hand to lay Isai. 57. 1.

An Evil-boding Death to heart? no Son
Of All the Prophets when Elijah's gone
Look after him?
Forbid this, Heaven! Shower
On a bereaved Clod of Earth a power
To yield a spire of grass allusion to the poetical fancy of Ajax
whereon may grow
The Name of COLLINS, help a verse to show
His Virtues, as that Flock acknowledged
Their Do Dorcas, Act. 9. 39.
when to the Spicy Mountains fled.
Assist me, thou who have engaged the Just
A Memory, Psa. 112. 6.
to whom the precious dust
Of Saint Dissolved remains united! --
I SIGH the Fate for which our broached eyes
Spend floods of brine; at which a dire surprise
Of a soul-chilling horror does invade
The Soul not stone before; at which are made
In serious minds as many wounds as were
To Casar whom the (...)
given. Reader, shake to hear;
The DEATH of COLLINS it is. (...) without
A Paper winding sheet to lay him out!
A shame. O that Egyptian Odours, and
Embalmers too Gen 50. 2.
were now at my command!
I want them. But Hyperboles withdraw,
Be gone Licentious Poets. What I saw
On this occasion let some country Rymes
That call a Spade a Spade, tell Aftertimes.
DEPRIVED of Charrets and of Horsemen too. all. to 2. King. 2. 12.

I on the wings of Contemplation flew;
Into the howling desert thus I went,
The cut off garden so same render the Garden of Nuts, Cant. 6. 11. in a phrase
very accommodable to America.
where our David sent
His sheep to seed and fold, from which he drove
The Ravenous Tigre-brood, in which he gave
His herds a Rest at noon. Cant. 1. 7.
On Jordans Banks
I meant to sit with Thoughts on this and Thanks
But there found I an Elect Lady, some (though groundlesly though) suppose a
Church intended by that name in 2. Job 1.
There
Groveling in Ashes, with dishev'led hair,
Smiting her breast, black'd with a mourning dress,
Resembling mother Sion in distress; all. to the figure thereof in B. K.'s
ingenious poem.

Or like a Rachel in a Bethl'em plight, Mat. 2, 18.

But with a Beauty glittering too, that might
The Features show that Judah's preaching King
Much did once in his machless Raptures sing; viz. the Canticles,

I found her. There amazed into a Tree all to such a metamorphosis celebrated
in Ovid.

Almost transformd with passion: Sympathy
Produced this Enquiry, Who I wonder,
Seems Sorrow's Center, Sorrow's Essence yonder?
Lo, I no sooner had approached near,
Then from above this voice did (...) Here
Pity, the Church of Middletown bespeaks
Set in the midst of swoons and sobs and shrieks.
With Bowels full of it I hastened to
The Wet place, asking Why she grieved so;
And had this Answer.
SIr, Ask you this? Are you a Sojourner
Within New-Englands bounds and know not why?
I Have lost great COLLINS, man! O that, O there
From this Tears-Fountain Hinc illoe lacrymae.
is my misery.
Immortal COLLINS! what a Charm is in
So dear a Name? It Is Honey mixed with gall
To think, I had him, but, I miss him; Seen
He was, sad word! fuimus Troes.
but so no more be shall.
MY Love is Talkative: it is fit that I
Thus vent my smothered Fire. The Rabbis say
That when good old Methusela did dye,
His Wife nine husbands lost in him that day.
Like Looser I will speak: The Lamentation
Over Jerus'lems Woe does suit me well,
A Widow how is she become! Lam. 1. 1.
Privation
Seems now to be my only Principle.
Once did I prise, I Will now praise what I had.
The box of his Fames Ointment Eccles. 7. 1.
now shall send
Abroad its Odours. Alexander from whose corpse it is said there went a smell
surprizingly fragrant,
dead
Had not the scent which does from him ascend.
Some Elogyes compose to try their Wits
The Gout, praised by Pichennerus,
the Feavour, praised by Huttenus,
yea and Injustice, praised by Glaucus,

Folly praised by Erasmus,
and Poverty praised by Pierius, all in set poems, or orations.
have in the Fits,
Of Ranting Writers had a comeliness.
My Theme, my Humor is not such an one:
Who to prove Cicero not eloquent,
Penned Books, as once an humoursome person did.
who truth and worth for guards disown
Such only count Collins not excellent.
Bright COLLINS, Star of the first Magnitude,
Extol him how could I! I sha'n't be chid
If as much time on him my gazes should
Spend, as that Greek Socrates, who spent 15 year in framing of one Panegyric,
one oration.
in's Panegyric did.
O that Apelles were my servant now
To limn this Hero, but his utmost All
Would blush, and draw a vail upon the Brow as that painter did upon his
Minerva's.

Below whose Majesty his skill would fall.
I would that you, my friend, (...)
Could fill with Erogyes no fewer then
The little eels of which I can with my Microscope see incredible hundreds
playing about in out drop of water.
that may swim in it: I think
They all should celebrate this Flower of men.
I would too that each syllable all round
This Globe with perfumed Air might fly about;
Or your Stentorophonic Tube which speaking-Trumpet may be heard a vast way off
might sound.
The praise of admirable Collins out
Death, thou All-biting all to ye Acrost. of Mors (...)
Prodigal, a blow
Of thine has laid within the ground a plant
Surpassing Cedars. I did hardly know
A spice whose quantity on it was scant.
Good Nature and good Education were
In him conjoined to such an high degree,
As gained the Title of that Tit. Vesp. who was termed, Deliciae (...)
Emperor,
In this rare soul Mankinds delight we see.
Facetious Snow-balls from his candid breast
With early Magic hence would captivate
His near, Familiars, so that he was blessed
Who could have leave to be his Intimate.
Hence from his Cradle clothes his neat discretion,
Mounted upon bridled Urbanity,
Before a most obliging Disposition,
Triumphant rode in every (...)
But Oh the fruits of Heavenly Graces dew
Upon so rich a soil! Let Peter bid.
His Brethren add one graces pearl unto
The v. the glorious catalogue 2. Pet. 1. 5-7.
rest: The whole heap was in Collins hid.
You Would scarce believe the FAITH residing in
This Child of Abraham, the strong Impression
On his (...) 2. cor. 4. 18.

Or Gospel glories, of things past expression:
How dearest to him his Redeemer; how
With brave Ignatius whose saying often was, Amormens est crucifix us
he could warble out
O Christ, my Love; how we might even allow
A JESUS engraved which is grossly and fabulously reported of another
within his breast no doubt.
HIs VIRTUE took this sister by the hand;
And with her train accompanied thus,
In vert'ous slights he went -- how much beyond
An Aristides two glories of the heathen, the one for Justice, the other for
Fidelity.
or a Regulus!
For KNOWLEDGE, tho in him poor Harvard lost
One of her tallest sons, one of the best
Soldiers in her Minerva's Camp, my boast
Of higher Wisdom in him i'n't the least.
My Moses, he in Egypts Learning verst Act. 7. 22.

Had more then that; Accomplishments Divine
In exercise of which, while he converst
With Isr'els Jah, to us his face did shine. Exodus 34. 35

Yare at his GRAMMAR, kenning how and when
To speak: his tongue a Prove. 15. 4.
tree of life, no (dross
Proceeding from this Chrysostom golden mouth.
) the penn
Of Ready writers like, not barbarous.
How lofty in his RHET'RIC, when with cries
To the Omnipotent reduced to say as in Exodus 32. 10. feriendi licentiam petit
a Mose qui fecit Mosen.

Let me alone, thereby he scaled the Skies,
And with the old preces er lacrymoe sunt Arma Ecclesia.
Artill'ry got the day.
In the best LOGIC, Oh how Rational!
How able to spy Canaan through! how ready
To baffle a Temptation! and withal
Full of his Oracles sound, solid, steady!
How right was his ARITHMETIC that knew
Wisely to measure his own Psa. 90. 12.
days! How right
Was his GEOMETRY, that found the true
Bulk of the earth! a point and an invisible point no doubt would it be to an
humane eye in the starry Heaven, tho it probably contains above Ten Thousand
Millions of cubic German leagues.
not worth the sight.
In his ASTRONOMY how ripe his eye
Reaching to things beyond the stars! Always
Exact in this no-vain as (...) other Philosophy is called in Col. 2. 8.
PHILOSOPHY,
That in all things he sound his Makers (...) docuit quaelibet herba Deum.
praise.
Master of all the Arts that show us what
It Is from each Bad unto each Good to go;
To all his Knowledge last subjoyning that, Socrates his Hoc tantum scio, me
nihil soire.

All that I know is, that I nothing know.
For TEMPERANCE, he lived upon it, he
Like Hooper spar d much in his diet, more
In 's speech, but most in Time; the hateful Three
the Pleasures, and Profits and Honors of the world, become the 3 Belzebubs of
it, according to the Distich Ambitiosus honos et opes et suda voluptas, Haec
tria pro trino Numine mundus habet.
Fly-gods of the world mean while he cared not for.
To Meat a Dan. 1. 12.
Daniel; and a Rechabite Jer. 35. 6.

To Drink; like a John Baptist Mat. 3. 4.
in his Raiment;
His sleep, like David, Psa. 119. 62.
robbing in the Night;
Still putting Nature off with scanty payment.
Abstemious in all things at such a rate,
Some (like Eliza K. Edw. vi. used to call the Princess Elizabeth, his Sister
Temperance,
in her Brothers eyes,
Him Brother Temperance could denominate.
And Justice caused what ever looked otherwise.
For PATIENCE whole beds and loads of it
In his soul flourisht. What Affliction meant
He felt as much as most do talk, and yet
Groans might from him, but Grumbles It was the sentence of a great Saint under
great pain, I groan but do not grumble.
never be sent.
And under Provocation, 'twas a care
By him maintaind to smile Affronts away.
Not fireing when mere Cock-boats landed are;
Seldom decoyed from his mild Yea, or Nay.
No Brother of whom Homer so often represents in fumes.
Achilles; like unto
The Upper Regions free from Tempests; full
Of the doves temper: Able for to go
Over an Alphabet, as was wont to do the Renowned Roman Emperor.
tho Anger pull,
His GODLINESS steered allusion to Sola sit humanae pietas cynosura carine.
all his motions still:
God had his thrice-hot Amo to, Domine, plusquam meos, plusquam mea, plusquam
me. Bern.
love, his life, his Whole:
Gods Honor was his End, and in the Will
Of God he molded all. to Romans 6. 17. gr.
his renewed soul.
His several Turns on a Religious thread
He sought to string: fixing that Motto on
What signal he in both his Callings did,
With much devotion, Lord as he, Propter te, Domine, propter te.
for thee alone.
How James-like were his of whom Ecclesiastical History relates, that his
hardened knees wore the Badges of his hard prayers.
Prayers, how did the word
Of Life, his heart, Christ's as Jerome remarkt of his friend Nepotian.
Library affect!
What Godward flames did his pure Anima justi Coelum est.
mind afford
Of any Ord'nance dreading a Neglect!
BROTHERLY-KINDNESS did procure the Law
Of Kindness, in his prove. 31. 26.
lips, a Denison
Of Philadelphia which name signifies brotherly love.
in him we saw;
Heir to the soul of the Apostle Heb. 13. 1. gr^^ [b] of whom it is said that
when through age he could do no more, he would give that short Lesson for a
long Sermon to his congregation, my Children, love one another.
John.
A Zuninglian entire that ever said a savory speech recorded of the famous
Zuinglius.

Let me see Christ in any one, I shall
Him with both Arms embrace. Whatever made
Distinctions, this with him removed all.
And CHARITY in him warm Beams extended
To all the Race of Man; Philanthropy
Him like a shadow every where attended;
COLLINS made up of Love, we used to cry.
An Injury seldom resenting more
Than Cranmer or the Martyrologer Holy Mr. Fox.

Who urn'd his Ashes, of whom it is notour,
Of good, for ill, Turns from them sure you were?
In fine, As the Senecd.
Philosopher did give
His friend advice, suppose a Cato's eye
On you, and so be wise; when I would live
Uprightly, I Would imagine COLLINS by.
Thus was he for a Christian, and thus he
With Conversation lightened, every Deed
Of his in print a Sermon yields me: Ille pius pastor, quo non prestantior
unus, Qui faciendo docet, quae facienda docet.

But now what as a Minister you will heed.
Methinks I see how fraught the Pulpit was
Of Grace, of Gravity, of Wisdom, when
With most harmonious notes a Barnabas
He now was, and a Boanerges then:
How deep his Sermons were, where Elephants
Might take content, and yet withal how plain,
Suited unto the leather Dublet's Wants.
All in a near unimitable Strain:
What undasht all. to 2. Cor. 2. 17. gr.
wine he gave me: what a Zeal
For me consumed him: how material
He was in Dispensations aimed to heal
Distempers in me, yet how Spiritual:
He like an Ox all. to those 2 creatures in Rev. 4. 7. whereof by the former
some will have the Pastor, and by the latter the Teacher of a Church to be
meant.
was always laboring
To feed me, but he like an Eagle all. to those 2 creatures in Rev. 4. 7.
whereof by the former some will have the Pastor, and by the latter the Teacher
of a Church to be meant.
too
Did soar to Pisgah's Top, from thence to bring
Celestial Visions pore-blind us unto.
One is a Doctor most so Alexander Hales.
invincible
Another most so Bradwardine.
Profound, a Third is counted
A Subtle so Scotus.
one; (Scholastic Records tell)
A Fourth so Aquinas.
Angelical by none surmounted:
COLLINS was all of this. The noble thus distinguished in an Epigram of Beza' s
Three
Geneva Crowns, enlightening Calvin, and
The thundering Farel joined auspiciouslie
With shouring Viret, here in one did stand.
For Memory almost a Seneca, whose tenacious Memory is to all Ages memorable.

For Judgment and Fancy inferior
To few: in Learning rich, and every way
He was a furnished Gospel-Orator.
How many all. to. Act. 16. 14.
Lydian-hearts reputed him
A an excellent Divine, the English of whose Name seems to be Key-carrier
Claviger, by him unlockt? To us
For Light giv*n to our House how much Esteem
He had as an another, whose Name in likelihood was House. Lamp.
Occolampadins!
To save poor me and mine, Oh how severe (...) the Motto of the Emperor Sever
us, which was LABOREMUS.

His Labors were! how lasting his Renown
Must to my Offspring be, Once (saying) were
Doves eyes within the Locks of all. to Cant. 4. 1. where by those expressions
some understand Christian Teachers surrounded with their believing Hearers.
Middletown!
My Neighborhood shared with me too; he gave
Some Spirit unto them: and then his One of his last Services was that he
assisted in a Day of Prayer at New Haven, immediately on which he sickned.
Haven
He chose: So on the Day He died on a Sabbath Day about the beginning of the
Morning Exercise.
we used to have
Heaven from him, from us he flew to Heaven.
The Age of Perkins about 44.
just attaind, he thought
It time to follow him. But Why so fast?
The cause you know that of such things is brought
Belonged to him, he only grew too fast. Immodicis brevis est atas et rara
senectus,

More would I say but Heart-corroding Anguish,
Lays that check on me, you have lost him now.
Broken with thy big Loss dear Friend, I languish.
Hence would my Tears more than my River flow.
Now in Micaiahs Trance 1. King. 2^ ^^
I seem to see
For Food on mountains, wandering Shepherdless,
And Shiftless rambling, what belongs to me.
Wast Park of mine that now no Keeper has!
Lord, is my Night come shall Impanitent
Transgressors now continue so? Shall it
Upon my Meeting House, while men repent,
This and that man born here allusion to Psalm. 87. 5.
no more be writ?
Shall a forsaken now Soviety
Without its Head, its Heart, its Eyes remain?
And like Isaiah's woeful Vineyard ly all. to (...) 5.

With withering Grapes abandoned by the Rain?
O Ghastly Omens! if Parans die
Let Heidleberge look to it. If Austin go
Let Hippo tremble. If Elisha fly 2. King. 15. 20. It Is one of the Jewish
Oracle's, Quando Luminaria patiuntur (...), malum est signum m^ndo.

After his Master, next year brings a woe
I fear of both sorts now Some have observed, that the Death of a faithful
Minister in a place where he has done God much service, is often attended with a
great Mortality among other persons in that place. ^. Collins. Elijahs
Lamenation. P. 18.
Mortalities,
Of Famines too I fear the Sea Amos 8. 11.
worst, I fear
The Gallop of no less Calamities
Then can be wrapped in a pale Comets Hair
Amidst these hidcons Frights perplexed, I mourn
With Incoharent Throbs you see. Now tell me
Whether it be not just that thus forlorn
I here bewail this that has late befell me.
SHE said; Her heavy words were hardly out
When, as one planet-struck, a doleful shout
Of the surviving COLLINSes detaind
Me from Replies to what had been complained.
To fill the Stage there seemed to throng a crowd
Of his Relations to us. First aloud
His Aged Parents with drenched Hankercheifs
Saw and had cause thus to proclaim their Griess:
A Son, our Staff and A Bird sam'd for its regard to its Dam.
Stork; (said they) A Son,
Our Benjamin, Alas, must he be gone
To his Long-Home before us? Heaven more
May now be Heavan to us than before.
Farewell, thou world of One of the most splendid Cities wherein, is hence
appositely termed Lutetia.
Dirt; we meekly wait
But for a Vitam habentes in patientia, Mortem in desiderio.
Call too. This deplored: Straight
His Brethren not as a see Jer. 22. 17.
Jehoiakim
But as a v. 2. Sam. 1. 17.
Jonathan, bemoaned him,
With this, We live to see the Joseph die,
Whom we thought born for our Adversity!
His Widow then, (the tender Whiting swam
Through the Black all. to the Mare mortuum.
sea of Death to us) I came
(Said She) to bear a part with you. But I
Must in deep Silence do it. That every Sigh
Of mine -- O that it Marbles might erect
To him, for lack of whom I Am thus deject.
And then his Orphans, all ensabled add
O could we say -- that once a Father had,
A Father whose paternal oversight
Did make us over happy, whose Delight
Was in our Welfare, whose Behaviors
Still taught us -- Mercy! what a Loss is our's!
In this Distraction mixing once again
A Consolation-cup; such the Jews were wont to have at their Funerals.
Thick Mists amain
About us gathering; a Murmur there
Of the blessed Shade himself we then might hear.
FOND Mortals, wipe your eyes (said he) pray
That liquor for your selves. all. to Luk, 23 28.
poor Envy it is
Which prompts your Threnodies for me. To weep
For my sake, is but to Ignore my Bliss.
O what a world of smoke of dust of Folly
Am I sailed all. to Phil. 1. 23. where to depart, is by some translated to
loose Anchor.
from! No sin shall me annoy,
And no Temptation more to be unholy
Shall ever molest me in my Masters JOY.
I have my Ragged Mantle dropped; I have
All Vanity and all Vexation Mors Beatitudinis prinicipium, Laborum meta,
peremptoria peccatorum, Aug.

Escaped, my Clay safe kept within a Grave
Preserved lies for the Resurrection.
No Cross Christ and his Cross part at Heavens door, for there is no room for
Crosses in Heaven. Ruther^. Epist.
shall ever gall my shoulders more,
From God, correcting my disorders, and
No Club e're strike me, red with ancient Gore,
Still by each Cain Came adbuc clavus Abelis sanguine rubens ubique
circumfertur. Bucholtz.
retained in his hand.
I Am got within the Vail, and there I see
The ever-glorious Face of the The Heaven of Heaven, portrayed in Joh. 17. 24.
GOD-MAN,
And He with Transports does convey to me
As much of GOD as entertain I can.
I Know, I Live, I Love; But how? forbear
To be inquisitive: It cannot be told
TO you; No, tho you all skilled in the language which bold conjectures think to
be Heavens Dialect.
Hebricians were:
Nor can shell-vessels all. to 2. cor 4. 7. gr.
this things meaning hold.
I find besides my loving Guardians here,
Here the Good Angels that conveyed me through
The Divel-haunted-Dungeon- Atmosphere, the territores whereto the apostate
troops of Lucifer seem to be confined, from ephesians. 2. 2.

To mine annex their Hallelujahs do.
Here, me the Chorue of the glorified,
The polisht all. to 2. cor. 5. 5
stones, now in the Temple plact
The twice clothed all. to 2. ibid. where an upper garment of glory is engaged
to the souls on which an under garment of grace is wrought with the Eternal
Spirits Needlework.
Souls, salute on every side;
I see Nathaneel v. Joh. 1. 47.
here, I know the rest.
Be glad that I am here, and after hye,
Your selves, with diligence, all posting hither,
Precepts and Patterns left, my Counsels eye,
And Copyes, so we shall be soon together.
Souls, follow me. Anon the Stars, the Sands.
The Aroms of the Universe -- a Scrol
Like Heaven filled with Nines, for oypher stands,
Compared to the Long joys a line purposely to long for the verse, but too
short not (...) shadow of ETERNITY
that over us may roll.
A PERIOD this puts to the Tragedy.
He vanished; They retired; confused I
Now quite alone, have nothing else to do,
But to pour out a short Hosannah to
The Worlds Almighty GOVERNOR to whom
On this account now these Petitions come
From lifted Hands, and bended Knees -- (...)
By whom vast Hosts of Beings with a Word
Are made and moved: Let thy much-hop'd (...)
Shield us, like Walls from much-fear'd Desolation.
O Save New-Englands Churches; Let them be
Still golden Candlesticks, beloved by thee,
Still Puritans; Still Ivory Palaces.
Keep up the Quickset Hedge about them: Please
To keep the gladsome Streams of them alive.
Save Middletown, and cause the Place to thrive
Under Fat Clouds still, and that Bochim let
By thy Provision be a Bethel yet.
Save every soul that reads this Elegy;
Like COLLINS let us live, like COLLINS die.
AMEN.
Sic mihi contingat vivere sicque mori.
Sic optat,
Qui long sequitur vestigia semper adorans.
Qualis vita, ita
FINIS.

