Proposals for the Printing of a large BIBLE,
by William Bradford.
THese are to give Notice, that it is proposed for a large house-Bible to be
Printed by way of Subscriptions [a method (...) England for the printing of
large Volumns, because Printing is very chargeable] therefore to all that are
willing to forward so good (and great) a Work, as the Printing of the holy
Bible, are offered these Proposals, viz.

1. That it shall be printed in a fair Character, on good Paper, and well bound.

2. That it shall contain the Old and New Testament, with the Apocraphy, and
all to have useful Marginal Notes.

3. That it shall be allowed (to them that subscribe) for Twe^^y Shillings per
Bible: [A Price which one of the same volumn in England would cost.]

4. That the pay shall be half Silver Money, and half Country (...) at Money
price. One half down now, and the other half on the delivery of the Bibles.

5. That those who do subscribe for six, shall have the Seventh gratis, and
have them delivered one month before any above that number sha^^ be sold to
others.

6. To those which do not subscribe, the said Bibles will not be allowed under
26 ^. a piece.

7. Those who are minded to have the Common Prayer, shall (...) the (...) and 6
d. per Book.

8. That as encouragement is given by Peoples subscribing and paying down one
half, the said Work will be put forward with what Expedition may be.

9. That the Subscribers may enter their Subscriptions and time of Payment, at
Pheneas Pemberton's and Robert Halls in the County of Bucks. At Malen S^acy's
Mill at the Falls. At Thomas Budds House in Burlington. At John Hasting's in
the County of Chester. At Edward Blake's in New Castle. At Thomas VVoodrooffs
in Salem. And at William Bradford's in Philadelphia, Printer and Undertaker of
the said Work. At which places the Subscribers shall have a Receipt for so much
of their Subscriptions as paid, and an obligation for the delivery of the
number of Bibles (so Printed and Bound as aforesaid) as the respective
Subscribers shall deposit one half for.

Also this may further give notice* that Samuel Richardson and Samuel
Carpenter of Philadelphia, are appointed to take care and be assistant in the
laying out of the Subscription Money, and to see that it be employed to the use
intended, and consequently that the whole Work be expedited. Which is promised
by

Philadelphia, the 14th of* the 1st Month 1688

