The PLAIN CASE STATED Of Old -- but especially of New England, in an Address
to His HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF ORANGE^
HAil noble Prince, in whom our Joy and Love
Unite, and (as to their own Center) move.
In whom those Royal Qualities combine
Which may erect a Second Constantine.
Among the Songs which Britain's joyful days
To You present, accept New-England's Praise:
We also boast our selves of English Race:
And from our Ancestors, who stock't this place,
The name of stricter Protestants derive,
And in Your faith and favor hope to live.
We heard, (and it to us did Sorrow bring)
The much-lamented death of the late King;
And, with but too much Truth, did calculate
From thence of all our woes, the wretched Date
Then James, with Papal Benediction
And Popish principles assum d the Throne:
A Prince whom Nobler Virtues never did yield
Fitter, the Scepter of the World to wield:
But to what Ills can Popery persuade!
And to what Ruin do its Maxims lead!
And what a Hackney is a Bigot made!
Under his umbrage did the Birds of Night
Sing their damned notes, and sang them with delight;
And Locusts of the Fit, graced with his Smile,
In swarms invaded our (once happy) Isle.
Heroic El'sabeth for us, in vain,
Bafled the fraud of Rome and pride of Spain.
Whilst Jesuited James did readvance
The twisted policies of Rome and France.
A Nuncio from the old Rogue of Rome
Must with Applause to England's Palace come,
A Nuncio, which a Century or more
Of reformed England never saw before;
And we, in grateful sort, must send again
On humble Embassy good Castlemain,
And, by a Proxy kiss his Worship's Toe,
Whence unknown streams of unknown Blessings flow.
From Innocent our plotted Ruin came,
Guilty in Fact, tho Innocent in Name.
From France's Don, whose Papal-Romish trade
Of Blood and Ruin has such havoc made,
That his one Persecution has done more
Than the ten under pagan- Rome before.
From Jesuits a brood, hatched by the Devil,
To be the Propagators of all evil,
Incarnate Fiends, to Lucifer all, 'd,
And heirs to all his cruelty and pride:
From these, our James, devoted to the Cause
His Measures took, their Counsels were his Laws:
Our Sanguinary Laws, though few yet good,
And justly merited by men of Blood,
And those with milder penalties enforced.
Were with a Prorogation indors't.
Those Laws, which Parliaments had made to live,
Were laid in dust by Grand Prerogative;
And Tests were useless grown, Dispensing Power
Disarmed their Force, that they could strike no more.
Popery bare-fac't stalk't our injured streets,
Justled the Reformation where it meets,
And Cells of Mass under our noses grew,
And daring Priests did eagerly pursue
Their Patron's Orders with unbounded joy,
Or to deceive us Her'ticks, or destroy.
Dissenting Protestants they strove to please
And wheedle, by a short delusive ease.
The established Church trampled, against all Law,
And, Jehu -- like, drove where they could not draw.
Whilst Renegado- Papists were preferred,
And had their King's peculiar Regard.
The Snare was laid, the pointed hour drew nigh,
Wherein our Name and Cause was doomed to die.
Great were his hopes (who, when the Stroke was given
Claimed for Reward a double share of Heaven)
To sacrifice in one brave funeral Pile,
The numerous HERETICS of either Isle.
Nor could the Vastness of this damned design
The Limits of his Popish Rage confine,
But over the Ocean to this world it flew;
Reformed America must suffer too.
That we were must'red in this bloody Roll
Our Sufferings tell (who then could us cajole?)
We, by Papistick wiles, may well believe
Were marked a lingering Ruin to receive.
They grug'd that we should harmlessly possess
With Ease and Freedom this our Wilderness.
Which our religious Ancestors (who fought
God in a Desert Country) dearly bought.
Our Charter, which freely we had enjoyed
In three successive Reigns, is first made void;
Condemned for forged Crimes we never knew.
Nor at this distance could er'e answer to.
Condemned unheard; their fraud would not admit
A clear Defense and Legal; nor was it fit
In a Court where Astraea nere' did sit.
And thence were we annex't to a Popish Crown,
By which we were designed to be undone.
Then came a man to be our President,
As well against the Law as our Content:
But he, Alas, did only smooth the way
For a Superior Lord, who made no stay.
Soon came the Jersy Knight, crafty and Stout,
And for his Master s Interest cut out.
Soon did he and his Creatures let us know
Whence all our miseries were like to grow.
Knaves, Beggars, Papists formed the triple League
Which carried on the ruinous Intreague.
We were not treated by the insulting Knaves
As freeborn English, but as poor French Slaves.
Taxes were raised, without Mercy, or Measure,
To keep us low, and fill our Tyrant's Treasure.
To MAGNA CHARTA we coul'd claim no Right,
Neither our own, nor English Laws would fit,
But such as by Distortion, and Abuse,
Would still advance the Plot to ruin us.
New Laws by a small shabby Juncto framed,
And then so surreptitiously proclaimed,
As if they chose* Oh when were Laws so made!)
They rather should be broken than obeyed:
So, if we kept or broke them, 'twas by chance;
They made advantage of our Ignorance:
Strained their own Laws beyond their true Intent,
To our great Cost, Sorrow and wonderment.
All that we counted dear was made a Prize
To the raging Lust and hungry Avarice
Of a few tattered Rascals from New York,
More insolent than ever was Grand Turk.
Their debanch't tricks the harmless Country saw,
But vainly sought a just redress by Law.
The Law, which even our smallest Trips could find
Distinguished Friends, and in their Cause was blind.
Their Lust on Honor strange Excursions made:
Their Avarice did our Estates invade.
Our Lands, for which we to the Natives gave
Their own Demands these new-come Beggars crave,
Our Lands, which we had peaceably possess't
For Sixty years, they with strange flaws molest.
It would disturb our Father's peaceful Graves,
Saw they their poor Posterity made slaves,
Or knew our Lives or Liberties betrayed,
Or knew our Lands to foreign Foes conveyed.
Yet thus with grief might poor New England cry,
We our own Lands with our own Coin must buy;
And Patents take, or else some sordid Knave
Soon intercepts, and ne^^ but ask and have.
The Secretaries House of Office told
(And Courts of Justice) where our Rights were sold,
New Tricks they found, and Fetches with rare skill,
To bring more Grist to their insatiate Mill.
Money we paid, for what we could not know,
Except to Feed their ever-craving maw,
But never full, for fill we might, as well,
As soon the gaping mouths of Death and Hell.
Law at a price, and Justice we must buy,
Each small Court-Officer gapes for his Fee,
Else Law would be denied, and Right delayed,
Whatever Madam MAGNA CHARTA said,
Our Penal Acts their scores and hundreds slew,
Through cursed aid of an informing Crew.
These in our hated Courts did boldly tread,
Villains, who daily damned themselves for bread:
Rogues, who for money (I in plainness think)
Would swear the Sun a bottle full of Ink.
These, Juries must implicitly believe,
And by their Testimonies Verdicts give,
The Sense of Thinking-men they must forego,
And, as the Court directs them, blindly do,
Else they are turned back, and for their honest Strife
Must forfeit the Conveniences of Life.
Juries were pack't out of their own vile lump
To serve a Turn, and turn them up a Trump,
Men of small Sense, and smaller Honesty,
Their knotty roguish Causes to untye.
From Freedom of Discourse our Tongues were mor'd,
For we were made Offenders for a word.
When, Mighty Prince, we of Your Landing heard*
Tho Hopes and Wishes were on Tip toes reared
Yet we our Hopes could whispering only tell;
And bold was he who dared to wish You well:
Him shall I style true Ben, who hither came,
To save his Life and an untainted fame;
Harris was he, whom Parliaments had known
TO have been by Popish rage and frauds undone,
Yet here he could not escape the Lion's Paw*
Only for wishing well to WILLIAM of Nassau.
Our last great Grievance, which we could not bear
(With Grief we tell, and Oh, with Pity hear!)
Was a perplex't mysterious Indian-War,
For which with mighty Forces we prepare.
We, who a Hundred, in the days of yore
Could beat a Thousand Indians and fight more,
An Army now a thousand strong must send,
With a poor Handful Hundred to contend;
In horrid Woods where no Provision grew,
Sneaking months after months to ly perdue.
Our Officers were Popish men of blood,
Whose Principles could nere consult our Good.
Our Scatt ring Foes but seldom came in sight,
Or if they had, we had no power to fight;
No War was ere proclaimed; what could we do?
We dare not kill, the Law would then pursue.
Mean time a tedious Winter past our head,
Our Sufferings such, we envied even our dead.
And they not few by sore Diseases went.
Hunger and Cold, and how could this content?
And thus things stood, and thus the Plot went on,
From earth to root our Her'tick Nation
Here, and in our beloved Native Isle;
Till Heaven on us cast a propitious smile;
Piti'd our wrongs and on their Counsels frowned,
And raised a man their Empire to confound.
'Twas YOU, Great Sir, whom Heaven did elevate
To make more famous this our Eighty Eight
Than that wherein brave El'sabeth did quell
The jointed powers of Spa^n and Rome and Hell.
YOU, us with gallant Forces did Invade,
(by long Successes formidable made)
Our wishes join d and met our hearts half way,
Whilst Terror seized our popish foes that day.
One bloodless month our happy Nation freed
From popish Plots, by which we feared to bleed;
Pounded a crew of mercenary Knaves.
Jesuits and Priests, tools used to make us Slaves.
Frighted our stubborn King, who would not part
From his dear Bantling, nor his Bigot-heart.
Convened our Countrey's Representative,
By whose sage Counsels we now hope to live.
This hearing, by Your great Example swayed,
A just Attempt oppressed New- England made,
Not to revenge our wrongs but set us free
From arbitrary Power and Slavery:
This did Heaven bless, and on our Action smile,
Befooled our foes, and brought them to the Toil.
Sir, Your Protection we hope and crave;
Condemn not the Success Your Courage gave.
For this our Songs shall Your brave Triumphs meet,
Laying our Lives and sorunes at Your Feet:
For this Your Name will consecrated be
In English Hearts to late Posterity.
May still Success Your great Achievements crown!
Go on to Conquer, as You have begun.
BOSTON, Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Harris at the London Coffee-house.


