The Excellent Privilege of LIBERTY and PROPERTY BEING THE BIRTHRIGHT Of the
Freeborn Subjects of England.

CONTAINING I. Magna Charta, with a learned Comment upon it. II. The
Confirmation of the Charters of the Liberties of England and of the Forest,
made in the 35th year of Edward the First. III. A Statute made the 34 Edw. 1.
commonly called De Tallageo non Concedendo; wherein all Fundamental Laws,
Liberties and Customs are confirmed. With a Comment upon it. IV. An abstract of
the Pattent granted by the King to William Penn and his Heirs and Assigns for
the Province of Pennsilvania. V. And Lastly, The Charter of Liberties granted
by the said William Penn to the Freemen and Inhabitants of the Province of
Pennsilvania and Territories thereunto annexed, In America.


Major Hoereditas venit unicunque nostrum a Iure and Legibus, quam a Parentibus.

To the Reader.
IT may reasonably be supposed that we shall find in this part of the world,
many men, both old and young, that are strangers, in a great measure, to the
true understanding of that inestimable Inheritance that every Freeborn Subject
of England is Heir unto by Birthright, I mean that unparalleled Privilege of
Liberty and Property, beyond all the Nations in the world beside; and it is to
wished that all men did rightly understand their own happiness therein; in
pursuance of which I do here present thee with that ancient Garland, the
Fundamental Laws of England, bedeckt with many precious Privileges of Liberty
and Property, by which every man that is a Subject to the Crown of England, may
understand what is his Right, and how to preserve it from unjust and
unreasonable men: whereby appears the eminent Care, Wisdom and Industry of our
Progenitors in providing for themselves and Posterity so good a Fortress that
is able to repel the Lust, Pride and Power of the Noble, as well as Ignorance
of the Ignoble; it being that excellent and discreet Balance that gives every
man his even proportion, which cannot be taken from him, nor be dispossessed of
his Life, Liberty or Estate, but by the trial and judgment of Twelve of his
Equals, or Law of the Land, upon the penalty of the bitter Curses of the whole
People; so great was the zeal of our Predecessors for the preservation of these
Fundamental Liberties (contained in these Charters) from encroachment, that
they employed all their Policy and Religious Obligations to secure them entire
and inviolable, albeit the contrary has often been endeavored, yet providence
hitherto has preserved them as a Blessing to the English Subjects.

The chief end of the Publication hereof is for the information and
understanding (what is their native Right and Inheritance) of such who may not
have leisure from their Plantations to read large Volumns; And beside, I know
this Country is not furnished with Law Books, and this being the Root from
whence all our wholesome English Laws spring, and indeed the Line by which they
must be squared, I have ventured to make it public, hoping it may be of use
and service to many Freemen, Planters and Inhabitants in this Country, to whom
it is sent and recommended, wishing it may raise up Noble Resolutions in all
the Freeholders in these new Colonies, not to give away any thing of Liberty
and Property that at present they do, (or of right as Loyal English Subjects,
ought to) enjoy, but take up the good Example of our Ancestors, and understand,
that it is easy to part with or give away great Privileges, but hard to be
gained, if once lost. And therefore all depends upon our prudent Care and
Actings to preserve and lay sure Foundations for our selves and the Posterity
of our Loins.

INTRODUCTION.
IN France, and other Nations, the mere Will of the Prince is Law, his Word
takes off any man's Head, imposes Taxes, or seizes any man's Estate, when, how
and as often as he lists; and if one be accused, or but so much as suspected of
any Crime, he may either presently Execute him, or Banish, or Imprison him at
pleasure; or if he will be so gracious as to proceed by form of their Laws, if
any two Villians will but swear against the poor Party, his Life is gone; nay,
if there be no witness, yet he may be put on the Rack, the Tortures whereof
make many an innocent Person confess himself guilty, and then with seeming
Justice is executed. But,

In England the Law is both the measure and the bound of every Subjects Duty
and Allegiance, each man having a fixed Fundamental-Right born with him, as to
Freedom of his Person and Property in his Estate, which he cannot be deprived
of, but either by his Consent, or some Crime, for which the Law has imposed
such a penalty or forfeiture. For all our Kings take a solmn Oath (1.) At their
Coronation, To observe and cause the Laws to be kept: (2.) All our Judges take
an Oath, wherein among other points they swear, To do equal Law and Right to
all the Kings Subjects, Rich and Poor, and not to delay any person of common
Right for the Letters of the King, or of any other Person, or for any other
cause: Therefore says Forteseue, (who was first chief Justice, and afterward
L. Chancellor to K. Henry 6.) in his Book de Laudibus Legum Angliae, cap. 9.
Non potest Rex Anglia, etc. The King of England cannot alter nor change the
Laws of his Realm at his pleasure; For why, he governs his people by Power
not only Royal, but also Politic: If his Power over them were only Regal, then
he might change the Laws of his Realm, and charge his Subjects with Tallage and
other Burdens, without their consent; but from this much differs the Power
of a King whose Government is Politic; for he can neither change Laws without
the consent of his Subjects, nor yes charge them with Impositions against their
wills. With which accords Bracton, a learned Judge and Law-Author, in the Reign
of K. Henry the 3d, saying, Rex in Regno suo superiores habet Deum and Legem;
i. e. The King in his Realm has two superiors, God and the Law; for he is
under the Directive, though not Co-ercive Power of the Law.

It Is true, the Law it self affirms, The King can do no wrong, which proceeds
not only from a presumption, that so excellent a Person will do none, but also
because he acts nothing but by Ministers, which (from the lowest to the
highest) are answerable for their doings; so that if a K. in passion should
command A. to kill B. without process of Law, A. may yet be prosecuted by
Indictment or upon an Appeal (where no Royal Pardon is allowable) and must for
the same be exceuted, such Command notwithstanding.

This original happy Frame of Government is truly and properly called an
English man's Liberty, a Privilege not exempt from the Law, but to be freed in
Person and Estate from Arbitrary Violence and Oppression. A greater Inheritance
(says Judge Cook) is derived to every one of us from our Laws than from our
Parents; For without the former, what would the latter signify? And this
Birthright of Englishmen shines most conspicuously in two things: 1.
PARLIAMENTS. 2. IVRIES.


By the First the Subject has a share by his chosen Representatives in the
Legislative (or Law-making) Power; for no new Laws bind the People of England,
but such as are by common consent agreed on in that great Council.

By the Second, he has a share in the Executive part of the Law, no Causes
being tried, nor any man adjudged to loose Life, Member or Estate, but upon the
Verdict of his Peers or Equals his Neighbors, and of his own Condition: These
two grand Pillars of English Liberty, are the Fundamental vital Privileges,
whereby we have been, and are preserved more free and happy than any other
People in the World, and (we trust) shall ever continue so: For whoever shall
design to impair, pervert or undermine either of these, do strike at the very
Constitution of our Government, and ought to be prosecuted and punished with
the utmost Zeal and Rigor. To cut down the Banks let in the Sea, or to poison
all the Springs and Rivers in the Kingdom, could not be a greater Mischief; for
this would only affect the present Age, but the other will Ruin and enslave all
our Posterity.

But beside these Paramount Privileges which the English are estated in by the
Original Constitution of their Government, there are others more particularly
declared and expressed in diverse Acts of Parliament too large to be inserted in
this place.

Magna Charta OR The Great Charter made in the 9th year of King Henry the 3d,
and confirmed by King Edward the 1st in the 28th Year of his Reign.
Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guyan,
to all Archbishops, etc.
We have seen the Great Charter of the Lord Henry, sometime King of England,
our Father, of the Liberties of England, in these Words:

Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Normandy and Guyan, and Earl of Anjoy; To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barrons, Sheriffs, Provists, Officers, and to all Bailiffs, and
other our faithful Subjects, which shall see this present Charter, greeting;
Know ye, that we, unto the Honor of Almighty God, and for the Salvation of the
Souls of our Progenitors and Successors, Kings of England, to the Advancement
of holy Church, and Amendment of our Realm, of our mere and Free Will, have
Given and Granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barrons,
and to all Freemen of this our Realm, these Liberties following, to be kept in
our Kingdom of England forever.

CHAP. I. A Confirmation of Liberties.
1 st, WE have granted to God, and by this our present Charter, have Confirmed
for us, and our Heirs forever, That the Church of England shall be free, and
shall have all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolably. (2.) We have granted
also, and Given to all the Freemen of our Realm, for us, and our Heirs
forever, these Liberties under written, to Have, and to Hold to them and their
Heirs forever.

CHAP. II. The Relief of the King's Tenant of full Age
IF any of our Earls or Barrons, or any other which hold of us in chief, by
Knights Service, dye, and at the time of his Death, his Heir be of full age,
and owes his Relief, he shall have his Inheritance by the old Relief, that is
to say, The Heir, or Heirs of an Earl, for a whole Earldom, one hundred Pounds;
the Heir, or Heirs of a Barron, for a whole Barrony, by one hundred Marks; the
Heir, or Heirs of a Knight, for one whole Knights Fee, one hundred Shillings at
the most; and he that has less, shall give less, according to the old Custom
of the Fees.

CHAP. III. The Wardship of an Heir within Age, the Heir a Knight.
BUt if the Heir of any such be within Age, his Lord shall not have the Ward of
him, nor of his Land, before that he has taken of him Homage. (2.) And after
that such an Heir has been in Ward (when he is come to full Age) that is to
say, to the Age of one and twenty years, he shall have his Inheritance without
Relief, and without time, so that if such an Heir being within Age, be made
Knight, yet nevertheless, his Land shall remain in the keeping of his Lord,
unto the term aforesaid.

CHAP. IV. No waste shall be made by a Guardian in Wards Lands.
THe keeper of the Land, of such an Heir being within Age, shall not take of
the Lands of the Heir but Reasonable Issues, Reasonable Customs, and Reasonable
Services, and that without destruction and waste of his Men and his Goods. (2.)
And if we commit the Custody of any such Land to the Sheriff, or any other
which is answerable to us for the Issues of the same Lands, and he make
destruction or waste of those things that he has in Custody, we will take of
him Amends and Recompense therefore. (3) And the Lands shall be committed to
two lawful and discreet men of that Fee, which shall answer unto us for the
Issues of the same Land, or unto him whom we will Assign. (4.) And if we give
or sell to any man the Custody of any such Land, and he there do make
destruction or waste, he shall lose the same Custody, and it shall be assigned
to two lawful and discreet men of that Fee; which also in like manner shall be
answerable to us, as before is said.

CHAP. V. Guardians shall maintain the Inheritance of their Wards, and of
Bishoprics
THe Keeper, so long as he has the Custody of the Land of such Heir, shall
keep up the Houses, Parks, Warrens, Ponds, Mills, and other things pertaining
to the same Land, with the Issues of the said Land: and he shall deliver to the
Heir, when he comes to full Age, all his Land, stored with Ploughs, and all
other things, at the least as he received it; all these things shall be
observed in the Custody of Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priors,
Churches, and Dignities vacant, which appertain to us; except this, that such
Custody shall not be sold.

CHAP. VI. Heirs shall be Married without Disparagement.


CHAP. VII. A Widow shall have her Marriage Inheritance, and Quarentine: the
King's Widow.
A Widow, after the death of her Husband, incontinent, and without any
difficulty, shall have her Marriage, and her Inheritance. (2.) And shall give
nothing for her Dower, her Marriage, or her Inheritance, which her Husband and
she held the day of the Death of her Husband. (3.) And she shall tarry in the
Chief House of her Husband by forty days after the Death of her Husband,
within which days her Dower shall be Assigned her (if it were not assigned her
before) or that the House be a Castle. (4.) And if she depart from the Castle,
then a Competent House shall be forthwith provided for her, in the which she
may honestly dwell, until her Dower be to her assigned, as it is before said;
and she shall have in the mean time her reasonable Estovers of the Common. (5.)
And for her Dower, shall be assigned unto her the third part of all the Lands
of her Husband, which were his during Coverture, except she were endowed of
less at the Church-Door. (6.) No Widow shall be distrained to marry her self;
nevertheless she shall find surety that she shall not marry without our Lisence
and assent (if she hold of us) nor without the assent of the Lord, if she hold
of another.

CHAP. VIII. How Sureties shall be charged to the King.
WE or our Balliffs, shall not seize any Lands or Rents for any Debt, as long
as present Goods and Chattels of the Debtor do suffice to pay the Debt, and the
Debtor himself be ready to satisfy therefore. (2.) Neither shall the Pledges
of the Debtor be distrained, as long as the Debt. (3.) And if the principal
Debtor fail in the payment of the Debt, having nothing wherewith to pay, or
will not pay when he is able, the Pledges shall answer the Debt. (4) And if
they will, they shall have the Lands and Rent of the Debtor, until they be
satisfied of that which they before paid for him, except that the Debtor can
show himself to the acquitted against the said Sureties.

CHAP. IX. The Liberties of London, and other Cities and Towns confirmed.
THe City of London shall have all the old Liberties and Customs which it has
been used to have: moreover, we Will and Grant, that all other Cities, and
Buroughs, Towns, and the Barrons of the five Ports, and all other Ports, shall
have all their Liberties and free Customs.

CHAP. X. None shall distrain for more Service than is due.
NO man shall be distrained to do more Service then is due for a Knights Fee,
nor for any Freeholder than therefore is due.

CHAP. XI. Common Pleas shall not follow the King's Court.
Common Pleas shall not follow our Court, but shall be holden in some place
certain.

CHAP. XII. Where, and before whom Assizes shall be taken, Adjornments for
difficulty.
ASsizes of Novel Disseisn, and of Mortdancesters, shall not be taken, but in
the Shires, and after this manner, if we be out of this Realm, our Chief
Justices shall send our Justices through every County once in the Year, which
with the Knights of the Shire, shall take the said Assizes in those Counties
(2.) And those things that at the coming of our aforesaid Justices, being sent
to take those Assizes in the Counties, cannot be determined, shall be ended by
them in some other place in their Circuit. (3.) And those things which for
difficulty of some Articles, cannot be determined by them, shall be refered to
our Justices of the Bench, and there shall be ended.

CHAP. XIII. Assizes of Darreign Presentiments.
ASsizes of Darreign Presentiments, shall be always taken before our Justices
of the Bench, and there shall be determined.

CHAP. XIV. How men of all sorts shall be amerced, and by whom.
A Freeman shall not be amerced for a small Fault, but after the manner of the
Fault; and for a great Fault, after the greatness thereof, saving to him his
Contenements. (2.) And a Merchant likewise, saving to him his Merchandise, and
any other Alien than ours shall be likewise amerced, saving his Wainage, if he
fall into our mercy. (4.) And none of the said Amercements shall be assessed,
but by the Oath of honest and lawful men of the Vicinage. (5) Earls and Barrons
shall not be Amerced, but by their Peers, and after the manner of their
Offense. (6.) No man of the Church shall Be amerced after the quantity of his
Spiritual Benefice, but after his Lay Tenements, and after the quantity of his
Offense.

CHAP. XV Making of Bridges and Banks*
NO Town, nor Freeman shall be distrained to make Bridges nor Banks, but such
as of old time, and of Right have been accustomed to make them in the time of
King Henry our Grandfather.

CHAP. XVI. Defending of Banks.
NO Banks shall be defended from henceforth, but such as were in Defense in the
time of King Henry our Grandfather, by the same Places, and the same Bounds as
they were wont to be in his time.

CHAP. XVII. Holding Pleas of the Crown.
NO Sheriff, Constable, Escheator, Corroner, nor any other our Bailiffs, shall
hold Pleas of our Crown.

CHAP. XVIII. The Kings Debtor dying, the King shall be first paid.
IF any that holds of us Lay-fee, do dye, and our Sheriff or Bailiff do show
our Letters Pattents of our Summons for Debt, which the dead man did owe to us;
It shall be lawful to our Sheriff or Bailiff, to Attach and Inroll all the
Goods and Chattels of the Dead, being found in the said Fee, to the value of
the same Debt, by the sight and Testimony of Lawful men, so that nothing
thereof be taken away, until we be clearly paid off the Debt. (2.) And the
residue shall remain to the Executors, to perform the Testament of the Dead.
(3.) And if nothing be owing to us, all the Chattels shall go to the use of the
Dead (saving to his Wife and Children the reasonable parts.)

CHAP. XIX. Purveyance for a Castle.
NO Constable, nor his Bailiff, shall take Corn, or other Chattels, of any man,
if the man be not of the Town where the Castle is, but he shall forthwith pay
for the same, unless that the Will of the Seller was to respit the Payment.
(2.) And if he be of the same Town, the Price shall be paid unto him within the
forty days.

CHAP. XX. Doing of Castle-Ward.
NO Constable shall distrain any Knight for to give Money for keeping his
Castle, if he himself will do it in his proper Person, or cause it to be done
by another sufficient man, if he may not do it himself, for a reasonable cause.
(2) And if we do lead or send him in an Army, he shall be free from
Castle-Ward, for the time that he shall be with us in Fee in our Host, for the
which he has done Service in our Wars.

CHAP. XXI. Taking of Horses, Carts, and Woods.
NO Sheriff nor Bailiff of ours, nor any other, shall take the Horses or Carts
of any man to make Carriage, except he pay the old Price hinted, that is to
say, for Carriage with two Horses, 10 d. a day, for three Horses 14 d. a day.
(2.) No Demesne Court of any spiritual Person or Knight, or any Lord, shall be
taken by our Bailiffs. (3.) Nor we, nor our Bailiffs, nor any other, shall take
any man's Woods for our Castles, or other our Necessaries, to be done by License
of him whose the Wood is.

CHAP. XXII. How long Fellons Lands shall be holden by the King.
WE will not hold the Lands of them that are convict of Felony, but one Year
and one Day, and then those Lands shall be delivered to the Lords of the Fee.

CHAP. XXIII. In what place Wears shall be put down.
ALl Wears from henceforth shall be utterly put down by Thames and Midway, and
through all England, but only the Seacoast.

CHAP. XXIV. In what Case a Precipe in Capite is not grantable.
THe Writ that is called Precipe in Capite is not grantable from henceforth to
no Person of any Freehold, whereby any Freeman may lose his Court.

CHAP. XXV. There shall be but one Measure throughout the Realm.
ONe Measure of Wine shall be through our Realm, and one Measure of Ale, and
Measure of Corn, that is to say, the Quarter of London. (2.) And one Breadth of
dyed Cloth, Russets, and Habersects, that is to say, two Yards within the
Lists. (3.) And it shall be of Weights as it is of Measures.

CHAP. XXVI. Inquisition of Life and Member.
NOthing henceforth shall be given for a Writ of Inquisition, nor taken of him
that prays Inquisition of Life, or of Member, but it shall be granted freely,
and not denied.

CHAP. XXVII. Tenure of the King in Socage, and of another by Knights Service,
petty Serjeantry.
IF any do hold of us by free Farm, or by Socage or Bargage, and he holds
Lands of another by Knights Service, we will not have the Custody of his Heir,
nor of his Land, which is holden of the Fee of another, by reason of that free
Farm, Socage or Bargage. (2.) Neither will we have the Custody of such Fee,
Farm or Socage, or Bargage, except Knights Service be due unto us out of the
same free Farm. (4.) We will not have the Custody of the Heir, or of any Land
by occasion of any petty Serjeantry, that any man holds of us by Service, to
pay a Knife, Arrow or the like.

CHAP. XXVIII. Wager of Law shall not be without Witness.
NO Bailiff from henceforth shall put any man to his open Law, nor to an Oath,
upon his own bare saying, without faithful Witnesses brought in for the same.

CHAP. XXIX. None shall be condemned without Trial: Justice shall not be sold
or desered.
NO Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be (...) of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or (...), or be out-lawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor
we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by Law of the Land. (2.) We will sell to no man, we will not deny or
defer to any man either Justice or Right.

CHAP. XXX. Merchant strangers, coming into this Realm, shall be well used.
ALL Merchants, (if they were not openly prohibited before) shall have their
safe and sure Conduct to depart out of England, as to come into England, to
tarry in and go through England, as well by Land as by Sea, to buy and sell
without any manner of evil Tools, by the old and rightful Customs, except in
time of War. (2.) And if they be of a Land making war against us, and be found
in our Realm at the beginning of the Wars, they shall be attached, without harm
of Body and Goods, until all be known unto us, or our chief Justice, how our
Merchants be entreated there in the Land making war against us. (3.) And if our
Merchants be well entreated there, theirs shall be likewise with us.

CHAP. XXXI. Tenure of a Barrony coming into the Kings hand by Escheat.
IF any man hold of any Escheats, as of the honor of Wallingford, Nottingham,
Boloin, or of any other Escheats, which be in our hand and our Barronys, and
dye, his Heir shall give none other Relief, nor do none other Service to Us,
than he should have done to the Barron, if it had been in the Barrons hands.
(2.) And we in the same wise should hold it as the Barron held it, neither
shall we have the occasion of any Barron of or Escheat, any Escheat, or keeping
of any of our men, unless he that held the Barrony or Escheat, otherwise held
of us in Chief.

CHAP. XXXII. Lands shall not be aliened to the Prejudice of the Lords Service.
NO Freeman from henceforth shall give or sell any more of his Land, but so,
that the residue of the Lands the Lord of the Fee may have the service due to
him, which belongs to the Fee.

CHAP. XXXIII. Patrons of Abbeys shall have the Custody of them in time of
Vocation.
ALl Patrons of Abbeys which have the Kings Charter of England, of Advowson, or
have old Tenure or Possession of the same, shall have the Custody of them when
they fall void, as it has been accustomed, and as it is before declared.

CHAP. XXXIV. In what only case a Woman shall have an Appeal of Death.
NO man shall be taken or imprisoned upon the appeal of a Woman, for the death
of any other than her Husband^

CHAP. XXXV. At what time shall be kept a County Court, Sheriffs Turn and Leet.
NO Country from henceforth shall be holden but from Month to Month; and
where greater time has been used, there shall be greater (2.) Nor any Sheriff
or his Bailiff shall keep his Turn in the Hundred but twice in the year, and no
where but in due place, and accustomed, that is to say, once after Easter, and
again after the Feast of St. Michael, without occasion. So that every man has
his Liberties which he had, or used to have in the time of King Henry, our
Grandfather, or which he purchased since. (4.) The view of Frank-pledge shall
be so done, that so our Peace may be kept. (5.) And that the Tything be wholly
kept, as it has been accustomed. (6) And that the Sheriff seek no occasions,
and that he be content with so much as the Sheriff was wont to have for his
View-making in the time of King Henry our Grandfather.

CHAP. XXXVI. No Land shall be given in Mortmane.
IT shall not be lawful from henceforth, to any, to give his Lands to any
Religious House, and to take the same Land again to hold of the same House; nor
shall it be lawful to any House of Religion to take the Lands of any, and to
lease the same to him of whom he received it: If any from henceforth give his
Lands to any Religious House, and thereupon be convict, the gift shall be
utterly void, and the Land shall accrue to the Lord of the Fee.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Subsidy in respect of this Charter, and the Charter of the
Forest, granted to the King.
EScuage from henceforth shall be taken, like as it was wont to be in the time
of King Henry, our Grandfather, reserving to all Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Templers, Hospitalers, Earls, Barrons, and all Persons, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, all their free Liberties and free Customs, which they
have had in times past. (2.) And all these Customs and Liberties aforesaid,
which we have granted to be holden within this our Realm, as well spiritual as
Temporal, to Us and our Heirs, We shall observe. (3*) And all men of this our
Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, (as much as in them is) shall observe the
same, against all Persons in likewise. (4.) And for this our Gift and Grant of
these Liberties, and of others contained in our Charter of Liberties of Our
Forest, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barrons, Knights,
Freeholders, and other our Subjects, have given unto us the fifteenth part of
all their Movables. (5.) And neither We nor Our Heirs shall procure or do any
thing whereby the Liberties, in this Charter contained, shall be infringed or
broken. (6.) And if any thing be procured by any Person, contrary to the
Premises, it shall be had of no force nor effect* those being Witnesses, Lord
B. Archbishop of Canterbury, E. Bishop of London, etc. We ratifying and
approving these Gifts and Grants aforesaid, Confirm and make strong all the
same for Us and Our Heirs perpetually. And by the tenure of these presents do
renew the same, willing and granting for us and our Heirs, that this Charter,
and all and singular his Articles, forever shall be steadfastly, firmly and
inviolably observed.

In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters Pattents to be made, T.
Edward, our Son
at Westminster the twenty eighth day of March, in the twenty eighth year of
our Reign.
The COMMENT on Magna CHARTA.
THis excellent Law holds the first place in our Statute Books, for though
there were, no doubt, many Acts of Parliament long before this, yet they are
not now extant; it is called Magna Charta, or the great Charter, not in respect
of its bulk, but in regard of the great importance and weight of the matters
therein contained; it is also styled, Charta Libertatum Regni, The Charter of
the Liberties of the Kingdom; And upon great Reason (says Cook in his Proem)
is so called, from the effect, quia Liberus facit, because it makes and
preserves the People free. Though it run in the style of the King, as a
Charter, yet (as my L. Cook well observes on the 38 chap.) it appears to have
passed in Parliament; for there was then a fifteenth granted to the King by the
Bishops, Earls, Barrons, free Tenants and People, which could not be, but in
Parliament, nor was it unusual in those times to have Acts of Parliament in a
form of a Charter, as you may read in the Princes Case, Coo. Rep. l. 8.

Likewise, though it be said here, That the King has given and granted these
Liberties, yet they must not be understood as mere Emanations of Royal favor,
or new Bounties granted, which the People could not justly challange, or had
not a right unto before; for the Lord Cook in diverse places asserts, and all
Lawyers know, that this Charter is for the most part only Declaratory of the
principal ground of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England; No new
Freedom is hereby granted, but a Restitution of such as lawfully they had
before, and to free them of what had been usurped and encroached upon them by
any Power whatsoever; and therefore you may see this Charter often mentions sua
jura, their Rights and Liberties, which shows they had them before, and that
the same now were confirmed.

As to the occasion of this Charter, it must be noted, that our Ancestors, the
Saxons, had with a most equal poize and Temperament, very wisely contrived
their Government, and made excellent Provisions for their Liberties, and to
preserve the People from Oppression; and when William, the Norman, made himself
Master of the Land, though he be commonly called the Conqueror, yet in truth he
was not so, and I have known several Judges that would reprehend any Gentleman
at the Bar that casually gave him that Title; for though he killed Harrold the
Usurper, and routed his Army, yet he pretended a right to the Kingdom, and was
admitted by compact, and did take an Oath to observe the Laws and Customs.

But the truth is, he did not perform that Oath so as he ought to have done,
and his Successor William Rufus, King Stephen, Henry the 1st, and Richard
likewise made frequent encroachments upon the Liberties of their People; but
especially King John made use of so many illegal devices to drain them of
Money, that wearied with intolerable Oppressions, they resolved to oblige the
King to grant them their Liberties, and promise the same should be observed,
which King John did in Running-Mead between Saints and Windsor, by two
Charters, one called, Charta Libertatum, The Charter of Liberties (the form of
which you may read in Matthew Paris, fol. 246. and is in effect the same with
this here recited) the other, The Charter of the Forest, Copies of which he
sent into every County, and commands the Sheriff, etc. to see them fulfilled.

But by ill Council he quickly after began to violate them as much as ever,
whereupon Disturbances and great Miseries arose, both to himself and the Realm.
The Son and Successor of this King John, was Henry the third, who in the 19th
Year of his Reign, renewed and confirmed the said Charters; but within two
Years after cancelled them by the pernicious Advice of his Favorites,
perticularly Hubert de Burgh, whom he had made Lord chief Justice; one that in
former times had been a great lover of his Country, and a well-deserving
Patriat, as well as learned in the Laws, but now to make this a step to his
Ambition (which ever Rides without Reins) persuaded and humoured the King,
that he might avoid the Charters of his Father King John, by Duress, and his
own Great Chatrer, and Charta de Foresta also, for that he was within Age, when
he granted the same; whereupon the King in the eleventh Year of his Reign,
being then of full Age, got one of the Great Charters, and of the Forest into
his Hands, and by the Counsel principally of this Hubert his Chief Justice, at
a Council holden at Oxford, unjustly cancelled both the said Charters,
(notwithstanding the said Hubert de Burgh was the Primary Witness of all
Temporal Lords to both the said Charters) whereupon he became in high favor
with the King, insomuch that he was soon after ( viz. the 10th of December, in
the 13th Year of that King) created (to the highest Dignity that in those times
a Subject had) to be an Earl, viz. of Kent: But soon after (for Flatterers and
Humorists have no sure foundation) he fell into the King's heavy Indignation,
and after many fearful and miserable Troubles, he was justly, and according to
Law, sentenced by his Peers in an open Parliament, and justly degraded of that
Dignity, which he unjustly had obtained by his Counsel, for cancelling of Magna
Charta, and Charta de Foresta.

In the 9th Chapter of this Great Charter, all the Ancient Liberties and
Customs of London are confirmed and preserved, which is likewise done by diverse
other Statutes, as 14 Edw. 3. Chap. 2 etc.

The 29th Chapter, NO FREEMAN SHALL BE TAKEN, etc. Deserves to be written in
Letters of Gold; and I have often wondered the Words thereof are not Inscribed
in Capitals on all our Courts of Judicature, Town-Halls, and most public
Edifices; they are the Elixer of our English Freedoms, the Storehouse of all
our Liberties. And because my Lord Cook in the second part of his Institutes,
has many excellent Observations, his very Words I shall here Recite.

This Chapter contains Nine several Branches.

First. That No man be taken or imprisoned, but per legem terrae; that is, by
the Common Law, Statute Law, or Custom of England; for these words, per legem
terrae, being toward the end of this Chapter, do refer to all the precedent
matters in this Chapter; and this has the first place, because the Liberty of
a man's Person is more precious to him, than all the rest that follow, and
therefore it is great Reason that he should by Law be relieved therein, if he
be wronged, as hereafter shall be showed.

2dly. No man shall be desseised; that is, put out of Seisin, or dispossessed
of his Freehold, that is, Lands or Livelihood, or of his Liberties, or free
Customs, that is, of such Franchises and Freedoms, and free Customs as belong
to him, by his free Birthright, unless it be by the the lawful Judgment, that
is, Verdict of his Equals (that is, of men of his own Condition) or by the Law
of the Land, that is (to speak it once for all) by the due Course and Process
of Law

3dly. No man shall be Outlawed, made an Ex lex, put out of the Law, that is,
deprived of the Benefit of the Law, unless he be Outlawed according to the Law
of the Land.

4thly. No man shall be Exiled or Banished out of his Country, that is, nemo
predit patriam, no man shall lose his Country, unless he be Exiled according to
the Law of the Land.

5thly. No man shall in any sort be destroyed, (Destruere id est quod prius
structum and factum fuit penitus Evertere Ex diruere) unless it be by the
Verdict of his Equals* or according to the Law of the Land.

6thly. No man shall be condemned at the King's Suite, either before the King
in his Beneh, where the Pleas are Coram Rege (and so are the Words, nec super
eum ibimus, to be understood) nor before any other Commissioner or Judge
whatsoever; and so are the words, nec super eum Mitimus, to be understood, but
by the Judgment of his Peers, that is, equals, or according to the Law of the
Land

7thly. We shall sell to no man Justice or Right.

8thly. We shall deny to no man Justice or Right.

9thly. We shall defer to no man Justice or Right.

Each of these we shall briefly explain:

1st; No man shall be taken, (that is) restrained of Liberty by Petition, or
suggestion to the King or his Council, unless it be by Indictment or
Presentment of good and lawful men, where such Deeds be done. This Branch, and
diverse other parts of this Act, have been notably Explained and Construed by
diverse Acts of Parliament.

2dly; No man shall be Disseised, etc. Hereby is intended that Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels, shall not be seized into the King's hands
contrary to this Great Charter, and the Law of the Land; nor any man shall be
disseised of his Lands or Tenements, or dispossessed of his Goods or Chattels,
contrary to the Law of the Land.

A Custom was alleged in the Town of C. that if the Tenant cease by two Years,
that the Lord should enter into the Freehold of the Tenant, and hold the same
until he were satisfied of the Arrearages. It was adjudged a Custom against the
Law of the Land, to enter into a man's Freehold in that case, without Action or
Answer.

King Henry the 6th, granted to the Corporation of Dyers within London, Power
to search, etc. And if they found any Cloth dyed with Log-Wood, that the Cloth
should be forfeit. And it was adjudged, that this Charter concerning the
Forfeiture, was against the Law of the Land, and this Statute; for no
Forfeiture can grow by Letters Pattents.

No man ought to be put from his Livelihood, without Answer.

3dly, [ No man Out-lawed] that is, barred to have the benefit of the Law. And
note, to this word Outlawed, these words, unless by the Law of the Land, do
refer [ of his Liberties:] This word has three Significations.

1 st, As it has been said, it signifies the Laws of the Realm, in which
respect this Charter is called Charta Libertatum, as aforesaid.

2 dly, It signifies The Freedom the Subjects of England have: for example,
the company of Merchant-Taylors of England, having power by their Charter to
make Ordinances, made an Ordinance, That every Brother of the same Society
should put the one half of his Clothes to be dressed by some Cloath-worker free
of the same Company, upon pain to forfeit ten Shillings, etc. And it was
adjudged that this Ordinance was against Law, because it was against the
Liberty of the Subject, for every Subject has freedom to put his Clothes to be
dressed by whom he will, etc. sic de similibus. And so it is, if such, or the
like Grant had been made by the Letters Pattents.

3 dly, Liberties signify the Franchizes and Privileges, which the Subjects
have of the Gift of the King, as the Goods and Chattels of Fellons, Outlaws,
and the like, or which the Subject claims by Prescription, as Wrack, Waif,
Stray, and the like.

So likewise, and for the same Reason, if a Grant be made to any man, to have
the sole making of Cards, or the sole dealing with any other Trade, that Grant
is against the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, that before did, or lawfully
might have used that Trade, and consequently against this Great Charter.

Generally all Monopolies are against this great Charter, because they are
against the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, and against the Law of the Land.

4 thly, [No man Exiled] that is, Banished, or forced to depart, or stay out of
England, without his consent, or by the Law of the Land: No man can be exiled,
or banished out of his Native Country, but either by Authority of Parliament,
or in case of Abjuration for Felony, by the Common Law: And so when our Books,
or any Records, speak of Exile or Banishment, other than in case of Abjuration,
it is to be intended to be done by Authority of Parliament, as Belknap and
other Judges, etc. banished into Ireland in the Reign of Richard the second.

This is a beneficial Law, and is construed benignely; And therefore the King
cannot send any Subject of England against his Will to serve him out of the
Realm, for that should be an Exile; and he should perdere patriam: No, he
cannot be sent against his Will into Ireland, to serve the King or his Deputy
there, because it is out of the Realm of England; for if the King might send
him out of his Realm to any place, then under pretense of Service, as
Ambassador, or the like, he might send him into the furthest parts of the
World, whom being an Exile, is prohibited by this Act.

5 thly, [No man destroyed] that is, Fore-judged of Life or Limbs, or put to
torture or death, every Oppression against Law, by color of any usurped
Authority, is a kind of Destruction, and the words aliquo modo, any otherwise,
are added to the verb destroyed, and to no other Verb in this Chapter; and
therefore all things, by any manner of means, tending to Destruction, are
prohibited: As if a man be accused or indicted of Treason or Felony, his Lands
or Goods cannot be granted to any, no, not so much as by promise, nor any of
his Lands or Goods seized into the Kings hand, before he is attainted; for when
a Subject obtains a promise of the forfeiture, many times undue means, and
more violent Prosecution is used for private Lucre, tending to destruction,
than the quiet and just proceeding of the Law would permit; and the party ought
to live of his own until Attainder.

6thly, [ By lawful judgment of his Peers] that is, by his equals, men of his
own Rank and Condition. The general division of Persons, by the Law of England,
is, either one that is Noble, and in respect of his Nobility, of the Lords
House of Parliament, or one of the Commons, and in respect thereof, of the
House of Commons in Parliament. And as there be diverse degrees of Nobility, as
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barrons, and yet all of them are
comprehended under this word Peers, and are Peers of the Realm; so of the
Commons, they be Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens and Yeomen, and yet all
of them of the Commons of the Realm. And as every of the Nobles one is a Peer
to another, though he be of a several degree, so it is of the Commons; and as
it has been said of Men, so does it hold of Noble Women, either by Birth or
Marriage.

And forasmuch as this Judgment by Peers is called lawful, it shows the
Antiquity of this manner of Trial: it was the ancient accustomed legal course
long before this Charter.

7thly, [ Or by the Law of the Land] that is, by due Process of Law, for so the
Words are expressly expounded by the Statute of 37 Edw. 3. Chap. 8. and these
Words are especially to be refered to those foregoing, to whom they relate;
As, none shall be Condemned without a lawful Trial by his Peers, so none shall
be Taken, or Imprisoned, or put out of his Freehold, without due Process of the
Law; that is, by the Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful men of the
place, in due manner, or by Writ original of the Common Law.

Now, seeing that no man can be Taken, Arrested, Attached, or Imprisoned, but
by due Process of Law, and according to the Law of the Land, these Conclusions
hereupon do follow:

1. That the Person or Persons which commit any, must have Lawful Authority.

2. It is necessary that the Warrant or Mittimus be Lawful, and that must be in
Writing under his Hand and Seal.

3. The Cause must be contained in the Warrant, as for Treason, Felony, etc.
suspicion of Treason or Felony, or the like particular Crime: for if it do not
thus specify the Cause, if the Prisoner bring his Habeas Corpus, he must be
discharged, because no Crime appears on the return; nor is it in such case any
Offense at all, if the Prisoner make his escape* whereas if the Mutimus contain
the Cause; the escape would respectively be Treason or Felony, though in truth
he were not Guilty of the first Offense, and this mentioning the Cause, is
agreeable to Scripture, Acts 5.

4. The Warrant or Mutimus, containing a lawful Cause, ought to have a lawful
Conclusion, viz. And him safely to keep until he be delivered by Law, etc. and
not until the party committing shall further order.

If a man by color of any Authority, where he has not any in that particular
case, shall presume to Arrest or Imprison any man, or cause him to be arrested
or imprisoned, this is against this Act, and it is most hateful, when it is
done by Countenance of Justice. King Edward the sixth did Incorporate the Town
of St. Albans, and granted to them to make Ordinance, etc they made a by-Law
upon pain of Imprisonment, and it was adjudged to be against this Statute of
Magna Charta, so it had been, if such an Ordinance had been contained in the
Pattent it self.

[ We will sell to no man, deny to no man, etc.] This is spoken in the Person
of the King, who in Judgment of Law in all Courts of Justice is present; and
therefore every Subject of this Realm, for Injury done to him in Bonis, Terris,
vel Persona, in Person, Lands or Goods, by any other Subject, Ecclesiastical or
Temporal whatever he be, without exception, may take his Remedy by the Course
of the Law, and have Justice and Right for the Injury done him, freely without
Sale, fully without any denial, and speedily without delay; for Justice must
have three Qualities, it must be Libera, free; for nothing is more odious then
Justice set to sale; plena, full, for Justice ought not to limp, or be granted
piecemeal and Celeris, speedily: quia Dilatio est quaedam negatio, Delay is a
kind of Denial: And when all these meet, it is both JUSTICE and RIGHT.

[ We will not deny or delay any man, etc.] These Words have been excellently
expounded by latter Acts of Parliament, that by no means Common-Right or
Common Law should be disturbed or delayed; no, though it be commanded under the
Great Seal, or Privy Seal, Order, Writ, Letters, Messuge, or Commandment
whatsoever, either from the King, or any other; and that the Justices shall
proceed, as if no such Writs, Letters, Order, Message, or other Commandment
were come to them; All our Judges swear to this: for it is part of their Oaths,
so that if any shall be found wresting the Law to serve a Courts turn, they are
Perjured, as well as Unjust; the common Laws of the Realm should by no means be
delayed, for the Law is the surest Sanctuary that a man can take, and the
strongest Fortress to protect the weakest of all; Lex est tutissima Cassis, the
Law is a most safe Headpiece: And sub Clypeo legis nemo decipitur, no man is
deceived whilst the Law is his Buckler; but the King may stay his own Suit; as
a Capias pro fine, for he may respit his Fine, and the like.

All Protections that are not Legal, which appear not in the Register, nor
warranted by our Books, are expressly against this Branch, nulli differemus, we
will not delay any man, as a protection under the Great Seal granted to any man
directly to the Sheriff, etc. and commanding them, that they shall not Arrest
him, during a certain time, at any other man's Suit; which has Words in it,
Per praerogativam nostram quant nolumus esse Arguendam, by our Prerogative,
which we will not have disputed; yet such Protections have been argued by the
Judges, according to their Oath and Duty, and adjudged to be void; as Mich. 11
H. 7. Rot. 124. a Protection granted to Holmes a Vintner of London, his
Factors, Servants and Deputies, etc. resolved to be against Law, Pas. 7 H. 8.
Rot. 66. such a Protection disallowed, and the Sheriff amerced for not
Executing the Writ, Mich. 13. and 14 Eliz. in Hitchcock Case, and many other of
latter time: And there is a notable Record of ancient time in 22 E. 1. John de
Marshalls case; Non pertinet ad vicecomitem de protectione Regis Iudicare, imo
ad Curiam.

Justice or right] We shall not sell, deny or delay Justice and Right, neither
the end, which is Justice; nor the mean whereby we may attain to the end, and
that is the Law: Right is taken here for Law, in the same sense that Justice
often is so called, 1. Because it is the right Line, whereby Justice
distributive, is guided and directed; and therefore all the Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, of Jail-delivery, of the Peace, etc. have this clause,
Facturi quod Iustitiam pertinet, secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae, i.
e. to do Justice and Right, according to the Rule of the Law and Custom of
England; and that which is called common Right in 2 E. 3. is called common Law
in 14 E. 3. etc. and in this sense it is taken, where it is said, Ita quod stat
Rectus in Curia, id est Legi in Curia.

2. The Law is called Rectum, because it discovers that which is tort,
crooked or wrong; for as Right signifies Law, so tort, crooked or wrong
signifies Injuries, and Injuria est contra Ius, Injury is against Right. Recta
linea est index sui and obliqui, a right line is both declaratory of it self
and the oblique. Hereby the crooked Cord of that which is called discretion
appears to be unlawful, unless you take it, as it ought to be, discretio est
discernere per Legem, quid sit Iustum, discretion is to discern by the Law what
is just.

It is called Right, because it is the best Birthright the Subject has, for
thereby his Goods, Lands, Wife and Children, his Body, Life, Honor and
Estimation are protected from Injury and wrong* Major Hoereditas venit
unicunque nostrum a Iure and Legibus, quam a Parentibus; A greater Inheritance
descends to us from the Laws, than from our Progenitors.

Thus far the very words of that Oracle of our Law, the sage and learned Cook;
which so fully and excellently explains this incomparable Law, that it will be
superfluous to add any thing further thereunto.

A Confirmation of the Charters of the Liberties of England, and of the
Forest, made in the 35th Year of Edward the first.
EDward, by the Grace of God, K. of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guyan, to all those these present Letters shall hear or see, greeting. Know ye,
that we to the honor of God, and of holy Church, and to the profit of our
Realm, have granted for us and our Heirs, that the Charter of Liberties, and
the Charter of the Forest; which were by common consent of all the Realm, in
the time of K. Henry our Father, shall be kept in every point without breach.
And we will that the same Charter shall be sent under our Seal, as well to our
Justices of the Forest, as to others, and to all Sheriffs of Shires, and to
all our other Officers, and to all our Cities throughout the Realm, together
with our Writs, in which it shall be contained, that they cause the aforesaid
Charters to be published, and to declare to the People, that we have confirmed
them in all points. And that our Iusticers, Sheriffs and Mayors, and other
Ministers, which under us have the Laws of our Land to guide, shall allow the
same Charters pleaded before them in Judgment in all their points, that is to
say, the great Charter as the common Law, and the Charter of the Forest for
the Wealth of our Realm.

Chap. 2. And we will, that if any Judgment be given from henceforth contrary
to the points of the Charters aforesaid, by the Justicers, or any other our
Ministers that hold plea before them, against the points of the Charters, it
shall be undone and holden for naught.

Cap. 3. And we will, that the same Charters shall be sent under our Seal, to
Cathedral Churches throughout our Realm, there to remain, and shall be read
before the People two times by the year.

Cap. 4. And that all Archbishops and Bishops shall pronounce the sentence of
Excommunication against all those that by word, deed or council, do contrary to
the aforesaid Charters, or that in any point break or undo them. And that the
said Curses be twice a year denounced and published by the Prelates aforesaid.
And if the same Prelates, or any of them, be remiss in the denunciation of the
said Sentences, the Archbishop of Canterbury and York for the time being,
shall compel and distrain them to the Execution of their Duties in form
aforesaid.

Cap. 5. And for so much as diverse People of our Realm are in fear, that the
Aids and Tasks which they have given to us before time, toward our Wars, and
other business, of their own grant, or good will (however they were made) might
turn to a bondage to them and their Heirs, because they might be at another
time found in the Rolls, and likewise for the prizes taken throughout the Realm
by our Ministers, We have granted for us and our Heirs, that we shall draw no
such Aids, Tasks nor Prizes into a Custom, for any that has been done
heretofore, be it by Roll or any other President that may be found.

Cap. 6. Moreover, we have granted for us and our Heirs, as well to
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other folk of holy Church, as also to
Earls, Barons, and to all the Commonality of the Land, that for no business
henceforth, we shall take such manner of Aids, Tasks or Prizes, but by the
common assent of the Realm, and for the common profit thereof; saving the
ancient Aids and Prizes due and accustomed.

Cap. 7. And for so much as the more part of the Commonality of the Realm find
themselves fore grieved with the Maletot of VVools, that is to wit, a Toll of
40 s. for every Sack of Wool, and have made Petition to us for to release the
same: We at their Request have clearly released it, and have granted for us and
our Heirs, that we shall not take such things, without their common consent and
good will, saving to us and our heirs the Custom of VVools, Skins and Leather,
granted before by the Commonality aforesaid. In VVitness of which things we
have caused our Letters to be Pattent, Witness Edward our Son, at London the
10th of October; and the twenty fifth year of our Reign,

The Sentence of the Clergy against the breakers of the Articles above written.
IN the Name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our
sovereign Lord the King, to the honor of God and of holy Church, and for the
common profit of the Realm, has granted for him and his Heirs forever, these
Articles above written; Robert, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England, admonishes all his Province once, twice and thrice; Because that
shortness will not suffer so much delay as to give knowledge to all the People
of England of these presents in writing. We therefore enjoin all persons, of
what Estate soever they be, that they and every of them, as much as in them is,
shall uphold and maintain these Articles granted by our Sov. Ld. the K. in all
points. And all those that in any point do resist or break, or in any manner
hereafter procure, counsel, or any ways assent to resist or break those
Ordinances, or go about it, by word or deed, openly or privily, by any manner
of pretense or color: We the foresaid Archbishop, by our Authority in this
writing expressed, do excommunicate and accurse, and from the Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and from all the Company of Heaven, and from all the Sacraments
of holy Church, do sequester and exclude.

NB. It may be observed that this Curse is left out of our late printed
Statute-Books, though inserted at large in that printed in 3 Vol. in Q. Eliz.
days, anno 1557. There is likewise another like dreadful, but more full and
express Curse, solemnly pronounced before in the time of K. Henry 3. which also
being omitted in our modern Statute-Book, I shall here add.

The Sentence or Curse given by the Bishops against the Breakers of the great
Charter.
IN the Year of our Lord 1253. the 3d day of May, in the great Hall of the K.
at Westminster, in the presence and by the assent of the Lord Henry, by the
Grace of God K. of England, and the Ld Richard Earl of Cornwall his Brother,
Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, Marshal of England, Humphery Earl of
Hereford, Henry Earl of Oxford, John Earl Warren, and other Estates of the
Realm of England: W. Boniface, by the mercy of God Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, F. of London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of
Lincoln, W. of Norwich, G. of Hereford, W. of Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of
Exeter, M. of Carlisle, W. of Bath, E. of Rochester, T. of St. David's: Bishops
appareled in Pontificials, with Tapers burning, against the breakers of the
Churches Liberties, and of the Liberties or other Customs of the Realm of
England, and namely those which are contained in the Charter of the common
Liberties of England, and Charter of the Forest, have denounced the sentence
of Excommunication in this form. By the Authority of Almighty God, the Father,
the Son and the holy Ghost, and of the glorious Mother of God, and perpetual
Virgin Mary, of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all Apostles, and
of all Martyrs, and of blessed Edward, K. of England, and of all the Sts of
Heaven, we Excommunicate, accurse, and from the benefits of our holy Mother the
Church, we sequester all those that hereafter willingly and maliciously deprive
or spoil the Church of her Right; and all those that by any craft or wiliness
do violate, break, diminish or change the Churches Liberties, and free Customs
contained in the Charters of the common Liberties, and of the Forest, granted
by our L. the King, to Arch-bps, Bps, and other Prelates of England, and
likewise to the Earls, Barons, Knights; and other Freeholders of the Realm:
And all that secretly or openly, by deed word or council, do make Statutes, or
observe them being made, and that bring in Customs, or keep them when they be
brought in, against the said Liberties or any of them; and all those that shall
presume to judge against them. All and every which persons beforementioned,
that wittingly shall commit any of the Premises, let them know, that they incur
the foresaid Sentence, ipso facto.

So zealous were our Ancestors to preserve their Liberties from encroachments,
that they employed all the strength of human Policy and religious Obligations
to secure them entire and inviolate. And I declare ingeniously, I would not for
the world incur this Curse, as every man deservedly does, that offers violence
to the fundamental Freedoms thereby repeated and confirmed.

A Statute made Anno 34 Edw. 1. commonly called de Tallegeo non Concendendo.
Cap. 1. NO Tallage or Aid shall be taken or levied by us or our Heirs in our
Realm, without the good will and assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Free men of the Land.

Cap. 2. No Officer of ours, or of our Heirs, shall take Corn, Leather, Cattle,
or any other Goods of any manner of Person, without the good will and assent of
the party to whom the goods belonged.

Cap. 3. Nothing from henceforth shall be taken of Sacks of Wool, by color or
occasion of maletot.

Cap. 4. We will grant for us and our Heirs, That all Clerks and Laymen of our
Land, shall have their Laws, Liberties and free Customs as largely and wholly
as they have used to have the same at any time when they had them best. (2.)
And if any Statutes have been made by us and our Ancestors, or any Customs
brought in contrary to them, or any manner of Article contained in this present
Charter: We will and grant that such manner of Statutes and Customs shall be
void and frustrate for evermore.

Cap. 5. Moreover, we have pardoned Humphry Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex,
Constable of England, Roger Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, Marshal of England,
and other Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, and namely John de Ferrariis, with
other being of their fellowship, confederacy and bond, and also of other that
hold 20 l. Land in our Realm, whether they hold of us in chief or of others,
that were appointed at a day certain to pass over with us into Flanders, the
rancour and evil will born against us, and all other Offenses, [ if any they
have committed] against us, unto the making of this present Charter.

Cap. 6. And for the more assurance of this thing, we will and grant that all
Arch-Bps and Bps forever, shall read this present Charter in Cathedral Churches
twice in the year, and upon the reading thereof in every of their Parish
Churches shall openly denounce accursed all those that willingly do procure to
be done any thing contrary to the tenor, force and effect of this present
Charter in any point. In witness of which thing, we have set our Seal to this
present Charter, together with the Seals of the Arch-Bps, Bps, which
voluntarily have sworn, that as much as in them is, they shall observe the
tenor of this present Charter.

The Comment.
THe word Tallage is derived from the French word Tailler, to share or cut out
a part, and is metaphorically used for any Charge, when the King or any other
does cut out or take away any part or share out of a man's Estate; and being a
general word, it includes all Subsidies, Taxes, Tenths, Aids, Impositions, or
other Charges whatsoever.

The word Maletot signifies an Evil (i. e. unjust) Toll, Custom, Imposition, or
Sum of Money.

The occasion of making this Statute, was this, K. Edward being injured by the
French King, resolves to make War against him, and in order thereunto requires
of Humphery le Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England, and
of Roger Bigot, Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, and Marshal of England, and of all
the Earls, Barons* Knights, Esquires, and Freeholders of ^^ l. Land, whether
they held of him in Capite, to contribute toward such his expedition, that is,
to go in person, or find sufficient men in their places, in his Army; which the
Constable and Marshal, and many of the Knights and Esquires, and especially
this John Ferrers taking part with them and all the Freemen, stoutly denied,
unless it were so ordained and determined by common consent in Parliament,
according to Law. And it seems the Contest grew so hot, that Bakers Chronicle,
fol. 99. relates a strange Dialogue that passed between them, viz. That when
the Earl Marshal told the King, That if his Majesty pleased to go in Person, he
would then go with him, and march before him in the Vanguard, as by right of
Inheritance he ought to do; but otherwise he would not stir. The King told him
plainly, He should go with any other, though he went not in Person. I am not so
bound (says the Earl) neither will I take that Journey without you. The King
swore, By God, Sir Earl, you shall either go or Hang. And I swear by the same
Oath (said the Earl) I will neither go nor hang. And so the King was forced to
dispatch his Expedition without them. And yet (says my L. Cook) although the K.
had conceived a deep displeasure against the Constable, Marshal, and others of
the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of the Realm, for denying that which he so
much desired, yet, for that they stood in defense of their Laws, Liberties and
free Customs, the said K. Edw. 1 st. who (as Sir Will. Herle chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, who lived in his time, and served him, said in the time of K.
Edw. 3.) was the wisest King that ever was; did after his return from beyond
the Seas, not only consent to this Statute, whereby all such Tallages and
Impositions are forbidden for the future, but also passes a Pardon to the said
Nobles, etc. of all Rancour, Ill will and Transgressions, [if any they have
committed] which last words were added, lest by acceptance of a Pardon of
Transgression, they should implicitly confess that they had transgressed. So
careful were the Lords and Commons in former times to preserve the Ancient
Laws, Liberties and free Customs of their Country.

An abstract of the Pattent granted by the King to William Penn, and his Heirs
and Assigns.
WE do give and grant (upon diverse considerations) to William Penn his Heirs
and Assigns forever all that tract of Land in America with all Islands
thereunto belonging That is to say from the beginning of the fortieth degree of
North Latitude unto the forty third degree of North Latitude whose Eastern
bounds from twelve English Miles above New Castle (alias Delaware Town) runs
all along upon the side of Delaware-River.

2. Free and undisturbed use and passage into and out of all Harbors Bays
Waters Rivers Isles and Inlets belonging to or leading to the same Together
with the Soil Fields Woods Underwoods Mountains Hills Fenns Isles Lakes Rivers
Waters Rivulets Bays and Inlets situate in or belonging unto the limits and
bounds aforesaid Together with all sorts of Fish Mines Mettles, etc. To have
and to hold to the only behoof of the said William Penn his Heirs and Assigns
forever To be holden of us as of our Castle of Windsor in free and common
soccage paying only 2 Beaver skins yearly.

3. And of our further Grace we have thought sit to erect and we do hereby
erect the aforesaid Country and Islands into a Province and Seigniory and do
call it Pennsilvania and so from henceforth we will have it called.

4. That reposing special confidence in the wisdom and justice of the said W.
Penn we do grant to him and his Heirs and their Deputies for the good and happy
Government thereof to ordain and enact and under his and their Seals to publish
any Laws whatever for the public uses of the said Province by and with the
advice and approbation of the Free holders of the said Country or their
delegates so as they be not repugnant to the Law of this Realm and to the Faith
and Allegience due unto us by the legal Government thereof.

5. Full power to the said VV. Penn, etc. to appoint Judges Leiutenants
Justices Magistrates and Officers for what causes soever and with what Power
and in such Form as to him seems convenient also to be able to pardon and
abolish Crimes and Offenses and to do all and every other thing that to the
complete establishment of Justice unto Courts and Tribunals forms of Judicature
and manner of Proceedings do belong And our pleasure is and so we enjoin and
require that such Laws and Proceedings shall be most absolute and available in
Law and that all the liege People of us our Heirs and Successors inviolably
keep the same in those parts saving to us final Appeals.

6. That the Laws for regulating Property as well for the descent of Lands as
enjoyment of Goods and Chattels and likewise as to Felonies shall be the same
there as here in England until they shall be altered by the said VV. Penn his
Heirs or Assigns and by the Freemen of the said Province or their delegates or
deputies or the greater part of them.

7. Furthermore that this new Colony may the more happily increase by the
multitude of People resorting thither therefore we for us our Heirs and
Successors do hereby grant Lisence to all the liege People present and future
of us, etc. (excepting such as shall be specially forbidden) to transport
themselves and Families into the said Country there to inhabit and plant for
the public and private good.

8. Liberty to transport what goods or commodities are not forbidden paying
here the legal Customs due to us, etc.

9. Power to divide the Country into Counties Hundreds and Towns to incorporate
Towns into Buroughs and Buroughs into Cities to make Fairs and Markets with
convenient Privileges according to the merit of the Inhabitants or the fitness
of the place And to do all other thing or things touching the Premises which to
the said W. Penn his Heirs or Assigns shall seem meet and requisite albeit they
be such as of their own nature might otherwise require a more special
comandment and warrant than in these presents is expressed.

10. Liberty to import the growth or Manufactures of that Province into England
paying here the legal Duty.

11. Power to erect Harbors Creeks Havens Keys and other places of
Merchandises with such Jurisdiction and Privileges as to the said W. Penn,
etc. shall seem expedient.

12. Not to break the Acts of Navigation neither Governor nor Inhabitants upon
the penalties contained in the said Acts.

13. Not to be in League with any Prince or Country that is in War against us
our Heirs and Successors.

14. Power of safety and defense in such way and manner as to the said W. Penn,
etc. seems meet.

15. Full power to assign alien grant demise or enfeoff of the Premises so many
and such parts and parcels to those that are willing to purchase the same as
the said William Penn thinks fit to have and to hold to them the said Persons
their Heirs or Successors in fee Simple or fee Tail or for term of Life or
Lives or years to be held of the said Will. Penn, etc. as of the said Seigniory
of Windsor by such Services Customs and Rents as shall seem fit to the said W.
P. his Heirs and Assigns and not immediately of us our Heirs or Successors and
that the said Persons may take the Premises or any parcel thereof of the said
W. Penn, etc. and the same hold to themselves their Heirs and Assigns the
Statute Quia emptoroes Terrarum in any wise notwithstanding.

16. We give and grant Lisence to any of those Persons to whom the said W. P.
etc. has granted any Estate of Inheritance as aforesaid with the consent of the
said W. P. to erect any parcel of Lands within the said Province into Manors
to hold Courts Barron and view of Frank-pledge, etc. by themselves or Stewards.

17. Power to those Persons to grant to others the same Tenures in fee simple
or otherwise to be held of the said Manors respectively and upon all further
Alienations the Land to be held of the Manor that it held of before the
Alienation.

18. We do covenant and grant to and with the said W. P. his Heirs and Assigns
that we will not set or make any Custom or other Taxation upon the Inhabitants
of the said Province upon Lands Houses Goods Chattels or Merchandises except
with the consent of the Inhabitants and Governor.

19. A charge that no Officers nor Ministers of us our Heirs and Successors do
presume at any time attempt any thing to the contrary of the Premises or in any
sort withstand the same but that they be at all times aiding to the said W. P.
and his Heirs and to the Inhabitants and Merchants their Factors and Assigns in
the full use and benefit of this our Charter.

20. And if any doubts or questions shall hereafter arise about the true sense
or meaning of any word clause or sentence contained in this our Charter we will
ordain and command that at all times and in all things such Interpretation be
made thereof and allowed in any of our Courts whatsoever as shall be adjudged
most advantageous and favorable to the said W. P. his Heirs and Assigns so as
it be not against the Faith and Allegiance due to us our Heirs and Successors.
In Witness whereof we have caused our Letters to be made Pattents. VVitness our
self at Westminster the fourth day of March, Anno Dom. 1681.

The Frame of the Government of the Province of Pennsilvania and Territories
thereunto annexed, in America.
To all Persons to whom these presents may come;
WHereas King Charles the second by his Letters Pattents under the great Seal
of England, bearing date the fourth day of March, in the thirty third year of
the KING, for diverse Considerations therein mentioned, has been graciously
pleased to give and grant unto me William Penn, by the name of William Penn,
Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir William Penn deceased, and to my Heirs and Assigns
forever, all that tract of Land or Province called Pennsilvania in America,
with diverse great Powers, Pre-eminences, Royalties, Jurisdictions and
Authorities, necessary for the well-being and good Government thereof. And
whereas the Kings dearest Brother James Duke of York and Albany, etc. by his
Deeds of Feoffment under his hand and seal, duly perfected, bearing date the
24th of August, 1682. he has granted unto me the said William Penn my Heirs
and Assigns all that Tract of Land, lying and being from twelve miles northward
of New Castle upon Delaware River, in America, to Cape Henlopen upon the said
River and Bay of Delaware, southward together with all Royalties, Franchises,
Duties, Jurisdictions, Liberties and Privileges thereunto belonging.

Now know ye, That for the well-being and good Government of the said Province
and Territories thereunto annexed, and for the Encouragement of all the
Freemen and Planters that may be therein concerned, in pursuance of the Rights
and Powers aforementioned, I the said William Penn have declared, granted and
confirmed, and by these presents for me, my Heirs and Assigns, do declare,
grant and confirm unto all the Freemen, Planters, and Adventurers of, in and
to the said Province and Territories thereof, these Liberties, Pranchises and
Properties, so far as in me lies, to be held, enjoyed and kept by the
Freemen, Planters and Adventurers of and in the said Province of Pennsilvania
and Territories thereunto annexed, forever.

Imprimis, That the Government of this Province and Territories thereof, shall
from time to time (according to the Powers of the Pattent, and Deeds of
Feoffment aforesaid) consist of the Proprietary and Governor, and the Freemen
of the said Province and Territories thereof in the form of a Provincial
Council and Assembly, which Provincial Council shall consist of eighteen
Persons, being three out of each County, and which Assembly shall consist of
thirty six Persons, being six out of each County, men of most note, for Virtue,
Wisdom, and Ability, by whom all Laws shall be made, Officers chosen and
public Affairs transacted, as is hereafter limited and declared.

2 dly. There being three Persons already chosen for every respective County of
this Province, and Territories thereof, to serve in Provincial Council, one of
them for three Years, one for two Years, and one for one Year, and one of them
being to go off Yearly in every County. That on the tenth Day of the first
Month yearly forever after, the Freemen of the said Province and Territories
thereof, shall meet together in the most convenient place in every County of
this Province, and Territories thereof, then and there choose one Person,
qualified as aforesaid, in every County, being one third of the number to serve
in Provincial Council for three Years, it being intended that one third of the
whole Provincial Council consisting, and to consist of eighteen Persons falling
off yearly, it shall be yearly supplied by such new yearly Elections, as
aforesaid, and that one Person shall not continue longer than three Years; and
in case any Member shall decease before the last Election, during his time,
that then at the next Election ensuing his decease, another shall be chosen to
supply his place for the remaining time he was to have served, and no longer.

3 dly. That after the first seven Years, every one of the said third parts
that goes yearly off, shall be incapable of being chosen again for one whole
Year following, that so all that are capable and qualified, as aforesaid, may
be fitted for Government, and have a share of the care and burden of it.

4 thly. That the Provincial Council in all cases and matters of moment, as
their arguing upon Bills to be past into Laws, or proceedings about erecting of
Courts of Justice, sitting in Judgment upon Criminals impeached, and choice of
Officers in such manner as is herein after expressed, not less than two thirds
of the whole, shall make a Quorum, and that the consent and approbation of two
thirds of that Quorum shall be had in all such Cases or Matters of Moment. And
that in all cases and matters of lesser moment, one third of the whole shall
make a Quorum, the Majority of which shall and may always determine in such
Cases and Causes of lesser moment.

5 thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall have the Power of
preparing and proposing to the Assembly hereafter mentioned, all Bills which
they shall see needful, and that shall at any time be past into Laws within the
said Province and Territories thereof, which Bills shall be published, and
affixed to the most noted place in every County of this Province and
Territories thereof twenty days before the meeting of the Assembly, in order to
passing them into Laws.

6 thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall take care that all
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances which shall at any time be made within the said
Province and Territories, be duly and diligently executed.

7 thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times have the
care of the Peace and Safety of this Province, and Territories thereof; and
that nothing be by any Person attempted to the Subversion of this frame of
Government.

8 thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times settle
and order the Situation of all Cities and Market Towns in every County,
modelling therein all public Buildings, Streets, and Marketplaces, and shall
appoint all necessary Roads and Highways in this Province and Territories
thereof.

9 thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times have
power to inspect the management of the public Treasury, and punish those who
shall convert any part thereof to any other use, than what has been agreed
upon by the Governor, Provincial Council, and Assembly.

10 thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall erect and order all
public Schools, and encourage and reward the Authors of useful Sciences, and
laudable Inventions in the said Province and Territories thereof.

11 thly. That One Third of the Provincial Council residing with the Governor,
shall with the Governor from time to time have the care of the management of
all public Affairs, relating to the Peace, Justice, Treasury, Trade and
Improvement of the Province and Territories, and to the good Education of
Youth, and Sobriety of the Manners of the Inhabitants therein, as aforesaid.

12 thly. That the Governor or his Deputy shall always preside in the
Provincial Council, and that he shall at no time therein perform any public
Act of State whatsoever, that shall or may relate unto the Justice, Trade,
Treasury or Safety of the Province, and Territories as aforesaid, but by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Provincial Council thereof.

13 thly. And to the end that all Bills prepared and agreed by the Governor
and Provincial Council, as aforesaid, may yet have the more full concurrence of
the Freemen of the Province and Territories thereof, It is declared, granted
and confirmed, that at the time and place in every County, for the choice of
one Person to serve in Provincial Council, as aforesaid, the respective Members
thereof at their said Meeting, shall yearly choose out of themselves fix Persons
of note, for their Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, to serve in Assembly, as their
Representatives, who shall yearly meet on the Tenth day of the third Month, in
the Capital Town or City of the said Province, unless the Governor and
Provincial Council shall think fit to appoint another place to meet in, where
during eight days, the several Members may freely confer with one another, and
if any of them see meet with a Committee of the Provincial Council, which shall
be at that time purposely appointed to receive from any of them, Proposals for
the alteration or amendment of any of the said proposed and promulgated Bills,
and on the nineth day from their so meeting, the said Assembly, after their
reading over of the proposed Bills by the Clerk of the Provincial Council, and
the occasions and motives for them being opened by the Goververnour, or his
Deputy, shall upon the Question by him put, give their Affirmative or Negative,
which to them seems best, in such manner as is hereafter expressed, but not
less than two thirds shall make a Quorum in the passing of all Bills into Laws,
and choice of such Officers as are by them to be chosen.

14. That the Laws so prepared and proposed, as aforesaid, that are assented to
by the Assembly, shall be enrolled as Laws of this Province and Territories
thereof, with this Style, By the Governor, with the Assent and Approbation of
the Freemen in Provincial Council and Assembly met. And from henceforth the
Meeting, Sessions, Acts and Proceedings of the Governor, Provincial Council
and Assembly shall be styled and called, The Meeting, Sessions, Acts and
Proceedings of the General Assembly of the Province of Pennsilvania, and the
Territories thereunto belonging.

15. And that the Representatives of the People in Provincial Council and
Assembly, may in after Ages bear some proportion with the increase and
multiplying of the People, the Numbers of such Representatives of the People
may be from time to time increased and enlarged, so as at no time the number
exceed seventy two for the Provincial Council, and two hundred for the
Assembly; the appointment and proportion of which Number, as also the laying
and methodizing of the choice of such Representatives in future time, most
equally to the division of the Country, or number of the Inhabitants, is left
to the Governor and Provincial Council to propose, and the Assembly to
resolve, so that the order of rotation be strictly observed, both in the choice
of the Council, and the respective Committees thereof, viz. one third to go
off, and come in yearly.

16. That from, and after the Death of this Present Governor, the Provincial
Council shall together with the suceeding Governor, erect from time to time
standing Courts of Justice, in such Places and Number as they shall judge
convenient for the good Government of the said Province and Territories
thereof; and that the Provincial Council shall on the thirteenth day of the
second Month, then next ensuing, elect and present to the Governor, or his
Deputy, a double number of Persons, to serve for Judges, Treasurers, and
Masters of the Rolls within the said Province and Territories, to continue so
long as they shall well behave themselves in those Capacities respectively, and
the Freemen of the said Province in Assembly met, shall on the thirteenth day
of the third Month, yearly, elect, and then Present to the Governor or his
Deputy a double number of Persons to serve for Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
and Coroners for the Year next ensuing, out of which respective Elections and
Presentiments the Governor or his Deputy shall nominate and commissionate the
proper number for each Office, the third day after the said respective
Presentiments, or else the first named in such Presentment for each Office, as
aforesaid, shall stand and serve in that Office the time before respectively
limited; and in case of Death or Default, such vacancy shall be supplied by the
Governor and Provincial Council in manner aforesaid.

17. That the Assembly shall continue so long as may be needful to impeach
Criminals fit to be there impeached, to pass such bills into Laws as are
proposed to them, which they shall think fit to pass into Laws, and till such
time as the Governor and Provincial Council shall declare, That they have
nothing further to propose unto them for their Assent and Approbation; and that
declaration shall be a Dismiss to the Assembly for that time, which Assembly
shall be notwithstanding capable of assembling together upon the summons of the
Governor and Provincial Council at any time during that year, if the Governor
and Provincial Council shall see occasion for their so assembling.

18. That all the Elections of Members or Representatives of the People, to
serve in Provincial Council and Assembly, and all Questions to be determined by
both or either of them, that relate to the choice of Officers, and all or any
other Personal matters, shall be resolved and determined by the Ballot, and all
things relating to the preparing and passing of Bills into Laws, shall be
openly declared and resolved by the Vote.

19. That at all times when the Proprietary and Governor shall happen to be an
Infant, and under the Age of one and twenty Years, and no Guardian or
Commissioners are appointed in writing by the Father of the said Infant, or
that such Guardian shall be deceased, that during such Minority, the Provincial
Council shall from time to time, as they shall see meet, constitute and appoint
Guardians and Commissioners, not exceeding three, one of which shall preside as
Deputy and chief Guardian, during such Minority, and shall have and execute,
with the consent of one of the other two, all the Power of a Governor in all
public Affairs and Concerns of the said Province and Territories thereof,
according to Charter; which said Guardian so appointed, shall also have the
care and oversight of the Estate of the said Minor, and be yearly accountable
and responsable for the same to the Provincial Council, and the Provincial
Council to the Minor when of Age, or to the next Heir in case of the said
Minor's death, for the Trust before expressed.

20. That as often as any days of the Month mentioned in any Article of this
Charter shall fall upon the First day of the Week, commonly called the Lords
day, the business appointed for that day shall be deferred till the next day,
unless in cases of Emergency.

21. And for the Satisfaction and Encouragement of all Aliens, I do give and
grant, that if any Alien, who is or shall be a purchaser, or who does or shall
inhabit in this Province or Territories thereof, shall decease at any time
before he can well be naturalized, his Right and Interest therein shall
notwithstanding descend to his Wife and Children, or other his Relations, be he
Testate or Intestate, according to the Laws of this Province and Territories
thereof, in such cases provided, in as free and ample manner, to all intents
and purposes, as if the said Alien had been naturalized.

22. And that the Inhabitants of this Province and Territories thereof may be
accommodated with such Food and Sustenance as God in his Providence has freely
afforded, I do also further grant to the Inhabitants of this Province and
Territories thereof, liberty to fowl and hunt upon the Lands they hold, or all
other Lands therein, not enclosed, and to fish in all Waters in the said Lands,
and in all Rivers and Rivulets in and belonging to this Province and
Territories thereof, with liberty to draw his or their Fish to shore on any
man's Lands, so as it be not to the detriment or annoyance of the Owner thereof,
except such Lands as do lie upon Inland Rivulets that are not boatable, or
which are or may be hereafter erected into Manors.

23. And that all the Inhabitants of this Province and Territories thereof,
whether Purchasors or others, may have the last worldly Pledge of my good and
kind Intentions to them and theirs, I do give, grant and confirm to all and
every one of them full and quiet Enjoyment of their respective Lands to which
they have any lawful or equitable Claim, saving only such Rents and Services
for the same as are or customarily ought to be reserved to Me, my Heirs and
Assigns.

24. That no Act, Law or Ordinance whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be
made or done by the Proprietary and Governor of this Province and Territories
thereunto belonging, his Heirs, and Assigns, or by the Freemen in Provincial
Council or Assembly, to alter, change or diminish the form or effect of this
Charter, or any part or clause thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning
thereof, without the consent of the Proprietary and Governor, his Heirs or
Assigns, and Six parts of Seven of the said Freemen in Provincial Council and
Assembly met.

25. And Lastly, I the said. William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the
Province of Pennsilvania and Territories thereunto belonging, for my self, my
Heirs and Assigns, have solemnly declared, granted and confirmed, and do hereby
solemnly declare, grant and confirm, that neither I, my Heirs or Assigns shall
procure or do any thing or things whereby the Liberties in this Charter
contained and expressed shall be infringed or broken: And if any thing be
procured by any Person or Persons contrary to these Premises, it shall be held
of no force or effect. In Witness whereof, I the said William Penn at
Philadelphia in Pennsilvania, have unto this present Charter of Liberties set
my Hand and broad Seal this second day of the second Month, in the Year of our
Lord 1683. being the thirty fifth year of the King, and the third year of my
Government.

William Penn.

INDORSED.
THis within Charter which we have distinctly heard read, and thankfully
received, shall be by us inviolably kept at Philadelphia, the 2d of the 2d
Month, 1683.

The Members of the Provincial Council present.
William Markham, Will. Clayton, James Harrison, John Moll, Francis Whitwell,
John Hillyard, Christop. Tailor, Will. Clark, Phil. Lehmane, Sec. Will. Haige,
Thomas Holme* John Richardson, John Simcock, William Biles, Richard Ingelo, Cl.
Concilii-

The Members of the Assembly present*
Casparus Harman, William Furcher, Robert Lucas, John Darby, John Kipshaven,
James Williams, Benjamin Williams, Alexander Molestone, John Blunstone, William
Guest, Robert Bra^y, John, Songhurst, Valentine Hollinsworth, Tho. Bra^y, John
Hill, James Boyden, Will Yardly, Nicholas Walln, Benony Biship, John Hastings,
Tho. Fitzwater, John Bezor, Robert Wade, John Clows John Harding, Fr. Hassold,
Luke Watson, Andrew Brinkstone, John Heart, Joseph Phips, Simon Irons, Robert
Hall, Dennis Rotchford, Io. Wood, Robert Bedwell, John Brinklair, John Curtis.
William Sinismore, Henry Boman, Daniel Brown Sam. Dark, Cornelius Verhoof.

John Southworth, Cl. Synod

Some of the Inhabitants of Philadelphia then present,
William Howell, Edward Warner, Henry Lewis, Samuel Miles.
FINIS.

