AN APPEAL To the Men of New England, with a short Account of Mr. Randolphs
PAPERS.
IT is the Unhappiness of this present Juncture, that too many Men relinquish
their Stations of Privacy and Subjection, and take upon them too freely to
descant upon affairs of the Public; and those generally such as have
manifestly no Love for, nor Interest in the welfare of this Country, who yet
assume a strange liberty to themselves of justifying the Conduct of the late
Usurping Government, and censuring the Justice and Order of the late
Revolution; and by clandestine Libells, and open Coffee-house talks, endeavor
to sow Factions and Divisions among us. It has been therefore thought fit (in
order to the unity of the People, and healing the present discomposures) to
propose the ensuing Queries and Cases, upon which it is desired every man would
exercise his faculty of judging, that hereby he may know how to encounter the
Sophistries and stop the mouths of these pestilent Gainsayers.

1. Of the Injury done to our Charter.
Whether the Charters of New England were not invaded and vacated in pursuance
of the very same ends that caused the General Attempt lately made upon the
Charters throughout all the English Dominions?

Whether the Destruction of the English Charters were not one of the most
considerable Branches of the late Popish Plot, for the subversion and utter
extinction of the Protestant Religion?

Whether it be rational to suppose that our late Superiors at (...) did
receive or could propose any advantage by the overthrow of our
Charter-Government but only to bring us within the reach of Popish Counsels,
when it should be time for them to work upon us?

Whether (supposing our Charters forfeitable) we had forfeited them by breaking
any one Article or Condition in them?

Whether therefore the late Conspirators in the Court at White Hall did not rob
us in the Massachusetts Colony of our Charter, by first letting fall their Quo
Warranto, when we had sent Agents to stand a Trial at Law; and then by issuing
out a Writ of Scire facias against us, requiring us to appear suddenly after at
Westminster and so entering Judgment against us for our nonappearance, whilst
in the mean time it was perfectly impossible we should have any timely notice
of it?

Whether it be not a great Article in the Declaration published by his Highness
the Prince of Orange* concerning the Reasons of his Descent into England, That
all Magistrates who have been unjustly turned out, shall forthwith Reassume
their former Employments and the English Corporations return to their ancient
Prescriptions and Charters?

Whether Connecticut died not as a Fool Dies, and were not baubled out of
their Charter, and whether they are not more knaves than fools, who would go
about to make them twice dead, when not only their Charter was actually
restored by the Proclamation of King James, but also his present Majesty has
declared (as we have undoubted information) That their Charter is as Good as
ever?

Whether we have not Received an Attested Copy of a Bill past in the House of
Commons, which expressly Declares, That the Proceedings against our Charter were
Illegal, and a Grievance?

Whether notwithstanding the sense of all England Assembled in a full and free
Parliament to the contrary, we should not rather lick up the Spittle of some of
our Learned Jayl-birds, who ever now and then spawn a Pamphet to tell us, That
we have been fairly dealt with?

Whether when it is considered that for the mere hope sake of a lasting Peace
and Settlement under the protections and privileges of our Charters, we have
with an incredible expense and labor subdued a dismal Wilderness into a
famous, and flourishing Teritory, of no small advantage to the Crown of
England; we may expect that it will be thought just and fair for us to be
deprived of those Privileges and Enjoyments by which we were hereunto decoyed
and ruined by the miseries of an Arbitrary Government?

Whether upon the little glimmering prospect which we now have of our being
freed from the wretched circumstances under which we labored by the loss of
our Charter-Priviledges, we may not be allowed to wear a little joy in our
faces, and return thanks to our God, the Sovereign Bestower of all the good we
have in Possession or Expectation?

Whether if our late President should make it appear, either that he did not
contribute to the loss of our Charter, or that he has a just and due regret for
doing it, this might not reconcile him to the affections of the people, of
which among so many that have desired to see him humbled, so few desire to see
him ruined?

2. Of the Commission by which we were lately Governed.
Whether the late Commission by which the late Government was imposed upon us,
did not deny us the Common Rights, which all English men justly count
themselves born unto, and entirely subject (...) that was dear to us unto the
Arbitrary Disposal of five or six men, that showed their manifest hatred to
whatsoever N-England loved?

Whether if indeed by our being here, we become Slaves, and are to be utterly
excluded from all interest in making of Laws, and raising of Taxes, but what is
in the submitting and smarting part of them we had not better agree to break up
the Plantation, and march some for England again?

Whether those People who now declare for the continuance of that Commission,
do not therein (some ignorantly, some maliciously) ^bets Treason, and the worst
of Treasons against the Liberties of the English Nation, and make themselves
parties to the worst Enemies of their Country?

Whether they were persons inconsiderable for Note or Number which did call our
late Government by the name of a French-Government, and counted it an Essay or
Specimen of what was intended for the whole English Nation?

Whether any good man has done any other than buy Repentance at a dear rate by
espousing the Interests, or gratifying the humors of the men that so lately
Lorded over us!

Whether common Cursing and Swearing and Sabbath-breaking be not admirable
qualities in a Governor, and such as may make any New-Englanders dote upon
him, or endeavor his (...), when we have all the assurance in the world that
we shall be commended by the Authority of England for our deposing him?

Whether when a Governor has made his allowed Knot of Counselors competently
drunk at his Bouts with them after midnight, they be not in a fine pickle to
manage the Government of this large Territory, which no doubt now perishes for
the want of such Super-sober Counselors?

Whether those people who now afflict themselves with a Bodily fear that a mean
person may now and then get into the place of a Magistrate among us, have not
forgotten, what sort of Gentlemen were among our late Counselors? And whether
they know the Original of our late boisterous Deputy Governor, who in very
good time informed us, That the Scabbard of a Red-coat should quickly signify
as much as the Commission of a Justice of the Peace?

What were the Qualifications which were counted enough to make a man capable
of a Place in the late Administration?

3. Of the Opression which was used every day upon us in our Civil Concerns
Whether some of the principal Gentlemen concerned in the late Government have
not once and again ingeniously Confessed, That the Government was become
Intolerable?

Whether those that Rob on the Road, or in the night under the fear of Hanging
are not honest Robbers in comparison of them that Rob in the capacity of
Lawyers, by making the Law it self out a Fool to manage the designs of Robbery?

Whether any man alive can tell what Law our late Masters were pleased to
Govern by.

Whether amongst many other injuries which the Fermentations of the last April
did unto several honest people, this be not one, that certain picked, settled
and Standing Officers (but no Free holders) called Jurymen, were thereby
dismissed from their places, which we thought they must have held Durante Vita,
by a Lease for their Lives?

Whether in one and the same Crime, sometimes the Old Law of New England was
not that which did convict the fault, and the new Law of Old-England, that
which did adjust the Fine?

Whether we did not with a very singular Edification, and Satisfaction hear our
late courteous Rulers very gravely hold forth unto us, that, It was not for His
Majesty's Interest that we should thrive?

Whether the usage of the Ipswich Men, and the Plymouth Men were not so just
and kind that they ought never to forget it? or whether a peaceable desiring,
that we might have liberty for an Assembly before we Raised Taxes; or whether
Begging Money to carry on a Trial at Law for Town-lands injuriously invaded,
were an inexpiable Treason?

What was Major Appleton put, and kept in Prison, and denied an Habeas Corpus
for?

And for what were Major Saltonstal and Mr. Bradstreet, and others Imprisoned
and put to a strange Cost and Charge.

How many times have the Excise-men gone unto honest and courteous Houses in
the Country, pretending themselves ill, and so procuring the Civilities that
good people use to treat Strangers with, but thereupon dropped a threepence, or
sixpence in a by place of the House, and then sworn that they bought drink
there; and how many times has this Trick been played upon persons that never
sold a drop of drink in their lives? Who clapped these Knaves on the Back, and
held them by the Chin in these Rogueries? Who went Ships with them?

Whether Mr. Morton the very Reverend, and no less peaceable Minister of
Charlestown, were not by Governor Androsss furious Command (contrary to the
declared Sense of two of the Judges upon the Bench) dragged out of his own
County, to be Tried for Seditious Preaching, on purpose because he thought no
place but Boston could afford a Jury wicked enough to ruin him, on the
Testimony of one single Debaucht Person, contradicted by the whole Assembly
that heard the Sermon?

What was the true Reason why no Town might meet to Transact any
Parish-business, above once a Year?

Whether it was not both verbally and really denied by the late Usurpers here,
that any man in the Colony owned so much as one Foot of Land? And so after all
the vast Treasure and Labor which we had spent to provide for our selves a
Livelihood in a Wilderness, had not we brought our Hogs (and all our other
Cattle too) to a fair Market?

Whether it were possible for all the money and Movables in New England to have
paid the prizes that must have been exacted for the Patents, which we were now
obliged to take for our Own Lands, even as they are stated in the Fees of the
Secretaries Office?

Whether a certain person diverse ways endeared to our late Gang of
Mony-catchers, having of his own a Spot of Land, worth not above Two Hundred
Pounds, was not at last forced to offer Fifty Pounds for a Patent for it, and
yet after all could not get it so, because (forsooth) a Neighbor offered to
give more for a good Title to it.

How many Hundred Acres of other men's Lands have been begged by Counselors,
out of their singular and fatherly Affection to the Country? and who must have
maintained the scores of Widows and Orphans, that must have been brought to
beg their bread, whilst others begged their Lands?

Whether when some certain Widows that had their Lands taken from them,
pleaded with these public Thieves, and urged on them, That God would one day
plead the cause of the Widows, they were not scoffingly bid to stay till that
day come?

4. Of the Persecution which our Sacred Concerns were assaulted with.
Whether Jefferies the late Lord Chancellor of England, or some body else,
advised no body, To Ruin these Churches as fast as he could yet not to do it
by force* but to Sap them by starving the Ministers every where from their
Employments, upon which their Churches will by consequence fall of themselves;
and whether fine steps were not taken in the practice of this Advice?

Whether in the ordinary Dispensations of Justice among us, if a person
accused of any Crime, were a vicious profligate blasphemous Fellow, he were not
likely to have all possible favor shown him, but if he were a serious, holy,
Good Man, he might not expect the utmost rigor, that the extent of their sense
of the Law could inflict on him?

Whether the pious Christians in New England had not some cause at least why
their Consciences might scruple the mode of Swearing on the Book, when the
Common Law which is the only Law pretended for it in this Case does in all old
Presidents, interpret a Swearing ON to be a Swearing BY the Gospels, and we
have long thought it sinful to swear by any Creatures?

Whether some of the Justices themselves in their giving of Oaths did not
awaken our thoughts by making the poor people Swear By the Holy Evangelists,
concluding the Oath with so help you God* and his holy Evangelists? And whether
when a man was prosecuted for Perjury, the form of his Indictment did not run,
That he did perjuriously on the Holy Evangelists of the Almighty God Depose,
etc? And whether yet even the Homiles of the Church of England do not teach us,
That to say, So help me God, and Saint John, is Idolatry?

Whether many of the best People in the Country were not Fined and Imprisoned
merely for scrupling to Swear on the Book, though they readily offered to Swear
with an Vplifted Hand?

Whether the least affront offered unto them that were so scrupulous were not
to put them by from Serving on a Jury, or as a Witness? And whether the bottom
of this intreague were not chiefly to render the Largest the most sober, and
valuable part of the Country incapable of any Interest in the passage of
Justice between man and man? And whether some folks would not have had then a
brave time on it?

Whether those very Judges, who punished holy and worthy men, for only
scrupling a mode of Swearing, ever did or durst punish a Quaker for not
Swearing at all?

Whether those very Oppressors who would not permit the New-Englanders to
retain their old Rites in Swearing, did not allow New-Yorkers under the same
Government to Swear with Vplifted Hands according to their ancient Mode?

Whether none of our late Superiors had cause to know that in the island of
Guernsey, and Jersey, which are under the Crown of England it be not according
to Common Law (because Ancient Custom) to Swear with Lifting up the Hand?

Whether although it seem a small Truth for which the good people have suffered
his malicious and unreasonable Persecution, yet the (...) of the Cause do not
rather augment and commend the Fidelity of the Sufferers?

Whether the late wise Justices did not affirm all the Ecclesiastical
(...)-Laws against Nonconformists to be in force against us, when they so
vigorously prosecuted that worthy Minister Mr. Mather the Younger for
Publishing (before Sir Edmond Andross arrived here) a modest and placid
Discourse giving the Reasons of our Dissent from the Ceremonies of the Church
of England? And of what value with them was the late King's Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience? And whether, when they had the power of binding and
loosing the Press, it had not been more sasisfactory for them to have answered
it by Scripture and reason or any way rather than by a ruinous Romish
Prosecution?

Whether when 'twas argued, that it would be a very unfair thing to punish the
Noncon's in this Country, for not using the Service of the Church of England,
while the Country had scarce any but Noncon's in it* and so every man almost
in the Land must pay at least 12 l a day (besides other far greater penalties)
which with Sundays and Holidays would amount to four pounds a man by the
year, for not being present at the Common Prayer Worship, that Justice had not
more of the Wolf than the Fox in him, who replied, We are in a way to bring it
to that extremity?

Whether when the late Kings Declaration for liberty of Conscience, gave us
hopes of deliverance from an approaching Persecution, the Ministers of Boston
having agreed with their Congregations to keep a day of Thanksgiving to God for
that Mercy, Governor Andross did not send for them the night before the day
intended, and with many menaces, bid them keep the day at their peril, and tell
them he would send Soldiers to guard their Churches and them too? and yet
having thus put by the day, to the great scandal and offense of the whole Town,
had he not the face to deny afterward that ever he had forbidden it?

5. Of the Indian War.
Whether no Indian Lands, nor Indian Rights have been Patented away by our late
Patent mongers?

Whether to advance this principle, that the Indians, because Pagans, have no
Title to any Lands at all in this Country, be not the way to continue the
friendship of the Indians to us? and whether after all the hard censures we
have undergone, the World will not judge us the juster, and more righteous of
the two, who own they have though Pagans, a just Right to all their Lands but
those, which they have by fair Contract or just Conquest parted with?

Whether it were no bodies Expectation, that on pretense to pay off a great
Army for a long Service, a vast Tax must have been Levied, which would on
purpose have been made intolerable to the people? that hereupon a distressed,
and distracted part in the Country would have mutiny'd? and an advantage would
thence be taken by some sort of men to have taken away the Lives, and Estates
of whom they pleased for being concerned in the Rebellion, though they had been
never so peaceable, and innocent? Would not this have been a notable way for
some folks to thrive in the world?

Whether no Captives of late escaped from the Indians have affirmed, That the
Indians say, Some persons in Boston have encouraged them to go on with the War?

6. Of the Revolution.
Whether it were not purely in Opposition to the enemies of the Prince of
Orange that we Seized upon Governor Andross, and his Accomplices? and not a
design hatched by Jesuits to carry on a Popish Interest among us, as a Pamphlet
lately dispersed very gravely and politickly informs us?

Whether our late Rulers did not use all imaginable care to keep us* ignorant
of the Successes of the Prince of Orange, which themselves had sufficient
information of?

How many Healths has that Riotous, and abject Crew drank to the Confusion of
the Prince of Orange since eighty nine; and whether that sport is like to last
always unremarkt or unpunisht?

Whether the news of the Princes coming into England did not fill them with as
much visible Consternation as us with satisfaction, and whether the Reason of
it be not manifest to all of us?

Whether the man that brought the Princes Declaration with him into the Country
were not Imprisoned for bringing treasonable and seditious Papers with him?

Whether some Riots that have been committed since the Revolution were not
secretly produced, or at least fomented by men of the same Party with them that
most suffered by them?

Whether Governor Andross by stealing out of the Castle where he was a
Prisoner, after he had abused the Captain with such assurances of his proving
himself a true Prisoner, did not give an evidence of some peculiar Guilt or
Fear upon him as well as Falseness in him; and whether the Captain ought to
trust him again, or in Civility so far to remember him as a Gentleman, as to
forget that he is a slippery Prisoner.

What would those Fellows be at, who are so lavish in their Discourse as to
condemn us for Pirates only for taking Pirates? what party did Pounds serve
that it must be so criminal to Apprehend him? and who were his Correspondents?
and whether it be not very reasonable not only that those Men who ventured
their Lives so nobly for their Country should be commended, but rewarded?

Whether it be not the special Privilege of Charlstown Church and Town to be
furnished with Deacons and Captains, which publish Remonstrances against the
present Government, and Berogue the deserving Gentlemen in whose hands it is?
and whether those Fellows (to retort the phrase upon them they so saucely use
to the Gentlemen in Authority) could propose any thing by their late Mutinies
and Factions, than the putting the Country into a Flame?

Whether those Men who desire to see the late Power in play again, be not weary
of their own Lands, or Livings (if they have any?) or do not want to be Owners
of Other Men's?

Whether those Men who now show themselves violent against our return in any
sort to our Charters, are not therein declared Enemies to he glorious designs
of the greatest Prince in the World?

Whether it would not be a fine spot of work, when we have given to Sr. Edmond
Andross and his Creatures the afront of dismissing them from the Government,
and we every hour look for a Confirmation and Approbation from England of what
we have done, yet to restore them to their former places?

Whether a strict eye ought not to be kept on those ridiculous Blades at
Charlstown, and those Mischievous ones in Prison, who are scattering about the
Country their scandalous Pamphlets, to persuade a thing so pernicious?

Whether such empty trifling Pamphlets can Proselyte any but the silliest
Buzzards in the World, and whither we have reason to fear we have many such
among us?

AND since it is in a late Pamphlet boldly affirmed that none of the Letters (in
our hands) of those lately in Office or Government, manifest an design of
ruining the Country* or procuring any violence to the Inhabitants; we shall
annex some few Notes among many much worse) out of the Letters of but One of
them, viz. Mr. RANDOLPH, and by this little, let all dis-interested persons
judge, whether those who guided the People to this alteration had not some
cause.

Randolph to the Earl of -- June 14. 1682.
I humbly beseech your Lordship that I may have consideration for all my
Losses, that the heads of this Faction here may be strictly prosecuted, and
Fined for their Treasons, and Misdemeanors, and my Money paid out of their
Fines. I will engage with Five Hundred of His Majesty's Guard to drive them out
of their Country. -- As for all the persons joined, and concerned in the
Faction here, I know but one man, who was not himself a Servant, or a Servants
Son.

R. to my Lord -- December 3. 1684.
If that great body of People by misunderstanding be once broken and dispersed
into the Southern Plantations, the French will certainly by degrees swallow up
that great Country planted, and possessed by His Majesty's Subjects now above
these sixty Years, and so at length become Masters of all His Majesty's
VVest-India Plantations, which by the benefit and advantage of those many
Harbors in that Country may be obtained.

R. to the B. of -- June 14. 1682.
If His Majesty's Laws (which none but Phanaticks question) be of force with
us, we could raise a sufficient maintenance for diverse Ministers out of the
Estates of those whose Treasons have forfeited them to His Majesty.

R. to the B. of -- May 29. 1682.
In my Attendance on your Lordship, I often pressed that some able Ministers
might be appointed to perform the Offices of the Church with us. The main
obstacle was, how they should be maintained? I did formerly and do now propose
that a part of that Money sent over hither and pretended to be expended among
the Indians, may be ordered to go toward that Charge. -- As for -- he is one
of the Faction, a man of mean Extraction, coming over a poor Servant; as most
of the Faction were at their first Planting here, but by extraordinary zeal and
cousenage, have got them great Estates in Land; so that if His Majesty Fine
them sufficiently (and well if they escape so) they can go to work to get more.

R. to the A. B. of -- October. 27. 1686.
I have some time since humbly represented unto your Grace, a necessity of
having a Church built in Boston, to receive those of the Church of England* we
have at present near four hundred persons, who are daily frequenters of our
Church, and as many more would come over to us. But some being Tradesmen*
others of Mechanic Professions, are threatened by the Congregational Men to be
Arrested by their Creditors, or to be turned out of their work, if they come to
our Church. -- I have taken care to inform my self how the Money sent over
hither for the Company of Evangelizing Indians in New England is disposed of;
Here are seven persons called Commissioners, or Trustees, who have the sole
manage of it* The chief of which are Mr. Dudley our President a man of a base
servile and Antimonarchical Principle; Mr. Stoughton* of the old Leven; Mr.
Richards, a man not to be trusted in public business; Mr. Hinkly, a Rigid
Independent, and others like to these. -- I humbly presume to Remind your Grace
of your promise to me when in England; that a Commission should be directed to
some persons here unconcerned to Audit, and report their Accounts of that Money
-- We want good Schoolmasters, none here being allowed of but of ill
Principles; The money now converted unto private or worse Uses* will set up good
and public Schools, and provide a maintenance for our Ministers who now lives
upon a small Contribution.

R. to Mr. Blathwait. May 21. 1687.
His Excellency has to do with a perverse people. -- Nothing has been wanting
in his Excellency to bring all things to a good posture, both private and
public; He discharges the duty of an Excellent Governor, but these people are
Riveted in their way, and I fear nothing but necessity or force will otherwise
dispose them.

R. to Povey, May 21. 1687.
His Excellency tries all ways to bring the people to Quit-Rents.

R. to Mr. Pen, November 9. 1688.
This barbarous people were never civilly treated by the late Government, who
made it their business to encroach upon their Lands, and by degrees to drive
them out of all, That was the Ground and Beginning of the last War. His
Excellency has all along taken other Measures with them. -- I hear Mr. Mather
and such like Men of Antimonarchical principles at home are complaining against
me: I confess, if being the Occasion of Subverting their Old Arbitrary
Government be a Crime, I must Submit.

Printed in the Year, 1689.


