THE CHURCH OF ROME Evidently Proved Heretic,

By Peter Berault, Dr.

Who abjured all the Errors of the said Church in London at the Savoy upon the
2d. day of April 1671.

Heretici sunt, qui supra Scripturam saepiunt. Iraeneus Lib. 5. Cap. 17.
BOSTON, Printed by S. Green for James Cowse: 1685.

To the Right Reverend Lord HENRY, Bishop of LONDON, Dean of His Majesty's
Chapel, and one of His most Honorable Privy Council.
Solomon faith, There is nothing new under the Sun. This My Lord, being true,
whatsoever has been written before, to discover the ^rrors of the Roman
Church, and whatsoever I may say, will appear but a Repetition. This
Consideration has a long time put a stop to my Pen, and I believe that I
should never have written upon this Subject, if my Conscience had not obliged
me, and my Friends incited me to do it.

That which here I present to you, My Lord, is the Church of Rome clearly
proved Heretic, which is the reason why I have forsaken it; and when I present
this Discourse to your Lordship, I offer it to a Person as much famous by his
deep Knowledge, as by his Virtue. I do not design here to prove the on^ and the
other, my insufficiency hinders me and your Modesty forbids it me: And i^
should be very unprofitable, since this whol^ (...) is fully convinced of it;
your (...) wherein you acquit your self (...) worthily, and the Godly and
Learned Instructions that you give to your People both b^ mouth and writing;
the particular estee^ that the King, and all the great and learne^ of this
Kingdom have for your Person, an^ the love and respect that all your Sheep have
for you, as for a true and good Shepherd, a^ sure marks that what I say is
truth.

I hate flattery, I love sincerity, I kno^ you do not desire to be praised;
therefore will finish this Epistle, saying, that since every body esteems,
Honors, and loves you, it an evident sign that they are convinced your Merits.

I do not speak of the zeal that you show these last days in opposing
vigorously the p^nicious Sentiments of the ^apists, and the (...) to discover
the Authors of so^^ and horrible a Conspiration. I will only write here, that
it may be said of you, th^^ which St. Paul says, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me:
Yes certainly, My. Lord, this just Judge will give you this Crown that be
promises (...) all his good and faithful Servants; and if he desires to give
it you, it is because you are still useful in this World to instruct and
convert Souls. Since then those only which continue to the end do enjoy it, I
pray to God to give you perseverance, and most humbly beg this favor of you to
believe me with respect,

MY Lord, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, PETER BERAULT.

THE ROMAN CHURCH Evidently proved HERETIC.
MAny if they write but a Pamphl^t are wont to make a great Preamble^ they
build, as the Proverb says, the Door bigger than the House; they promise much,
and perform but little. That I may not be guilty of such a fault, and intending
to be brief, I shall immediately enter into my Subject, and prove thus, that
the Church of Rome is Heretic.

That Church which is obstinate in her errors, is Heretic; the Roman Church is
obstinate in her errors, Ergo.

The Major Proposition is true, and granted by all Divines; as for the Minor,
which is in question, I prove it thus.

That Church which refuses to obey the holy Scripture in several points both
of Faith and Practice, is obstinate in her errors: The Roman Church refuses to
obey the Holy Scripture in several points, both of Faith and practice, Ergo.

The Major Proposition is true, and granted by (...) Divines; as for the Minor
which isin question, I prove it thus. That Church which refuses to obey the
holy Scripture in several points both of faith and practice, is obstinate in
her errors; the Roman Church refuses to obey the holy Scripture in several
points both of faith and practice, Erg^. The Major Proposition is also true and
granted by all Divines; as for the Minor which is in question, I prove thus.

That Church which adds something to the Holy Scripture, and diminishes from
it in several points, both of Faith and Practice, and thinks above that which
is written, refuses to obey the Holy Scripture; for we are commanded not to
add to the Word of God, nor to diminish from it, I Cor. 4. 6. And Paul forbids
to think above that which is written. But the Roman Church adds to the Holy
Scripture, and diminishes from it, and thinks above that which is written,
in several points both of Faith and Practice. Ergo. She refuses to obey the
Holy Scripture, in several points both of Faith and Practice, ergo, She is
obstinate in her errors; ergo, She is Heretic. That the Roman Church adds to
the Holy Scripture, and diminishes from it in several Points both of Faith and
Practice, and thinks above that which is written, I shall endeavor to prove
it evidently.

In the ^^se place it is written in the Law, which God did pronounce and Write,
Exodus 2^ 4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor any (...) of
any thing that is in be aven above, or that is in the (...) beneath, or that is
in the waters under the earth, thou shall (...) bow down thy self to them, nor
serve them. and Dent. 4. 15. T^^ ye good beed unto your selves, for ye saw no
manner of similitude (...) the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out
of the midst of the fire, le^t ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graves
Image the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female, and in
Isaiah 40. 18. it is said, To whom will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye
compare unto him.

The Roman Church makes graven Images and boweth down her self, and prays to
them, worshippeth, kisseth, and serves them, and offers Incense to them: She
makes also Images of God the Father in the shape of an old Man, holding the
Globe of the World in his hand; and of the Holy Ghost, in the form of a Dove.
And though the Council of Constantinople condemned the worshipping of Images,
and did forbid the placing them in O^tories and Churches, where the Divine
Majesty is worshipped, nevertheless the Church of Rome sets them up, and
ordains that they shall not only be received into places of Adoration, but also
shall be adored and worshipped: And the Bull of Pope Puts the fourth,
containing the form of the Oath for professing of Faith, dated at Rome in the
Year, 1564* makes Image worship absolutely necessary to be believed by all
(...), as an Article of Faith. And most firmly I (...) (says ^e) that the
Images of Christ, and the Mother of God always Virg^n, and the other Saints
are to be had and retained, and that to them ^our and veneration is to be
given. Then it is manifest she adds to the Holy Scripture, and sinketh above
that which is written. And she must not say to excuse herself, that this
forbidding is only against Idols, and not against Images, because these words
following ( nor any Likeness of any thing) do contain and signify the one and
the other, I mean both Idols and Images.

Likewise she must not say that she worshippeth and serves them with a service
of (...) and not with a worship of (...) for besides this distinction is new,
and unused in the Primitive Church, and not found in the Holy Scripture; it is
always true, the Roman Church adds to the Word of God, and thinks above
that which is written. It is certain: according to her own confession, she
worshippeth with a worship of (...) the Images of God the Father, the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, and of the Cross. And these words of Samuel, Prepare your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only, do destroy all these distinctions of
the Roman Church concerning the service of (...) and worship of (...) and that
it is a flat Idolatry to worship God in any Image is expressed and manifested
by the Children of Israel, when they made the golden Calf to be a
representation of God; for the Text, ( E^^.3 ^) shows that it was Idolatry,
for which many of them were plagued and punished: and yet their meaning was to
worship the true God in the Calf; for they were not so simple as to think or
believe that that dead Idol or Image was God; and therefore the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome is as gross and wicked as their was.

Pray let us represent to our selves two Souls, one Protestant and the other
Papist, and both before Jesus Christ at the fearful day of his Judgment. If
Christ ask the Protestant Soul, why she did not make Images, nor bow down her
self to them, nor worship them, nor serve them; she will answer him, it is
because thou did say unto me, thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image,
or any likeness of any thing; thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor
serve them. And If Jesus Christ, as I suppose should say unto her, thou
ought to understand thereby Idols, and distinguish between the worship of
(...) and (...) and hearken unto the Romish Church; she will reply boldly,
Lord, thou did tell me in thy Gospel, Mark 7. 7. In vain do they worship
thee, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. Thou did tell me by St.
Paul, Gal. 1. 8. Though an Angel from Heaven Preaches any other Gospel unto
me, than that which I have received, let him be accursed. Thou did tell me by
the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 6. not to think of men above that which is written;
thou did tell men in thy Gospel, Mat. 40. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. This is the reason why I have not made
Images, nor worshipped them, nor served them. But what shall a Papist soul
answer, when Jesus Christ will speak with her thus: I told thee, Thou shall not
make unto thee any graven Image, or the likeness of any thing that is in heaven
above (...) I told thee Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them. Likewise I told thee these words of Isaiah, 40. 18. To whom will ye liken
God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? and thou have not kept my
words. What shall this poor Papist answer? I believe nothing but that the Pope
and the Roman Church taught him the contrary, and Jesus Christ will undoubtedly
reply, seeing thou have preferred the Commandments of the Pope before mine; Go
away with the Pope and see whether he is able to deliver thee from everlasting
fire, and perpetual Prison.

Secondly, It is written in several places of the Holy Scripture, that Jesus
Christ is our Savior and Redeemer, Act 4. 12. and neither is there any
Salvation in any other, for there is none other Name under Heaven given among
men whereby we must be saved, as it is said in the Acts: It is also declared in
1 John 2. 1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is the propitiation for our sins. And in 1 Timothy 2^ 5. There is one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. And notwithstanding all
that, the Papists call the Blessed Virgin the She Redeemer of the World, they
say the Saints are in some way our Redeemers, they put their trust and
confidence in them, as we may see in several Prayers, wherein they speak thus,
O great Saint, in whom I put my trust and confidence, etc. and they take them
for their Advocates and Mediators: and though Christ teaching his Disciples to
pray, commands them to direct their Prayers to his Father, and say, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. And though the Lord says by Hosea, 13. In me only is
thy help there is no favor besides me. Nevertheless the Pope to fatten his
Cheeks, and fill his Truncks with Money, will have us to have recourse unto
Saints, and take them for our Advocates and Mediators, as it may be seen in the
Council of Trent, Seff. 25. It is then evident the Roman Church adds to the
Holy Scripture, and thinks above that which is written; and she must not say
she prays and beggeth the favor of the Saints, as we pray a Friend at Court
to request a kindness from his Majesty; for in the first place it is written.
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and it is not
written that any other is our Advocate.

Secondly, If the Kings Son should say, when ye will ask my Father any favor
come ye unto me, and not unto another; if afterward some body should go unto
another, he should be very imprudent. Jesus Christ speaks thus, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy lade^, and I will give you rest.
Therefore we must not have another Advocate. Chrysost^me speaking of the Woman
of Canaan who though she were a sinner was bold to come unto Christ; says
thus, En prudentiam bujus mulieris, non precatur Jacobum, non suppi^cat.
Joanni, non adit ad Perrum, nec Apostolorum coetum respicit, ^ut ullum little
requi^^t, sed (...) his c^^mbus poenitentiam sibi comitom adjungit, and ad
ipsum fontem progreditur. Behold the wisdom of this Woman, she does not pray to
James, she does not beseech John, she goes not to Peter, she looks not to the
company of the Apostles neither does request of any of them; but for all this
she takes Repentance for her Companion, and goes to the very fountain it self.

Ambrose likewise answers the carnal reason of the Papists. Sole^t, says he,
misera uti exculatione, dicentes per istos posse ire ad Deum, sicut per comites
itur ad Reges. Ideo ad Regem per tribunos and comites itur, qui^ homo utique
est Rex; ad Deum autem, qu^m utique nibil latet, suffragatore non est ^pus, sed
mente d^vota, abic^nque ^nim tali^ locutus suorit, respondebit illi: That is,
They are wont to use a pitiful excuse, saying, by these ( Saints) they may have
access unto God, as by Earls there is access to Kings. Therefore it is that by
Officers and Earls access is made to the King, because the King himself is a
man; but to come to God, from whom nothing is hid, there is no need of a
spokes-man, but of a d^v^ut mind; for wheresoever such one speaks to him he
will answer him. Hereunto I may add that which is written in Eccles. 9. 5, 6.
The dead know not any thing, neither have any more a portion for ever in any
thing that is done under the Sun. And therefore I may say the Roman Church
entreats in vain the help of the Saints. And the most learned Doctors thereof
cannot say how they may hear the prayers of men; for they confess it is not a
property of their happiness; and some say they see in the face of God, as in a
lookingglass, all things here below. Some say they see only the things which
belong to them. Some say God discovers to them the Prayers of men; Some say
the faithful which are upon the earth give notice of their desires and minds to
the Saints, as the Angels do communicate their thoughts one with another. To
make it short, the Roman Church is so uncertain, concerning the Saints, that
oftentimes, as I think, she worshippeth and prays to them that are now
burning in everlasting fire.

Thirdly, It is written in the first Chapter to the Hebrews, 1. 3. That Jesus
Christ purged himself our sins; and in St. Paul to the Romans, Romans 1. 1. There
is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. And in Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
And in the Book of Wisdom canonized by the general Council of Trent, The souls
of the Righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch
them. Nevertheless the Roman Church believes and teaches that there is a
place called Purgatory, wherein the Souls of the Just are tormented and
afflicted, some for a short time, some for a hundred years, some for a thousand
and upwards, and others to the end of this World. I do constantly hold, says
Pope Pius the fourth, finding Purgatory to be very serviceable for his Kitchen,
there is a Purgatory, and that the souls there detained are helped by the
suffrages of the faithful. Mandat sancta Synodus, (says the Council of Trent)
omnibus Episcopis, at sanam de Purgatori^ doctrinam a sanctis Patribus, and
sacris Conciliis traditam, a Christi fidelibus (...) teneri, doceri, and ubique
proedicari diligenter studeant. And though the Roman Church cannot tell whether
this Purgatory is in the Air, or in the Earth, or in the place wherein sins
were committed, yet she says the Pope with a little Indulgence laid unto a
Bead, or Cross, or Medal, or with a M^^s said upon certain days of the week,
gives power to deliver from this Purgatory w^^m he plea^^d, and when he
pleases. I (...) then in the first place since this Doctrine is not found in
the Holy Scripture, the Roman Church a (...) to the Word of God, and thinks
above that which is written.

Secondly, I show she does destroy her self, when she will have us to believe
under the pain of damnation, that there is a Purgatory. For if there be a
Purgatory, either it is to purge sins or to purge the pain due unto them: It is
not for the first, because the Roman Church believes Jesus Christ did by
himself pu^ge all our sins; and because they are to be purged before we be
separated from this World. It is then for the purgation of the pain; but the
pain is punished and not purged; for a Gallows is ^o^ for the purgation of a
Murder, but for the punishment of it. Therefore seeing Purgatory, according to
the Papists, is only for the pain due to sins, they destroy themselves, when
they call it Purgatory. For it has no warrant in the Holy Scripture; Christ
shows out two places, Heaven and Hell, saying that the rich man's soul, which
was unmerciful to Lazarus, went after his death to Hell, and there was
tormented, and that Lazarus soul (he being dead) was carried into Abraham's
Bosom, a place of joy and comfort. To the Thief which was executed with Christ
at his passion, and believed in him, Christ answered, This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise: which shows that the souls of the faithful never come
into Purgatory fire, to be burnt and punished; for all their sins are forgiven,
and consequently the punishment incident to the same is forgiven also, and
their souls pass from death to life, namely Heaven. Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are
the dead which d^e in the Lord, from henceforth they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. If from the time of their death they have
blessedness and rest, then they are not in any Purgatory fire to be burnt and
tormented. And Austin speaks thus, The first place the Faith of the
Catholics does by divine Authority believe to be the Kingdom of Heaven, the
second Hell; a third place we are utterly ignorant of; neither can we find any
such in the Holy Scriptures. And in another place he says, That they whi^^
believe a Purgatory fire, are much deceived, that through a humane conce^t.
Know this, (...) he, that when the soul is separated from the (...) presently
it is either placed in Paradise for its; works, or (...) ^eadlong into the
bottom of Hell its sins. And Justin Martyr says, Post (...) stat^m fit (...)
and impurum distinct^^, and dicuniur (...) Paradisum; That is, (...) after
death there is made a separate (...) be^^ good and bad men, and that the good
are carried unto Paradise.

Fourthly, The Papists hold their general Councils and their Pope cannot err;
but they are deceived, for St. Austin plainly teaches, that only the
Scriptures cannot err; General Councils, says he, which are gathered of all
the Christian World, are often corrected, the former by the latter, when by any
trial of things that is opened which was shut, and that is known which was
hidden. If a General Council may be corrected, as says Austin, ergo it may
err; and therefore he speaks thus to Maximiand the Bishop of the Arians;
Neither ought I to allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of
Arimene, to take advantage thereby; for neither am I bound nor held by the
authority of this, nor thou of that; for set Matter with Matter, Cause with
Cause, Reason with Reason; try the matter by the authority of the Scriptures.
The Council of Cons^^tinople condemned the setting up Images in the Church, and
the Council of Nice afterward allowed them. One of them being contrary, must
needs be erroneous. And that is granted by it self, when in a set form of
Prayer, which is appointed to be said after every Council, they pray, That God
would spare their ignorance, and pardon their errors.

The Pope himself may err. Pope Innocentius does teach, That young Children
cannot be saved except they receive the Baptism of Christ, and also the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. Pope Galatius Decreed, that all they
should be excommunicated which would receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
but in one kind. But this Doctrine is taxed for an error by all Papists, and
the Council of Trent made a Decree contrary to the Doctrine of the Pope
Gelasius. Si quis dixerit ex Dei proecepto vel necessitate salutis omnes and
singulos Christi fideles, utramque speciem sanctissimi Eucharistioe Sacramenti
sumere debere, anath^ma sit. Ergo the Pope of Rome may err, and we may see it
in their Decrees, wherein it is written, that he is to be judged of none except
he be found erring from the faith, whereby it appears that they thought he
might err in matters of Faith, or else that exception was put in vain. All men
are subject to error; all men are liars in their own words, and sinners in
their works, therefore by their own confession, General Councils and Popes are
not infallible; therefore when they say they cannot err, they both contradict
themselves and add to the Word of God, and think above that which is written.

They boast also the Popes Supremacy; they say that the Pope has pre-eminence
or authority ove* all the other Bishops; but upon what ground, I know not. They
say it is because he i^ Successor to Peter, and because Peter had such a
pre-eminence and authority over the rest of the Apostles, therefore the Pope
being his Successor, must be so over all Bishops. But it is false that Peter
had such pre-eminence over the rest of the Apostles. I grant that Christ said
to Peter, after he had confessed him to be that Christ, and the Son of the
living God, Thou are Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church; but
these words give no superiority to Peter above the rest, only they show that
the Church is builded, not upon the Person of Peter, but upon the Rock, namely
upon Christ, whom Peter confesses to be the Son of the living God; for as
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 4. That Rock was Christ, and other foundation no man
can lay, but that which is laid already, namely, Jesus Christ. And in the
second Chapter to the Ephesians, he says, That the Church is builded upon the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus himself being the
head-stone in the corner. Where then can they find that Peter was made Prince
of the Apostles? and had pre-eminence or authority over them? they answer it is
when Christ gave unto Peter the Keys of binding and losing; but hereunto I say,
that Christ therein gave no authority more to Peter than to the rest; for he
does not say I give unto thee, but I will give unto thee, which promise was
afterward performed, and when it was performed, the Keys or the power of
binding and losing was given not only to Peter, but also unto all the rest
together. Go ye says Christ unto all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you.

And in John, the twentieth he speaks thus, Receive ye the Holy Ghost;
whatsoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whatsoever sins ye
retain, they are retained. By these words we may see that Christ speaks unto
all the Apostles, and not to Peter only, and so it is evident that Peter
received no power more than the rest of the Apostles; Pray, let them tell me,
where was Peter's Supremacy, when Paul reproved him to his face? Gal. 2. 11. I
withstood him to his face, says Paul, because he was to be blamed. Where was
Peter's Supremacy, when at the Council held at Jerusalem where the Apostles
were, yet not Peter, but James ruled the Action, and according to his Sentence
was the Decree made? and when there was a contention amongst the Apostles, who
should be the greatest amongst them, Christ told them plainly these words,
Luk.22. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that
exercise Authority upon them are called Benefactors; but ye shall not be so,
but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and be that is
chief as he th^^ does serve. If the greatest must be as the least, what
authority has he above the rest? therefore since the Popes Supremacy over all
the other Bishops, is grounded by the Papists upon Peter's Supremacy over the
rest of the Apostles; and since Peter has not such a pre-eminence or authority
over them, it follows that the Pope has none over the other Bishops.

This is confirmed by St. Hierosm ad Evagram he says, That the Bishop of
Eugubium, or any other the least See, is equal to the Bishop of Rome; for they
all joined in the same Commission, they must serve in the Church, be diligent
to discharge that great charge in the Church, which their Master Jesus Christ
has equally laid upon them. And Pope Gregory himself affirms, That whosoever
takes the title of universal Bishop to his See, he cannot be less than
Antichrist.

Therefore the Roman Church adds to the Word of God, and thinks above that
which is written, when she boasts of the Supremacy, or Superiority of their
Popes over all other Bishops, since this Doctrine has no ground in the Holy
Scriptures.

Fifthly, The Church of Rome believes that their Pope has authority to depose
Kings and Princes, and to kill those they call Heretic. But upon what ground I
know not; It is certain ^^t in so doing or attempting to do, he is bo^^^
notable Traitor unto God, whose Authority he does claim and arrogate; and unto
Princes, to whom he is to be subject: for the pulling down of Princes God has
reserved to himself alone that power: for it is he that puts down the mighty
from their seats, and exalts them of low degree. By me faith he, Kings Reign,
and Princes bear Dominion. He removes Kings, and sets up Kings; seeing
therefore it is God, that has this authority proper to himself, which way can
the Pope claim it, without injury to the Power of God? they answer, it is by
reason of his Keys; but they must remember that the Keys given, were the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and consequently by authority of the Keys he cannot
meddle with terrestrial Kingdoms to shut out those that are in them. And he
has no more authority by the power of the Keys, or of binding and losing, than
any other Bishop; for the Keys were given to all the rest of the Apostles as
well as to Peter; For Christ spoke thus; Job. 20.23. Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins
ye retain, they are retained. And therefore for any Minister of the Gospel,
thereby to claim authority above another, is contrary to the will of Christ,
for they are all indifferently joined in one Commission, and consequently have
all equal authority. And therefore the Pope has no more authority by the
virtue of his Keys, than any other Bishop, that is to say, none at all to
depose Kings and Princes: his duty is rather to obey them, and to teach the
same obedience to others, as the Apostles of Christ did. 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit
your selves (says Peter) to every ordinance of men for the Lords sake, whether
it be to the King as supreme. And St. Paul says, Let every soul be subject
unto the higher powers, etc. and Christ himself said, His Kingdom was not of
this world, he refused to be made a King. Himself paid tribute to Caesar, and
commanded others to do the same. If Christ were subject to Caesar, is it not a
shame to the Pope to exalt himself above Caesar, I mean above a King?

The Papists answer that he got this sovereign Authority by donation from
Constantine, but I will grant some Christian Emperor was so foolish as to give
his Empire (which is neither likely, nor credible) yet I say it was not lawful
to take it, if he will be a Minister of the Gospel, or Successor of the
Apostles: for Christ has expressly forbidden his Apostles, and in them all the
Ministers of the Gospel, all such Dominious, saying thus unto them, Mat. 20.
26. The Kings of the Nations reign over them, and they that be great amongst
them, bear Rule or Dominion, but it shall not be so with you; which words being
prohibitory, show that they must not reign like Kings of Nations, but they must
serve in the Church, and be diligent in the great charge that Jesus Christ has
laid upon them; and therefore the Pope has no Authority over Kings and
Princes, that may be seen by these words of Tertullian; Colimus Imperatorem ut
bominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo mincrem; that is, We honor the Emperor
as the next man to God, and inferior to God only. And again he says, that
Princes are a Deo sec^nds, post cum primi, ante omnes, and super omnes; that
is, The second to God, the first next after God, and before and over all men.
Optatus, says, Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, qui fecit
Imperatorem; that is, There is none above the Emperor but God only which made
the Emperor: and Chrysostom says, Parem ^ullum super terram ^abet, that is,
He has no equal on Earth. And Gregory Bishop of Rome himself affirms, That
Power is given to Princes from Heaven, not only over Soldiers but Priests
also; and therefore it is evident that the Pope has no authority over Kings
and Princes: nor to kill those they call Heretic; for that Doctrine which they
teach is contrary to Christ's Doctrine, as we may read in St. Luke.

Because the Samaritans would not receive Jesus Christ, his Disciples James and
John seeing this, said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from
Heaven, and consume them; but Christ turned and rebuked them, and said, ye kn^w
not what manner of spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. It is certain that all Papists are not in that
Opinion; some of them are very good, and I know some who would start, if they
should hear such a Doctrine; but yet it is clear that this Doctrine is taught
and practiced amongst them. Their several Plots here in England, their
Massac^es in Ireland, France and other Countries, as we may read in History,
and their proper words as they are written here prove it evidently.

Si vero Dominus temporalis requisitus and monitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam
purgare neglexerit ab bac Hereticz faditate, per Metropolitanum
Excommunicationis vinculo Innodetur, and si satisfacere contempserit, ex tunc
vasallos ab ejus fidelitate de^unciet absclutes, and terram exponat Catholicis
occupandam; That is, If a Prince being admonished and required by the Church,
shall refuse to purge his Country of that soul Heresy, let him be
Excommunicated by the Bishop; and if be refuses to give satisfaction, from
that time let him pronounce his Subjects discharged of their Allegiance, and
expose his Country to be possessed by the Catholics.

And in the following words, great Indulgences and Privileges are granted to
them which shall endeavor to destroy those they call Heretics; Catholici, que
crucis assumpta Charactere, ad Hereticorum exterminium se accinxerint, ill^
gaudeant indulgentia, illoque Privilegio sint muniti, quod accedentibus in
Terroe Sanctoe subsidium conceditur; That is, Let the Catholics who taking the
sign of the Cross, shall attempt to root out the Heretics, rejoice in that
indulgence, and be defended with that Privilege, which is granted to them who
go to the Aid of the Holy Land.

Therefore I conclude that the Pope has no power to depose Kings and Princes,
nor to kill those that he calls Heretic, and that the Roman Church adds to
the Word of God, and thinks above that which is written, and therefore she is
Heretic. And if according to their Doctrine, those which are Heretic may be
killed lawfully, and their Land possessed by the Catholics, they being
themselves Heretic, as it is proved clearly; I let to the Reader to draw the
Conclusion.

6 ly. Jesus Christ being about to leave the World, and his Disciples
afflicting themselves, he does not comfort them, by saying I leave you my Body,
under the Species of Bread and Wine, but he tells them, The poor always ye
have with you, but me ye have not always; I came forth from the Father, and am
come into the World; again I leave the World, and go to the Father, Joh.
12.8.16,28. He tells them that his Father will protect them, and send them his
Holy Spirit, and that he is going to prepare them a place in Heaven. He tells
them of his Intercession, and of his second coming, and that the Heaven must
receive him, until the time of the restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. By
these words it appears clearly that it is contrary to the Holy Scripture, to
say, that the Body of Jesus Christ is yet upon Earth; yet the Roman Church
believes that Christ's Body is still upon Earth in several places, therefore she
adds to the Word of God, and thinks above that which is written, therefore
she is Heretic.

I know what the Church of Rome says for the Proof of her Belief; her
principal Argument is this; Mat. 26.26. Christ took bread and gave thanks, and
said, Take ye and eat, this is my Body, which is broken for you. Jesus Christ
says the Roman Church, is true: He has said in giving the Bread, this is my
Body, therefore this Bread ought to be changed into the true Body of Jesus
Christ; and to show (she says) that it is not the Figure of Jesus Christ, and
these words, this is my Body, are not Metaphorical (as the Protestant Church
believes) because he said, which is broken for you; now it is not the figure
of Jesus Christ, which was broken for us, but the true Body.

To which I answer, it is certain that Jesus Christ is true, and though he
said, This is my Body which is broken for you, and that it was the true Body of
Jesus Christ which was broken for us, and not the Figure; that does not hinder
these words from being Metaphorical: And to let you see clearly, observe my
reason. This is my Body which is broken for you, (is) that is to say signifies
or represents, as you may see in several other passages of the Scripture, as
for example in this; the Rock was Christ, where this word ( was) means did
signify or represent. Which is broken for you, the Relative ( which) does not
serve to show the Transubstantiation, or that the Bread is changed into the
true Body of Jesus Christ, because it is related to the word ( Body) and not to
the proposition, This is my Body; it has relation to the Attribute, and not to
the Subject; that which, according to Cardinal Cajetan, hinders not this
Proposition to be Metaphorical, no more than this, the Rock was Christ; for if
the Evangelist had added, which was crucified, or which was raised again; as
the Relative ( which) would not hinder this Proposition from being
Metaphorical; likewise these words, which is broken for you, hinder not the
other Proposition, to be Improper or Metaphorical.

Mark, that his Body was not broken before he Suffered. How did he say then,
which is broken, before it was broken? there is no sense of it but this; the
Bread was broken, and signified that his Body should be broken; now as the
breaking of the Bread, did signify the breaking of his Body, so the Bread must
signify his Body: but as his body was not broken indeed, when the Bread was
broken, so the Bread could not be his Body indeed, for then his Body should
have been broken, when the Bread was broken. If because Christ says This is my
Body, this is my Blood, they will have these words to be expounded Literally;
why then do they not expound the other words of Christ literally also, as
concerning the Cup? for the Text says, that he took the Cup, and said, This is
my Blood. I am sure they will not say that the Cup was the Blood of Christ, (as
the words be) but they will grant a Figure in those words, namely Continens pro
Contonto, that by the Cup is meant the Wine in it; if then they will admit a
Figure in this, why may not there be a Figure in the other? namely Signatam pro
^igno, that these words, this is my Body should be understood thus, the Bread
is a Sign of my Body.

I may prove as well that Christ is a Door, because he says, I am a Door; or a
Vine, because he says, I am a Vine; for his sayings are alike; Figurative
Speeches must not be construed Literally: Now that they may see, that not we
only say it is Bread and Wine after Consecration, Christ himself does call it
Bread and Wine after he had given it as he did before; Mark 14. 25. there he
says, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine: Here Christ says, that
it was the fruit of the Vine, which he drank, but his Blood is not the Fruit of
the Vine, therefore Wine was his Drink, and not Blood; Therefore after
Consecration, Wine was still Wine. And St. Paul says plainly and expressly, 1
Cor. 11. 26,27,28. That the Communicant does eat Bread, Ergo, it remains
Bread after the words of Consecration: For if it were Tran^^^tantia^ed into the
Body of Christ, thou were there no Bread to eat, but the Body of Christ is the
thing that should be eaten, and so it should not be called Bread.

What I say, may be seen again by these words of Jesus Christ: when he said,
Ep^. 3.17. That he was the Bread of Life, and that all which would live, must
eat him: his Disciples murmured until he expounded his words, and how did he
expound them? thus, He that comes unto me has eaten, and be that believes in
me has drunk. After, when he instituted this Sacrament in like words, they
murmured not, which they would as before, if he had not resolved them before,
that to eat his Body and to drink his Blood, was nothing but to come to him,
and believe in him: After he had said so, they murmured not, because they did
see some reason in it. And as it is plainly said, Joh.6.63. This is my Body, so
it is plainly said, These words are Spirit, that is they must be understood
Spiritually, and not (...) so says Austin, Believe and thou have eaten.

It was Christ's manner to teach by Similitudes, and Figures, showing one thing
by another. For Example, Christ calls the Lamb the Passover, in place
whereof this Sacrament succeeded, and therefore presently after they had eaten
the Passover, Christ Instituted this Sacrament to be used for it; Christ, I
say, called the Lamb the Passover, and yet the Passover was this, an Angel
passed over the Houses of the Israelites, and struck the Egyptians; this was
not a Lamb, and yet because a Lamb was a Sign of this Passover, as the Bread
and Wine is of Christ's body, therefore Christ called the Lamb the Passover, as
he called the Bread and Wine his Body. That may be seen again in Circumcision,
Baptism, and the Cup. For Circumcision is called the Covenant, and yet
Circumcision was nothing but the cutting away of a skin; and the Covenant is
this, In Abraham's Seed all Nations shall be blessed, I will be their God, and
they shall be my People, I will defend and save them, and they shall serve and
worship me. This is not Circumcision, and yet as though Circumcision were the
Covenant it self, it is called the Covenant, because it signifies the
Covenant; so Bread and Wine are called Christ's Body, because they signify
Christ's Body.

Baptism is called Regeneration, and yet Baptism is (...) dipping our Bodies in
Water, and Regeneration is the renewing of the mind to the Image wherein it was
Created. This is not Baptism, and yet as though Baptism were Regeneration it
self, it is called Regeneration; because it signifies Regeneration; so the
Bread and Wine are called Christ's Body and Blood, because they signify them.

And the Cup is called the New Testament; and yet the Cup is but a piece of
Metal, filled with Wine, and the New Testament is, He which believes in the Son
of God shall be saved. This is not a Cup, and yet as though the Cup were the
New Testament it self, it is called the New Testament; so the Bread and Wine
are called Christ's Body and Blood, because they signify Christ's Body and Blood.

And this Doctrine of ours may be confirmed, because every Sacrament was called
by the thing which it signified, and yet never any Sacrament was taken for the
thing it self, It is the consent of all Writers, that a Sacrament is a Sign,
therefore not the thing signified, no more than the Bush at the Door, is the
Wine in the Cellar.

But what then will the Papists say, is there nothing in the Sacrament but
Bread and Wine? Nay, we say not that the Sacrament is nothing but a bare Sign,
or that we receive no more than that you see; for Christ says, that it is his
Body, and Paul says, that it is the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood:
Therefore there is more in Sacramental Bread than in common Bread; though the
nature be not changed, yet the use is changed; it does not only serve the body
as it did before, but also it brings a bread with it which nourishes the
Soul; for as sure we receive bread, so sure we receive Christ. And you may see
this by this Similitude; Thou have an Obligation in thy hand, and I ask thee
what have thou there? and thou say, I have here an hundred Pounds; why, say
I, there is nothing but Paper, Ink and Wax. Oh, but by this, say thou, I will
recover an hundred Pounds, and that is as good. So this is as good, that under
these signs you receive the virtue of Christ's Body and Blood by Faith, as if
you did eat his Body, and drink his Blood indeed.

7 thly. This Doctrine of Transubstantiation is also contrary to the Senses, to
Reason, and to the Holy Fathers.

When the Church of Rome would oblige me to believe that what my Senses behold,
is not Bread nor Wine, but the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, it is clear
that it is contrary to them, since they are sensible of the contrary; for my
eyes see them to be Bread and Wine; I smell Bread and Wine; I taste Bread and
Wine; and my hands feel Bread and Wine.

They confess with us, that it is contrary to the Senses, but that this Mystery
ought not to be measured by the Senses, and that Jesus Christ being true, and
having taken Bread and Wine, saying, this is my Body, and this is my Blood;
this Bread and Wine must be changed into his Body and Blood: that indeed it is
contrary to the Senses, but they ought not to be Judges in the Mysteries of
Faith.

I answer, that Jesus Christ made use of the Senses to prove to his Apostles,
that he was not a Spirit, but a body, when he says to them, Luk.24.32. Handle
me and see, for a Spirit has no flesh and bones as ye see me have. And if the
Fathers Disputing against the Marcionites and Eutichians, the former of which
believed that Jesus Christ had not a true body, but only the appearance; and
the latter, that the substance of his body was changed into the Godhead after
his Resurrection: they made use of the same words of Jesus Christ, Handle me
and see, for a Spirit has no flesh and bones as ye see me have. To provethe
falsity of their belief, I may, after their example, make use of my Senses in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and and say, to let the Church of Rome know,
that what they believe to be the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, is truly
Bread and Wine, Handle and see.

They say besides that, the reason why Christ Body was not seen in the
Sacrament, it is because he is there miraculously, and that there is a Miracle
in the Sacrament; whereunto I answer, that if the Bread be turned into the very
Body of Christ, by a Miracle, then should it appear visibly so: for the nature
of every Miracle is to be visible to the outward eye and senses, as when Christ
turned Water into Wine; it was visibly Wine; when Moses's Rod was turned into a
Serpent, it was visibly a Serpent^ and so if the Bread be turned into the very
Body of Christ, it is visibly a body, if they will hold a Miracle therein. But
Austin answers there is no Miracle in the Sacrament, saying thus, Honorem
tanquam Religiosa possunt habere, staporem tanquam Mira non possunt: That is,
the Sacraments may have honor as things Religious, but are not to be admired
as Miracles.

8 thly. It is also contrary to reason, first, because it supposes the same
body in several places at one time; a body may be considered objectively at one
time in several places, but that it should be physically or substantially in
many places at one time altogether, as the Church of Rome would have, which
says and obliges to believe, that the body of Jesus Christ is substantially
in Heaven, and Earth, and in every place, where the Priest pleases to
consecrate, or pronounce these words, This is my body, this is my blood; and in
every part of the consecrated bread: so that if you divide it into a thousand
parts, it is there in every part wholly: it is that which is contrary to
reason, because according to reason, a body of six foot in dimension, cannot
occupy no more place, than the circumference of six foot; and though it may be
successively in several places, yet it cannot at the same time.

And these words of Peter, Act.3.22. whom the Heaven must receive until the
times of restitution of all things prove my sayings evidently. For if his Body
be in Heaven, and that he has a true Body (as all men know he has) how can it
be that it should be both in Heaven and in Earth, as touching his Body, at one
time? for though he have a glorified Body, yet he retains the nature and
property of a true Body still, which can be but in one place at once; and so
says Austin, Corpus Domini in quo resurrexit, uno tantum loco esse potest^:
That is The Body of the Lord wherein he rose again, can be but in one place
only.

Secondly, It is against Reason, because it makes Accidents exist without any
Subject; it is the nature of Accidents to be joined to their Subject: as for
Example, it is the nature of the whiteness of a Stone to be joined to the
Stone; so that if you destroy the nature or substance of the Stone, you must of
necessity destroy its whiteness, and other its Accidents, and according to the
Opinion of modern Philosophers, who say that Accidents are nothing else than
matter modified, that is to say, as it is disposed to this or that fashion, it
follows that matter cannot be destroyed without its Accidents being destroyed
likewise with it. It is the Opinion of Iraeneus, who says, That we cannot
consider water, without its humidity, nor fire without heat, nor a stone
without hardness; these things being so united, that the one cannot be without
the other, but that they must exist together. And the Church of Rome teaches
the contrary, for in their mystery of Transubstantiation, they put the
Accidents without any Subject; they put color and quantity without matter,
smell and taste without substance; hardness and humidity without their being any
thing that is hard and moist, which I may very well say or affirm is contrary
to reason.

Ninthly, Likewise it is contrary to the holy Fathers; they say that the
Eucharist Consecrated is Bread, such as we eat, and which satisfies the Belly.

Theodoret says, Neque enim signa mystica post sanctificationem recedunt a
matura sua, manent enim in priore substantia, figura and forma, and videri and
tangi possint sicut prius, That is, The mystical signs after Consecration do
not depart from their nature, for they abide still in their former substance,
figure and form, and may be both seen and felt as before.

The same Theodoret says, That Jesus Christ has honored the visible Symbols
with the Name of his Body and Blood, not in changing their nature, but in
adding grace to it.

Chrysostom says, That the Mystical Symbols do not ^ase their proper nature,
but remain in their first substance, as the Body of Christ has preserved the
true substance of a Body when it was glorified.

And Pope Galasius says, That the Consecrated Bread is honored with the name
of the Body of the Lord, and yet the nature of Bread remains in it; non
desinit, inquit, substantia vel natura Panis and Vini: and certe, Imago and
Similitudo Corporis and Sanguinis Christ's in action miste^iorum Corporis
Christi Celebratur. That is, The substance says he, or nature of Bread and
Wine does not cease, and verily there is the Image and Similitude of the Body
and Blood of Christ, celebrated in the action of the mysteries of the Body of
Christ.

Origines says thus, The Bread that is sanctified with the Word of God, as
touching the material substance thereof, goes into the belly, and forth again
like other meats.

Chrysostom writing to the People of Antiocb, says, God gives us things
spiritual under things visible and natural; and again, Being sanctified it is
delivered from the name of Bread, and is exalted to the name of the Lords Body,
although the nature of the Bread still remains.

Justin Martyr Bishop of Lion says, That ou^ flash is nourished with the Cup,
which is the Blood of Christ, and is increased with the Bread which is the Body
of Christ. This passage destroys those of the Roman Church, who because that
the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, are compelled
to say, that our Body is not nourished with the Bread and Wine but with their
Accidents, or by some substance that God creates.

Tertullian says, Jesus Christ took the Bread, and giving it to his Disciples
made it his Body, saying this is my Body, that is to say, (says Tert.) the
figure of my Body.

And Austin says, Non dubitavit dominus dicere, boc est Corpus meum, eum daret
signum corporis sui. That is, The Lord doubted not to say, this is my Body,
when he gave but the sign of his body.

Christi miranda patientia adhibuit Judam ad convivium, in quo corporis and
sanguinis sui figuram discipulis tradi^^^; That is, The admirable patience of
Christ, (says Austin) admitted Judas to the Banquet, wherein be delivered to
his Disciples the figure of his Body and Blood.

He says that the Sacraments are called by the name of the things they
represent.

The Sacrament then of the Lords Supper may be taken either conjunctively with
what it represents, and in this sense it is said to be the Body and Blood of
Christ; or separately from the things which it signifies, and in this sense,
it is the type, the symbol, or figure of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ:
and that is to be seen in the affairs of the World, where we say the Letters
which are brought, wherein is contained the pardon, which the King gives to a
Criminal, are the Kings Pardon.

Baronius says, that Theodore Bishop of Rome, for the Condemnation of Pyrus,
and the Council held at Constantinople for the Condemnation of Photius, took
the Consecrated Cup, and poured Ink into it, and having dipped their Pens into
these two mixed Liquo^s, they subscribed the Depositions of these Men. If they
had believed that the Consecrated Wine was the Blood of Jesus Christ, as now
the Church of Rome believes, is it credible that they would have mixed Ink with
it, and dipped their Pens with it? no, it is not to be believed, for the Church
of Rome would not do so now, but would believe they should commit an horrible
Sacriledg.

That which confirms all that I am about to allege from the Fathers against
the pretended mystery of Transubstantiation, is, that when they Disputed
against Idolaters, they confuted them with these words; Why do ye adore what
your hands have made, and which has neither Speech, nor motion, and which is
subject to fire, and to corruption, and to be stolen away by Thieves? If at
that time, they had believed that Jesus Christ had been under the Accidents of
Bread and Wine, and if the Fathers had taught that Doctrine, it is most certain
the Idolaters would have retorted their Argument, and have said, that the God
which they adored in the bread was a work of their own hands, which has
neither speech, nor motion, but was subject to corruption, to fire, and to be
stolen away; but we do not find they made such an Answer. Therefore it is a
sign that this Doctrine was not taught by the Fathers but was contrary to them.
Moreover, if they had believed Transubstantiation, that is to say, the changing
of the Bread and Wine into the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, they would
not have failed to instruct us that a body is under a point that it has
Accidents without any Subject; that it is after the manner of a Spirit; they
would have taught us what nourishes our bodies in the receiving of the
Sacrament and from whence come the worms which are engendered in the bread; they
would have told us what kind of action it is which makes Christ exist under
the species of bread and wine; whether it was a Reproduction, or Adduction, or
U^ification? I say they would have taught us all these things, since the Church
of Rome gives now a particular Instruction in it; now since they were as wise
and learned, as the present Doctors of the Church of Rome now, and since they
said nothing of it, it is a mark that this Doctrine was contrary to their
Opinion.

And when they disputed against the Marcionites and Eutichians the former of
which believed that Jesus Christ had not a true body, but only an appearance;
and the latter that the substance of his body was changed into the Godhead
after his Resurrection; they alleged these words of our Lord, Luke 24. 39.
Handle me and see, for a Spirit has no flesh and bones as ye see me have. If
they had believed that in the Lords Supper the Accidents had continued without
the substance of bread and wine (as the present Church of Rome believes) the
Marcionites would not have failed to allege this example to prove that the
senses perceived in Jesus Christ an appearance of a body without reallity, as
they did see in the Lords Supper an appearance of bread and wine when they were
not really there. But so it is that they did never allege such an Example;
therefore I may truly say that this was not the belief of those times, and that
it was contrary to the opinion of the ancient Fathers.

And to show you the right Father of Transubstantiation, it was one of the
Dreams of Innocentius the third, in the year of our Lord 1215. So many years
passed before Transubstantiation was named, and then a Pope set it first on
foot; so it came out of Rome, and for want of Scriptures has been defended
with Fire and Sword.

You see then that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is contrary to the Holy
Scriptures; and since notwithstanding the Roman Church does believe it, it is
evident they add to the Word of God, and think above that which is written, and
therefore they are Heretic.

The Roman Church does not only think above that which is written, and add to
the Word of God; but also diminishes from it, as I will show you evidently.

First, The Apostle of the Gentiles will not only have us to speak in the
Church with a known tongue; but also he shows the confusion of them which
speak in an unknown. Except Pipe or Harp says he, give distinction in the
sound, how shall it be known what is Piped or Harped? If the Trumpet gives an
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? So likewise you,
except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. I thank my God, says
he, I speak with tongues more than you all, yet in the Church I had rather
speak five words with my understanding, that i^ my voice I might teach others
also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. And the Roman Church must
not say St. Paul thereby speaks concerning Sermons, and consequently does not
speak against her, because she preaches in known tongue, for St. Paul speaks
concerning Prayers Psalms, and Thanksgivings. verse. 14, 15, 17. If I pray,
says he, in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is
unfruitful. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with
the understanding also, I will sin with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also; else when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall be
that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understands not what thou say? And notwithstanding this
ordinance of Paul, and the confusion of them which go against it, as it is
declared by the comparisons of the Pipe, Harp, and Trumpet, the Roman Church
prays, sings, and gives thanks in an unknowen tongue: and though in the
Primitive Church the Blessings of other common Prayers are performed in the
vulgar tongue, Gretzer. def. cap. 16 lib.2. and lingua auditoribns non ignota
omnia peragebantur, and consitetudo it a ferebat ut tota Ecclesia simul
psalleret, all things were dispatched in a language not unknown to the People,
and the custom, was that the whole Church did sing together. And a multitude of
their Authors acknowledge, that the public prayers in the first age were in a
tongue, that the people understood. And though Austin says, Deus vult ut quod
canamus, intelligamus, and humana ratione, non quas^ avium voce canamus; God
requires that we understand what we sing, like m^n endued with reason, and not
chatter like birds.

Nevertheless, when the Bishops of Rome had mounted themselves to an eminent
degree of grandeur in the world, then nothing would serve their turns, but
they must be giving Laws, and prescribing Rules, though never so irregular and
unreasonable; and as Conquerors usually bring in, and oftentimes impose their
own language, on those they have subdued, and intied for their Slaves; so the
Popes made it their business to plant their Roman Rites, Ceremonies and
Language in what other Churches they could, that the same might afterward
serve as an argument of their Jurisdiction, and the others dependence.

It is then manifest the Roman Church diminishes from the Word of God, and
thinks above that which is written.

Secondly, St. Paul writes to the Colossians, Col.2. 16. Let no man judge you
in meat or drink; And to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 24, 25, 27, Whatsoever is
sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake: If any
of them that believe not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go,
whatsoever is ^et before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake; and
writing to Timothy, he says, 1 Timothy.4. 4. Every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving. And concerning
Marriage, he says, Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well
as other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas. And a Bishop can
be the husband of one Wife, and in the thirteenth to the Hebrews, Marriage is
honorable to all, and the bed undefiled; but Whoremongers, and Adulterers God
will judge: and in writing to Timothy, he says, forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, is a Doctrine of Devils; if thou put
brethren in remembrance of those things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus
Christ nourished up in the words of says, and of good Doctrine, whereunto thou
have attained. And Jesus Christ himself honors so much the marriage of the
Priests, that he chooses the Son of the High Priest Zacbarias, to be his
forerunner, 1 Cor.7.2. Because of Fornication; says Paul, let every man have
his own Wife; that is, whoever has not the gift of Continency; whether Clergy
or Lay man; so says Chrysostom. ^om. 19. upon these words. And the Roman Church
commands to abstain from meat in certain time and days, and all Bishops and
Priests to marry; and in the Council of Nice, of which the Ecclesiastical
Historian Socrates, Lib. 1. Cap. 11. writes thus; It pleased some of the
Bis^o^s to bring in a New ^aw into the Church, that those that were dedicated
to the holy Ministry viz. Bishops, Priests, or (...) and Deacons should not
sleep any longer (...) their wives: But Paphnutius an Egyptian Bisho^ who had
one of his eyes p^nckt out formerly for the Testimony of Jesus, stood up in
opposition thereunto, crying out aloud, that they should not impose so heavy a
yoke, for (...) Marriage Bed was honorable, and Matri^^ny unpolluted, lest
with too much precis^^^ they should rather hurt the Church; for all (...) could
not bear the exercise of Continency, and that accompanying with man's lawful
wife, (...) not breach of chastity. Which prevailed so (...), that the Council
acquie^cing in his opinion, only decreed that the Clerks should not accompany
with other women, besides their wives.

But Gregory the seventh by cruel decrees (...) Excommunication, deprived
Ministers of the^^ lawful wives, and compelled the Clergy to the Vow of
Continency; and the Council of Treat forbids Marriage unto all those that are
in O^, (...) and curses those that say that they (...). Si quis dixerit
Cleric^^ in sacris Ordini^ng ^^titutos, vel Regulares costitatem solem^^ter
professos posse Matrimonium contrahere, contractum que v^^^dum esse, non
obstante. Lege Ecclesias^ica vel Voto, and oppositum nibil aliud esse quam
d^^nere Matrimonium, posseq^e omnes contrahere Matrimonium, qui (...) senti^^t
se castitatis, (...) ^^overint, ^abere donum, Anat^ema ^it.

^^ls then manifest the Roman Church dimini^heth from the Word of God, and
thinks a Marc that which is written.

She forbids also the holy Scriptures to the common People; and in the
Council of Trent it is written, if the reading of the holy Scripture, is
permitted indifferently in a know^ Tongue amongst all People, it will be more
hurtful than profitable. And so the Roman Church is wiser than St. John
^^b.5.39. which says Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think (...) have
eternal life; and wiser than St. Paul, who writting both to the Bishops, and
all his Brethren, either Men or Women, either young or old, speaks thus: I
charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all holy Brethren. 1.
Tess.5. 27. and writing to the Colessians, he says, When this Epistle is read
amongst you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and
that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea Coloss. 4. 16.

The People of Beroea were higly commended that they searched the Scriptures,
to see whether those things were true or no, which Paul himself theacheth. Act.
17. For whosoever he be, though he were an Angel from Heaven, if he teach
Matters contrary to the Doctrine of the holy and Canonical Scriptures, were to
hold him accursed, as the ( Gal.1.8.) Apostle of Jesus Christ commands; and
the Church of Rome forbids them to the common People, saying, it is
perilous, it causes schisms, Sects, and Heresies, as if she were wiser than
Christ, St John and St. Paul.

Thirdly, We read in St. Matthew, Mat. 26. 27. Christ took the Cup and gave it
to them, saying, drink ye all of it; and the Roman Church will have no body to
drink of the Cup but the Priests; thinking Jesus Christ spoke to the Priests
only, when he said, drink ye all of it. But St. Paul writing to the Corinthians
amongst whom were more Laics than Priests, shows the contrary, saying Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
And though in the general Council of Constance, the Roman Church does confess
this holy Sacrament was received in the primitive Church with the Bread and the
Cup; yet in the general Council of Trent she speaks thus: If any man says,
that the Catholic Church had no just reasons to give the Communion to the
Laics, and Clerks who do not say Mass, under the Accidents of Bread only, and
that she erred in that, let him be Anathema.

Their Reasons why they took the Cup from them, are (say they) many
Inconveniences and several Absurdities. But besides, there is no
^^conveniency; though there should be any, it ^^ught not to be above the
Commandment of Christ and Paul. Christ', the primitive Church and the Apostles,
were very wise and prudent and seeing they have commanded and give the
Sacrament with the Cup, the Roman Church ought to follow their example, and
obey the^ If there were any Inconveniency, Jesus Christ who is very wise, and
the Apostles, should have remedied it; therefore since they have not fo^bidden
the Cup, the Roman Church must n^^ forbid it. And as well and by as good
Authority may they take the Bread from the People likewise; and Pope Gelasius
did decree that (...) should be Excommunicated, which wou^^ receive but in one
kind; therefore, as you m^^^ read in the beginning of this Treatise, since the
Church is Heretic, which adds to the Word of God, or diminishes from it, or
thinks ^bove that which is written; the Church of (...) me taking away the
Cup from the comm^^ people, and from the Clerks which are (...) Priest, it is
clear that she diminishes from (...) holy Scripture, since we are commanded
(...) drink of the Cup; for, as it is said here abo^^ Christ says, Drink ye
all of it; and St. P^^^ speaking indifferently unto all, says thus; L^^ man
examine himself, and so let him eat of (...) Bread, and drink of that Cup; and
consequen^^ it is manifest, that she is Heretic.

They say true the Church of God her^^^p Earth is visible to the outward eye,
and was always; and so they tell us, that our Church is not the true Church of
God, because it was not always visible to the outward eye; for where was your
Church (say they) before Calvin, Luther, and those that you call Reformators?

To which I answer, That though the true Church of God here Militant upon Earth
were always, yet she was not always visible to the outward eye; pray let them
tell me, where the Church was visible, when being gathered at Jerusalem, there
arose a great Persecution against her, in so much as they were all scattered:
for as it is said in the Acts 8.1. At that time there was persecution against
the Church that was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad throughout
the regions of Judea and Samaria. Where was the Church of God visible when
Jesus Christ was sn^^tten, and all the rest were scattered and hid, as it is
written in Mark? Where was the Church visible in the time of Elias the Prophet,
when he complained that he was left alone? O Lord, said he, they have forsaken
thy Covenant, they have destroyed thine Altars, and slain they Prophets with
the sword, and I am left alone. By these words, I am left alone, every body may
see that Elias knew not where was the true Church of God; though as it is
manifest by the Answer which God gave him, there were, besides him, seven
thousand true worshippers of God yet remaining, which had not bowed their knee
to Baal. The true Church of God the^ may be though she is not visible to the
outward eye. So was the primitive Church, in the time of the Heathen Emperors;
so she was in the days of Queen Mary here in England; so she was in the other
Times, when she was persecuted by the Romish Popes; and so she was before the
days of Calvin, Luther, and all the other Reformators; she had her secret
Me^tings and Assemblies, though unknown to he^ persecutors; there were in those
days many true worshippers of God, which were not par^takers of the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome and who had their secret Meetings amongst
themselves, though they we^^ unknown, though they were not visible to the
Papist. And therefore they do not conclude well, when they hold stiffly that the
Church o^ England, is not the true Church of God, because before the days of
Calvin, Luther, and other Reformators; she was not visible to their eyes;
seeing I have proved clearly that a Church may be a true Church of God, though
not visible to the outward eye.

They hold besides, their unwritten Traditions to be received with equal and
like Authority, as the holy Scripture; and consequently they hold the sacred
Scripture to be imperse^^ (...) not contain all things necessary to Salvation.
That this is their Doctrine, may be seen in the Council of Trent, by these
following words. Nec non Traditiones ipsas, tum ad ^idem tum ad mores
pertinentes, ^anquam vel ore tenus, a Cri^sto, vel a Spiritu Sancto dictitas,
and co^xinua successione in Ecclesia Catholica Cons^^va^as, pari pretatis
affectu ac reverentia suscipi^ ac veneratur. That is, This general Council
receives and honors with an equal piety and reverence the Traditions as
well belonging to faith as manners, as they were dictated by the Holy Ghost, or
by the v^ry mouth of Christ, and kept in the Catholic Church by a continual
Succession. And again (...) this same Session, ^ui traditiones praedictas
scio^^ and prudens contempserit, Anathema, ^it. Whosoever knowing the said
Traditions, and shall purpose^ com^^n them, let him be Anathema. And Pope Leo
the fourth, says thus He that receives not without difference the Papish
Ca^^, as well as the four Gospels, believes not a right, nor boldeth the
Catholic Church effectually; and so they do not hold the holy Scriptures to be
perfect, and to contain all things necessary to Salvation, which is against
these words of (...) These things are written that ye may believe, and that in
believing you may have life eternal. Contrary to St. Paul 2. Tim. 3. 15. who
says, Thou have (...) the holy Scriptures, which are able to make the (...)
unto Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. And contrary to Christ
(...), who says, Whatsoever is requisite for our Salvation is contained in the
Scriptures: And in another place he speaks thus; All things are ^ear and
manifest in the Scriptures; and whatsoever things are needful, are manifest
there.

Therefore I conclude thus, since, as says Ireneus, l. 5. c. 17. Heretici sunt
qui supra Scripturam sapiunt; and since that Church is Heretic which is
obstinate in her Errors; and since that Church is obstinate in her Errors,
which refuses to obey the holy Scripture in several ^^^nts both of faith and
practice; and since that Church refuses to obey the holy Scripture which
adds to the Word of God, and dimini^^th from it, and thinks above that
which is written; for God says, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add unto the word
which I command you, neither shall you diminish from it. The Roman Church adding
to the Word of God, and diminishing from it, and thinking above that which is
written, ^as I have proved clearly) it follows that she refuses to obey the
divine and sacred Scriptures; and consequently, that she is obstinate in her
Errors; and therefore that she is Heretic. I could say more, but I think this
sufficient to prove what I did undertake in this small Treatise.

It is then with good reason I am (...) out of that Communion; when I was
amongst them, I dare say, both my Ignorance and Zeal were such these last few
years, that the special Motives which induced me to enter into a Covent, being
about 17. years old, was to Preach the Holy Gospel unto them that I did believe
deceived, and to give the light of the Truth to the Protestants, which I
thought to live amidst the darkness of Ignorance. I continued in that
resolution about 11. years, and being ready to perform it, that which happened
to St. Paul, almost happened unto me; for as he went unto the High Priest, and
desired Letters from him to Damascus to the Synagogues, that if he found any of
this way, whether they were Men or Women, he might bring them bound unto
Jerusalem; and as he came near Damascus, suddenly shined round about him a
light from Heaven^ he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him,
^aul, Saul, why perse^^test the^ me? it is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks; and he trembling said, what will thou have me to do, O Lord? the Lord
said unto him, Arise and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou
must do. The men which were in journey with him, brought him in to Damascus, he
there received his ^ight by Ananias, land was (...) with the Holy Ghost, and
having lived certain days with the Disciples which were at Damascus, he
Preached Christ, (...) he did persecute, that he was the Son of God. And when I
was ready to ask and receive Letters to Turkey or England, that I might bring
unto the Roman Church those that I could find separated from her, whether they
were Men or Women, and being ^^dy to perform my resolution, I heard an inward
voice saying unto me, Thy zeal is not just, those which thou will persecute,
are the true Children of God; astonished by that voice which spoke to my heart,
I answered, Lord, let me know the truth; and after I had several ^^mts
instantly begged that favor from the Lord, his Divine Providence presented me
two Books, The Perpetuity of Faith, written by one Claude Minister living at
Paris; and Calvin's Institutions; and after I had examined, and compared these
two Books with the holy Scripture, and discours^d some few days with the said
Claude Minister, I found that this inward voice which spoke to my Heart was
true; therefore leaving my first resolution I came in to England, not that I
might bring unto the Roman Church those that I should find separated from her,
but that I might separate them, that I should find of that Communion.

I thank God, because he made me know, the truth, and I will give him thanks as
long as I live; it is certain I am out of my country, and separated from my
Friends an Kindred; it is, because they would not give me leave to serve God
and worship Him according to his Will, and Commandments. I know they curse me,
and call me Heretic and Excommunicated; but I had rather bear the Curse of
men, than of God. Whosoever, says Christ, Mat. 10. 31. loves Father or
Mother, or Brethren, or Sister more than me, he is not worthy of me; such love
better their Brethren than Christ, who to please and humor them, keep not his
commandments. Christ taught me not to be ashamed, nor to blush for the Gospel,
and whosoever shall (...) him before men, he will deny him before his Father
which is in Heaven: Mat. 10. 33. I will confess him before all men, and obey
him, and suffer what he pleases for his sake; therefore I say, who shall
separate me from the truth of the holy Scriptures? shall tribulation, or
distress, persecution or famine, or nakedness or peril, or sword? I hope that
neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present nor things to come, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate
me from the truth of the Holy Scriptures. I pray to my God to keep me in that
mind as long as I live, Amen.

FINIS.

