The PEOPLE's RIGHT TO ELECTION Or ALTERATION of GOVERNMENT in Connecticut,
ARGUED In a LETTER; By Gershom Bulkeley Esquire one of their Majesty's Justices of
the peace In the County of Hartford.

Together with a Letter to the said Bulkeley, from a Friend of his in the BAY.

To which is added, The Writing delivered to James Russell of Charlestown Esquire
warning him and others concerned, not to meet to Hold a Court at Cambridge,
within the county of Middlesex.

By Thomas Greaves Esquire Judge of their Majesty's Inferior Court of Pleas and one
of their Majesty's Justices of the peace within the said County

And also his ANSWER to Mr. Broadstreete and the Gentleman (...) at the
Townhouse in Boston concerning the same.

Published for the Information and Satisfaction of their Majesty's loyal (but
abused) Subjects in NEW ENGLAND.

Philadelphia, Printed by Assigns of William Bradford, Anno 1689.

TO the honorable Robert Treat Esquire and to the Worshipful James Bishop,
William Jones and Jones Fitch, and other the Worshipful Justices of the
several Counties: and any other whom it may concern, assembling at Hartford:
To advise concerning Holding of a Court of Election by Virtue of and according
to the late Patent.
Sirs,
I Am at this time (by reason of bodily Infirmity) unable to wait upon you in a
suitable manner, or to maintain discourse as this Occasion may require, or
indeed to write much, yet (considering the Exigency of the case) I will do what
I can, and apply my self to you as follows.

And to prevent all prejudice against what I have to say, I shall premise thus
much, Viz. That though I was no freeman of the Colony, yet I never was, nor am
an Enemy to our ancient Charter-priviledges, and could th^^ now be regularly
Recovered, I should rejoice in it, and if I knew any thing whereby to justify
the present proceeding, I should not conceal it; but we must not do evil that
good may come of it*

I am not at all ambitious of keeping my place, it is a Burden and no Benefit
to me; an orderly discharge will be very welcome, and the sooner the better; if
I could absolve my self from my oath, it had not been to do now; so that I am
under no Temptation on these accounts. It Is only the Trust reposed in me, and
my real desire of the Common good which puts me on, very well knowing, that
nothing but ill Will is like to be my reward.

Further, I am sensible of mine inability to wade in those great Affairs, and
would not abound in my own sense, nor in any sort take upon nor go about to
teach those of whom I had need to learn; yet, Plus vident oculi quam ^culus.
Many eyes see more than one: and a weak eye may chance to see that which a
better over-looks. And I having with others, (tho much against my own
Inclination) received his Majesty's Commission as a Justice of the Peace for
the County of Hartford, and having at that time taken the Oaths. of Supremacy
and Obedience, as also that of a justice, for keeping of the Law, the
Conservation of the Peace, and the quiet and good Government of the people, it
did concern me to Consider the ^uty by these means so strongly bound upon me,
and accordingly I have since that time done my poor endeavor to inform my self
in the Laws, that I might discern between Right and Wrong for the good of the
people.

Therefore, in sense of my duty to God, the King, your selves, and all his
Majesty's good people here (for I am debt^r to you all, and am embarked in the
same Bottom with you; and do account it (...) Duty to seek the peace of the
place where I live) therefore (I say) I shall not* and I think, I ought not) be
wholly silent at this time, but according to that little which I have learned
and observed, I shall modestly, and yet freely and plainly, offer a few
Considerations to you which respect the present Affair, desireing you neither
to accept nor reject what I say, because it comes from me, but according to its
own merit; for the matter in hand seems to me to be of very great Weight, and I
beseech you to consider and ponder it thoroughly before you engage in it,
forasmuch as an Irregularity in this Proceeding, may be the beginning of great
Calamity and Woe to this people.

The present Motion seems to me to be not only illegal, needless and
unprofitable, but indeed very criminal dangerous and hurtful to us, and that
upon these Considerations.

First, Before you can Regularly (or by Virtue of and according to your late
Patent) hold a Court of Election, you must be first Restored to your former
politic Capacity, whereby you were under the Name of His Majesty's Governor
and Company of the English Colony of Connecticott, ^^^sons able and capable in
the Law to plead and be impleaded etc; and to Have, Take, Require and possess
Lands and other Hereditaments etc. of which, that Privilege of Government was
a principal one given by your Patent.

For I reason thus, If you do now assume the Government, and proceed to
Election, you do it either in a private and personal Capacity, or in a public
and politik Capacity, I suppose you do not pretend to the First, for that is
not to do it according to your patent, and besides it is criminal.

For Subjects in private Capacity to take upon them to set up and exercise
Government as they see cause, is direct Rebellion and Treason. Therefore you
must do it in a public and politic Capacity, but this you cannot do (...) you
are restored to such a Capacity, in which indeed you once were, but now are
not: which I thus prove from the Patent it self.

Our late Sovereign King Charles the Second, did in the year 1662. by his
Letters Patents for himself* his Heirs and Successors, Ordain and Constitue
the therein named Patentees, and the then present and future Freemen etc. One
Body politic and Corporate in fact and Name, by the name of, His Governor and
Company of the English Colony of Connecticut in New England in America; and
that by the same Name they and their Success^^^^ shall and may have perpetual
Succession, and shall and may be persons able and capable in the law to plead
and be imple^ded, to Answer and be Answered unto, to defend and be defended in
all Suits, Causes, Quarrels, Matters Actions and things of what kind and nature
soever. And also to Have, Take, Possess, Acquire and Purchase Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments etc. This is the express Letter of that Clause of the
Patent, whereby you were constituted one body politic and Corporate, able and
capable in the Law as aforesaid; and whereby also, you were by the name of
Governor and Company to have perpetual Succession, or to be perpetuated by
annual Election, at least, as the Patent afterward shows, and upon this
Clause do all the privileges afterward* granted depend.

But now you are not such a Body politic and Corporate capable in Law as
aforesaid, for you know, that by the late Transaction between his Majesty and
his then Governor and Company of the late Colony of Connecticut, (...) is
changed and taken into his Majesty's hands, and the late Colony of Connecti^co
annexed to the Bay, the Governor and one of the Assistants made and sworn
Councillors and Judges under this new Government, the late Deputy Governor
and the rest of the Assistants, made and sworn (...) in the several Counties
under the same new Government, and this a year and a half agone: How legal
these proceedings were we need not now dispute; but this it is in fact: Hence
there is no such thing in fact and name as the Governor and Company of the
Colony of Connecticut. And hence the Corporation is dissolved and made
incapable in the law to plead and be impleaded etc. or to have and take or
possess any Hereditaments; and consequently incapable to Take, Erect and
Exercise Government. For neither the Governor alone, nor the Company alone i^
the Corporation, nor capable to plead or be impleaded as such, but the
Governor and Company together. If they Claim or Take, they must Claim or
Take together, if they Sue, they must Sue together, and if they be sued, they
must be sued together and not apart. Besides, by the means aforesaid the
Succession is interrupted and broken off, for by the same name of the Governor
and Company of etc. you were to have perpetual Succession, and that Succession
to be perpetuated by annual Election of the Governor, Deputy Governor etc.
which has not been. Therefore in your present state you are not Successors of
the former Corporation; and consequently cannot take the privileges until
restored to your former politic Capacity: and (to add that) you cannot restore
your selves to it, for that is inconsistent with your Subjection to the
Supreme power.

By all this it does appear, That as there is no Governor, or
Deputy Governor to give Order for the Assembling of the Company, (without
which their Assembling for such (...) end is unlawful) so there are no Freemen
capable of choosing or o^ being chosen* for if there be not a Corporation
capable, there cannot be capable Freemen of that Corporation: And if in this
state you proceed to Election, there is no Freeholder or free Subject of
England belonging to this Late Colony, but has as good a Right, and is as
capable of Choosing as any of you, because there is nothing to hinder it, and
this the people see. Also there are now no Assistants enbaled by lawful
Authority (without which none may do it) to take the Oath of the Governor or
Deputy Governor when Chosen; all which things the Patent does expressly require.

All this seems necessarily to follow from the very words of the Patent, and
how it can be avoided I cannot see: but that I may not seem to vent my own
Notions only, I shall briefly give the words of Sir Edward Coke as sound a
Lawyer and as great a friend to the English Subjects Libertyes as ever England
knew, In the Case (says he) of Mayor and Commonality (which is the same in
effect as Governor and Company) Where there is no Mayor the Commonality cannot
make claim; because they have neither ability nor Capacity to take or sue any
Action. [Coke upon Lit. page 2^3.] so that without a Governor or Deputy
Governor you cannot so much as Claim the Government by Law, much less enter
upon it. And therefore we see that in the Patent, the King does not Constitute
only a number of Freemen, and make them immediately capable to take such and
such privileges, and give them power rudely to run together whenever some
factious spirits shall make a bustle, and so in a tumult to choose them a
Governor and Magistrates; No, but he first creates them a Body politic
consisting of Goverour and Company, and by that name makes them capable in Law
to take the privileges which he thereafter gives. And he himself nominates
and appoints the first Governor or Deputy Governor for the time being, to
give order for the Assembling of the Company upon all occasions (whether for
Election or otherwise) and in such orderly manner gives them leave to assemble
as often as need requires.

Secondly, (Which does also confirm the former) Before you can hold a Court of
Election according to the Patent, you must have a General Court or Assembly
constituted according to the Patent: the reason is, because the Patent does
ordain, that the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants etc. be annually
chosen, not without, but in the said General Court: concerning this matter the
King, in his Patent, ordains three things.

1. That every Second Thursday in May and October ^or oftener if need be) there
shall be a General Assembly. 2. That this General Court or Assembly, consist
of the Governor or Deputy Governor, and at least six of the Assistants, and
of the Freemen or their Deputyes. 3. That at least once in every year (Viz.) on
the second Thursday in May, the Governor Deputy Governor and Assistants of
the said Company and other Officers etc. shall be in the said General Court
and Assembly to be held from that day or time newly chosen for the year
ensueing etc. Thus says the Patent expressly: But you have now no Governor,
Deputy Governor, nor Assistants, therefore can have no such General Court or
Assembly; therefore can hold no Court of Election by virtue of or according to
your Patent. Examine the Patent and see etc.

From these two Considerations it appears, that if you do proceed to Election
in your present state, you will but deceive your selves and trouble (...): all
that you will do, will be void in Law: (...) you think to set up will be but an
imaginary Government, (...) without a substance, Magistrates without Authority,
for you can (...) them none, neither does the Patent give them any. A
Government (...) cannot determine the Present Government, nor vacate the
Commissions that have been given out from the King, and are still in force, nor
exercise any Authority to effect: for their Authority may justly (yea, ought
to) be denied by every one, and they cannot enforce it, without Lawless
Usurpation and Tyranny. 2. You will but trouble your selves, for you will be
immediately liable to a Quo-Warranto, and can give no account by what Authority
you do these arbitrary things.

Thirdly, The Government is now in the Kings hands, (and here, that no person
may cavil, the word King may be understood indefinitely for the King his
Heirs and Successors, for the Heir or Successor is King, when the Time of
Succession is come. But I say, The Government is now in the Kings hands, and it
will be wisdom to proceed in a regular way, if you desire to recover it. For
in regard of the dignity of his person, the King has by Law a Prerogative above
the Subject* for the keeping of what he has. Hence, a man may not enter upon
the King as he may upon his Fellow subject; much (...) may he enter upon the
King by Force. I do not now enter upon that Question, How far those that are by
and under the King entrusted with public Power and Office, for the defense of
the Laws and the Libertyes of the Subject, may, in case, use force for that
end; and the people under them at (...) Call and Command; This is another
Question, and not our case, and those that desire satisfaction, may consult
those that have written weightily upon that Subject. It is one thing to defend
the Laws and Liberties of the Subject. This some think some may do, and this
defends the Government: But it is another thing to subvert and change and take
possession of the Government it self, this none may do. And though some may say,
But the Government is illegally taken into the Kings hand, and it is one of our
great Liberties: 'I shall say something to that by and by.

Therefore to let that Question pass untoucht. I said that the Subject may not
enter upon the King with force: now you cannot enter upon the King in point of
Government, but it is with force, for all power of Government implies force
antecedent, for the setting of it up, and concomitant for the Support and
Defense of it, and partly because you cannot do it in this way of Election
without Multitude, which is Force in the judgment of the Law, as well as Manus
arm^^ae, or Force of Arms, so that if you do it, it must necessarily be done
with force; now to enter upon the King in point of Government with Force, what
is it but to invade the Crown? And Kings do account their Heads and Crowns to
be very near each to other; and that he that attempts against the one,
attempts against the other.

This Affair therefore does touch the Crown, and nearly concern your
Allegiance, and is worthy to be well considered, for it is of dangerous
consequence; it is dangerous to those that shall Choose, and be Chosen, and
Accept; dangerous to all that shall any ways contrive, counsel, abett or
conceal, (tho here is hardly room for Concealing, (A City set on a Hill
cannot be hid, and these things cannot be done in a Corner) it is dangerous to
your selves and Posterity, yea dangerous to us all, and does require more skill
in Law and state affairs than is very common among us, to make the way plain
to a safe proceeding in it; for I cannot find that the Law does use any softer
Language concerning such Actions, than that of Tumults, Insurrections,
rebellious Riots, Sedi^ion, Rebellion, Treason, etc.

Gentlemen, I hope you will be careful to keep at a due distance from such
things which are wont to be Bi^^^rnesse in the end. It Is an easy matter to run
too far; And the worst is wont to be made of such things when they come to
Trial.

Fourthly, You may here consider that the Government was not taken into the
Kings hand* without your own Submission, and some sort (at least) of Consent;
whence possibly there was not so much Illegality in that proceeding as some do
imagine. I was not personally acquainted with those Transactions, and therefore
cannot undertake much in this; but this I suppose will not be denied, that if
parties be at Law (whether King and subject, or subject and subject) and
instead of standing a Trial, they agree upon Conditions, and the Conditions are
performed, and so the Action be let fall, this is not illegal: and if
afterward either party be sensible of inconveniency, will it be fair and
honest for him to say it was illegal, and thereupon break his Agreement? The
Inhabitant of the Holy Hill swears to his own hurt, and changes not. You were
at Law with the King, and its like you thought it would be a great Charge to
maintain the Action, and it might go against you at last, and you should be
annexed to York; and hereupon you submit to the Kings Wisdom and pleasure,
begging that you may be annexed to the Bay; the King performs this condition,
and lets fal^ his Action, Demands the Government, and you yield it up to him;
if now you find it prejudicial, you must lay your hand upon your mouth, and
not take it again by force. We must not think to leave and take when we please.

Fifthly, None are allowed by the Law to be Judges in their own Cas^; no not
the King himself: But if you proceed in this manner, you take upon you, in your
own case to judge the King, to condemn and take possession, which in reason
will never be borne, for Princes are as tender of their Prerogative as Subjects
can be of their Liberties.

But to abate the Force of these Considerations, some say, We hear there is no
King, R^gall Power is Extinct, etc. I answer, it is no pleasant Objection or
Subject to speak to, but yet the Necessity of the present time seems to require
a word or two to prevent these unwise and unwary speeches which do not become
Subjects. Therefore I say first, That Rumors are but a sandy foundation to
ground such assertions, or to change and build Government upon, we have yet
nothing of Record concerning the King. 2. This does not help our case at all,
for if it were indeed so, that the Scepter were departed, you have then nothing
to do with the Patent; It Is only the King's Governor and Company that has
Interest in the Patent, and the King grants it only for Himself, his Heirs
and Successors, if there be none of these, your Patent and Estate in it are
expired without any more to do. But, 3 ly. The King is a Ro^all Body politic
which has Succession whereby the Crown passes not only to heirs by Blood,
but to Successors also; in which respect it is said, That in Judgment of Law,
The KING never dies. There is therefore allwaies a King.

But others say, What shall we do? (...) is no Government; the Governor who is
the Head of it is imprisoned, and has Surrendered his Government I answer, It
is a very great Error and proceeds from ignorance to think that there is no
Government, and it contains so many inconveniences and mischiefs in it, as it
is not safe to mention them; so long as there is any supreme power, there must
needs be a Government. 2. The Governor is not the Head of the Government but
the King. And the Government is not his propperly and originally but the King's.
The Governor is but a Minister of the King in the Government, which Ministry
it is said he has surrendered to be secured and be disposed of by Orders that
shall be re^^ived from the Crown of England. It will not become us to pre^^nt
these Orders and dispose of the Government otherwise our selves; but to
acknowledege our Subjection to that Crown, as our Neigh^ours ^ould do w^ll to
do. 3. The Commissions of the Judges and Justices of the several C^unties (the
Execution whereof is no small part of Government ^ are granted by the
Governor) (its true) but not from the Go^ernour, (...) from the King, and are
derived from the Crown; it is not from an inferior but from a Supre^^e power,
and they do still continue in force, no^withstanding the i^mprisonment or
Surrender of the Governor; for they are matters of Record under the great
Seal of the Dominion, and cannot be counter^^^ded without matter of Record of
as high a nature. You may take one instance from Charles the first his time, He
was indeed the head of the Government; but yet notwithstanding the great Breach
and long Wars between him and his Parliament, and his long imprisonment after
that, both together) from 42. to the end of 48. there was still a Government,
and it was his Government, and exercised by the Kings Commissions as long as he
lived, for they were not changed nor superseded till a year after his death, as
the Histories of those times show. So that notwithstanding all the Rumors we
have had from abroad, and the Overtures at home, there is a Government still,
to which we ought to submit; and that for Conscience sake. Let us not have
cause to say, that there are none that will be governed.

Sixthly. I may desire you to consider those honored Gentlemen who had the
Rule over you under the former Government, and are now also in place under this
Government, who I believe would hardly have accepted any Commission under the
present Government, but for this end, that you might not be so much Ruled by
strangers as otherwise you might have been, and to prevent the miseries that
might follow thereupon: I am sure that this was one principal Argument that
they used with me, when they saw me so averse as I was to Accept, and I think
the end has been so far attained, as that you ought with Thankfullness to
acknowledge, that by this means you have escaped the greatest part of those
grievances which others complain of, and not now (you think you have the staff
in your hand) to ride over their Consciences who are under Oath (from which
neither they nor yo^ can absolve them) to execute their Commissions, and to
tread them down as mire in the streets: The measure that you mete may be
measured to you again. It Is a golden Rule, That which you would that others
should do to you, do you the same to them; and do not recompense evil for good.

Some I know reflect hard upon them for giving up the former Government; much
like those that refl^ct upon old father Ad^m; but I will so far apologize for
them, as to desire you to (...) upon your selves, for have you already
forgotten that you (I mean the people) were divided in your opinions; many
grudged at the charge of that Affair, whence it was hard (if possible) for
them seasonably to (...) to maintain the suite* (I my sel^ know who were then
as hot against the raising of money for that Purpose (and cried out it was
illegal) as now hot for the Patent, and ready to cry out upon the loss of
that as illegal; but I will not prejudice any man.) Others were so aff^a^d of
being annexed to York, that they thought it the best way to submit without
mo^e a do, so that they might be annexed to the Bay Surely you cannot forget
these things, by which (comeing from the people by their Deputye^) it is
reasonable to think that the General Assembly was moved to make that
Submission to the King, and in all Reason it was much better so* th^n for want
of money, to have had a Judgment given against us upon a N^hil-Dic^^, or
Contempt, and it is possible, that if t^ose who reflect so hard upon them had
been under the ^ame Circumstances, they would have done the same thing or
worse. Therefore methinks they might be a little considered, and not made the
(...) of the people.

Seventhly. Consider your Profession, we are all Protestants, I hope there is
not a Papist in our Limits, I know not any: and we profess to believe
(rejecting humane Traditions) That the word of God is the only and sufficient
Rule of Faith and Manners. And do we not there find that Sure word of
Prophecy, to which we may do well to take heed, as to a light that shines in a
Dark place, which does direct and counsel us, To fear the Lord and the King,
and not to meddle with those that are given to change, To Keep the Kings
Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God, To Give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's, To Study to be
quiet, and to be subject to Principalities and powers (because they are of God)
and to obey Magistrates, To submit our selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto
those that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers and the praise of
them that do well, for so is the will of God, that with well doing, we may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men, etc. and, Not to despise Government,
nor to speak evil of Dignityes? These are sound Doctrines, and will well
consist with the protestant Religion (else we had reason to be ashamed of it)
and it were to be wished, That these among us who are the salt of the earth and
Light of the world would season the people by putting them in mind (as Paul
commands Titus) of those great Duties so necessary for these perilous days,
wherein men are (as was prophesied they would be) so apt to be Tra^^ers, heady
and high minded, and to despise Government. Therefore before we proceed in this
Affa^^e, consider what our Religion will gain by it, and Ornament or a Blott,
and whether we shall not give Occasion to adversaries (that seek occasion) to
blaspheme the name and speak evil of the ways of God amongst us.

Eighthly, Consider the time and state of affairs in the Christian world. If
any thing be true of that which comes to us it seems, it is a time wherein
there is a strong engagement to root out the Protestant Religion. Europe is
upon this account in ^^^mes, the Ax is laid to our own Root, if (...) be so, it
is a time wherein we had need to strengthen the things that are weak, to join
heart and hand together against French and Pagan-Force and Cruelty, and to
unite heaven and Earth if possible* for the preservation of our selves and
posterity, and for the Defense of the cause of God and his Truth with us;
surely this is no time to fall to Faction^ and parties, to tread down the
Government that is left, (too weak already.) to disturb and obstruct the Course
of Justice, To confound the Militia, that no man shall know whom to Command
nor whom to Obey, and to promote private interests, and therefore set every
man's hand against his Brother, unless we design to ruin all. I wish there
be not some Jesuit that has foisted in this Project amongst them in the Bay and
us here, as the most probale way to ruin us at this time; for it is the old
trade of that Diabolical sort of men by their plausible crafty Counsels, to
make protestants destroy themselves, by stirring up, and fomenting divisions
among them; and promoteing any thing which tends thereto, the which, how
naturally and necessarily they will flow from this proceeding is easy to show:
but it is better to be silent than by speaking to show men the way which they
are too ready to run into

Ninethly, More might be said, but the last Consideration that I shall offer
(and which I think may satisfy any reasonable man) is, That it is known the
Country is in daily Expectation of Orders from the Crown of England, for the
Settleing and Regulating of the Government, those Orders will either contradict
or overthrow your Election, or else countenance and Encourage it:

If they overthrow it, to what end is it to hold a Court, (if we could hold a
Court) to make Election, to change and turn things up-side down, and hereby put
the Country (which is poor enough already) to unnessary Charge, and know not
how to defray it when we have done, and to run the hazard of displeasure from
the supreme power abroad, and of making Division and Mischief at home, and all
for an imaginary Government, which may possibly last for a week or a month.
Sapiens incipit a Fine.

If the Orders that shall come do countenance and encourage to an Election,
they will be such as will enable us to it, and so we shall preserve a good
Aspect abroad, and Unity and Peace at home; what need then of such Haste? These
things cannot be spoken against. And the Town-Clerke of Ephesus could say, that
these things being so, you ought to be quiet and do nothing rashly.

(...), We shall loose our day if we do not proceed now. I Answer, There is
nothing in that, for if you have sufficient Warrant from the Crown of England,
to enable you to the thing, you will be enabled as to a Day, and Persons, and
what else is ^eedfull which now, you are not, as before was said*

But say others, If we have an Election before these Orders come, we shall be
in a Capacity to capitulate, and so obtain the better terms, etc. I answer
this is a great mistake, It will be a mighty Disadvantage; for it will be a
wonderful thing if you be not looked upon and dealt with as Criminalls.

Again, Whom do you mean to Capitulate with? Surely it will be good manners
for us to Ask, and not to Command; to Follow our Leaders and not to go before
them.

But some think; These are small matters that will be overlooked, and easily
pardoned, we need not stand upon such nicetyes.

But I Answer how small they are will be best seen afterward, and it is better
not to need a pardon, than to presume upon getting one.

From all these Considerations I conclude, that our strength is to sit still,
and therefore do advise

That instead of moving toward an Election, the Judges and Justices in the
several Counties, considering their Commissions which they have received and
the Oaths which they have taken, for the faithful Execution of them, and
Remembering that the Judgment is not man's but God's who is with them in the
Judgment, they take Courage and do it; and in Order thereto Unanimously
Declare, that they will Maintain and Exercise the Government (in their Degree)
according to their Commissions, in Conformity to the Laws which are the Rules
of their Commissions, and the true and propper Bulwarks of the Subject's just
Libertyes, being careful to do nothing contrary thereto, to the best of their
understanding: and that the good People here do willingly and cheerfully submit
and yield obedience to the several Officers in their Respective places, as
their Duty is, until such time as sufficient Warrant shall come from the Crown
of England for other Orders. And in the mean time, we all with one consent
Lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the Heavens for a happy Composure
of these Commoti^^s in England and those other Kingdoms, for the Restitution,
Security and propagation of the Gospel, true Religion and Worship of God; and
for the preserving and establishing of the peace and liberty of his people
there and here, and elsewhere throughout the world to the glory of God.

This Course is regular, innocent, offensive to none, and most safe for our
selves and ours: but if the people will not be advised, I very much fear that
the issue will not be like a Tree of Life, or the desire satisfied, else truly
I should not at this time have given you or my self this trouble.

The Opinion, and Resolution of the other Justices I know not, but for my part,
I am plain, and I must declare and pro^est against an Election at the present,
as that which is justly offensive to (...) ^upreame Power, in whose hands
soever it is, or shall be, and perniciou^ to our selves; and if the people
should wilfully proceed to it, it will remain for the Justices to consider
whether the Law and their Oaths don't require them to make a Record of it, and
Certify it into the Chancery, etc. But I hope there will none enforce to such
things, and I pray that you may all Act under the Influence of the God of peace
and order And in Testimony that this is my Opinion and Advice, I have hereunto
set my hand, on the eighth day of May 1689.

Gershom Bulkeley.
Pa^em te poscinius omnes. Peace is the Tranquillity of Order, therefore Order
is the only right Way to Peace.
(...) to Gershom Bulkeley Esquire (one of their Majesty's Justices of the (...) in
the County of Hartford) from a friend in the Bay.
Sir,
I Have seen your Letter referring to the Government of Connecticut Colony
Directed unto Col^ ^reate and other Gentlemen there, and being very well
acquainted with the papers and passages you refer to and the Truth of them
severally: I earnestly expected the Answer, as extremely necessary for the
Vindication of the assumed Government in your parts, if at least they mean to
continue their Allegiance and Dependence upon the Crown of England, or to hold
their Majesty's Subjects in those parts in Obedience to them. But for that I
hear nothing in their Defense, I must be allowed to guess, that either those
Gentlemen have Orders from their Ma^esties unknown to any, th^s to adv^^c^
themselves, or that they mean to cast off their Dependence and Obedience to the
Crown of England. The first of these is dishonorable to suppose, the latter
will end in the utter Ruin of the English interest here, and leave us a prey to
all Nations, when the wild beast shall pass by and tread down the Thiste.

But whatsoever be the Opinion or Resentment of your Gentlemen, I will assure
you Sir the good people here (that are so far quitt of the fright and hurry of
the late and present confusion in these parts) wish that the men of Sechem h^d
hearkened unto Jo^han, that God might have hearkened unto them; and fear lest
the proceeding here as well as with you, being plainly represented at home,
should alarm a ^^st and wise Prince, to take some severe method to keep the
people of these Colonies in a more strict Obedience to the Crown of England
than will agree with our present licentious and ungoverned frame; there being
amongst us men not of the least interest that daily say, they will not be
shuffled out of their Allegiance.

When it shall be seen and understood that the Noise of a French PLOT, and a
Maqua's PLOT, A (...) to BURN the TOWN of BOSTON and to MASSACRE the PEOPLE,
neither have nor ever had the least shadow of truth, but a pure Malicious
Invention on^ey, to persuade the Common People into an ill Opinion of those
appointed to rule and Govern them, and whom in Duty and Conscience they ought
to obey, and being in that manner amused were pushed and hurried into such a
Rising and Convulsion of the Government, without ever considering the effect:

And when it shall be told (as now too truly it may) that the Effect of these
changes, are the total Subversion of their Majesty's Government, the Loss of
the Garrison at Pemaquid, the County of Cornwall, the Province of Main and
other parts, Several hundreds of their Majesty's subjects, the Fishery and
Lumber trade, the Running away of many of our people, who turn Pirates and do
their Countrymen and neighbors the same Mischiefs that the Algerines do upon
the Coasts of the Christians, whilst their Majesty's Ship of War is
dismantled and made useless, the most injust, long, and cruel Confinement and
impris^nment of the Governor, (who was both capable and active on all
occasions for the public good and safety of the Country) several of the
Council, and other persons employed in public Office in the Government, (an
Act, for which ^he (...) world can show no Example or Parallel) and the
Committing of the greatest Routs and Riots, even on the Sabbath day, and many
other inconveniences that daily grow upon us: surely all sober^ and thinking
men cannot but see the Folly and Error of these things, and wish that day had
never been, which has occasioned so great mischiefs and miseryes, of which we
all see the beginning, but none can tell the end.

Amongst the many and false Rumors and Aspersions cast upon his Excellency the
Governor, and spread abroad to bring him into Disreputation with his Prince,
and make him odious to the Common People, I find one (not of the least) taken
notice of by you) very well answered and made of no Weight) which doubtless
Influenced some and was a means to withdraw and delude others, but do not
perceive by your Writeing that you were satisfied in the Falsity as well as the
Weakness of that Assertion.

Therefore that you may be rightly informed in that particular, I must tell
you, That the Peoples taking to Arms, was wholly a Surprise to His
Excellency, and that until they were actually so, he had not the least Advice
or Intimation thereof, and used no other means, but by the force of his
Authority endeavored to Satisfy them; And to that end Hearing that many of
the Council were at the Councill-Chamber, where (it being the ordinary
Council Day) they were to meet, (and some perticularly by him sent for from
Salem and other parts to be there) His Excellency went to them, and desired
their Assistance to pacify the people then in Arms, offering on his part to
do what might be proper for His Majesty's Service and the Good and Welfare of
His Subjects here: but several others of the Chief of the Town and
Magistrates in the late Government being designedly met there, instead of
Complying with his Excellencies Proposalls, and to Support and Maintain the
Government, they lent the Crowd their arm to shake the Tree, and made his
Excellency a Prisoner in the Councill-Chamber, and soon after some of the
Cou^^ill and other Officers that waited on him: An Act much like that of Brutus
to Caesar, abating the difference of the Person, and that they did not stab
him; but kept him a Prisoner to undergo worse Miseryes.

After his Excellency was thus Confined, he was often pressed with (...) to
give Order for the Surrender of the Fort and Castl^, which he absolutely
Refused, and never gave any Order for the Surrender of either, but they were
Forced from the Officers that had the Command of them: If this be a Surrender
of the Government, you and all prudent men may judge: I am sure (as you have
well observed) the Law gives it a quite other Term.

His Excellency had sufficient Authority and Orders from the Crown of England
to secure the Government, which (no doubt) he would have done* had all those in
place discharged their Duties, and the People continued (...) Orders from
England for that purpose, nor had he (...) to appoint Trustees, the King (...)
were sufficient. But it* (...) what a Strong Delusion the people (...) at that
(...) and thou^^^ they had with their Thousands obtain^d a mighty (...) or
Twelve naked persons, and therein (...) God good Service. The Strength of
Government consists in the Obedience of the People, and when that Duty is not
Regarded the Government is soon Overthrown, and all turned into Anarchy and
Confusion; of which we have now a sad Example: for what between an Imaginary
Government and the (...) of the Mo^^le it is hard to know who is uppermost.

I have always considered the Ministry of this Country as that which the
people came into this Wilderness to see, and I hope it shall never be a Reed
shaken with the wind, and their present influence in all parts of the Country
to move the people to bethink themselves of their Causeless and (...) able
Prejudices, Wrath and Rage, their ungodly deeds, and hard Speeches one against
another; and to dispose them to their Duties and Obedience to their Majesty's
Government as established and appointed over them from the Crown of England,
and that they would prove themselves to be Children that will not lie, that God
may become their Savior; is humbly offered as a great part of their Province.

I am ignorant whether from any in these parts you have been written unto since
your letter was made public here, but I am sure your Reasons will be found
true, agreeable to Religion and Law, and what you have said against an
Election, is as true against an Assumption; and what is true of the Avoidance
of the Charte^ of Connecticut, is much more true of that of the Massachusetts;
and ho^ a dependant part of the English Nation can legally come at Government,
at least the Coercive part of it, without a Grant from the Crown, being not to
be found in the ordinary Readings of the Law; may be enquired for at Delphos.

We often say, that every man has a pope in his belly, but I hope nobody
pretends to have a King there, whatever Sovereignty men take to themselves of
opinions in Religion, the Government expects by private persons to be treated
with more Distance and Difference, and will certainly be obeyed.

Sir I have Known you long a true Lover of your Country, of Integrity and
Service in your Place and Station, and account your plainness to your
Countrymen in this great Affair, as the best Service you could offer them,
and am deeply sorry if any other Opinion be ta^en thereof amongst the people,
however I perceive you have what you expected: and the Rewards of Virtue and
public Service are not so soon nor easily gotten.

That all these things may have a happy Composure, and Their Majesty's Subjects
in this their Dominion a due and true Sense of their Duty and Allegiance (which
can only make these Plant^tions happy and flourish) I am very sure is your
desire as well as of (Sir) your Friend and Servant etc.

The Writeing Delivered to James Russell of Charlestowne Esquire by Thomas Graves
Esquire Judge of their Majesty's Inferior Court of pleas, and one of their
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, within the County of Middlesex.
To James Russell of Charlestowne Esquire to be communicated to any others that are
in like manner with your self concerned herein.
Sir, Forasmuch as I am credibly informed, that your self with some other
pretended Magistrates do intend on the first Tuesday in October next, to meet
together at Cambridge to keep a pretended Court of Judicature, not having any
lawful authority from our Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary
enableing you so to do, I therefore considering the obligation lyeing upon me,
by the Commission of the Peace for this County of Middlesex, as also by a
Commission to be Judge of the inferior Court of Pleas in said County, both
from the Crown of England; neither of which (although I have by the late Tumults
(not yet stilled) been hindered from executing the power therein (...)
committed) is yet legally vacated, or superseded: I can do no less to show
(...) Loyalty to the Crown of England th^n to signify unto you, that any such
Me^^^ng can be looked upon no otherwise than as contrary to the peace of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary their Crown and Dignity:
and therefore I must on their Majesti^s behalf warn you, that you presume not
to ass^mble at Cambridge or any other place within this County, for any such
unlawful purpose aforesaid; but that you do at all times be^^ good Faith and
Allegiance to their sacred Majesty's, as you will answer the contrary at your
peril.

Dated in Charlestowne this 21st day of September in the first year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady King WILLIAM and Queen MARY Annoq Dom.
1689:
The Answer of Thomas (...) Esquire. to Mr. Broadstree^e and the Gentlemen met at
the Townhouse* ^n (...) ^oncerning the aforesaid Writing.
Mr. Thomas Greaves being (...) to make his appearance at Boston, on the ^^ of
September. 1689. at which (...). Broadstreete produced a paper which was showed
Mr. Greaves, demanding (...) knew it, (who answered he did) it was proposed for
a Reading, but Mr. (...) made answer, They need not give themselves that
Trouble, for he (...) knew the Contents and owned it to be his Act. But it was
Read; (...) the Reading Mr. Broadstreete made a Speech to Mr. Greaves, in fine
(...), He would say no more till Mr. Greaves made Answer; which he had (...)
prepared in Writing, as follows Viz.

As to the paper delivered to (...) Russell I judge I did but my duty in it,
and therefore cannot in conscience (...) from it, and I shall be ready to
answer King William and Queen Mary whenever (...) any authorized from them
shall call me to account for the same. I am sworn to (...) Crown of England,
and your selves have proclaimed King William* and Queen (...) to be the
rightful Sovereigns of the Realms and Territories belonging thereu^^^*
Therefore I cannot own any Lawful Authority in any until I be (...) informed
that they have Commission from their Sacred Majestyes.

Thomas Greaves.

FINIS.

