The Present State of the New-English Affairs.
This is Published to prevent False Reports
An Extract of a Letter from Mr. Mather, To the Governor, Dated Sept. ^. 1689
from Deal in Kent
The House of Commons Ordered a Bill to be drawn up for the Restoration of
Charters to all Corporations. Some Enemies of New England did bestir themselves
on that Occasion. But it has pleased God to succeed Endeavors and
Solicitations here so far, as that N.E. is particularly mentioned in the Bill.

It has been read twice, and after that referred unto a Committee for
Emendations. What concerns N. England passed without any great opposition. The
Bill has been in part read the third Time, and the Charters of N.-Eng. then
also passed without Objection. Only some Additional Clauses respecting
Corporations here, caused Debates; so that the Bill is not as yet Enacted.

In the latter end of June, a Vessel from Mount Hope arrived here, which
brought your Declaration of April 18. with an account of the Revolution in
New England. The week after I went to Hampton Court, and had the favor to wait
on His Majesty, who told me, That He did accept of, and was well pleased with
what was (...) in New England, and that he would order the Secretary of State
to signify (...) Ancient Rights and Privileges restored to them.

The King has sent a Gracious Letter (which was delivered to me, and if I
return not my self, I shall take care that it be sent to you) bearing Date
August 12. Wherein He signifies His Royal Approbation of what has been done at
Boston, and assures you that the Government there shall be settled, so as shall
be for the Security and Satisfaction of His Subjects in that Colony, and in the
mean time bids you go on to Administer the Laws, and manage the Government,
according as in your Address you have Petitioned.

My Lord Mordent (now Earl of Monmouth) bade me assure you that He would be
your Friend, and he bade me tell you from him, That your Charters should be
restored to you by Act of Parliament.

I have been with most of the Kings most Honorable Privy Council, who have
promised to befriend New England as there shall be occasion for it. The like I
may say, of all the Leading men in the Parliament.

I have been in the Downs a fortnight, and Aboard Mr. (...), several Nights,
but the Wind has been against us. And we now hear that the New Foundland
Convoyes (on whose Assistance we had a Dependence) are gone.

Superscribed To the Honorable Simon Bradstreet, Esquire

Governor of the Massachusetts Colony in N-England.

A Passage extracted from the public News-Letter, Dated July 6. 1689.
The people of New England having made a through Revolution, and secured the
public Criminals. On Thursday last, the Reverend and Learned Mr. Mather,
President of the College, and Minister of Boston, waited on the King; and in a
most Excellent Speech laid before His Majesty, the State of that People;
saying, That they were sober, and Industrious, and fit for Martial Service; and
all with their Lives and Interests were at His Majesty's Command, to tender the
same unto His Majesty: That they desired nothing but His Majesty's Acceptance
of what they had done, and His Protection; and that if His Majesty pleased to
encourage and Commission them, He might easily be Emperor of America. His
Majesty assured him, that He was pleased with what was done for Him, and for
themselves in the Revolution, and that their Privileges and Religion should be
secured unto them.

Extracted from a Letter of Mr. Mather, to his Son, Dated Sept. 2. 1689.
On July 4. The King said unto me, That He did kindly Accept of what was done
in Boston. And that His Subjects in New England should have their Ancient
Rights and Privileges Restored and Confirmed unto them. Yea, He told me, That
if it were in his power to cause it to be done it should be done, and bade me
rest assured of it.

The Charter-Bill is not finished, because some Additional Clauses respecting
Corporations here in England caused a Debate; and the Parliament is for some
weeks Adjourned.

Besides the Letter from the Kings Majesty, whereof we have notice as above;
there is now arrived, an Order from His Majesty to the Government, bearing
Date, July 30. 1689.

Requiring, That Sir Edmund Andross, Edward Randolph, and others, that have
been Seized by the people of Boston, and shall be at the Receipt of these
Commands, Detained there, under Confinement, be sent on Board the first Ship,
bound to England, to answer what may be objected against them.

Boston, Printed and Sold by Samuel Green, 1689.


