BY HIS EXCELLENCY A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS HIS MAJESTY has been graciously pleased, by His Royal Letter, bearing
Date the sixteenth day of October last past, to signify That He has received
undoubted Advice that a great and sudden Invasion from Holland, with an armed
Force of Foreigners and Strangers, will speedily be made (...) an hostile
manner upon His Majesty's Kingdom of ENGLAND; and that although some false
pretenses relating (...) Liberty, Property, and Religion, (contrived or worded
with Art and Subtilty) may be given out, (as shall be thought useful upon such
an Attempt;) It is manifest however, (considering the great Preparations that
are making) That no less matter by this Invasion is proposed and purposed, than
an absolute Conquest of His Majesty's Kingdoms, and the utter Subduing and
Subjecting His Majesty and all His People to a Foreign Power, which is
promoted (as His Majesty understands) although it may seem almost incredible) by
some of His Majesty's Subjects, being persons of wicked and restless Spirits,
implacable Malice, and desperate Designs, who having no sense of former
intestine Distractions, (the Memory and Misery whereof should endear and put a
Value upon that Peace and Happiness with has long been enjoyed) nor being
moved by His Majesty's reiterated Acts of Grace and Mercy, (wherein His Majesty
has studied and delighted to abound toward all His Subjects, and even toward
those who were once His Majesty's avowed and open Enemies) do again endeavor
to embroil His Majesty's Kingdom in Blood and Ruin, to gratify their own
Ambition and Malice, proposing to themselves a Prey and Booty in such a public
Confusion:

And that although His Majesty had Notice that a foreign Force was preparing
against Him, yet His Majesty has always declined any foreign Succor, but
rather has chosen (next under GOD) to rely upon the true and ancient Courage,
Faith and Allegiance of His own People, with whom His Majesty has often
ventured His Life for the Honor of His Nation, and in whose Defense against
all Enemies His Majesty is firmly resolved to live and dye; and therefore does
solemnly Conjure His Subjects to lay aside all manner of Animosities,
Jealousies, and Prejudices, and heartily and Cheerfully to Unite together in
the Defense of His MAJESTY and their native Country, which thing alone, will
(under GOD) defeat and frustrate the principal Hope and Design of His Majesty's
Enemies, who expect to find His People divided; and by publishing (perhaps)
some plausible Reasons of their Coming, as the specious (though false) Presences
of Maintaining the Protestant Religion, or Asserting the Liberties and
Properties of His Majesty's People, do hope thereby to conquer that great and
renowned Kingdom.

That albeit the Design has been carried on with all imaginable Secrecy and
Endeavors to surprise and deceive His MAJESTY, (...) has not been wanting on
His part to make such provision as did become Him, and, by GOD's great
Blessing, His Majesty makes no doubt of being found in so good a Posture that
His Enemies may have cause to repent such their rash and (...) Attempt. ALL
WHICH, it is His Majesty's pleasure, should be made known in the most public
manner to his loving Subjects within this His Territory and Dominion of
NEW ENGLAND, that they may be the better prepared to resist any Attempts that
may be made by His Majesty's Enemies in those parts, and secured in their trade
and Commerce with His Majesty's Kingdom of England.

I Do therefore, in pursuance of His MAJESTY s Commands, by these Presents make
known and Publish the same accordingly: And hereby Charge and Command all
Officers Civil and Military, and all other His Majesty's loving Subjects within
this His Territory and Dominion aforesaid, to be Vigilant and Careful in their
respective places and stations, and that, upon the Approach of any Fleet or
Foreign Force, they be in Readiness, and use their utmost Endeavor to hinder
any Landing or Invasion that may be intended to be made within the same.

Given at Fort-Charles at Pemaquid, the Tenth Day of January, in the Fourth
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES the Second, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith etc. Annoque DOMINI 1688.

E. ANDROS.
By His EXCELLENCY's Command. JOHN WEST, d'. Secr'.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Boston in New England by R. P.


