From a Gentleman of BOSTON To a Friend in the COUNTRY.
SIR,
THE Motions of Divine Providence in our Days, have been stupendous,
especially in present Appearances for Deliverance to Gods Israel; not only in
Europe, and our own Nation; but among our selves, who were reckoned as
Outcasts, whom none did seek after. We cannot but Recognize our Late Danger,
when we were in the Mouth of the Lion, and Paw of the Bear: And Mavelous
Protection from being made a Prey to their Teeth. Our present Deliverance is no
less Remarkable, being in so strange and wonderful a way, in which were such
evident Footsteps of Gods Presence, as scarce any Age can Parallel; such a
Spirit was Raised, United and Governed, to take the fittest Season, and the
best way for the breaking the Nets of the Wicked, and making way for the Escape
of the Birds that were Entangled in them. Surely great and thankful
Acknowledgments are due to God upon this account; and we cannot better express
them, than, by seeing and owning God in them, and depending on him for the
perfecting thereof. It is far more easy to pull down an House, than to build
it, and to get, then well to use a Victory. It Is Storied of Hannibal, he
excelled in the first, but fatally mist it in the other. My Hearty Prayer is,
so good a work as has been so successfully begun, may not be endangered by ill
management.

1 Either by provoking God to withdraw his helping Hand, by proud insulting
over Fallen Enemies: Read that Scripture, Proverbs 24.17, 18. And beware, it
becomes Children to be afraid when their Father is Angry, though with a naughty
Servant.

2. Or by differing and dividing Apprehensions among our selves, either by
groundless Jealousies of each other in the present Care for our Safety, or
various Opinions about the way and time of settling the Government: Two things
I find there are in which most Sober Men vary: The one is, for making an
ELECTION this Year: The other, rather for the Re-assuming our present Standing
and Adjourned Court: This latter seems most Eligible, for the following Reasons.

1. The time is Lapsed for Nomination according to our Law.

2. We are not in a fit frame nor posture for a present Choice.

3. The Magistrates and Deputies Chosen in 86. Were Chosen for the Year, but
were by force hindered; and that quickly from Discharging their Duty, and
therefore it is yet to do.

4 They are a standing Court, and Adjourned, and need only their Appearing and
Sitting to fix us where we were.

5. They most of them exposed themselves by their Last Act for its Continuance,
as will appear by the Writing hereunto Annexed.

6. If the Election Day pass, they may then appear at Liberty to perform what
the people expected by their Choice, and they engaged by Accepting; And the
next day to the Day of ELECTION, is thought fit that our Magistrates and
Deputies should reassume the Government.

7. They have power to judge any of their Members, whether they be fit for
their Station.

8. They have also power, and we doubt not of their willingness to take in Free
men under qualifications of Sobriety, and some Interest in the Country by
Estate.

9. There is more Reason to take up with the Government as so Adjourned, then
to make a new Choice, for that cannot be done without them.

You may Communicate this to whom you please, That God may guide us into, and
unite us in the way of Peace is the Prayer of Yours,

N. N.


