The Charitable Samaritan.

A SERMON On the tenth Chapter of Luke, Ver. 30 -- 35. Pronounced in the French
Church At BOSTON.

By Ezechiel Carre formerly Minister of Rochechalais in France, now Minister of
the French Colony in Narrhaganset.

Translated into English by N. Walter.

BOSTON, Printed by Samuel Green 1689.

Advertisement.
The Occasion which made way for this Sermon is this: The Author being obliged
to bestow some part of his Ministry on the French Church of Boston, until it
should please God to provide for it, he was much surprised to observe that for
many Sabbaths; this Church contrary to its custom, extremely neglected Alms
toward the Poor, which our Discipline recommends at the conclusion of each
exercise; this made him take a resolution to Creat of this Subject, which he
has done in this Sermon. The Church seemed to be moved therewith, and some
particular persons acquitted the Author to give it them to publish, which one
of them now does.

Moreover, if it appear in English, it is not because we have a mind to
trespass on the Rights of others, but it is because it was impossible here to
Print it in its natural Congue: however it will produce this effect, if no
other. it will manifest the Uniformity of the Doctrine of Protestants from the
most distant places in the World; and that the great Traject of Sea which has a
long time separated us hinders not but that in the main we may have the same
Sentiments.

God give an happy Success to our innocent Designs.

To Mr. John Pastre, French Merchant, Refugee in BOSTON.
SIR,
I Present you with the Sermon you Requested of me, you are absolutely the
Master thereof, and may do with it what you please. I shall not oppose so much
as with a feigned modesty, the publication of it; on the other hand I shall be
satisfied with it: for I account it a great Honor God puts on his Servants,
that they may instruct his Faithful Ones in all places and in all times.
Likewise I assure my self that you will not be displeased to read sometimes
that which you delighted to hear, and to share a part of that satisfaction to
your Friends. Our little Colony will chiefly have obligation to you, for hereby
you will in some sort justify them against those Calumnies, whereby some would
render our Retirement into this new World suspected: for persons may easily
perceive, that those who maintain such Doctrine, and have exposed themselves to
so many dangers and miseries on the account of it, cannot reasonably pass for
Papists, and that it is uncharitable and uncompassionate to accuse them as
such. I would believe that it is this interest, rather than any other, which
will oblige you to bring this Sermon to light. In recompense whereof, I do, in
the name of all my Flock, wish a thousand blessings on your Person and
Concerns. These are the Prayers he makes to God who is most sincerely,

Sir, Your most Humble and most Affectionate Servant Carre Minister.

A Prefatory Recommendation Of the SERMON, with a brief Account of the Late
French Persecution.
THe New-English Reader is here entertained with a Sermon Pronounced in the
French Congregation at Boston, by a Reverend Minister of that Nation, at this
time a Refugee among us; and the Doctrine therein delivered sufficiently
discovers the Worthy Author to be a Christian, and a Protestant, that may
challenge a Room in our best affections. It is none of my Business here to
Argue in defense of every particular Notion or Expression occurring here: For
if the compassionate Samaritan himself have not escaped the profane Lashes of
those exquisite Chyrurgeons, who say, It Was ill done to pour Oil into a Wound;
not considering that besides the use of common Oil in wounds that reach not the
Bone, Oil kept until the age have destroyed the Salt of it, is one of the
greatest Balsoms in the World; much more may a popular Discourse on the
compassionate Samaritan meet with censures from such as love to criticize, and
seek none saporem led scientiam. All I shall observe is, that as it is the
compassionate Samaritan, that is here with an acceptable ingenuity Discoursed
on; So with the Bowels of a compassionate Samaritan, we ought here to reflect
upon the dismal Persecution, which has driven this Learned Person, and his
Congregation hither. It Is a Persecution which all the Cruelties and Butcheries
perpetrated by the Children of Cain, in former Ages, hardly equal; and the
Characters of it, whether we consider the beginning of it with the Banishment
of the Pastors, as it were on purpose to reserve them for the approaching
Resurrection of the slain Witness; or whether we consider the various kinds of
Barbarity exercised by it upon the remaining Churches in Tortures which would
have rendered the worst of Deaths a most easy pleasant eligible thing unto the
miserable Sufferers; I say, its Characters are altogether Extraordinary.

After innumerable previous Abuses and Injuries, at the year 1680, the poor
Protestants in France found themselves loosing all sorts of Offices, until at
length not so much as a Midwife of that Religion might be allowed. The
new-Converts were discharged from the payment of their Debts; and the Resolved
Confessors might not sell their own Estates, to assist their escape from the
Storm now breaking on them; but instead thereof, were forced to bear all the
Duties and Charges of their Apostate Neighbors; And Parents were compelled to
bear the Expenses of a Popish Education for their own Children, whom they had
rather seen perishing in the Rivers of Egypt. When the project was grown ripe
for it, the French Tyrant employes a vast Army of Dragoons for the afflicting
and Reducing of the many scores of thousands of Protestants, whom the former
Temptations had not yet overcome. The Leaders of these New Apostles first
Summoned the Inhabitants of the several Towns together, to let them know, 'twas
the Kings pleasure they should turn Roman Catholics; and the poor people
humbly Replying, That they would gladly sacrifice their Lives and Estates in
the Service of the King, out their Consciences were to be disposed of, by none
but God alone. These Dragons then furiously possessed themselves of the several
Towns, and were every where quartered in the Houses of the Protestants, like
Locusts devouring all before them. When these Monsters had wasted all the Goods
of this distressed People, they then fell upon their Persons. After the most
bitter Excerations, these Tormentors would hang up the poor People by their
Feet, and making of great Smokes under them, would almost choke them. If then
they would not Sign an Abjuration, they tossed them to and fro into great
Fires, till they were almost Roasted; and sometimes plunge them down into deep
Wells, till they were half Drowned there. They stripped others Naked, and pricked
them with Fins and Bodkins, till they could endure no more; and others they led
about by the Noses with Pincers holding of them. Some they kept waking, by
cruel Punches and Noises, for many Days and Nights together, till they utterly
thereby lost their Wits; and others that were sick they would with Drams in
their Chambers give all possible vexation to. In some places they bound Men and
Ravished their Wives and Daughters before their eyes: In other places they
pull' off the Nails, and scorched and scalded the Feet of the more constant
Confessors, using therewithal ten thousand other Cruelties, which none but the
wit of Devils could have invented for them. And if none of these things brought
the Protestants to Renounce the Truth of the Lord Jesus, they were cast into
horrible Dungeons, where they pined away to Death. If any were caught making an
Essay to fly away, they were treated with Cruelties more intolerable (if any
could be so) than those that have been related; and never were wild Beasts
pursued with such Eagerness and watchfulness, as these poor Lambs were by their
Wolvish Persecutors.

Nevertheless, many Thousands of the Protestants, found a merciful Providence
assisting of their Escape; and some of them have Arrived unto New England,
where before they came, there were Fastings and Prayers Employed for them, and
since they came, they have met with some further Kindness, from such as know
how to Sympathize with their Brethren. We have cause to think, that the
Resurrection of the slain Witnesses in France, is now very near; and if any of
us have been Compassionate Samaritans toward this afflicted people, we shall
Rejoice with them, in the Redemption which draws nigh.

In the mean time, as it is my Hope, That the English Churches will not fail in
Respects to any that have endured hard Things for their Faithfulness to the Son
of God; So it is my Prayer, That the French may not Loose what they have
wrought: nor after their prodigious Trials, come forth any otherwise, than as
Gold out of the Fire: and that if any among them, have Labored under any
unhappy Distemper after all, the Ensuing Sermon may prove, not an Extreme
Unction, but a Balsamum Samaritanum for them.

Farewell Reader, and since now the Compassionate Samaritan, by the Accurate
Translations of an Ingenious Person, speaks English, Entertain him with the
Courtesy which his Character Entitles him unto.

Cotton Mather.

In the Name of God.
Luke 10. 30, 35. And Jesus answered and said, a certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell amongst Thieves, which stripped him of his
Raiment, and wounded him with many wounds, etc.
THough every Nation has an extreme propensity to applaud it self, we may
notwithstanding assert, that no one ever had so high an opinion of it self as
that of the Jews. There was nothing more common amongst them than to beast
themselves to be the People of God, to have his Temple and his Laws, to be the
Children of Abraham, etc. and therefore they esteemed themselves more holy and
perfect than the rest of Mankind, and the only people capable of reaching to
the possession of Happiness. Jesus Christ, my Brethren, vigorously attempted
the disabusing this people of these bold conceits, in sundry occasions: It Is
this he discovers by the Conversion of the Samaritan Woman, (John 4.) for it
then visibly appeared that the Jews were not the alone people that were called
to the possession of Heaven, as they pretended. He again endeavors to pull
down their pride, ( Luke 17.) by the healing the ten Leprous Persons, whereof
nine were Jews, who gave not thanks to God; but only one who was a Samaritan,
and testified his Acknowledgments. And here likewise Jesus Christ takes
accasion to disabuse them of that unjust and bold Preoccupation in which (...)
them, by representing to them a Samaritan (...) charity the Priests and
Levites; a man says Christ (...) from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among
Thieves

It (...) the design of this discourse from the prec^^ (...) You there see a
Teacher of the Law propound^^ (...) to Jesus Christ, thereby to surprise him;
Master, (...) What must I do to inherit Eternal Life? thereupon Jesus Christ
willing to insinuate unto him, that it was the observation of the Law, asks
him, What is written in the Law, and ^^at read thou? the Lawyer answers him,
in giving an abridgment of the two Tables of the Law, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and
love thy Neighbor as thy self. Jesus Christ approving his knowledge prescribes
him the practice, do these things says he, and thou shall live. The Lawyer
willing to justify himself in the observation of this Law, and to show that he
had well practiced the same, demands of him, who is his Neighbor? imagining
that he was obliged to do good to none but his Friends and Acquaintance,
comprizing in the name of Neighbor only those of his own Nation. But Jesus
Christ to disabuse him represents to him in this parable that all men were his
Neighbors, even those that were least known to him and his most cruel enemies,
such as was the Samaritan; but he remarks yet farther another default in these
Hypocrites, which was, that they made their Charity to consist only in words
and in the exterior, he here discovers to them by the example of this
Samaritan, that it consists in real actions and in the good Service which we
perform. Thus you see what is the intention of Jesus Christ in the discourse
but now read unto you.

The first consideration which arises upon this Text is, that some will forth
with enquire whether it be a Parable or an History. Some say that it is an
History, and this is the common opinion; others hold that it is a Parable,
because here are no names specified: for my own part, I account it both a
History and a Parable, and that the History is the foundation of the Parable.
There seems to me to be in Scripture two sorts of Parabolical Discourses; some
are purely such, as the Parable of the Sower, that of the Ten Virgins, etc.
These are Discourses which have no reality, but are designedly invented to draw
from thence some excellent Moralities. But there are other sorts of Parables
which humane wisdom cannot imitate, and which have a character wholly Divine,
these are such as are founded upon some real fact. Thus I doubt not, but that
there was a bad Rich Man, a Prodigal Child and wicked Servants, etc. Whom
Christ out of Charity names not, upon whose actions he composed those excellent
Discourses which we read in the Evangelists. These sorts of Parables are so
much the more considerable, as these Histories which furnish them with matter,
are particular events which Providence has prepared, whereon to build Heavenly
Truths. This Parable here is of this number, there was then heretofore a man
wounded by Robbers in the Highway of Jerusalem, there was a Priest and a
Levite so uncompassionate as not to succor him, which through their neglect a
Samaritan did. But these surprising occurrences represented excellent Mysteries
in a spiritual sense. I have then two things to examine in this Text: First I
will explain the History, secondly, the Parable. On the one hand, I will show
the Literal Sense which is here (...); on the other hand, I will discover the
Mystical Sense here hidden. God give us grace, that being animated by the
example of this Samaritan, which we have this day set before our eyes, we may
in all ways manifest our Charity toward our Neighbors, and even toward our
most cruel Enemies, that so we may one day inherit eternal Life. Amen.

God, my Brethren, has so disposed of things in this world, that he has given
to men their diverse Scituations; they do not all compose one and the same City;
because by that means they would not enjoy the different commodities which he
has dispersed throughout the diverse Regions of the World: but has settled them
in many Cities, between which he has placed a certain distance, that men might
maintain some sort of commerce with one another. And for the entertaining this
Society, God has given to every one its advantages; thus Jerusalem had not the
Balm nor Gardens of Jericho, neither had Jericho the Miraculous Waters or
August Temple of Jerusalem. So that for mutual communication there was an
Highway between these two Cities. This was also a place very proper for
Robbers who do commonly make choice of the most frequented ways. Thus St.
Jerome relates, that between Jerusalem and Jericho, there was a place called
Adommim, which was full of Thieves, and where they ordinarily robbed
Passengers. Thus you see that it is very much to the purpose (whether you
consider this Discourse as an History, or as a Parable) That Jesus Christ
brings in this man going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and falling into the
hands of Thieves.

These Wretches aimed more at his Goods, than at his Life, they stripped him.
Our Habits were given to us to cover our shame; but it oftentimes happens, that
we make them the matter of our P ride They are ordained to defend us against
the injuries of the Weather; but through our vanity they many times become the
occasions to expose us to the assaults of Robbers, these magnificent Garbs make
them presume that we are in great plenty, which excites the wicked to diverse
temptations, it is a bait which the Devil exposes to the eyes of Robbers, as men
lay baits for those Creatures they have a mind to surprise. These men here no
sooner saw this man, clothed (according to appearance) richly, but they seized
him, and stripped him.

But as we do not willingly permit the things we lawfully possess to be taken
from us, so this man opposes them, he endeavors to repel violence by violence;
he makes use of his utmost resistance to hinder the taking away his Goods; but
his attempts are unprofitable, he yields to their fury, he falls wounded with
many blows. It Is the ordinary consequent of Theft and Robbery, that after they
have a considerable time pillaged the Goods of their Neighbor, they find
amongst those they unjustly rob, some, who oppose their violence with their
utmost force, so that the Thieves are thereby engaged to take away the Life of
those whose Goods they have a mind to enjoy. Thus Coveteousness is the fountain
of all sorts of evils, it is the Mother of Theft, Robbery, Murder, Violence,
inhumanity, etc. for these Wretches after they had wounded this man with many
wounds, leave him half dead.

There were two reasons moved them to go their way. The one was the danger they
would be in, if found near a man whom they had a little before evilly treated
with so much cruelty; they feared to be accused as the Authors of this Murder,
and to be punished according to their Crime. But I doubt not also but it was
the horror of their action which obliged them to remove further from this man.
A Sinner who sees his Crime before his eyes, endeavors to remove it from his
fancy. He loves not a sight which occasions him so many disquietments and
perplexities; he turns from it as much as he can. These Wretches go their way,
leaving this man half dead.

Jesus Christ thus already begins to pull down the pride of the Jews seeing he
discovers to them that between Jerusalem and Jericho such abominable actions
were committed: these people could not be so holy as they boasted themselves to
be, since it is evident, the Highways were full of Murders and Violencies.
But what happened in this adventure? by chance there came down a P riest that
way, and saw this man thus Murdered just expiring, and he passed by on the
other side; so likewise a Levite coming to the place, and seeing him, passed by
on the other side of him.

These two were Brethren to the wounded man, of the same blood, of the same
Nation, of the same Religion; and if these Wretches would do no good for
Strangers, yet at least they ought to have done it for their dying Brother.

These two men who read the Law, and expounded it every day, ought not they to
have kept in mind that excellent passage of Scripture, Thou shall not hide thy
self from thine own Flesh? Isa. 58. 7. Nevertheless these uncompassionate men
turned away and passed on the other side.

Ah my Brethren! it appears from hence, that there is a great difference
between the Preaching Charity, and the practicing of it. God had entrusted his
Oracles with this P riest and Levite; it was they who ought to have instructed
others but if it be they do not what they Preach all their Discourses, are but
as sounding-brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1.

I know that they wanted no excuse, there is no Sinner that does. This Levite
would not have failed to say, It behooves me to hasten, that I may go and gather
in the Tithes that I may be at leisure to follow my Occupation* and that I may
instruct my people; The other might say, I must employ my self about my
Sacrifices, and present the Offerings to the Lord, etc. But do thou not know,
O profane Priest, that God says, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, Hos. 6.
6. and thou blind Levite, you Tithe Mint, Annis Cummin, and neglect the
weightier matters of the Law; these things ought thou to have done, and not
to have left the other undone, Matthew. 23. 23.

Being both Teachers in Israel, they ought to have know how to distinguish, in
their Duty, that which there was Mor^^ from that which there was Ceremonial;
and to understand that what was Moral ought to go first. Nevertheless th^^ went
more upon the Observation of they Ceremonies, than upon the exercise of
Charity, which is an unjust preferrence. Also it is, when oftentimes we
dispense with a Duty which contrary to our worldly interest, under pretext of
another although much inferior to it; without considering that the lesser
should give way to the greater. By this rule of sol^ and true Piety, this
Priest and this Levite were under an obligation to have left their Tithes and
their Offerings, to have Relieved this poor Wretch.

Behold a Samaritan far better instructed in the Law of Charity, who passing by
the same way, is touched with Compassion, and drawing near to this poor dying
Wretch, wound up his Wounds, etc. See the difference between these two sorts of
people, this Priest and Levite were persons chosen by God for the practice of
this Charity, but they did it not. Oh God! What ingratitude is here? and the
Samaritan on the other hand without any obligation (than that of Piety) does
it; here observe, that oftentimes, those whom God calls to be Exemplary to
others do their duty the least of any.

But take notice hereof the excess of Charity in this Samaritan. There was an
irreconcilable hatred between these two people; the Jews and the Samaritans
set up Altar against Altar. Jesus the Son of Syrac speaks on this wise.
Nevertheless this Samaritan no sooner beheld this miserable Creature but he had
(...) He might have reasoned with himself and said, If I should come near this
dying man they may accuse me for killing of him, at the least they will have
evil thoughts of me, because of the hatred which is between our Nations; but
Charity is not suspicious; he never stands to reason, because his heart is
touched, besides he might (to hinder his giving any thing to this poor wounded
man) have said, I have need of it my self, I may give that which I may one day
find the want of; But Charity seeks not her own interest, 1 Cor. 13. 5. She
adores Providence, she causes to hope that God will make good with great
advantage all those Goods which we generously expend for the relief of the
poor, as he did of old to the Widow of Sarepta, 1Kings 17.

After all, This, Samaritan in his drawing near this wounded man to relieve
him, did it not out of ostentation, for he appears alone on the way, but merely
from the consideration of this man's misery; many give their Alms to be seen of
men, and if they come near the Poor to bestow any thing, it is through vain
glory; and it is properly their ambition that gives their Alms, and not their
Charity; but here it was the heart that gave, He was touched with Compassion for
the poor man.

It does well appear that his pity was sincere, since it produced such great
effects, he bound up his wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his
own Beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him, etc. this Wine and
Oil the poor Samaritan carried with him for his own nourishment; but how dear
soever his Aliments be to him, he willingly sacrifices them to the recovering
this wounded man.

He did not as those do, who come to the poor with useless Promises, and store
of wishes, but give them nothing. Oh great abuse! This man does not so; but
coming unto him. he bound up his wounds. Behold what Charity is here (...) have
commonly a loathing of such things, but Charity (...) him to go beyond all
these Repugnancies of nature. He does more, he poured in Oil and Wine. These
are Remedies made use of for wounds; God having given to these two excellent
Creatures not only the virtues to preserve the health of a man, but also to
Restore it when amiss.

But he stops not there, he set him on his own Beast, and brought him to an
Inn, he willingly incommodes himself to ease the wounded man, he saw that his
feet could not carry him, and therefore helped him upon his Horse, and for fear
least some accident should happen to him by the way, he conducted him himself,
and led him to such a place as Government had established for the convenience
of Travelers; no sooner is he arrived there, but he took care of him.

He thought himself not discharged of his duty toward this man, if through his
neglect, his wounds should have been exasperated, he therefore looks to him
afresh.

But being obliged to depart on the morrow, he took twopence, and gave them to
the Host, and said unto him, take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest
more, when I come again, I will Repay thee.

This Samaritan you see spared nothing, no, not that which men love most, his
money he paid the Host; he recommends the wounded person to his care, and
promises at his return to make him a full payment for all the time that he
should be with him. How excellent a period has Charity? how general? how
Distinguished? every thing in it contributed to the benefit of this poor
wretch; with his heart he was moved to compassion, with his hands he bound up
his wonnds, with his feet he drew near to relieve him, with his money he paid
for him, and left wherewithal afterward for his entertainment.

Second Part. Beloved Brethren, if I had naught else in my view but what the
Letter presents, I should here finish my Reflection; but we must make a
discovery of the mystery that is here hid, thoroughly to see what the Text
presents.

And in regard thereof it may be said, that the man here represented to us
going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, is Adam, coming forth of the hands of his
Creator, Jerusalem here is Heaven, which is the vision of peace, the City of
the great King; Jericho signifies in Hebrew an Orchard or a good smelling
place. This was Terrestrial Paradise. This here was the estate of man in
Innocence* at the beginning of the world; but what happened to this man, he met
with Thieves who stripped him; These Thieves are his Passions which in causing
him to sin. Robbed him of his Innocence; they were in his heart as in a hidden
place, and therefore he had no mistrust of them; so that he fell through
inadvertancy into their Snares.

The head of these Thieves is the Devil that Roaring Lion, who seeks whom he
may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. or else in the Prophets terms, which lies in wait
secretly as a Lion in his Den, he does catch the poor when he draws him into
his Net, Psalm 10 9.

How ere it was, these Thieves stripped him, they took from him all those good
qualities God had clothed him withal; they spoiled him of his Original
Righteousness, which encompassed him about in his innocence as a precious
Garment, and after this Loss he found himself so naked, that he went to hide
himself amongst the Trees in the Garden, and sought out FigLeaves to cover
himself, altogether ashamed of his Nakedness.

But this was not all the inhumanity these Thieves exercised toward him: they
wounded him with many wounds. Those are the cruel wounds that he received in
his Soul, by the assault of his passions, his Understanding was darkened, his
Will was corrupted, his Reason was Dethroned, and as before she was Queen of
the Soul, she became a Slave to the Senses.

A very sad Estate, but yet behold worse!

These Thieves so evilly entreated this man that they left him half dead; this
is the Condition of Man by Sin, he Languishes, he is cast down and cannot get
up.

True it is, a man half dead, sometimes may lift up his eyes to Heaven, or stir
his Arms as oftimes in struggling, but these signs of Life are but the
forerunners of his Death.

What then? Has a Sinner any ability for Grace? shall we say that man in his
Natural Corruption then is not Dead in Sin (as our Religion teaches;) but he is
wounded, he is but half dead. This is exactly the Tale of the Pelagians and of
the Jesuits.

For Answer,

But First, Let me ask, Whether a man deadly wounded can heal himself? If he is
left of all other succor, he must unavoidably perish. It is the same with the
Sinner in his Natural Estate, the Bite which the old Serpent has made in his
Heart is a mortal wound; for the wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6. 23. He then
undoubtedly perishes without the help of Grace:

But Secondly, I say, That man is both dead, and half-dead at the same time;
Dead, with regard to himself, but halfdead in regard to God. The Sinner of
himself, is no more able to come out of his Estate of Natural Corruption, to
the Life of Grace, than to raise himself when dead; but God can without a
Miracle Regenerate this Sinner, and cause those Faculties which before were
capable of naught but evil, fruitful in all virtuous actions.

3. In fine we may say that man is but half-dead to Grace, inasmuch as he has
the Faculties to Repent, and a Spirit capable of knowing Good, a Will that
might love and do the same; but he is dead as to the usage of these faculties;
he knows not how to will to repent, this is a moral Impotency; which is so much
the more Criminal, as it is fuller of Malice and Stubborness.

Man being in this Condition two sorts of persons approach him, but yet could
not Relieve him, first a Priest, for all the Sacrifices of old in effect could
never save the Sinner. The blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of a
Heifer sanctified none but such as were polluted as to the Flesh, but in no
wise reached the Spots of the Soul; the use of Sacrifices practiced by the
Nations time out of mind was more through the secret feelings of their
imperfections before the Divinity, than in imitation of the People of God, they
make a large Discovery of Sin, but give no help to the Sinner. They have showed
the wound without binding it up, and to speak according to the sense of my
Text, they came within sight, but would come no nearer; I shall say if you
will, That the lawful Sacrifices might cause an hope of healing, but they give
none; seeing this Priest by this wounded man one might hope that he would take
compassion on him, but it was all that he did, for he passed by on the other
side, and left him in his misery.

There came by afterward a Levite, who was no more favorable to this poor
wounded man than the Priest.

This Levite is the Law by the Ministry of Moses, and the works of the Law.
This Levite saw well the evil, but he gave no Remedy thereto. The Law discovers
sin, but takes it not away; therefore by the works of the Law, no* Flesh shall
be justified before God, Romans 3. 20. but by the Law we come to the Knowledge of
Sin. This Levite* seeing the wounded* person, went on the other side.

But in fine, behold a Samaritan, who coming that way, went to him, saw him,
and had Compassion on him.

Jesus Christ my Brethren, is this Samaritan, that does that which the Law and
the Sacrifices could not do, but why is Jesus Christ here Represented by a
Samaritan?

Answer, It may be in allusion to his Name, for Samaritan signifies
Conservator; which very well agrees to our Savior; but more than that, he was
the object of the Jews hatred, Thou art a Samaritan said they to him, and have
a Devil. Where we may observe, That Jesus Christ answered, I have no Devil, but
did not say, I am not a Samaritan; his infinite wisom would not Remove those
thoughts they had of his being a Samaritan (in some sense) because it was he
which performed the function of this Samaritan.

First, This Samaritan as he Journeyed came to the place where this wounded Man
was. Jesus Christ left his Country, which was Heaven; he appeared here below
as a Traveller.

The Samaritan drew near, the sick man Christ draws near to us because we
cannot draw near to him. He draws near to us by his Gospel, by his Sacraments,
by his Grace; but he in person drew near to us when His Divine Person was
joined with the Humane Nature in Him, and that he conversed amongst men.

Thus it was that this mystical Samaritan seeing this wounded person, was moved
with compassion, Jesus Christ from Heaven beholding Mankind in perdition, is
so touched with Compassion, that he came down to help them.

Yea, Lord Jesus our adorable Savior, it was thy mercy alone that moved thee
to come down from Heaven upon the Earth for the Salvation of men ( must it
needs be? did thou say, considering our (...)) must it needs be, that I leave
so many Sinners to perish, must it be that for the disobedience of one man,
though overcome with weakness that all Mankind should be Exposed to Everlasting
Punishment; I have a Remedy in my power. Thus Lord thou art touched with
Compassion.

This Divine Savior stops not there, he undertakes the healing of the Sinner,
and coming to him he bound up his wounds, those were Sins that were his Wounds,
they caused in him a lively sense of Grief, and threatened him with a speedy
Death: but behold, an Almighty Physician that put to his hands, and bound up
his Wounds!

This, my Brethren, Christ did in his publishing the Law of Grace: this was the
first Dressing which he applied; this offer of Salvation quieted a little his
grief, and let him see the means to obtain Healing.

After this, This Samaritan pours in Oil and Wine, the one to Cleanse, the
other to Assuage; this is a Token of what Jesus Christ has done for our
Salvation. The Threatenings wherewith he accompanies his Gospel is the sharp
Wine, that causes the horribleness of Sin to be felt; the promises which he
joins therewith, is the Oil which sweetens our hopes. He that believes in the
Son has life eternal, John 3. 35* behold the Oil which asswages the Wound; He
that believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him: here you see the sharpness of the Wine; Jesus Christ at the beginning of
his Dispensation, applied this Wine, by the Ministry of John Baptist, Mat. 3.
Generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come?
and himself applies the Oil in his Blessings, Mat. 5. where he intends the true
happiness of Christ in us. This is the way* which God takes for the healing of
every Sinner. Hence David was so extremely Censued by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. he
presently denounces the judgments of God; behold the Wine, which is poured in
the wound; but afterward he declares to him that God had received him to
mercy. That is the Oil which asswages the bitterness of Soul in this poor
Sinner.

Again, What does not this Samaritan do for this wounded person; he alights
from his Horse and helped him on his Beast* Christ was Abased to advance us, he
made himself poor to make us rich, he came down from the highest degree of
glory, to raise us up; he was King of the World, and of the Church, and yet
took on him the form of a Servant, for to make us Kings to God his father; he
became mortal and a Sufferer, for to make us mortal and glorious; in a word he
suffered Death to give us life, according to the Oracle of the Prophet, By his
stripes we are healed, Isa. 53. 5.

The Samaritan conducted the wounded person to an Inn; This is the Christian
Church; which is the refuge of Sinners. There it is where all are free to
enter, whether Jew or Greek.

Without any distinction, such places were appointed for the relief of
Travelers, and they were no sooner come into those public places but they
washed their feet, Genesis 18. 4. It Is in the Christian Church that the Sinner
finds Relief of his troubles, here it is where not only his Feet but his hands
and his head is washed, etc. John 13. 9. It Is in the Christian Church also
where he is nourished with the word of God, and his Sacraments, that is the
Manna which the faithful that Travel in the Desert of this World are fed with
in this (...).

There it is in fine where Jesus Christ takes care of the Sinner, It Is in the
Christian Church where he bestows his necessary Remedies for their Spiritual
Maladies, there he applies the virtue of his merit, and Displays the Efficacy
of his Grace; there he bestows the Balm of Gilead, which are the Consolations
of his Spirit, his Merit justifies the Sinner, his Grace regenerates him, his
Spirit comforts and fills him with Joy unspeakable; and so the Sinner comes to
be healed.

David was sensible of his need thereof, Psalm 51. Purge me with Hysop, and I
shall be clean; says he, verse 9. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow; he
had in his thoughts the Sacrifice and precious. Blood of Jesus Christ to blot
out his sins, in verse 10. he begs of God, to Create a clean heart in him,
'twas his Grace* which he desired to sanctify him; in verse 12. he beg to
receive of him the Joy of his Salvation, which is the consolation which a
Sinner enjoys, who knows that his sins are forgiven him.

But the better to show the degrees of the love of Jesus Christ in its utmost
extent, we need only to observe what he further does for the Sinner; on the
morrow when he departed, he took out twopence, and gave them to the Host; he
paid our Debt, in discharging our sins, he satisfied the justice of God for us,
he gave himself a ransom for us, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Our sins are real Debts
according to the Idea of our Savior in his Divine Prayer, (or if you will)
Death is our Debt, for it is what the Law violated did require, Genesis 2. 17.
Jesus Christ in undergoing it for us paid our Debt, which he did before his
departure into the Heavens, before he entered into his own Mansion, when he dyed
upon the Cross.

After which he recommends his Children unto the Host, bidding him to take care
of them.

1. He recommends them to the Holy Ghost, in whose hands he left them; he
prays him to comfort them,, to bind up their wounds, and to sanctify them,
take care of them: He recommends them also unto God his Father, which he did in
a most authentic manner, in that fervent prayer in the 17 th of St. John, and
chiefly the 11 th verse, Holy Father, says he, Keep in thy Name these whom
thou have given me, to the end they may be one as we are; etc. and finally he
recommends them to the Ministers, to whom he has given his Keys, his Word and
Sacraments, that Wine, and that Oil that closes up the wounds of sinners: Yes
it is to us that you are recommended, my Brethren, we are your Hosts, you lodge
in our hearts, you are nourished by the Word which we Preach, comforted by our
Exhortations, healed by our Spiritual Medicines.

Jesus Christ concludes with this engagement, All that thou spendest more when
I come again I will repay thee.

Jesus Christ must come in a* short time to render to-each according to his
works (Romans 2. 6.)

But he here respects particularly the reward he will give to his Servants, he
will give to his Ministers what they have been out over and above; It Is to what
the other parable answers in Mat. 25. 14. -- -- 30. of those Servants that
improved* the Talents their Lord entrusted them withal, he caused them to enter
into his joy, and confirmed them in greater Authority than they had before,
according to that maxim of our Recompensor, To him that has shall be given,
whosoever then shall have an overplus of his Talents, shall receive so much the
more. It Is in the same sense he here promises to restore to his Servants the
overplus.

But what the Ministers of the Gospel are they able to give any overplus, to
the sufferings of the Savior of the World? he has by his Death discharged our
Debts, and yet nevertheless he tells his Ministers, that if in his absence,
that is, since his Ascension into Heaven, they bestow any thing overplus, he
will restore it to them again at his coming at the last day: Do we then say
with the Church of Rome, that the Saints and the Martyrs by their works of
Superarogation have made as it were an addition to the Sufferings of Jesus
Christ, and that it is this overplus, the Lord here promises to compensate?

Answer, God forbid, Brethren, for that is to associate the creatures with the
Creator, this is to make of the Saints and Martyrs so many Mediators and
Redeemers, and finally would make God beholding to Men, because at this rate
they would perform more than they owe.

Rather let us say, my Brethren;

First, That we must not always so strongly press all the Expressions in
Parables, and that these sort of mystical Discourses having their Foundation on
apparent or true History; sometimes there are circumstances that are particular
to the History, and which by consequence appertains only to it, which would be
folly to apply them to the Parable, according to their signification. Such may
this here be, which attributes to the Servants of God, the giving an overplus
beyond the sufferings and merits of Jesus Christ.

But Secondly, Although we should take this Term as appertaining to the Parable
we may very fitly explain this Overplus, to be the Sufferings of the Servants
of Jesus Christ, which so strongly confirm the Faithful, in the same sense, as
St. Paul said, That he fulfilled in his Body the rest of the Sufferings of the
Lord Jesus.

Christ having purchased the Church by his Blood, St. Paul by his assured holy
Conquest to Jesus Christ; Christ Dyed for the Salvation of Mankind, and St.
Paul dyed for the confirmation of that Truth. It Is the same thing here. The
care which the Servants of God take for the Strengthening of the Faithful,
whether by their constancy, or by their Doctrine and virtue, passes for the
Overplus of the Sufferings, and of the care of Jesus Christ for the Salvation
of the Faithful, to whom he promises an ample reward at the last Day. You see
by this time my Brethren, the excellency of this Parable. It Is a full
Representation of Divinity. It Is an Abridgment of Religion, which contains in
gross all the most important Mysteries of our Salvation; here we see the slate
of Innocence, the Fall of Man, the birth of Sin, its Empire, it Consequences,
the means of Salvation, the Law of Grace, the Merit of Jesus Christ, his cares
for the Church, his coming in Weakness, and his coming in Glory. Here the
Admirable Wisdom of our Savior appears, that in one Parable, (and that a very
short one) he encloses all the Mysteries of Religion; here we may distinguish
the Masters work from that of the Servants. But it is time to conclude.

APPLICATION
Let us my Brethren, make some Reflections on the four sorts of person, which
here present themselves; you see here first, a man wounded, Secondly, The
Thieves that assaulted him. Thirdly, A Priest and a Levite that abandoned him.
Fourthly, A Samaritan that comforted and healed him.

1. In Beholding this man Lying by the way so cruelly Murdered, you will be apt
to Bemoan and Deplore his hard hap, Sinners, and yet you little think that you
your selves are that man; seek then after no other Subject of your Complaints
than your selves, and as Jesus Christ said to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves. One may say
here the same thing to you: Miserable Mortals, bewail not the hap of this poor
wounded person, but bewail your own; Sinners, consider then your miserable
condition, you are this man half dead, and strecht out by the way. It Is you
that sin has mortally wounded, you were born, and you live in this Estate; and
that which is more to be Lamented is, that though this misery be so great, yet
we know it not. The pride of men carries them for the most part to believe they
are able of themselves to come forth of this Calamity, and that they have
strength enough to raise themselves out of that condition; no, no, my Brethren,
that is not in the least the Truth of the Fact. Quit your selves of these
unjust and bold Sentiments, Free Will is but a Chimera that cheats almost none
but the followers of Antichrist, to discover the vanity of these pretentions,
you need only consult your own experience. How many times have you undertook
the overcoming your passions without ever prevailing? Sinners, do you not
perceive in your hearts an invincible torrent of corruption? Assure your
selves, that you are in no capacity to succeed without the Assistance of
Heaven; acknowledge then the necessity of Grace, implore with humility the
Efficacy of the holy Ghost; never appear before God without a lively feeling of
your misery, and if you find in you any good Disposition, give all the glory
thereof to God

But in avoiding this Precipice, my Brethren, take heed of falling into another
opposite thereto. Do not (...) his miserable Estate wherein you are, take up a
pretense (...) still with folded Arms in the work of your Salvation, say not
through weakness and culpable Remissness as that slothful Sinner, seeing I am
not able to raise my self, I must wait until Grace Convert me; Oh my Brethren,
God acts not with us, as with unsensible Stocks, he cannot Convert you without
your selves, you must give him a Subject to work upon, at least you must
present the sick person to him, if you would have him healed, you must then put
your selves into a Condition to receive his grace; is it not true, that if this
wounded man had not been in the way, the Samaritan had not met with him; and is
it not true, that if he had not bin in a posture to move pity, this charitable
man had gone by him without saying any thing to him? There are also some
certain steps that the Sinner must make for to prepare a way for grace; he must
be found in the way, which he does, when he is found hearing the Word of God,
in Gods House; and when he gives attention to the Preachings of his Servants,
and when he implores help from God for his Conversion, and when he fervently
desires the same: Oh then it is that he is powerfully assisted, and receives
the impressions of Grace; Seek and you shall find, Knock and it shall be opened
unto you, ( Mat. 7. 7.)

2. But if you should agree with me, that you are that man half dead,
overthrown by the way side, I am sure you will not so easily conclude, who are
the other persons of the second Rank, you will say without doubt, that it is none
of you that were these infamous Robbers that Assassinated this man, you abhor
their action, yet permit me to tell you, (...) are the persons again, of whom
mention is made in the second place. Yes, it is you Sinners (in a sense) that
are these Thieves; suffer me to say of this Parable, as Nathan said of his to
David, It Is thou that art the man, 2 Samuel 12.

This offends you, but have patience a little, and see the proof. Thou
slanderer that Rendest thy Brother in secret, thou ought not Refuse to be put
in this Rank, do not thou in a sense Murder thy Brother by thy Calumnies?
These are stabs thou piercest him withal, stabs without doubt more cruel, than
the wounds of the Body, since thou assaultest his honor, which is more dear to
him than his life.

Revengful person! thou that seek all occasions to be revenged on thy
Brother, and that keep an implacable hatred in thy heart against him. Thou
art a Murderer of him, in the opinion of a great Apostle, John 3. 15.

Unjust Merchant! Thou deservest to be placed in this Rank, thou who make use
of a thousand Frauds, and a thousand subtle shifts in thy Dealing, to enjoy
the Goods of thy Brother, ah in so doing thou Robbest him. I tell thee then, as
Nathan said to David, Thou art the man.

Wretched Father! Thou ought to be put into the number of these Robbers;
thou who by thy Debauchery or Idleness, causest those which God has given thee
to bring up, to dye with Hunger, thou Stickest a Dagger in their bosoms, since
by thy evil management, thou reducest them it may be in their necessities to
seek their Livings by unlawful ways: Thou art this Thief, since thou take
from them, that which God has appointed for their subsistence; to wit, thy
Labor and pains, but thou art a far worse Robber, and more cruel Murderer by
thy fatal Example. I say to thee once again, Thou art the man

Finally, We will put amongst this Troop of Robbers and Murderers, those
Wretches who bare away the Goods* of their Brother by Gaming: And I positively
assert, That there is no person, who gives his mind to Gaming, but forms a
resolution to rob his Neighbor, I speak not here of those slights and cheats
that accompany Gaming, I speak of that which is the most innocent in these sort
of things (if at least one may say, there is any thing innocent in them) which
is, that each Gamester purposes to win, and one of necessity must win, behold
the Robbery, according to the Law of right, which defines Robbery, by enjoying
the Goods of another contrary to the will of the Possessor; so that following
this Maxim, wherever there are two Gamesters, there are two Thieves, the one
by inclination, the other real and Effective: because he which loses, desires
to win, and would not willingly see his money in the others hands.

But you will say, I am no Highway Robber, as those were who assaulted this
poor man; you are not Highway Robbers, it is true, but is your cruelty the
less extreme, is he that stabs another without giving him warning, or in
embrceing him less criminal, than he that kills by open Force or Threats.

3. But another will say, I am none of these Thieves and Murderers, since I am
no calomnator, nor Gamester, nor Debauched, nor Revengeful, etc. I do no hurt
to any; thou bad Christian, it is not sufficient not to do evil, but thou must
also do good: the bad rich Man was not in Hell for doing evil to Lazarus, but
it was because he did no good to him. This Priest and this Levite will very
well shun the judgment of God in that they killed not this Man; but I know not
whether they will escape punishment for not relieving him when they might have
done it: this I know of a surety, that liberality is one of the principal
points on which Jesus Christ will examine Men at the last day, and that hard
heartedness toward the Distressed will be motive sufficient for Damnation: I
was an hungry and you gave me not to eat, thirsty and you gave me not to drink,
I was a stranger and you took me not in, etc. Depart from me you cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41, 42. etc.

I make no doubt but you will consent with me in this, and in your heart blame
this want of Charity in the Priest and Levite, who passed by without succouring
this poor man: but you consider not that every day you do the same; all those
times that you know the necessity of your Brethren and do not concern your
selves about the remedy thereof, do not say that you know not any that are poor
and indigent, or that have need of your help, Ah! have you not them every day
before your eyes? many whom the Robbers of Persecution has reduced almost to
the condition of this poor wounded man in my Text (that is to say) who are half
dead with miseries, for they cannot properly be said to live that are in such a
condition: they may be said to be half dead. How many times have you passed by
them with an heart as indiffrent as this Priest, and this Levite showed to this
wounded man, notwithstanding, they are your Brethren, of the same blood, of the
same Nation, of the same Religion. Ah my Brethren! you ought to lay their
poverty to heart, since it is caused for the best of all causes in the World,
to wit, that of Jesus Christ's: how much should that move us since thereby
Christ presents occasion to us to exercise our Charity in such manner as may be
most agreeable to God ( Gal. Chap. 6. ver. 10. how much should it animate us!
since it confirms us in our holy Profession, for so many persons would not
expose themselves to such harsh miseries, and all for a lie. Brethren, you that
have saved something from this Shipwreck have compassion according to your
Ability. Let it be known that the same interest inspires you in your mutually
assisting one the other.

4. But Christians, limit not your Charity only to your Brethren, else what do
you more than the Turks and Pagans, Do good to all even to your very Enemies,
Imitate this Samaritan toward this Jew. These two Nations (as you know) hated
one another mortally, and were of different Religions; nevertheless this
Samaritan passes all that by, and shows to this poor afflicted man, all the
good Offices he was capable to perform. Let the very seeing the miserable,
suffice you for the finding objects worthy your pity.

And for to overcome the utmost Efforts of the hard-heartedness of Mankind;
remember what Jesus Christ has done for you, he stripped himself of his glory,
be made himself poor and miserable, yea mortal, for the Love he bore to you,
will you then refuse to give him some small portion of your Temporal Goods? for
in as much as you give it unto one of these little Ones, you give it unto him,
Mat. 25. 40. The poor are the Treasurers of Jesus Christ* he charges to his own
account that which you bestow on them, and he will largely pay you the Interest
another Day. If you advance some part of your Goods to the poor, he will
Restore you an hundred fold in the world to come.

He will do much more, he has promised to give you Heaven for a cup of cold
Water. Of all the Goods you possess, you shall carry nothing with you* you
shall have nothing Remaining to you, but what you have (as it were) Deposited
into the hands of our Lord, Then make to your selves Friends of this
corruptible Riches, so that when you fail, they may receive you into
Everlasting Habitations. AMEN.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Adorable Trinity, be Honor and
Glory, for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

