THE Joy of Faith, OR A TREATISE Opening the true Nature of FAITH, its lowest
Stature and Distinction from Assurance, with a Scripture Method to attain both;
by the Influence and Aid of Divine Grace: with a preliminary Tract evidencing
the Being and actings of FAITH, the Deity of Christ, and the Divinity of the
Sacred SCRIPTURES.

2 Cor. 1. 24. We have no dominion over your Faith but are helpers of your JOY:
for by Faith ye stand. Phil. 1. 25. I know, that I shall abide and continue
with you all for your furtherance and JOY of Faith, etc. Augustine Confess. L.
6. C. 4. De Deo. Medicamenta fidei confecisti and aspersisti super morbos orbis
terrarum. By Samuel Lee. M. A. Sometime Fellow of Wadham College. Oxon.

Boston, Printed by Samuel Green. 1687.

To his highly Honored Friend, Sir John Thomson, Knight and Baronet; and his
most pious and virtuous Consort the Honorable Lady, the Lady Frances: Grace
and Peace.
Honored Sir,
I T pleased the Lord in his holy Wisdom to afflict me with a Fever in the
months of July and August, 1684. and in his own due time to command its
departure. As an offering of praise and thankfulness to the Majesty and Mercy
of God. I thought of composing this Tract, though under the remaining weakness
derived from an autumnal distemper: yet thereby I humbly hope some benefit may
arrive to broken and tempted Spirits. For though my mouth be shut and silent as
to Public Service, yet I should greatly rejoice, if my heart could be opened
in Print, to help any toward heaven. The Dedication is proper to your most
noble person, if you please to accept, what would be an infringement of duty
not to present to you who have so often refreshed me and mine in my privacies
and retirements, kindnesses not to be buried in the grave of ingratitude: but
to be acknowledged before the Sun. Your Library was also most kindly opened to
my use: wherein stands many an ancient Author, calling aloud for converse, and
reaching out his auxiliary hand, and pointing at the state of Christianity in
former and purer ages. There did I first consider of the consignation of the
Canon of Scripture which is touched upon in these Papers, but might be much more
amplified and adorned: had I more constancy of abode and supplies of the yet
remaining Records of the first five hundred years that have happily survived
the flaming fury and rage of the barbarous Goths and Vandals and other wasters
of both the East and Western Empire, which might have conduced to the
completing of such a work. But we must wait the times of Divine Wisdom in
appointment of any such happy seasons to view those desirable monuments.

But why print? and why on such a subject? and why now? I answer to the first
and third because being interrupted in my greatest work, I would gladly be some
way useful in my generation: It may be, some that mourn in secret, and others
that are as yet not called, but under the Election of Grace may attend and
meditate on these things. Tho Preaching or Printing prevail but little with
this degenerate age, (Jer. 6.29.) though the Bellows be burnt in the fire, and
the lead consumed which was appointed to purify the drossy Oar: yet with
Jeremy and Esaias, and Paul we must in our several ages keep on where God opens
the door of opportunity for us, tho Israel be not gathered, let the Labor of
faithful Workmen wait for its reward from the Lord of the Harvest. Tho we for
our Labor of love be accounted as the shavings and off-scourings of all things
to this day: it is but for this life: (1 Cor 4. 13.) tho all the filth and
garbage of the tongues in the streets of Ashdod be flung into our Carts, we
must carry away the burden patiently, and meekly wipe off the soil from our
names and faces. Tho our presence be a burden to many houses, and our testimony
less minded than the piping of Children in a Market place, (Luke 7. 32.) yet
our Lord commands us to persist, till he relieves us. But that which I must
every where own, Worthy Sir, give me the favor I pray, and leave to testify:
that your reverence in hearing and accepting of their messages, as of the
Lord's Ambassadors has been always very exemplary, and I hope will return
into your bosom with a Prophets reward who have been an Obadiah to them in the
time of spiritual Famine.

But Secondly, Why on such a subject?

1. Answer, Tho many have written, yet it is inexhaustible: besides methods may
vary, and variety breeds delight, if joined with brevity. If I have laid the
foundation of such a Discourse in the beginning a little deeper than usual upon
the Divinity of Scripture, and the Deity of our blessed Lord: I hope and beg
that the Learned, Wise and Pious would not count that or any part, a digression
too improper: heartily wishing, it may succeed, Posidonius in ult Augustine,
Cap. 15. P. 869. Tom. 1.
like Austin's going providentially out of his way in a Sermon and beyond his
intention as if he were sent on purpose to find out and convert Firmus from the
Manichees, as it proved.

There be many, that understand not the nature of Faith, tho so often writ
upon, still afflicting their Spirits, as not having that Grace, because they
feel no assurance: To such I principally direct and bend my style, hoping and
praying that no Soul touched with inward sincere remorse for sin: but reading
and ruminating on so many direct and positive promises, both to beginners and
back-sliders, (Isai 57. 18.) will dare to despond, but come in freely to lay
hold on the golden Scepter of mercy, and thereby of eternal life. As for the
Basilisk of Envy, I commend it to the piercing eye of Heaven, under whose
protection I wrote these lines. Plin. l.29. c.4.

And now, worthy Sir, ( not to be prolix) I most humbly beg all the mercies of
the new Covenant to be your portion, and that the noble vine on your house side
may spread Branches like Joseph's ( Genesis 49. 22.) Ps. 128. 3.) by the well and
run over the wall; that your Sons may be as Olive plants grown up in their
Youth, (Psalm. 144 12) that your Daughters may be as those Marble corner Stones,
polisht after the similitude of Solomon's Palace. That you may see your
Childrens Children walking in the Truth and peace upon Israel. 2 Ep. Joh. 4.)
and after these da^es in the valley b^ received to the mount of transfiguration
in Glory:

So Prays Honored Sir, Yours in all Gospel Service, Samuel Lee.
Abbots Langly Jan. 16. 1685.
The Preface.
HAving Observed, that many Christians spend their Days in the Valley of
Sorrow, and walking up and down very pensive, being full of Fears and Doubts
about their eternal Estate, can perform no cheerful Service to God, bring
little honor to their Profession, or comfort to their Relations, or any sweet
quiet to their own spirits: I often pondered what should be the bitter root of
all this Wormwood and Gall, and being very desirous to deal in compassion, as
having been under some tentations, I spoke with several, and found upon
conference these following to be the principal causes of this Bondage of Spirit.

The I. Was great ignorance of the true nature of Faith, and of the main
fundamental Truths of the Gospel, which did amaze me to find upon search in so
many glittering, talking, but indeed shallow Professors.

2. Another wa s the great Levity, Van ity, and Laxness of their lives,
trifling out their precious time in fidling querks, tales and jests, to please
some whose Trenchers they hang upon like the Parasites in Theophrastus, not
lihe the blessed People of the former age, who far outshined us in the purity
of Conversation, and therefore in the brightness of their assurance.

3. Others I observed to be of a froward, perverse, ill-natured,
ill-conditioned, sower humor, full of prate and unprofitable multiplicity of
words, censures, backbitings, hollowness of true friendship: often murmuring at
God, and quarrelling with their Superiors.

4. Others I perceived to be naturally of a fearful, timorous, wavering,
inconstant, suspicious spirit, ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge
of the Truth.

5. And to end, most people extreme worldly, couvetous, full of fordid,
overreaching tricks and cunning cheats in dealing, and unless for a show,
basely backward to any excellent works of charity, and strict in examining the
poor, to find an evasion which Jerome so complains of in some of his age. Such
as these eat out the very power of godliness, and rob themselves of the season
of meditation, Periclitatur religio in negotiis Piety is lost in a crowd of
worldly business with these and the rest I must declare that the holy Spirit of
God delights not to hold communion, as being fiery or miry Spirits.

Hereupon in my retirements (I hope by the Grace of God) I pitched my thoughts
(when I could not be so publicly useful as formerly) upon the composing a
small Treatise of the genuine nature of Faith, and in a peculiar Chapter to
show the individual connection of Sanctification of heart and life in every
gracious Believer.

In the management whereof, I thought it might not be inexpedient to lay its
foundation upon the Doctrine of the verity of the Scriptures in one Chapter,
and of the Deity of our blessed Lord in a second after the Preface; the former
being the Doctrinal object of Faith, and the latter the personal.

Now forasmuch that in all Sciences there be certain Principles, on which their
Theoremes and Maxims are built: we may consider of the like in Divinity, that
the Holy Scriptures, (2 Timothy 3.15.16.) (being able to make us wise to
Salvation) are the only true Basis and Foundation, on which all the great
Doctrines of Holiness and Happiness do most firmly insist. In particular that
great point of Faith, which bears it self on the new Covenant of Grace,
revealed in those sacred Pages. I thought meet therefore briefly to endeavor
the proof of this high point, that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
are the undoubted Word of the living God; and thereby to be received with all
veneration imaginable as the solid fundamental of true Christianity, and in
special of the weighty Doctrine of Faith: And this I have the more willingly
performed at the entrance of this Tract, that good Christians may not (I hope)
need to go other where to draw: But have sufficient to settle their Faith on
this Foundation, tho it be more amply enlarged upon abroad.

Now whereas it may be said that Principles are indemonstrable, as in
Mathematics and other Sciences, Suarez. 5to. Mettaph. L. C.
we must understand that Maxim of the Principles of Essence and not of
cognition or knowledge. It is so, as to the verity of Holy Scriptures, we cannot
demonstrate them any further (and it is enough) than that they are founded on the
glorious Authority of the infinitely wise, true, and most holy God, as
consentanious to the verity and excellency of his nature, and published by his
injunction, as the rule of life and means of communion with himself in eternal
happinesss. The Lord has spoken, and who shall not tremble? ( Amos 3.8.) Oh
that Majestic style, ( Ezekiel 14.4. etc) [ Thus faith the LORD] makes Men and
Devils to quake, and rottenness to enter into their Spirits, when God sets it
home upon their consciences.

My Design then is to show, that at the Revelation and Exhibition of the holy
volumes, that I may both satisfy and confirm weak Believers, and convince (if
possible) scoffing Atheists, that there were such mighty Testimonies of their
divine, original attending the dispensing of them to the Church and the World
that may convince all of their Heavenly Offspring! If persons but not on the
veil of wilful ignorance, (2 cor. 3. 15.) detaining the truth in
unrighteousness. And in the close it will appear that Hystorical Faith well
grounded is useful to true and saving Faith.

There are then two principal points which did await their sliding down from
Heaven into the hearts of the illuminated Penmen inspired by the Holy Ghost,
and the uttering of them to the People in their distinct Ages, which may be
comprehended in the first Chapter.

1. The wonderful Oracles and Prophecies mentioned in those sacred leaves,
which have been punctually fulfilled in the several Generations of the Church.

2. The Divine Miracles above and beyond the power of nature; exhibited at
those two great junctures, the delivery of the Law by Moses, and the
promulgation of the Gospel at Mount Zion. In the conclusion of this first
Chapter, I intend (God willing) to treat somewhat of the consignation of the
Canon of Holy Scripture, a Point much desired by some, and may be of use to
others.

In the second Chapter, let us speak to the Deity of our blessed Lord: which
indeed is the grand point of Christian Religion and the very Foundation of the
Church of God, as Nicephorus Callis^us reports a Story of a deep Cave
discovered at Jerusalem under the ruins of the old Temple (when the Jews by
the permission and instigation of Julian to contradict the Prophecy of our
Lord, would needs attempt to build it again, but were beaten off by Thunder and
Lightning) where they found within it upon a Stone Pillar the Gospel of the
Apostle John, fairly laid and preserved. Let the Patriarch protect the truth of
the story: I mention it allusively to this great Truth that lies at the
Foundation of the true Church, that the Deity of Christ the principal design of
John's Gospel, is the only Rock laid by the Father in Zion, ( Isai. 28.16.)
without which our Faith sinks, and all our hopes vanish. If that be a nullity,
all is gone, Christianity is a vain Profession and our Bibles as to Christ and
the new Covenant of Grace of no value.

Wherefore O Professors of this true Religion hold these two points inviolable
as your lives [ Tho verity of the Scriptures, and the Deity of Christ] Then may
we safely and comfortably proceed to the main subject of this Discourse, the
nature of true saving Faith: which I have divided into ten Chapters, but shall
enlarge principally on three or four, being the drift and scope of my writing
to help the Joy of FAITH in those poor hearts; who tho truly gracious, yet like
young Samuel, cannot well discern the voice and presence of Christ. And this my
undertaking I beg the divine help and Grace to assist and prosper, extending my
time and health after my late sickness, according to his blessed will,
affording the favorable influence of his loving countenance.

This Tract divides into two parts. The first containing the Foundation; the
second the more visible superstructure about the nature of faith. The first
concluding with two Chapters, and the second with ten.

But whereas some may question, what need any further on this Subject, wherein
several (...) already traveled. I may rejoyne that Holy Luke thought meet (in
his pure Greek) as to his handling that heavenly Subject of our Lords Life, (
Luke 1. 1.) that though many had taken it in hand before, yet he would set
forth some things not mentioned by other Evangelists. Yea, how many in almost
all ages have prosecuted the same points in Divinity with benefit and use to
the Church, both in Commentaries and Controversies? This consideration
encouraged these Lines to appear: having observed some further need of these
Chapters, on which I mainly insist, and were the great motive of my writing,
and are but little touched heretofore, and yet are very useful to chosen
Vessels; Yet, the far greater number of the truly gracious Servants of God. To
whom it you draw near, and can have the happiness to come within them for their
good (for they are shy and aware of every approach) you may find their lives to
hang in an anxious suspense between fear and hope, and feed only upon some few
gracious glimpses, like the Beams from between April Clouds let down out of
Heaven into their hearts to sustain their Spirits from sinking, and to preserve
from dying under grievous Fits of the palpitation of their hearts.

To these I chiefly bend my Souls desire and humbly beg the dewes of Zion upon
these Meditations and Labors, that neither they nor I may faint under lost
expectations of Mercy.

And so I finish the Preface, and come to the Treatise it self.

S. L.

The JOY of FAITH
PART I.
Of the Fundamental points, necessary to build a sound and vigorous Faith, laid
down in two Chapters. The first referring to the Divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures: The second demonstrating the Deity of our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

CHAPTER I.
The Authority of the Sacred Scriptures.
THat the Holy Scriptures, wherein we daily read and meditate for our
instruction in order to Eternal Life are the very words of God, there are many
weighty arguments to evince it upon the hearts of all sober and well-inclined
persons; nay, which by the good conduct of Gods spirit may influence the minds
of Heathen and Atheists, would they but improve the common light of reason,
that Candle of the Lord. Nay, Prove. 20. 27. James 2. 19. Mat. 8. 29. Mat. 4. 2,
(...). Mark. 5. 7.
Devils themselves who believe and tremble at the Judgment to come, and desire
of our Lord not to torment them before that time: do quote them in argument
against our blessed Savior in his tentations, and acknowledge his Deity as
being the Son of God.

But I shall not dwell upon the several Heads to clear this truth, so often
insisted upon by the Pious and Learned, in their Systems and Bodies of
Divinity, but I shall only touch some of them, and enlarge upon one or two,
which are the chief design of this Chapter.

1. One Argument that some mention is their venerable Antiquity, which though
it be no cogent proof, vet allowing that of an ancient, ( quo quid antiquius,
co verius) that Truth is elder than Error, I would not lay aside the pains of
Clemens Alexandrinus and others, who prove that the writings of Moses are
ancienter than any the Heathen world can pretend to. To which I would annex
their stupendous preservation through the fury of all ages, especially the
raging flames of Antiochus and Dioclesian, those cruel Persecutors of the
Church of God; neither would I be silent as to the invincible pains, Buxior^^^
Tiberias
and toil which the Jewish Masorites underwent to preserve the Hebrew
Original. With such exactness did they manage that Affair, that they had in
numerato, punctually set down every word and every letter in the whole Bible,
and did also set down which was the middle word and middle letter of the whole,
and I think of every individual Book: which was indeed a high providence of God
toward the conservation of those happy leaves; and I could heartily wish the
New Testament had been so guarded by industrious and holy persons in the
primitive times. Nay it were well, if yet at this day some pious Rectors of
Universities and Schools of Learning would take up the ancientest and purest
Copies, and perform it at this time. The Masorites did the work long after the
first penning of them on purpose to preserve it in their dispersions.

But I proceed to other Arguments, As

2. The Majesty of their Style, that might justly make the Universe tremble,
and all the powers of darkness to hide their heads in the dark Chaos of
confusion.

3. The Heavenly Harmony of their distinct parts, tho written in various Ages,
and distinct places.

4. The self-denial of the Penmen, discovering their own sins and heart
corruptions with the follies and weakness of their nearest and dearest
relations, which is not done by other Writers, as Thucydides, Xe. nophon, or
Plutarch, or Livy, but especially by Lawgivers, which might disparage their
Government; as the compilers of the twelve Tables, or Theodosius in his Codex,
or Justinian in his Pandects, or other his Sanctions of the Civil Law.

5. The Sublimity and spirituality of the Mysteries therein discovered far
beyond the invention or comprehension of men or Angels. They may (...) (if they
please) and pry toward them* 1 Pet. 1. 12.
but none except the Lion of Judab can (...) and (...) both open the Seals, and
expound the mystical depths of this admirable volumne. So far is it beyond the
brains of the most fine spun Philosopher, that Amelius the Platonic in Clem of
Alexandria confessed of the first verses of the Apostle John's Gospel [ This
Barbarian faith he] has comprised more stupendous matters in three lines,
then we in all our Volumns.

I might adjoyn to this the purity and holiness of its subject matter, and the
glorious scope and design for our everlasting communion with God in heaven.

6. In the sixth place, a principal argument may be deduced from the Imperial
Power and Efficacy on the Souls and Consciences of men; both as to conviction
of sin, sustentation of wounded Spirits, and their consolation under the
darkest clouds and deepest confusions, while we are in this valley of Dragons,
which is the reason why truly gracious persons wade and dive through
Sicknesses, Troubles and strong anxieties; when wicked and ungodly men languish
and perish a thousand times over and over, because the former enjoy the sweet
influences of the Spirit of God in the promises of the Gospel, to cool their
consciences and calm their spirits into a halcyon serenity, and sometimes tread
upon the Asp and Dragon without any fear. By these and the like means the
Scriptures confirm and ascertain themselves like self-evident principles: when
the Spirit of God strikes aside the Curtains and Vailes of ignorance, and
purges the Corruptions out of the minds of men.

Let all the world rage in storms of contradiction, and like him in Laertius,
affirm snow to be black, or another, that there is no seuse in pain, or boldly
assert the Sun shines not, when I see it, or a cordial comforts not, Job. 6. 4.
Psalm. 38. 2.
when I feel it, or that a troubled conscience is but a melancholy fancy, when
she Terrors of the Lord drink up the spirits of men. These should be sent to
Anticyra, to purge with Hellebor for madness. Pray, what Energy or power can he
in a printed paper in the reading of a Chapter, wherewith Austin and Junius
were converted from sin to God, or what powerful charm in hearing a mean
Preacher, perhaps none of the Learnedest, like the blessed Fishermen of
Galilee, to change the heart: if so many proud, haughty and rebellious sinners,
who of direful Persecutors have sometimes turned tender cherishers and
protectors of the Church of God: Jer. 23. 29. Psalm. 19. 11. Heb. 4. 12. Ezekiel.
2. 4. 3, 11, 17.
were it not for the fire of the Word of the Lord of Hosts that melts the Stone
of the heart, and the hammer of that word that breaks the rocks of the sturdy
Zanzuramims all to powder; insomuch that bitter scoffers have been changed into
witty Tertullians, and turned their Satyrs into Panegyrieks. Some morose
Philosophers have proved quick and acute disputants in the primitive times to
defend the Christian Religion. What can that be imagined to be that works so
strange effects upon whole Nations from the East to the Western-Indies,
whitened the Black-Moores, civilized the hearts of Scythians more ferine,
ragged and brutish, than the Rocks and Hiccanian Tigers, that give them suck,
and beautified the barbariously painted Britains far beyond the Oratory of the
Gauls. It could be no other power than the awful dread of the Divine Majesty,
and the melting sweetness of his mercy concomitant with his heavenly Word.
Wherefore such are justly to be suspected for strangers to the work of grace,
like Nicodemus at first, tho a great Doctor in Israel, yet a great dunce in the
excellenc point of the New Birth: Or like that Doctor at Oxford sometime since,
that searched his Dictionary for the word [Regeneration] and could not, tell
what to make of it, because he found it not there. I say, we may greatly fear
that they never felt this mighty power of the Spirit of God to change their
hearts, Romans 1. 16.
that dare talk so proudly and irreverently against the selfevidencing power of
the holy scriptures on the consciences of men: when the Majesty of God shines
ten thousand times brighter in the Meridian of that Book, than the Sun without
clouds at noonday in the Zenith of Africa.

I shall entreat my ingenuous and pious Readers kind leave to descend into the
bowels of two arguments to give evidence to the truth of the Holy Scriptures,
and so conclude this present chapter. Which are drawn from the Oracles and
Miracles mentioned in this sacred Book: The fulfilling of the one, and
performing of the other; to the consternation and amazement of such as had the
happiness to be spectators of either, are in some part attested and confirmed
by Heathens themselves, and cleared off by several Writers of unquestionable
authority, confessing the matters of fact, which were accomplished in the
successions of several ages, with great exactness and punctuality.

SECT. I.
Of Scripture Oracles.
FOr this purpose, it must be laid down for a standing rule, that the certain
and determinate foreknowledge and prediction of future events long before they
come to pass, is an undeniable evidence of infinite Wisdom and Power, and
compatible to no created being Hence, the Lord challenges this glory to his own
name: that former things foretold by him did issue in the time predicted. Yea
further, I^ai. 42. 9.
to (...) the people into the mount of observation, tells them, He would
declare (...) things before they should spring forth of the Womb of Providence.
Nay, Isa. 43. 9, 10.
calls to the Heathen to bring out their Witnesses (if they had any) to
justify their Idols, as to the verity of their predictions; and then appeals
to the Jews as his own Witnesses, that they might know, believe and understand,
that he was God, and before him there was no God formed, nor shall be after
him. Which argument is amplified and prosecuted in the forty sixth and forty
eighth chapters, asserting the Divinity of his Essence, and the verity of his
declarations and prophecies. Citations might multiply, in which the silver
Trumpets of the holy Prophets sound harmoniously in the ears of all Nations, ^
Pet. 1. 25.
proclaiming this mark and character of his eternal Deity, and that his words
endure for ever, and are filled up to the brim with veracity and run over the
banks of all ages in chrystalline streams of accomplishments: while in the mean
time their (...) and all the Delphian and Dodonean Oracles have filled the
Heathen World with crooked serpentine lies and cheats. Mat. 5, 16.
Whereas the very Ordinances of heaven shall sooner be involved into their
ancient dismal Chaos, then any of these blessed sayings shall in the least
tittle be dissolved or made void.

I shall now enter upon some of the famous Oracles of Scripture, which have bin
so plainly verified before the eyes of many Nations, that several Philosophers
and Historians of the Gentiles have confessed this truth, and born witness, to
their eventual fulfillings and doubtless honored and embraced those Divine
Parchmonts with great veneration; when many of them traveled into Syria, and
had the great happiness by the leave of some Rulers of Synagegues, ( prece and
pretio) using gifts and entreaties to behold and read those heavenly
prophecies; and it is more than likely, that many notions among the ancient
Platonists are corruptions of and Compositions with the matter of those
profound Writings.

But before further procedure, I must premise, that for want of my Library at
hand, since my sad recess from my most desired services, I am forced to make
the best use I can of my memory, and therefore cannot make my Citations so
perfect and exact, as I else would: and partly from the defect of Historians in
barbarous ages; we are not able to joy nt every Oracle ^o its precise
complement: I shall yet endeavor to recall as many as I can, leaving the rest
to further oppertunities by Divine leave. Besides I do not think it very proper
to over-burden this tract or insist very long on such things, which else are
useful to settle our faith upon a solid foundation, since our chief aim is the
Doctrine of Faith it self.

In the first place then, because the transactions about our blessed Lord and
Savior are the very kernel and marrow of the whole bible: I shall (...) them
down before I present any other Prophecies.

First we read that God himself immediately foretold to our first parents the
incarnation of his son our blessed Lord by a Woman, and by the Prophet Isaiah,
that she should be a Virgin: Gen 3 1^ Isai 7 14 Postel. in speed hist, c 6. p
204 and Spotswood hist scoti p (...) Land 1668
and so its related that the Druids which were so famous of old here in
Britain, did of ancient times declare that he should be born of a blessed
Virgin; whence we may observe, that our Lord took upon him the humane nature;
not the Angelical, and likewise that he took upon him no man's person but a
distinct one of his own, Heb: 2 16: Luke: 35 Gen: 12 3 and 18 18, and 22, 18,
Gen: 26: 4: and 28: 14: Number: 6: 24, 17
his body being formed of the Holy Virgin, by the inun^^ration of the Holy
Ghost,

2. It is foretold that he should proceed from Abraham, and therefore of the
Hebrew Nation, excluding Japhet and C^am, and all their Posterity: Again, he
was to come of Isaac, excluding all the Mi^ianites and Hagarens: After that
from Jacob, excluding the Edomites, since he was to be their glittering ^^arr
proclaimed by Balaam to arise out of the loins of Israel, and should in the
latter days have dominion over Gog or the Turk, according to the Samaritan
Copy. The luster of this star shined upon the Magi, or wise men the posterity
of Abraham by Keturah, and is also tou^ht by Chalcilius upon Plate's Timeus.
[Est quoque alia faxctior and venerabilier bistoria, que perhibet ortu stellae
cujusdam non morbos mortesque denuniciatas; sed descensum Dei venerabilis ad
humanae conservationis, rerumque mortalium gratiam: Quam stell, am cum nocturni
iti^ere suspexissent chaldeorum profecto sapientes viri and consideratione
rerum caelestium satis exercitati, quesissae dicuntur recentem ortum Dei
repertaque issae unajestate puerili, veneratos esse, and vota Deo tanto,
convenientia noncupasse, quae tibi multo melius sunt comperta quam Caeteris]
These are the words of Chalcidius to Orostus Bp. Mat 2: Cbalcid: in plat:
Timeum: p: 219: Edit: ^: 4 to 1617: Gen^ 25: 15:
of Corduba Edit: Lug: 4to: 1617

These wise men (that I may a little gloss upon that point) I take to be of the
posterity of Abraham's second wife, and mingled among Ishmaelites, whom their
father sent away and planted in the East Country that is called in the Hebrew
Kedemah from Kedem, one of the sons of Ishmael, who dwelt among the Itureans of
Jetur, and the Nab^thaei of Nebaioth, and the Cediaei in Pilny of Kedar, etc:
on the East of the Land of Canaan before you come to the River Euphrates, and
this was the Land that should be composed into a Map by it self, and called the
Land of Kedemah, or the east country; and here it was that Job lived, being of
the ^ace of Keturah or of Ishmael in Kedem, and here the rest of his friends
also dwelt, that were petty Kings over little Territories adjoining to some
little Cities in those elder days: Among these were the Zabii of Balaams
Kindred, cultores Dei the worshippers of God, that sprang out of Abraham's
family, but were polluted with diverse superstitions and magical corruptions
fardled together out of Astronomy physic, and several blind absurd traditions:
yet retaining some relics of truth, not utterly obliterated, but degenerating
worse and worse. Of whom were the Ancient Chaldeans, and Genethliaci, observers
of stars and times, and daily grew more corrupt and confused till it came to
the Arabians, their Haly and such like patrons of folly. The former were those
that dwelt among the Mountains of the East, and by the Rivers of Mesopotamia,
whose snccessors we prophesied to come with presents to Christ: Our second
Solomon and the very time of their coming to our blessed Lord at Bethlehem may
be stated from the Eclipse of the Moon within the same year, Numb 22 23, 7
psalm 72 1^
that Herod dyed; But enough of this at present:

3. In the next place it was declared by Jacob on his deathbed, in his
swan-like song, that the Messiah should descend of Judab, and rise up like a
Lion out of that Tribe; Genesis 49: 10:
but who dares rouse him up or encounter with him.

4 The particular family in that Tribe was pre^icted to David to be from
himself and other where, Ichro: 17, 11. 4. Psalm: 89: 20: Isai: 11: 1:
that he should spring from the root of Jesse the Father of David.

5. The place of his birth is also specified to be the little city of
Bethlehem, and of his education to be Nazareth as some interpret that place in
Zechary, Micab: 5: 2: ^ech: 6: 12: Mat: 2, 23: 4: 15: Isa: 9: 2:
not only because he was the Branch, but as to the Town where he lived, and
that he should appear in the second Temple, and fill it with glory, and that
the crowns which were hung up in the windows of that Temple should presignifie
the counsel of peace to be between his Kingly and Priestly Office; and besides
there are many other specialties mentioned concerning him, Zech: 9: 9:
which came exactly to pass: as his riding to Jerusalem on the foale of an Ass,
and the peoples crying Hosanna before him, his being sold for thirty pieces of
silver, Psai: 69: 21:
and pierced on the cross: his drinking vinegar, and feeding on Gall, his
tasting of myrrhine wine, the wine of the condemned to soporate the senses,
Mark 15: 23:
and stupifie pain.

6. The time of his coming into the world is also distinctly predicted: First
in general when the Land of Israel should be forsaken of both their kings; nor
only the Syrian of Damascus, Psai 7: 16:
but the royal scepter, or at least the Supreme Government shall depart and
utterly be cut off from Israel and Judah: Genesis 49. 10. Joseph ^s
which was completely performed, when Herod caused the Sanhedrin to be put to
Death.

But yet more particular, Dan. 27.
when the middle of the last week of Daniel, or the 486th year and an half
should be fully accomplished at his sufferings in the midst of that week; the
Periocha or compass of which year took up their Epoch or commencement at the
twentieth year of Artexerxes Longimanus, when the Commandment or Edict went
forth (not to return out of Babylon, nor to build the Temple which were done by
former Kings, but) to restore and to build Jerusalem, even its streets and
walls. ver. 25.
In the time prescribed from that twentieth year: our blessed Lord both
appeared and suffered for his Elect, under Pontius Pilate according to the
Scriptures. His manifestation to the world under Augustus, and sufferings under
Tiberius, Seem to be hinted by Suetonius and other Authors. Nay, the Swan of
Mantua sings an Anthem out of the Sybill of Ci^ma upon his Birth.

I am redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia regua,
Jam nova progenies caelo demitiur alto.
The Lovely Virgin and her Heaven born Son,
Commands the golden age again to run.
So then, we find in the Old Testament these admirable predictions concerning
him.

1. What Nature our Lord should assume.

2. From what Nation he should spring.

3. From what Tribe.

4. What Family.

5. In what place.

6. At what time he should appear, and all those fulfilled to a tittle: which
demonstrate the Divine Original of the Holy Scriptures.

Besides these Oracles concerning our blessed Lord so exactly fulfilled and
arrested partly by Heathens, partly by Jews and primitive Historians, but
especially by the New Testament, which that it must be admitted for a competent
witness will be I hope evident by the Divine Authority in the consignation of
the Canon spoken to in the close of this Chapter: There remain yet some
Prophecies to be briefly rehearsed, which yield a further and great light in
this point of the verity of Scripture-predictions, and therefore of their
Divinity.

For instance, the universal deluge prophesied by Noah 120 years, before it
came: which antedate of years if not mentioned before by others, yet the deluge
it self is confirmed by many Heathens, even Youths at school, (...) de Solert
(...). Lucian de Deasyria the Ask p. 10. 60. Edit Paris 1615. Genesis 7. 19
(...) in Ovid and Horace; and the Dove of Drucalion or Noah is touched by
plutarch himself a grave Historian; that wonderful Deluge, though some have
thought particular, yet when the Holy Ghost speaks (...) so expressly, that all
the high Hills under the whole Heaven were covered, I am sorry that any should
open the door to Atheists to play upon Scripture. Which having declared that
All the high hills were covered, adds further, that the waters did prevail
fifteen cubits above those Mountains and what vast high Mountains they are
wherein the Ark rested, which were anciently called A rarat, as if. ( Har guall
Har) Mountains upon Mountains in the ragged Country of Elw^nd in Media; let the
ingenious Olearius declare, who I could wish were followed by other Travelers,
Olearig in his Persia.
that they would learn Astronomy before they go abroad for many good purposes
in Travels, but especially for Calculation of Eclipses, in order to Longitudes,
and of taking the Altitude of the Pole in the rudera or ruins of ancient
Cities that our ancient Geography of Scripture, and of Civil Writers might be
perfected.

But there is one thing more that may demonstrate the contrary to their weak
opinion about particularity of the deluge; because, if the waters were higher
than those exalted craggy tops in Armenia, and other places there must have
followed a powerful defl^x of that liquid element, whereby all Champion
Conntries must be overflowed to give an aequilibration or poise from all sides
of the world upon the Center. Not to argue from the earths diurnal motion,
which is the principal cause of the flux and reflux of waters in all Seas, and
particularly the Atlantic Ocean, and the Mar-del-zur under the line and
Tropicks: the former being boisterously repelled by that great bar of America,
sends them back with such violence to make those mighty tides in these
North-west parts of Europe, and possibly on the West-sides of America the like.

But pardon me this paragraph spent on 2 matter per transennam.

But I proceed.

The Prophet Moses foretold the Captivity of Israel many hundred years before
it came to pass, and the deliverance of Israel in the latter days, not yet
fulfilled. This great person is thought by some to be veiled under the name of
Moso^us in Jamblichus, his receiving the Law in Mount Hereb is so palpably
expressed by Orpheus in his gnomae in these words, [(...)] as the waterborn
Prophet ordained in his Law of the two Tables, that I am scarce satisfied,
whether this Orpheus were not feigued by a primitive Christian, Ju^. sat. 14.
ver. 133.
rather than a Thracian Harper. But to be sure Juvenal was not counterfeited by
Thomas Aquinas his Conuntryman, in that verse.

Tradidit arcano qu^deunque volumine Moses

Whatever Moses delivered in his hidden volumne; he needs no testimonies from
Heathens, his authority is unquestionable.

Many other predictions we find in Scripture, as the birth of Josiah above two
hundred years before the Event as I think may appear. I King 13: 2. Isa: 13: 21:
That Nineveh upon Tigris the Head of the Assyrian, and Babylon on Euphrates
the head of the Babilonian Empire should never be built more, but continue a
habitation for Satyrs, and the Jims and Ohims or wild Cats of the Desert; and
therefore they do very ill, that call Bagdat by the name of Babylon. a well
inhabited, and beautiful place: which denomination gives defiance to the Holy
Scriptures: whereas this Bagdat called so from the pleasant gardens is forty
miles below, on the same River: But in the old ruins, by the River side, is a
little Warehouse, called Felugea, and among the vast piles of confused heaps
of destruction, there are so many serpents and wild Beasts lurking up and down,
Sanders in Purch
that it is most dangerous for persons to venture among them.

Again, there is likewise found a Prophecy of Cyrus, which some take to be 170.
others 200 years mentioned before his appearing: Ifa. 44 28.
but I have not that golden canon of Ptolomy by me at present, which states the
Nabonassar Era, and the Persian Monarchy, etc, so exactly, that we need not
wave up and down in those Chronological Difficulties, which others have done
before us, and I could heartily wish, his A^nagest and this Canon were printed
by that manuscript in the famous Bodly Library, out of which I copied it.

When the great deliverer of the Jews came abroad in the world, some assert,
(as I remember) that they showed him Isaia^^ Prophecy concerning himself
written so long before: not unlike to what Jaddua the High Priest did in
reading to Alexander out of Daniel, Josephus ^. 11. c. 8.
the predictions of his great conquests over the Persian Empire.

But to draw toward an end, in mentioning a few more, tho there be many; the
irreparable ruin of Edom spoken of, long before the (...) when there remained
neither name nor nation, but as wrapped up in Idumea a little parcel of the
Province of Judea under the Romans which contained the Phi^istim Country, and
(...) southward. Nay, there be many other Kingdoms fell under the same
prophetical doom, that are now lurking in their ruins and ravenous beasts,
preying upon the bones of the ancient Cities. Of all other, that of Egypt is
remarkable, that it should be a base Kingdom; nay, the basest of Kingdoms, and
should exalt it self no more, Ezekiel. 29. 15
and so it has been ever since the Persians conquered it, under whom it
groaned, and then turned to the Grecians under one of Alexanders Captains till
Cleopatra: then a provincial to the Romans, and after them to the Saracens the
Mamalukes and Turks, by whom it is dreadfully pillaged and plunged by every new
Bas^a to this day.

But above all we should mind and diligently Dan. 2. and 7
observe that most famous prophecy of the fonr great Monarchies in Daniel;
whose truth almost every History of the civil Nations demonstrates age by age,
from Nebuchadnezzar to the end of the world. Which as it is twice exemplified
under two visions. so the fourth or Roman is much more amplified by holy John
in his Patmus Revelations. By both which as by two great torches every man in
his proper age beholds the verity of scripture prophecies, to shine forth most
illustriously: and we may be as certain of what remains yet unfulfilled, to
receive its accomplishment as of that we have read, and heard, and seen,
performed before our eyes.

There is one Prophecy I would not let slip, and that is in the Prophet
Zephaniah, which declares that God will famish all the Gods of the earth: and
men shall worship him, Eth 3: 11
every one from his place, even all the Isles of the Heathen. I the rather
mention it, because Plutarch that learned Gentile has writ a tract as if on
purpose to verify this prophecy which he enstiles peri eklelo^potion
Chresterion of the Eclipse or silence of Oracles, Plut Suidas de Augusto
La^ta^tias Boeth de di^^iol schoastirs b (...) 12 c: 41: Orosius me puer
Hebraeus jubet binc ad tartara adire Heb: 13: 20
where he mentions the death of the great God, pan o megas tot^n^ke which some
apply to our blessed Lord the great Shepherd of the sheep. It is related also,
that the Temple of Apollo at Delphos in Phocis of the Grecians (where
afterward true Religion was set up) was overthrown by Earthquakes and Thunder
and at the same time when Jerusalems Temple was destroyed, and neither of them
rebuilt to this day: to intimate that Pagan worship of the Heathens, and the
ceremonious worship of the Jews should be removed, and give place to the
Christian Worship in spirit and Truth.

The last thing that I shall mention is the noble prophecy of the conversion of
the Gentiles, so often set forth in many Chapters: the fulfilling whereof is
attested by multitudes of Authors of all Countries, how Thomas in the East
converted the Indians, and that the posterity of them that resisted him, are
marked at this day with one leg much bigger than the other, Capt. Prout
as I received by eyewitnesses for a truth; but the account is only a child of
tradition: In the Northwest the Scythians were converted by Andrew, and thence
their Posterity the Scots own him for their Tutelars S aint. The Britains as
many assert were converted by Joseph of Arimathea, the Egyptians and Abyssines
by Mark and his Disciples.

But I proceed no further, it may be observed by every ones experience to this
very day. These things require just Treatises to enlarge upon, and to display
in their full and lovely colors.

But yet that I may set before all a method to convince every candid person of
the truth of Scripture upon this score, and hence their divine original; I
would desire them to do but two things:

1. To observe and study what Prophecies the cardo saeculi the present state
and scene of things determine us to be under the fulfilling at this present day.

2. I recommend to their continued studious observation, what things remain yet
to be fulfilled, that they may thereby be daily satisfied and fully convinced:
For if the great God have thought fit in love and mercy to reveal such great
things to his Church: we ought to lay aside our trifles and vanities of
contradiction, and observe the workings of his Providence which continually
roll upon the wheels of Prophecy. And therefore I shall name some Prophecies
yet to be fulfilled:

The second coming of Christ was prophesied of by Enoch before the Flood, Jude
14 Numb: 24: 17. 19. 24: Rev: 8: 2:
and by some part of Baalams Prophecy; But the New Testament blows many
Trumpets over Prophecies, as if challenging the whole World to observe this
issue, and among others, let us touch these following,

1. The final period of the Metalline Image set forth by Visions in the Book of
Daniel.

2. The downfall of Antichrist after the expiration of his 1260 years, now at
the doors.

3. The ruin of the Turk after the end of 391 years from the establishment of
his Ottoman Empire, Ezekiel. 38. 10.
and the great thoughts that shall come into the heart of that God in these
latter days.

4. The Conversion of all Israel to our Lord Christ, and their restoration to
their own Land, never to be removed more.

5. The glorious state of the united Church both of Israel and Gentiles, from
the River Indus to the Atlantic Ocean, wherever the four metals have
obtained: yea and the spreading of it wherever the ten toes have set the prints
of their dominion, and that this blessed state shall endure in all manner of
spiritual Holiness and temporal felicity under a perpetuum ver, prudentlus
a continual spring when the seasons shall be most happy, Heavens influences
most benign, unity and concord and interminable peace among all Nations, and
the deliverance of all the creatures (which now groan under the cruel
oppression of the wicked) into the Festival liberty of the Sons of God, Rom: 8:
21, 22:
this happy (...) restoration ^f all things shall continue to the close of the
World, when those of the out^iles about the Holy City attempting mischief shall
be destroyed by fire from Heaven, which enters us upon the sixth, viz.

6. The Conflagration of the World, 2 pet: 3: 7: Mal: 4: 1:
and all the wicked in it by fire: mentioned by Peter, and crept into Ovid in
his Metamorphosis [Esse quoque in fatis, etc.] Its written in Fatidical Books
that the Heavens and Earth shall perish by fire.

7. The return of our Lord to take up his People into Heaven. 8 Then comes the
great Resurrection and 9 The tremendous day of Judgment After which 10. He
proceeds to deliver up his Medi^torian Kingdom to the Father, Joh: 14: 3: Rev:
20: 12, 13 I cor: 15: 24:
and then the Glory of Heaven shall continue to all eternity, when God shall be
All in All.

SECT. II.
The Miracles in Scripture.
HAving Treated some what of the infallible Prophecies, I shall now by the
Grace of God rehearse some of the notable Miracles mentioned in Holy Scripture.
For as much as they are works above the power of nature, therefore all Nations
stand gazing at such mighty exhibitions of Gods Majesty; such as curing
blind-born Persons, the restoring the dumb and lame, who were so afflicted from
the Mothers Womb, yea, reviving of many from death to life: are they not
undeniable Testimonies, that such a one that performs these, is a God, or
transacted by the immediate assistance and presence of God? whence we may very
well infer, that what such a one speaks is to be embraced as by divine
Authority. For that glorious Person, that manifests in his works such heavenly
and celestial power, must be believed to be God, and a God of supreme Truth
and highest verity, as well as of surpassing power. For infinite power and
truth are and can be centerd no where but in a God.

Let us then recite some of the noble works of God mentioned in the divine
Pages; that showed themselves both before, and attended the promulgation of the
Law and Gospel, which transcended all the powers of nature and of Angelical
Spirits to produce: although evil Spirits have ever labored to imitate God, and
set up a chapel of Miracles to oppose the glory of his Majesty, and of the
holy Prophets, and of the Son of God.

1. The first that offers, is the destruction of Sodom by fire from Heaven,
mentioned by Strabo, Pliny, Solinu^, Mela and Diodorus-Siculus; naming also the
two chief Cities, Sodom and Gommorrah, that perished in their flames, and that
the place where they stood being turned into a most dismal lake, called
Asphaltites from Brimstone or Bitumen, wherewith it abounds. They speak also of
the Aples that grow near it, which seem ripe and pleasant, but being touched,
crumble into dust.

Two things I would here call to mind:

1. That the Holy Scriptures set forth Hell by this Lake of fire and brimstone
in several places. ^sa: 30: 33: Mark 9: 45: Rev: 14: 10: and 19, 20, etc


2. That a Gentleman, one Mr. S teel, who with some young Merchants visited
those places, and bestowed upon me a Glass of the water of that Sea, and a Cup
made of to Cedar of Lebanon: relate in a small Treatise of several things which
they saw in the Holy Land, and particularly, that the rudera or Piles of some
Buildings began to show their heads visible above water, which are judged to be
remnants of Sodom etc; Ezekiel 16: 53, 55
and that put me in mind of a remarkable Scripture about the return of Sodom
and her Daughters or Villages in the latter day, at the reduction of Israel to
their own Land; and that the waters of the Sanctuary shall cure the dead Sea,
Ezekiel 47: 10
from ^ngedi to Eneglaim or Galli^ in Moab: But I leave it to the Consideration
of the Learned.

2. The second Instance may be of Isreal's coming out of Egypt by the power of
Gods outstretched arm, Of Joseph in Egypt, see Justi^ 1: 36: c: 2:
with many Miracles preparing and attending their exit Some things to this
purpose are mentioned by the Compilator of Trogus Pompeius, L. 36. and by
Manetho in Josephus; which tho some would draw to another time, yet the
settling of those that are there said to come out of Egypt, at Jerusalem, seems
to show it Nay, Plin: l: 30: c: 1: de prepar: l: 9: c: 8: Apulejus: Apol: p 54:
the very Magicians that contended with Moses are remembered by pliny, under the
names of Jannes and Jo^apata, and by Eumenius in Eusebius, and by Diodorus,
Siculus in Photius, L. 40. taken notice of by the Learned Bp. Usher in his
Annals.

3. The third may be the Conquest of Canaan by Joshua, whom some recount for
the Hercules of the ancients, Hercules Tyrius in Lucian de Deam syria p: 1036:
and a remembrance of his victory, graven on a Pillar by the Phaenicians in
Africa, showing that they fled from the face of Joshua into that Country where
their Brethren of the Race of Cham of near alliance to the Canaanites then
lived; which is touched as I remember by Procopius in his Vandalick Wars and
others. Procop
The standing still of the Sun seems hinted at by Plautus in the double day, I
think in his Amphilryo.

4. The fourth wonder may refer to the retrocession or going back of the Sun in
the days of Hezekiah, which engaged the King of Babylon to send an Embassy on
purpose to search out the truth of that Prodigy. In reference to which, this is
remarkable, that some Eclipses mentioned to have happened before Hezekiahs
days, are all found by our modern Astronomical Tables, as exact; as if those
Prodigies had not been extant: which may give to some a little more facile
apprehension of the motion of the earth, then the Perepatetick School will a^
yet admit. For the Phoenomenon or ap^earance may be solved by a miraculous
stopping of the Earths diurnal motion, though its annual in the Zodiac might
continue.

5. The fifth concerns that extraordinary Star, which a^peared at the Birth of
our Lord to the Magi in Kedemah or the East by the River Euphrates, Mat: 2: 2:
who came (...) from Jobs East Country, whereof before, and which presaged as
they thought in those days the rising of some Grand Emperor out of some
Eastern Nation: whereof Suetonius speads [Percrebuit in toto orient, etc.]
that there was a presage of one that should Rule the whole World; sueton in
Vespas^c: 4: and Tacittbist: 1: 3: [pluribus persuasio intrat etc.
which they applied to Vespasian but more truly concerned our blessed Lord,
whose kingdom was to be ^niversal and eternal.

There is a passage also about Hero^ at this time, which tho no miracle, yet it
was prodigy of cruelty, which that infamous Prince perpetrated in the Land of
Judah; and herein may somewhat concern this Treatise, that it sets the time of
the Epiphany or coming of the Magi or wise men to our Lord, a little before
that Lunar Eclipse in March, which preceded that Tyrants death; who flew so
many innocent children, and his own son among the rest, that gave occasion to
the Emperor Augustus to taunt him with that Scoff, Macrob: sat^^^ 1: 2: c 4:
that he had rather be Herod's Hog than hi s son, counting him for a Jew (and I
think he was a proselyte) tho indeed he were an Idumean of Ascalon by birth,
that is of that Idumaea or Edom so called in the days of our Lord, as may be
observed in Ptolomies greek Geography, lying in the south-part of Judah.

6. But the most remarkable miracle was that of the Suns Eclipse at our blessed
Lords passion, because it disappeared, and was mantled with pitchy darkness
near the Full-Moon of the Passover, paul Diacon: max: in scholl: ad Diony^
Origtract: 29, and 30: in mat: Eusebius e^lit: scaltaustin: Ephesians: 156:
which is impossible in the course of nature. For proof whereof Eusebius gives
in ample testimony in his Chronical Canon, citing the 14th. Book of Phlegon of
Trallis, who asserts it to have happened in the fourth year of the 202
Olympiad. Dionysius also the Areopagite is mentioned by the Magdeburgenses for
an Epistle of his written to the Citizens of Hei^^polis or On in Egypt, Magd:
cent: 1: l: 1: c: 11: p: 381: augustine Ep: Rom: de civit Deil 10: c: 27: and
Euseh, in vit Constantin^
wherein that common saying is avouched for his [Deus naturae patitur, aut
mundi machina collabitur] The God of nature suffers, or else the frame of the
world is flying in pieces] Besides what Petrus Comes^er records, where ever he
had it; that the Philosophers of A theus disputed about this Eclipse, as being
the occasion of building that Altar to the unknown God: Tho Pausanias (as I
remember declares it to have been erected upon the great devastation made by
that fearful pestilence at A theus, pausan in atticis Laert in Epimedid Lucian
philopatri Oecumenius. etc.
in the time of the Peloponnesian War, so notably described by Thucydides. But
passing that, the aforesaid admirable Eclipse of the Sun being celebrated near
the Full-Moon of the paschal solemnity. It must needs follow, that the Moon her
self must he prodigiously and totally Eclipsed, being near her opposition at
the same time. Nay there was moreover another Eclipse of the Moon in her
natural course in the Evening of the same day: as by calculation out of the
Tables does manifestly appear, the Scheme whereof is exhibited by Buntingius in
his chronology, and I think declared by others also. So that there were three
Eclipses in the compass of one natural day, Lang. de christ annis
that all the inhabitantsround the globe might read in the heavens some
wonderful work about that time, had they known the language of those glittering
lamps, whose places being then near the Equinoctial, the sun in Ari^s, and the
Moon in Libra, they might be seen almost from Pole to Pole. Such a Spectacle as
never had happened from the foundation of the World, and possibly may never
again. It being a superlative attestation to the glorious sufferings of our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Concerning the darkness of that time,
how dreadful and universal it was, others having discoursed; I shall not
enlarge.

Many other wouderful Miracles transacted by the Prophets in the Old Testament.
and thousands by our Lord, and many of his Apostles in the new are set down for
the confirmation of the holy Oracle s. Several things, and some person s
mentioned in the Sacred Books are likewise glanced at by the Heathen Writers.
Such persons as the Magi are hinted by Laertius, some things mentioned by
Celsus in Origens refutation of his Heathenish Opinions, by Julian, Porphyry,
Apollonius, etc. who endeavoring to undermine the Authority of the Scriptures,
have by the conduct of providence strangely ratified it, Niceph.
as the Patriarch of Jerusalem said of Julians attempt to rebuild the Temple;
Mat.
it happened that not a stone was left upon a stone there, the anger of God,
sending Thnnder and Lightning, and Ebullition s of fire out of the bowels of
the Earth so violent, that all the foundations of the old Temple were flung out
to the destruction of many of the old Jewish Builders at that time. There be
several of the learned primitive Fathers have taken great pains to good purpose
on such like points, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Justin Martyr, Lactantius
Arnobius, Eusebius, etc. who have distinctly written against the Gentiles with
the Pen of a Diamond, and abundantly refell^d their Errors and Sophistries
setting forth the great and mighty acts of holy men of old, attesting the
Tacred Doctrines: Yea so great was the conviction of the stupendous works of
our blessed Messiah, the Wonderful, the Counselor upon the Spirit of the
Emperor Tiberius: Isai 9 6. Fuseb ex Tertul. l 2. c. 2.
that he strongly urged the Senate of Rome to recognize him for God. But the
counsel being horrible idolaters would not admit it: Because (said he) he would
have no other God besides himself: which indeed is but his just and magnificent
right, no^ will he give up his glory to dumb Idols.

But yet, these mighty works forespoken of, Isai. 6. 10.
tho they do not, nor can of themselves directly cause true Faith in the
heart, without the Almighty power of God (else why did not the gross-hearted
Jews believe) yet are they a strong Foundation for Faith to insist upon, Dan.
10. 21.
and to induce the belief of the Divinity of that person who is the original
Revealer and Deliverer of these Scriptures. of truth to the World. However it
be plain that Miracles work no Faith without a divine concurrence, but persons,
as Pharaob and his Associates might stand amazed a while, Joh. 2. 23.
yet quickly return to their late stupidity. And our blessed Lord we see would
not trust the unbelieving Jews, though he had exhibited great Miracles among
them, because he knew what was in the corrupt and false heart of man.

But now let us step into the third and last section of this Chapter.

SECT. III.
The Consignation of the Canon.
HAving by many Arguments (I hope) demonstrated the Sacred Authority of those
inestimable volumes of Scripture: There yet remains an enquiry about the
finishing of the Canon, or the compass of all the Books that are of Divine
stamp and original. Those two great Luminaries of the English Nation, Dr. John
Rainolds of Oxford, and Dr. William Whitaker of Cambridge, have largely and
solidly handled thy s Point against the Romanists which the Learned know better
than I: But since that somewhat on this Subject may not be ungrateful or
unuseful to many: give leave to treat a little upon it in this Section, and so
conclude this first Chapter,

It is then the Sentiment of several of the Ancients in the primitive times,
that the holy Apostles of the Lord did consign or state the Canon of Scripture,
and it has obtained among many of the Learned for an indub^table truth, of
which Testimonies I (...) recite some to that purpose.

The first whereof is Melito Bishop of Sardis about the Year 170. A. 170 Eusebius.
l. 4 c. 25
so saves Eusebius, attesting that he set out the Canon of the Old Testament,
just as we do, omitting the Apocrypha, for which purpose he Traveled into the
East to gain full intelligence. Athanasius of Alexandria sets down the same
Catalogue, A. 340
as Rainold de Apocryphis, Vol. 1. P. 361.

Cyril of Jerusalem, A. 360
the same in his Catechis. l. 4. and expressly asserts the Apostles to be the
declarers of that Canon, and that it was received from them, Rain p. 328. and
361
in these words, Quibos nobis libros tradiderunt, that delivered these Books
over unto us.

The Council of Laodicea met (in an Apostolical Church) and composed of Asian
Bishops, A. 394. or 8. Magd. cont 4. p. 833. A. 385
mentions no other as to the Old Testament.

Amphilochius of Iconium recites the same Rain. P. 332. Jerome in his Catalogue
of ancient Writers, expresses it thus of John, [Novissimus omnium Scripsit
Evangellum rogatus ab Asiae Episcopis] that he being entreated by the Bishops
of Asia (of all the Evangelists) was the last that wrote a Gospel: as we may
gloss upon the words: we find also that Justin Martyr affirms that John did see
the Visions, and compose the Book of the Revelations of what he saw in ^^^mos
(now Patina in the Fgaean Sea.) And to the same purpose it is attested by (...)
lib. 5. toward the end, and by Eusebius, l. 4. c. 18.

Furthermore, Austin who a little survived Jerome, in his Book against Faustus [
Excellentia canonicae autoritatis veteris and novi Testamenti, etc. Apostolorum
confirmata temporious etc.] and again, [Nemodare pote^^ authoritatem cuiquam
libro, August. (...) Faustuns. l. 11 c. 5. L. 13. c. 4.
quam per Ecclesias Christi ab ipsis Apostolis consts, utas non accipit, utinde
ad posteros firmata commendatione transcurreret.] None can give authority to
any Book (that is of Scripture) which he has not received from the Churches of
Christ, constituted by the Apostles themselves, De Doct. Christ l. 2. c. 8.
that so they might be transmitted with a firm recommendation to posterity.]

Again, when treating of the Canon, he says, we should follow the authority of
those Churches [Quae Apostolicas seeds bahere and Epistolas accipere merueru^t]
which were dignified by the presence of the Apostles, and received Epistles
from them. And such was the Church of Laodicea, whose Canon is above cited.

There is moreover a famous quotation out of Eusebius, mentioned by Dr. Couzins
in his History of the Canon, where he brings the ancients asserting, Page 32
(...) L^nd 4 to. 1657
that the Apostle John (rogatu) at the request of the Asian Churches did fix
the genuine canon of Scripture: and adds Eusebius to it. This is in the margin,
but in text of his discourse, c. 4. 647. thus. [Before Saint John dyed, w^o
dyed last of all the Apostles, the Canon of Scripture was made perfect, and
delivered over to the Christian Church.] What a happy p^n had he used and blessed
the Church with an excellent discovery, had he quoted the chapter and book out
of Eusebius, if the words cited were really there. But upon most diligent
search, I could never yet find it in that Author, tho I have read him over (but
pardon my saying so) in some places, but especially the recited, over and over.
If there be any mistake in my search, how glad to see it rectified and how
thankful: But I fear otherwise, and rather suppose either he had some other
Copy or Manuscript, or else the mistaken citation must refer to the writing of
his Gospel, and not the consigning the Canon. For indeed the Apostle did
compile his Gospel [Rogatus ab Asiae Episcopis] at the desire of the Bishops of
A sia, Eusebius. l. 4. 5. 18 and l. 5. c. 6. Ironaeus. l. ^. c 1. and l. 5.
justin. mart heronim. in catalogo ut magdeb. cent. 1. l 2. c 10. p 569. and l
2. c. 4. p. 67.
as Eusebius and J erom and others relate, that is very true. Now tho some hence
would deem that his Gospel was the last book of Scripture written by any
Apostle, yet I rather understand it, as I said before, that he was the last
that wrote any Gospel of the life and acts of our blessed Lord. For so the
words of Jerome imports [ novissimus omnium, etc. he was the last of all that
wrote any Gospel History, not that he [ novissimum librum novi Testamenti
conscripsit] wrote the last book of the Testament, that cannot be fetched ont of
these words of Jerome, but is a force put upon them. From whence they would seem
to draw, that if his Gospel were the last book written; then he thereby
consigned the Canon of the whole Scripture: But the former not being clear from
th^se words, (that because he was the last that writ a Gospel, that therefore
the Gospel was the last book of Scripture that was written by any Apostle)
that is not consequent. But if we can clear that the Gospel of John was the last
book of holy Scripture, that ever was written by the appointment of God, it
were to purpose indeed, that the Canon were sealed up by it. But if the
Revelations should prove to be the last book written by command of the Spirit,
and penned at the desire of the Asian Churches, according to his visions in
^atmus, then it must be Sigillum Canonis, the finisher of the holy canon. Put
this as yet I cannot certainly find, and therefore at present must acquiesce.
Yet as to this Revelation book, there being of old much debate, it was at last
determined among the Heresies to question its Authority: now its being so late
received, it seems to imply, that it was the latest penned.

Whatsoever has been hitherto said, I rather incline to think, that this great
work was not concredited to Angels, or any holy men, or Primitive Churches at
first, but performed by the Majestical Authority, the Lord and King of his
Church, and that he himself in his own person commanded the sealing of the
Canon to his Servant John from heaven, in the close of the Revelation-book;
however (...) comes to pass, that we have not as yet this testimony of John,
^^mally set down by any Ecclesiastic Writ^^ of the Primitive Times, that I
have had the happiness to peruse: happy they that shall produce it, authentic,
just and true. But it seems to me that our Lord himself performed this work,
when he added those direful and fearful curse s to fall upon any that dare to
add or diminish from it: which look s like a sanction of heavenly Majesty, Pro.
22: 18, 19
not only pronouncing that particular Prophecy, but as extensive to the whole
Bible: since it was foretold by Daniel, that the Messiah should not only suffer
for transgression, Dan: 9: 24: Grasserus
but also seal up vision and Prophecy. Which I well know may be construed in
reference to all the ancient visions concentring in him: but the phrase may
comprehend also his sealing and determining and putting an end to all visions
and prophecies, after which there should come no more; he being the great
Prophet of his Church, and his holy Spirit the great dictator of Scripture.

This I humbly take to be the full final and utmost period of all Scriptures,
according to the foretelling of D aniel, and the practical consignation by our
Lord himself, and therefore needs no further authority. Whether then this or
the Gospel were written last, it matters not so much as to the signing of the
Canon, but since the Apostles in their times did attest it, and the primitive
churches worshipped and walked by its light, and that ever since by some
notable providence it has stood in the rear of the Canon in all ages: we have
received it in connection with the other holy Scriptures, as the complex or body
of Divine Truths let down from heaven, and therein as Tertullian expresses it,
we adore the fullness of the Scriptures. Rom 3 2 1 T^^ 3 10 2 Pet 1. 21.


To draw toward an upshot, since we find the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
cited in the New, a s the Oracles of God and thereby made authentical by the
Spirit of God, assuring us that the Prophets of old time spoke as moved by the
Holy Ghost, and what they wrote was received by the Jewish Church, which is
dignified with that honor to be the (...) or the keepers of the divine law:
since also that the New Testament is confirmed by divine miracles and oracles,
and the attestation of our Lord himself in the close of the Revelations; what
remains but to conclude, that they are of heavenly original, and have supremacy
in and over the Church, and over the whole world, as the rule of life, and are
as a star shining in a dark place, directing us in the path to eternal life.
Whatever the Romanists talk of their Church, or any other of the Patriarchal
Seats, especially Jerusalem and Antioch, where we are sure that Peter sat: yet
the Church can give no Authority to Scripture s, Ephesians. 2. 20.
but commendatory and all else i s but Sophism. For the Church is built upon
the doctrine of the holy Apostles and Prophets. So that although at first we
receive the scriptures in and from the ministry of Christ in his church. Yet as
Austins saying to this point may be glossed, [The whole Authority, both for
Ministers to preach, and churches to act, is deduced only from the holy
scriptures, so that the Churches of Christ ought to do nothing in doctrine
worship or manners, but a s the holy scriptures are their best, their unerring
and most authentic guide.

There rests yet a small objection before I conclude this chapter, which is,
that is citations in the new (as I said above) do ratify the Old: then the
Septuagint translation should receive a higher character than the Hebrew,
because in some places its cited when differing from the Hebrew, Then Aratus
being cited in the Acts and Menander in the Corinths, Acts 17. 28 1 Cor 15 22.
Tit1 12
and Epimenides, in Titus, are all authorized by the Apostles.

I answer, That the Septuagint Greek is cited only as a Translation: which by
wonderful providence was composed at the command of Ptolomy, to prepate the
Grecian Gentiles for receiving the Gospel. But I must not enlarge.

As to the heathen authors, Aratus and Epimenices are urged ad bominem, as
arguments from their own Prophets to convince them of some heathenish follies
and impieties. As for Menander, he is cited as the learned judge in answer to
Anacreon in the 32 verse of his atheistical rhyme: much like Horace and other
Epicurean Ballad makers: who often push at one another with scoffs and jeers.
Nay far better men then they some of the good fathers of the primitive times in
the Apologies made in defense of the christian-church bring in multitudes of
Testimonies out of Heathen writers against their Pagan Idolatries,
Superstitions, Atheisms, Persecutions, and the va^ boasts of the antiquity of
their shameful dunghill Deities, which matter i s obvious in the writings of
Origin against Celsus, Clemens Alexandrinus, in his stromata; Minutius Falix,
Arnobins against the Gentiles, Austin in his book of the city of God and
Learned Jer^^ in many of his Epistles and commentaries.

Let us then determine this point from what proceeds in the arguments assumed
from Oracles and Miracles, Gelas Cizen^ hist Nice^ council,
nnd many other grounds briefly touched above, that they are the very Word of
God, but particularly by their converting power upon the Soul, commanding
reverence, and trembling and horror into the conscience both of men and D
evils: as they did upon the S pirit of that Petulant Philosopher in the council
of Nice. Nay, so terrible is the weight of these Truths upon the Souls of some
fleering atheists that they are forced sometimes to Hobbianize, that is,
tremble to be in the dark, as he did at the Lord of Devonshires being afraid to
walk abroad without Mastiffs or Pistols, and how ^uch more was be appaled at
the approach of death.

Whereas on the other side, how often have we seen with joy and delight, this
blessed Word of God to have comforted many a soul in the greatest conflicts and
agonies of death, whence it follows, that these effect s must be the issue of
divine power, and that these writings are indeed the very Word of the holy God:
since no other books or preachings do or can so rouse and startle the proud
conscience of man. Insomuch, that e lse we might justly wonder what the man
ails that is so tormented, his heart raging like the troubled Sea, till the
Allablaster box of fragrant ointment be opened out of the promises, and the
balsome when poured into a scalded and wounded spirit, immediately asswages its
pain, and sink s the blisters: which all the Divines and holy Orators in the
world could never do, till the presence of God stamped idea's of mercy and
comfort, speaking peace to the Soul. Whence we may sweetly infer, that no other
books can be received with any powerful convictive authority: but wherein they
agree with the tenor and canon of holy Scriptures: so that whoever walks
according to this rule, ^al. 6. 16.
peace shall be on him, and mercy as on the Israel of God.

I shall then finish this first Chapter with that inference, for which those
mediums were brought. That since Faith in Christ Jesus is the very scope and
design, the very sum and substance of the whole Scripture: it follows, that the
acting of Faith upon them (as the Doctrinal Object of such divine original) is
grounded on the holiness and truth of the omnipotent and eternal God. Wherein
it is impossible for him to deceive us in not fulfilling his gracious promises,
Heb. 6. 18
to humble contrite and broken spirits, that trust in hi s mercy.

In like manner, Ephesians. 2. 20
the acting of our Faith on the Lord Jesus as its personal object for our
Justification, is built on the foundation of the holy Apostles and Prophets,
Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, Psalm. 87. 1
laid by the Father in the holy mountains.

Whoever then believes not God on his Word and Promise makes him a Liar as far
as in his power: 1 John 5. 10.
which every one should Tremble to think on, because they believe not the
record, that God has given of his Son. Which pertinently leads me into the
second chapter, about the Deity of our blessed Lord, the natural and eternal
Son of God. Which, Doctrine being evicted and manifested, (...) a most sure
ground for Faith to erect the Temple of Glory, and will secure our tenure of
Salvation inviolable, like a House built upon the Rock of Ages, that will
endure to all Eternity.

CHAP. II.
Of the Deity of Christ.
To Prove the Doctrines of Christ to be true and perfect, we must demonstrate
his person to be infallible, and to prove his sufferings to be satisfactory to
Divine Justice, there must be an infinite value in that glorious person, who
was graciously pleased to suffer for the sins of the Elect. If this be clear,
then Faith builds upon a Foundation as firm as the Being, Fidelity and
Constancy, of a holy and gracious God: This cannot be better fixed, but by
manifesting the Deity of Christ in the glorious Messiah, who appeared upon
Earth in the day s of Augustus Caesar. Now if Christ be God, even the natural
Son of God, then the most precious Blood of his sufferings by communication of
idioms or properties between the two natures may be called the blood of God,
Acts 20. 28. Heb 1. 3 and 9. 12. Rev. 1. 5, 8 Hornbeck, Mareius, Calovius, etc.
as it is in the Holy Scriptures.

For the Proof of the Deity of Christ, I intend no great Enlargement, but refer
to those who write directly against the Socinian Heresy: it concerns us only
to argue a little upon this point, and deduce some intermixed consequencies.

As to this great Subject, having already accounted for the Divinity of the
Scriptures we may now take leave to use them as Testimonies sent from heaven,
and left upon Record in the Church to prove this Truth. On which very score,
its commonly received from the Ancients, that the Apostle John wrote his Gospel
against Cerinthus, and other primitive Heretics, by the instigation of the
Asian Churches. But most certainly by the inspiration of the spirit of God.
After him Athanasius of Egypt, Hillary of France and Fulgentius of Africa, and
several others have largly and nervously handled the sword of the spirit
against the Arians. Let us however touch a few arguments in the case.

1. The first argument may be taken from the Eternity of Christ, no Being can
be eternal, but must be God. Our Lord was in Being from all Eternity, and
therefore must needs be God: Joh: 17. 5.
he had a glory with the Father before the world was, but let us join it with
eternal sonship, and infer, that if he were the eternal son of God then he must
be true God in Essence, for he must be every way the character of his
Hypostasis, or as we translate it, the express image of his Person. This
Argument of Christ's being God, because he was the eternal son of God. The Jews
very well understood its force, and therefore presently argued against him of
Blasphemy in assuming the honor of being God. For to be the eternal Son of
God, John 5. 18.
he must be coessential with God: which confession that Christ was the Son of
God; he required of all his Disciples, and it must be understood of his eternal
Being, and not as Adam is called a Son of God: because he urges the Jews with
his works, and such as none can produce but a God, such as the Father
performed; Mark 1. 24. 5, 7. Luke 4. 84. 8, 28. ^aert in Thalete
whereof more by and by. The Devils themselves do own this point, and yet how
many blind nominal Christians are there who have not attained the knowledge of
Thales, who calls him the (...) if cited right. And yet our days find some who
bear the Name of Christ, but blaspheme his nature, and speak boldly against
this grand Fundamental of Christianity: such as the Socinians and many Quakers,
poor wretches perverted by cunning sophisters, that pl^ad against the only true
means of their own salvation, and return again to the Old Covenant of works.
Whereas the scripture is both evident and copious s in the case. Prove. 2. 23.
A s that of Wisdom: ( I was set up from Everlasting, etc.) which must be
expounded of a person from that of verse 30. I was by him, as one brought up
with him, I was daily his delight, Psalm. 110. 1. Mat. 22 44. ^ob. 1. 18. Deuteronomy.
30. 12. Romans 10. 7. Ephesians. 4. 10. ^ob. 8. 58. Rev 1. 8. Job 1. 2
rejoicing always before him] This Problem confounded the Pharisees: How can
the Lord of David be his Son? He it is that lay in the bosom of God, and came
down from Heaven, being the same that ascended up again. He it is, that was
before Abraham, That was, and is, and is to come, the Almighty: That was in the
beginnning, and had his glorious Being before ever the World was, Isai. 57. 15
1 Timothy 3. 16
as the Ancients truly expound that phrase. Now what can be before the World
began, but Eternity, wherein God inhabits. This person was God manifest in the
flesh, ^ob. 1. 14.
and therefore God before his manifestation on Earth: Heb. 1. 8.
when he veiled his glory within the Tabernacle of his sacred flesh. Moreover
if God the Father call Christ God as he does [ Thy Throne O God is for ever and
ever] His Glory then must be coequal with the Fathers, Phil. 2. 6.
before the World began, he esteeming it no robbery to be equal with God. Yea
as God in unity of Essence, he is (...) the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Which Name and Style is applied to him by the
Apostle John, and seen by him as written in his vesture upon his thigh, adding,
that he was the Alobs and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and last.
Rev. 19. 16. 22 23


3. Hence flows the Doctrine of the unity of Christ the Son of God, with the
Father in the same Divine ^^ence, and therefore the the Father calls him his
Fellow in Zechary, and some observe concerning that passage in Isaiah [Smitten
of God and afflicted] that [ OF] the note of the Genitive, Zech 13. 7. Isai 53
4.
is not in the Hebrew: and therefore construed from the Hebrew [A smitten God]
equivalent to that in the New Testament, Act. 20. 28.
where the precious blood of Christ is called the blood of God, as abovesaid:
yet others affecting not this reading in Isaiah, I shall not contest it at
presen^^: but as to his unity, there be many (...) places, wherein our Lord
determines it, that he and the Father are one, and had the same essential glory
together from eternity. For speaking of the manutenency and protection of his
sheep from perishing, Job. 10. 30. and 17. 11, 21, 22, 23.
he declare s himself one with the Father that gave them to him: whereupon the
Jews being clear in the Argument took up stones again to destroy him as a
Blasphemer, in that he made himself one with God.

4. Again, He that is Omniscient and knows our thoughts by his own discerning
eve and power, must needs be God. As Solomon spoke to the Lord in Prayer: Thou
only know the heart of the Children of men. ^ Chron. 6. 30. Rev. 2. 23. Mat.
9. 4. 12, 25. Luke 5. 22. and 6 8. and 9. 47. and 11. 17.
Now our Savior expressly assumes it to himself; that he searches the Reins
and the heart, and it is often expressed, that our Lord knew the thoughts both of
his Disciples and his enemies as may be observed in the Scripture. Nay, he
perceived when thoughts did but arise in their hearts: much like that of David,
Thou understandest my thoughts afar off, which demonstrates an Omniscient
Deity, Luke 24. 38. Psalm. 139. 2. Heb. 4. 12, 13.
and this our Lord did not discern as to one of his Disciples only but of
several at once. So that this essential word of God is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, and all things are naked and open before
him, and no creature but is manifest in his sight, which must needs follow,
because he is the Creator of all: which brings in the fifth;

5. Another conviction of this glorious Truth of Christ's Deity is drawn from
his Omnipotency. Job 1. 3.
For all things were made by him and without him was not any thing made that
was made: which action of creating must needs be invested in the infinite power
of his Essence, whom we have before proved to be the Eternal God; and had the
same glory with God the Father before the World, was, praying further that his
humanity now assumed into unity with the second person might be dignified with
the same glory. John 17. 5 Col. 1. 16.
This great truth is confirmed by the great Apostle [By him were all things
created in Heaven and Earth, even the Angels, those glorious Spirits were
formed by him, and for him, that is for his glory and service, Rev. 4. 11. Heb.
1. 1^.
and to sing his praises. But to end, its spoken by God the Father to Christ [
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the work of thy hands.

Yet further,

6. As Christ made the World, it must needs follow, that he also governs it:
sometimes immediately by himself, sometimes by the ministration of Angels, and
as to the Church by his own Spirits. Thence is he styled King of Kings, King of
Nations, and King of Saints. The Apostle Paul asserts him to be before all
things in his eternal Essence, Col 1 17
and that by him all things to consist, (...), Heb. 1. 3.
have the continuation of their Beings, Lives and Motion s. Yea, it is he, tha^
bears, supporteth and upholdeth all things by the word of his power. He spoke
the word and they were made, and he speaks and ordains the time, method and
means of their continuance.

7. Besides, as he maintains and preserves the world in its being, Luke 24. 19.
Job 2. 11. and 11. 4. and 6. 54. and 5. 21. and 1: 14:
so likewise, beyond the ordinary course of nature, in the time of his
Incarnation, he wrought all those mighty Miracles by his own divine power.
Whereby he manifested his own Glory, that is, of his Deity. As in turning Water
into Wine at Cans, and in raising of Lazarus, he was glorified to be the Son of
God: Therefore the Apostle John from that and many other cases, of raising the
dead, etc. might well affirm, that he had seen his glory, Job 5 17 and 15: 24:
and 10 18.
even in the transfiguration, as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth. Till the incarnation or rather the beginning of his Ministry
the Father wrought; But now (says he) I Work. He laid down the life of his
Humanity, Heb: 1: Rom: ^: 4: andC.
rose from the dead, ascended into Heaven, and sat down at the right hand of
God by his own Divine Power. Tho ^is true, that some of these things, being
sometimes ascribed to God essential, and otherwhere where predicated or
affirmed of Christ personal, do therein unite in the confirmation of his Deity:
who performed all these great signs, 1 John 5. 13.
that we should believe him to be the Son of God.

8. Another Testimony of his glorious Deity is, the pardon of sin. The
Pharisees saw the force of this Argument, Mat. 9. 3 Luk 5. 21
and blasphemously ca^cht at it, as a great crime, for arrogating to himself
the honor which is alone due to the Majesty of God. But our Lord sufficiently
knew the dignity of his own person, tho somewhat veiled: yet to the comfort of
many a poor sinner, and to their inestimable joy, often (as a God) pronounced
the forgiveness of their sins. Nay to show the union of his humanity with the
Deity, Mat. 9. 2, 3. Act 5: 31 Heb: 1. 3
declares that the Son of Man has power upon Earth, as well as in Heaven to
forgive sins. So the Apostle to the Hebrews confirming his Godhead over and
over in the same Chapter, asserts, that having purged away our sins by himself,
i. e. by his blood, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

9. Again, since contrite sinners do humbly supplicate to God for the pardon of
sin: Job 14. 13
we find him recorded sometimes as the direct and immediate object of Worship
both from men and angels. How often do we find him prayed to, and worshipped by
his Disciples, and himself accepting all as his due. Now he that receives
prayer and answers it to the people (...) God, and takes into his custody the
spirits of dying Saints, as he did Stephen's, this person must needs be God.
Act: 7: 59 Heb: 1: 6 Mat: 8: 27 Job 38: 9
Nay all the Angels of God are commanded to Worship him, at whose word the
raging seas hush into their swaddling bands, and are quiet like a child sleeping
in its cradle: the boisterous winds delight to be still, that they may without
noise hear his delicious and heavenly voice with all silence and subjection,
and make a halcyon calm from Pole to Pole.

10. But to end: He that is declared to be judge of the World, and to raise all
persons out of their Graves by h^s own Imperial command to appear at his
righteous Bar, must not that person be God? If he knew not the hearts and
thoughts of all and every secret thing from his own Omniscience, Eccl. 12: 14
which thing is an incommunicable attribute of God, he could not be Judge of
quick and dead at his appearance and Kingdom. To Judge the World was by the
Pharisees acknowledged to be the character of a God. 2 Timothy 4: 8:
The high Priest therefore hearing this, rents his clothes, and calls it
Blasphemy. But why the second person having admitted the humanity into union,
and being head of the Church should perform this glorious work, Mat: 26: 65
Mark 17: 64
depends only upon the Economy of the sacred Trinity: a secret not to be
irreverently peered into but adored. Lets be wise to Sobriety according to what
is written and not transcend the limits at the foot of the Mount. Rom: 12: 3
But to draw to an issue: He is also constituted Judge of Angels at that great
day, they must bow their celestial knees at his Name, and the evil Spirits
acknowledge this while our Lord was here below, Isa: 45: 23 Rom: 14: 10, 11 Mat:
8. 29:
beseeching him not to torment them before the time. Now it is a work competent
alone to a God to torment Spirits All the powers in heaven and earth besides
cannot do it of their own vigor and force, unless permitted, influenced,
directed and managed by God in it: and blessed be God for it, that has
reserved the dominion of our spirits to himself alone, as well as of Angels.
But this supremacy was acted by Christ at his pleasure from the innate power of
his Deity, when he cast them out as evil and unclean spirits fore against their
wills, and at their supplication gave them leave to go hither or thither. For
they are in adamantine chains, and those chains in his own hand, 2 Pet: 2: 4
and casts them into hell and looses them when he pleases. There fore he, Rev:
20: 1, 2, 7^
who by his own power and authority in communion with the essential God head
does these great things, must be God blessed for ever, Amen.

I know the Socinians talk of their created God, and so would fain evade the
dint of Scriptur^s: but that is most perfect nonsense to assert two Gods, and
one a created God. For Infinite can be but one: or else hold one to be titular,
as Angels and Magistrates, tho in a higher Orb and Order; which yet is
inconsistent with the precedent Scriptural Arguments, that prove our blessed
Lord to be God in essence, coequal with the Father and Holy Spirit, to whom be
glory and dominion for ever and ever.

Now then, since this most excellent person by virtue of his sufferings in
communion with his infinite Deity (tho in it self impassible) has given full
satisfaction (...) his Father for all the sins of Believers, and by whom we
receive the atonement, Rom: 3: 21: and 5: 21 Act: 20: 2
even through the merit of his precious blood, and that hereby he is become a
personal, particular and immediate Object of our Faith, and that by him we do
believe in God the justifier of the ungodly through his righteousness and his
alone: Rev: 22 17: Heb: 9: 12: Ephesians: 5: 26: Tit: 2: 14: 1 John: 1: 7: 1 Pet: 1: 2
Rev: 3: 5: Heb: 9: 16:
and that this glorious person so graciously invites all thirsty sinners to
take the water of life freely, and to believe in his Name for the remission of
Sins: let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find Grace to help in time of need.

Now let this suffice to have written about the two great Foundations of Faith.

In the first Chapter concerning the Divinity of the Scripture s: And in the
second in reference to the Deity of our blessed Lord, which I hope will so
satisfy, comfort and erect the Spirits of feeble and staggering Believer s,
that they may the more sweetly and firmly lay the stress of their fears in life
and death upon thy s Rock in Zion: and if they will be but careful and vigilant
a s to holy walking, and be earnest in Prayer to enjoy the beautiful and
Soulrefreshing influence s of the Holy Spirit: They may then walk safely and
joyfully through the valley of the shadow of death till they arrive at the
mountain of Glory.

And so I proceed to the second part of thy s Treatise about the nature and
actings of Faith it self more immediate and particular.

PART II.
Of the Nature of Faith in particular.
Having in the first part of this Treatise, laid the precious foundation upon
those two marble rocks, the Doctrine of the Divinity of the Scriptures, and the
Deity of Christ: which may be likened to those vast and stately ^^lciments
which Solomon built on the sides of Mount Moriah, to sustain the grandeur of
the Temple. I should now proceed to erect the strong hold of confidence, and
the pleasant Palace of assurance: wherein that beautiful Daughter of Zion, the
grace of faith sits as upon a throne of ivory, within the Curtains of our
second Solomon.

And this I shall endeavor in the Ten Apart^ments or Chapters following.

Chap. 1. Of the Name and Nature of Faith. 2. The various Expressions setting
out its nature. 3. The lowest or least degree of saving Faith. 4. Of
Justification, the immediate effect of Faith. 5. Of entering into Covenant with
God by Faith. 6. Of the necessary and inseparable connection between
Sanctification or holiness, and Faith. 7. Of the Infirmities of Believers. 8.
Of assurance or joy of Faith how attained, with some clear signs. 9. The danger
of Unbelief. 10. The happy Fruits and benefits of Faith.
And so conclude the whole with some Corollaries by the blessed leave and help
of our gracious God.

I intend not to enlarge very much on any but to be briefest on those where
others have been copious. On the second, third, sixth and eighth, I would
insist a little liberally: it being my primary design, to strengthen the weak
believer, and in courage sinking spirits: beseeching them to meditate seriously
on the directions for understanding the nature of Faith in the first and
second; and to be conscientious in their holy care of walking with God in the
points prescribed in the 6th chapter. That so they may live more comfortably,
dye more sweetly, and reign victoriously.

And now let us walk together into the first chapter by the gracious assistance
of our holy and ever-blessed God.

CHAP I.
Of the name and nature of Faith
THe Rise or Origin of this word is from the Italian Feed, and that from the
Latin, Fides, and that as some conceit, from the Greek (...) to persuade and
that from the Hebrew, Pethah. Cicero in his Offices descants on the word Fides,
as if so termed qula ^^s quod dictum: because we believed, what is spoken or
promised, shall be done. Our English Saxon word [ Believe] comes from the
Dutch, lieven, and that as it is thought from the old provincial Latin among
the Reman Colonies in those quarters [ Libeo Libet] to list or consent to a
thing with love or liking, and that the word (...) comes from a Teutonick word
of the same extract [ Verloff] which signifies to assent. Now as one of the
Ancients says, ( consensio est ^olentis) consent is the act of a person that is
willing: so to believe, is to consent freely and with love to the truth of what
is spoken, which breeds conviction and satisfaction on the mind of man. Now the
inclination of the will to believe, is wrought by God, and if any question, why
one is persuaded by God and not another.: Psalm. 119. 36.
Let him take his answer from holy Paul, that it is God that makes to differ,
and O man, who art thou that reply against God, and if that please not, let
the bold fellow go look another: (...), 4. 7. ^om, 9, 20.
But as Austin treats him, caveat presumprores, etc. Let him take heed of
presuming in curious searches, and determining the mysteries of grace, and the
counsels of God. Is it not abundantly enough, that thy heart is softened,
melted, inclined to cast thy self wholly on the free grace of the New Covenant:
when others repelling the glorious light of the Gospel, run back again to the
Old Covenant of works, and split themselves upon the rock of presumption;
expecting divine mercy without the merits of Christ, and so rush upon the pikes
and spears of divine justice and vengeance to their eternal ruin.

But to prosecute our work.

To Believe is to be persuaded and satisfied in our hearts and consciences of
what God has spoken and promised in the holy Scriptures. On the other side, to
beget a confidence and trust as to what any man speaks or asserts: among
several Nations, according to their civil and municipal Laws there must
intervene a proof or an ascertainment made by the instrument of a public
Notary, or by trusty witnesses of the vicinage as among the Northern Nations,
recited in Lindebrogius, etc. or else by sound arguments that cannot be
refelled without incurring gross absurdities: as in cases of unknown Murders,
the wonderful providence of God does shine forth in their discovery by such
methods and probable arguments, which procure an acquiescence and quietation of
spirit, as to the truth of the things delivered. But in divine cases ((...)) I
am sufficiently satisfied and persuaded by the mere word of God: Romans 8. 38.
When I am sure that God has said it, I believe it, for in things Divine there
can be no sublimer proof then the testimony of God himself. For the very being
of an infinite God determines his verity; and when our imperfect and lapsed
reason, and many times misguided by education, and the secret impressions of
converse from designing persons, that are apostates from the truth; does thr'u
pride and envy, and delight in contention study to contradict, and invalidate
the texts of sacred Scripture.

Let Us remember that infinite Wisdom, (had it so pleased him) could have
amazed us with such potent arguments that might strike us dumb, and muzle and
astonish us, as our Lord did the Pharisees at every turn.

God is Truth, and Truth Essential, the fountain of all Truth, and in him is no
darkness at (...) Not one lota or tittle of any of his sacred words can be
infringed by the least or greatest of Errors. John 1. 5.
Whence it comes, that the truths of Gods revelation are the grounds of all the
firmitude and stability of our spirits;which otherwise might waver, Isa. 7. 9.
and wander from their constancy, ^ Chron. 20. 1
per avia eserti, through the gloomy bypath of error to all Eternity.

In the significant language of the Hebrews, the word therefore which is
translated by Faith, is a conjugate from (...) verit, or truth For as much as
Truth is the peculiar object of trust, and whence some think the word Trust to
be derived; (...)
and therefore judge that all liars, promisebreakers and false witnesses are
unfit to be trusted with persons or matters of the very least importance, and
should be thrust out of all good men's houses, Psalm. 101. 7:
and all civil society, and should be forced to live among beasts or such as
are like themselves, which is worse: and there cheat and abuse one another till
their mutual extirpation; Deuteronomy. 19. 19. (...) 22, 19.
or rather by godly and wise Magistrates be made to suffer the penalty
prescribed by a wise and holy God, according to what their lies and false
witness might have injured their brother: whether in life, member, good name or
estate, they should suffer exactly the same punishment, their eye should not
spare nor pity, according to the Lex (...), or else the world will never be at
rest nor quiet from wicked wretches.

But were this Law of God made the Law of Nations, his blessing would follow it
with more peace and tranquillity, then yet the world has seen.

Well then, as Truth is a most radiant attribute of God, and dwells in his
nature, as he is Ens primum and simplicefrmum, the eternal and uncompounded
Being: And if Angels, Job. 4. 18.
whom he charges with folly in comparison with himself, do not ( raciocinari)
reason by mediums, but act by intuition: how much more does that most abstruse
and immense being, the Father of lights, both in his cognition of all things at
once, and according to the purpose of his own will, act in expressing and
manifesting what he pleases to his creatures and shining upon that
manifestation with such a glorious ray of truth, that were it not from the
darkness of our lapsed estate, we should without any dispute or hesitation
immediately embrace it for the highest and unquestionable verity. Hence it is
that in whatever he speaks from his most holy mouth by Oracles or Prophets
ratified in their authority from him, must be judged a great presumption and
impiety to call for a reason of any of his words or actions by bold and daring,
and impudent creatures. For from the rays of truth streaming from the immense
and soul-dazling sun of his verity flows all the certainty and stabiliment in
the spirits of angels or men, to fix and settle us in our belief and obedience.

Whoever then does believe, sets his seal to the Word that God is true; and he
that does not believe, John 3. 33.
as far as in him lies, would seem to induce, that the holy and true God,
should be a liar and deceiver, and not to be trusted. Such is the most horrible
consequent of unbelief. Though I am well satisfied, that there are some
trembling souls, The Lady Thomson late of Osterley: park cut now in heaven.
that either from natural timorous tempers or some other dark incidencies upon
their spirits do not come up to clear and comfortable actings of Faith, and
that abhor the very thoughts of not trusting God upon his word of promise, and
are truly gracious at bottom, though cannot discern and know it. As I knew not
long since a gracious Person, when discoursing of the work of God upon her
heart, 1 John 5. 10. and 6. 29.
said that she trembled at that Scripture in John, of making God a liar, and
that the deep pondring upon it, was the beginning of her conversion One is apt
to think, it were a very easy thing to believe the holy God upon his Word: Ephesians.
1 19: 2 These. 1. 11 Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. 3 Tim. 1. 15.
but indeed, renewed and sanctified persons have sound it one of the most
difficult works in the whole world, because its contrary to nature, to found
our salvation upon another righteousness, and therefore needs a miraculous
work from God to effect it in us. It Is true, that the doctrine of the Gospel is
a most faithful saying that is, a most certain and undoubted assertion full of
grace and truth, and worthy of all acceptance or embracing ( utrique ulnis and
in utraque cordis camera) in our most intimate bosoms: that Christ came into
the world to save sinners: But it requires almighty power of the spirit of
Christ to bring us to the obedience of faith, But of this more (God granting)
in the sequel. Now I Will proceed about some things in the nature of Faith, to
which end I may recount that good old saying of Austin cited by some Accipe and
signas) receive it, that is, believe it, and thou fealest to the truth of God.
Thus Sarah acting by Faith, judged him faithful who had promised, and attained
the end of her particular trust in the case whereunto God had spoken.

But not to dilate in generals, I might proceed to the hononymy of the term,
and the various Synonymous expressions of it found in Scripture. I might from
fathers and schoolmen, from confessions of the Reformed Churches, and their
commentaries, common places and Systemes from controversial writings between us
and the Romanists, and from the many holy practical writers of our own on this
very subject, raise a great pile or mass of discourse, and therein but actum
agere, over and over with the same in some little varieties. But I forbear,
since my chief end and scope is principally to erect and comfort broken,
languishing spirits, that hang in suspense as it were between the hopes of
heaven, and the fears of hell: I would gladly put a Scripture staff (even one
of the slaves of the Ark within the Sanctuary) into the hands of every weary
and heavy laden soul.

I shall not then be nice or overcurious in handling this point under the
distinct heads of definition or description, or in distinguishing it into
several sorts, and so proceed to examine all the causes, effects properties,
adjuncts, contraries, and the several corollaries deducible from all: or the
cases of conscience, doubts and objections afflicting troubled spirits; for
they are innumerable: but only treat upon some particulars most practical and
useful, either past by, or but lightly touched by others. As Doctor Boodt that
learned Physician, and of great request with the Reverend Bishop Us^er, was
more pleased to write [ de affectibus ommisses] of cases not handled, then to
trouble the world with large bodies of Physic over and over. So should all
endeavor not to burden the church of God with swelling discourses, wrought up
into a cumbersome Tympany out of others preceding, who have done worthily in
their generations: but should either add quid novi: or quid noviter, either
something new, that may increase christians knowledge and grace, or after a
concise and clear method, that may raise the fancy, tortifie memory, and take
with such as are out of the church to help on their conversion. Though I am
sensible of my own deficiency, and entreat a candid Reader to pardon what is
here done out of a great thirst and desire to cast in some mites for initiated
believers, as may help I hope, and add to their faith, or the joy of faith, and
supply something of what is yet lacking in the faith of some weaker christians,
with whom we converse in Ordinances. Divinity is an Ocean that has neither
shoares nor bottom, there is room enough without envy for every one to spread
new Sails, and in continual travel, velling, we may still see more wonders of
God in these Deeps.

But yet not to prescind and cut off all proper method and genuine handling of
this subject.

I shall first set down the true nature and essence of this grace of saving
faith, and then proceed to the rest of the chapters in their prescribed order.

Now since it has pleased the goodness of God, to give spiritual life to many
thousands in these British ^sles, that have, and do believe by the
instrumentality of several burning and shining lights ^ver since the latter end
of the Reign of Tiberius, Gildas deexc^^ Britan.
when the Gospel began first to shine among our praecessors: whom God has
raised from age to age out of his infinite mercy, as serviceable under his
divine commission to open and apply the holy scriptures; from Joseph of
Arima^bea and his companions at Glastenbury, as our Ancestors do generally
determine it, and have handed it through dark and gloomy times, Spelman. council
Tom. 1.
till its brightness recovered again by the industry of German of Auxere, and
Lupus of Troyes, their disputation at Vepulam against ^elagius his errors and
heresies. Nay, through his divine goodness there never wanted some worthy
patrons of the truth under British Saxon, and Norman Governments, till the days
of Wicklif, that great Luminary, whose rays shone into Bohomia, Helvetia, and
thence into Poland, as a late worthy Rector of Lesna, and university in that
Kingdom, sometimes since did acquaint me, that they own it. And after him still
sprang up more and more illustrious persons till the restoration from Popery.
Since which the doctrines of holy faith derived from Scripture have been set
forth by the Reformed in several Nations, and called a Body of confessions
printed in quarto. But to let them pass: I shall for the maine follow that Type
of truth which our own teachers have gatherout of those sacred pages.

In the first place then, the church of England having exhibited the main
doctrines consonant to the holy Scriptures in their Articles, Catechism and
Homilies, I shall name some particulars to our purpose about Faith.

In the eleventh Article we have this clause: [ That we are justified by faith
only, is a most wholesome doctrine, See Nowels Catechism Homilies edit Land.
1635. Fol. p. 22. Homily of falvation or justification) part 1. p. 14.
and very full of comfort, as is more largly expressed in the homily of
Justification] of which more fully in the confession of Faith, and the defense
of it by Bishop Jewel, some hints see in the Catechism, but especially the
Homilies.

In the fourteenth Homily thus; [ Lively Faith is a true trust and confidence
of the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ] and farther, that this [
true and lively faith is not ours, but by Gods working in us.] and again, P.
17. It Is not the act of faith that justifies, that were by some act or virtue,
that is within our selves, etc:] and again, ^. 18. [ By Faith given us of God,
we embrace the promise of Gods mercy, and of the ^emission of our sins] and yet
still more fully in the third part, p. 20. [ True christian faith is, etc to
have a sure trust and confidence in Gods merciful promises to be saved from
everlasting damnation by Christ, whereof does follow a loving heart to obey his
Commandments]

In the little Catechism there are hints to the same purpose, as that in the
answer about Baptism, there is required Faith [ Whereby they steadfastly believe
the promises of God]

But lets proceed to others;

The Assembly of Divines in their Confession of Faith, after some previous
Discourse about it, expressly thus. [The principal act of saving Faith are,
accepting, receiving and resting upon Christ alone for justification,
Sanctification, and eternal life, by virtue of the covenant of Grace.] There Is
also much to the same effect, amplified in the larger, and contracted in the
shorter Catethism.

The Declaration of the Faith and Order of the Congregational Churches in
England met at the Savoy in London, by the Elders and Messengers, October. 12.
165o. express it in the very same words, Chap. 14. Sect. 2. Page 24. which are
before rehearsed out of the confession of the Assembly of Divines at
Westminister.

All these Societies then for substance do most harmoniously agree in the same
Doctrine of Faith, exclusive of works in the point of Justification. And oh
that they would also, once agree to live quietly and peaceably by each other,
as becomes Professors of the same holy Faith, washed in the same holy Baptism,
and called in one hope of the same calling, and as becomes the worshippers of
one Lord, Ephesians. 4. 5.
and one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all,
that truly believe.

We agree in Judgment, as to the great points of Salvation, and why not
affection and brotherly love, and peace; forbearing one another in little
matters, not introduced into the primitive Churches before the declension and
apostasy began, I am sure, the Church of England teaches other Doctrine in the
second and third part of the Sermon of Faith. Well then, we are at amity in
this great particular, That [ Faith is the gracious acting of the whole soul or
heart of a sincere Christian; whereby he rests and (...) upon a (...) Savior
for remission of sins and eternal life grounded on the precious promises of
God: which is infused and wrought there by the holy Spirit at our new birth and
convertion from sin to holiness.]

In this Declaration of the nature of Faith we may for distinction sake, take
more especial notice of the succeeding particulars in peculiar Sections.

SECT. 1.
1. First, We may enquire, where this Grace of Faith is subjected, and that's
expressed to be in the whole man.

The Subject of its inherence is not this or that particular faculty, but the
whole Soul or heart of Man: as the Scripture often expresses it: and we may
observe that some times the Heart is put for the ( 1 King. 3. 9.
) understanding: sometimes for the ( Act. 7. 39.
) will, other times for ( 1. Cor. 7. 37.
) purpose: for the affection of ( Mat. 6. 21.
) love: for inordinate ( Romans 1. 24.
) lusts in their seat: for ( Eccl. 6. 7.
) desire, and for the ( Luke 1. 16 and 21. 14 Acts 8: 37: Luke 24 Romans 10. 9.
Prove: 3: 5:
) memory.

Now that Faith is situate, first in geral, in the heart, and then in the
particular faculties; let us further manifest it: and begin with that of Philip
to the Eunuch of Ethiopia, [ If thou believe with all thine heart, thou
may be baptized] so our Lord to the two Disciples, O foolish and slow of
heart to believe. Again, in the Episile to the Romans, if thou shall believe in
thy heart, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness: and we are commanded to trust in the Lord with all our heart.
And again, Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by Faith: and on the other
side, unbelief is fixed also, Ephesians: 3: 17. Heb: 3: 12
or seated in the heart. Take heed left there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief. I might multiply, but its obvious in Scripture.

The Jewish Rabbis or Philosophers (such as they are) use to place the Soul
and, Job 38: 36
its understanding faulty in the heart, Barthol. Anat. Hag. 1655. 8. d.
Cartesius 1: 3 c. 6. ^. 336 Fromond, de anima
according to that in Job, Who gives understanding to the heart: but the Greek
Schools in the head or brain; where some Anatomists have found out a chamber of
presence; and there in the Glandula pinealis, where this Empress sits in state,
and commands the little world or Empire of man. The Peripateticks give the Soul
a Forest-range through the whole body and others (as I remember) conceit that
it swims in the blood, and flies up and down in the spirits, etc. and make a
great stir about the fibula animae: the button or bond that ties or links the
rational and animal soul together, and when they come to the powers and
faculties of the Soul, they make great distinction, and from thence their
notions are derived and mixed with many subtleties among the school Divines, in
the dark times, before the Reformation appeared. Whose works though in some
things may be of good use to fix terms and distinctions: yet ordinarily their
niceties have eaten out the heart of solid Divinity, till the happy days of
the restoration of the Gospel.

As to what we are upon, Durandus Q Scaliger, etc.
I think with some of the School men, and several other Learned men of late,
that there is no sound foundation in reason for this variety of faculties,
specifically distinct as some would have it: yet having asserted that Faith, is
subjected in the whole Soul, that I may conform to the received and used
Opinion: I would show how Faith resides and acts in every reputed faculty, and
thence by induction of particulars in the whole Soul.

That Faith is seated in the understanding, is undoubted; because it is a
rational act of the soul, being resolved into the divine authority of God, who
is infallible. Since also our reason is finite, corrupt and obnoxious to many
impostures from satan: I take him for the wisest and most rational person, 2
Coe: 4: 4^
who in the deep and profound mysteries of Christian Religion, acts his reason
by Faith in this life, and waits for fuller Revelation when he comes to glory.
Here we see, that is, 1 Cor: 13: 12:
understand but in part, but there we shall know even as we are known.

In the work of Grace, the understanding is first enlightened to know the truth,
called the opening of the heart in Lydia, Acts 16: 14: Joh: 4: 10
and our blessed Lord tells the woman of Sichem: if thou knew the gift of
God, thou would have asked him for living water. (...)
There Is a thick masty wall broken through by the hammer of Gods word, 2 Cor:
10: 4.
within the stony heart, and a clear (...) window placed in the breach: that
the light of the glorious Gospel may shine into the mind: 2 cor 4 4
which before was blinded by the God of this world, Ephesians: 5: 6:
that they should not believe the truth. Ye were darkness it self (says Paul)
more than Egyptian or Cymbrian, this being the darkness of the bottomless pit,
but now are light in the Lord.

This illumination from Heaven fetches off the scales as from the eyes of Paul,
and teaches us all to have a prospect of an Ocean of wonders in Gods Law, and
of deep mysteries in the promises, yea to apprehend and apply them aright. Isa:
53: 11:


Therefore Faith is sometimes set out by knowledge, Jeh: 10: 38:
by his Knowledge (objectively) shall my righteous servant justify many. Our
Lord also proving his Deity by his Miracles, (...) 17: 3:
bids them, if they will not credit his words, yet believe his works, that ye
may know says our Lord; and believe that the Father is in me and I in him.
Where knowledge and Faith are explicitly connexed together. Again, This is life
eternal to know thee and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. It was to that
purpose our Lord made himself known and manifest to all his Disciples in the
glory of his Deity. Yea our Faith on him as God-man is wrought in us by
revelation from the Spirit, the eyes of our understanding being enligtned by
him. Ephesians: 1: 17
So that we have both the object and Organ illustrated at once: Christ set
forth in the Gospel, and our understanding shone upon by the Spirit: and at
length from the first degree of light, Rom: 1: 17 Col. 2. 2: and 1: 12: 2 Timothy:
4: 8:
the Saints proceed from Faith to Faith, and then by holy Meditation with
diligence, arrive to that acknowledgment of the mystery of God and of the
Father, and of Christ. Nay to such sweet and full assurance at last, that with
holy Paul, they come to know, whom they have believed, and wait for the Crown
of Righteousness at his appearance and Kingdom. From all this we may conclude
that a true Believer takes Christ for his Savior and Ruler, with a clear and
irrefragable Judgment.

2. The second particular work in the order of nature, (tho conjoynt in time)
as to conversion, is the inclination of the will to receive Christ. Now because
the Scripture delights exceedingly to set forth our Relation to Christ by
Marriage union: Ephesians: 5: 32 Song of Solom:
I shall a little insist upon it. We say then in such covenants. that it is the
Will that makes the Match. It Is not the saving a few words in the Chancel out of
a Book by inforcement of Parents or Friends instigation against their own wills
and minds, such Marriages are but brutish conjunctions, when persons marry
merely for Money or outward Preferments, and not unfeigned love, which God never
ordained or appointed to be the ends of that blessed union, but with the heart
and sincere affection. Promises are but dipped in falsehoods and lies, and often
managed by some subtle false Judas for base ends: where the sweet unforced
inclinations of the will is not present: which will after a while vent it self
in captious, perverse suspicions and unnatural reflections, and seldom ends but
in gall and bitterness without great mercy to the innocent party. Sanctior
copuld cordis qu^^ corporis:
For the truth is, it can be no less than an original cheat, and a wicked
action: when a Woman accepts a Husband merely for gain or honor, when her
heart was never honestly and truly toward him. It was the false act of a
strange or whorish heart in the sight of God, when others whose spirits were
right, might have stood sincere and faithful, being filld with candor and
sweetness, in conjugal Relations. Even so it is as to outward hypocritical and
seigned Professors, who take Christ in the Sunshine of the Gospel, and in hope
of a great inheritance, when the will in its personal adherence to Christ for
his righteousness, and holiness, never came to a true and real union. Whereas
the Will is the main point in Marriage, according to the determinate rule of
the civil Law [ Consensus non concubitus efficit matrimonium, Cod. Justin
It Is consent and not the bed that makes it.] So in all moral actions, contracts
and agreements: neither is it otherwise in this grand, spiritual concernment of
the soul: when the Judgment has declared the undone and ruined estate of any
out of Christ, and proclaimed the rare excellencies that are in him; and how
appropriate a Savior to scatter all our fears, root out all despondencies; and
to supply all its wants and indigencies: Then comes in the Will, and chooses
his person as the most lovely in Heaven and Earth, consents to all his gracious
offers, and sincerely embraces his love and mercy with unspeakable joy and
thankfulness, and delightful resolutions of new and constant Obedience.

The soul then being invited by Christ in such sweet alluring terms, ^ev: 24:
17: sa: 551: ^ong: 1: 3:
as these [ Whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life freely,
and ho every one that thirsts, etc.] it finds a sweet inclination smelling
hagrantly of the precious a^ointings of the Spirit: when this powerful faculty
is turned about, renewed and filled with the balsome of heaven, and thereby;
through infinite grace and irresistible power allured to look, and run after
him, to accept him and close with him on the terms of the New Covenant of grace.

In Scripture therefore, the Will is often phrased and signified by the heart.
Thus Solomon prays at the Dedication, that the Lord would incline their
hearts, that is, 1 King: 8: 58: Psalm. 119, 36, 112.
sweetly bend their wills to keep his laws; and David thus, incline my heart
unto thy testimonies, and to perform thy Statutes. To incline the will, is,
when divine light has set before the understanding, the knowledge of the true
good, this divine power inwardly moves the will to it; Lactant, de Orig c: 3:
de falls. sa 7. l. 3. c. 10 de ira Dei c: 7. and B^ Wilkins in a set disc urse
8. Land 1678.
not by any force or coaction, but by a sweet melting and moulding it into the
Will of God. Man is a rational creature, and a religious, as Lactamius seems to
make the last his specific difference from bruits. So that when the stony
heart is by infinite power changed into golden oar, then it is melted by the
fire of divine love in the furnace of godly repentance, and by degrees cast
into the mould of the divine will, and effigiated or shaped into the exact
image of his Son. After this great work, the renewed soul finds its will
determinately carried to blessed objects, and turned quite about to delight in
heavenly persons and things. There Is no compulsion in the point, but nature
renovate fertur, the soul being changed, is now by its own spontaneous freedom
carried with a spiritual naturality to that which is coadequate to its essence,
and has received from God a blessed recovery to an enjoyment of, and a
complacency in this supreme and everlasting good. Now though the soul can do
no otherwise (as far as it is renewed) yet it is no way compelled, but acts
according to its own delight and pleasure. For the whole soul, whole heart,
whole will, so far as renewed, is carried out with all the Sails of its
desires, and satiated with the sense and comfort of this most happy change, and
when come to heaven will be fully concentred in those enjoyments, and bathed in
that Ocean of bliss, no otherwise in their (though minute) proportion, than God
himself, the humane nature of our Lord, then holy Angels, and the Saints in
glory.

After which manner some of the Ancients, and several of the Moderns express
themselves. Strangig de Voluntate Dei, amstel. 1657. p. 683. l 36. 14 and p.
686.
I shall a little touch upon what Strangius declares to this point [ Libertas
naturae est abomni necessitate, quae repugnat naturae voluntaris] Liberty of
nature is when free from all necessity, which is a thing repugnant to the
nature of the Will.

Again, [ Necessity does not overthrow out Liberty.]

Again, [ Indifferency lies then in the nature of Liberty, P. 687.
when it can act or not act about the same object, when it may choose either
that or another] and afterward instances in God, in Angels, and in the blessed
Saints, 690. and so (...) p. 87. A^t Burges of se^ p. 3 12.
whose will is determined to true Good, etc.

This powerful and sweet motion and inclination of the will of a believer by
the spirit of God, may be happily shadowed forth by the inclination of the mind
in (...) carried toward union in the Marriage-covenant. It is of God, and
generally little or no reason to be given of many of their choices, but an
influence or impulse from heaven, in those that out of pure and honest
affection, give mutual consent to that relation, and not for any base and
simster ends, but for personal delight in each other: wherein that unspotted,
intaminated love in rational beings, so vastly differs from brutish lusts, and
draws nigh to an Angelical Excellency, like that of an honorable Lady to a
Philosopher in Scotland, mentioned by Burton in his book of Melancholy. How
much more and transcendently excellent is that joyful and heavenly love moving
in the heart by the finger of God, in a soul that thirsts after spiritual
espousals to the Lord of Life.

There is no adumbration of our union to the Lord Jesus, more proper or
pertinent than this, wherein the Scripture does so greatly delight. To the
accomplishment whereof the drawing of the Father is requisite, and it is
performed by inward teaching, Ephesians. 5. 32 Rev. 19. 7. Joha 6. 44, 45,
and thereby producing a heavenly inclination to this union and communion with
his Son: as the most excellent person, and most beloved of the Soul. This
secret work being formed upon the heart, makes up that inseparable conjunction
with Christ, which shall triumph in the same chariot to eternity. Moreover,
when it is freely consented to by the Soul (For the gracious heart acts
voluntarily, tho by the spirits instigation and inflexion) then does God impute
the righteousness of his beloved Son to that soul, being now become a true
believer, and by inward entire love in the heart, espoused to him.

Hence it follows, that whatever the son has, 1 cor. 1. 30
the Father makes over to a Saint; who by virtue of those espousals enters into
a right and title to Christ's Wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, and becomes a coheir with Christ of the same inheritance in the
kingdom of glory, and as it is here in the kingdom of grace, so much more in
heaven above, ^ulget radiis mariti, the Church shines not by reflected, but by
infused or implanted rays of her husbands glory, being one with Christ in
mystical union, the same spirit and the same glory being in there, as our Lord
sets it out, [ I in them, and thou in me, John 17. 22, 23. (...). 16. 14. John
1. 12.
and the glory which thou gave me, have (...) given them, that they may be
one, even as we are one] In his comeliness we are made perfect. For on them that
receive him, the Father bestows a powerful and magnificent privilege to
become the adopted sons of God.

Having discoursed a little largely, (with thanks to the stronger christians
for their leave and candid forbearance of time as to the weaker Saints, about
the nature of the will, as being the principal seat of Faith, and the seminary
of its fruitful effects.

Let us now proceed,

In the third place to the affections of the soul, which are indeed but several
emanations or streams from the Will, and may be compared to semidiametral lines
that flow from this center, and run out into the spacious circumference of
actions. For when the heart of will inclines this or that way, or to their
opposites: it then shines forth in those extensive eradiations by the passions
and several affections of the Soul. Isa. 26. 9.
As for instance, the church of God in the Prophet cries out with my soul have
I desired thee in the night season. So in respect to fear, holy persons are
said to fear God in the singleness of heart: and others are recounted to love,
Col. 3. 22. Deuteronomy 13. 3. Judge. 16, 15. Song 1 4, 7.
and trust in the Lord with all their hearts, and love is stated to be from the
heart.

In this love of our hearts to Christ, lies the quintescence of our union, and
thence a spouse like reverence, and a sweet holy fear to offend, or displease
him in the least. Ephesians. 5 33.
The like whereof is commanded in Scripture, to be the holy deportment of all
Wives to their Husbands, Let the Wife see or look to it (...) that she fear or
reverence her Husband. insomuch that Solomon brings in the Spouse with such a
reverent care; when her bridegroom was asleep, that she charges all persons in
and about the place, to make no noise that may disturb or awake her beloved
till he please. Song 2. 3
She is filled with an heart-ravishing joy in communion with him, though here
but through the lattesse of Ordinances, takes sweet complacency in an holy rest
in his fellowship, Song 2. 5.
and feels a delicious faintness in the sick agonies of love: is always
satiated in his society, but never satisfied, always filled to the brim with
pleasure, and running over in his praise to the daughters of Jerusalem, while
the fountain of love pours out of the heart of Christ into the bosom of a
Saint, by a true perpetual motion, this glorious person, ^la. 62. 5. 7
delighting in his goodness and rejoicing over us with singing.

These and many more are the pure, unstained, sanctified motions of the will,
so far as renewed, rectified by grace, and acting toward its native and
genuine objects at first concreated with it; as fit, proper and qualified for
it. It Is the will then, ^sal: 42. 1, 73. 25.
which desires, loves, thirsts, longs and pants after the living God, and is
never quiet or settles its full complacency oh any person or thing besides God
alone, but there it is satiated with all manner of delight and joy for evermore.

4. In the next place, conscience comes in to act its part, and having looked
round about upon all the pre-actings of the soul, subscribes to the new
creation with this eulogy: Behold all the work of God is very good. It is a
mixed act of the soul flowing from the understanding and will together, and
proceeds from an inward work, Simplicius.
as a philosopher expresses it, if I remember right.

When the soul makes dialogues within it self: It is the reflection of the soul
upon all its precedent acts, whether radical or deduced, wherein conviction is
mainely concerned: As the Evangelist speaks of some Pharisees, that they were
convinced of their own consciences, John 8, 9.
which do accuse or excuse according to the nature of the light and integrity
within, and so helps the soul to assurance, by a d^ligent intuition into the
actings of Faith. Conscience is the souls looking-glass, Romans 2. 151
wherein it beholds all the red flashings upon its ^^ce, when others talk
behind them at a distance. This inward redness more especially rises from the
immediate rebukes of this vic^gerent, and happy are such, who have their hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience [ nil conseire sibi, nullaque (...)] To be
conscious of no guilt, Heb. 10. 22.
and to have no faults staining vermilion upon the checks of conscience.

I might enlarge in the next place upon the power of fancy and imagination,
that anvill and hammer of thoughts in the workhouse of the brain.

But I rather proceed to the last that I shall touch upon: and that is the
Memory, that wonderful faculty: which Austin in his confessions does so
extremely and deservedly admire, and the Platonists are so deeply affected with
it, that they thought the souls science to be little else then reminiscence, or
a recognition of what it had before its delapse from heaven into the body.
Memory is the souls crystal cabinet replenisht with diamond cells or Loculi,
so termod by Lully: wherein things heard and learned, are safely retained; and
who is able to expound the reason of its rehearsals. It is the recollection of
the soul upon it self, acting over and reviewing every thing at its pleasure,
and thereby has a great influence upon the affections to excite them with
delight or dolor [ meminisse juvabit and dolebit] When we lay up memorials in
our hearts, Zuk. 1. 66 Psalm. 139 18. and 63. 6.
the end is to bring them forth of the treasury of a good and honest breast,
like wise Scribes fitted for the Kingdom of God. Thus David remembers God
sometimes to his comfort, and when awake, was still with God. At other times he
remembered God and was troubled, comparing his present dolesome flate with his
former more delicious times.

This faculty (so we may term it, Galen
being a (...) or a faciendi potestas) a power in the Soul to do something
peculiar in calling things to remembrance, carries a flaming Torch in, its hand
over all the chambers of the Soul, S^nuert. lustit.
and by Physicians and Philosophers is reckoned one of the three inferior
senses. Now in this, as in all other powers Faith has its residence, and acts
in and from them upon its most noble and spiritual objects. I shall not recount
many Scriptures [ Some trust in Horses, and some in Chariots: Psalm. 20. 7.]
but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God, even what he has done for
us of old, and trust him still. Saints use to call to mind former merc^ies to
encourage Faith [ I will remember thee from the land of Jordan, Psalm. 42. 6.
and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizzar, the little hill Mizoar before
Zoar. In which and the like places David escaped the violence of Saul. Memory
helps Faith in a gracious person, recalling the ancient benefits of God to his
Church, and his wonders of old. Help a Holy man's Memory as to former actings of
Faith in his straits, and you comfort him presently with the sweet hope of
continued deliverances, till he arise to the great deliverance in the Heaven of
glory.

But left I be tedious, I shall prosecute no more, but descend to the second
Section of this Chapter.

SECT. II.
Of the Primary Efficient Cause of FAITH.
AS to the efficient Cause, Author or Worker of Faith in the heart: we know
that every good gift comes down from Heaven. And hence Faith is sometime
ascribed to the donation of God essential; being called the gift of God, the
Faith of the operation of God. Again, Jam. 1. 17 Ephesians 2. 2. Col. 2. 2. Phil. 1.
29. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. Phil. 2. 13:
it is said to be given to the Saints to believe, and the work of Faith is said
to be the effect of his mighty power: In which, and in all other heavenly gifts
and graces, to will and to do are both wrought of God. As it is in true
repentance, a grace that's always conjoined with Faith, and leads out of our
selves by the hand of Faith into Christ; the former being given of God, so is
Faith. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
All our sufficiency to think but a good thought slides down from Heaven.

Q. If you ask then, How thoughts come into the heart?

A. I Answer: They flow into the head or heart by the power of imagination,
thru the windows of the senses or from concreated ideas, or by some
instillations and special infusions from God, as it is in all curious Arts and
Sciences: Prev. 8. 12
He is the finder out of all witty Inventions, as we read in the case of
Bezaleel for the Tabernacle, and in Hiram for Temple works. If you ask, (...)
holy thoughts come? I answer, from the infusion of the Spirit, Ge^i 1. 2:
and his warming the waters of the Soul; as it is expressed by Moses in the first
Creation, so it is in the new Creation from the breathings of the Spirit on the
garden of spice s, which ^e himself has planted in our hearts. Isa. 26. 12:
Psalm: 33: 22: 1 Chro. 29: 18: 1 John: 2: 27
So it is in the work of Faith, as the Church expresses it: Thou have wrought
all our works in us and for us: he causes us to trust or hope in his Word. He
begins and inspires good thoughts into us, and keeps them in the imagination of
our hearts. He teaches and anoints us with the oil of the Spirit. He makes all
new within us, and puts hearts of flesh into us, Jer. 31: 18* Ezekiel. 36: 26
and turns us unto himself, because he is the Lord our God, having accepted us
into covenant relation with himself.

Sometimes the work of Faith is ascribed to the Father, Ephesians 1 19, 20.
as in that to the E^hesians: we are made to believe by the exceeding greatness
of the mighty power of the Father, even the same power which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead. And other where it is said, Joh. 6. 4^
that no man can come to the Son (that is, by Faith) except the Father draw him
by the golden chain of his electing love, and teaches him from his chai^ in
Heaven. Besides the work is oftentimes ascribed to Christ, who is said to be
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and that he is exalted to give repentance
and forgiveness of sins, Heb 12. 2. Act. 5. 31
both which are intimately co^nexed with Faith, as in the case of the Father of
the tormented Child, Mark 9. 24
praying to Christ to help his unbelief.

But more especially and immediately its attributed to the holy Spirit, who
works in our understandings to think of heavenly things, and puts holy motions
into our hearts, which are the original of those sudden thoughts by darting of
Scriptures, and precious Promises into our memories, Romans 8. 5, 9. John 14. 26.
and kindling sparks of light and comfort in our hearts: yea the witnessing of
our spirits to him are wrought by him. He inclines our wills to embrace
himself, and Christ our Lord. For if we have not the spirit of Christ, Rom 8. 9.
we are none of his. Yea, Faith it self, even as all other graces are given by
one and the same spirit. Again, one of the fruits of the Spirit is recorded to
be Faith, 1 c^r. 12, 9
and to speak with reverence, it is from his implantation and inoculation in
the new paradise of the Soul. Gal 5. 22.
Yea, and after that we have believed, we are also sealed up in the Faith by
this holy spirit of promises. He seals all his own gracious workings upon our
hearts. Sometimes Believers are said to receive the Holy Ghost presently upon
the first work which evidently shows the connection of Faith and holiness by the
samespirit. Ephesians 1, 13. 13, 19. 3, 16, 17
Hence it is observable, that tho Prophecies be never so perspicuously and
radiantly fulfilled, and tho admirable miracles were performed to illustrate
the presence of the Deity: yet they wrought not the least grain of Faith,
without the energy of the spirit; he must add thereto an inward miracle upon
the heart. Thus it b^fel the Israelites in the Arabian Desert: Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4.
For God (says Moses) gave them not a heart to perceive unto that day. Just so
the Capernaites, they saw Christ s blessed person, and his eminent Miracles;
but believed not, as not being given to them by the Father: Joh 6. 36, 37. John
12. 37.
and so it was with the Pharisees and other Jews, tho he had done such great
works before their eyes, yet they believed not on him. There must be therefore
a working power of the spirit concomitant with the Ministry of the outward call
of the Word: else none shall believe the report of Christ by Isaiah, Isa. 53. 1.
unless the arm of the Lord be revealed within. Hence it is that some have
professed to have heard a kind of voice at their conversion: as holy Austin
declares expressly concerning himself under a fig tree in the Garden at Millain:
Confess. 18. (...)*
Isa 30. 21.
not di^^ormous from that of the Prophet* They shall hear a voice behind them
saying, this is the way, walk ye in it.

Q. But some may say, If Faith be wrought by the Holy Ghost, Gal. 3. 2.
how is it said that we receive the Holy Ghost by Faith?

A. I Answer, Tho the Holy Ghost work Faith in us at first, that Faith which
was wrought in us by him, is further augmented and increased in us by the same
holy spirit and acts together with him in prayer for a further addition of his
gifts and graces. Besides in the primitive times, it was the method of mercy,
that when persons had declared their Faith, upon that they received the Holy
Ghost in his dona ministrantia or gifts for good of the Church. I might treat
further of the adjuvant, subor^inate and instrumental cause s, the variou s and
wonderful method s, the season s and time s of divine working. A s Na^man wa s
excited by a poor captive Maid at home, and by hi s Servant s abroad, to
believe God for hi s cure by the Prophet: it i s in thousands of case s and
notable circumstance s: wherein God produce s this blessed work: but I must
surcease, and end with a deduction, that since the work of Faith i s
supernatural, and our conversion birth from the spirit: then are we not the son
s of God begotten by the will of man, Job: 3: 6: Joh: 1: 12.
but of God and are breathed upon with the breath of spiritual life, by that
free agent the spirit of God. Not where and when the heady list and free will
of man pleases that great Idol of a perishing World, A^ 18: 29: Prove. 1. 19:
Ephesians: ^: 1:
rejecting the free grace of God. Faith is of Grace. There Is no power in nature
to believe, nay the very preparation of the heart is from the Lord. We are by
nature dead in sins and trespasses, and can no more believe than the old
feigned Atlas can support the heavens, or an inconsiderable fly with her
impetuous hummings can shove a Mountain into the Sea.

But I pass to the six Sections belonging to this Chapter: whereof briefly,
hastento the Chapters I chiefly aim at.

SECTION. 3.
The next thing to have touched, was the more immediate and peculiar Object of
Eaith; and that is no more than the person of our blessed Lord in his
sufferings, our beloved Savior on the Cross: viz. to believe on his Name, to
look up to the Antitype of the brazen Serpent, John 1: 12: Act: 16. 31: Rom: 5:
11: and 3: 25:
when lifted up upon the pole of the Gospel. As Paul told the Jailer, If we
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved: a Lord to Rule, a Jesus to
Save, and a Christ to Anoint us; and so we shall receive the atonement: For
God has set him forth for a Propitiation through Faith in his blood: without
blood there is no remission, Heb: 9: 22:
and without blood of an infinite value, there can be no expiation to infinite
Justice. Now if any be so bold as to dispute with their Maker, why this way and
no other? I Answer, Rom: 9 20:
Who art thou that reply unto God, being thy self but a defiled shiver of a
pitiful Earthen Vessel, ready to be dashed in pieces every moment. I shall
rather turn off to answer the c^ril of a Jew, who being asked, how they can
expect now to be saved, since their magnificent Temple, and the brazen Altar of
Sacrifice lie in the dust: whereas they are commanded not to presume upon
Sacrifice but in that place at Jerusalem; since also they can legally pretend
to no pardon without blood, and yet will rest upon that place misinterpreted of
a poor man's Offering of a handful of fine Flower, Lev. 5. 12.
and Moses his saying from the Lord that his sin should be forgiven him. To
which may be answered, that the Temple was dedicated, and the Priest, and the
Altar were Consecrated with blood, Mat: 23: 19:
which gave a virtue to all the Sacrifices and offerings: but I rather reply,
that this handful was to be offered, not as we translate it, (...)
[ according] but [ upon] the Offerings of the Lord made by fire: This being
joined with the Lords Flower, which was continually burnt with the Lords Lamb
of the morning or evening Sacrifice, and so had its virtue from that bloody
offering. But ala s, there is now no place to offer either Lamb, or Incense, or
Wine, or Oil, or fine Flower according to Gods Institution since the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus and Hadrian the Roman Emperors. Let us pray
therefore that the poor Jews might be enlightened to come to the^ blessed Altar
of the Cross of Christ, Heb. 7: 28:
and to this Priest of the Tribe of Judah, who is Consecrated for evermore.

But let s remove to the fourth

SECT. 4.
The fourth section should exhibit, wherein the true and genuine essence of
Faith consists. The formalis ratio, or that which gives to it, the force and
power to unite us to Christ, and thereby to receive influences from him.

Of this having said somewhat already in this Chapter, and intending God
willing to dilate upon it in the next, and show, that it lies in recumbency or
rel^ing upon the Lord Jesus Christ as he is set forth in the Gospel romises

I shall strike off to the fifth.

SECTION 5.
5. The fifth particular concerns the great ends of Faith.

The first and more immediate* is the forgiveness of sin, and justification of
our persons, by the imputation of the meritorious Blood of Christ. Acts 13. 38,
39
As Paul in his Sermon at Antioch in Pisidia, preached the forgivenes s of sins,
and that all which believed in him were justified from all things, as to which
they could not be by the law of Moses, according as the Evangelist expressed it:
Mat. 1. 21.
He came to save his people from their sins.

A second, is the Salvation of our souls, according to Peter, receiving the end
of ^our Faith, 1 Pet: 1. 9.
the salvation of your souls.

The last and ultimate end, as of all both persons and things is the glory of
the wisdom, justice, and mercy of an infinitely holy God. Romans 4. 20. Job* 17.
2^.
For he that believes on the son glorifies the Father also. As Abraham being
strong in Faith, gave glory to God: so Christ professes in prayer, that (...)
was glorified in his believing Disciples; and when all the Saints shall triumph
together in heaven, their (...) or (...) of victory will be, with blessing and
honor, Rev 5. 13.
and glory and power to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for
ever and ever, even the Lamb that was slain, even the same that takes away the
sins of the believing world.

SECTION 6.
In the sixth place, it is of great use to amplify upon the foundation or
groundwork of our encouragement, in the management of this great affair aright
by the strength and cooperation of the spirit: and that is no other, than by
the divine promises, laid up in the covenant of grace It Is the promise allures
us, the voice of the word calls us, the faithfulness of God secures (...), the
motion of the spirit prompts, incites and hastens us to come to Christ; who
most graciously accepts us, kisses us, and lays us down to rest in his most
fragrant bosom. And here it is worth our time, if every minute were more
precious than the whole universe, turned into a massy diamond; to expatiate
upon the freeness, the unsought and unforethought love of God in making them,
the certainty of their accomplishment, as built on the essence and veracity of
God, their riches and preciousness, as being equivalent to the Crown of glory,
encompassed with the golden ring of eternity, When we have obtained* like
precious Faith, we shall be made partakers of like precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.
1, 4. Heb. 13. 7. and 6. 12.
as if we follow the Faith of Saints, we shall at last with them inherit the
same promised Kingdom.

In the seventh Place,

SECT. 7.
I might trace a little the time of Faiths first infusion, and first operation
in the heart, which is undoubtedly at the new birth, when ever it is. But how
to prescribe, and when precisely to determine that, in the soul of a Believer
is more difficult, than to state the quickening or animation of an embrio in
the womb of her that is with child, or for any Naturallist so set the moment of
the first separation of night from day at the initiating crepusculum or ascent
of the first attom of the morning rays of the Suns body, or the primogenial
fermentation of the vegetative soul in the seed Corn in the Earth, when it
begins to chit; or the first ^apors in Mineral beds, that procreare Mercury
into a running liquid body, which afterward is congealed by Sulphur into Gold.
Its much more difficult to set down the first punctual workings of the Spirit
in our hearts.

Q. But you may ask me, Cui Bono To what end were it to be so accurate, if it
were possible?

A. I Answer, In all humility, tho we never attain the precise and nicest time:
yet as far as we may and with what holy modesty we can attain to dive into
these heavenly secrets, the sooner we discern the work, by so much the sooner
may our spiritual joy spring, which animates our services, and anoints the
wheels of our Souls to become like the Chariots of Ami^adab. For which purpose
I refer my Discourse to the third Chapter of this Treatise.

SECT. 8.
In the eighth Place, I might show the inseparable union and connection between
Faith and Holiness, they are individu^ comites, sweet companions never divided,
but delighted in each others smiles, lovely twins brought forth by grace. The
heart of a Believer is purified by Faith, Act. 15: 9
and his life most orient and beautiful in holiness. Whosoever then pretends to be
a Believer, and walks not in holiness of life, is a self-deceiver and wrongs
his own soul: But lets reserve this to a peculiar Chapter below. (...).


I should now issue this Chapter: but that I desire in the close of every one
to answer one or more practical Questions for our spiritual improvement;
referring to what precedes in the same Chapter.

Q. 1. If any trembling soul should ask, Have I this sound Faith of Gods Elect?

I should Answer briefly,

1. 1 Pet. 2. 7.
Christ is precious to every one that believes; the joy of his heart, and
delight of his soul, when but under this sweet hope, and when a little
quickened and (...) in communion: I sat under his shadow with great delight.
(...)
Faith and Love always ride together in Solomon's Chariot, which is pared with
love for the Daughters of Jerusalem. and 3. 10.


2. The promises of the Covenant are precious to such a soul, they are
ornaments of grace about his neck, and ^therial Cordials in all its fainting
Fits: Psalm 27. 13.
I had ^ainted, says David, had I not believed to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living. It values them above a Kingdom:

Q. 2. If we fear our state, how may we gain Faith? Romans 10.


I Answer briefly, 1. By diligent attendance on the Word of God, Faith comes
by hearing.

2. By hearkening to the inward motions of Gods Spirit in hearing the Word.
Luke 24. 31*
When thy heart is warmed by some passage in a Sermon, take special notice of
that particular point. Its a sign Christ is conferring with thy heart, as with
the two Disciples near Emmaus, whose hearts burned while he opened the
Scriptures.

3. Ponder and meditate deeply upon that which warmed thy heart, to bring
Christ's counsel into a resolution for obedience.

4. Sacrifice these intentions upon the Altar of Prayer, in the Name of Jesus
Christ unto the Father. But these things requiring little tracts: Gerson:
Bonaventur Scala
He conclude with that of Gerson the Chancellor of Paris, who treating of
Meditation, states that for the sweetest, when the soul opens it self toward
Heaven, Psalm. 85. 8.
receiving in its precious dewes, without forced and artificial methods, as
David, Ariani perilplmar. Ery thrai and Benjamin itinerar.
He hearken what God the Lord will say, for he will speak peace to my soul:
which is like the mother shell of the Oriental Pearl at Baharem* which
Naturalists relate, conceives those precious unions by the dew of Heaven.

But I must now retire to the second Chapter, and it is more than time: only I
dilated upon this a little the more, as being a substantial head in respect to
the essential nature of Faith.

CHAP II.
Various Expressions in Scripture, setting forth the Nature of FAITH.
THe beginning and carrying on of the work of Faith in the heart is set forth
in holy Scripture by many pertinent and sweet expressions, which tend to
enlighten and comfort the souls of dark, drooping and weak believers: and
helping them to discern the inherence of this grace in their hearts. Metaphors,
Parables and Allegories many times teach us, when direct Precepts will not do
me work. Upon, some whereof of I shall endeavor to treat in this Chapter, and
present them as a climax or a Jacobs Ladder, whereby to scale the Palaces of
eternal joy.

1. In the first place, Rev. 24. 6. and 22. 17.
We find this grace set forth by thirsting and hungring after Christ and his
righteousness: which are strong and vehement appetitions after supply of proper
food and moisture to refresh the Spirits, and to preserve natural vigo^. Which
if not timely satisfied produce pantings, Psalm. 42. 1.
faintness, swoundings, and at last convulsive motions, the very harbingers of
death. Thus did holy David pant after God, Psalm. 27. 13.
as the hunted Heart, having lickt up a fiery Serpent, pants after the
waterbrooks. And at other times he had totally fainted, had not Faith fed his
hope with a seeing of God in the land of the living. The promises of mercy are
made to such thirstings and strong desires after God. Isai. 55. 1, 2. and 26.
8, 9, 12. Psalm. 97 12.
The desire of our soul (says the Church) is to thy Name, and at the
remembrance of thine holiness do we rejoice. Again, with my soul have I desired
thee in the night, when others are folded in the arms of the deepest sleep, I
am musing with deep meditation, and am still awake with thee. Then follows that
holy confidence dropped in from heaven: Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for
thou also have wrought all our works in us, whence it follows, that when the
breathings of the soul are inspired by God. (...) his ordinance of peace shall
issue from the throne of grace.

Besides, The thirst of the soul through defect of the dewes of Zion, sometimes
pro^es so extreme, that it falls into assuming Fever: and lies tossing, and
tumbling, and feeling after cool places, Song. 2. 4.
but finds no rest* till it comes to the chambers of Christ; and then with holy
longings and bitter ejaculations cries out: My heart and my flesh faiteth, Oh
when shall I come and appear before him? when shall I see his face, enjoy his
love, and rest in his bosom? This is a sure act of Faith when the soul prises
Christ above all; delights in none but him as the incomparable object of his
souls satisfaction: if it take any comfort in sublunary things; it is but in
ordine ad Christum in subordination to him, and in order to his glory. The soul
does anhelare, breath and thirst more after him than all the pleasures and
treasures of Egypt, the Gums of Arabia, the Spices of India, the Diamonds of
Golconda^, or the peculiar riches of Princes: nay than the fragrant Rivers of
Balsam in heaven in self, besides him, as the holy Psalmist flames it out:
Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom in earth in comparison with thee.

2. Sometimes Faith is represented by looking up to Christ with a steadfast eye,
and an ear^ful countenance, till all the visive spirits pass the optic nerve
and land in his bosom. All the bowels of the Soul are wrackt and torn with
convulsive motions and iliack passions, the heart faint and sick, with many a
swounding fit: Psalm. 38 10. Lam 2. 11.
the vital moisture having spent it self at the eyes, is almost blind with the
saltness of the tears, and ready to give up the ghost in deep sighs and
profound palpitations of heat^; Song 1. 7.
has only a few minutes, wherein to cry ou [ O thou whom my soul loves,
hungers, longs and pants after: and being now set down under a Palm in the
valley of tears and terrors, sinks down and yet looks toward him, when flying
away like a young Heart upon the Mountains of Lebanon, and leaving it in a
desolate case, forlorn, and exposed to the mercy of Tigres and young Leopards.
Yet the Soul cries out, as long as breath and life remains will I look to the
place, where thine honor dwells, as the only one of my soul, my Lord and
Maker, who have commanded me to look toward thee and be saved. Thy Word says
Behold me, Isai. 17. 7. and 45. 22.
behold me, and my hears in obedience replies, Thus will I spend my days and
end my life.

This Looking to Christ is sometimes shadowed by the stung Israelites looking
up to the brazen Serpent. Joh 3. 14.
In imitation whereof it is thought the Gentiles composed their Talismanical
figures, whereof the Learned often treat. But letting them pass, let us call to
mind that Israel after their many murmurs in the Wilderness, and refractary
deportments toward the Rock of ages, felt at length the dreadful wrath of God
in sending upon them those Alati Serpents the fiery flying Serpents of Arabia:
Plin. Epi^han.
those angry venomous creature s; which having once fastened their needle
teeth, and dropped their yellow poison into the wound, the stung person s (
tanquam a di^sade percussi) were painted a s said of some with variou s spots
of the color of Serpents, and swelld immensely, died with an insatiable
thirst, a s in the deadly Calenture at Sea. (...) metal (...) in (...)
But such a s looked up to the copper Serpent made at Punon, and set on a Pole,
presently received cure, a s if the flesh of the adder had been laid to the
wounds, to extract the malignant venom. Had they looked any whither else but to
this type of our Savior, all was in vain. Had their eye been upon Moses in the
moral Law, or on Aaron in the ceremonial observances, it would have performed
no cure: it was Christ alone, who overcame the great Serpent of the bottomless
pit, and was lifted up on the cross, for this blessed view of Faith*

3. This work of Faith is set forth by coming to Christ at his call, Mat. 11.
28.
according to that sweet invitation of his: [ Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, etc.] For the burden of sin, the Law, Gods wrath, hell
and eternity lie very heavy upon conscience, and will prove unsupportable,
unless ^^sed by his bosom. When the soul is read, to starve, pines away, and
looks black with famine: John 6. 35.
then to hear that blessed voice, [ Whosoever comes to me, shall never hunger, and
he that believes on me shall never thirst] Where our holy Lord himself
explains coming by belie^ing: pedibus fidei, with the fe^t of faith and
affections, 44, 45, 46,
we come to him for salvation; and so it is used in the neighbor verses. Psalm.
63. 8.
Sometimes it is expressed by the souls following hard after God, ( hebr,
cleaving) that is, following so closely, as if it held him by the garment, and
dragged after him. In the times of fear and desertion, Song 1. 3, 4. Bern
it runs after God, being allured and drawn by the perfumed ointments of his
name, the rich odours of the promises, as powerful attractives to needy and
distressed persons: othertimes this work is exhibited by the flying of guilty
persons in old time to the city of refuge. Thus David points at God as his
refuge and high rock to fly to and be safe. Of ancient times, it is reported that
the gates of these cities stood continually open, that all the ways were made
plain and even: that every stumbling block was removed, and the passages
maintained with accurate care above all the highways in Canaan, Isa. 57. 14.
and some of^ the cities might be seated in plains, as Bezer was; that
difficult ascent might not retard the speed of the flyer: that so the soul
guilty of bloody crimes, Deuteronomy. 4: 43* Numb. 35: 1^
might escape the dreadful avenger, that holy Law of God, and having retired to
the city of Christ, might there continue so long as this Eternal High Priest
after the order of Melchizedeck, shall continue in being, and that' s according
to the Law of an endless life for evermore. Heb 7. 6. 28.


4: Thy s acting of Faith is shadowed forth by our receiving of Christ, and
therefore must be an act of the will and affections; when being sensible and
convinced of his being the most adequate good for the soul, stretches forth its
hand like a ragged indigent beggar, after a bag of gold, when frankly held to
him by some munificent prince: or as a drooping, sinking, languishing patient
holds out his cup for a physi^ians cordial. For to as many as will receive him,
he gives out the right and privilege of adoption to a glorious inheritance
above the starry heavens. John 1. 12. Col. 2 6. John 17. 24. Rev. 3. 21.


O Blessed Savior, will thou give thy heaven, thy glory, thy joy, thy crown,
thy throne (by mystical union) to as many as do but accept of this motion of
mercy (...) Will acceptance bring us into acquisition and a just perception of
all the territories of this vast, grot. de ^ure, etc.
immense and eternal patrimony? Who would not open his arms, his heart, the
penetralia cordis, the most intimate chambers of his soul, according to all thy
tenders in all thine offices, and to all thy blessed purposes, and cry out
(...) vehement and ardent moans? Are not the doors wide open: come bright
morning star, come Lord Jesus, come quickly! True! Prove. 22 16. Song 5. 5
Faith indeed is but the hand, that turns the lock of the souls closet, to
entertain her blessed Lord: But it is the spirit of Christ who lays his powerful
hand upon the hand of Faith; else would continue shut and never open: But this
instrument of instruments (as the Philosopher calls the hand) acts and works in
the power of that great efficient, the spirit of God, and is co-operative in
him, with him and by him, Yea, the spirit has a co-essential communion with
Christ himself, who stands at the door and knocks by the call of his Ministers,
and leaves sweet smelling myrrh dropping upon the handles of the lock: which
like the famed oil of Lunaria, (bear with the comparison) will eat th^orow
all, and make the iron bolts to fly in sunder. O then my soul, since the Lord
of glory is come to these everlasting gates, take heed of a third knock: lest
he take unkindly, depart and leave thee in the dark night of desertion.

5. Another medium to set forth the actings of Faith, Isa. 56. 4. 27* 5. Isa.
27. 5. 56. 2, 6.
is laying hold of him and his most blessed covenant. This is called, taking
hold of Gods strength, that is, the ark of his strength: that so we may make
peace with him that dwells between the Cherubims. The same with laying hold on
Gods righteousness and salvation, in flying to the horns of the Altar of
propitiation, viz. the brazen by blood, Lev^t. 19. 30: Isa. 56, 6. 58. 13.
and the golden by incense. It is further deciphered by ^^ving the name of the
Lord ((...), wherein is everlasting strength) and in keeping the Sabbath from
being polluted, which is a special part of Gods covenant, and a true token of a
gracious and godly man, in this his laying hold of God. Nay, we find, that the
Lord complains of the church, that few or none did lay hands on him, a kind of
holy violence in fervent prayers and Faith, mixed with ardent desires, and
coming to him with earnest resolves to hang upon him, as Mary did on Christ at
his resurrection. The Lord knew the soul of Mary would be clinging upon him,
and therefore with a gracious requital, manifests himself to her, and sends her
with an errand of love to his Disciples: There is a sort of holy violence, and
graciou s impudence (...) be used in those cases, as Chrysostom expresses it
of the woman of Canaan, that would have no denial. Mat. 11. 12.
When we seek the kingdom of God, we must seek it with vehemence, and take it
by violence. We are commanded to lay hold on eternal life, in allusion to the
swift courses at the Olympic, 1 Timothy 6, 12.
stadium in Greece: who coming near the prize or garland: stretched out the
hands and leapt up with some violence to take hold of the crown of victory. 1 Timothy: 6. 12. Heb: 6: 18:
So the Apostle exhorts us lay hold on the hope that is set before us: as Jacob
held the Angel fast and would not let him go before he was blessed: Yea, the
Spouse in the song, having found whom her soul loved, Song 3. 4.
held him close, and let him go no more.

6. In the sixth place, When we are now come to him, and have laid hold of his
strength, and are sweetly solaced with his favor: Prove. 3: 5:
then begin we to rely, lean: and rest upon him with some holy confidence, For
leaning and trusting are in Solomens language terms equivalent. A posture this
is of great sweetness, and satiates the soul, that it seeks no further. All
sublunary relations and enjoyment s leaves a windy emptiness in the soul, but
here is [ Jacobs enough] which indeed contains [all things] and so indeed should
be translated. Jer: 33 11. Song 8. 5.
Such high contentment of spirit fills the soul in her walking out of the
wilderness toward Canaan leaning upon her Beloved. The same pollute we find
the beloved disciple in, John 21: 20 Psalm 37. 5. and 22 8.
leaning upon the bosom of our blessed Lord: Thus are we encouraged in our
streights to row^ ourselves and our affairs upon the Almighty; revolve te and
tua: Usher Divin p. 161. Lo^d. 1677.
To the same purpose, that holy man Bishop Usher is much pleased with the term
of the souls hanging upon Christ for life and salvation, when he is setting out
the nature of Faith: Sometimes the Scripture uses the expression of the souls
staying it self upon the Lord, Isai. 10. 20.
the Holy One of Israel: in allusion to the support of a staff, employed by
weak or aged persons, to preserve from stumbling and falling. Accordingly they
find a holy rest and repose of spirit, with a sweet recollection from the
trembling of heart, and quivering limbs, by an happy settlement in his arms.
Yea, when the feet have been swelled and blistred with rambling up and down in
a weary and thirsty land: Dan: 8: 4:
here they find the shadow of a high rock, with pleasant crystal streams
pouring out of its cavernes, to revive the faint, and recall their flying
spirits.

But now lets search what are the great ends of the souls recumbency,
innitency, resting, and quiet reposing it self on this blessed Lord in the
Arheretum sacrum, or paradise of his love; why, certainly such things that
assuage its vehement thirst, quell and subdue its fears, compose its trem
blings, and allure its confidences, and are no other than these following, viz.
Remission of all sin, Justification by free grace, peace of conscience, when
sprinkled with the blood of atonement: adoption into Sonship, heirship, and all
the privileges and liberties of the children of God, Sanctification to
mortify the power and dominion of sin, and to quicken our graces and duties,
to support us against, and under all fiery tentations: to enlarge and fortify
our spirits under dificult services, and to persevere to the end; Phil. 1 6, 1^
that at last we may attain the redemption of our bodies (...) the dust, and
the resurrection to (...) these resort more properly under the tenth and last
chapter, and therefore here I forbear.

7. The next place sets forth Faith by our cleaving to the Lord with full
purpose of heart. A (...) s 11. 23. Isai. 28. 16:
When the soul is gl^wed by an holy love to the mercies and goodness of God, it
will then (...) steadfastly abide with him. It makes not haste out of the
mountains of Zion as if full of bogs and quakemires, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Josh. 23. 8.
1 Cor. 1. 17 2 Cor. 11 2
but as being settled on the strong and lofty rock of ages. This closing of the
soul with God, is often set down in Scripture by that trust and affiance which
a true believer has in God, adhering or cleaving to God is a term also which
sometimes attends upon conjugal relation, whereby true and faithful persons,
having the yoke of that union lined with the soft velvet of love, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
become one, as in person by the law, so much more in spirit and delight To the
same purpose he Apostle affirms; that true believers being united to Christ by
a true and lively faith, become one spirit with the Lord; and long daily to be
more fully espoused by larger affections, of the unction of Christ's spirit in
order to the solemnity of that glorious marriageday of the Lamb. Romans 7 4. Rev:
19: 7: Phil: 3: 20:
And this is true ^aith indeed, when person s long for the appearance of Christ
in glory.

8. Next follows that term of embracing of Christ; as the Saints of old being
first persuaded of the truth and goodness of the promises, (...)* 13:
then at length embraced them utrispue ulnis with all affection, and what are
the promises but the precious fine linen, wherein Christ our sacrifice was
involved after his death at his funeral (...) which is the principal object of
our faith, even Christ in his sufferings. This act of embracing, notes our
ardent affection to him, delight in him, and heavenly communion begun betwixt
Christ and the heart of a believer: Love i s Faiths Agent and factor: Faith
works by love, a true lover of Christ i s certainly a true believer in him,
and this love increase s by faith, and faith by love. For the soul determines
it; The more I know of his Excellencies, the more I believe in him: Romans 5. 4, 5
and I love him more, because I have the experience of Christ's love to me. In
this very state of the valley, there i s a mixing of hearts and spirits, but in
heaven the soul is swallowed up in his love for ever.

9. In the ninth place a Believer arrives at this reverent freedom with the
Lord, in all its streights and disiculties, to cast its cares and burdens upon
him, being both commanded and encouraged by him to do it: Psalm. 6. 3.
Whenever I am afraid says David, He trust in thee. If the heart safely trust
in a friend, Prove. 31. 11.
there follows a mutual unvailing and disclosing of the most secret and bosom
counsels. Psalm. 71. 3. Jer. 20. 12: Psalm: 142: 2:
So does the soul pour out its sorrows, and open its whole cause before God.
Three things make a friend or relation desirable: power to protect, wisdom to
advise and love to comfort and mingle joys and sorrows together. All these are
eminently and transcendently sound in heaven. Jam: 1^;
There Is a heart large enough to entertain thy moans: wise enough to guide thee
in the dark turns of Providence, and so good as not to upbraid thee, and can
command Legions of Angels at a beck for protection. ^ Pet. 5: 7.
Let us therefore cast our care upon him, for he cares for us, and it is worth
notice, what the Apostle terms thy care, the Psalmist terms thy burden,
promising that the Lord will sustain thee; Psalm. 55. 22.
to show that (...) dividing cares, heartrending cares, are great burdens. But
divine sustentation and support of the soul in trouble, plainly show s, that
God takes a fatherly care of thee, and will not suffer thee finally to be
moved, as David's song in the end of that Psalm, since thou art a righteous man,
and have cast all thy soulbattering cares upon God s promise: which are but so
many tentations to try thy faith and trust in him.

Besides, this trust i s expressed by casting anchor within the vail. Heb: 6: 19:
When the ship of the soul being turned up-side down as to the world, though
too near the earth in this bodily estate, yet in spirit sails above the
firmament, and makes all its fails upward still, Rev: 11. 19:
and if any storm arises, it then rides at Anchor upon the Ark in heaven,
within the vail, beyond the sta^ry Canopy, a s upon the rock of life, the Lord
Christ himself.

10. In the tenth and last place, faith acts by Resignation, giving up all it s
comforts into his heavenly hand, when a true believer both living and dying
commends his spirit into his divine man^tenency, during this frail life in all
the mighty turns, circles or helixe s of providence, full of intricate meanders
and mazes past finding out, is led by a hand coming down from heaven: so that
all ends well with a Saint: his stormy dares do always end in a sunshine
evening. He gives up himself to the guidance of his counsel and as to death,
both for time, place, was and method, yields up all to his ^a^e conduct, and
yet sometimes breaths out with a most humble and reverent motion (his soul
still king in the dust of submission before him) to grant him (...), or an easy
departure out of this life; if it may be his holy pleasure, and till quietly
hoping and waiting for his salvation. Thus Jacob in the Old Testament in the
(...) of his last languishments cries out, I have waited for that Salvation O
Lord: gen, 59 18. Luke 2. 30 23, 46.
and good old Simeon in the New: Let thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen, and mine arms embraced my Savior and thy Salvation. This did our
most (...) Lord, (...) into thy hands, I commend my (...) it and so did blessed
Stephen Lord Jesus receive my spirit; testifying to the Deity of (...), Alis 7.
59.
the immortality, of his soul, and the resurrection of his body in the same
prayer of resignation.

There may be found in Scripture some other passages, exhibiting the nature of
Faith and Trust, as fixing the heart, choosing of Christ, waiting for his
coming, and expecting the blessed day, much to the same effect: but to cut off
prolixity, Psalm. 108 1. Luke 10. ult.
I shall rather convert the former ten particulars with the like into some
spiritual Soliloquies: since all of them exhibit some excellent benefits
flowing from Christ, alluring the soul to him, as by the smell of those
precious s ointments, wherewith he was affused and inaugurated into all his
offices by the Holy Ghost, which was signified by the inunction of the
Aaronical Priesthood of old in type, by a choice composit on of myrthe (or
Benzoin) cinnamon, Exodus 30. 24.
sweet calamus, cassia lignea, and oil-olive. So was our holy Lord consecrated
a Priest for ever over the house of God. Psalm. 45. 7.


Let us now breathe out our warm desires and flowing hopes in some few
Ejaculations (as to all the ten particulars) into his own bosom.

The Soliloquies.
1. O Blessed Lord, I am (...) and burnt up with the sense of thy wrath the
thunders of thy Law amaze my soul, Psalm. 22. 15. 119. 13.
Death and Eternity make my bones to quake, I am dried like a pot sheard or as
a bottle in smoke. Vox saucibus haeret: my tongue is ready to cleave to the
roof of my mouth. But I come to thee as a gracious Savior, inviting, calling,
promising to help me in those fainting agonies. I thirst after thee, as the
fountain of Siloam, and more than David after the water of Bethlehem.

2. I faint, and my soul quivers upon my pale lips, nay is upon the wing to
take flight into eternity. I look up for some reviving smiles from the light of
thy countenance: Do thou look down O blessed Lord with one beam of mercy, and
it cures me for ever; speak Lord for my soul waits to hear that peace which is
the fruit of thy lips, Psalm. 45. 2.
and that grace which was poured out into them. O let me not faint nor sink
into the dust of death, and perish for ever. For I have chosen to exhale my
soul into thy bosom, and dye at thy feet.

These are the sweet ardours of Faith.

3. Now then since I am come to thee. O my blessed Savior, and that with my
whole foul, and come at the call of thy Word and Spirit. For I heard thy voice
in the woods of the wilderness, and am returned to lie down at thy foot: shall
the hungry go emty away from the feast of such a Solomon. Luke 1. 53. Prove 9. 3.
Thou did invite me by thy Ministers in many a choice calling Sermon and I
made no excuse, though too much delay (so speaks my sorrow) yet the feet of
those, who brought the glad tidings of the love were to me more beautiful and
enamouring than the ruddy morning.

4. Moreover O searcher of Reins, thou know that I am inwardly willing to
receive thee upon all the terms in thy holy Gospel, signified by thy heavenly
call, since then my bended with inclines its bowing head toward thy bosom, and
my whole soul cries after thee, since my hands are stretched out toward thy
holy place, and my parched mouth wide open to receive that Nectar of heaven,
the waters of life: O fail not the expectation of the needy that commits his
soul to thee and be not silent to my cries, Psalm. 4C. 2.
(...) out of the deep and dark (...), and from the horrible clay.

5. Thou have O Savior full of bowels given strength to my feet, and restored
the (...) and sinews that hung shriveld about my anckle bones; as thou did to
the cripple at the Temple-gate; so deal with me thy Lazarus, Acts 3. 7.
that's spiritually lame and full of for ^s, yet limps toward the throne of
grace, the Temple of mercy. Strengthen m^ hands O Lord, that I may as firmly
take bold of (...) as I am freely come to thee for thy Salvation.

6. Yea most blessed Savior, I begin to be encouraged b^ the warm beams of thy
love, and feel some virtue flowing from thee, to invigorate all the (...) of my
affections, and whatever incites and inspirits the motive faculty of my so
(...) so that I now most humbly and reverently beg leave and permission to lean
upon thee, and to lay my soul down b^ thee, and in thy bosom to repose, as far
as thou (...) graciously please to admit me into thy communion, for succor,
support, and comfort.

7. O stay me with flaggons, for I am faint, by the strong and over coming
beams of divine love, and yet resolved in thy strength to cleave to the arm of
thy power, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
and by the unction of thy spirit to be united into one spirit with the Lord.

8. And to embrace thy love, that everlasting love, which sprang from thee in
thine electing mercy and pity before the would began,

9. And (...) now become more solicitous by thine aid and help, to call all my
cares upon thee, then ever I was anxious and distressed as to (...), while
those pressures caused (...) soul to (...) out to heaven.

10. I am now determined by thy power, to (...) out my soul at (...) only into
the compassionate bosom, to be kept to the day of Redemption, and being
strengthened with all might by thy glorious power, humbly resolve to wait with
all patience, in the fresh actings of Faith, till I see thy face in the joyful
morning of the resurrection.

The soul having in these few panting soliloquies, poured forth its breakings
of heart before God, desires yet further to be resolved in one question, to
help its joy and there with I shall conclude this chapter.

Quest. How may I discern the truth and indegnity of these breathings of the
soul to be the true a tings of Faith.

Answ. I answer, labor to feel the pulse of thy soul, as once a Greek
Physician touching the arterial pulse of a young Prince of Macedon, know
whether is heart want. So may we assuredly know, where our treasure is seated
and where our love is planted: if we find our hearts to be where Christ is set
down, even at the right hand of God.

But lets reply a little more distinctly. Cor. 3:1, 2.


1. Consider, where thy soul does most acquisce, where do thou feel thy soul
at most rest and quiet. He that bids his soul take ease in a sat barn, was but
a gross fool, Luke 12. 18.
and he that puts his hope or trust in a clod of yellow clay, bows down to a
dumb Idol, that cannot profit. But if as David (when dying) we have all our
hope and salvation in the covenant of a living God, 2 Samuel, 23.
established to us in all things and sure. If thou repose thy weary spirits in
the bosom of Christ, and find thy lingering weariness to wear away in the
warm bath of his Love, and resignest thy self into his tuition, and under the
canopy of heaven, and exercising thy self in applying precious promises
suitable to thy captive state by the rivers of Babylon, and patiently waitest
for his bright and blessed appearance and Kingdom.

This is true Faith.

2. Where is the solace and delight of thy soul? Is it in things and persons of
Christ s delight: The things of the spirit, and the excellent persons upon
earth: is thy soul at rest, Rom 8. 5. Psalm. 16. 3. Romans 5, 1.
and under holy quiet; because in some measure satisfied, that thou art at
peace with God. This will breed true joy, for peace is the alma parens, they
happy Mother of joy. Whereas contention and grief quarrel in the yoke together.
Now when the storms of Gods wrath are calmed by the sprinkling of Christ's
precious blood upon the Mercy-Seat, there will gradually follow joy unspeakable
and full of glory. And where this peace is, there is true Faith be sure.

3. By the souls continuance in the daily actings of faithful recumbency,
whereby the habit is fortified. Yet always remember to add thereto a
continuance in welldoing. Steadfast Christians are perserverers. Romans 2. 7.
The Stony-ground brought forth (...), and that with joy at the first hearing:
it was but flashy and endured not, having no firm root, the rock lying too near
under it: but the good ground brought forth fruit with patience, Luke 2. 15.
continuing under winters frost, add summers heat, till the joyful day of
harvest. This is true Faith, indeed, and commended by our Lord himself.

CHAP III
The least or lowest Degree of FAITH.
HAving Discoursed of some various Expressions of Scripture, painting out the
true Nature of Faith to the life: Let us now proceed further in our design to
comfort shaken, and contrite Spirits. To which end, since we find Scripture
mentioning some persons as strong in Faith, giving glory to God, and others but
infirm and weak, accosted with this compellation: O ye of little Faith, Mat. 6.
30. and 8. 26.
why do ye doubt and fear? the Faith of the former being very visible and
apparent to themselves and others: the latter tho true Believers, yet
exceedingly filled with fears, sorrows and jealousies over their own hearts: It
would be expedient for their erection and comfort to consider what may be the
Criterions or tokens of a true Faith tho in the lowest degree and upon that
account to dilate a little on these two Branches

1. What may be accounted the lowest, meanest, weakest estate of new Converts
or young beginners in the School of Christ.

And 2 To how low an Ebb secure souls may be reduced in time of desertion.

An answer to either of these may yield mutual satisfaction to both: Lets begin
with the first,

Q 1. What may we enstate and determine to be a critical token of a true
Believer in his meanest acts of Faith?

A. In Answer to this lets consider, First in general, that the commencement or
beginning of this grace is sometimes represented by conception or quickening of
a Child in the Womb: Ephesians. 2. 2. John 3. 3.
sometimes by the new birth or visible appearance in the light of this World.
Sometimes the work of regeneration (and therein Faith, its principal
ingredient) is resembled to the wind in its invisible original from mineral
Exhalations out of the bowels of the Earth and Sea, Mark 4. 27. Luke 13. 2.
to its motion and progress in the air. Otherwise it is likened to a grain of
Mustard Seed, the least of all oleracious Seeds that grow to so great an
extension at last. It Is likened also to a little leaven that ferments and works
it self into the whole mass. To Seed-Corn under the globe or mould that (...)
the impregnation of nitrous Rain, and sulphurions Earth, concurring to their
germination first chits and breaks the membranes, and then sprouts above the
ground, Or it may be compared to the budding and flowring of Trees in the
Spring: or to the grafting of a Cyon into the cleft: or a (...) into the bark
of a Tree, which b^ degrees conceives both by the warmth and moisture of the
Stick. But still the precise time or modus of the curious transactions in the
vegetable Kingdom; these certain fusion or percolation of Liquors and Spirits
is not easily discerned, or accounted for, by the most accurate Naturalists.
Yea when all is done and written by Roger Bacon of Oxford, or Sir Francis or
Veralam, or the Learned Harvy, or an of the new Philosophers of (...) France or
Germany, or (...) that Learned Dane: there is hope in the whole quire can yet
determine the admirable mysteries of Generation. None can fathom the works of
God in wise productions, and the various textures and needle works of his
diving power; as the Psalmist has expressed it.

Put much more abstruse, Psalm. 139. 15. Opere Phigianico.
intricate and unfathomable is it in spiritual cases. For how and at what time
grace is inspired or sown in the heart: and how it works, ferments and by warm
influences, becomes like a Spiritus intus agens, an inward working Spirit: its
neither discerned by persons themselves, much less by others, sometimes during
the space of several years, For it grows we know not how, Genesis 2. 6. Col. 2. 19.
nor can delineate the motion of its growth: but being watered from heaven by a
living mist sent by God upon this happy Plant in the Eden of a gracious soul,
it increases with the increase of God. Hence it follows, that it is impossible
for thousands of fix the time of these firm heaven, working or irritations,
these irradiations or impregnations of the Spirit of God. Neither need (...)
sufficient it is to discern it, when sprouted a little from its seminal
Principles wherefore to urge the preciseness of time as to regeneration (in
persons that draw near to Ordinances) is timerarious and rash; and he is too
busy a person, that strictly requires it of tender Consciences, and makes it
an inflexible rule of Communion.

I may then say of this, more than of all other works of divine Wisdom and
Power in this lower Orb, that the eye of the Vulture has not searched it out:
it is too high and too wonderful for us. As holy David having treated of his
being secretly, Joh. 28. 7. Psalm. 139. 6
fearfully and wonderfully made as to the curious fabric of his body in all
its vessels, ligaments, veins, artery s, nerves, and juices in all the
repositaries, sings in harmony and consort to heaven (how vastly melodious
beyond the hymn of Galen) and stands at length upon the brink of an Ocean of
Ecstasies as to the precious thought, (...). 17.
that God had to and in his soul I shall therefore not venture into these
Arcara Imperii, and Magniala Dei, these stupendous secrets of divine wisdom
and mercy: nor sail toofar in deep waters near this terra incognita, nor treat
too close of the first initial formation of grace and faith in the heart, by
the operation of the spirit of God. A labor wherein we may sweat and toil till
saint, and dive so long, till the damps in these golden mines extinguish our
Spirits. I shall then only for some comfort to sincere beginners insist a
little (according to what I may, by the help of grace) and ponder on the first
discoveries and discernings of this work in the heart, under the beginning work
of Regeneration, that is under the present agitations and breathings of the
holy Spirit. To which purpose I may genuinely compare the sense, which the
mother of an Embrio begin s to feel, when discerns an inward conception by some
secret pulsations as of a little wind in her bowels and some nauseous
ebullitions from her stomach, Ferneli de etc Weckerns de Secretis 1. 4. p. 85.
Bas. 1629.
and thereby perceives there is a new work of impregnation formed with in,
beyond all observations of the state of body since here birth: and begins to
give a right judgment, that in Gods due time she may become a happy Mother,
indeed, of some beautiful creature. Or give leave to behold it in the glass of
another Emblem. It fares here, as when persons by some unobserved and
unforeseen emanations of spirits from the heart, Plin. L. 11. c. 37. Song 6. 5.
and 4
and pressing through the opt ick nerves flow into their mutual eyes, and dart
themselves into one another breasts, whence they become suddenly taken, and as
it were inkindled by certain lineatures in their feitures; and are rapt into
deep admiration of somewhat in each other, which neither themselves nor the
wisest Philosopher in being can give reason sagacious enough to unfold the
surprising influence when they are constellated to conjugal union.

So true is that (I think) of Lucretius: Malts legit sacro involucro natura,
neque (...)
Fas est scire quidem mortalibus omnia, etc
Nature with sacred mantle things does hide,
Nor can Man's wit such mysteries decide.


Much more deep shall we find it to be in spiritual and divine concernments,
when the Soul having heard or read of the admirable and unparalled
incomparable excellencies of Christ, begins by the power of heaven influence to
hearken to Gospel motions; whence the first beginnings of grace are coucht in
faint and weak, though sweet and pleasing inclinations to hear more of that
precious and excellent person. Then the Soul proceeds with the Daughters of
Jerusalem to enquire further of his dignities and the blessed disposition of
this kingly savior. Next after intelligence received, it never rests seeking
for him with the lovely Spouse, In Niceph call.
and when once come to a sight of that glorious countenance in which Majesty
and Love sit upon their Throne, as it is reported of his external hiew) then
does the soul by this interview, break forth into holy Ardorsafter the
enjoyment of his everlasting kindness, and the bottomless bowels of his
infinite mercy and affection, This is the point which I would end favor yet
further, to exemplify in the sequel of this Chapter, and labor to state the
first beginnings of grace to lie in secret motions, holy wishes and
inclinations of the will to Christ this Princely Savior of the Elect.

The desire of a man (saves Solomon) is his kindness the he cant accomplish his
will yet it is acceptable with God for the died, Prev. 19. 22. 2 Cor. 8. 12.
When some spiritual good is presented to the newly sanctioned will be the
light of a heaven-born judgment: it draws the soul to think, ponder and study
how to attain that happiness, and this volition or extension of the spirit is
found in different persons at various times. Some feel a blessed inclination
from their very child hood ((...)) to Religious courses and the holy ways of
God. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
You may observe in some Children at four or five years old a love to the
sacred Bible, and the wise instructions of godly Parents. It would do ones soul
good to see, how prettily and earnestly the little hearts will lean their heads
to the wall or hangings, and suck in the sincere milk of a mothers
instructions, as Solomon did. Only let Parents be prudent and heedful in
pressing too much or pouring too long into little Venice Glasses, left it
nauseate or run over. Remember Jacob would not drive the little ones too falt,
Genesis 33. 13,
left they died. Children are like a chicken or little Birds, feed them too
much, and by night, and you endanger killing them: Be wise toward such, and
sow here a little and there a little, and the work of God may prosper sweetly.

In Persons at the first workings of the Spirit of God, you may observe,

1. First, There appears some savouring of the things of God: which shows there
is a new palate formed by the spirit of God in the soul, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8.
5.
suited to the Manna of heaven; they begin to mind he things of the Spirit,
with a disrelish of vain and frothy company, a happy inclination to virtue, and
wholesome infusions (...) reverent awe to their Teachers and institutor s: which
when once taken off from the heart, all the Argument or Rhetoric in the world
shall never fallen any good maxim upon such a person; but now you shall see
very young ones love to have their heads in a Bible, and the tears ready to
spring at some sweet passages in that blessed Book: intimating to us that the
same spirit, who penned it, has begun to write the faithful counterpart on the
fleshy tables of their hearts.

2. They find and feel the inward bent of their soul to be toward God, the
byas of the will always inclined Heavenward, tho some rubs and hillocks may
divert a while. They are like the Sun-flower ever turning to that glorious
Lamp; or as the needle pointing to the Northern Pole. It may suffer some
variations and supervariations, and mysteries of Declination not hitherto fully
determined to help the longitude; but in the main, its course bent and delight
is toward that point of the compass. The soul no otherwise, having received an
affrication or touch from divine love, evermore bends the motion toward God,
and is enamoured upon the goodness and Excellency of our blessed Savior. Vain
things like vinegar upon nitre, Prove. 25. 29. Eccl. 2 2.
gives an odious hiss, and fumes away in a Stench: so does this gracious soul
pity carnal men's laughter as a touch of madness, and says of foolish mirth
what does is?

3. Again, There is in this new heart of (...), this covenant heart, an inward,
sweet sensibleness of that great stone of impenitence, that as yet remains
unbroken in pieces, which with its ragged points and angles wounds, the tender
fleshy part, and makes it bleed with joyful sorrow. The holy new convert is
greatly sensible of its proud flesh, and that heavy lump that hangs like a
talent of lead at the feet: and the worlds bird-lime that sticks to the wings
of the soul, when it would mount up to heaven in holy duties. Or as persons
after a great autumnal fever, labor under a squeazy stomach with a mass of
baked humors at the bottom. So does the soul, and weeps in secret, and often
bewailes it before the throne of God.

4. There is also found within it a secret joy in the discovery of light. It
takes inward pleasure in the launcing of the tumors of pride, to let out the
corruption of nature. The lamp of Gods word is more precious and joyful to it,
than the dawnings of a Spring-morning out of the East. It Is sign of an
unsanctified heart and a very proud spirit, to snuff and smart at godly
reproof. But this is a certain note of grace begun, when no corruption is too
dear, no secret sin so delectable: but it will part with it at the conviction
of the Spirit. Yea, and the more searching, any Ministry is, the more it
delights to fit under it; and dares not call that a legal (...), which drives
men out of the School of the Law, into the Temple of Christ.

5. Besides, the tender soul g^ieves under it s fears of the want of true
Faith, and is never quiet, till it gain some li^^ly hope of its implantation
into Christ, which it c^erishes and no (...) by the application of promises.
But till then it wrings its hands, runs up and down moornfully through all the
streets of New Jerusalem; being desolate in spirit, as not having a comforting
sense of any faith at all. It cries lamentably from watchman to watchman,
bears many affronts and injuries in the tearing of her vail, Song. 5. 7.
and smiting upon her head; till at last she finds her beloved, and embraces
him in the arms of Faith. Then the soul continues in the use of all prescribed
means to attain the vision of his divine love in the glass of affiance.

6. Again, This troubled soul flies far from the land of excuses, hates
palliations, and self-conceited applauses, and lays all the fault upon it
self: heaps accusations, and lays snares and tentations for its own feet: and
so great, that the holiest minister, and one skilful in cases of conscience,
can hardly sometimes answer and resolve. Whereas the hypocritical Pharisee is
commonly full of talk, has little or no solidity, is confident and boasts of
experiences with a false tongue and deceitful heart. But our gracious young
convert is as sensible of the least sin, as the tenderest hand has a quick and
immediate sense of the fitting of a fly, or the gentle breathings of a Western
Air. It laments over In-dwelling sin, bewails its residence, and sounds
continual alarums against it. For it cannot bear the domination of that proud
Viceroy of Satan, to fulfill it in any lusts thereof. If it prevail though but
a little, the soul triumphs as if its conquering flag were entering the gates of
heaven. For although its motions and impulses against unholiness be yet but
weak, tender and low; yet are they the fruits of integrity, and grow forward in
Strength. This i s a true sign of grace, and that the new life is in good
earnest begun in that heart; for is finds repentance toward God, and true
sorrow for sin, conjoined with real inclinations, resolutions and workings in
its gradual turning from it, and an holy hatred of all thoughts of reversion to
it.

7. The soul feels within it self an holy inclination to sincerity, in all its
actions; which like a fragrant perfume in every chamber of all its powers and
faculties, gives a grateful scent in every duty: Psalm. 139. 23.
and delight s to be unfeigned in every good word and work. It hates painted
garments of hypocrisy, and therefore with great humility, requests of God to
search its heart, Psalm. 143. 2. 130. 3.
and begs to be what God would have it, and prays withal, that he would not
enter into a severe judgment, and mark what is done amiss with an urgent
scrutiny: for then no flesh can stand in his sight, but entreats forgiveness of
God that so he may be feared and worshipped. From hence springs that solid,
sweet and comfortable doctrine of the Reformed Churches [ That the true desire
of grace is true grace:] On which Basis sound consolation will stand
inviolably, when all the proud towers of Pelagius and Arminius shall moulder
into dust at the fall of Babylon. For now the soul in this humble and holy
frame lies at the foot of God, mourns for sin as committed against God, thirsts
after the righteousness of Christ alone, and prays for the spirit of God to
allure and draw it into fuller communion, having taken God in the new covenant
for its God alone.

8. Lastly, it studies the increase of holiness by all holy means and methods
in meditation, self-examining, and conversing with old disciples, ^ Cor. 7 1.
and experienced believers. For in suchlike God communicates his gracious
presence: and in these mountains of Zion Commands the blessing and life for
evermore.

In these and such particulars, if serious Christians would please to go down
the stairs of humility, Psalm. 133. 3.
into the closet of their own heart, and ponder more upon what they read with
holy meditation, they might better observe the [motus primo primi] the first
infant motions of their hearts toward God and heavenly objects: but cursory
reading spoils all.

Some indeed advise an hours meditation to an hours reading, I think a set
quantity of time is not necessary, but so much as may clear and warm the
motion upon the heart. By experience it will be found that the spirit of God
works by various methods and very different, yet so, that by one or other token
any poor broken trembling soul may in some measure be comforted, as to a true
work begun in the heart, Psalm. 51. 6.
and may learn to know divine wisdom in its secret formations of grace within
it s utmost recesses and retirements. To conclude, I take this to be one of the
lowest sentiments of a true work, when there are found continually secret
inclinations, motions, thirstings and desires after God and holiness, which by
strict and careful observation may be perceived to grow and increale year by
year; and this note is common to all believers, though in their weakest estate:
who would not change their slender hopes for all the kingdoms of the world and
the glory of them. This work flows from the first breathings of the spirit of
God, and may be discerned as to truth and sincerity by these two notes.

1. If conjoined with patient continuance in well-doing, Romans 2. 7.
though weakly, yet with the face toward Zion.

2. If growing in spiritual strength, though at present by small degrees, and for
a while scarce discernable: like the growth of a child, 2 Pet 3. 18.
or the augmentation of a plant, or the motion of a shadow of the Style upon
the Sun-Dial

But so much of the first:

Let Us treat a while on the second branch of the chapter about a deserted soul,
and then come to an end.

2. Of the lowest acts of grace in a deserted Soul.

Here, such as are inwardly for the main work truly gracious; yet through vain
walking, and too much frequenting and associating with vain company of forthy
relations, who because of nearness of blood or affinity, some sweet tempers are
loath to reprove, for want of the grace of holy courage and wisdom: finding too
much carnal delight in them, especially if witty and pleasant: though it cost
them many a salt tear in closets. In this there lie s a deep snare to easy and
unthinking spirits, not considering the after-pangs to bring forth a new birth
of holiness, though they be otherwise in the main truly pious.

Others are taken with apish garbs and habits, fashions and gestures, going
bent, as if troubled with some foreign disease, conforming themselves to the
image of this present world, Rom 12 2. Luke 16. 15.
which is -abomination in the sight of God, loving of trifling and unprofitable
converses in their visits, and wanting of secret and serious thoughts of
eternity, the world to come, and of standing before the Son of Man in his day,
and this often joined with too much neglect of secret and working communion, at
which the world scoffs, when spending their strength and marrow in the worship
of Mammon or Flora, fall off at length too far from their zeal for the pure
worship of God in Christ.

Others by various deordinations of life, (not here to lengthen about) for want
of caution and watchfulness over their hearts and lives, grieve and vex the
spirit of God and having wounded their own consciences, have lost their crown
of joy, that is withered away: and they are now defer vingly bemoaning
themselves in the dark caverns of desertion, Isa. 50. 11.
and can see no light, and are in danger to follow others, who blazed a while,
and then went out in a snuff, whereas it becomes true believers, Heb. 4 1.
to be very tender and careful that they do not so much as seem to fall short
of so great salvation.

I answer, before any comfort can break in, to such; they must repent and do
their first works, and take heed they do not further lost what they have
wrought. Yet to such I reccommend our Lords advise to Laodicea, John. 8. Rev.
3. 18.
to buy eye salve of him to anoint their eyes, that they may see and
acknowledge their sins, and turn at his rebuke and chastening.

Then may they begin with some hope to search what vital acts are not as yet
extinguished. Though in a swoone or a deliquium animae an eclipse of spirits,
yet their pulse has not lost all its vibrations, their eyes not quite set: yet
look up toward heaven, though somewhat dismally. There Is yet left a little
warmth, a little moisture, a little breathing against the looking-glass of a
promise, held by a faithful searcher and observer of souls. You may take notice
that this partial back slider turns not wholly to profaneness and an utter
forsaking of the ways of God: but retains an impulse and a secret, respect to
those that are gracious, but does not muc^^ care to show it publicly, and when
they begin to revive out of their long fit of ^olly, give a doleful motion of
their eye to their near relations, at whose checks they formerly scoft too
much. They are like the smoking flax, or weik in the golden candlestick newly
gone out, which yet by admotion or putting to it a little lamp fire of the
sanctuary; conceive afresh flame moving swiftly to it upon the oily smoke
ascending from it. Or they may be compared to the bruised reed, which being
battered by a storm of tentations lays down its hanging head upon the surging
Waves of a violent torrent, and is high to be swallowed up. I say to such
though now in a sorrowful case, yet if they were once implanted truly into
Christ the true vine of Lebanon: they shall never finally wither and perish:
for the calling and grace of God is without repentance, who always loves to the
end. For the foundation of his prescience and pre-electing love remains sure,
he knows who are his: but let them take he^d that they depart from all
iniquity, 2 Timothy, 2, 19.
and never return to folly more. They may make a shift to get to heaven, and
sit within the door; but with many a piercing sorrow and doleful agony, and
black Sack cloth on the loins of their hearts, before they get thither. But in
the mean time, if they are right (as I hope and here suppose) I would help a
little, that they may not totally walk in darkness) I advise them to a serious
search of their former way s, and to holy resolutions add sincere endeavors of
amendment, and hereby they may possibly attain to find some inward motions upon
their hearts, that may manifest some vitality in the souls pulse toward things
above: some true desires of renewing communion with God, though mixed with briny
tears, scarlet blushings of conscience, and fore buffetings of Spirit. Vital
acts may begin to appear in recording the former times of the shinings of Gods
face upon their tabernacles. Yet, as some Di^mes conceive, that though David's
bones were well set after his sore fall: yet there remained a (...) a stiffness
and benummedness that was like an Almanac to him all his days after, Psalm. 51.
8.
to his last. But for the ^ain I do believe he did recover the beams of Gods
face, and especially at his swan-like song, had the clear S^n-shine of Gods
love, after his zainy clouds; and that the (...), 1 Samuel: 23. 4.
the sure mercies of David were made sure to him; yea and that he went off with
a ruddy evening, portending a glorious morning at the resurrection. And so
maye^t thou, (...) thou quicken thy pace to red^em thy communion and walk with
God more carefully.

But now no more to that: only since the mention of means as necessary ( quo^d
nos) to the working and knowing of that work of grace, Inference false professor
in beginners, and in recoveries from backsliding. I would infer a few
considerations toward some outward false professors, who presume of having
grace, and of being received to mercy upon common terms of the amplitude of
divine benignity, and yet continue notoriously and grossly neglective of holy
duties, unless by fits, using them as bellows to blow up the bla^e of false and
flattering hopes: for if they do at times, hear, read, and pray, yet spend not
(together with them) such serious and searching meditation on the deep points
of eternity as their cause requires. But if they do now and then upon a fit of
melancholy: yet quickly abandon all their secret resolution s of amendment,
and slip out of all, like an E^le after thunder, and seldom come near it more
but if they chance to return a little, it is upon some terror of God, some
disaster, some sickness, some loss, some fear, some fright of conscience, and
then theyl confess and seem to repent of sin, and look full of flushes, wipe
their mouth with her in the proverbs, and after vows, make enquiry: expiate
their wickedness with a sacrifice: and then to it again.

Dare men thus impose upon God, and even wrest and force mercy against the
Promises which are always connext with obedience to precepts, or do they think
to lay the load upon Gods Sovereignty; and with a bold face lay the cause of
their wickedness at his door, who is bound to none, it is mercy and free grace
to any. They know full well in their Consciences, that they have a natural
power to perform external duty to external commands, as to hearing, reading,
praying, etc. nay somewhat of internal, as in meditating, examining, resolving,
and watching to perform their souls convict ions. They can do these things as
well as go to Taverns, Suffrage of Brit. Divines at Dort. p. 68.
Gamings, Lotteries; and it is justly to be seared, to worse. Cannot they as
well repair to the assemblies, hear reverently, resolve humbly, perform
uniformly, to the unspeakable comfort of their own Consciences, under whose
Discipline they so often tremble, and after that to the joy of their godly
Relations resolutely bid an eternal Farewell to all their foolish, vain and
treacherous Companions, they would be loath to meet them in ^ell the next bout,
and to dwell with them in everlasting burnings. O then while the golden sands
of time are yet running, take hold of good Advice, to cast off such reprobate
Sons of Belial, and abjects of the earth, and hope by this method to arrive at
divine mercy in Christ, by trusting in Gods Covenant upon reformation, and
after some time well spent in Holiness, may obtain the Joy of Faith, which will
end in the Salvation of their Souls.

It Is but a little courage and the work is done! O venture not the damnation of
thy soul on the punctilio's of Dastardy, as afraid to displease such brainsick
fools, who after the thread is snapt by death, will curse one another for ever,
as being mutual promoters of each others eternal ruin. But I shall transmit
this useful Satyr to the sixth Chapter, and close the present with a question
or two, and so end it.

Quest. 1. How to discern the first beginnings of Grace?

Ans. As it was with Thomas, he had at first but a confused knowledge whether
Christ was going, when told of his departure: and as the blind man being under
Christ's cure, saw imperfectly at first, men walking like Trees: but at length
came to more perfect sight: so it is here, good souls at first see but darkly,
and feel but grossly, yet thus much they may surely know, and therefore infer a
work of Grace surely begun within them, by serious enquiry into their own
hearts; what their inmost thoughts when in a good frame do principally run
upon? what their earnest desires do most constantly thirst after and pitch
upon? what the secret wishes of their Souls are bent upon? and herein
Conscience will be a faithful witness whether it be for Salvation in the true
way of Faith and Holiness, which is accepting of Christ on the terms of grace
and Gospel tenders, as I have often mentioned to be the matter of our most
close and secret enquiry, (...). 23. 7.
and impartial resolution from an honest and unbribed Conscience. On which
account I may remember what ouce Mr. Rogers of Hassam, being desired by Mr.
Knightly a worthy Gentleman in Northamptonshire, when one time he could not
sleep in the night, to help him to a Scripture to meditate on, told that of
Solomon; As the man thinks, so is he, which is so in truth; For at what
stairs the heart, and its continued thoughts are plying: there lies the true
index of the souls state and its future happiness.

Quest. 2. Whether desires of Grace are Grace?

Ans. The former hint at this, lets a little enlarge and determine for a
Scripture truth: if those desires be true and sincere of which take two or
three tokens.

1. If such desires are followed with faithful and speedy endeavors to promote
and accomplish in the use of proper means. One thing have I desired, Eccl. 9.
10. Psalm. 27. 8. Prove. 1. 3, 4. 18. 1. 21. 21. 22. 1.
says David, and that will I seek after the soul of a sluggard desires and has
nothing, but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat. Again, the desire of
the faithful kills him, for his hands refuse to labor, he is always roaring
within, that there is a Lion roaring without. Ruin is the end of lazy wishes,
but he that is diligent in this business shall stand before the Prince of
Princes.

2. If thy desires grow and increase, having been attended with success He that
gathers by Labor, shall increase. Holy desires will grow by knowledge and the
teachable grace of humility. Grow in grace, Prove. 18. 11 2 Pet. 3. 18.
says Peter, but how? ^he Answers, by the knowledge of our Lord and Savior.
Yet there is a slated measure to which we are appointed, and can proceed no
further, tho we know it not and to whatever point our study is bent, we can
know but in part in this life, and therefore Faith of the choicest Believers is
but in part on this side glory.

3. If thy desires prove uncessant and impatient till accomplishment and
enjoyment, Prove. 13. 12 Prove. 18. 1.
then will they prove a tree of life. Thru desire (says Solomon) a man having
separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom. He must alienate
from all impertinen^^^s, and dedicate himself to the (...) the work in hand,
the matter and end proposed: which is a fair token that a man's in earnest, and
will never cease till he arrives at his Haven by the fair wind of Providence
Desire is a restless affection, and pursues its end against all opposition
round the whole Globe. Like a Spring that breaks out at the foot of the high
Mountain of Resolution, and quickly spreads to a well, a brook, a river, till
at last it unbosome in the vast Ocean. Or like the Morning Star that ushers in
the dawning twilight, which gradually ascending, swells over the Eastern
Mountains, and prophecies the bright Suns appearance, who never leaves climbing
the horizontal hills till he shines in his luster, and at last sits down in his
Throne in the mid-heaven, Prove. 4. 18.
guarded with Lions. Such is the path of the just, which shines more and more
to the perfect noon day of eternal glory.

But to end, after all considerations of the nature of desires and the meanest
state in grace: be but sure and clear that thy Faith is of the right stamp, and
your enquiry about the lowest degree of Grace will be rather superfluous, and
too full of critical ambiguities and niceties,

CHAP IV, V.
T He Title of the fourth Chapter concerns the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, as before related, Page 54, and was fitted for Publication: but because
of necessary avocations calling me from the Press, which the sharpness of the
Winter, and other delays had too much congealed from Motion: I found it
expedient at present to lay it aside till another season if God permit: And
likewise the firth about Entering into Covenant by Faith; and shall now proceed
to the sixth Chapter; neither shall I handle that in the full Latitude I had
prepared, but speak more succinctly in some things under that Head, for the
same Reasons.

CHAP VI.
The necessary and inseparable connection between Sanctification and true FAITH.
WHat I may at present exhibit on this Subject may be comprised under these
Heads.

1. Let Us treat a little of the nature of Sanctification,

2. Show the undivided connection between that and Faith.

3. Intermix some complaints about formal Professors.

4. Answer a Case or two and end.

As to the first we may peremptoryly determine the point, that wherever true
Faith dwells there must and will be true holiness both in heart and life: and
where it Is not; that person who pretends to Faith without it, is a
self-deceiver, and in his attendance upon Ordinances without life-obedience is
but the servant of base hypocrisy. ^ 1.12,etc:
Will any dare to tread Gods Courts on sacred days, and lift up crimson hand
in prayer, that are full of blood and stained with bribery and oppression (...)
loathes to smell any perfumes in such assemblies mixed with the unsavory stench
of their defiled bodies and putrid lives.

True Sanctification does not lie in outward solemnities, and the gaudery of
Temple-worship, Jer. 7. 22.
as the Prophet treats the Jews in the Name of God: that he commanded then not
concerning Burnt offerings and Sacrifices, 6. 20.
or the Incense of Sheba, or the sweet Cane of Arabia, that is, comparatively,
no nor principally, as he did moral duties of piety and honesty. To obey is
better than sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 22.
and to hearken than the fat of ^ams. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands
of fed Beasts, Mich. 6. 7.
or ten thousand Rivers of Oil, or the children of our bowels to smoke upon his
Altar? no, no! But to to do justly, Psalm. 50. 17.
love mercy, and to walk humbly with God, this (...) is good in his sight. Will
God eat the flesh of Bulls, Psalm. 69. 31.
or drink the blood of Goats? no! he requires the offerings of praise and
thanksgiving, this will please him better than an Ox, that has young horns
and hoofs: Hos. 6. 6. Jos. 5. 7, 10 Amos 5. 25. Act. 7. 42. Mat. 12. 7. 9 13.
Mark. 12. 33. Ephesians. 1. 21. Col. 3. 10
and therefore in cases of mercy, God dispenses with Ordinances; as he did with
Israel in the Wilderness, both as to Circumcision and the Passover for about
forty years together: but with Moral duties never. Our Lord bids us therefore
to go and learn this point more diligently: For a Pharisee may be huge
ceremonious s with his white linen about a platter, but yet neglect the
weighty matters of the Law, Justice and Judgment, and Mercy, Whereas true
Sanctification is a work of Gods Spirit, renewing the whole man after the image
of God in righteousness and true holiness: whereby he is instructed and inabl^d
in all ways of Scripture obedience, to mind the weighty and principal things
of love to God and our Neighbor: and not leave undone those lesser points,
which belong to any institution of God, and not of man.

By this inward work upon the heart, the sanctified person immediately begins
the practice of Mortification, in lying to sin, and of rising to newness of
life: but yet thy s work i s not perfectly and completely wrought in any person
during this life: therefore we must interpret the Apostle in his prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
that the Thessalonians might be sanctified throughout: not in the highest
pitch of degrees, but of soundness and sincerity in every part, 1 Cor. 6. 17
and member of the new Adam.

There is a habit of holiness infused, and wrought in the heart by the holy
spirit of promise: by which means we are joined to the Lord, and become one
spirit with him.

We do not of our selves first believe, and so receive the spirit of God: this
were to ascribe the actings of faith to the power of man, before the infusion
of grace: but first the inspiring and inclining motions of the spirit descend
into us, Joh 3. 8. Ephesians. 2. 22.
whereby we are enabled to believe on the Son, and to become by one Spirit
united to him a s our head.

All habitual graces are wrought in us seminally at first and at one time: yea
Faith it self as to the order of time is infused together with the rest in the
same moment of our regeneration and sincere conversion to God. Habitual
holiness therefore in the production of its blessed fruits and faith among the
rest does antedate all the particular acts of Faith or other Graces. As in
natural Generation all the powers of life are (insemine concepts and dai^ato)
formed at once: Aristot^d. gen animal. l. Pecquet de venis lacteis
but the heart having implanted within it, the true sanguifying virtue becomes
the primum vivens and movens, the first living and moving principle, which is
discerned by its pulsation (like the desires of the Soul in the beginnings of
Faith) yet all sensation, attraction, digestion, excretion, fanguification,
formation of nervous juices and spirits with locomotion and the rest, are all
settled at once; but display their operations afterward at the command of the
rational soul. Much like hereunto is the work of the new conception, formation
and exertion of spiritual and vital acts.

In the first actings of the Spirit we are passive, Isa. 65. 1.
being found of him after whom we sought not at first: but after, that by a
connexed power and concourse of the holy spirit, we act and rely on Christ in
the promise of life, Ephesians. 4, 16: Col. 2. 9, 10
and receive all the supplies of nourishment from the glorious head of
influence thru' the spirit. Even as the head of the natural body conveys the
animal spirits thru' the several conjugations of the nerves into all parts of
the body to manage both sensation and motion. As the Scripture expresses it,
Isai. 44. 3. Mat. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 11
we are sanctified in (...) and power or of the Lord Jesus by the Spirit of our
GOD.

A s to the Author of Sanctification, it is no other than in all gracious work
s, even God essential, and the spirit of God in his more particular Operation s
and Application s.

A s for preparation s to grace in any spiritual way before the influence s of
the spirit, Ephesians: 2: 1.
they are insignificant and unsavory notions: for by nature we are dead in
sins and trespass s. Ti s the same holy Spirit who incline s at first to the
use of mean s, and warm s the heart in and by them, as appointed and sanctified
of God.

There are, it is true, various degrees in moral habits and their actings by the
common work of the Spirit in h^^ ordinary efficacy: but in many moral person s
in the state of nature, these morality s produce (...) of old, in the Scribe s
and Pharisee s, strong and very vigorous resistance against the more spiritual
operation s of the holy Spirit of God.

2. I proceed now to the second point premised, which is to show that Faith and
Holiness s are inseparable companions, like Jonathan and David, native twin s
coming up from the washing of regeneration both together: which may be evident
a s follow s:

1. Because Faith i s a part of holiness s or the new creature, in the
renovation of the image of God: whom to believe on hi s Word wa s the duty of
Adam in Innocence and i s indeed a branch of the first Commandment, and part of
that blessed pourtraicture i s restored again by Christ under the new Covenant.
By nature since the fall it is true, we incline to distrust God and believe
Satan before him, and in not obeying him intrusting to his Son upon his Word,
we give God the un truth: as to the method of salvation by another
righteousness. But indeed Faith is a prime part of our holiness, whereby we
trust God as to his promise of eternal life by his blessed Son, Jer: 17: 7:
Acts. 26. 18. 15. 19.
and is the very critical and discerning character between a true convert and a
carnal man We are said therefore to be sanctified by Faith in Christ, and the
heart to be purified by Faith: not from it self as an efficient cause of
holiness, Gal. 5. 6.
but as it daily fetches and derives holiness from him as head of the Church.
So that Faith in sanctifying us after the first infusion of grace is a power or
virtue cooperating with the spirit of God and enjoys a constant concourse of
the same holy Spirit in all our spiritual actions.

2. Another ground may be taken from the conjunct work of the spirit: John ^^]
who in his very first impulse and motion to true and saving conversion at his
coming down into our hearts ^for that purpose, works both Faith and Holiness at
the same moment.

3. Because our blessed Lord came into the World ('it is the end of his advent to
us) not only to be the object of our Faith, but to save us from our sins, Mat.
1. 21. Tit 2. 14. 1 John 3. 8.
and Faith must act upon him for that end to purify and deliver us from our
iniquities: not only for salvation from hell or wrath to come: but also from
the guilt and ^'th of sin. For we are chosen (...) him to be noly, and created
in Christ unto good works. Christ gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity,
Ephesians. 1. 4. and 2. 10. Tit, 2. 14
to purify u s for a peculiar people, zealous of good works where we may
observe justification and sanctification riding together in the same Chariot.
If then all gracious habits be wrought at once, the too much nicety of arguing
about the precedence of this or that grace is to be rejected, as not agreeing
to the uniform work of the new nature, nor the inward experience of saints
whose graces work according to influence, opportunity of providence, 1 Cor. 12:
11:
and the good pleasure of the spirit in his assistances, who divides to every
one severally as he will. We may admit somewhat as to congruity of the seeming
order of nature or time, but not press such conceptions over strictly for
various experiences will contradict the curiosity of such notions. But we may
firmly determine, that the understanding cannot spiritually discern the
excellencies of Christ, 1 Cor: 2: 14:
nor the will of man steadfastly believe in him nor the affections savingly
embrace him, till we are first regenerated by Gods most holy Spirit, who is
powered out into every faculty and power of the soul at the very first initials
of Conversion.

4. Because the Commandments of holiness are part of the object of our Faith in
its doctrinal foundation. Romans 7. 12.
Therefore Paul in his conflict sets down this as a maxim, that the Law is
holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good.

5. Besides, the truth of our Faith is demonstrable by holiness as its genuine
effect. Its vain for persons to pretend to Faith where this is wanting, though it
may not appear (...) at the first. The Apostle James spends a large discourse
upon this Argument, Ja^. 2. 17.
to prove that Faith without the works of holiness is but a dead Faith. Indeed
our holiness being imperfect does not justify the person before God, but it
justifies the faith of the person to be true: and the Apostle Paul conjoynes
Faith and Holiness together, and thence proves our eternal life. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
Blessing God for having chosen the Thessalonians to glory, and proves it
because they were sanctified by the Spirit, and did believe the truth of the
Gospel.

6. Lastly, Because the application of Faith, or the working or actuating of
our Faith upon Christ in the promise, does not only sweetly and clearly
manifest our being justified, but assists us also in the obtaining and
increasing of holiness. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
They walk and work together. For how do the precious promises of the covenant
purge us from sin and all filthiness of flesh and spirit, but by the acting
faith in Christ, and so do embrace Christ for our sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and in his name and power derive holiness from those precious promises, which
are the golden Pipes or nerves, that convey it from our glorious head. Whence
it comes that our belief of the inheritance promised, and of Heavens
aimiableness revealed by the Word, and ratified on and by the verity of God:
helps us daily to walk more holily and to be made more meet for that Kingdom
with the Saints in light. And thus it is, Act. 15. 7 Lev. 4 20, 33.
that Faith purifies both the heart and life for glory. Even as under the
Levitical Law, the action of the Priest in his offering the Bullock, Rainold
praele^t vol. ^. p. 123.
and sprinkling the blood before the Lord is said to purge away sin, or make
atonement for their sin s, that is instrumentally. So may Faith be an
instrument in deriving the sense of our justification, and the sweet influences
of our sanctification from our blessed Lord in believing the sanctifying
promises made in his Name, and actuated by virtue of his holy Spirit.

Now then, according to that common and useful sentiment: there be two works
that attend Sanctity: the first is to mortify sin: and the second to vivifie
and quicken Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 11.
that we may be holy in all manner of conversation, and this not of our own
power either to begin, carry on or finish: but wholly by the work of the Spirit
at first, and then by his gracious concourse with every holy action of the new
creature to the last, being carried on by the power of God thru' Faith to
Salvation. This is so great a Scripture truth, that it is to be admired that the
impugners of it, who stand upon their own power so much, both as to conversion,
and as to perseverance, should be so noted for looseness of life which shows
the secret tremendous judgment of God, that such as too much neglect the
righteousness of God, M r. Hickman Hist of Arminianism p. 396.
should many times have so little of their own: as it is observed by; a Learned
Writer in a short History of such points.

Having thus treated a little about the necessary conjunction of holiness with
Faith, lets exhibit its beautiful face in the following crystal Glass of Holy
Scripture.

1. It principally consists in the inward frame of the heart according to the
Will of God, when the image of God does most illustriously shine into it. True
Religion and Holiness are fundamentally seated in the heart: all other is but
painted false and hipocritical. Bell-Religion is but mocking of God, when lewd
men and women run to the Assembly to show their clothes, Prove: 7: 14:
stare upon their goatish paramours, and like the strange woman in the
Proverbs, pay their penny at the Temple, and then with an impudent face deck
their Bed with Tapistry, and perfume it with Spices. ver: 16, 17:
But true inward holiness excites and instigates persons constantly upon the
taming and subduing rather than bridling only their fierce and sensual lusts,
and to crown right reason with full power and dominion over their inferior
beastly appetites: which is and may be performed genuinely and successfully
alone by true grace.

2. Holiness consists in studying and observing the purity of Gods Worship,
prescribed in his Word according to his Will. For what communion can we have
with so holy a God; Heb. 12 9. Exodus 2^. 24. 29. 22. 29 42. Numb. 6. 24.
in methods formed besides and contrary to his appointment. If earthly Prince s
will not receive Addresses but according to their own prescriptions, and
appoint Masters to order those solemnities: why not much rather be subject to
the King of Kings, that Father of Spirits and live, when God had set down all
the Ordinances of his Worship to Moses, then adds: there will I come unto you
and bless you.

3. In sobriety and chastity toward our own bodies, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. Tit. 2. 12.
possessing those noble vessels (wherein our souls those Lamps of life shine so
radiantly) in Sanctification and Honor.

4. In a vigilant care of Justice and Righteousness between man and man: Mat.
7, 12.
setting before our eyes that golden rule, of doing to others as we would
others should do to us.

Whoever then, upon the high testimony given to Faith in Scripture shall wax
wanton with Grace, Romans 6. 1
and fancy they are set at liberty to live as they list: such do but trifle
with God, and impose upon the purity of his Precepts, and in the end will
deceive themselves and if repent not fall into the precipice of eternal
Damnation. Which point is faith fully determined in the Homilies of England
concerning Faith, Chap. 4 P 23.
and more copiously in the second part about Faith, Page 24. where they declare
Faith to be a working grace; and again Page 28. citing the Apostle Peter, where
we translate the words, 2 Pet. 1. 5.
Add to your Faith virtue, they read it [ Minister or declare virtue in or by
your Faith.] that is, show forth the force, power or virtue of your Faith in
all your other graces, and in the holiness of your lives by the effects and
fruits of a true and living Faith.

Let us now consider one or two questions, and finish this Chapter at present.

Quest. 1. What means may we use to attain and increase true holiness.

Answ. 1. I answer, Study thine own heart, keep it with all diligence,
especially from your own iniquities, Prove. 4. 23.
and your own special tentations, by a wakeful guard, both in prayer and
watchfulness. Observe who comes in and goes out. Examine thy self more
frequently, and meditate deeply and seriously to give a wise and deliberate
answer to these three questions in the Catechism of conscience.

1. Whence came I? what is my original State

2. Where (...)? what and whose work am I doing?

3. Whether g^^l, after this life is ended.

Give (...) satisfying answer according to Gods Words to these questions and
scrutinies of an (...) conscience, and this will (...) you upon a dying pillow:
When all the world i s not worth the tip of an a (...) to you. You will need no
longer (...) but as to dependent explications upon these heads: For if your
peace be made with God on this score, you are out of gunshot. But ever
remember Joseph's question about the Eye and Presence of God in all places, gea.
39. 9
saying, How can I commit this great wickedness, and sin against od. Especially
consider his flamming (...) to awe you from secret sins, which are all in the
light of his countenance, Psalm. ^0. 8.
when no other eye is upon you; and be ashamed to commit those things under his
eye, which you would blush to commit before a little child, and are in a fright
at the turn of every door, left a child should come in to observe you, and tell
tales of you, when faithful Relations out of Town, return again. O the hellish
practical Atheism, that lurks in the hearts of professing hypocrites! that
write Sermons only to accuse them at the day of Judgment, and to be a pile of
papers to burn them in hell, unless they repent. O set your ways before the
eyes of the Lord, Prove. 5. 21.
who pondereth all your goings. That Is like an Isaac in the field, a Joseph in
an empty house, (...) pious Nathanael under the Fig Tree alone. John 1. 48.


2. Study an exact imitation of the Saints in glory, that are now enjoying the
promises, whose faith follow. If vain persons would ensnare by their scoffs or
inticements, remember they are but the wile s of the Devil. ^^stful villain s
dare not stand the repulse of a brave and virtuous spi rit: casta estquam (...)
rogavit. They I shrink and sink with shame into the Devil s bosom, when the
glory of an holy life chaftize s them into horror and strangling. Ponder the
path of thy feet, and walk in the way of good men, Prove. 4, 20, 25. and (...)
and 5, 6.
and the righteous s, that are the excellent upon the earth let be thy
companion s. Aerie person s so called, are fit for no company, but the prince
of the power of the Air, that rules and rages in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.
the Son s and Daughter s of Belial, that shall be damned. When sinners entice,
consent thou not. A man is discerned by his companion, and a woman man by her
Gallant, as the infatuated world shamefully Italianizes; but a wound and
dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away: Prove. 6. 33.
keep thou in the path of the just that shines more and more, till the perfect
day.

Mark the perfect, and behold the upright, the end of that man is peace. Follow
their grace, Psalm. 37. 37,
and their glory will follow you. Shining beams stream from their paths to
enlighteen your feet in the way to bliss and happiness.

3. Stop up the casements of thy senses at any approaches of vanity. Let thine
eyes look right forward, Prove. 4. 25.
and take heed to thy going. Wax up thine ears, as Ulysses in Homer, from the
Syren-songs of fools, that may split thy soul upon the Rocks of Chari^dis. The
five senses are as so many rushing flood gates to set open the heart to all
iniquity.

4. Beg of God a quickened heart to secret and family duties. Cry to the Lord:
Psalm. 80. 18^ Jer. 10. 25.
Quicken me, and I Will call upon thy name, and tremble to be among those
families, that for not calling on God s Name, shall have his fury poured out
upon them. Family Prayer is like some Elixir, or morning antidote in
pestilential times, and like some anodyne or cooling cordial julep in an
evening, to procure beloved sleep in the bosom of God.

I was told a notable passage from a holy man, Mr. (...)
a native of Lancashire: that a witch being to be turned over, confessed at her
Execution, that she could never bewitch the person or family, (as I remember)
of a certain godly man in that country, because she could never find him come
out of his doors without prayer in a morning.

Again I beseech you let us take heed of Omission-sins, and beg pardon for, and
assistance both of memory and strength against them; yet be not too much
discouraged, if age, sickness, or weakness, or some sudden disappointment s
hinder or impair thy work. Nay if sometimes the sweet wind of the spirit do not
breath so fragrantly upon thy garden of spices with the same benign
influences, as to me thy heart in holy ardors and flames of love; remember that
relentings and mournings under such apprehended absences of the spirit, do
manifestly infer the inward presence of the same holy spirit in the compunction
and brokenness s and languishments of heart for Christ, do show a sickness for
want of communion visible, by secret invisible touches of his love. Behold he
stand s behind the wall, (...)
and will by and by look forth at a window, and show himself through the
lattesse to thee.

Let me here interpose an humble and earnest request to all persons who may
light upon these line s, to set upon a speedy and sincere reformation of all
things displeasing in his sight, that the Lord may bless us, and restore and
preserve our mercies, and especially to conserve the Gospel among us.

Lets' also mix prayer with holy thankfulness for the least of mercies: which
reminds of a passage of Mr. John Ball, when occasionally at a very short and
mean dinner with Adams Ale, (as the Author terms it) he breaks out into these
words. It would cost a man many a years labor to be truly and thoroughly
thankful for one piece of bread and cheese, Clearks lives p. 176.
Oh how many: poor persons in this land would leap at the crusts parings and
offals, which many lewd persous and wastful servants fling away presumptuously
against the command of our Lord, who could make bread by a word out of stones,
out of nothing, and yet bids that nothing be lost: while as they consider not
what bitter poverty they may bowl under; John 6. 12
nor the dreadful judgment of a famine of bread and water.

But then, how much more abundantly thankful ought we to be for the
festivaldays of the Gospel, which we have enjoyed: that so we provoke not the
master of the feast to remove both his flourishing table, and such ungrateful
guests. Since many people are even weary of their faithful and painful
Ministers, who are so disheartened, grieved and wearied with abuses offered to
them: that we may justly ^ear, lest God should prove weary of us all as we are
weary of him, and provoke him to take away the golden, and put brazen
candlesticks in their room, as that holy man Dr. Owen expressed himself with much
sadness to that purpose, a little before his ascent to the spirits of just men
made perfect. Lets earnestly implore the divine love and patience to forbid
these dangerous symptoms, and return in mercy to us again.

5. Look well to the flocks of your families, that no sin break forth without
rebuke, restraint and punishment as the matter requires; study and beg for
prudence in government. Take heed of multiplying over-many, especially
impertinent words in family prayer, lest worshippers prove sleepers, and
disturb that duty by snoring. Remember that God is in heaven, Eccles. 5. 2.
and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few. It often makes the ways
of Religion tediou s and irksome to young persons, and sometimes hinders their
looking toward heaven: In all points labor to keep servant s and children in
full work and business, and keep them from gadding with Dinah. For women's
chaste behavior gives a flatter denial, than their saying of [no] to wanton
fellows. They come too near a grant to airy women that would seem to deny it.
Let the reins of government be held in a gentle hand; moderata durant: Let not
little faults be the object of severe chastisements, yet wise correction is
most necessary, tho now fled from this dissolute age, which is the true cause
of many enormities; it is hard for good persons to retrieve it, while wicked
persons are so rampant and powerful: but do what thou can in the wisest way,
for a good man's paths are ordered of the Lord. Ill and sordid breeding and evil
communications affects many thousands with corrupt manners all their days.
Good education helps to sweeten ill-tempers betimes; as a new vessel that is
scented with a vinous liquor. And although under bad influences at birth, and
in nursing by a froward milk ( as Plutarch pronts it) yet wise parents by the
blessing of God may greatly form and lick their conversation into some smooth
civllities. Its a weighty work to fashion young ones to religious habits, it
tames the heathen fierceness, and barbarism of some natures, and brings them up
by degrees to advance in some measure the glory of God, their countries
benefit, Ephesians. 1. 2.
and their own peace; within, and ornament without.

Whereas others who are hurt by bad presidents, and example s in the ungraceful
carriage of Superiors, who care not to prune or lop off the wild luxuriancies
of youth; they often prove quarrelsome and contentious wretches in age,
disturbers of families, the instruments of mischief in cities and towns, and if
many, then they prove firebrands to whole Nations.

6. Deliver your souls from this wicked generation, Acts 2. 40.
fly youth^^ lusts, fast away tentations, beat down (...) flesh, that great
Ass, as Helarion terms (...) by moderation and abstinence; especially from wine
and strong ^rink, and all excesses. Shun as a serpent or a flying dragon, the
dreadful madness of these days, which tends in the end to shame and beggary
here; to the ruin of many ancient and famous families: who have swallowed many
a park, and many a Lordship, and drunk down the royalty of fishing in many
Rivers. As it is easy to see in the turns of estates from the old to new upstart
races, in the antiquities of many counties described by diligent men of late.
But what is worst of all, they are ready to sink into everlasting burnings, in
flaming pitch and brimstone, in that direful and bottomless lake.

Quest. 2. If true holiness be so rare a Jewel, and always connexed with true
Faith: then help us to know whether we are indeed truly sanctified?

Answ. 1. I answer, we may know that we are truly sanctified, if we have been
exercised in godly sorrow and repentance for sin, joined with an holy hatred
against it.

True penitent tears like salt-waters, do purge and cleanse the soul. Bitter
sorrows, and an inward sense of Gods wrath, with an holy awe of Gods precepts
and threatenings, (...). 12. 10.
and a sincere desire of amendment fit the souls palace for the carrying on of
grace.

Holiness of life, and reformation of our ways does always follow inward and
sincere Repentance.

2. An inward satisfaction with and some delight from the heart in a convincing
Preacher, that searches his heart to the bottom, and lets out the old
corruption, and then pours in the Samaritan Oil of the Gospel upon the acute
wine of the Law; yea he reverences and loves him for his work sake and
faithfulness to his Patient.

Obj. But may not an unsanctified person show outward holiness and have some
inward ^ogmatical Faith, as Herod and others.

A. Their Obedience is neither universal nor permanent, Luke 8. 13. Heb. 6. 4.
and 10. 24. 2 Pet. 2. 20.
and their Faith not rooted in an unfeigned love to Christ,

No more here to this, intending a further measure in the eighth Chapter.

To conclude about Sanctification with the words of that holy and reverend
Person, Bp; Ushe^ in his little sheet about the two Witnesses. Being ask t^ by
a Lady of Honor what Sanctification was: after some modest diversion, brake
out into this expression, See Br^t Divine at D^rt. p. 110
[ That it was the offering up the whole will to God, which was more than all
burnt offerings and Sacrifices, To which I may subjoyn that none need to dread
or fly back from the flames of affection in this free will Offering, though it be
difficult to flesh and blood: for it is perfumed with the Frankincense of our
Lords passion offering at the brazen Altar, and the fragrant mingled Incense of
his intercession at the golden Altar. So that in conclusion, all the holy ways
of wisdom are pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

Thus much at present to explain a little the nature of holiness in this
Chapter together with a sad lamentation dropped upon the Hearse of vain Professors
in these days. But lets add, Let him that stands take heed lest be falls, be
not high-minded but fear: Romans 11, 20. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
for thou stand by Faith: and that grace of God alone makes thee to differ.

Let us now finish this excellent and useful Subject of Holiness: though mixed
with some warm reflections for the good of souls, and come to a very
comfortable Subject about the Beauty and joy of Faith in the Throne of
assurance: (...)
though I should inter weave a shorter Chapter about the infirmities of Believers
to prevent stumbling at the (...) of Assurance: and now I hope somewhat to
change my voice in more sweet (...) of comfort, for the use of broken and
mournful Saints. The Foundation indeed is laid in the Doctrines of Faith and
holiness, if faithful Souls will diligently build gold and precious stones upon
it: they may erect the most stately and Imperial Temple in the whole World,
(...)
not like the Pygmy pyramids of Egypt up to the Clouds and Vapors, but like the
Cedar-Temple of the second Solomon, all wrought with Saints and Cherubims,
whose Pinacles reach within the highest Heavens n^^ babent ^ambras, all shadows
and mist s are fled away. Still remember that all must pass thru' the Temple of
virtue and grace, before they can enter the Temple of heavenly glory.

CHAP VII.
T His Chapter about the infirmities of Believers, for the same fore-written
causes, I lay aside at present, and proceed to the Eighth, about the Doctrine
of Assurance.

CHAP. VIII
Of the Assurance of FAITH.
THe nature of Assurance and Method to attain it, is the Subject of this
Chapter. In former times, Faith was represented under the notion of assurance,
or a Saints particular certainty, that Christ died for his own soul among the
rest of Believers. G^^ 2. ^0.
Like to that special privilege to which Paul prescribes, that Christ loved him
and died for him. But now, more diligent observation of Holy Scripture and
experience has cleared up this point; that assurance is the belief, Romans 5. 1.
that we are justified by Faith in Christ and so have peace with God. It i s
the application of Faith, or a persuasion of our hearts concerning the love of
God. ^ Joh. 3. 19.
When the Spirit of God sets his seal upon our hearts with the impression of
the image of Christ as in wax or as the Ancients graved the effigies of their
Prince s on a Cornelian or Opal, or such precious Stones. Ephesians. 3. 12.
It produces a confidence of access by Faith in Christ, Joh. 14. 23.
and i s daily more and more evidenced by the abode of both Father and Son with
us: when the ripe Grape s of Eshcol are cast into our bosoms, and Christ
himself come s in to sup with us. Rev. 3. 20.
Assurance shines by a reflex beam of the souls eye upon it self. When a Saint
sitting down in the closet of his own heart takes a clear view of his face in
the glass s of Faith. I may term i^ a Saints belief of hi s own Faith. Assurance
i s the cream of Faith when it is settled: its the joy of Faith springing in the
Soul from the warm healing beams of the Sun of righteousness rising upon its
humble valleys. Some take Faith to be a trust on the promise for remission of
our own sins in particular, or conjoined with reliance, dependence, adherence
and affiance. When having cast all our hope and expectation of heaven and
happiness s into the arms of Christ alone; and thence infer the promise to have
been made to us in particular, by an immediate consequence drawn from our
special and personal application of the indefinite or more general promise, and
taking it as a divine Oracle to us in particular, and therefore call it special
Faith: the promise being thereby assigned to me immediately as certainly as to
any in the world, because I have set to my seal, that God is truth, and
accepted him upon his Word. When this is done, to wait with joyful expectation,
that God will perform it at the day of Christ. But what is all this any more
than Faith and assurance tied up together in a bundle of sweet smelling Myrrh:
Psalm. 1. 6.
dressed up in various word s to the same effect, a s we before expressed it Lets
then proceed and endeavor to prove it under some distinct heads.

1. That Assurance may be had. 2. Prescribe some means to attain it. 3. Some
Rules to clear it. And 4. Solve a question how to retain and preserve it.
1. First. Let s show that assurance may be obtained by every true Believer,
under these Arguments.

Arg. 1.

Because God has commanded and exhorted us to try and examine our own estate,
Brit. Divines in Synod Dort. Page 140 2 Cor. 13.5. Phil. 2. 12
whether we are in the Faith or not, and therefore we may know it. We are
commanded to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling: therefore the
sense of it may be wrought out: and we are urged to do it with fear and
trembling, to spur u s unto godly care lest we should miscarry. Again, we are
enjoined to give diligence to make our calling and election sure, ^ Pet. 1. 10.
and therefore we may ascertain it, and make it plain and evident in the eyes
of our Consciences.

Arg. 2.

Because God has given out many gracious promises of it to the faithful. I
might gloss on that place [ Thou shall know that I am thy Savior and
Redeemer:] or a clearer in that; Isai. 60. 16. and 22 17. (...) Cor. 2. 12.
The effect of righteousness, shall be quietness and assurance for ever; and
yet further [We have received the Spirit of God, that we may know the things
freely given us of God.

Arg. 3.

Because many have enjoyed this honorable favor and high privilege from God.
^ John 3. 2.
Qued potuit, potest, what has been attained, may again. We know that when he
shall appear we shall be like him:] and so in several other places. I doubt not
bu^ many living can put seal to this truth, as having lived in this mount of
vision. Among other^ who are gone to enjoyment, I would call to mind, Mr.
Benjamin Albya a Turkey Merchant of good repute for his holiness, and whose
evidence^ I have by me, approved and signed by some grave and holy Divines.
Another was my much honored, Mr s. Anna Revell Mother to my beloved Wife
Phaebe; a very holy Matron, and a discerning Christian, who acquainted me ( I
think twice) with great humility and tears trickling down in a most mee^ broken
and penitent manner: which made me value the testimony more than Gold (...)
that she had walked in the light of Gods countenance for thirty years not
interrupted. I mention it, not so much for my happy relation ^as because of my
certain knowledge: and indeed she was one, who walked accordingly. O that all her
remaining Friends and Relations would lay it up, as a Jewel of value for them
to eye and imitate. But it is not every gracious persons attainment adire
corintbum, to go to heaven feeding on Milk and Honey to carry this glittering
Diamond in their bosom. They are Gods Joseph's, Genesis 43. 11.
to whom he sends the Balm and the choice Fruits of Canaan to feed upon while
they are in Egypt. Yea, of those, who enjoy this Sun shine, this transfiguring
vision in Tabor, all have not equal visions, nor the same persons at all times
alike: but ate up and down, higher and lower: tho they never want a sweet view
of the Turrets of Salem, yet sometimes it i s a little more cloudy: but when
they skilfully set the Telescope or Prospective of a lively and actuating
Faith, they may discern plainly the Pinacles of the Temple of Glory, and like
Moses on Mount Nebo become ra^isht with a sight of that lovely Land, that land
of desire, that land of the living, that goodly Mountain even Lebanon. Which
view (to speak humbly and with some desired fellowship of this joy) gave wings
to the soul of Moses, Deuteronomy. 3. 25.
and swift feet to his affections, when he gave a leap from that pleasant and
fragrant Mountain into Glory.

But to leave the first part of this Chapter, and proceed to the second about
mean s and methods to attain Assurance, which may be performed, 1. By
Argumentation. 2. By observation of the Spirits influences.


As to Argumentation:

1. First, By Arguments drawn from our having and acting of Faith and the
effects of it, we may obtain some measure of this blessed privilege. Thus
[Whosoever believes in Christ, such a persons sins are pardoned, and therefore
shall be saved. But I believe, and therefore I shall be saved. The major
Proposition is expressly the Word of God, and built upon the rock of eternity.
The minor, which is [That I believe] must be wrought out and proved by the
first Chapter of this Treatise, or any other holy Directions; and then upon
examination is to be found in the sense and experience of thine own soul: and
thence the conclusion will irrefragably and undeniably follow with unspeakable
comfort and full of glory. Now here a Christian may see, how necessary it is to
ponder diligently upon the true nature of Faith, and to understand its inward
essence and actings in casting the soul upon Christ, and likewise the
distinction of Faith from Assurance, and how assurance may be clearly and
firmly built upon a sound and a well-argued sense of its being and acting in
the soul. In the Looking-glass of Assurance the soul beholds it self clinging
and cleaving to Christ while he is supporting and carrying it over the stormy
Ocean to the haven of glory. It is Faith that seeds the Lamp of Assurance, and
Assurance i s the Oil which feeds the Lamp of Joy.

2. We may argue the truth of our Faith by the fruits of holiness, and thence
in^err and draw forth Assurance. Because of the unseparable connection there is
between Faith and holiness; 1 John 1. 7.
whosoever walks in the light, the blood of Christ cleanses him from all sin: that
i s, whoever is sanctified, may thence infer, that he is justified, and shall
be glorified. So Paul argues: Rom, 8. 30. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.
He that is washed and sanctified, is also justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and shall inherit the Kingdom of God. If we study to walk to all
pleasing: we may then give thanks for that we are thereby made meet for the
inheritance with the Saints in light. Col.1. 10: 12.


3. Again, Grace in exercise is a most evident token of its real existence, and
may consequently raise Assurance. If a tree flower fragrntly, it is certain it
has a root. If a Ship be under Sail, and its Top-gallants out, shows its found
estate, and make s way toward its Ophir. To be strong and swift in motion
demonstrates a strong and healthy soul, and is the way to keep it in a happy
frame: for exercise conduces to health and Strength. Waters of great rivers, by
their voluble motions and tides, resist putrefaction and the heavenly bodies by
their continual circulations and fiery beams convey their influences to serve
all the sublunary generations and accretions. Little sparks by agitation,
conceive larger degrees of fire in the application of more combustible matter
and purify the Air. Artificial implements, as Locks, Saws and Handles, etc.
are made brighter by mutual affrication, attrition and use. So do the
chariotwheels of the soul kindle fire by swift rotation and motion in the ways
of holiness, and run flaming toward heaven.

4. We may argue it from the goodwill of God toward us, according to that in
the Angelical Song [ peace in earth, and good will toward men] peace of
conscience on scripture-ground is a certain token of Gods good will toward us.
Euke. 2. 14.


But if you ask: But will God pardon me in particular

I Answer, why doubt it? 2 Cor. 5, 20. John 3. 33.


When as God exhorts, commands and sends his Ambassadors to beseech us to
believe him, and rest upon his promise, and not to make him seem to be a
deceiver by our unbelief.

Nav, thou and I, and every one, to whom the Word of Life does come, are
commanded in particular to believe.

Obj. I but says the timorous soul, how can I know that he means the promise of
life to me?

Answ. I Answer, if thou trust him: it will certainly prove so,

For thy accepting, and then relying, and resting on him to perform his
promise, makes up the agreement between God and thee.

More of this anon God willing.

5. An interest in the prayer of Christ, is an assured help to evidence that we
are in Covenant, and under electing love.

To clear up this we must take our Lords own reasoning before the Father, I
have given them the words thou gaves^ me, John 17. 8. 6. verse 14.
and they have received them, and have kept thy word, and they are hated of the
world, because they are not of it. So that if we keep the words or commandments
of Christ, and are therefore hated by the world, we may conclude we are hi s,
verse. 9.
and under the efficacy of his divine prayer. He pray s for them whom the
Father gave him out of the world, and not for the world. And left we might say,
this concerned the Apostles only, our Lord subjoyn s: I pray for them also that
shall believe on me through their word. verse 24
Wence we may infer, that all true believers in Christ upon the hearing the
word of Apostolical Doctrine, are the Subjects of Christ's prayer. The great end
of all is, that at last we may be with him, and see his glory.

6. Learn the blessed art of applying promises: this is a sure and certain way
to argue out the point of Faith, and to infer assurance. He that can
spiritually, apply a promise, ha s the Spirit of God, and acts in and by his
virtue and instuence. A promise in the reading sparkles and shines; but a
promise applied, comforts and warmes. Some noble cordial as Alchermes, or that
of Tycho or some great Elixir, if charily set up in a closet or a cabinet of
crystal is an help to the thoughts: but drunk or taken down in a proper
vehicle, makes it by divine blessing to become actually restorative. Could we
repeat all the promises in the Bible, forward and backward, and reduce them
upon occasion to proper head s and use, and service: yet it is special
application gives the signative virtue: and therefore I shall endeavor by the
help of grace to give in a little aid to this purpose.

First, Universals contain particulars of the same kind. Indefinite and
unlimited promises are equivalent to universal in a necessary matter. Gods
invitation i s universal, hi s proclamation extensive to all quarters of the
world, to all Regions and Age s, ^ Pet. 3. 9. Mark 10. 49. 16. 15; col. 1. 23.
Isa. 55. 1. Rev. ^. ^^. John. 3. ^^. 1. 37. 1 cor. 5 2 cor 6, 17. John 6. 37.
God would have none to perish. He, every one that thirsts, and whosoever
will, let him take of the water of life freely, and whosoever believes shall
not perish.

Wherever the found of this GospelTrumpet rings:

Into (...) eats this blessed news descend s (...), he is the person invited.
The Lord excepts no person in the proclamation, that will but receive the
promise of life: and although a God, yet beseech s us to come to him, and has
promised (if we will come) to accept and receive us: I will receive you says
the Lord, if you will come out from among them. If you will come to me, I will in
no wise cast you out: No time, quality, number, or other circumstance of sins
set bars to freegrace. The promulgation declares the mind and good will of
God, and that if thou in particular accept the proffer of mercy, thou may
conclude it to be thine, Because the inclination of thy will within, comes down
from God out of heaven, and plainly determines that he is willing to save thee,
because thou art willing to close with his grace upon Gospel-terms of holiness
s and new-obedience: ^nke. 1. 1^.
Thy will is the effect, and therefore the token and evidence of his will to
thee, good will toward men. Whence thou may collect, that thy name i s
written within the parchments and coverings of the general promises: which when
thus accepted, they are then particularly applied.

Obj. If any inwardly object their own unworthiness.

Answ. I answer, it is a most frivolous and impertinent cavil against thy self.
For Christ came to save, not the worthy Pharisee, but the miserable, Rev. 3.
17. Romans 7. 8. 11.
smful and unworthy Publican. The Sick need the Physician and not the whole:
and therefore come the rather, because poor, miserable, blind and naked. Sin
took occasion by the commandment to stay thee: do thou take occasion by sin to
run to the promise. Therefore come to Christ, because lame, tattered torn and
wounded, and sick and creeping by the hedg-side* The more miserable, the more
acceptable; when under the sense of misery, thou come to so merciful an
High Priest and Savior. The promises of the Gospel are made to no other; if
thy case were not miserable, thy coming were to no purpose. The very reason
which thou objectest, is the only reason why thou should be encouraged to
come, to run and fly to this bosom of mercy. (...) has made his promises
without any previous foresight of any holiness, Ezekiel. 36. 32.
grace or Faith. It is for his own sake alone, that he blots out our
iniquities, not for yours, Indeed he sends his Son, Word, Ministers and his
Spirit along with them. He is graciously pleased to call, invite, beseech and
command us to believe: he promises rewards, threatens punishments, proffers the
use and help of all imaginable means proper to this end. He also by his holy
Spirit, moves upon our wills, softens, turns and bends them as he pleases: and
by his quickening work stirs up and guides our consciences in all its offices.
So that I may say, Acts 13. 26.
as the Apostle to some of old: To you is the Word of this Salvation sent O
languishing trembling soul, would thou gladly embrace the promises, and
implore his help to do it? What can thou desire more: since it is hi s promise
to do this work, and grant this mercy to such petitioners at the throne of
grace. Perhaps thou will answer,

All this I find, Mat, 8. 3.
even sweet inclinations in me by grace to accept, embrace and perform.

But oh blessed Lord I beg, that I might be cleansed from the leprosy of sin,
oh that I might be holy?

To this I rejoyn a question.

Art thou willing to be holy? according to the Gospel rule s, to accept the
proffers of mercy as both pardoning and purging, to be holy as well as happy,
in Christ's method, that is, to use sincere endeavors after that holiness which
(...) declarest to thirst for, if thou upon calling, in the power of his might,
with integrity of heart, do really intend and set about it to use purging
graces and ordinances, and wait with perseverance for the manifestation and aid
of the Spirit of grace; (whereof beneath) I may then be humbly bold to say to
thee, though as yet but low it may be, Luke 19. ^^.
in the state of grace, yet oh thou little but zealous Zacheus, come down and
Christ may dine at thine house this day. 1 cor^. 3. ^^.


I may then say, The Covenant is yours, Christ is yours, God is yours, life and
death and all is your s, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Stretch out in
the blessed name of the Son of God, and in his power and at his command the
hand of your longing thirsting, hungring, panting, hastening Will to the Lord of
life, and the great work is done, and tho^ art happy.

I confess, I need say no more but that I desire to enlarge upon this so
desirable a Theme: considering that one thing may be sanctified to take with
one Spirit; that may not with another: out lets ever remember the connection of
holiness with Faith in the sixth chapter: Cel. 2. 2.
if you would obtain to be the helps of clear full and strong Assurance, to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and the Father and of Christ: (...) so a
spiritual acquaintance with God a^ a gracious Father in Christ. 1 John. 17. ^.
This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, in and together with
Christ as a Father, to dwell and abide with us.

But lets proceed to a second means of application.

2. Particular promises made in ancient times, concern every particular
believer in all succeeding ages. For whatsoever was written aforetime was writ
for our learning, Romans 15. 4.
that we might have hope. As all the precepts concern us, and we concern our
selves in duty and obedience to them; then why not interested in the promises,
unless there be some special reason assignable to the contrary. 1 cor. 10. 11.
Heb. 13. 5. Romans 4. 24.
We may observe also, that all the examples of unbelief, and Gods displeasure
to ancient Israel, and the particulars unto some persons among them, were set
forth for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come to us that
live in the ends of the earth, or ages of the world. Joshua^s Faith and Courage
is recorded for us.

The Faith of Abraham is recited not for his sake alone, but ours also; to whom
it shall be imputed, of we believe on him that raised up Jesus Christ from the
dead. The Apostle having enrolled the memorials of any (...) Patriarks before
our Lords time, Heb. 1. ^0. 13. 8.
concludes; that they without us shall not be made perfect. Whose Faith let u s
follow, since Christ is the same yesterday in Joshuahs time, to day in Paul's
and for ever through all generation s.

All the sheep of Christ drink of the same River of life, the same streams of
the promise, that runs through paradise (...) volubilis ae^um.

It come s originally from the secret channel s of the Ocean of divine and
eternal love, and breaks or springs forth out of the rocky mountain of Zion,
and the various source s of its Ordinances. So that every Saint may sing with
David, Psalm. 87. 7.
All my springs are in thee O Zion in thee O God of Zion. All the promises are
in and thru' Christ the Prince of Zion. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
Yea and Amen, even certain, inviolable and unchangeable.

3. If thou would successfully apply the promises, labor to strengthen the
habit of Faith by frequent actings of it upon Christ in the Promise. Remember
to be every day ejaculating up to heaven, and casting the eye of Faith upon a
Savior in glory, Rev. 5. 6.
a Lamb as it had been slain, and standing in the midst of the Elder s by the
Throne of God. This is a sweet method to bread love to Christ, and love will
raise thee up to some assurance and confidence in hi s love. God is love, and
his mercy to sinners in misery is the fruit of his love, and love springs out
of the original goodness in the nature of God: Psalm. 33. 18^ 147. 11.
who delights in them, that hope in hi s mercy and trust in bit love: and when
the love of God to us begin s to warm our hearts with the inward feeling and
taste of it; as the foretast of the Wine of the Kingdom: it increases Faith, and
experience of it advances us into higher degrees of love. Then thy s sweet
sense of divine, eternal, electing love brought into our hearts by Faith, leads
us at last into the pleasant fields of Assurance.

4. That so we may particularly apply the promises, call to mind and ruminate
upon the qualifications mentioned in the promises: and if you can find such
gracious inclinations wrought in you by the Spirit of God, then may you humbly
determine your selves to be heir s of the promises. I would not strain hard in
the examination of many great things required in the promises: but if thou
can by a sincere search find in thee a humble brokenhearted frame: it is a
covenant frame: if thou find in thee a penitent fear to sin, a holy trembling
at Gods Word, a thirsting after Christ with some sparks of true love to him:
tho thou may seem to faint under the sense of wrath sometimes; yet if thou
resolve in his strength still to thirst after him, and his pardoning love, and
to hope for it in his promise; yea and if thou perish, and thy heart strings
break, yet to gasp out thy last at his foot: Thou art the desirable person, the
Daniel, the man of desires, the Samuel the asked of God, the Nathanael, the
gift of God, without guile, the beloved, the acceptable person, that shall be
taken into his bosom for ever. Only and always remember and perfectly con this
lesson (I entreat thee in the Lord) that these actings must always be connexed
with holiness, as it is expressly determined, Chapt. 6. and which I do so often
recall to mind, and the Lord by his powerful grace enable u s to do it: then
may thou draw forth a perfect lot for the self out of our Joshuah's Book of
the Land of Canaan, which is above all heavens.

Thu s, when thou have wisely and deliberately weighed the various phrases in
the promises: then examine the frame of thy heart; and if finding them suit in
some sweet measure, tho not so clearly, as thou longest to have it; yet fear
not, delay not to join thy heart and the promise together. And this moreover
I Will say to thee for thy comfort; that tho the hand of thy Faith should shake
with some tremblings at present, be not dismayed: Mat 9. 2 Mark 2. 5
our blessed Lord who spoke to the palsy man, both can and will in due time
(for thy inward hope is an evidence of it) speak that great strengthening word
to the relaxed nerves and sinews of thy Faith: 2 Timothy 2. 13.
Son be of good theer thy sins be forgiven thee; for if thou hold but the head,
nay if touch but the hem of his garment, virtue will proceed, and thou wilt
perceive it by some sweet settling quietings of Spirit: as when the dew of
heaven fall s in a still evening. For he will abide faithful, tho we do not in
so full and triumphant a manner act Faith upon him; Psalm. 149. 41 50. 23.
yet he will continue to be gracious, and will shortly beautify the meek with
salvation: If you order your conversation a right, he will show and make to
shine the face of your Savior; and the Sun of his salvation upon you his
beloved ones. That person may certainly conclude himself to be in Christ, who
walks in this World as he did, all to our proportion, and continue in acts of
contemplation and adherence, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Eeb. (...)
embracing the promises.

Hither to I have spoken some what to the application of the promises, whereby
we may argue true Faith, and thence lay a strong foundation for assurance: but
before I relinquish this Subject, I would touch upon the several Arguments used
by the Apostle John, which he insists upon in his Epistles, written on purpose
for the comfort of Believer s, 1 John 1. 4. and 5. 13. 1 John 3. 23.
that their joy may be full, and that we may know that we have eternal life. To
which end, it is Gods Commandment to believe in the Son, and to love one
another.

Let us then mention the chief in Order:

1. The first evidence of eternal life is drawn from our walking in the Light,
that is, of holiness, 1 John 6 and 2 29. and 3. 6. 9. walking in the truth,
Epist. 3 3 in obedience to his Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. 5 and 3. 24. and 5.
2. 3. and Epistle 2. 6. In imitation of Christ's holy walking, 1 John 2. 6. and
4. 17. and in purifying of our selves according to his pattern, 1 John 3. 3.
and yet all this must be qualified in respect to our infirmities and
weaknesses, 1 John 1. 8, 9, 10 and 2. 1, 2.

2. The second Argument to prove the truth of grace, and assure our selves
before God, is love to the Brethren, 1 John 2. 9. 10 and chap. 3. 11, 14. and
4. 7, 12. 20. and in his Gospel, Joh. 13 35.

3. The third Argument is from our not loving the World, nor the things
thereof. 1 Job. 2. 15. a s the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes or the
pride of life, ver. 16.

That is, 1. Pleasures of all sorts, as luxury in Diet, Habit, House s,
Gardens, rambling about the World without special ends; and all inordinacy and
intemperatenes s in the body, as Jerome uses to express it, in ventre and sub
ventre. For they that love Pleasures and Riotings shall not be rich in purse
say s Solomon, Prove. 21. 17.
nor in grace, says the whole current of Scripture.

2. The lust of the eye, which is as to all sorts of covetousness, to get and
retain by right or by wrong, in an excessive appetition of the things of this
World, which must be left behind us, and do not, can not fill the heart of man,
no nor the eye with satisfaction. Eccles. 5. 11.


Nor 3. the (...) that is, the Pride of Ambition, Fastuousness, Honor and
advancement into great places, and to be alone in the Earth. These things
eagerly pursued, eat out the heart and power of godliness.

4. The fourth Argument is assumed from the anointings of their Spirit, 1 John
2: 20, 27. and 3. 24 and 4. 13. whereof more by and by God willing.

5. The fifth Argument is taken from a holy and reverent hearing of Gods
Ministers, 1 John 4. 6. we may know what spirit we are of by this, if we
receive Christ: as Hilary expresses it, [ Qualis ab Apostolis praedicatus est]
as he was preached by the Apostles and submit to him in all his Offices and
Ordinances. Such a one belongs to the spirit, that is of God, that keeps the
Doctrine of Christ as the Apostle expounds himself, Epistle 2. ver. 9.

6. The last Argument arises from our love to Christ, 1 John 5. 1. and in him
to the Father.

Now if these things be found in us, we shall then overcome the World, 1 Ioh.
5. 4. and shall not be touched virulently or ^^tally by Satan, 1 John 5. 18.
shall have access to God in prayer. 1 John 5. 14. and shall have boldness in
the day of Judgment; 1 John 4. 17. and this will so settle our sense of the
love of God to us, that it will by degrees cast out the torment of fear. For it
will allure us to a holy familiarity with divine love, 1 John 4. 18.
and so sweeten our thoughts and affections of and to him, that we may begin to
enjoy a kind of heaven upon earth, which the Father of his great mercy in
Christ grant unto us by the Spirit.

Having hither to treated about Argumentation, I proceed now to the second Head
about attaining Assurance, which is by the irradiation of the Spirit of God
upon the hearts of Believers. For all is in vain as to gaining of solid and
permanent comfort, unless the Spirit of God come in and confirm us against the
innumerable doubt s and cavils that will arise upon us under all our Arguings,
because of the subtlety of satan, the natural diffidence of our own hearts, and
the clouds that arise from the unholiness of our lives, and the dread of
eternity. I design therefore to treat a little while about the witness of the
spirit, his immediate breathings, his bright shinings, and as it were speakings
within our hearts, when a holy soul has this witness in himself. 1 John 5. 10.
2. Cor. 1. 3. Act. 10. 44.
For in and upon believing, the Father of Lights and of all consolations sends
in his own due time, this his holy spirit like a dove of peace into our hearts,
who helps us to discern the truth of the work of grace. [After ye believed
says the Apostle, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. Ephesians 1: 13.
He is sometimes set forth by a Seal and a Witness to the bond of the Covenant
by a Seal and an Earnest to the contract about the inheritance: 2 Cor. 1. 22.
by a Seal and a Love-Token or an (...), a word used of old to note Tokens sent
before Marriage, and to be sure, God will not lose his earnest, not be sure,
God will not lose his earnest, nor be defeated of the fore token s of his
contract of love to souls: sometimes the Spirit is compared to fire, and yields
both the light of joy, the heat of love and influences or quicknings for
service. And it is this lively Faith, which works by love effectually thru' the
Spirit

But I would speak a little more distinctly; for the observation and the
experience of holy men has set to their seals, that they do find and feel
sometimes a most illustrious irradiation upon their hearts from the Spirit of
God: which I take to be of two sorts:

The 1. We may call an irradiation of concurse with our spirits.

The 2. An irradiation of incidence upon our spirits. Give leave to use the
terms and explain them to the meanest.

The First or the irradiation of concurse is then dispensed when he shines upon
our Argumentation: when we have labored with our spirits, used Scripture
mediums, and upon examination suited them to our hearts in their most inward
sincere and humble searches; then comes the spirit of God, and witnesses with
our spirits that we are the children of God. When we have toiled and sweat many
a time in our closets and brought things as we hope sometime^ to a pretty good
issue; then thru' one tentation or another our unbelieving hearts fly off from
the Conclusion and all our comfort vanishes. But now, when our arguing s by
evident Scripture tokens are finished over and over; and yet still we demurre to
lay hold on the Tree of life, and while we stick in the mire of fear, doubting
and hesitancies, and wander under dark clouds in the depth of midnight, then
comes in the spirit of God, Romans 8. 16.
as the Morning Star, glittering over the Horizon and clears all. This is the
(...) or the cowitness of the Spirit of God.

2. The other is that which I beg leave from a term in Optics, to call the
irradiation of incidence, and is then illustriously performed, when the Spirit
of God in his most free and glorious agency is pleased to shine personally upon
our spirits, without and apart from all argumentation whatsoever. This comunion
with the spirit draws nigh to that of Angelical intuition; where by acts of
volition and luminous emanation they converse mutually together in a higher
degree than we do here by ratiocination with mediums and consequences.

This is the point we are now upon, to show that the Spirit of God (when he
pleases) without any previous foregoing arguments does testify by a secret,
still, heart-ravishing voice, Acts 2. 2. (...)
and does sweetly and suddenly (as it is said in the Acts) dart in a ray,
persuading and sati sfying the soul in an instant; that thou art a Child of
God, that sin is pardoned, and that thou shult be saved. Which I remember the
British Divines at Dort call the Spirits speaking to the heart, and even in
darker times, there were some of the Illuminate both of Spain and Germany, and
France that had to do, I am persuaded with many distrssed souls in their secret
confessions, and were acquainted with great worknigs in the hearts of
penitents, but few of them had skill to manage those inward methods.

Of which things we may find some notable footsteps in Bonaventure, Gerson,
Thanlerus, and sundry others.

So that of this inward, clear and bright persuasion of Gods love to the heart,
we have no solid reason to doubt; but that some holy persons have enjoyed it.
Austin at his conversion in the garden at Millain had a voice, though he had no
vision, as Paul had in the fields by Damascus.

I shall be sparing, and touch but an instance or two.

Dr. Manton spoke it in my hearing, at Oxon, of one that being in conflict in
prayer, had a beam shining into the chamber, and being desired by him to have a
care of delusion; answered, O Mr. Manton, little do you know what God may do
for his poor distressed children, or very like words.

But the caution was wife and grave.

I know one also, who being for almost a week deeply distressed about Eternity,
had an impression as like a voice within, as if he heard it, comforting in
these words [ I will give thee rest] and so it followed speedily and joyfully:
and at another time: [ I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.]

I might also hint at the beam upon the wall in prayer to Dr. Winter in his
life, and the voices of Angels to Mr. Patrick Simpson.

I must confess, they are great privileges and sweetnesses, which God may in
his divine good pleasure, and I am persuaded does sometimes instill and drop
into gracious, when timorous hearts, and whose constitutions the great former
of hearts and spirits knows full well to be naturally over subject to fears and
inward commotions: he like a most gracious and Tender Father, full of pity and
bowels, discerns our frames. See Mr. Mathers prevalency of prayer Psalm. 103. p
17 14 at the end of his Tract of N. S. troubles. Psalm. 40. 17.
By his loving eye and remembering that we are dust, is mindful of us in our
low condition: whereas many proud and disdainful persons set light by the
inward sorrows of broken and contrite souls. And are like lamps despised in the
thought of him that is at ease. But says David though I am poor and needy, yet
the Lord thinks upon me, and with how many precious thoughts his goodness is
pleased to embroider and enamel upon the hearts of his holy, humble, meek and
trembling children [For your high exalted, boasting person s, though it may be
have some few grains of grace at bottom, are seldom visited with these inward
joyes] But the meek will he teach his mays. Such blessed thoughts of grace
David could not number, Ps. 139. 17, 18
they were more than the Sands of the Sea, or the stars of heaven for multitude.

But now if these of such like lines should fall under the view or knowledge of
any profane or scoffing Ishmael that may vilify the works of God, and like
bruits speak ignorantly of what they know not: I would advise them to forbear
presumptuous speeches, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Jude 10.
lest their bonds be made strong, lest the Terrors and horrors of the Almighty
should one day drink up their spirit s. So that when Gods Servants shall
rejoice and sing for joy of heart, they shall cry for sorrow of heart and howl
for vexation of spirit. Isai. 65. 14.


But yet, because there may be such things as Enthusiasme s and transformation
of Angels of darkness among some that call themselves Sweet-fingers: and among
others that have more need to mourn over their (...) and delusions in the dust
of shame. I would speak some what to that question of an humble Soul.

Quest. How may I comfort my heart, that this irradiation you speak of is a
true and immediate work of the Spirit of God, and no delusion?

Answ. In answer to thy s, I must first in all manner of humble modesty
declare, that I would not dare to meddle too far with such deep and mysteriou s
workings and influences, only professing with all thankfulness to the Majesty
of divine mercy; that having had some glimpse s of hope a little sometimes, and
thirsting after some further and clearer helps from heaven, we faint not
utterly: but striving after, to attain toward the resurrection of the dead,
crave leave to set down somewhat, that I hope may be a clue to conduct us out
of the Labrinth, and maze of delusion

The first and best token, that these are no deceits, can only arise from the
spirit himself. According to that saying of holy John. It is the Spirit that
bears witness, that the Spirit is truth. 2 John ^. 6: Whitak. de. Sacramentis
p.
As I remember the learned Whitaker in his book of the Sacraments, says, it
should be translated (I have forgot the page, my books being laid up) But this
is a great truth: as no better light to see the Sun by, Psalm. 36. 9. 34. 5.
than his own light: So it is of the Spirit, as David expresses. In thy light we
shall see light: and they looked to him and their faces were enlightened. This
is the apprehension of learned graciou s persons, that the spirit of God never
speaks by this his inward heavenly voice; but that he graciously helps them to
know that it is no delusion: but that it is he, even the spirit himself that
speaks to them. This phrase of speaking to the heart, and in and upon the
heart, is more visible in the Original Hebrew of the Old Testament, and was
well known to the Prophets of old, and is much treated upon among Jewish
Antiquiarie s. 2 Pet. 1. 19
Out of whom I must not here stand to enlarge but call to mind what the Apostle
Peter mentions of the Day Star arising in our hearts, so that it is as clear
(when the spirit of God does thus shine and testify) yea and more radiant,
than the Sun at Noonday without clouds.

I shall say no more to this, but what our Lord to the Angel at Pergamus, of
them that have a new name written in the white stone, Rev. 2. 17.
which none knows saving be that receives it.

2. I need say little more, but that wherever the Spirit does so illustriously
speak and shine: it is concomitant with growing in holiness. For this most holy
Spirit of God is still a building and increasing in such the works of holiness,
they are of a heavenly frame, rivers of holy discourse flow from their lips in
prudent seasons; they are not vain and trifling spirits: but grave and serious,
and yet cheerful. For the joy of the Lord is their strength, and they have
inward delights, and value not the cracklings of fool s. Divine joy is a
weighty thing, and yet greatly upholds the spirits, and sustains their griefs
and infirmities. If you come into their company by a blessed accident, as they
say of the Adepti in Philosophy, there is a glittering star shines from their
converse and society.

3. They are the most humble persons living. For the humble he will teach his
way, Psalm. 25. 9.
and show his Covenant, I know they may fail sometime s, and othertimes have
need of a little holy courage against despisers; But the main of their
conversation is like them, of whom the spirit of God says, they took notice of
them that they had conversed with Jesus, Acts 4 13.
who was meek and lowly: if we imitate him, we shall find this rest; and
remember that Moses the meekest man had the greatest interviews with God in the
Mountain. Such as are given to much prate and length of idle impertinent
discourses are seldom and little or never acquainted with the Spirit of God.

4. They are also the sweetest persons, and fullest of love, though sometime s
provokt by fierce and evil spirits about them, but if their natural tempers had
been before somewhat eager and sharp: yet now they are washed, purged, whitened
and sweetened by the Spirit of God. Tender to the Tempted, kind to the
afflicted, pitiful to all: bear every ones burden with a gracious frame: only
they are taught by the holy Spirit, 1 cor 23 4. 5.
as to such as prate with maliciou s words against them to imitate holy John,
not to succum be under a proud Diotrephes: 3 John 9.
but loves a child of God as such with the full stream of his Spirit. And this
love to the brethren is much more to Christ himself, being filled with the love
of the Spirit which by degrees cast out the torments of fear, ^ John. 4. 18,
and gives a blessed confidence as to the Appearing of the Day of Judgment.

To end this, we must remember, that the holy Spirit of God does never witness
or illustrate apart from the Word. Isa 8, 20.
If any light in you, try it by the Word and Testimony, and hence that as
Tentation s and afflictions sanctified, so the manifestation s and communions
of the Spirit help us to understand holy Scriptures and promises by experience,

Let us then be sure as far as possible, that the person that pretends to be
thus illustrated, prove himself to be an holy person in heart and deed, or else
all is like a puffed and swoin delusion, and such an one must lie down in sorrow.
For the Spirit of God is a most holy spirit, and never seals but as he is, the
holy Spirit of Promise, upon the holy heart of an holy child of God.

Well then to end this second part of the Spirits illustration. Ephesians 1, 3. Rom
8. 16. 1 John 4. 13.


I say it is not meant of the Spirit of God concurring or witnessing with our
spirits in the point of assurance, clearing up our doubts, dispelling the mists
and clouds uponour spirits: But it is an (...), or like an (...) a bright
shining Ray, a most illustrious beam streaming down from heaven into the inmost
chambers of our hearts, and is an act distinct and apart from his former
blessed concurse with our spirits in time of argumentation or the gracious
application of the promises for our peace and comfort: it is an irresistible
evidence of divine love, See Dr Owen of the spirit 167^
scattering all the clouds of diffidence and distrust in that very moment; and
when this immediate irradiation flows in, though it may be a distinct act from
that upon argumentation; yet it cannot be totally severed from it, because in
thy s glorious light, though we may see further; yet cannot but see any
argument, we think meet to touch upon, to be also illustrated by it: as the
Moon in her increases may be seen in the heavens like a cloud in the day time,
which also has its light from the Sun, while he is yet shining bright within
our hemisphere at the same time: and when these come together, they make
heavenly work indeed.

That these blessed visits have been sometimes, tho rarely, afforded yet to some
few, besides Patriarks and Apostles, I have no cause to doubt, whatever some
Pontificians have said to the contrary, to darken it. The Holy Scriptures clear
it, experience does witness it, and seal it in the hearts of some meek, humble,
self-denying, mortified and holy walking persons, who having lived a while in
the light of Gods countenance, have afterward gone to heaven in a Chariot of
Triumph.

Having now spoken what concerns this excellent point, and observing that these
Orient Jewels are such grand raritie s, and having placed them in the middle
like a Diamond set in ouches of Gold; give leave to descend again from the
Spouse s Tower of Lebanon into the Plains of Damascus, Song. 7. 4,
and walk again in the pleasant Gardens at the foot of the hill where streams
flow with the comfortable Doctrines of Assurance. A privilege of high Dignity,
which tho it attain not to the first of David's Worthies, yet does attend and
that more frequently many of the children of God; if they will labor to be
holy, and study thy s high point of Arguing and observing the accesses of the
Spirit of God, and in their diligent working and prying into it, they may learn
and perceive it thus,

1. First, We may obtain some sweet knowledge of this point, by the Spirits
interceding in our hearts, helping to form and frame our Prayers both for
matter and manner, Rom.. 8. 13.
teaching us both what and how to Pray.

2. By His sweet pleading our evidences within us, when we find a kind of
divine holy force put as it were upon our spirits to determine comfortably, and
witness to the Spirit's work, not being able to deny some grace to be in us,
when strongly urged and put to it by some intimate and gracious, faithful
Friend.

3. By His discovering our graces to us in times of tentation and conflict, 1
Cor. 2. 1^.
yea, and in Communion at the Lords Table, and in Meditation.

4. By Hi s cogent Apologies for us in our Consciencies upon our Reptenance and
Humiliation in the sight of God: Psalm. 51. (...)
proving and clearing up to us our love to God: so that weak Believers who at
present have but little glimmerings of joy, yet finding true love in themselves
by his light may by degree s thru' his happy testimony arrive to further
clearness both in love and joy.

III. Now by the order prescribed in the beginning of this Chapter. I should
proceed to the third Branch, and that is to treat or some Rules to clear up our
Assurance.

I Answer to thy s, that herein I have even prevented my self, and therefore
shall at present only add, that these Particulars following may be of use.

1. A watchful care of a holy heart.

2. To observe the inward workings and issues of it.

3. To be careful in cleansing and washing of the first risings of sin in the
Laver of Sanctification.

4. To labor a holy attendance upon, and a spiritual delight in the addresses,
incomes, comforts, and sealings of the Spirit that we may discern and rejoice
in them,

5. An earnest invoking the Father to send the comforter in his assuring work
upon a sanctifying progress; John 14. 24.
for then he proves a comforting Spirit, after he has been a sanctifying
Spirit. He first comes to us as the Holy Ghost, and then as the Comforter: tho
the foundation of both be laid at once, yet the appearances are successive.

But I hope to add more in answer to the Questions by and by, only I would
first set down a passage about assurance out of that grave Writer, Hooker in
his Polity, in his Life before it. P. 17.
Mr. Hooker, which I hope may be of use to some of his persuasion as well as
other s; and it is to this purpose:

[There's a certainty of Evidence and of Assurance, grant that the weak in
Faith enjoy not certainty of Assurance, because they (...) not: but are they
not grieved for it, wish and strive it may be otherwise. Whence comes this, but
from a secret love and liking that they have to those things which they believe
to have. Because no man loves those things, which in his own opinion are not,
etc. Therefore love and desire to believe, is Faith. (...) thinks that things
believed, are, (that is have a being) without Faith. Which Arguments (says he)
all the subtleties of infernal powers will never be able to dissolve.] Thus far
he: to which let me, join, that since Faith of evidence (as being the
foundation work) is therein more excellent than the Faith of Assurance, as
being the superstructure (tho I had rather call it in Scripture terms the
Assurance of Faith, since Assurance properly as I have often said is a distinct
thing from Faith: tho common speech has prevailed to make such a distinction;
as if they were proper Members or Branches of true Faith. But let that pass, I
say, if Christians would arise to high Assurance, they must lay their
foundation strong and deep in the rock of evidence upon Christ himself.
Evidence flows from a direct act; Assurance from a reflect: the one is like the
view of the Suns body in the heaven, the other like his reflection in the
water, or on a Looking glass. Now all reflect rays are weaker than the direct,
and the reverse than the incident. But I speak not here of the Spirits work,
and its most illustrious evidence: but of our workings upon the actings of our
Faith. As to which the stronger our applications are to Christ, the stronger
and more comfortable will be the reflections upon them. For both rays, the
nearer the reverse and incident are in union, as in the depth of Summer, the
heat and influence is the more strong and fervent, and so it is here:

But now it is high time to hearken to some Questions which troubled Soul s may
bring in.

Quest. 1. The first Question may be: How may I be assured of the pardon of my
sins, and consequently of Salvation?

Ans. In answer to this, I shall lay down some Rules to clear it, which was the
third thing premised in the beginning of this Chapter.

1. Forsaking of sin, with a holy endeavor to mortify and subdue it, Prove.
28. 13. Mic. 7 19. Rom 8. 13.
is a special sign of mercy.

2. When after darkness s and conflicts, a begun renovation of life with a
sincere care to continue it, is attended with some springings of peace in
conscience with God, this will prove an excellent token. For the blood of
sprinkling upon the conscience speaks better than Abel's blood: Heb. 12. 24.
That cried out for condemnation; this for reconciliation with God.

3. When we find some sweetness in our admissions to the Throne of Grace. When
our eye up to the Throne affects our heart at the threshold of Gods Sanctuary.
When a bended knee and a melting heart work together. Then we may ask of God
what ever we will, if according to his will: the precepts and the promises
being the rule of asking. We have a most free access to plead the promises both
of this and the life to come, Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb. 4. 16. 1 Timothy 4 8.
so that by holy degrees and steps we may arrive to further humble confidence
of divine mercy.

4. When we feel some gracious risings of love to God, as pardoning our
iniquities for Christ's sake, and tho we do not so fully and sweetly feel it as
we would: yet our hearts do pant and long after it. This is a true sign of Love.

But yet to clear it a little, the humble soul will ask,

Quest. How shall I know that I love God?

Ans: I answer, Of all the affections that spring and bubble out of the will,
this is most easily to bediscerned and known. Do you know the Sun, when you see
him walk in brightness, do you know that you live by the actings of the senses
and the pulsation of your arteries: or do you know that you walk when you move
your feet, and feel your motions from place to place? you may as certainly know
your affections and the workings of your Soul. This distinguishes men from
Bruits in the acting of their reason upon all they do, and in managing end s
and means. The affections spiritually beating, are the pulsations of the
regenerate heart. Observe then your Objects: if you love the things above,
better than all below; Col. 3. 2. Isal. 73. 25.
in your choice and preference, tho sometimes under some ebb s and eclipse s:
yet still you find an inward regard to God and his glory: and that you perform
every action in ordine ad Deum, and love all as to the inward sincerity of your
heart: 1 Cor. 10. 31.
and enjoy every relation with some desire to work up your mercies toward God
in thankfulness and usefulness. These are good tokens that you are risen with
Christ by Faith, and that your life is hid with God in him, and that by
continued degrees of Sanctification, you shall at last arrive to this, even to
appear with him in Glory.

4. But that I may at length wind out of this delightful Labyrinth in
discoursing about Assurance; Let us hearken to the second Question, wherein the
Soul being somewhat revived does now start the fourth Particular at the
beginning; and that is,

Quest, 2. How may I preserve and retain Assurance when it is gained?

Ans. The reason of this Question arises not only from hence, because the sweet
sense of divine love is a most desirable frame of Spirit, and fills the soul to
the brim with joy and peace in the Holy Ghost; and besides renders persons very
serviceable and greatly honors Religion: But also because,

1. Many gracious persons that have true Faith, yet labor under deep fears of
Hypocrisy, arising from their pious Education, not answered by proportionable
holiness. It puts great jealousies in their hearts, that all they have done, is
but a forced work, and a habit of formality; attracted from the precepts of
godly Ministers and Parents, instilling into an enlightened conscience the
frightful form of an outward conversation consonant: and therefore fear at a
strange rate that their diamonds are but as it were from the soft Rock of St.
Vincent, their Gold, but Alchymy, their Faith but fained and temporary.

But be not discouraged: For that Faith is true and unfeigned, which proceeds
from a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 19.
and a good conscience, that is, without fraud and guilt, in setting it naked
and open before God, Act 24. 16.
in laboring and exercising to keep a good conscience in sight of God and Men.
You may then rejoice in the testimony of such a conscience, having been upright
before him in the main bent of the soul, Psalm. 18. 23.
and in keeping from your own iniquity.

What tho thou did not come in with such remarkable pangs; no more did
Zacheus nor Lydia. It Is not the manner but the truth of our coming in to Christ,
is the great point, if thou constantly adhere to the Lord with full purpose of
heart. Act. 11. 23.
Nay, what if there were some errors at first, this puts no bar, if the root of
the matter be in thee. The Apostles followed our Lord at first in some hopes of
preferment in the temporal Kingdom of the Mossiah: but at length understood the
Doctrine of the Cross better, which God in great tenderness is pleased to vail
from young convert s at first, or at least preserve them from suffering till
they are strengthened, and then like the Apostles they still cleave to, and
continue with the Lord under all trials by the exceeding power of his might.
And thus a s I remember, Crakenthorp of the sixth Council, P.
Dr. Crakenthorp in defending of Cyprian and Jerome against some pontificians
imputing some errors to them, the better to vindicate their Liberius answers;
that if they (...), they did it not willingly, but (...) ready to reform upon
the first approach of Scripture light, and conviction. It Is so in our case, they
are ready with that holy man to pray, what I see not, teach the name. Job 34 32.
The mind and will of God is the perfect square, rule, canon and compass of all
their actions: and tho they may fail three' weakness s, yet never thru'
wilfulness.

Wherefore be not out of heart, O tender and trembling soul, let not go your
hope and confidence, because you have not had so long and such bitter pangs in
the new birth; that makes the work the harder, but not the truer. A child may
be born sometimes (...) greater case and speed. Great horror s may attend great
sinners, and yet after all their heavy convictions may stick in the birth and
never be truly converted, till they are truly and perseveringly reformed: which
indeed cuts the work short and makes the evidence clear. If thou have been
under a gentler hand from God, bless him with louder Songs of praise. For the
shorter and sweeter the method, the greater is, the mercy: and as one said, A
young Saint may make an old Angel.

2. This question begs a full answer: because, though want of Assurance does
not denote an unbeliever, yet it keeps a true believer under the dark shade s
of fear and sorrow. Assurance besides, in the best of Saints is but an
imperfect work, because our Faith it self is but imperfect: we see but in part,
because we do but trust in part. If our Faith do at any time waver and stagger,
Col. 2. 2.
assurance must needs qviven and shake. It Is true, there is mention made of the
riches of full Assurance: but that is comparative in respect to some Saints, and
mentioned as attainnable with full sweetness, and may possibly for the main,
continue pretty constant, especially in very acti ve and suffering Saints, yet
it is not without ebb s and bussetings in the best.

There are but few that walk in the mountain of Sunshine all their lives; as
it is said of Zabarel the Philosopher, when one day in his study upon an high
hill near Padue; he enjoyed the bright and warm beams, while it rained all day,
in the valley, and he himself saw the dark and heavy clouds under the hill. Few
be like to Moses, to whom it s granted to walk on the top of Pisgah, till they
dye. Wherefore, 1 Pet 1. 3.
such as have once obtained Assurance and a lively hope of glory: blame them
not, if they are very desirous to preserve, increase, and imbellish it more and
more. For since Assurance may be lost for a season, a s it was in David, Heman
and Peter, and as in the case of that wounded deserted soul that asked (...)
once, Was ever any soul in so (...) a case as I? Yes, Clears Lives
says that great and skilful comfortor of a wounded conscience, Christ on the
Cross was in as sad a case, when he cried out of the Fathers forsaking him: I
think it therefore most meet to subjoyn some rules with divine help, to
maintain and preserve it.

1. Take heed of what impairs and darkens assurance, as the defect of quickening
influences: against that, pray for the supplies of the Spirit. If it rise from
a weakness of judgment, read more, meditate more, and cry after knowledge as for
hid treasure. If the seriousness of your spirits be hurt by minding vanities
and the rattles of pride and finery, and overvaluing the trifles of this world;
Pray for a more noble and judicious and generous frame, and judge of all worldly
men's Jewel s, as indeed the word ( jocalia) imports; as so many whistles and
hobbies for children to play with. If thou have lost thy comforts by neglect of
holy walking, take heed hereafter of damping thy joys by froth and
foolishness. Take heed of a vain heart, Prove. 10. 19,
of vain and manifold words, and especially fiery tongues, wherein Solomon says,
there wants not sin, and of vain converse with their apish and childish tales
and jests which are not convenient, and tend to corrupt the mind by deceitful
lusts Ephesians. 5.4
. These things will blot thy evidences, and quench the Spirit of God. Pray that
God would not lead thee by his providence into tentations. If thou would have
the Lord to know or acknowledge thee for hi s, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
depart from all iniquity, and that will prove the foundation to be sure. Keep
the divine commands, though you find mixtures of weakness, yet in an holy fear
and love to the purity of the precept, Psalm. 101. 2. 112. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 17 2 John
2 3. and 4. 13.
labor to walk in your house with a perfect heart. For we may be sure, that we
know him, and be humbly confident that he is our God in Covenant, if we keep
his Commandments.

2. When under great darkness (for every stitch we must not run to a Doctor)
repair to your faithful Interpreter, that may reveal and open to a man his
righteousness: (...)
some blessed soul that s higher in acquaintance with heaven, then your self,
as you may humbly judge, some experienced christian, some faithful, grave and
prudent friend, no babbler, nor revealer of secrets, nor scoffer at the workings
of the Spirit, as if enthusiasmes; he is an unjudiciou s person: and if you
cannot well wrestle out the point your self; but still your soul droop s and
drives in the mire, and no light of joy comes in: then open your soul to some
prudent friend and give him leave, nay entreat him to search out the coare, and
conscientiously follow his advice, and it may prove a most happy day to your
soul by comparing mutual experiences: yet remember in matters of weight, that
might prove a scandal, if he should not be wise and faithful, be very cautious
of discovering; what thou should only pour out before the Lord. Isal. 142. 2.
For if he be of a weak envious spirit, and once used to speak evil of friends
behind their backs, use him not, hell prove a foolish serpent, and double your
misery.

3. Judge not thy grace always by its flowers, but search out its sap and root.
One may be a well spread and weighty christian, and yet not flower in much
discourse. The flowers of some trees fall off quickly, and never set in to much
visible fruit, and some have no flowers at all as the fig, and yet yield s a
wholesome and pleasant fruit. It Is so with some choice and serious christians,
you shall not hear them talk much, unless you pump and draw out the spirits by
questions I like them the better. For the little they produce is usually much
to purpose and of good weight. Yea further you may, if critical, observe, that
the graces of good men may vary in fruit, and have their different seasons, but
never alter their grain or root. Grace may lie hid as the corn under ground
after first Sowing: yea after it is come up, may bow and hide its green head
under a flight of show. And when there is least of sense or present experience,
yet the root of Faith like strong winter-corn, may grow more inward and
downward, being covered and kept under by pinching North-east blasts, and sharp
black frosts; till it recover head by an early Spring. So indeed, the power and
strength of grace is best seen and discerned, when it persists and stands its
ground under a shock of tentations, and adversity s. At length the Sun will
return Northward, and the sharper the past winters were, theyl^ make the new
spring the pleasanter. Comforts, their proper nature lies in being restoratives
from bitter troubles, and a sweet May-morning, is most delightful after a dark
and thunder night.

4. Take heed of denying the works of the Spirit within thee, and labor to
discern the gracious fruits of the Spirit as distinct from moral actions and
virtues: and principally observe your conflicts against sin, when followed with
success. Godly jealousy not to be deceived, is good: therefore search and try
thy heart, and if thou find sound footing for grace, then bless God, and honor
the Spirit, and grieve him not by froward and foolish self-accusations, which
savor of the spiritual pride of humility: but in all meek and humble modest
manner own free grace, adore divine mercy, and testify to it; when thou
judge by the best of thy wisdom, that thou art called to give in thy
testimony, as the Apostle Peter requires, and David performs in telling what
God did for that poor man's soul, as he calls himself. Toll legem and fiet
certamen. See Ambrose as he is cited By Mr. Philpot in Fox Martyrt vol. 3. p.
542. 2 Pet. 3. 15. Psalm. 34. 6.
Or as Ambrose cited by Mr. Philpot: Take away the Law, and then we will
dispute against you.

5. Assurance should be earnestly prayed for, and diligently wrought out by
holy labor; and it will come. Give diligence to make it sure, says P eter.
Surely it is blessed working in these golden mines. It proves with the diligent
hand like the works of Chimical Physicians, who suffer great pains, travel,
dust, smoke, and swelter in their fiery furnaces: and though they attain not
the great Arcana, yet often meet with curious rarities, which sufficiently
reward their diligence. 2 pet, 1. 5, 10.
Assurance usually comes in upon our diligent use of prayer, meditation and
holy walking in some time after several plunges, fears and sorrows. Though
indeed sometimes the ways of God prove unsearchable, and sometime s he is
pleased to bestow this favor on a sudden to such as are gracious from their
childhood, tractable and ingenuous at the calls of God, as young Samuel: when
he understood it by the instruction of an elder Saint: and when such have not
been defiled by any great stains and blotches in their youth, nor caused the
ways of God to be evil spoken of by any scandalous sin.

Quest I f now you ask how to preserve it when you have received it in an
answer to your earnest prayer? Psalm. 25. 7.


A. I answer, Conservatur qua quaeritue. It Is preserved by the very same methods.

6. Call to mind what former experience s you have enjoyed. Having once seen
the King s face, it will for ever enlighten yours; former mountain-visions
makes a Saint s heart to shine as bright as Moses's face, Psalm. 34. 5.
and reflects upon the heart gloriously in the valley of desert: once having
cleared up the love of God to you then may you return to that experiment. As a
fountain shown by the Angel of the Covenant at Beersheba, the well of the
sacred oath of God, Gen 21. 14. Romans 11. 29. Heb. 3. 14, and 10. 35. Phil. 1. 6.
It will never dry up it fears no scorching summers. For the gifts and calling
of God are without repentance. Cast not away then, the beginnings of your
confidence. For he will perfect what he has begun, till the day of Christ.

7. Cherish the sacred motions of the Spirit of God: for he takes of the things
of Christ: not from us, our merits faith or holiness: John 16. 15.
for they are of no value, but of his blood to comfort us: therefore hearken to
hi s affectionate breathings. If thou at any time fall thru' Infirmity: this
holy Spirit helps thee to mourn under the sight of displeased love. If thy
faith seem to muddle and grope in the dark: he will shine upon thy path again.
If grace like the sensible plant, shrink up, by the touch of some rough hand of
tentation: it will open and expand its branches again by thy s Suns warm and
sweet influences. If then the joy of Assurance spring again, if the glories of
heaven be described as in a lively Landskarp before thine eyes, written as it
were with bright illuminated letters; [ E capite mortuo sanguints vel urinae]
(...) Song 4. Jerome.
bless the Spirit of grace, and cry out with the Spouse in the book of Songs.
Be gone O chill and blasting north, and come O fruitful cherishing, distilling
south upon the garden of my Soul, that the spices thereof may flow forth that
my beloved may come and eat his pleasant fruits.

8. Be careful in the constant use of Ordinances, and pure worship, and
especially the Lords Supper (and considering the time s of trouble) as frequent
as thou can: (but woe to them that are obstructers) and remember when God
opens the doors of his Sanctuary, that thou behave with all holy reverence,
endeavoring to enjoy it in its purity and power. There the King sits at his
Table, Song 1. 12.
and the Spiknard sends forth its fragrant smell. At this banquet Faith helps
to assure us, that we shall as certainly sit with Christ in glory, as we now
partake of the seals in grace. Here Christ is received by the hand of a true
believer, here we eat and drink Christ into our souls. As we take the bread and
wine into our bodies: so by Faith we take his most precious body and blood;
which being digested with an holy heart, is turned into the nerves and spirits
of Assurance. That thou may now sing the holy hymn of praise with a loud
voice, This is my Lord and my God, he will come and save us; Let not go this
your holy confidence, 1 Pet. 1. 13.
but hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Lastly, look dilgently to the holiness of your ways, and with it be careful of
a humble resigning interpretation of the ways of God toward you, that you be
never too much elevated or high-crested in prosperity: Heb. 12. 5. (...) Soul
conflict p. 321. Romans 8. 28.
not in time of adversity, despise his corrections, or faint under them. It is
a never-failing rule (said holy Sibbs) to discern a man's state in grace, when
he finds every condition draw him nearer to God, and when all things work
together for his good: A s the flesh of vipers ( I may add) and other poisons,
compounded and corrected into Antidotes, and mixed well together, prevail
against contagious diseases: so do corrections sanctified, sweat out the poison
of sin: that it shall never fatally touch the heart and vitals of such as truly
love God, and are called according to his purpose.

I shall now conclude this long but sweet Chapter with Mr. Scudders Testimony
of the work of Grace. walk. ^. 555, Land, 8. 1674.


The Question being put about Assurance; he there asserts, that whosoever can
answer affirmatively to these following queries (which I may contract) may be
assured of Gods peace and love, and of his own salvation, what ever fears or
feelings may seem to happen to the contrary.

Quest. 1: How stand you affected to sin? are you afraid to offend God, and
dare not sin wittingly? is it your grief and burden, that you cannot abstain
it, nor get out of it as soon as you would?

Quest. 2. How are you affected to holiness, and the power of godliness? To
know Gods will and do it? to fear and please him? is it your grief when you
fail? and your joy when you do well?

Quest. 3. How to the Church of God? are you glad when it goes well, and
grieved when is goes ill, and sit trembling with Ely to hear how it goes with
the Ark of God, however it be with your own particular?

Quest 4. How toward men? do you dislike wicked men, and love those that fear
the Lord, because they are good?

Quest. 5. Can you endure your soul to be ripped up, and your beloved sin to be
smitten by a searching Minister: and like him the rather? and can yield an
obedient ear to such a wise reproof?

Quest. 6. Tho you have not Evidence always, or can scarce tell whether you
ever bad it: yet resolve or desire, and will as you are able to cleave to God
in Christ for salvation by Faith, and to trust in no other person nor by no
other means to be saved?

If you can answer [Yea] to all, or [Any] of these, assure your self, you are
in God's favor and state of grace, and that you sin not with allowance, it is
adherence. Thus far that holy man.

I like well that saying of his [ Or any of these] for so should Signs and
marks be framed by Divines for examination of distressed souls, that the
meanest and lowest form of Christians may reap true comfort by their laboriousg
leanings: when a higher and more experienced Christian may possibly carry more
sheaves of this joyful harvest in the bosom of his soul.

Now, tho, I have been larger than ordinary in this Chapter, out of tender
regard to troubled and darkened Spirits: yet I hope the multiplicity and variety
of expressions (which to the Learned in Christ's School may seem somewhat long)
may beg and obtain their loving and candid excuse, since I hope thru' grace I
may say with some grains of integrity, that I have endeavored to manage my
words with some care and circumspection in the main: that so if possible, I
might with divine assistance and blessing, help to draw some out of the pit,
where no water is: and that I might not grieve, no not one soul of the
generation of the Just: but to be a helper of their Faith and Joy. If any think
I have been too copious I beg their copious pardon. Dulce est ex magno tollere
^cervo. Its comfortable gathering for an exiled Ruth, and (upon Boaz his leave
and order) to ramble all the Field over, and to glean where, and what she
pleases. The Lord increase our Faith, and give leave to our joy to go up with a
Pipe into the house of the Lord as in the solemn Feasts, Isai. 30. 26.
and sing the Songs of Assurance in the heights of Zion. Which conducts me into
the view of the next Chapter, to set forth the danger of unbelief, and exhibit
some preventives against the rising of that sore sin: That the Lord may be
graciously entreated to advance the work of Faith with power, 3 These. 1. 11.
and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness; that the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ may be glorified in us and we in him.

CHAP. IX, X.
T He ninth Chapter about the grand danger of Unbelief, and some methods to
avoid the funk Rocks in that dead Sea: and likewise the tenth about the choice
blessings and inestimable benefits that flow from saving Faith: how thereby a
good Christian, by the grace of God may live a joyful life in the midst of all
his troubles, and ride in one of our second Solomon's Chariots over the Kidron
of death unto the Mount Olivet of Ascension into glory; but what I said before
upon the titles of the 4th and 5th Chapters, crave also a Super-sedea s or a
Writ of Ease for these: tho I am somewhat unwilling to omit them, especially
the 7th about the infirmities of sorrowful and deserted souls. If the published
papers find acceptance with the pious, it may encourage the others to appear in
Gods due time, as a second part of this Tract: if they may be thought useful:
but at present they are left to some other providential opportunity: if the
Lord permit and prosper it: which I humbly give us to the divine conduct in
sparing of life, and shining upon the seasons of his holy Will and pleasure: if
otherwise I hope the Lord will stir up some to perform the like with more
usefulness and success in advancing the poor in spirit toward the Kingdom of
heaven, then any of these mean helps could have effected and so I leave this
and all the labors of any of His faithful Servants with the great Lord of the
Vineyard and conclude this Tract with the Epilogue to the whole, which I had
prepared.

THE Epilogue Or Conclusion, in some Corollaries or Deductions from the
precedent Discourse: tho cut short in a great measure, contrary to my desire
and intention.
THe main body of this Treatise being finished, thought meet to draw some
useful dedications for profit and delight.

1. The first that may arise is, That if true Faith be the only means to
Salvation thru Christ, then natural reason is Insufficient to guide us in the
way to Heaven. Not that the true use of reason should be laid aside in drawing
Logical or Rational consequences from Scripture Assertions: but we must not use
it to lay down Principles and Axioms founded and grounded only upon the light
of nature: which is not furnished with ability to dive into the wonders of Gods
love, or the deep mysteries of his Gospel in order to Salvation. If it were
(since the Shipwreck of humane nature) capable to work such effects; what then
needed the Revelation of a Savior; and why has the Church of God thought meet
to comprehend the Doctrine of life in Creeds or short System s of points purely
and merely to be believed. Farewell all Articles and Confessions of Faith, and
in truth all our Bibles: if reason were the only Cynosure or Polestar to direct
us to the haven of happiness. But blessed be God, he has infused better
thoughts into us, and bestowed better things upon u s, and which do accompany
true salvation. Upon many accounts therefore do we reject humane reason in the
sense fore mentioned, as a true means to discover God in the new Covenant, or
to open a way for reconciliation to him, and peace with him, or to hold any
saying communion with him in grace and glory.

1. Because natural reason (as such) in its noblest and most sublime estate, is
but a finite Agent, and therefore cannot drink in thing s of infinite depth.
There Is no proportion between finite and infinite, the organ and the object.
John 3. 11.
The cockleshell of man's brain cannot contain the immense and superlative
knowledge of heavenly things: who can expound the Trinity, the union of the two
natures, the incarnation of our Lord from a Virgin the union of the Members of
the mystical body by the Spirit; the resurrection of the dead. and the true
nature of Eternity, and several other. Its therefore necessary to act Faith
upon the Doctrines revealed by God in holy Scripture. Nay how can Naturallist s
with any face hope to measure these deep counsels and ways of God when there
are so many things born in Mathematics, and natural Philosophy, and Physic
that pose the most acute Philosophers in the world, and set them together by
the ears, and so are like, to the end of the world. As about the progression of
two parallel lines, Mr. Boil in a late (...)
the quadrature of the circle, the extimous convexity of the heavens: the
wonderful motion of the fixed Stars, that a sixth star should move in the
aquator 52555 miles in a minute; that one of the first magnitude is a hundred
times bigger than the Earth, and that so many thousands of them keep their
constant mutual distance since the Creation, and yet move in a liquid ether.
Who can determine the motion of Mars or the Moon exactly: or expound the
Lodestone in all its variations, or clearly reason out all difficulties of the
Tides, or saltness of the Sea; or can by calculation set down that or the like
appearances of the Sun and Moon both above the Horizon and in the meridian when
they are in opposition partile: so as to determine them exactly to a point of
time, M. Na Rev^
as they appeared to a Relation of mine at the Cape of Norway? who can open and
discover the vert^^es and the reasons of Specificks, and occult qualities
called by the Greeks (...) unspeakable properties. Nay to go much lower; who
among the Learned in Chrenology can truly state the age of the world
considering the years of the Antediluvian Fathers are set down in round
numbers, and yet how positive are many weak pretenders?

What the admirable sagacity of future ages may compass as 10 thousands of
problems within the circle of Sciences, or in that most noble Art of Chvmistry,
or the Analysis of the three kingdoms of nature; the tubes and glasses of our
present inventions give us no sufficient prospect. We and our Fathers pity
Austin and Lactantius, and others for denying the Antipodes, Philaster
Brixiensis
and (which makes the Jest) for deriding those that held that opinion) and some
so zealous as Pope Zachary, to Excommunicate Bp Virgilius for holding it. And
some of the Ancients put down very odd here sies of the like kind. The learned
of this age wonder at the denial of the motion of the Earth, tho now the truth
of it appears clear to all the generality of the ingenious of Europe, and might
be easily demonstrated by the transition of the Moon constantly eastward by the
fixed Stars in the Zodiac, by the six-sold bigness of Mars at his opposition
to the Sun, and by other invincible reasons mentioned by Gallxe and others.

Indeed so may posterity deride at these our ages, and the more ingenious of
future times, may stand amazed at our dullness and stupidity about minerals,
moteors and the cure of diseases, and many thousand things besides, about the
luster of stars and precious stones, which may be as easy to them as letters to
us: which was so wonderful a mystery at first, and is so still to the American
Heathens, to form the fleeting breath of our lips into painted scrawles upon
paper. To them the longitude may be as easy a s tho Latitude to us, and that by
methods, we yet do not dream off. Such rare inventions may be given in of God
to beautify the glory of the latter days. All our writings in Divinity, will
be like insipid water, to what shall then appear upon the Stage, when the J ews
come in; and the Artists that shall then be born, may discover more things in
the works of God to be discust and endeavored to be explained, then they
themselves shall arrive to. The superfine Wisdom and Learned Wits of those
acute times will discover vast regions of darkness and ignorance. There will be
a plus ultra to the end of the world. The scope for which I mention these or
the like curiosities, is, that if nature can pose all men in the matter and
composition of the heavenly bodies, and in the various mixtures of all things
under the Moon, and puts forth new riddles continually to vex and torture men's
brains in making water malleable, or to measure mineral winds, etc. to find the
weight of fire, or to make artificial carbuncles to shine and burn in the
night, or exuberate Mercury: Rev. 21. 18. P ers. Stat 1.
yea and malleable glass too; which some boastere pretend to: if in millions of
things we are stunted and fooled at every turn, that we may cry out with the
Satyrish. -- Auriculas Asini quis non babet? What fearful sots are we in the
things before us? Then what shall dull reason do in the great sublimities and
solemnities of faith, and the doctrines set forth by Infinite Wisdom. What long
ears had Sacius and many others that will admit little or nothing but what must
come to this scale, that will scarce turn at an hundred weight. Nay things that
the glorious Angels do straiu at, and makes their wisdoms to bend like an Ozier
in a storm, and can never feel the bottom of these deeps without drowning: Mat.
18. 10.
though they stand always beholding the face of God.

2. Reason, besides its finiteness being less then the dwindle of a rush candle
to pierce into the concameration of the heavens: its also very corrupt since
the fall of man, polluted with many stains and filthy contagions. The
pi^^^mater is now grow u impia. The strongest brain is now shrunk into a
cerebellum, and that stained with yellow poison. The pure spirits in the nerves
are now grown thick, and corporeal with many feculencies. The ey's chrystalline
humor has a thousand black motes swimming in it: that we can discern nothing,
but what s confused, inverted, distorted. The most setend and shning intellect
that ever was in meet man, Schottieter Ecstaticus Scheiner Kircher.
it now become more cloudy and smoky than those Mountainous spots said to be
found of late in the body of the Sun by the Telescope. It is most deplorable to
think how imperfect and obscure the minds of men appear, and yet thru' the
obstinate perverseness of their wills, how desperately tenacious of old fond
and foolish notions. So that not only the stupid Country an who is immerst in
the dungil of conceitedness, and will not alter his old customs: But also many
that sacrifice to Minerva in the School of Philosophy can hardly stride one
step beyond Aripotle, but are mocked and traduced by ignorant Caprisios. How
much more blind (then the very Moles and Beetles are in discerning the motions
of the heavenly bodies) are natural men as to spiritual objects, they are stark
and stone blind, and see not one spark of light. The nature of man as truly
says the Apostle, perceives not the things of God, I Cor. 2. 14.
neither indeed can do, for they are spirituatly discerned He bath no eyes
suitable and proper for such excellencies.

3. Because reason (a s such) was never appointed to obtain those sublime end
s. God never designed the great matters of eternity and the other world, and
the tremendous ^^^ues of his glorious Decreases to be scanned and examined by
the weak brains of silly worms, that crawl at his footstool: but has ordained
them to be believed and received for supreme truth upon his sovereign
authority. Our bodily hands can sooner span the visible heavens, then our
shallow and short reason the invisible mysteries within the heavens: And who is
that hold sceptick that dares to enter the lists, Isai. 45. 9.
and contend with His Maker. Let pot-sherds strive with the fellow potsherds,
and not with the Almighty potter himself., A proud usurpation, and a saucy
intrusion, no ways fit for such atoms of being as we are, to meddle with.
These mysteries surpass the ingeny of the most intuitive Angels: their morning
or evening science is blacker than the deepest midnight, neither can they know
these things but by Revelation from heaven.

4. Besides all this, Ephesians. 3. 10.
man is subject to a thousand tentations, and prestigiating infatuations from
Satan: if God permit; and lies under many doubtful uncertainties from other
strange Emergencies and Events of Providence: which fall like so many mists and
fogs upon his understanding: till the light of the Gospel shine out more
clearly. Under what fearful bondage did all the fallen posterity of Adam grovel
and groa^, and knew not whence their misery sprang; till God sent his Word and
healed them. Nay, if Gerson hi^ it right, the Devils themselves (that do so
usurp over the dismal world) thru' their evil works, are daily more entangled
and darkened since the Fall If so, Psalm. 10^. 20.
then how much more may poor man thru' his own corruption, and others fettering
insinuation s become incapable of these noble objects: so that we may look upon
that as a proud conceited saying, let fall in the close of a Sermon. My
Religion is my Reason, and my Reason is my Religion. If this be not cum ratione
insanire, to dote upon that withered hag of corrupt reason and its dangerous
fables: then commend me from these giddy christians, to the more noble Heathens
of former ages: who both saw and instructed the world with better precepts, and
acted upon more generous principles wrought out by the dim light of nature,
whosoever reads many of the Platonicks, and several of the Stoic and Epicurean
Philosophers before and after the coming of our blessed Lord, will find their
arguings to have suggested by the conduct of providence some preparations or
the world not to think so strange of matters of Faith. When the Septuagint in
their translation of the Hebrew Bible (or the pentateuch at least) into Greek
at the command of King Philadelphus did spread the saving knowledge of the God
of Israel wherever Alexanders conquering sword, and his greek tongue together
had obtained.

As to the present point, I shall recite a few testimonies, and then turn off
to further inferences.

The first shall be of Plato in his Epistle to Dionysius. who advices to [shun
such as a (...) a gulf or dark pit: who expect and require punctual
demonstrations in the things of God: as if they could be apprehended and held
in by our hands] and again in his Gorgins he says, that Socrates did rather
give credence to the things which he received from the Propheress Diotima: then
insist upon a conviction by reason Theophrastus also the Scholar of Aristotle
affirms concerning natural things that whoever seeks to find a reason of all
things by their (affected) reason take away knowledge it self: Calen, deusu
part. 1. 15.
and Galen one of the Princes of Physicians expresses of some things. thou
endeavor to find out, by what means such a thing was made: its plain, thou
do neither understand thy own weakness, nor the power of the (great) Maker:
and therefore Pliny in his natural history cuts it short: Plin. 1. 2. c, 1.
that a man cannot take right measures of other things, since he knows not
himself: and to end, I may recall an observation of Capivaccius: that experience
in Physic manifests many errors, which reason did not reveal.

The truth is, that in most Arts and Sciences, many argute reasonings and
fine^oun distinctions (...) and others, vanish into smoke: (...) they come to
the touchstone of (...) experiments: wherefore now the Learneder part of the
world have left off their old musty maxims, and sophistical cavils of the
Schools whereby pure Philosophy has been entangled and obscured; and are
resolved to spend some ages, and set all Europe a work to write volumns of
faithful experiments before they will prefume upon more systems of natural
Philosophy to gull the world: and then call a Council out of the learned
nations in some center place, and so make short and pithy and uncontrollable
axioms for the Schools: I might mention many things that have made a great
noise, but upon trial have sunk down into emptiness and shame: I shall only
touch the notion of managing a flying chariot, when once by the force of
springs raised above the gravitation of the Atmosphere: But alas the wheels,
when they come to action, few in pieces or stopped quickly in the current,
looking for better Workmen. Yet such was the ingenuity of some, and their
imagination towred so strongly, that they procured a Merchant to make some
trial of the Torricellian experiment of quicksilver at the peak of Teneriff in
order to determine how high the air might gravitate: But alas to little
purpose: as all automata, especially a s to durability and perpetuation of
motion do as yet pose and abash the greatest pretender s: but their ingenuous
endeavors are most highly commendable, and seem to be reserved as blessings
for better ages. When Bellona and Erinnis shall be banished out of the earth,
and Pallas shall teach Athens with an head piece of iron no more. When holiness
and integrity shall beautify the world, and divine grace shall raise new
Bezaleels and Aboli^bs to make those sweet and candid persons happy in their
generations, by exquisite and curious inventions: which these bloody and
treacherous days shall never see thru' the righteous Judgment of God.

But to draw to an end: since the Majesty of God is not nor can be known,
Bradward p. 29.
so neither can his works and ways: not the least of his admirable operations
can be found out to any perfection: Job. 11, 7. Meditat. Devotis.
let me conclude with a story in a treatise a scribed to Bernard, of one that
was laving the Ocean with a little shell, and being asked what he meant:
answered, Thus do they who think to exhaust the knowledge of the Essence or
Works of God (or to that purpose) and then breaks out into a fober ejaculation,
though in barbarous Latin, (...) te capere possem, cum non possum capere
meipsum] How can I comprehend thee, whereas I cannot understand my self?

Now lets descend to another inference.

2. A second induction from the forediscovery may be, that the study of the
Holy Scriptures is most excellent, necessary and profitable; being given by
inspiration from God to make us wife to salvation. Thence we may extract, what
is the perfect will of God as to doctrine, 2 Timothy 3 16. ver. 15.
worship and government for the World in the conduct of providence, and in the
Church by the scepter of Christ. They being the only true directors as to
eternal life, John 17. 3. 5. 39.
ought to be diligently searched by us. Dig in their mines for for spiritual
understanding of things that will enrich you to all eternity. The Diamond Rocks
of Gulcondah or any I ndian, or Chinaor Japan treasures are baubles and trifles
to humor crying children with, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
in comparison of these. The Day of Judgment will turn all them to ashes: when
those shall adorn and stand thee in stead at the Dreadful Bar, where all the
great Dons of the World shall tremble to appear, and none but Saints shall life
up their heads in that great morning of their Redemption.

3. Since this treatise concerns a happy preparation for our state in the world
to come: it strongly incites to an impartial examination, Whether we be in the
Faith or no? to enquire what graces or what degrees are yet deficient? and
especially to work at the main or fundamental grace of all, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
to search what is lacking there 2 Pet. 1. 10.
For when the defects are supplied it will give you an abundant entrance into
the heavenly Kingdom, and certify you that you have a blessed right and title
to that incorruptible inheritance. Your holy Faith will work sweetly by the
help of love; and unseigned Faith is ever concomitant with unseigned
Repentance, to purge and cleanse continually both heart and life, and then
comes thankfulness s riding into the heart in the Chariot of love and helps to
conduct us into higher measures of service, Song 3. 10.
and sweeter degree s of joy, as a prodromus and forerunner of the eternal
happiness.

4. This Treatise may serve as a powerful motive to servent and uncessant love
to the Lord Jesus: who has done all for us, yea more than we can think. It
cannot enter into our hearts to conceive what he has purchased and prepared
for those that love him. Isai. 64. 4
Oh what delight should we take in him? Oh what thankfulness can we express or
render to him. He has planted his graces in and upon us as so many pearls and
jewels to adorn us. Prove. 4. 9. 1. 9. Song 7.12. Joh. 14. 2.
His love is advanced as a Banner and Shield to protect us He is ascended far
above all heavens to sit a place for us, and then will come again and take u s
thither. Let us give forth all our love to him, till we come to the full
enjoyment of his. Here I would beg a little leave to pour out a complaint, and
weep over our want of love to Christ: for we see and find that we are all too
apt by the sad inclination of the old Adam within us, to love and embrace any
temporary comfort above and beyond him, and then to few the old fig-leaf
excuses to hide our nakedness from his all-searching eye: sometimes we make
Idols of Relations, if sweet tempered and pleasant like Jonathan and David, and
so incite God to take them away in displeasure, and to plant sower, dirty and
crabbed tempers in their room; and yet 'ti s in a mixture of mercy to wean us
more to himself: for very few have the wit and grace to set God on the Throne
in the midst of their hearts, (...). 3. 20.
and let all others wait and tend while he sups with us. Let Us pray our
heavenly Father, and beg it earnestly, that if he will please to purge away our
former miscarriages, and indulge such mercies to us in our pilgrimage; that he
would please also to teach, help and incite our hearts to love him best, and
above all, and love none but as foot-stools to advance our hearts the more to
him, and to improve all in order to him. Then are we more likely to keep and
enjoy our mercies, and taste more of God in them all, till the blessed time of
our ascension to his bosom.

There be multitudes of a far more inferior orb, stamp and form; that instead
of persons which sometime s have an excellency, when holy, meek and cheerful;
fit to converse with man, Prove. 5. 19. and ^1. 10.
and ordained of God to be his solac^: but their price is far above Rubies. I
lament over those that value not persons gracious and rare-tempered: which are
the very ornaments of the Creation; but being of a low and sordid frame fall
down and worship fine houses, green Gardens, fleet Ships, bags of Guynnies, and
such like trash, with many other dumb Idols, that will not profit in the day of
wrath; Dan. 3. 1.
and yet continue dancing in the plains of Dura, at the sound of the Organ.
Flute and Sackbut; and in a moment slip down into the Grave. I have read of a
good Woman that after her conversion, having flung away her foolish trifles:
once upon the opening her Chest, and seeing them ly there: cries out: Oh says
she, these were (once) my Idols: but now she had left her idolatry: and minded
nobler Objects.

There be some yet worse: that if you attempt them tho by gentle reproofs are
not content with ordinary leaves to cover it, as being decent, comely,
fashionable: but are in mad rave, and cry like Micah: will ye take away my
gods, Judge. 18. 24.
and ask what ailes me? They dote upon a painted trifle, or a silly lace, or a
dress with silver hawksbells, as one in the West; or a well-set Border of false
hair: Isai. 3. 24.
Tho as Martial reflects Scit te Proserpina canam, the Goddess of Hell knows
thee to be but a bald Coot. But yet they will in their Moon-like tires worship
the Queen of heaven. When will the world, be wise, nay, when will Christians be
modest and sober, remembering they are but dusts that Paradise had no garments,
and Heaven will have none, and serious christianity and a mortified heart to
the vanities of this life (if risen with Christ) seeks things that are above,
Col 3. 1.
and is not only content, but pleased with great moderation in all those
things, Phil. 4. 5. l Pet. 3. 3.
like the holy Women that of old, and called their Hu sbands [Lord s] and not
afraid of any amazement or Scorn from a vain world, knowing that all must
shortly perish in the dust: and clothe red worms with all your Scarlet. Vicus
Parmensis Imag. Augustorum ^. 1. 42. 4 to
Livia the Empress being asked by the Roman Matrons, what art she used to render
Augustus so kind and gracious, as to obtain any thing at his hand: Answered, I
do it by my modesty, since I do all things according to his will and mind. This
would rid the world of Serpents, when the Law of kindness sits down in the
chair of duty. Let not such as would be thought other persons, and such as
would be highly favored of God; let not such by an Herodias-attire betray
their unacquaintance with him, the slightness and lowness of their spirits, and
the deformity of their souls, and how little of the image of Christ is formed
in them, that can delight in things that please him not, and in midst of their
many outward pleasures forget the affliction s of Joseph (alluding to the ten
Tribes in the rocks and mountains of Media.) and lay but little to heart the
sorrows of the Church of Christ either abroad or at home. Amos 6. 6
If you truly love the Lord Jesus, remember your vanity and foolishness is
always before him: Psalm. 69. 5.
beg his pardon, and study these things and walk in the Garden of Gethsemany
among his sorrows and drops of blood, which may inflame your affections to him,
and crucify them to the world more and more. You begin to grow up, and some
some into years: Its high time as the Apostle exhorts to put on the Lord Jesus,
and to make no provision more for the flesh and the lusts thereof. Romans 13. 14.


5. Fifthly, The Doctrine of Faith infers it to be great wisdom and duty to
keep your consciences undefiled. For the mystery of Faith is held and preserved
in a pure, 1 Timothy 3. 9.
clean and serene conscience, like a crystal Venice-glass tipped with gold
(...), that runs like a clear sweet stream not conscious of any sin wilful
committed. 1 Timothy 1. 19.
Its sometime termed a good conscience: whereof wilful sins make sorrowful
ship-wracks: A good conscience is a continual feast, gave Paul a Banquet every
night, and composed him to a better rest, than in a bed of Roses. But why is a
good conscience such a golden vial for Faith? Because holiness of life seeds
conscience with joy, and thereby testifies and comforts about the truth of
Faith.

6. Sixthly, We may observe from the former tract, that Faith is an excellent
engine to discern and observe the wise Government of God in the World and in
the Church. Its a Telescope to discern afar off in the heavens, and a
Microscope to pry into minuter accidents in the earth. Had we no other
Argument, Heb. 11. 3.
yet by Faith we may know it, and that more fully and punctually, how the
worlds were framed, and by Faith we understand the divine dominion and
management of the world by Spirits. He makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers
a flaming fire: of some whereof lets speak in order.

1. First, God manages many things by the ministration of Angels. They are the
seven eyes of God, that joy to see the plummer in the hand of Zerubbabel for
rebuilding the Temple. Heb. 1. 7. Zecb. 4. 10. Dan. 9. 21. 10, 13, 20. Genesis 19.
1. 2 Kin. 1. 9, 15. Deuteronomy 32. 8.
We read in Scripture of the Prince of Persia, and Groecia, of Michael and
Gabriel tho the third is judged to be meant of Christ: the other of created
Angels; which were employed in divine work s and messages: and what were the
Chariot s of Mahanaim, and near Samaria, and at Elijah's capture, and other
times, but the holy Angels of God. There is also a place in Deuteronomy, which
the Septuagint read thus [When the most High divided the inheritance to the
Nations, when he separated the Sons of Adam he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the Angels of God.] Tho I do not justify the
Translation: yet it shows that this notion was current among the ancient Jews:
And although the P seudodionysius in his Hierarchy of Angels, Set s down many
frivolous fancies and curiosities about their orders; yet that God is pleased
to execute his pleasure by the administration of good, and sometimes evil
Angels, is consonant to holy Scripture. As in the Psalmist, Psalm. 78. 49.
he sent evil Angels among the Egyptians, and so made a way to his anger: whom
some interpreters judge to be good Angels, but called so from the evil of
punishment, which as instruments they inflicted. How ever that be, yet it is a
Scripture truth, and an object of Faith, and known by experience in several
ages: And although the methods be unknown yet the matter is certain and indeed may
be joy and comfort to Saints to know that they encamp about them that fear him,
Psalm: 34: 7:
and are the valiant ones about their beds by night; they are the holy Watchers
in Daniel, and the comforters and aiders of Saints by day, and why may not they
suggest some heavenly illapses, as well as evil Spirits tempt, when God
permits. Its ground of sweet joy and praise for the Saints to have such society
and communion with these holy Sons of God, these Morning Stars that sang before
him. Job 38: 7 Zech: 6: 8:
Its said of them that they quieted the Spirit of God in the North Country:
that is, Gods wrath was satiated by the execution of justice upon Babylon in
the ministry of these holy Angels. They fought against the Assyrian in
Sennacharibs Camp: 2 King 19: 35. Zech: 1: 8: 2 Chro. 35. 21.
they were in Battle array against Babylon among the Myrtle Trees. What may we
divine of the visions to Pharaoh Necho, when commanded to go up against
Carchemish the Cercusium in Ammiano, or of that to Alexander in Josephus; or of
that voice to Totilas, commanding him to go against Italy, and making him (the
flagellum Dei) God s Scourge to the Nations: were not they secret impulses and
instigations of Angels upon their Spirits to do the work of God?

2. Sometimes by the spirits of men: God turned the Egyptians heart s to hate
hi s people, and deal subtly with his Servants: after a while, Ps. 105. 29.
37 Ezod. 12. 36.
he gives them savor in the sight of the same nation: so that they lent them
what they required, both Jewels of gold, silver and raiment sometimes a
Pharaoh, that dealt kindly with them all the days of Joseph: and then other
Pharaohs that were very harsh and cruel to them. Sometimes a Grecian Alexander
shall favor them, and after him Antiochus, one of his Successors, deal
barbarously with them. When Israel was come into their own land, God promised
to restrain the Spirits of the Neighboring Heathens at the three times a year,
when they went up to worship, yea to bridle the inward desires of the adjacent
nations, Exodus 34. 24.
that not a man of them should so much as desire their Land. In after-ages, the
Prophet Daniel treating of the times of the silver breast, Dan. 11. 27.
Prophesies, there should arise two Princes, scil. Antiochus Epiphanes, and
Prolomaeus Philometor who should speak lie s at one table: but it should not
prosper: that i s, make feigned shows of amity, when they feasted together; but
it should not avail them. To name no more, there is a wonderful Praediction in
Ezekiel, that in the latter days (not yet fulfilled) things shall then come
into the mind of Gog: Ezekiel. 38. 10
that is the Turk or Tartars (as the learned judge) He shall think an evil
thought, ver. 18. ver. 22.
even to come into the Land of Israel, after the Jews are re-entered into it.
But the Lord will plead against him to his utter destruction, and he shall be
finally ruined, when the Lord will raise up the Sons of Zion against the Sons
of Greece: Zeck. 14. 3. 9. 13.
that is against the Turk or Tartarian, in that day having fixed his seat at
Constantinople, in the old Imperial Palace of the Grecian or Eastern Empire:
and being the Successor of the Grecian Alexander in his East Dominions.

3. Sometimes by the heavenly bodies, and their influences by the spirits of
meteors, and many other natural exhalations out of the seae and bowels of the
earth, as from Vesuvius AEtna, Hecla, and the Vuicanian Islands. How did the
Stars in their courses fight against Sisera, Judge. 5. 20.
causing great inundations in the River Kishon, that ancient River, or River of
Antiquities or great battles of old: but now swelling to a great overflow,
swept away the Host of the Canaanites? How did the Lord tame the pride of Egypt
by locusts, hail, fire, and frogs, and darkness that might be felt, thick fogs
as black as pitch, and many other ways. How did God subdue the proud Pope
Hadrian by a fly, etc. There Is no age but echoes and cries aloud to all
people, to prove and make all to acknowledge the Sovereign Dominion of the Lord
of Hosts in the Heavens, Earth and Seas, and over all Creatures: nay under the
earth, in Mineral Caverns, if Paracelsus and the Learned Agricola write true
stories, of multitudes of Spirits and living creatures in the bowels of the
earth. All testimonies trumpeting aloud how God at times arms what of hi s
Hosts he pleases, for the protection of his Church, and the ruin of his
enemies. Famous is that memorial of the cloud which presented its dark side to
the Egyptians, but gave light to Israel: when the Red Sea stood up in heaps,
and the depths were congealed or frozen in the heart or midst of that sea;
Exodus 15. 8. 14. 22.
so that the waters became as a wall to his people, which the Egyptians
essaying to pass thorough, were drowned. Nay the wonderful motion of the tides,
which is so great a mystery, Heb. 11. 29. Exodus 15. 10. Psalm. 147. 18.
is managed by Gods Wisdom: and the inconsiderable sands are a boundary to the
Ocean, determining how far his waves shall toss themselves, and go no further.
Jer. 5. 12.
They have their stated and fixed limits by the laws of Creation, which has
settled their channels into which they shall subside at his command. Some there
be (to mention it a little) that would infer the sea to be higher than the
earth from such a Text But it is a mistake, and misapply of scripture, Jonah 1.
Exodus 20. 4. Psalm. 24 2. Psalm. 107. 23.
which expressly sets the water s under the earth, and that it is established
upon the floods, and mentions men's going down to the sea in ships. If the sea
were not lower comparatively to the ordinary surface and globe of the earth
besides the mountains, how can all the Rivers run down into the sea, if the
earth out of which they spring, Isai. 42. 10. Eccles. 1. 7. Jer. 51. 42.
were not higher: wherefore the Prophet alluding to the natural situation,
foretells that the sea should come up upon Babylon and more to that purpose.
But this belongs not properly to our present work, only so far, as to show,
that God rules the raging seas, and the stormy wind s fulfill his pleasure.

Let Us step to Land, and end our voyage with one note more, to observe, Psalm.
14^. 8.
how that God enjoined Israel to plow and sow for six years; but must trust him
for the seventh, and part of the eighth, till the harvest same: living for the
while on the blessed providence of God, sending them tho greater plenty in the
foregoing years.

4. Fourthly and Lastly, lets touch a little upon the mysterious government of
the Church by his most Holy Spirit, swaying his golden scepter in the hearts of
Converts, and ruling them by hi s rod out of Zion. But this refers to that
great point of communion with the Spirit of God: Psalm. 110, 2.
which this treatise only considers in the doctrine of assurance, Chapter 8th,
and in one further consequence following, which is the seventh.

7. We may learn from the preceding tract, that the knowledge of our Faith and
the attainment of assurance flow principally from the influences of the Spirit
of God. He is the profound teacher of all mysteries, and the worker of Faith,
and therefore gives the clearest evidence: without the necessity of arguing,
when he is pleased to speak to the heart. Joh 16. 13.
He shall teach you all things (our Lord promises) and guide into all truth. He
glorifies the Son, receives of his, shows it to us, and manifests things to
come. Where he reaches any doctrine, he work s the knowledge and sense of it
into the heart, and causes us to believe: He is the former of faith, he
commands and incline s us to trust, and imprints the image of Christ upon us,
Epist. Gassendi de moiu impresso, etc
as the vis impressa sends out a power from the hand or instrument upon the
ball arrow or bull (...), which together with the air that is gathered by the
force into an impulsive vortex behind the body (as in the ignis lambens)
carries on the motion to the end of its vigor.

It Is more abundantly here: when the spirit becomes the arm of God to break the
lions in the heart; he moves and works in the most intimate recesses of the
soul; he shapes and forms the new Adam within us, and inspires it with fire
from the throne between the wheels of the cherubim s: Ezekiel 10. 7.
He is the skilful architect of the Temple of the Church, cementing the living
stones together, which were cut out of ^he mountain of the divine Degrees to
make a glorious Habitation for God by the Spirit. Ephesians. 2. 22.


Let Us then never forget to be earnest in prayer for the gift of the spirit:
since the influx of all grace, and the beautiful enamel of our hearts with
heavenly gifts, flows from this holy spirit of Urim and Thummim: All the truths
in Scripture can only be settled and confirmed upon our hearts by him. He is
like the master of Assemblies, that fastens the nail in a sure place: Eceles.
12. 11.
like the great shepherd that Knocks in (the paxilli in caula) the stakes about
the hurdles of the sheep-cotes to keep the harmless creatures from the Wolves,
close and warm together in a dark and stormy night.

8. Another deduction from the former treatise may be: that the number of true
believers i s very small: for the generality of the world knows not God in
Christ. The Turks indeed own him for a great Prophet, but disdain his banner.
The Jews confess there wa s such a person at Jerusalem? but contradict his
message, blaspheme his Deity, and stumble at hi s sufferings.

Among the various nation s bearing the same of Christian, what wild confusions
and subsurditie s are practiced in Muscovy: by the testimony of the ingenious
Olearius, Marriage
and what rude mixtures and barbarlties are ^ound among the Abyssins, south of
Egypt, as we are taught by that learned Writer ^udolphus, or what ignorances
blind Custom s, and perverse worshippings are notified among the Armenians,
Ludolph. Edit 1604. Fol.
Maronites or Thoma-Indians, as are related by Breerwood Paget, and in the
collections of travels in Purchase, and several other s. What shall we say to
the corruptions among the Pontificians, nay in the Reformed Churches of God in
the world and how are the lives of most grown degenerate and profane: insomuch
that one has adventured to pronounce that it is hazardable whether above one in
a million may be saved: I remember also to have read somewhere, Dr. (...)
that Chrysostom should say to the people of Antioch: that among so many
thousands in that great City, that scar^^^and hundred would be saved, and he
doubted of that too.

When we ruminate and consider of the pride, vanity, luxury, wantonness,
excess, and rioting, pleasure, and vainglory, envy, backbiting, and variance
both among Ministers and people: neglect of holy duties, love of the world, and
the perishing trash and trifles therein: The contempt of the Gospel and
faithful Ministers: we must subscribe to that of our Lord, (...) Fear not
little, yea very little or diminutive flock (when not only all the wild beasts
and wolve s; but the goats also are separated) For it is your Fathers good
pleasure to give to you a Kingdom. Zuk. 12. 32.
Since the number then comparatively is so very small, and the danger of
miscarrying so very great: oh how does it stand us in stead to make the things
of Eternity established and sure, which ushers in the next corollary.

9. That the knowledge of our sincerity and integrity, is of great use to gain
both peace and joy in believing: wh^^ is a principal aim in the foregoing
treatise. For though the want of Assurance does not prove us to be under the
power of unbelief, yet this defect shows the weakness of our Faith, and keeps
the yoke of bondage (in manifold fears, and torments) too strait and pinching
upon the necks of some that are truly gracious.

It is thy greatest interest then to clear the case, and to state thine
evidences by answering to the questions at the end of each chapter, or to the
whole in general, or by any sound way and method to manifest a work of true
grace and faith in thy heart. Phrase things, term or call them how thou will:
but be sure the work be right between God and thee. Sincerity will clear up
all: under various misprisions and accusations of undiscerning friends, who
usually insult upon persons in adversity (not for want of censorious pride and
folly, which they seldom come to own and behold, but in the glass of their own
calamities) yet holy Job stood his ground: and which was bitter indeed, to
conflict with their severe animosities, when under a cloud from God: yet still
held fast his integrity before the Lord. Thy s is such a strong pillar that a
Christian may lean the whole strength and stress of his soul upon it in the
name and power of God. A dear and intimate conjugal relation (who is mentioned
before chapter 8) would sometime s be upon this point: But am I right indeed,
am I sincere in my heart, and love to Christ, if I could but prove that
clearly, I know all were well? I answered, how do you know, or can prove the
truth of your love in the relation wherein you stand, but by descending into
your heart and examining the inward honest inclinations and readiness of spirit
to any kindness and labor of love. For any one may assuredly know, that they
have true love, or any other natural affection within their bowels, unless
their senses and brains be deficient. We may tell, whether we mean honestly and
truly in what we profes s and do? Whether our tongues agree with our hearts, or
whether there be found a secret aversation and loathing within, or not: It is
so, verily, in the case between Christ and us: ask your soul the question, and
answer it from the integrity of your conscience, Song 2. 16.
and then pronounce with the Spouse so often mentioned: I am my Beloveds, and
my Beloved is mine, for he feeds among the Lillies and Spice-beds of graces
in my heart.

There are manifold sign s of true grace set down by some: most whereof might
be spared, being but like pitch or birdlime to entangle discouraging Spirits:
use but few, and those very pertinent: if thou find a true one, truly wrought
in thee, it is enough: for then all are there in semine in the seed plot, tho
under ground. A s suppose: unfeigned love to the Brethren, or constant pantings
after God, and delight in secret communion, or the like. Be but sure of its
true being within you: it will do your buisiness, by serious pondering and
rumination upon it with the rid of Gods Spirit. Some are over-free in
multiplying token s, it show s a popular invention, but not very logical and
rational because usually co-incident, and but little comfort (rather sorrow and
perplexity) arises thence to mourning souls, under the absence of God, and
therefore be advised to forbear: because they will not agree to the various
forms: especially the lowest state of Christians and then there is wise work for
tentations: when you grieve the generation of the just, Psalm. 73. 15.
whom God would not have grieved.

If then, all your multiplied signs do not comfortably agree with thy strict
and impartial search: Be not cast down. For an honest heart, having true love
to Christ, tho mixed with failings, Romans 7. 5.
yet all lamented and none allowed: but hated and striven against with an
inward content of soul and joy, that it can bear up against the stream of
corruption, and with all its care towes the boat up the River toward the Spring
of its happiness and tho it find much unholiness, yet melt s and grieves over
it, studies amendment in what the word and conscience smites upon, and that
with some improvement in mortification, and some growing in grace or a gracious
willingness to be and do so, mixed with honest endeavors: tho it be not so
lively and flourishing as it would: tho the soul labors and sweat in the fire
of contention and conflict with its lusts, and corruptions, and feels (...)
that success it prays and thirsts after yet do not discourage nor greive thine
own spirit, and so hinder its elevation to work and service: The root of grace
appears to me, to be plainly in thee, and that it will by degrees wax and
increase like the house of David: and if thou can perceive some growth, tho
but little: it is a sure and certain Index of life. If thou daily die in some
measure to sin, Psalm. 18.
and particularly to that sin which thou art most inclined to, thy peevish,
froward, cursed, proud and contentious humors and lusts, or any else, upon
sudden inroads of Satan which thy heart and faithful Ministers and Friends
check thee for, and beginnest to live a little more to holiness, then thou
did; and growest and perseverest in grace, and art watchful against thy
lusts, and humbly and meekly thankful to them that reprove thee: and labourest
to imitate the hollness and meekness of Christ the beloved: I must say and
insist upon it, that sincerity is the cardo rei, the very hinge of that door
that lets thee into life and salvation, and if thou do truly love him, who
pardons all thy foolishness. I say then tho thou fear the work, that it was not
right at first, at such a time when thou thoughtst it was a found and a true
conversion: never stand puzling and frighting your spirit s about the point,
what that work was whither then sound or not: but do as Dr. Thomas Goodwin was
wont to counsel troubled consciences: Begin the work a new and lay your
foundation better, and build the materials of holiness upon the precious
foundation of Faith in Christ alone, and never gather your principal and
fundamental comfort and hope from works and duties; that will fail you: because
of their many and great imperfections: yet having planted your Faith aright on
the Doctrine of free grace: then exercise daily a more accurate care of
pleasing God, and thereby comfort your consciences, and beautify your holy
profession in all manner of godly conversation; and thy s brings me to the
tenth and last Affection.

10, In the tenth and last place: 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Labor to keep up the verdure and luster of holy walking with God. Lively
Faith breeds lively hope, and both make a lively Christian: who craws his
virtue from the death and rising of Christ for a conformity to him. Imitate
holy Abraham under the Oak by Hebron, in teaching thy Family, and keeping up
pure Worship in it: Its a great piece of a Christians work. Remember the
morning and evening Sacrifice: a little Lamb must be offered twice a day or
else the juge sacrificiunt, the daily Worship will be lost under the Gospel
times. Waloei commen^ in N. T. libr. histor, ex Petia to. Lug. ^at. 1653. 4 to
ad Act. 2. 16. and C 3. 1.
It is Judged by their antiquity s, that the godly ^^^elites went to Prayer in
their Houses at the times or hours of Prayer and Sacrifices of the the Temple.
To incline godly Family s to this practice, I might call to mind that we are
taught in our Lords Prayer, to pray in joint fellowship, the words are plural:
and I might also remember that God has threatened to curse the Families that
call not on his Name: where the Families (there) be comprehensive term as to
Nations and Countries, Jer. 10. 25.
yet it must contain Households within it. If it be presented as a free will
Offering, 'twill be accepted in mercy, and returned in Family preservations and
rewards. Teach then thy Children and Relations: Deuteronomy. ^. 7. Psalm. 92: 2. Morn
and even day and night. Act. 10. 2.
when thou lie down and risest up, that is evening and morning to whet divine
precepts upon their hearts: exercising thy self and thine to godliness. As
Cornelius the Centurion, being a devout man, and feared God with all his house:
gave Alms and prayed to God always, in which words, if his devoutness, or (...)
as it is in the Greek, he explained of Worship: then its plainly connexed with
all his house: but I shall not urge it, nor the phrase of fear for reverence in
Worship, according to the language of the Old Testament. This is certain, that
Family mercies call for Family Prayers, and Family praises: and whose (...) to
wait upon God in such Family addresses, will find a holy awe of God to fall
upon their inferiors and preserve their obedience, and shall enjoy many a
deliverance, and many a blessing Besides, in the constant practice of holiness,
you will have need of patience every day in doing and submitting to the Will of
God; Heb. 10. 36.
wicked Neighbor s if powerful, will oppress you; and false pretended Friend
s, wily Relations, and faithless Servants will endeavor to betray your
Children and your Daughters to themselves or theirs: use all wisdom, but
especially a quietness of Spirit: if you have none good in power to defend or
avenge you. Walk on with a humble submissive frame to God, till you receive the
promises, and then your reward will be abundant. In your Family-dutie s be
prudent, because of Servants and Children; render not holy duties burdensome by
tediousness. Eccles. 5. 2.
God (...) in Heaven and we upon Earth: let your words be weighty, considerate
and few. There will (surrepere) creep on a desidia or listlessness upon our
weak and corrupt flesh and a too much perfunctory formality in the constancy of
Duties, especially when growing in years, do what you can unless you be endued
with good natural strength and vigor of body, and use great watchfulness and
help from heaven. Which calls to mind that advice in golden Letters upon the
outside of the Pulpit in Paul's, London before the Fire [Concionandi satietas ne
sit, erit,] Take heed of too much length in Preaching: satiety will come
without sending for. Endeavor, if possible, to beautify and put a gloss upon
all the duties, you engage in; with some quickness of Spirit, craving Heavens
influence and assistance. They Will be the more delightful, and set a pleasant
verdure and vernish upon Religion with the more luster, to entice and allure
others into the same blessed path s of life. Labor also to enjoy and improve
all thy mercies and blessings in a cheerful manner, Eccles. 9. 9.
with the pleasant Wise of thy desire and delight, and with the precious
Olive-plants about thy Table: If the Lord of Heaven shall think good to bestow
upon thee so great a mercy, Prove. 5. 19. Psalm. 128. 3
as one of a meek and quiet spirit, which is of so great price with God. If
such a mercy and happiness be thy portion under the Sun, 1 Pet. 3. 4.
and therein to enjoy the good of thy labor: it is the gift of God, and must
be sacrificed in whole hecatomb s of Peace Offering s, Services and Praises to
the Majesty of Heaven. Hortature


But to draw to a final period: Be exhorted to keep thy accounts even, thy
faith vigorous, thy evidences clear. Maintain society among the Excellent in
the Earth, pious and fruitful Christians; multiply not relations, nor too much
acquaintance, they are burdensome, and chargeable robbers of time; Psalm. 16. 3.
and if possible to be had in the neighborhood, such as are of sweet tempers
planted with grace, they are like Pomgranates dipped in spiced wine, like
diamonds, or rather green Berils, or Emeralds, that most lovely of all colors;
set in gold, the most precious of all Metals. It Is better to sit alone in
sweet contenting silence on the top of an house, or in the corner of a
wilderness, then with a sower and exceptions creature: you may quickly know
them, they are forward, malipert, contentious, and imperious, and have all the
talk in company: Sweet tempers will sweeten thy journey to heaven, and make it
excceeding amiable. As the Ancient said of some Travelle rs toward Rome
[cantanses, minus ut via laedat, camus] cheerfulness cuts off the tediousness
of the way: and if moderate without vanity; does good like a Cordial Medicine.
Prove. 1^. 22.
Above all, let thy love to Christ be unspotted and inflamed: then thou need
not be anxious about the foolish censures of ignorant men, either of the world
or amongst false brethren; whose persons or censorious judgings and juglings
blessed Paul weighed not at all. Let Us imitate him: They are but the hissings
of the old Serpent, the ignita jacula, Satan's false-pious firebrands flung in
thy way to molest thy journey toward s thy Heavenly Country. Mind not their
supercilious, conceited proud reproofs and slanders, spurn them away with the
foot of faith and courage: know thy duty and study to do it. When they are in a
better mood and humor, and begin to repent and be humbled; 1 C^^4.3.
pity them; if they desire thy pardon, be as ready to forgive them: else
remember the divine counsel to Jeremy Let them return to thee, but return not
thou unto them: for they are rebelliou s against God: he will save and deliver
thee: Jer. 15. 19.
Trust in him, and he will bring it to pass.

We are then most uneasy and usually most unsuccessful: when we govern our
ways by the pride of others directions, and their say^o's especially of these
that ought to be guided by your self, and to enquire the Law at your lips, if
in such a station, Caelo descending (...)
it is Gods Ordinance: and if they be in the state of inferiors, you will never
find sweet rest, till you have step^ over the style of that foolish question:
[What will they say of you] Make the Word of God your rule, according to the
best of light, and study to increase it; and that in fine will bring peace and
rest. He that is not Tattle-proof, if so far forth in the minority of his
wisdom and judgment.

Every man is allowed [judicium discretionis] his judgment of discerning upon
and above all the world, and ought to guide his own actions by the light of his
own conscience, and to walk by the candle of the Lord within his own Spirit,
conjoined with the light of Gods Holy Word. For according to that must he
answer at the great Tribunal, Prove. 20. 27.
and not for neglecting what some conceited Usurper would impose upon his
conscience. Follow the verdict of the honest Jury of the vicinage, your own
impartial thoughts sitting in the court of conscience, illuminated to the best
of your integrity and knowledge: But never make other men's dictates your laws.
For as Solomon says, every fool will be meddling, Prove. 20. 3.
and being full of words, his own lips at last will ensnare and swallow up
himself. Eccles. 10. 14. verse 12. 1 These. 4. 11,
Turn off such proud insulting spirits with a holy disdain, and chide them home
to look to their own affairs, to study quietness, and do their own business.
Mind them not, turn away thine ears from such viperine mouths, make them not
thy compass to steer by, either in Calms or Storms but let the holy Laws of God
be taken in hand. Psalm. 119. 24.
Let Moses, David, Paul and John, be thy Counselors. Turn the Bible, and
discourse with those Divine Lawyer s, ask counsel at their mouth, and give them
thy see of meditation, and they will advise thee better than Papinian or
Justinian; and if very difficult cases rise, consult God s holy Ministers that
are in being, they are the present lively Oracles of heaven, Job 33. 23.
his Interpreters, to whom he reveal s his secrets, their digests and pandects
will advise thee thoroughly, and let the Scriptures dwell richly in thee in all
utterance and wisdom. Col. 3. 16.


Thus shall thou gain and maintain peace with God and with Christ the Son of
God, set down in his last and blessed Legacy, to fortify thy heart, Jon. 14.
27.
and compass thee with adamantine armor against a foolish quarlelsome and
troublesome world: and mark such as walk disorderly, 2 These. 3. 6, 11.
and cause divisions and offenses in Churches contrary to sound doctrine, avoid
them and have no fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness; Romans 16.
17. Ephesians. 5. 11.
that are set on by Satan to undermine the peace and comfort of saints
communion: such sower and rough tempers, they live and dye undesired, and are
said in the dust as a bundle and burden of dung unlamented: but keep society
with such, in whose hearts the peace of God does rule, to render them both
humble and thankful.

These are the Jewels, wherein God delights (while others continue troublers of
Israel) the Excellent Ones upon Earth, with such keep thy choicest interviews:
till thou arrive by his safe conduct beyond both the stains of sin, 2 Chronicles.
21. 20. Jer. 16. 4.
and the pains of sorrow.

If then the blessed marks in the foregoing tract be found in thy heart and
life, for the main: Song 4. 16. 8. 14.
thou shall find thy grace to bloom and flourish in these mountain; of Spices,
and in due time thy beloved will come leaping over the fragrant hills, to thine
excceeding joy: which was presented in our Title page as the end and scope of
all these lines, and like a boiling spring will ascend higher and higher, till
it run over in the joy of full Assurance: which bubbles first out of a
believing heart, and runs in the current of a wellspent life, and flows into
the joy of a blessed death: and then your soul being persumed with the
odoriferous ointments and spices, wherewith Joseph honored our Lords Funerals:
John 19. 40.
shall lie down by his sacred side in the same fine linen, till the day dawns
to the joyful marriage of a holy soul; to a holy new raised body, and to the
joyful marriage of a holy Saint with a most holy Savior, the heavenly
Bridegroom of his Church: when all the promises shall be sanctified in
accomplishment and completely fulfilled in all their circumce s.

At this Resurrection Day the present joy of Faith [as Faith] shall end, Rev.
14. 2. Mat. 24. 11. 1 These. 4. 16,.
and welcome the joy of Vision: when the joyful Angels shall sound their
Empyraean trumpets, Mat. 13. 43,
and the twenty four Elders shall sing melodiously to their pleasant harps made
of the Algum trees of Paradise, the song of Moses, Heb. 2. 12.
and the song of the Lamb: when Christ himself shall sing in the midst of that
bright constellation of the Stars, those Sons of the Morning, in Zion above.
And when all the Saints, like Kings with golden Crown s on their head s, and
like Priests, with pure Linen Ephods on their shoulders, shall prophefie with
their instruments of Music before the Lord, (...) 6: 13:
sitting as King and Priest upon his Throne forever and ever. The^ ^he Saints
shall invent new instruments of Music like David, and shall dance before the
A^^ of the testimony in heaven, and sometimes Riding in Curule Chairs made of
the Cedar of the Caelestial Lebanon, shall wait upon his triumphal Chariot of
Cherubims thru' all the holy Mountains of the heavenly Canaan, 1 Chronicles: 28: 18:
(...) Psalm: 36: 8:
and shall at pleasure drink of those Rivers of Eden that slide in crystal
streams from under the threshold of the Throne of God.

Then shall all they who have here thirsted after the Righteousness of Christ,
be filled with it to the brim: and shall ever sing for Joy of heart; Isal: 65:
14.
since they are sweetly and fully arrived at that Eternal, and unspeakable
mercy,

The Joy of Faith in its Glorious Vision.

June, 11. 1685. Die Jovis, at Abbots Langly in Hartfordshire,
FINIS.
A Song of Praise to God.
To the honor of the Holy Trine
Which in the highest Heavens does shine:
And to the Lamb, who is set down
Upon his Glorious Princely Throne:
Who washed our Crimson Sins away
In His mo^^ precious Blood that day
When He did on the Cross sustain
The Fathers Wrath, our Shame and Pain
For such as Pant and trust his Grace
And wait to see his Orient Face:
He Will teach their hearts to sing His Love.
In the Celestial Quire above
Where Saints in Songs their Joys shall spend,
And Faith's bright Vision shall never end.
ERRATA.
Title line 11. read upon the Deity. page 1. line 14. for words read Word. p.
173. 1. 9. dele the period p. 180. Margin r. (...) p. 182. l. 19. dele the
period p. 203 (...) P. 212. l. 31. r. Galilaeo. p. 214. 1. 6. Socinus. l. 30.
r. serene. l. 31. r. shining. p. 217. l. 24. r. (...)


