God's PROMISE TO HIS Plantations;

2 SAMUEL 7. 10. Moreover I will appoint a place for my People Israel, and I will
PLANT them, that they may dwell in a place of their OWN, and MOVE NO MORE. As
it was Delivered in a SERMON By JOHN COTTON, B. D. and Preacher of God's Word
in Boston.

Psalm. 22. 27, 30, 31. All the ends of the World shall remember and turn unto
the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee.
A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a Generation.
They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a People that shall
be born, that he has done this.
London, Printed by William Jones for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at the
three Golden Lions by the Royal Exchange, 1634.

Reprinted at Boston in New England, by Samuel Green; and are to be sold by
John Usher. Anno. 1686.

To the Christian Reader.
ALthough no good Christian, or indeed ingenuous man, can do any thing less
than approve of such endeavors as arm at the glory of God, and a common good
especially when they are managed by a clear warrant from Gods Word. Yet for
ames and ends that men put to their actions being hidden in their hearts there
is no way to declare them but by an honest profession of them which is
sufficient where we are entertained but with that common charity one man is
bound to yield another; But for the grounds and rule an action is wrought by,
and the praise of it in that respect, there is another judgment than that of
charity to guide us by, namely, by proving it by the touch stone of Gods Word.

Now because many may either not know, or do not consider upon how full a
ground and warrant out of the Word of God that undertaking (which was the
occasion of this Sermon) has hitherto proceeded, I thought good (Courteous
Reader) leave being with some difficulty obtained of the Reverend Author to
present unto thy view and consideration that which may in part give thee
satisfaction in this particular.

Ere long (if God will) thou shall see a larger declaration of the first rise
and ends of this enterprise and so clear and full a justification of this
design both in respect of that warrant to has from Gods Word, and also in
respect of any other ground and circumstanco of weight that is considerable in
the warrant of such a work, as I hope there will easily be removed any scruple
of moment which hitherto hate been moved about it.

If thou have any doubts yet unresolved, rather be entreated (...) understand
from (...) may be the answer of them (...) to discourage any man by them; so
shall thou be a helper and a friend whereas otherwise it may be against thy
will thou ma^se be an enemy to a work (for ought thou yet know) God is the
Author of.

It is hoped; there is none but will find (...) to approve of the work and of
them that engage themselves in it: But especially they who any way at least by
silence (a seeming applause) approved the Plantations of Virginia, St.
Christophers, Bermudas, this having ends inferior to none of them, and men
(not to compare but to give due honor to all employed in such noble
enterprises, promising as much by their usefullness industry love to their
Country, piety, and other qualifications as those did.

It is enough they adventure that hazard their persons, families and estates
for that work which it may appear to thee ere long thou art bound as well as
they to further.

Now it were injurious if not impious, not only to deny the right and benefit
of thy prayers to such, but also to load them with causeless aspersions (though
but in thy thoughts) for that, for which thou have great cause to praise God
for them, who has stirred up their spirits to that which has been a main mean
of peopling the world, and is likely to be of propagating the Gospel. For the
furtherance of which work in the hands of those that sincerely intend it let as
fervent prayers pass from thee to the throne of grace for them as I am
confident, (thy occasions being made known unto them, would be put up from them
in thy behalf.

Thine J. H.

2 Samuel 7. 10. Moreover, I will Appoint a Place for my people Israel, and I
will PLANT them, that they may dwell in a place of their OWN, and MOVE NO MORE.
IN the beginning of this Chapter we read of David's purpose to build God an
House, who thereupon consulted with Nathan about it, one Prophet standing in
need of another help in such weighty matters Nathan incourageth the King unto
this work, verse 3. God the same night meets Nathan, and tells him a contrary
Purpose of His: wherein God refuses David's offer with some kind of earnest and
vehement dislike, verse 4. 5. Secondly, he refuses the reason of David's
offer, from his long silence. For four hundred years together he spoke of no
such thing unto any of the Tribes of Israel, saying, Why build you not me an
House, in the sixth and seventh verses.

Now lest David should be discouraged with this answer, the Lord bids Nathan to
shut up his Speech with words of encouragement; and so he removes his
discouragement two ways:

First, By recounting his former favors dispensed unto David. Secondly, By
promising the continuance of the like, or greater: and the rather because of
this purpose of his.

And five Blessings God promises unto David, and his, for his sake.

The first is in the 10 th Verse: I will appoint a place for my people Israel?

Secondly, Seeing it was in his heart to build Him an house, God would
therefore build him an house renowned for ever, verse 11.

Thirdly, That He would accept of an House from Solomon, verse 12.

Fourthly, He will be a Father to his Son, ver. 14, 15.

Fifthly, That He will establish the Throne of his House for ever.

In this 10 th verse is a double blessing promised:

1. The designment of a Place for his People.

2. A Plantation of them in that place, from whence is promised a threefold
blessing.

1. They shall dwell there like Freeholders, in a place of their own.

2. He promises them firm and durable possession; they shall move no more.

3. They shall have peaceable and quiet resting there; The sons of wickedness
shall afflict them no more: which is amplified by their former troubles; as
before time.

From the appointment of a place for them, which is the first blessing, you may
observe this Note;

The placing of a people in this or that Country, is from the Appointment of
the Lord
This is evident in the Text; and the Apostle speaks of it as grounded in
nature, Act. 17. 26. God has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of our habitation. Deuteronomy. 2 Chap, 5, 9. God would not have the Israelites
meddle with the Edomites, or the Moabites, because he had given them their Land
for a possession. God assigned out such a Land for such a Posterity, and for
such a time.

Quest. Wherein does this work of God stand in appointing a place for a people.

Answ. 1. When God espies or discovers a Land for a people, as in Ezekiel. 20. 6.
He brought them into a Land that he had espied for them: And that is when
either he gives them to discover it themselves, or hear of it discovered by
others, and fitting them.

2. After he has espied it, when he carries them along to it, so that they
plainly see a providence of God leading them from one Country to another: As
in Exodus 19. ^. You have seen How I have born you as on Eagles wings, and
brought you unto my self. So that though they met with many difficulties, yet
he carried them high above them all, like an Eagle, flying over Seas and Rocks,
and all hinderance s.

3. When he makes room for a People to dwell there, as in Psalm. 80. 9. Thou
preparedst room for them. When Isaac sojourned among the Philistims, he dug
one Well, and the Philistines strove for it, and he called it Esek; and he
dug another Well, and for that they strove also, therefore he called it
Sitnah: and he removed thence, and dug another Well, and for that they
strove not, and he called it Rehoboth, and said, For now the Lord has made
room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the Land. Now, no Esek, no Sitnah, no
quarrel or (...), but now he sits down in Rehoboth in a peaceable room.

Now God makes room for a People three ways.

1. When he casts out the Enemies of a people before them, by lawful War with
the Inhabitants which God calls them unto, as in Psalm. 44. 2. Thou did drive
out the Heathen before them. But this course of Warring against others, and
driving them out without provocation, depends upon special Commission from God;
or else it is not imitable.

2. When he gives a foreign People favor in the eyes of any native People to
come and sit down with them; either by way of purchase, as Abraham did obtain
the field of Machpelah: or else when they give it in courtesy, a s Pharaoh did
the Land of Goshen unto the Sons of Jacob.

3. When he makes a Country, though not altogether void of Inhabitants, yet
void in that place where they reside. Where there is a vacant place, there is
liberty for the Son of Adam or Noah to come and inhabit, though they neither
buy it, nor ask their leaves. Abraham and Isaac, when they This Sojourning was
a constant residence there, as in a Possession of their own; although it be
called Sojourning or Dwelling as Strangers; because they neither had the
sovereign Government of the whole Country in their own hand nor yet did
incorporate themselves into the Commonwealth of the Natives, to submit
themselves unto their Government.
Sojourned amongst the Philistims, they did not buy that Land to feed their
Cattle, because they said There is room enough. And so did Jacob pitch his Tent
by Sechem, Genesis 34. 21. There was room enough, as Hamor said, Let them sit down
amongst us. And in this case, if the people who were former Inhabitants did
disturb them in their possessions, they complained to the King, as of wrong
done unto them: As Abraham did because they took away his Well, in Genesis 21, 25.
For his Right whereto, he pleaded not his immediate calling from God (for that
would have seemed frivolous amongst the Heathen) but his own Industry and
ulture, in digging the Well, verse 30. Nor does the King reject his plea, with
What had he to do to dig Wells in their Soil? but admits it as a Principle
in Nature, That in a vacant Soil, he that takes possession of it, and
bestows culture and husbandry upon it, his Right it is. And the ground of
this is, from the Grand Charter given to Adam and his Posterity in Paradise,
Genesis 1. 28. Multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it. If therefore any
Son of Adam come, and find a place empty, he has liberty to come, and fill,
and subdue the Earth there. This Charter was renewed to Noah, Genesis 9. 1. Fulfill
the Earth and multiply: So that it is free, from that common Grant for any to
take possession of vacant Countries. Indeed no Nation is to drive out another
without special Commission from Heaven, such as the Israelites had; unless the
Natives do unjustly wrong them, and will not recompense the wrongs done in
peaceable sort, and then they may right themselves by lawful War, and subdue
the Country unto themselves.

This placing of people in this or that Country, is from God's Sovereignty
over all the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof: as in Psalm. 24. 1. The Earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. And in Jer. 10. 7. God is there called,
The King of Nations? and in Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Therefore it is meet he should
provide a place for all Nations to inhabit, and have all the Earth replenished.
Only in the Text here is meant some more special Appointment, because God
tells them it by his own mouth; he does not so with other people; he does not
tell the Children of Seir, that he has appointed a place for them. That is, He
gives them the Land by Promise. Others take the Land by his Providence, but
God's people take the Land by Promise: and therefore the Land of Canaan is
called a Land of Promise. Which they discern;

1. By discerning themselves to be in CHRIST, in whom all the Promises are Yea
and Amen.

2. By finding his holy Presence with them, to wit, when he plants them in the
holy Mountain of his Inheritance, Exodus 15. 17. And that is, when he gives
them the liberty, and purity of his Ordinances. It is a Land of Promise, where
they have provision for Soul as well as for Body. Ruth dwelt well for outward
respects while she dwelt in Moab; but when she comes to dwell in Israel, she
is said to come under the wings of God, Ruth 2. 12. When God wraps us in with
his Ordinances, and warms us with the life and power of them, as with wings,
there is a Land of Promise.

This may teach us all where we do now dwell, or where after we may dwell, Be
sure you look at every place appointed to you from the hand of God. We may not
rush into any place, and never say to God, By your leave; but we must discern
how God appoints us this place. There is poor comfort in sitting down in any
place, that you cannot say, This place is appointed me of God. Can thou say,
that God spied out this place for thee, and there has settled thee above all
hindrances? Did thou find that God made room for thee, either by lawful
Descent, or Purchase, or Gift, or other warrantable Right? Why then this is the
place God has appointed thee; here he has made room for thee, he has placed
thee in Rehoboth, in a peaceable Place.

This we must discern, or else we are but intruders upon God. And when we do
withal discern, that God gives us these outward Blessings from his Love in
Christ; and makes comfortable provision as well for our Souls as for our
Bodies, by the means of Grace: then do we enjoy our present possession, as well
by gracious Promise, as by the common and just, and bountiful providence of the
Lord. Or if a man do remove, he must see that God has espied out such a
Country for him.

2. Though there be many difficulties, yet he has given us hearts to overlook
them all, as if we were carried upon Eagles wings.

And 3. See God making room for us by some lawful means.

Quest. But how shall I know whither God has appointed me such a place? If I
be well where I am, what may warrant my Removal?

Ans. There be four or five good things, for procurement of any of which, I may
remove. Secondly, There be some evil things, for avoiding of any of which, we
may transplant our selves. Thirdly, If withal we find some special Providence
of God concurring in either of both concerning our selves, and applying general
grounds of removal to our personal estate.

1. We may remove for the gaining of Knowledge. Our Savior commends it in the
Queen of the South, that she came from the utmost parts of the Earth, to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, Mat. 12. 42. And surely, with him she might have
continued for the same end, if her personal Calling had not recalled her home.

2. Some remove and travail for Merchandise, and Gainsake; Daily Bread may be
sought from far, Prove. 31. 14. Yea, our Savior approves travail for
Merchants, Mat. 13. 45, 46. when he compares a Christian to a Merchant-man
seeking Pearls: For he never fetches a comparison from any unlawful thing, to
illustrate a thing lawful. The comparison from the unjust Steward, and from the
Thief in the night, is not taken from the injustice of the one, or the theft of
the other; but from the wisdom of the one, and the suddenness of the other;
which in themselves are not unlawful.

3. To Plant a Colony, that is a Company that agree together to remove out of
their own Country, and settle a City or Commonwealth elsewhere. Of such a
Colony we read in Acts 16. 12. which God blessed and prospered exceedingly, and
made it a glorious Church. Nature teaches Bees to do so. When as the hive is
too full, they seek abroad for new Dwelling s: So when the hive of the
Commonwealth is so full, that Tradesmen cannot live one by another, but eat up
one another, in this case it is lawful to remove,

4. God allows a man to remove, When he may employ his Talents and Gifts
better elsewhere; especially when where he is, he is not bound by any special
engagement. Thus God sent Joseph before to preserve the Church: Joseph's Wisdom
and Spirit was not fit for a Shepherd, but for a Counselor of State, and
therefore God sent him into Egypt. To whom much is given, of him God will
require the more? Luke 12. 48.

5. For the liberty of the Ordinances. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14, 15. When Jeroboam
made a defection from Judas, and set up golden Calves to worship, all that were
well affected, both Priests and People, sold their Possessions, and came to
Jerusalem for the Ordinances sake. This Case was of seasonable use to our
Fathers in the days of Queen Mary; who removed to France and Germany in the
beginning of her Reign, upon Proclamation of alteration of Religion, before any
Persecution began.

Secondly, There be Evils to be avoided, that may warrant Removal.

1. When some grievous sins overspread a Country, that threaten desolation.
Mich. 2. 6, to 11 verse: When the People say to them that prophecy, Prophecy
not; then verse 10 Arise then, this is not your rest. Which words, though they
be a threatening, not a Commandment; yet as in a threatening a wise man forefeeth
the Plague, so in the threatening he sees a Commandment, to hide himself from
it. This case might have been of seasonable use unto them of the Palatinate,
when they saw their orthodox Ministers banished; although themselves might for
a while enjoy liberty of Conscience.

2. If men be overburdened with Debts and Miseries, as David's followers were;
they may then retire out of the way (as they retired to David for safety) not
to defraud their Creditors (for God is an avenger of such things, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
6.) but to gain further opportunity to discharge their Debts, and to satisfy
their Creditors, 1 Samuel 22. 1, 2.

3. In case of Persecution, So did the Apostle in Acts 13. 46, 47.

Thirdly, As these general cases, where any of them do fall out, do warrant
removal in general: so there be some special Providence or particular Cases,
which may give warrant unto such or such a person to transplant himself, and
which apply the former general grounds to particular persons.

1. If Sovereign Authority command and encourage such Plantations, by giving
way to Subjects to transplant themselves, and set up a new Commonwealth. This
is a lawful and expedient case for such particular persons as be designed and
sent: Mat. 8, 9. and for such, as they who are sent have power to command.

2. When some special Providence of God leads a man unto such a course. This
may also single out particulars, Psalm. 32. 8, I will instruct, and guide thee
with my eye. As the Child knows the pleasure of his Father in his eye: so does
the child of God see Gods pleasure in the eye of his heavenly Father's
providence.

And this is done three ways:

1. If God gives a man an Inclination to this or that course: for that is the
spirit of man; and God is the Father of Spirits: Romans 1. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 16. 12.
Paul discerned his Calling to go to Rome, by his (...) his ready Inclination to
that Voyage; and Apollos his loathing to go to Corinth, Paul accepted as a just
reason of his refusal of a Calling to go thither. And this holds, when in a
man's Inclination to travail, his heart is set on no by-respects; as to see
Fashions, to deceive his Creditors, to fight Duels, or to live idly: these are
vain Inclinations. But if his heart be inclined upon right judgment to advance
the Gospel, to maintain his Family, to use his Talents fruitfully, or the like
good end; this Inclination is from God. As the beams of the Moon darting into
the Sea, leads it to and fro: so does a secret Inclination darted by God into
our hearts, lead and bow (as a byas) our whole course.

2. When God gives other men hearts to Call us, as the men of Macedon did Paul,
Come to us into Macedonia and help us. When we are invited by others who have a
good Calling to reside there, we may go with them; unless we be detained by
weightier occasions. One Member has interest in another, to call to it for
help, when it is not diverted to greater employment.

3. There is another providence of God concurring in both these, that is, When
a man's Calling and Person are free; and not tied by Parents, or Magistrates,
or other people that have interest in him. Or when, abroad he may do himself
and others more good, than he can do at home. Here is then an eye of God that
opens a door there, and sets him loose here; inclines his heart that way, and
outlooks all difficulties. When God makes room for them, no binding here, and
an open way there; in such a case God tells them, he will appoint a place for
them.

USE II.
This may teach us in every place where God appoints us to sit down, to
acknowledge Him as our Landlord. The Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof.
His are our Countries, our Towns, our Houses, and therefore let us acknowledge
Him in them all. The Apostle makes this use of it amongst the Athenians, Act.
17. 26, 27. He has appointed the times, and places of our habitation, that we
might seek and grope after the Lord. There is a threefold use that we are to
make of it, as it appears there; Let us seek after the Lord, Why? Because if
thou come into an House, thou will ask for the owner of it: And so if thou
come into a foreign Land, and there find an House and Land provided for
thee, will thou not enquire, Where is the Landlord? where is that God that gave
me this House and Land? He is missing and therefore seek after him.

2. Thou must feel after Him, grope after Him by such sensible things, strive
to attain the favor of your Landlord, and labor to be obedient to him that
has given you such a place.

3. You must labor to find him, in his Ordinances, in Prayer, and in Christian
Communion. These things I owe Him as my Landlord, and by these I find and enjoy
him. This use the very Pagans were to make of their several Plantations: And if
you knew him before, seek him yet more, and feel after him, till you find him
in his Ordinances, and in your Consciences.

USE: III:
When you have found God making way and room for you, and carrying you by his
providence unto any place, Learn to walk thankfully before him, defraud him not
of his Rent, but offer your selves unto his Service: Serve that God, and teach
your Children to serve Him that has appointed you and them the place of your
Habitation.

OBSERVATION II.
A People of God's Plantation shall enjoy their own place with Safety and Peace.
This is manifest in the Text: I will plant them, and what follows from thence?
They shall dwell in their own place: But how? Peaceably, They shall not be
moved any more. Then they shall dwell safely, then they shall live in peace.
The like Promise you read of in Psalm. 89. 21, 22. The Enemy shall not exact
upon them any more. And in Psalm. 92: 13. Those that be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. God's Plantation is a
flourishing Plantation, Amos. 9. 15.

Quest. What is it for God to plant a People?

Answ. 1. It is a Metaphor taken from young Imps: I will make them to take root
there; and that is, where they and their soil agree well together, when they
are well and sufficiently provided for, as a Plant sucks nourishment from the
soil that fitteth it.

2. When He causes them to grow as Plants do, in Psalm. 80. 8, 9, 10, 11. When
a man grows like a tree in tallness and strength, to more firmness and
eminency; then he may be said to be planted.

3. When God causes them to fructify, Psalm. 1. 5.

4. When he establishes them there, then he plants and roots not up.

But here is something more especial in this planting: for they were planted
before in this Land, and yet he promises here again, that he will plant them
in their Own Land: which does imply;

First, That whatever former good estate they had already, he would prosper it,
and increase it.

Secondly, God is said to plant a People more especially, when they become
Trees of Righteousness, Isai. 61. 3. That they may be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord. So that there is implied, not only a
continuance of their former good estate; but that he would make them a good
people, a choice generation: which he did, 1. By planting the Ordinances of God
amongst them in a more glorious manner, as he did in Solomon's time.

2. He would give his people a nail and a place in his Tabernacle, Isai. 56. 5.
And that is to give us part in Christ: for so the Temple typified. So then he
plants us, when he gives us root in Christ.

Thirdly, When he gives us to grow up in him as Calves in the Stall, Mal. 4. 2,
3.

Fourthly, And to bring forth much fruit, Joh. 15. 1, 2.

Fifthly, And to continue and abide in the state of Grace. This is to plant us
in his holy Sanctuary, he not rooting us up.

REASON.
This is taken from the kind Acceptance of David' s purpose to build God an
House. Because He saw it was done in the honesty of his heart, therefore He
promises to give his people a place wherein they should abide for ever, as in
a house of rest.

Secondly, It is taken from the Office God takes upon him, when He is our
Planter; He becomes our Husbandman: and if He plant us, who shall pluck us up?
Isai. 27. 1, 2. Job 34. 29. When he gives quiet, who can make trouble? If God
be the Gardener, who shall pluck up what He sets down? Every Plantation that He
has not Planted shall be plucked up, and what He has Planted shall surely be
established.

Thirdly, From the nature of the blessing he confers upon us: When he promises
to plant a People, their days shall be as the days of a Tree, Isai. 65. 22.
As the Oak is said to be an hundred years in growing, and an hundred years in
full strength, and an hundred years in decaying.

Quest. But it may be demanded, How was this promise fulfilled by the people,
seeing after this time they met with many Persecutions; at home and abroad:
many sons of wickedness afflicted them. Jeroboam was a son of wickedness, and
so was Ahab, and A^oz, and diverse others?

Ans. 1. Because after David's time they had more Setledness than before.

2. To the Godly these promises were fulfilled in Christ.

3. Though this promise was made, that others should not wrong them; yet it
follows not, but that they might wrong themselves, by trespassing against God,
and so expose themselves to affliction. Whilst they continued God's plantation,
they were a noble Vine, a right Seed: but if Israel will destroy themselves,
the fault is in themselves. And yet even in their Captivity, the good amongst
them, God graciously provided for: The Basket of good Figs God sent into the
land of Caldea for their good, Jer. 24. 5. But if you rebel against God, the
same God that planted you will also root you out again, for all the evil which
you shall do against your selves: Jer. 1^. 17. When the Israelites liked not
the soil grew weary of the Ordinances, and forsook the Worship of God, and
said, What part have we in David? after this, they never got so good a King,
nor any settled rest in the good land wherein God had planted them. As they
waxed weary of God, so He waxed weary of them, and cast them out of His sight.

USE I.
To Exhort all that are planted at home, or intend to plant abroad, to look
well to your plantation, as you desire that the sons of wickedness may not
afflict you at home, nor enemies abroad, look that you be right planted, and
then you need not to fear, you are safe enough: God has spoken it, I will
plant them, and they shall not be moved, neither shall the sons of wickedness
afflict them any more.

Quest. What course would you have us take?

Ans. Have special care that you ever have the Ordinances planted amongst you,
or else never look for security. As soon as God's Ordinances cease, your
Security cease likewise; but if God plant his Ordinances among you, fear not,
he will maintain them. Isai. 4. 5, 6. Upon all their glory there shall be a
defense; that is, upon all God's Ordinances: for so was the Ark called the
glory of Israel. 1 Samuel 4. 22.

Secondly, Have a care to be implanted into the Ordinances, that the word may
be ingrafted into you, and you into it: If you take rooting in the Ordinances,
grow up thereby, bring forth much fruit, continue and abide therein, then you
are a vineyard of red Wine, and the Lord will keep you, Isai. 27. 2, 3. that no
sons of violence shall destroy you. Look into all the Stories; whether divine
or humane, and you shall never find that God ever rooted out, a People that had
the Ordinances planted amongst them, and themselves planted into the
Ordinances. Never did God suffer such Plants to be plucked up. On all their
glory shall be a defense.

3. Be not unmindful of our Jerusalem at home; whither you leave us, or stay at
home with us. Oh pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
her, Psalm. 122. 6. They shall all be confounded and turned back that hate Sion,
Psalm. 129. 5. As God continues his presence with us (blessed be his Name) so
be ye present in spirit with us, though absent in body: Forget not the womb
that bare you, and the breast that gave you suck. Even Ducklings hatched under
a Hen; though they take the water, yet will still have recourse to the wing
that hatched them; how much more should Chickens of the same feather and yolk?
In the amity and unity of Brethren, the Lord has not only promised, but
commanded a Blessing, even Life for ever more, Psalm. 133. 1, 2.

4. Go forth, every man that goes, with a public spirit, looking not on your
own things only, but also on the things of others: Phil. 2. 4. This care of
universal helpfulness, was the prosperity of the first Plantation of the
Primitive Church, Act. 4. 32.

5. Have a tender care that you look well to the Plants that spring from you,
that is, to your Children; that they do not degenerate, as the Israelites did;
after which they were vexed with afflictions on every hand. How came this to
pass? Jer. 2. 21. I planted them a noble Vine, wholly a right seed, how then
art thou degenerate into a strange Vine before me? Your Ancestors were of a
noble divine Spirit; but if they suffer their Children to degenerate, to take
loose courses, then God will surely pluck you up Otherwise, if men have a care
to propagate the Ordinances and Religion to their Children after them, God will
plant them, and not root them up. For want of this, the seed of the repenting
Ninevites was rooted out.

6. and lastly, OFFEND NOT THE POOR NATIVES; but as you partake in their Land,
so make them partakers of your precious Faith: as you reap their Temporals, so
feed them with your Spirituals. Win them to the love of Christ, for whom Christ
died. They never yet refused the Gospel, and therefore (...) they will now
receive it. Who knows whether God have reared this whole Plantation for such
an end?

USE II.
For Consolation to them that are planted by God in any place; that find
rooting and establishing from God, this is a cause of much encouragement unto
you, that what He has planted, He will maintain. Every Plantation his right
Hand has not planted, shall be rooted up; but His Own Plantation shall prosper
and flourish.

When he promises peace and safety, what Enemy shall be able to make the
promise of God of no effect? Neglect not Walls, and Bulwarks, and
Fortifications for your own defense; but ever let the Name of the Lord be your
strong Tower; and the word of His Promise the Rock of your Refuge. His Word
that made Heaven and Earth will not fail, till heaven and Earth be no more, Amen

FINIS.
April 23. 1686.
THere is now in the Press, and will shortly come out, a short Treatise
advising To buy the Truth and not to sell: Preached in the Lecture at Boston,
by the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard; And are to be Sold by Joseph Brunning at
the corner of the Prison Lane next the Townhouse.


