A GUIDE to HEAVEN From the WORD: OR, GOOD COUNSEL How to close savingly with
Christ.

Short but Serious Questions to ask our ^^arts every Morning and Evening,
whe^^^^r we walk closely with him.

Especially, Rules for the strict and due Observation of the ^ORD'S DAY.

Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. Printed by Samuel Green, 1689.

A Guide to Heaven from the WORD, or Good Counsel how to Close savingly with
Christ.
Twelve Rules to prepare you for closing with Christ.
WOrk your hearts unto a through and unfeigned belief of the Arti^^^^ of ^^ur
Faith: Believe certainly and firm^^^ (...) the least doubt, that there is a
great (...) glorious God, that Jesus Chris is his only (...) the alone Savior:
tha^ the Bible is (...) Word of God, that un^^^btedly there (...) a place as
Heaven and (...), Heb. 11.6.

2. Really believe that you carry within your (...) precious and immortal
Souls; which (...) be a^i^dge, by this God to one of those (...) places there
to be for ever and ever, Mat. ^^.26. etc.

3. Assure your selves that the last Sentence (...) he past according to your
well or ill beha^^^^ your selves in this life. Every man shall rewarded
according to his works, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. Mat. 3 10, 11. Eccles. 8. 11, 12, 13.

4. (...) upon it, that it is very difficult to come to that Heaven, and that
the way to (...) is broad and easy. Remember still you have deceitful hearts
within you, a wicked Devil nigh you, and snares: (...) and before you, Mat, 7.
1 (...)

Say my time is short, my (...) my strength is small.

5. Certainly believe it, ^

6. (...) How (...) though out of a poor (...) a glorious Palace^ Out (...)
dangers into an^ haven o^ Peace, Rest and Plenty or can all the Riches, Honors
and Pleasure here make a man going to that Hell happy: What a terrible Hell
will Hell be to great ones, that have (...) all their days in pleasure! it is
much to change a Palace for the dark silent Grave! Jewels and Deckings for
Worms and rottenness. But what is it to have sweet singings turned into bitter
howlings? ^^eckt and glittering rooms, pleasant Walks, (...) Attire, (...) Fare
into dark Dungeons, unquenchable (...) of Fire and Brimstone? Mal. 3. 15 to 18.
^uk. 12. 16, to 21.

7. Seriously think, I may get to (...) ^eaven, and avoid the fearful Plagues
(...) of Hell. If I shall come to glory, what a God shall I enjoy for ever and
ever? Into what blessed Arms and Bosom shall I cast my Soul? and if I should
go to hell at last, (...) I ^ear up under the weight of Gods Venge^^^ (...)?
well, yet there is hope, Gods heart, the door of Grace, and the Gate of Heaven
yet (...) open. How would the damned in H^ll (...) thousands of Worlds (if they
had them) (...) may be! Heaven, Grace, and Christ are offered, and dare I
refuse all? can I venture the loss of Soul and Body for ever and ever? Heb
13.31.

8. If I miss of Glory, it will be my own fault my damnation will lie at my own
door: God can clear himself of my blood; his proffers of Grace are free and
frequent, earnest and real; and shall I murder my own Soul? Ezekiel. 18. 32. Joh.
5.40. It may be written over my Grave, Here is one that destroyed himself, that
would go to Hell through mercies, judgments and warnings.

9. Debate the case with your soul solemnly, what is there in sin, that I so
much dote on? what are my greatest designs and projects in the (...) of
happiness our (...) I get the Houses, (...) at; and if (...) Certainly
conclude, (...) wile unto (...) work it out with (...) it, Pro. 3. 13, 14, etc.
(...) your hearts, (...) your hearts sound (...) have (...) the (...) is sound,
(...) reforming? Am I (...) set Ston-ward, (...)

(...) black, and hellish, (...) I seen it in the glass (...) but in Christ's
blood, exceeding and above measure sinful? To.7.13

2. Do I see in Jesus Christ a beauty and excellency, a fullness and
alsufficiency? is he the chiefest of ten thousands, altogether lovely in mine
eye? can I say, Oh thousands of gold (if I had it) (...) an Interest in
Christ's Blood, and cleansing, healing, peace speaking-blood: None but Christ:
All is but dung, that I may win him, Phil 3.7,8.

11. Take it for granted, that there is no Name under Heaven whereby you can be
saved, but Jesus Christ. (...) life, and that to come (...) the channel of
Christ (...) 4.10,11,12. Say, by (...) and hardened Gods he (...) my self open
to all (...) in the Bible! (...) and if I could bring (...) all my friends, the
(...) riches of all the (...) make up this woeful (...) do it.

12. Believe it, that save such as we that (...) only able but willing (...)
grace. What (...) bosom, put (...) glory, but love to (...) drink the (...)
make such loud calls, (...) be rejected and wait, (...) long, but love to
sinners, John 6. 35, 37. It Was love to Soul made him give up his body to be
broken, that precious box of Ointment, which fills both Heaven and Earth with
its sweet savor and pleasant perfumes. Having thoroughly weighed and believed
these foregoing propositions: then come to Christ these thirteen ways.

Directions how to close with Christ.
1. COme to Christ, a poor, lost, and undone Wretch, hopeless and helpless? as
to an only, able, and merciful Savior. Cry out as one sinking under the Waves
and boisterous Tempests of sin, Master, save, or else I perish, If thou will,
thou can, Heb. 7. 25. fa^^ with Thomas, My Lord, and my God, my Christ, and
my Savior (...) put the hand of thy Faith into Christ's pierced and bleeding
sides, Joh. 20, 27, 28. Say as they, Joh. 6. 68. Whither should I go but unto
^^ch a Savior? thou have eternal life. Thou (...) help me out of the deep and
miery ditch (...) sins, and over the fiery and fearful gulf of Gods wrath, and
can bring m^ into the blessed presence, yea, into the graciou^ arms, bosom,
and embraces of the God of glory. I stretch out the weak arms of my Faith to
thee: O stretch out the strong arm of the power and mercy, and come and save me.

2. Come as an humble, broken, and relenting sinner to an offended Majesty.
Come trembling with tears in your eyes, and deep sorrow in your heart. Come as
one vile in the sight of God, your self men and Angels. As the poor Publican,
not worthy to look up to heaven, smite (...) thy wicked heart. As the Centurion
say, I am not worthy thou should come under the roof of my heart. As the
Prodigal, I have sinned against Heaven, and am not worthy to be an hired
Servant. Yet there is mercy enough in my Fathers heart, and thy merits, Isai.
9.1. I have let (...) many poisonous Bullets, and bitter arrows of Sin against
thee; I have by sin fetched (as it were) blood from thy precious heart afresh,
though it ran so freely and abundantly for my (...); but now a sight thy
pierced side breaks my heart with sobs and sighs. My sins are row as so many
pricks in my side, thorns at my heart, and ropes about my neck.

3. Come as a filthy, polluted, loathsome Creature, to a cleansing Fountain of
Grace: Lazarus in all his sores, or Joh on the Dung hill with his s^abs and
botches, were not so filthy and abominable in the eye of man, as I am through
the running sores and plagues of my heart and life, in the sight of an holy and
pure God. I am more vile then the Toad, then the thinking Carrion in the Ditch.
How does this (...) stream through every duty and mercy, I stop the filthiness
of sin wherever I go. Oh wash, cleanse and purify me in thy blood, Joh. ^5.
16, 42. Unclean, unclean. Thy body was broken to let out thy blood for my sake,
and shall not my heart be broken to let out the filth and gore of my sin?

4. Come as a bond-slave, drudge, and Vassal to Christ as to a Redeemer
complain of the Devils cruel usage, and sins tyrannizing: Say, Lord, thou have
paid a price sufficient: Thou have redeemed me by thy precious blood, that is
more worth then ten thousand Worlds. Knock off these iron Fetters, rescue me
out of this hellish Dungeon of sin. I have no command of my head, or heart, of
my tongue or passions. How do lusts domineer! Luke 4. 18. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Romans
12. 13, 24. Here I lie staked down to the Earth by a carnal heart.

5. Come as a sin sick Soul to Christ, as to the only able Physician. As sick
persons crying out of an aching head, or griping bowels: So complain, Oh the
plague of an hard heart! the galls and gripes of a wounded conscience! the
wounds and stabs I have given my Soul by sin (...) Here I am sick to the very
heart, fainting and perishing, Oh a drop of thy blood, that is a cordial
indeed, the sovereign Balm of Gilead. These many years, yea, all my life have I
been diseased with the bloody issue of sin, and all others are Physicians of no
value; but if I may but touch the hem of thy righteous garment, I shall be
whole, Mat. 9. 20, 21, 22. I come to thee with mine Ulcers and Imposthumes to
be lanched, that the rotten members of my body of sin may be cut off.

6. Come weary and heavy laden with your sins to Christ for rest and ease, Mat.
11. 28, 29. Good Paul groaning under the weight of sin, makes many heavy heart
burning complaints, Romans 7. 18, 19, 24. but yet in ver. 25. he triumphs in
Christ: Holy David, restless and disquiet ^oars under sin, Psalm. 38. 1, to 9.
Those sins that were as jewels in your eye, yea, as your right and or eye, are
they now as Millstones and hands to your Soul.

7. Come as a poor, needy, and naked creature to Christ, as the poor to the
rich Man's door (...) Alms. Come quite stripped naked of your own righteousness,
Rev. 3. 17, 18. cry out of our spiritual Poverty, Lord, not one penny of race
to help my self. Never a poorer wretch (...) to t^^ee for mercy; Grace I want,
if I pe^^ it shall be at thy feet, begging and praying, will not be thrust away
from thy door, behold ^ant of Faith, Patience, Love, etc. Not able (...) think
or speak, to do, or suffer. Oh let the ^eet gales of thy Spirit bring thy rich
promises ^aught with incomparable grace and comfort, to ^lade their heavenly
treasure into my bosom, Give me the Key of Faith, that I may unlock thy rich
Storehouse, and fetch what I want.

8. Come as an hunger stary'd Soul for bread of life, thirsting and panting for
Soul refreshing grace, Isai. 55. Beg, cry out, Bread, Bread. In some Countries
through great want they cry, give, and cut me, (holding out their arm) give and
kill me. Cry, give Lord, and strike me, give me heavenly food, and do what thou will with me: Say Lord, if but as a Dog, I may receive crumbs that fall from
thy full table of Grace. Thirst and behold in every bleeding deep wound of
Christ a fountain of rich flowing mercy. Each heavenly promise steept in that
sweet blood of Christ by Faith can afford a full satisfying meal of joy and
comfort to thy pining hunger bitten soul. Apply the lips of thy Faith to these
full breasts, to those over, overflowing wells of Salvation. Say, Lord open
those precious (...) of Ointment, and sprinkle them on my dead, barren,
parched, thirsty heart. May I have but bread, but a (...) will be as a
refreshing Cordial; how (...) will a feast of fat things be, wine on the (...)

9. Come as a foolish ignorant, and (...) Scholar to Christ, as to a great
(...) School master. Say, Lord, it is (...) teach me, or I shall never learn: I
(...) understand, but thou can and do (...) people to profit: Lord, that I
may receive my spiritual eyesight: Thou have many an heavenly Lesson to teach,
as Faith, Patience, Self denial, etc. I am come to be thy Disciple, I have
along time been under the teachings of thy Spirit. Thou art meek and not harsh,
Mat. 11.29

10. Come as an unskilful, trembling Soldier, as a weak David struggling with
Bears, (...), and Goliath, with Principalities and Powers. Come to Christ as the
Captain of your Salvation; say, Lord, it is thou must teach my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight. It is thou must fight my Battles for me, or I shall
fall by the hands of these strong and towering Lusts. What batteries, ^^faults,
and storms does Sa^^^^raise against my soul! Heb. 2. 10. Ephesians. 6. 12.

11. Come as a condemned Malefactor and (...) Prisoner to Christ, as to your
Advocate and ^^tercessour: lay open your bad Cause and sad estate.

(...) Your crimes are great and fearful, horrid ^reason, and that against the
highest Majesty. 2. Your accusers and adversaries many, subtle, ^^ligent and
cruel. The Devil, your own heart and acquaintance can bring in black bills
against ^ou. 3. The Law of God condemns you, and your doom is dreadful. 4. The
great God ^our judge, is highly incensed, afronted and dishonored. Now apply
your self to Jesus Christ, who has undertook as bad causes: say, Lord, stand
between the flaming fire, and revenging sword of Gods wrath and my poor Soul, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

12. Come as a willing Servant to a good Mister, as a loyal Subject to your
only Lord and Sovereign, to obey, honor and love him above all others, and
that to the death, say, here I am, what will thou have me to do? Here is my
head to know thee, my heart to love thee, my tongue to praise thee, mine ears
to hear thy voice, and mine hands and feet to do thy will. Other Lords besides
thee have ruled over me. But thou art my only Savior and Prince, Act. 5. 30,
31. Heb. 5 9* I dislike none of thy commands, they are righteous good and
reasonable, but I find fault with mine own wretched heart, that I can no more
heartily love, and readily obey them. Say, thy work is as Adam's was in
Paradise, a pleasure and not a toil; as the Be laboring, sucks honey and
sweetness, 1 John 5.8. What sweet, soul ravishing work will my heart make of
praying, hearing, and meditation etc. when thou streamest forth thy graces,
these blessed silver drops of heaven into every vein of my Soul.

13. Come as a poor worthless Spouse to Christ, as to an honorable and
glorious Husband, come both for thy Wedding Garment and matchless portion. Come
as Abigail to David, 1 Samuel 25. 41, 42. Say Lord, here I am meanly, yea, vilely
descended, by sin a child of Satan and thou art the Lord from Heaven. Enoble me
with thy grace, which is divine and heavenly blood, far above the heroical
blood of Ancestors. Here I am ragged, decrepit, and deformed through sin: cover
my filth and nakedness with thy white, spotless Garment, that my shame appear
not. What is plaiting the hair, decking a filthy flimy carcass, to the adorning
the Soul with invaluable grace! Every grace of thine is a rich Diamond, a
Pearl, yea far above. The soul filled with God, is a little Heaven on Earth;
and these graces are the bespangling Stars and glittering Lamps thereof. Read
that notable Description, Ezekiel. 16. 3. to

14. These rich Ornaments, this Crown not of gold but of grace and glory, none
but Christ's Bride wears. Every morning set your self solemnly as in the
presence of God Omniscient, and charge your heart to give in a true answer to
these enquiries, as it will account for these, and many other things at the day
of Judgment before all the World.

Serious Questions to put to our Souls every Morning.
Quest. 1. H ow did I lie down and rise up? was God in my thoughts? and if so,
were the thoughts of him sweet and precious to my Soul, Psalm. 139 2, 3, 4. and
92. 1, 2.

2. In what frame is my heart at present? do I admire Gods goodness for the
last nights sleep, for adding more time to my life: and am I heartily thankful,
Prove. 3. 24.

3. Can I really commit all my affairs to God this day, to be guided by his
Counsel, protected and provided for by his care, and to be willing to be at his
dispose? Mat. 5. 25. etc. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Psa. 37. 4.

4. Am I resolved to speak for God and his glory, whatever it cost me? in the
strength of Christ I will not be terrified from, be ashamed of, or grow weary
in well doing? Mark 8. 38.

5. Am I a Child of God, an Heir of Glory? or a slave to sin, and a child of
Satan? if I am Gods child, must I not wear the glorious garment of Christ's
Righteousness, that royal, sparkling Livery of Heaven? if an heir of Heaven,
should I not cast off the Rags of Corruption, and take heed of defiling my self
with the mire of sin? Deu. 5. 32 Judge. 23. What should I do more then others,
Mat. 5. 47.

6. Who is the greatest deceiver? if my heart, let me not trust, but watch over
it all this day; wherein are the greatest dangers, the most horrid and ^^ful
mistakes? if about men's Souls, let me venture the loss of all rather then of my
precious never dying Soul, Jer. 17. 3. 13.

7. What are mine implacable, potent, and Soulruining Enemies, but the Flesh,
the Devil and the World? let me not pamper the one, hearken to the second, or
idolize the third; let me beware of them, watch and be sober, Romans 8. 8. etc.
Gal. 5. 17. 19. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Jam. 4. 4. 1 John 2. 15.

8. Who is and can be my best Friend, but God? let me take care in all things
to please him, fear of provoking him. Let me love him with all my heart, obey
him with all my might, and honor him throughout all the day, Psalm. 144. 15.

9. Wherein is the greatest vanity and vexation but in the world? Let me then
slight, and not admire and adore it. What is the sure gain and most lasting
good? Certainly Godliness, let me then prize, press after, and live in it,
Eccles. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Chap. 6. 6, 7.

10. What is my heavenly work, but to run a race, fight a good fight, strive
and wrestle? Can this be without care, diligence and watchfulness? 1 Cor. 9.
24. O that a vein of Religion might run through all I do this day!

11. Whose eyes will be upon me all this day to observe head and heart, lip and
life? will not God's the judge of all the Earth? and dare I sin in his
presen^^? dare I so highly affront him to his face? Heh, 4. 1^, Genesis 39 9.

12. If I should spend this day in vanity, sin and idleness, will it not be
bitterness and sorrow at night? if I spend it holily and profitably, shall I
not pray with more confidence, and lie down with the more peace? will not the
testimony of a good Conscience be ground of great rejoicing? Psalm. ^^, 7, 8. 2
Cor. 1. 12.

13. How would I have this day represented at the great day of Judgment? what
words, thoughts and actions, would I have then brought forth? let wine be such;
for certainly all must then be laid open, 2 Timothy 6. 11, 12, 17, 18, 19. Eccl.
11. 8.

14. How may I this day order my secular business, with most wisdom and
honesty, and for my greater advantage? Psalm. 1. 12, 5,

15. Am I fit now to pour out my self to God in Prayer? can I first and
chiefest seek the Kingdom of God? Mat. 6. 33. Psalm 52. 3.

Separate your self every evening from all Company, and ask your heart these
Questions: And wherein you have been guilty, be heartily sorrowful, and beg
pardon: and wherein God has enabled you to be in any measure faithful, bless
God and be thankful.

Every Evening ask these Questions?
1. WHat have I done this day for God and his glory? what can I look back upon
with comfort, Mic 6.8.

2. In what frame has mine heart been all this day? what have I desired most,
heavenly or earthly things? has my joy been more in God, and hope of glory,
then in riches, honors, etc? was my grief most for sin, or for ^roubles? what
have I sucked comfort from and ^ived upon; creatures the Cistern, or God the
Fountain? Jer. 2. 12, 13. Heb. 3. 17, 18.

3. What were my aims and ends, in what I went about? have I been sincere and
exercised (...) good conscience toward God and Men? did (...) eat and drink,
pray and discourse with an eye to Gods glory, or rather did self fit uppermost
in all? 1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 Pet. 4, ii.

4. What spiritual duties have I performed this day? did I regard the manner as
well as the matter? out of conscience did I do them, and not out of custom?
did I pray fervently, read with care and observation, meditate so seriously as
thoroughly to aff^ct the heart? Romans 12. 11. (...) Tim. 5. 13. Prove 10. 4. 1
These. 4. 11.

6. What have been my company this day? what good have I done to them, or
received from them? did I reprove, exhort, strengthen, encourage, comfort, or
warn, as occasion was given, and need required? Col. 4. 9. Heb. 10. 24, 25.

7. How have I born the troubles and crosses of the day? did I not murmr,
vex, nor sink? did I not entertain hard thoughts of, nor utter rash words
against God? Phil. 4: 11, 12.

8. What were my Temptations this day, and what my sins? was I not easily drawn
into sin? little overawed or restrained by Gods all seeing eye, merciful
heart, or revenging hand? was I not soon proud, angry, etc. did I not long
continue in it, and have I yet thoroughly repented of it? what conviction, or
mercy, or warning did I sin against, Isai. 5. 9. 12, 13. Jer. 1. 6.

9. What were my mercies this day, and how was my heart under them? was I
affected with Gods goodness, and unfeignedly thanful, and therefore cheerfully
fruitful in good works? Have I prized my health, friends and estates, etc. Ephesians.
5. 20.

10. What have I learnt this day? what more heart affection knowledge have I
got of God and his glory, of my self and my sins: of this world and that to
come? Phil. 1. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Col. 1. 9, 10.

11. What of Gods Word have I remembered (...) read, repeated, or heard this
day? was any Scripture sweet and good to my Soul? What promise did I by Faith
make mine own? what particular comfort did in any thing sway and rule me, 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17.

12. What graces have I especially exercised? have I lived by Faith, loved God
with all my heart and soul? denied my self in any thing dear to me for God? 2
Pet. 1.6.

13. Have I this day lived upon, loved honored and reverenced God the Father,
as my Sun, Shield and Portion? have I this day prized, owned, and made use of
Christ as my Savior, Intercessour and Friend; as my Root, Head and Husband?
has the Holy Ghost been to me a director or comforter, a qu^ckner or
confirmer? have I cherished and not quenched its motions? Psalm.84. 11.

14. Have I been affected with the evils of sin or misery of others, of Nation,
Parish and Family, of Friends or Foes? have I had a pitiful heart, or bountiful
hand to any in want? Psalm. 119. 106. Jam.2.15,16.

15. Have I shown more especial love and pity to those that are of the household
of Faith? how have I honored those that fear the Lord? Psalm. 15. 4. and 16 3.
Has a godly Job or Lazarus, though in rags and sores, been unto me as an
orient Pearl on a Dung hill? have I not valued men more according to greatness
then goodness? Gal. 6. 10.

16. Did the Church of God and interest of Christ^ly near my heart this day,
have I heartily prayed for the welfare of Sion? and mourned when its songs are
turned into lamentation, and its glory into desolation? Do I prefer Jerusalem
above my chief joy? Jer. 19.1,

17. Can my Family witness that I have done any good for or to them? can those
that best know me, speak best for me? have I been good as Husband or Wife?
Psalm. 102. 2. etc. as Parent or Child, as Master or Servant, Ephesians. 6. 25. etc.

18. Have I wronged no man in his Estate, by overreaching him; in his Name by
slandering, or back biting, 1 These. 4. 6. in his Soul or body, by letting him
fall into, or live in any sin or trouble, have I done to others, as I would
they should do to me? Mat. 7. 12.

19. Have I for given mine Enemies, rejoiced at others mercies, and not envied
any ones honor, riches or friends and coveted them? Luke 6 27, to 35. Mat, 6.
12, 14, 15.

20. Am I of a quiet, peaceable Spirit? have I not quarrelled and contended
with my Neighbors? or do I make up breaches, and follow peace with all men
(...) do I honor the King, and obey Governors for conscience sake, Romans 12.
18. etc 13. ^.

21. Has my clothing been suitable to my place and station? has my carriage
been so^^^, discreet and serious? have I not been vain ^^anton, nor frothy in
my discourse or Spirit? (...) Pit. 3,3,4. Tit. 2.1, etc.

22. Have I scorned and contemned the glory of the world, accounting it but
dirt for Grace and dross for Christ? 1 John 5. 4. 5.

23. Have I really set death before me? My life is as a vapor a shadow? if I
should die daily what a preparation have I made for it? am I sure, but this is
my last night? If God should ^hut mine eyes by death how is it like to be with
my Soul? dare I lie down with the guilt or filth of any one sin? is there any
returning from the Cor. 15.54, etc. Prove.27.1.

23. Can I tell how great the day of Judgment will be? how glorious and
terrible? and ^are I meet Christ coming in flaming fire, with (...) thousand of
my sins to take vengeance? can hold up my head? are my graces sound, and of the
right kind? All is not gold that glisters. Have I this day searched, judged and
condemned my self, 1 Cor. 11. 31. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. ^9, 10.

25. Do I believe Hell torments dreadful and eternal: Its flames unspeakable
scorching? (...) misery endless and easeless? and do I not fly from this wrath
to come? Rev. 14. 10, 11.

26. Have I ascended in the triumphant Chariot of Faith this day, and beheld
the new Jerusalem, Gods glorious Palace? did I live, love, think, talk as an
Heir of this Kingdom, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.

27. Have I not in all I have done, minded man more then God? have I not minded
only the cleansing the out side? Ephesians. 6. 5, 6.

28. Dare I lie down this night without praying ear nestly to God for the
pardon of my sins, the blessings of the night, and the salvation of my Soul.

Directions for the strict Observation of the LORDS DAY.
For Preparation.
1. ORder all your week business so wisely before hand, that you may have no
unnecessary work on Gods day; that your hands may be as free as possible from
worldly work, and your head from worldly cares and thoughts, Exodus 20. 8, 9,
10, 11.

2. Think seriously what a weighty work am I going about! my week affairs are
but Toy^ and Trifles to this. What are Sheep and Oxen, or Shops, to Grace,
Christ, or Heaven? Can I be too careful and serious in Gods work, in Soul
salvation work? Surely no. How holy should my thoughts be, how heavenly my
dis^ourse, how earnest my endeavors all the day ^ong, Isai. 58. 13, 14.

3. Therefore prepare with all your might, ^^arch your hearts and lives, 1 Chronicles. 29. 1, 2.

1. Find out what your sins are, to confess, ^ourn over, and pray against, Lam.
3. 20.

2. What the mercies are you want for Soul or Body, for your Friends, Families,
and Nation; account this day a Market day for your Souls, Rev. 3. 17, 18.

3. What blessings received, and what thanks to be returned, Psalm. 116. 12.

4. Think with your self, what good did I get by former, yea by the last
Sabbath? was my heart then broken or warmed with love to God, and the like?
what did I then learn, and how have I practiced it in the week? have (...)
fully digested by meditation, firmly believed, and faithfully obeyed the truths
that were last taught me? Isai. 1. 11. etc.

5. Beg earnestly of God that he would help you to sanctify a Sabbath, that
this may be the best Sabbath you ever kept; that your (...) may be more tender,
humble and heavenly (...) that the outgoings of thy soul may be (...) free,
strong and fixed, and the incomes of he^venly grace and comfort more abundant;
the God may reap more glory, and you receiving more good than ever heretofore.
That the holy keeping of this Sabbath, may be an earnest to you of keeping a
never ending Sabbath with God in glory.

To this end pray especially for these 4 things.

1. That God may prepare a suitable word for your Soul, that the Ministers
mouth may be opened, and his heart enlarged, and his message full of goodness;
that it may be the pure, plain, and powerful Word of God. Ephesians. 6. 18, 19.

2. That God would fill his own Ordinances with his own presence and blessing:
that he would touch your heart, when man speaks to the ear; drop, yea stream
down heavenly grace through these Conduit pipes, Isai. 48. 17. Luke 16. 14.

3. That you may have the hearing Ear, the seeing Eye, and the understanding
Heart; that you may be teachable, willing to learn, and apt to receive what God
delivers, Jam. 1. 21, 22. Psalm. 110 3.

4. That your Souls Enemies may be kept off, at least resisted and kept down.
That your hearts may not deceive you, the Devil divert you, nor the world
distract or disturb you.

Having thus in some measure prepared your hearts for the solemn work of this
great day; observe and practice these following directions, as ever you hope to
have the blessing of the Sabbath.

As soon as you awake fix your hearts (...) heaven ward; bless God that you see
(...) of one day more, especially Gods day; (...) in you may labor to have
your sins (...) and purged, and your Souls furnished with (...), and to fitted
for glory. Call the (...) our delight, Psalm. 118. 23, 24. Psalm. 59. 16. (...)
Beg heartily of God, that he would (...) then you by his grace, to do what he
(...), as he would have it done, that he would (...) your unpreparedness, bear
with your (...), accept of your poor services, and (...) all with his blessing,
2 Chr. 30. 18, 19, 20. That you be fitted for the holy and (...) work of the
day; affect your heart with (...) all the these ten following things:

1. With the Majesty of that God, whom you (...) wait upon, Psalm. 95. 2, 3. etc.

2. With the vileness of sin, and of your (...) because of sin.

3. With the sweetness of Christ, and the (...) of his love and mercy.

4. With the excellency of that heavenly (...) you are going about, and the
gain of (...).

5. With the vanity of the World and all (...) therein.

6. With the worth and high value of your (...) Souls.

7. With the rage, subtilty, and diligence (...) your souls Enemies.

8. Especially with the deceitfulness of you^ own hearts.

9. With the terror and torment of Hell.

10. With the unspeakable and everlasting glory of Heaven.

4. Carefully and conscientiously perform Family Duties, Josh. 24. 15.

1. See that your Servants, and Children (...) age, wast not away the morning
in sleep or idleness.

2. Cause them to join together in Prayer Reading, or any other godly Exercise,
Genesis 18. 19.

3. If you have time, you may Catechife them, or discourse to them of any of
those former ten things, Deuteronomy. 6, 6, 7.

1. Inform your selves and them, what a great and glorious Majesty and Master
you are to serve, Mal. l. 14.

2. What a blessed and heavenly work you go about, that it is heart-work, Joh.
4. 24. and therefore hard and difficult work, and yet that it is pleasant and
excellent, Prove. 3. 17. Chap. 8 34, 35. Oh the fatness of Gods house and the
beauty of holiness!

3. What an abundant and unspeakable (...) ward at tends the well-doing, even
life everlasting


