The Present State of New England.

Considered in a DISCOURSE On the Necessities and Advantages of a Public Spirit
In every MAN; Especially, At such a time as this.

Made at the LECTURE in Boston 20. d. 1. m. 1690. Upon the News of an Invasion
by bloody INDIANS and FRENCHMEN, begun upon Us.

By Cotton Mather.

-- Non displicuisse meretur,
Festinat Patriae qui placuisse suae.
BOSTON Printed by Samuel Green. 1690*

To the Honorable Simon Bradstreet Esqr. GOVERNOR Of the Massachuset Colony;
The Aged, Faithful, Venerable Mordecai of his Country: To the Honorable; Sr.
WILLIAM PHIPS Knight. GENERAL of the Forces now Engageing against our worst
Enemies; One Raised by God for such a time as this; And To the Honorable Wait
Winthrop Esquire MAIOR-GENERAL of the Massachuset-Colony: A continual Exemple of a
Public Spirit; ALL OF THEM, the most Loyal Subjects of THEIR MAJESTY'S, As well
as the very Happy PATRONS of New England*
These Reflections on our Present State, Ravished, first from my Thoughts by
the Necessities of All; and now from my Hands, by the Importunities of Many;
are Most Humbly Dedicated, by Their Sincere Servant,

C. M.

A Public Spirit Recommended unto the Inhabitants of NEW ENGLAND In A SERMON
At Boston Lecture. March 20. 1690.
Esther IV.14. If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, Thou and thy
Fathers House shall be destroyed.


IT IS well known, that the late Methods of this weekly and ancient LECTURE, have
been, to insist first on the Affairs of a sincere CONVERSION, and then on the
Duties of a pious CONVERSATION. Having dispatched the former, we are now
entertaining you with our ou^ Discourses and Directions on the latter. And you
must Indulge me this Digression, that the fresh News of our Distress and Danger
which within this fou^ and twenty Hours arrived unto us, have diverted my
Thoughts to That which you may behold this Text pointing at.

I could not altogether hold my peace at this time, without observing, that we
have as many Duties as we have Objects to be concern^d with. But as one of the
Objects which we (...) have before us, is, The People of God placed in very
terrible Distress, and Danger; thus among the Duties then expected from us,
none of the least Remarkable and Considerable is, The venturing of our All, in
the service of that holy People. Such was the Object, and such the Duty which
our Text refers unto. The people of God, had their All now just going to be
gone, and a great person is here called upon to venture All, for the service of
this People that were thus Expiring.

The words now read, are a message sent by a Renowned Mordecai, to the Empress
of the World. The whole Book of Esther is a commentary upon one Verse in the
seventeenth of Exodus; and that part of it, which we are now upon, claims a
particular s^are in the Exposition. But we must Praeface our Discourse upon it,
with a few, and but a few Remarks upon the blessed Mordecai, that we may feel
whereabouts we are. Know then that Mordecai was a Famous, an Aged, and an Holy
Jew. He had been carried into Captivity, with Ieconiah, above seventy years
before. And he Returned to, and Resided at Jerusalem, till the work of the
Temple received its unhappy interruption: but then he Retired that he might
serve his People in the Court of Ahashu^rus (who was also cal^ed Artaxerxe^)
there: A very laudable Ex^mple! 'twas the effect and effo^t of a m^st n^bl^
gen^r^sity, (...) worthy Man, when h^s opportunities to Do good were shut up at
home, thus to expose himself unto all the Temptations of a Princes Court, that
he might there be serviceable to the People of God.

But our M^rdecai gives a great affront unto one Haman, a Minion in the Court
of Persia. That Haman by his Brig^es, had obtained from the Persian Emperor, a
Commission and Privil^dg to require a m^re than common Reverence from the
Courtiers then about the Palace. But this good man found it against his
Conscience to tak^ such a notice of such a Mis^reant. The scruple arose in him,
^ither from This; That Ha^^^ was an Amalek^e; he was among the Chil^ren of that
Agag, whom Samuel slew; and so of a Genera^ion both Accursed by God, and no ^^
is jus^ly than greatly Abhorred by Israel; or which I rather Think, from This,
That it was a Divine and Sacred Respect, which Haman did now require. Such was
the respect which the haughty and impious Kings of Persia, would sometimes
arrogate unto themselves; and they would sometimes impart the same unto their
Parasites and Favorites. Had it been a mere civil respect which was here
demanded, it would have been very superflu^us and well nigh ridiculous to have
given express command unto all the Kings Servants that were in the Court
concerning it; good manners were doubtless enough used there. Now that a godly
Jew should refuse to render such an Honor to a ^or^y Potsheard of the Earth,
is not at to be wondered at, when we call to mind, That ^ven the pr^dent, but
pagan Grecians did refuse it, in their Address to the Persian Monarchs; and the
Athenians put one Timocrates to death, for adoring of Darius in such a manner.
Such a check was given to the pride of Haman! Now the bloody Revenge of this
Hellish Monster prompted him to pursue no meaner a satisf^ction for this
indignity, than the utter ^es^l^^ion and ^^tirpation, of the whole Nation which
(...) was of: one Lark will not ^ill the belly of such a Vultura. Besides he
saw the whole Nation was of such Principles and Persuasions in Religion, as
gave a reproof to his wicked practices; an intolerable Nation was it that would
know no God, but the Lord Jehovah, and with whom Creature. Worship was now
grown into Detestation: and therefore he procure^ an order for the total
Destruction of all the Jew^, to be executed, according to the advice which he
sought of the Devil f^r it, about this time of the year; and I suppose Anno
mundi 3485.

Perhaps, the Jews were before th^s, grown a little too secu^e and careless: it
might fill them with many promises of none but Good Times for them, when they
saw one of their own Religion sitting on the Throne. Moreover, The Jews had
every where offended the God of Heaven, by neglecting of His Ordinances for the
sake of their own Secular Accommodations. But we now all of the sudden see them
that were the only people of God in the world, involved in most Awakening and
Horrible Calamities; and they have a prospect of Nothing but a Speedy, a
present Ruin before their Eyes. 'Twas by something bigger than a Wonder, that
the People of God were now preserved!

A Strange Providence had exalted a Kinswoman of Mordecai's, whose Name was
Esther, to be the Queen of the Persian Empire; and she must be the Instrument
of the preservation. In order hereunto, we find in our Cont^^t, a very solemn
Message of her Uncle to her; in which we may Contemplate,

First, a Duty. The Duty pressed is, To venture All for the Rescue of them that
were the Afflicted People of God. The Thing En^oined upon Esther was, Go in
unto the King, and make Supplication for the people. This was the only step
that could be taken for saying the People of God: but it was one very despe^ate
and perilous. There was a cu^sed and a c^abbed Law among (...) which made it
capital for any unc^lled person to come into the presence of the King, (...) it
should please His powerful and So^^^^ign Majesty to Extend His ^olden Scepter,
as a Token of a Pardon for that presumption. Wherefore now to push into the
pres^nce of the King, was to rush mo^e ev^^^ntly upon the point of a Sharp
Sword, ^han of a (...) Sce^te^; it was to ^az^rd the L^^s of (...); not only a
Crown, but a (...) too must be ventured in ^t. And the (...) the Emperor unto
Est^^^, could not ^ut inc^^ase her Suspicions and J^alousi^s (...) is
Affe^^ions began to ^e (...); which m^de the Und^rtak^n* yet more Dub^ous,
Dangerous, and Form^d^^^e. However, (...) this was the Charg^ of the go^d
(...), If All must be (...) when the People of God are perishing, All that we
have, is too little to be ventured for their Help.

Secondly, A Reason The Reason is, like a good Sauce made up of Sour and
Sweet. It is made up of Discords, and there is a notable Musi^k in it.

First, We have Necessity for this venture, mentioned. Says M^^d^cai to his
Niece, Think not that thou shall esca^e. He speaks to her, as to a Passenger
Embarked in the same Vessel. Says he, Don't think that you shall not share
with, and fare like, the rest of the people of God, that are now ready to be
swallowed up. It was more probable, that the Queen would suffer for being a
Jew, than that the Jew should ^scape for being a Queen. Being a Queen, has been
found not enough to put a person be^ond the Reach of Malice and Envy; as the
Queen of Di^clesian, and the Queen of Navarre, besides nearer instances, have
assured us. A Lively vent^^e for the People of God, was once, it seems, the
only way to defend a Royal pe^s^n from every fatal mischief.

But S^^ondl^, We have E^o ^ragement for this Venture tende^ed Sa^s Mordecai
with a Magnanimous Faith. If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, (...)
are shall Enlargement and D^^^veran^e aris^ from another place. Here was that
Faith, by which, as the Ap^stle notes, the Believers of old, Escaped the Edge
^f the Sword.

From another place. There are Jewish Rabbis who look upon Place, here to be
the Name of God. It has been admired, that the Name of GOD, is no where to be
seen in the Book of Esther; and the Jews have a profane and foolish Custom
thereupon. But indeed, as the Greeks would write (...).

(...), upon their Books, much more may we see God in every verse, God in every
line of this Memorable Book. If the Name of Makom, or, Place be here put upon
our God, it is not without a cause: For, All things are in God; He is Immense
and Boundless in His Being; we cannot so well say, That God is in the World,
as, That the World is in Him; and whether it be proper or no, to say, That God
is even in the Imaginary Space beyond the utmost Selvidge of the World, this I
am sure of, That the Utmost Selvedge of the World does not limit and confine
this infinite God, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot Contain Him. It Is therefore
suggested here, That when the People of God can have no place of Safety, but
are in every place obnoxious to dreadful P^rsecutions, yet then, in their GOD
they will have a place to repair unto. It Is possible, That this Glorious PLACE
may ke^p the worst of all their Enemies from coming at them?

But what is the Duty t^en incumbent upon our selves* You have heard it in the
Text* and you shall again hear it, in our Doctrine, thereupon; which is briefly
This.

That every Christian should Readily and Cheerfully Uenture his All to to serve
the people of God, when a Time of Distress and Danger calls for it.

It had been both presumptuous and Injuricus to have Exhorted Es^ther unto
doing so, if it had not been a Duty altogether indispensable. The Blessed God,
for most wise and great Ends, permits Times of Distress and Danger to come upon
His people. That His Attributes may be Magnified, and that both His and Their
Adversaries may be prepared for the Vengeance, which belongs unto them,
Therefore it is that the most High brings His People sometimes into most amazing
Exigencies; it is for these causes, that they not rarely fall into such Times of
Distress and Danger, that like them in the Days of Esther, they Ly mourning and
weeping and wailing in Sackcloth and Ashes, before the Lord; and they see
themselves no where but upon the prodigious praecipices of Ruins hardly to b^
avoided.

In sueh a condition of Affairs (which is too much our own Condition) something
must be done; Attempts must be made for the Rel^ef and Rescue, of the People so
likely to be cut off. Though it becomes us to, Stand still, and see the Salvation
of God, I do not know that we are to sit still, without the use of Mea^s under
our Discouragements. But these Attempts cannot be made without Ventures in them.
It Is as possible they may miscarry, as that they may be successful. However, we
must ^et venture hard, and Venture far, yea, and Venture All, to serve the
People of God, in their Dist^^ss and Danger. If at THIS TIME thou altogether
forbear, and refrain, the doing of what may be s^^viceable to the Distres^^d
(...) with an Holy Terror* the Doom (...) Omission, Thou and (...).

(...) before us, to be a (...).

First, What, And

S^^on^^y, Why, we must Venture for the (...) People of God.

The (...) of our (...), is,

^ha^ Ven^ures are we (...) for the People of God, when Distr^s^ or Danger
calls?

I must make (...) work of it, and in One Word com^^ise what is to be said. I
say then,

We are to Venture every Thing in the World, but a preci^us and immortal Soul.
So did Esther ou^ Pattern. There is no Jewel, but that one of a never dying
Soul, too valuable to be ventured, when God and His People is to be served. The
first Lesson, the A. B. C. of Christianity, is that ^n Mat. 16.24. Let a man
Deny himself. We are so to Deny our selves, as to Venture our selves, and All
that we Are, and All that we Have, to serve the People of the Saints of the
Most High. But because you Look to see some particulars in the Bill of Charges
which the Distres^ and Danger of Gods People, may put upon you, Let me say;

First, We must venture our Quiet, for the People of God. It was the Speech of
a Gallant Man, in 2 Samuel 11.11. The Ark and Israel and Judah abide in Tents,
and my Lord Ioab, and the Servants of my Lord are Enc^mped in the open fields;
shall I then go into my house, to Eat and to Drink -- I will not do this thing.
Well said, thou brave Hero! May we in like manner scorn to Consult the Delights
and Pleasures (...) our own Repose, when the Service of God and His People
shall call us forth. Many Pains, many Toyls, and all the uncomfortable Fatigues
of Business, must be Encountered, without Reluctancies, when the People of God
are to be served; and we should forsake our soft Beds, our full Tables, and our
Fine Hous^s, for the sake thereof. We should engage in the Service of our
Generation, though there should be two Hankerchie^s which we are thereby
necessitated unto the continual wearing of; One to wipe off the Sweat of
Labor* and another to wipe off the Dirt of Reproach. We may not, for the Love
of Ease, decline the doing of what is to be done for the Interest of God, and
of His People.

Again, We must venture our Estate for the People of God. It is Recorded for
the everlasting Reputation of those well-disposed men, in 2 Cor. 8. (...) deep
Poverty, abounded unto the Riches of Liberali^y, or Simplicity, as it may be
rendered. Many persons can do nothing in a way of Service for the People of God,
because they say, They are poor. Nay, but our extremest Poverty should not
hinder our Liberality, When God and His People are to be served with what we
have* Whatever Simplicity the Wity and Crafty and Gripple Hold fasts of the
World, may imagine in it. We should not grumble at any Expenses which the
Service of God and His People is to be maintained with; and though we have no
more than Two Mites to give, we should part with more than One of them, rather
than his Interest should meet with any prejudice.

Furthermore, we must venture our Honor for the People of God. It was an Act
for which Moses is for ever Honorable, in Heb 11.24, 25. He Refused to be
called, The Son of Pharaohs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer Affliction,
with the People of God. Though we may arise to never so much Grandeur, Dignity,
and Preferment, by overlooking the Service of God and His People, we should
think Little of the Grandeur, and rather trample upon such Dignity and
Preferment. Though our Titles may be, Reverend, or Worshipful, or Honorable, and
perhaps Rightly so too; nevertheless we should think it no Humiliation to us,
that the People of God m^st be served by us. We are swollen with the vainest Air,
if we count our selves too B^gg to do what is bespoke for the Interest of those
that we should be Benefactors unto, if we would not unworthily pretend to be
Superiors over them.

Moreover, we must venture our Friends for the people of God. The Lord General
of Israel had a dear and a kind Brother, to whom nevertheless he said, as in 2 Samuel 10, 11, 12. Be of good Courage, let us play the men for our People: and
the Lord do that which seems Him good. Tho it be a Brother, yea, and somewhat
nearer than a Brother that we must part withal, for the Service of God and His
People, yet we must be willing to take o^r leave of such Rela^ions. It was a
very commendable Bravery in that Father, who having had six lovely and loving
Sons kil^'^ in the Service of the Public, brought out a seventh, even the Staff
of his o^d Age, unto the Press-Masters, and s^id Here I have one Son more* take
him too; this cause is w^rth them all. Suppose we have a Benjamin with us,
which we dote so much upon, that ou^ Gray hairs do with sad hearts tremble at
his departure from us: yet Benjamin too mu^t go, if the service of our Joseph,
our Jesus have occasion for him. There are many persons, who have brought very
bitter, w^ful, dolef^l Miseries upon their Children, by detaining them from the
Service of Gods People, when some hazard has appeared in it. Let us count the
very best of our Friends, never better bestowed, than in such a Service as may
be reputed a Friendship to the Interest of God.

All that I have hitherto asked for, is but a Small Venture; there is One more
that we are to make.

Finally then, We are to venture our very LIVES for the People of God, when
they cannot be brought out of Distress and Danger without the venture of our
Lives. It Is what we are summoned unto in 1 John 3^ (...) to lay down our Lives
for the Brethren. If an Heathen Py^ades and Orestes could not think their Lives
too large a price for each others Peace, what Life should be too much to be
Sacrificed for the Peace of a People which God counts His own? The Apostle Paul
tells us. For a good man one would even dare to Die and he saw it when an
Aquil^ and Priscilla were so ready to Die for him. If a good Person be so
valuable, What can then be too much for a Good People of the Lord? When Aaron,
when David, beheld a Destroying Evil breaking in upon the People of God, they
carr^ed their Liv^s to keep it off. We are to do what we can For such a People,
tho it be with The Ieopardy of our L^ves. If we have a call to Ride into the
very Bowels of the Earth, for the Service of the Public, we should as He of
old, with all Spur and Speed be there. The Service of God and His People should
make us to say, as the Martyr once, If every Hair of my Head were a Man, they
should all be Sacrificed in this Glorious cause.

These are Ventures that we should none of us be Backward unto. But our Second
Question then Enquires.

Why are such Ventures to be made* for the People of God, when a Pressing Time
calls for them.

Briefly, We ow our All unto the People of God. A Minister of God said once
unto another, Philem. 19. Thou on^st unto me, even thine own self. How much
mo^e may the People of God say this unto us all, Thou onest us thy self and thy
All; The People of God may call for our All. And

First, The Order of God Empowers the People of God, to call for it. We are His
by Creation. He has made us and not we our selves We are His by Redemption* He
has Bought us and not for our selves. Our God says unto us, as in 1 Cor. 6.19.
Ye are not your own. That which He has done for us, obliges us to say unto Him
devoutly what the Prince of old foolishly said unto another, I am thine, and
all that I have. Shall I not add, That we are His by Profession too? I ^ray,
which of you dare to say, I have something that God is not the Owner of? We
Profess that all we can Style our own, shall be, For Him and not for another;
otherwise we ly in our daily Protestations. We have our All from God. It is, In
Him that we Live and Move and have our Being. And shall not our All be For Him
too? Well, The God of Heaven has made His People, the Receivers of His Rents,
His Dues. They have a Letter of Attorney for it; and you shall see me produce
it, before I stir. It is in Matthew. 25.40. Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as
you have done it unto the least of these my Brethren, (Blessed Lord,
Condescendest thou to Style thy poor People so? and shall we count any thing
too dear to be Ventured for them!) Ye have done it unto me.

Secondly, The Design of God likewise Empowers them to call for it. All Things
are Ordained and Intended by our Good God, for the use of His People; He says
in 1 Cor. 3.2 ^ All is yours. And shall we defraud them as to any part of that
All? What is it thatGod allows us our Life and all the Refreshment^ and
Enjoyments of it for? It Is not that we may have a Taste of a few Sensual
Delights* God has not that Regard unto our Sensuality* No, It Is that the People
ofGod may be the be^ter for it: therefore it is that we are made Stewards of our
little All. Why, the whole World stands on this very Ground, That the People of
God may be Provided for; if there were none of them to be Served the Eternal
God, would with swift Lightenings and Hot Thunderbolts, immediately set fire to
the Universe* How comes the Greatest King to set upon a Chair of State? It is
affirmed of Cyru^, a Puissan^ Emperor, in Isa. 45.4. For Jacob my Servants
^ake, and for Israel mine Eiect, I have called thee. Much more ought we Little
Folks to imagine, that when we have arrived unto any thing of the World, the
Almighty God says unto us, It Is ^o^ the Sake and the Service of my Israel, that
I have Blessed thee. Shall I utter a word beyond any that has yet passed from
me? We are then to be Sensib^e of what we ^ead about our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself, in Ephesians. 1.22. God has put all things under His Feet: What for? It
followe^, And gave Him to be Head over all things to theChurch What a thing is
here? It seems that our Lord Jesus is made Heir of all things, and has the
Government of the wholeWorld put into His Hands, (in part) that so the People
of God may thereby be Served and Saved forever more: And what shall you and I,
Little Creatures* then think of all the Advantages which Go^ has put into our
Hands! Whom, I pray, Whom are they to be Serviceable to?

Thi^dly, The Glory of God, gives them a Concernment in our All. It Is the Name
worn by the People of God in Isa. 46.13. Israel, my Glory. The Lord our God has
more glory from His People, than from all the Visible World besides. Indeed all
the Sincere and Active Returns of glory which from the face of the Earth go up*
unto Him, are among such as these. The Great God is greatly Glorified by the
prosperity of His People; They Know Him, They Love Him, They Praise Him, while
Prosperity gives them Opportunity so to do; and as it is said in Psalm. 102.16.
When the Lord shall build up Zion, He shall appear in His Glory. The Glory of
God is promoted, when the Zion of God is Defended, Enlarged, Served. And wh^t
should we Dedicate and Consecrate our All unto, but the Glory of Him that is
God over All? It Is said, Eat and Drink unto the Glory of God; every Bit of
Me^at, every Drop of Drink, that we have; and whatever is reckoned in our All,
may be devoted unto the Glory of God* If so, it must go to the Service of His
People too.

Lastly, The Wrong we have done to the People of God, Enables them to Demand
our All. What is it that brings Distress or Danger upon the People of God? It
is, Our Sin. We, by our Sins have had an Hand in all the Inconveniences, which
put the People of God upon calling for our Help? How shall we then repair this
Wrong, but by prof^ring our All, to bring them out of their Distressed Plight?
Hence came that carriage of David, in 2 Samuel 24.17. He said, Lo I have sinned;
but these Sheep, what have they done? Let thy Hand, I pray thee, be against m^*
Even so should an holy Ingenuity prompt us to think with our selves; It Is we
that have sinned, and for our Sins, there are Storms and Wolves now threatening
the People of God; O let them all be spared, and let m^ All go toward the
Redeeming of them. This was that which poured Oil into the Flame of that Zeal
which Paul was once inspired with; He could say, I was once Injurious! and this
made him with a scarce imitable Diligence and Faithfulness, now lay out His
All, to serve the People of God, who had heretofore been worse for his
Misdemeanors.

But the Improvement of these things remains. And it shall be in these
Deductions.

Deduction I.
Hence, a private Spirit, especially at a Time of much Distress and Danger with
the People of God, is an ^vil much to be Rebuked. For us to see the People of
God gasping, bleeding, dying under Difficulties, and yet, At this Time
altogether to hold our peace! O it is a most unaccountable Baseness; and the
mouth of our God has stigmatized it with the characters of most horrible Wees;
as in Amos 6.6. Woe to them, that are not grieved for the Aff^^^ction of Joseph!
I lay down these two Assertions.

First, At All Times we should Employ our All for the People of God It should
be our Ambition, to be as the Blessed Bradf^rd was, Always doing of Good with
Tongues, or Pen, or Purse, or some other way. Most amiable was the Meditation,
which David was treating himself withal, in 2 Samuel 7*2. He sits down (...) his
Hou^e, and thinks* What shall I do f^r the House of my God? That Enquiry, What
Service may I do for the Church of God? should often be Rolled in our Minds;
and it will be so, if we do not too much countenance a Spiri^ual Barrenness in
our Lives. The Church of God, is well wor^h our Serving; next unto the Man
Christ Jesus, it is the Noblest Creature that ev^r was formed by the powerful
and Curious Hand of the Great God that formed all things. There is not an Angel
in Heaven, but what would g^a^ly wait upon the smallest and poorest Member in
the Church-Mystical; even so, the Little Ones have their Angels. Yea, our
Mighty Savior Himself, counted the very Blood of God, and Life of God a fit
Ransom for the Salvation of of the Church; and shall not we then reckon the
Church and People of God a fit subject for the best of our sorry Services? But
I pass on to say,

Secondly, In Times of much Distr^ss and Danger with the People of God, we are
then especially to V^nture our All on their behalf* We a^e at this Time to
speak, yea, and Act for them, Let the Venture Look ever so big and black upon
us.

Indeed, This is not the Spirit of ^^^ry man* Too, too many are of a private,
Selfish, Narrow Spirit, and are scandalously Little in their Inclinations. It Is
pity b^t some Odious Comparison should be excogitated for them. Will they
Venture All? No, they study for nothing but to Save One: And if God have Raised
up some Extraordin^ry Person, to Venture His All, for the Deliverance of His
Afflicted Country, perhaps all the Thanks that they give him is, Who bid him
do it? Will they Venture All? No, They Refuse All, or at least they Begrutch
All, that should go from them, for the public Weal. They Complain of All, and
Murmur at All, though it be a wretched Little, which they are Compelled unto, for
the common Saf^ty. Will they Venture All? No, They use all their Wits and all
their Thoughts to Contrive, how to Do nothing at all; and though they can spend
many Pounds in a year upon ^ pernicious Lust, yet a Sum not capable of so
High a Denomination exacted by a Reasonable Tax, is with them an Oppression
which (because they are far from Wise) does make them Mad. What would they be
at? They would not care though the Houses of their Neighbors were Burnt, if
their own Apples might be Roasted at the Flame. What would they have? They
subordinate their All, to this mighty Thing, that they may sleep like the Toad,
(I have now found a comparison for them!) with Claws full of the Dust which is
in the Belly of the Earth. There is this Detestable Neutrality in multitudes of
men; that Let the People of God sink, or swim, it is all one to them, Modo hic
sit been, (as he said) if their own Earthly Pleasures be not thereby Abated.

Alas, For this Private Spirit! It is this that has a mo^e D^smal Aspect upon
our own Land, than all the other things that Bode ill unto us. We ^ead in 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. In the last Days Perilous Times shall come; for men shall be
l^vers of their own selves. I know a Country in the World, that can afford
many Effectual Expositors upon that memorable Text. God grant that the last
Days of New England may not now be Running; it is too Evident, that we have most
P^rillous Times, and, I wi^h it were not as Evident, that men are too generally
Lov^rs of their own selves.

To Sharpen the Rebukes that are due to such an Evel Spirit*

Consider. 1.
By a Private Spirit no man proves a Real Gainer in the end. Men think to Save
by such a Self Consultation; but they Loose Egregiously and very Miserably: as
it is said in Ma^h 16.24. Whos^ever will save his Life, shall loose it. The men
of a Priv^te Spirit are loofers, even in this World. The allwise God has
uncountable ways to Deprive and Bereave men of those very things, which a
Private Spirit was resolved upon the Retaining of* The men of Succoth and
Penuel, would do nothing for Supporting the Army that was going against the
Midianites. N^, said they Let such and such Towns bear all the Charges, if they
will: But you forget not the Destruction that soon overtook them for it. The
Citizens of Constantin^ple were so Coveteous, that they would not maintain a
Watch on the Walls of their City when it was besieged; the beseigers by that
Def^ct soon became the Possessors of their wea^th and found Vast-Coffers o^ it,
h^arded up. This Private Spirit renders men Obnoxious to the terrible
Displeasure of an Holy and an Angry God; and what Secur^ty can they have
against the Desolating strok^s ^ot That? When '^was Judged that some of the
Provinces in Israel were breaking off from the R^st, and setting up for
themselves, and intending no more to bear the Name of The united Colonies; What
said the man of G^d unto them, in Numb. 32 23. B^hold, ye^ have Sinned against
the Lord; and be sure your Sin will find you out. It was a Note in a great
Song, Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Me^ioz, said the Angel of the Lord, Curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof. Why, what had they done, that the Bitter
waters of Jealousy and Consumption must in this large Quantity be got ready for
them? How many Men had they killed? and how many Towns had they burned? Alas,
There is nothing of all that; their Fault was this, Because they came not unto
the Help of the Lord, against the Mighty. If all the Angels in the Heaven, can
make a private Spirit prove a cursed One, and inflict a Blast upon those whom
it is prevailing in, it shall be done!

Yea, and the^ shall in the other World be Losers too. Who are those that shall
perish for ever? Why, They are the Men that cannot Venture. We find, in R^v.
21.8. The Fearful, to be the First in the Roll of them that shall go into the
Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone* they that were for bringing up the
Rear in all Services here, must Lead the Van in the Sufferings of the Pit
below. Our Everlas^ing Recompenses will be very much adjusted, by the Regards
which we had for the Flocks of the Lord Jesus here. It Is an awful Scripture, in
Isa. 60.12. The Nation and Kingdom, that will not serve thee (the people of
God) shall perish. If a Nation, a Kingdom, How much more must the Unserviceable
Person Look to be served so?

Consider 2.
A private Spirit, is very far from a Christian Spirit. It was the great Rule
of the Primitive Christianity* in 1 Cor. 10* 24. Let no man seek his own, but
every man Another Wealth. It was the Spirit of Christ, in 2 Cor. 8.9. Though he
was Rich, yet for your sakes, He became Poor. But of what Spirit then are they,
that cannot part with any Riches for the Benefit of their Neighborhood? It was
the Spirit of Paul, in Romans 9.3. I could wish that my self were Accursed from
Christ, for my Brethren. What Spirit are they then of, that cannot bear to see
themselves a jot the poorer or the Meaner for their Brethren? In the Primitive
Ierusal^m, they had, All things in Common. And a Readiness to Communicate is
but agreeable to all the Children of that First Christian Church, which was,
The Mother of us all. Are we Members of that Body, which the People of God make
up, or no? If we are, we shall be, Concerned for the whole. A Good Man will
say, as he in Ps. 1^2.8. For my Brethren and Companions sakes, I will now say,
peace be within thee. When he Looks upon the People of God, he thinks, These
are my Brethren* they and I have the same Father; He also thinks, These are my
Companions, I hope to dwell with them throughout Eternal Ages. Hereupon, he can
do any thing for them, and feels his Heart within him knit unto them, as Davi^s
was to Jonathan* This is indeed the Mark, the Sign, which a true Child of God
may be known withal; as in 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from Death
unto Life, because we Love the Brethren. We are yet in a state of Death, if we
count any thing too much for the Service of God and of His People.

Deduction. II.
How Sinful, H^w Woeful, How Wicked then are They, that will not forego, what is
wors^ then Nothing, to Serve the people of God,! If we are to Venture All, what
are they who will not Forego Sin, which is worse than Nothing that the people
of God may not thereby be Ruined? If we are to Venture a Life, Surely, we are
much more to give up a Lust, when the Service of Gods people call us thereunto.
We are then, to do, as in Math. 5.29. Pluck out a Right eye, and Cut off a
Right Hand which has been Anathematized by the word of God. Let this word reach
all the Lewd and Wild Sinners, which it belongs unto. To you be this now
declared; The best Service that you can do for the People of God, is* To
Forsake your Wicked ways, and your Unjust Thoughts, and Return unto the Lord.
Most Obdurate, Wretched, Bloody Sinners are you, if you had rather see this
Whole People destroyed, than that a Mortification should befall one of your
Delicate and Beloved Sins. I am to tell you, That this is the Language of your
^mpenitency, and Blush you not? When the Roman Emperor upbraided his General
Terrentius, ^or the Loosing of a Battle, he replied Sir, I must tell you, that
it is you that lost the Day ^^r us, by your open^Fighting against the God ^f
H^av^n as you do. This may ^uely be cast in the Tenth of all the Bad Livers in
this Place. You that Live without the fear of God, You that Live after a
Prayerless and Careless and Profane rate, not having the Fear of God before
your Eyes: You are those that every Day do the things, For which the Wrath of
God comes. This people of God is now in such Distress and Danger as it never
saw before; and I ask not your leave to tell you, That you are the Authors of
it all. It Is You, that bring whole Arm^es of Indians and Gallic Blood Hounds in
upon us; it is you that clog all our Councels with such Delay and Slowness, as
terrifies us in our most Rational Expectations. You are perhaps the most
Querimonious, and Outrageous of all People, in your Discontents, Why, but your
uns^bdued Sins are those which breed all our Discontents. These, They are the
Accursed Things, which make you the A^hans of the whole Cong^egation. You often
ask, What News? and long to hear of, All Peace. But I say, What Peace as long
as your Notorious and allowed A^ominations are Continued? Let Them go, and All
will be Peace in a Little while.

I use the m^re freedom in this Reprehension, as being able to back it, with a
great Authority. The Honorable General Court of this Colony, have newly
Published a very Serious and Solemn Procl^^ation, warning all Offend^rs against
the Laws of Sobriety, to mend their manners, and all Officers to Prosecute
such offenders, as the principal Troublers of their Country; and, Advertising
us, that if a Re^ormation be not Endeavored, the Righteous God will Punish us
yet seven Times for our Iniquities. O Happy, thrice and four times Happy
New England that is under the Protection of such a Government. Well, Now take
this Warning, ye Sinners in Zion; be Warned into a true Repentance. To Slight
such a Warning from the meanest person in the World, were a Dangerous
Unreproveableness; but when such a Warn^ng is given by a Father, it has a
particular Stamp of God upon it, and Woe to those that shall be Disobedient
thereunto. It is related concerning the Sons of Eli, They hearkened not to the
Voice of their Father, because the Lord would s^ay them.

Behold the Fathers of this Country, have been Warning all Bad-livers, That if
They don't Repent, We must perish* if you now show your selves Refractory in
your provoking Evils, what w^^l the Issue be, but* this, They hearkened not
unto the voice of their Fathe^^* because God would make a terrible Slaughter of
Them, and of all their unhappy Neighbors? The Word of our God unto us all, is,
that in Jer. 18.11. Beh^ld, I frame evil against you, and devise a Device
against ^ou; Retur^ Y^ Now ev^ry one from his Evil Way. O that this Counsel of
God might be Acceptable to us. I would a little alter the Terms of my Text, and
say, If thou alt^gether h^ld thy Sin, at this Time, thou shall be ^^stroyed for
it.

Deduction III.
But how lamentable then is the Condition of Them, that venture their All,
against the People of God! Such Fools there are in the World; malicious and
prodigious F^^ls indeed! Such an One was that Foolhardy Monarch, the King of
Egy^t, that would Venture His All, into the very bottom of the Red Sea, rather
than leave the people of God unpursued. How many are there, that will venture
their very All, for the Disturbing and Oppressing of them, concerning whom the
God of Heaven said, Long ago, Touch them not; Do them no Harm! But what get
they by this Bargain, this Phrensy? It was the Speech of God, in Zech. 12.2.
Beh^ld, I will make Jerusalem a Cup of Trembling. Truly, Every Drop of Blood,
yea; or of Tear Squeezed from the Abused people of God, proves a Cup of
Trembling, that is, a Cup of Poison, to the proc^rers of it; It makes them at
Length to Vomit, their very Bowels up. To hurt the people of God, what is it,
but, A Pushing hard against a great Stone? it gives Rubs and Wounds and an
horrible Death to the Invaders. All the Four Monarchies of the World, have
Tumbled into Confusion, for their Enmity, to that People, who are yet to make
the Fifth. To seek the Harm of this people, is to make an Impotent Assault and
Batt'ry upon the Omnipotent God Himself* but, Woe did ever harden himself
against God and prosper? Poor, Unworthy, Unthankful New England, has long had
Experience of such Disappointments befalling of its Venture some Enemies. It
was noted about the Piccardines of old, that Reforming people of God, If a man
be Weary of his Life, let him become an Enemy to the Piccardines. This has been
the Fate attending those whom the people of God, (and This people) have been
an Ey-sore unto* The great God has taken them in hand and made them find the
Ris^^^ of their very Lives in their Serpentine (...)

(...).
For a close; (...) Public Spirit then be^ ^wakened in us All for the people of
God, in the Distress and Danger which is now upon us.

The last Evening fi^l'd us with new Al^rm^ of an Attack from New France upon
this poor land; which was before involved in Calamities that astonished us. I
ask your pardon, that the Sudden Impression of those News upon me, has been so
violent, as to force my ('it is possible, Too Rash) Thoughts thus to another
Theme than that which I had been preparing for you. But, as the most of those
places which ^he Devastatio^s of the last year fell upon, were the more Pagan
Skirts of New England, where no Minister of God was countenanced; and that very
place which is just now Assaulted and Consumed, has had upon it the Infamy of a
most Heathenish Disrespect unto a Ministry; so, on the other side, I cannot
speak in any Assembly, where a Preacher of the Gospel may hope for a mo^e
Candid and Courteous Acceptance, than in the Numerous Auditory now before me.

Wherefore, I take leave to mind you, of what, I suppose every man can Tell me;
That is, That we may all sit and Sigh this Day, that clause in Neh. 9.37. We
are in great Distress. And, as the Orator once could say, Non est civis
Romanus, qui in hac Tempestate Ridere p^^^est; He is no Roman, that can be
merry at such a Time as this. Thus may I truly say, He is no New-Englander (not
worthy of the Name) who at such a Time as this, will not Venture his All, for
this Afflicted people of God. God forbid, that the Description of the
New England men, should at any Time, and much more at This, be That in Phil.
2.21. All seek their own. We have at this Time, a great Service to be done for
their Majesty's: K. William, and Q. Mary, whom God grant long to Reign; and
this, not only by Securing their Interest in this large Territory, and
Consequently in all America, but also by making a brisk Salley forth upon the
French Territories, which must else be, a Perpetual obstacle to the Thriving of
these Plantations. The Service of their Majesty's in the former of these was
the cause of the Revolutions here almost a year a go; we are now invited unto
their Service in the l^tter of them, notwithstanding that the Dissensions that
have been sown among us by the Relics of our late Oppressors have so much
enfeebled us. But that which will make my Application unto you at this time,
yet more Pungent, is, That we are undone if we do not now venture our All.

Consider 1.
We are Precipitated into such Destress and Danger, as we have never seen
before; Nothing so Exquisite has hitherto befall^n us* Our cause indeed is
That, in Math* 3.10. The Ax is laid unto the Ro^ts of the Trees* The Knife of
our God has been heretofore cutting and Pruning of us, but either Ill Fruit,
or No Fruit is the Best Fruit which we have hitherto yielded unto that glorious
Husbandman. Wherefore He is now come forth against us, with an Ax, a French
ax, accompanied with Indian Hatchets; and our very Root is like to receive the
strokes thereof. It Is wonderful if the Sentence upon the Barren Fig Tree, be not
passed upon us, Cut them down! with an eye to the Execution of that Sentence
upon the Jews, we find mentioned, in Isai. 66.6. A Voice from the City, a
Voice from the Temple, a Voice of the Lord. Even so, at this Time, there is a
Voice coming from almost every side of us; there is a Voice from toe North, a
Voice from the East, a Voice from the West; a Voice, as Loud as that in the
Heavens, which gave Terror to all this Land a few Months ago. What says this
Voice, but this, They are going to be Cut down for ever This is the Voice of
the Combinations, which our Adversaries have made against us; this is the Voice
of the strange D^stractions and Divisions which the (...)- some among our
selves do infe^^ (...) and this is the Voice of all our Fear^ (...) looks
Black. For my own part, I (...) confe^s, what issue my own Though^s are come
unto: It Is, Th^^ if the Blessed God intend that the Devil shall keep America
during ^he Happy Chiliad which His Church is now very quickly Entering into, (I
say, very quickly, for it is now past Question with me, That the Second Woe is
past; and the Third you know then Comes quickly) then our Lord Jesus will
within a few Months break up House among us, an^ we go for our Lodging either
to Heaven or to Europe in a very little while. But if our God will wrest
America out of the Hands of its old Landlord, Satan, and give these utmost
ends of the Earth to our Lo^d Jesus, than our present conflicts will shortly be
blown over, and something better than, A Golden Age, will arrive to this place,
and this perhaps before all of our First Planters are fallen a sleep. Now, It Is
a dismal Uncertainty and Ambiguity that we see ourselves placed in. Briefly,
such is our case, That something must be done out of hand. And indeed, our All
is at the Stak^; we are beset with a Thousand Perplexities and Entanglements.
The Question which we have now before us, in short is This, Whether we will
venture All, with an Hope to Preserve All, or Whether we will keep All, with an
Assurance to Loose All, by d^ing so.

Consider 2.
It Is a Precious People of God, which the present Exigencies press us to the
Serving of. The people which has a Little while possessed this Land may say
before the Lord, as they in Isa. 63.19. Lord We are thine. A Venture of your
All, is bespoke for a people that are in Covenant with God, and under a
Comfortable Relation to Him. It Is for a People that the God of Heaven has
heretofore miraculously appeared for: A People which have proportionably more
of God among them than any part of mankind beside. A People who concur in, and
Suffer for, that Protestation, The Lord is our King, our Lord, our Lawgiver.
Who would not Serve such a^ People? It was an Expression used once by a most
hearty Servant of New England, (the Honorable William S^oughton) to a very
gerat Assembly, God Sifted Three Nations, that He might bring choice, Grain
into this Wilderness The Product of that choice Grain, is that which now calls
for our Adventures. If New England miscarry, there will then fall some
Thousands of People that Love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, and that are
affectionately Acknowledging of Him in all their ways. But if Things go well
with New England, there will Myriads of Praises be continually going up from
hence unto the God of our Fathers. Our God will he Praised here, for our
Deliverances, (...), shall I say it? He will be Praised for it in the Third
Heaven too* as it was said, in Rev. 18.20. Rej^yce over her, thou Heaven. If
Heaven will Rejoice at the Destruction of Antichrist, it will also Rejoice at
the Deliverance of New England, which tho it be in the same Latitude with
Italy, is yet among the Sincerest of its Antip^des. In the Day when poor
New England shall be del^vered from its present Extremities* Then, Rejoice over
her, thou Heaven. Doubtless, There will Tidings be carried unto Heaven of it;
and it may be particularly notify'd unto those good old men that went from
hence to those Blessed Regions. Our Predecessors which are gone to the Spirits
of just men made perfect, may hear what a Deliverance God has (...) for their
poor Children here; and (...) ^ill then Ring with Triumphant (...) the great
Savior of New England, who can withold his All, from the Service of such a
People? Methinks, I should say as the Martyr once, Alas, That I have but one
Life to loose! It Is Immanuels Land that we Venture for. The Almost only Garden
which our Lord Jesus has in the vast continent of America, has the wild Boars
of the Wilderness trying to get into it; and That is it which now calls for our
Venture of our All.

The Psalmist could say, in P^al. 122.9. Because of the House of the Lord our
God, I will s^ek thy Good. Why, There is among us, The House of the Lord our
God. And this is indeed the Real Cause, of our having been so maligned, hated,
vexed, as we have been. The Devils are stark mad, that the House of the lord
ou^ Godpunc; is come into these Remote corners of the World; and they fume,
they fre^ prodigiously, That some of their old Vassals and Bondslaves here,
begin to pray unto the Almighty God. Hence, it is, that we were not only of late
got into the clutches of Rulers, That smore by the Living God, they would Ruin
our Chu^ches; but upon our Deliverance from Them, there is now falling upon us
an Armed Force, which a^m at our total Extirpation. The Controversy between Us
and Them is now brought unto that Narrow; in Exodus 32.26. Who is on the Lords
side? Eve^ so, Who is for Jesus, against Satan, and, who ^s for the true
Christian, Protestan^ Religion, against Popery and Paganism? You must now
venture for one of those. Take your choice my dear Country, men; but there is
no room to be Indifferent.

Consider 3.
How Much is ventured by how Many, Against the People of God? This was That
which the Psalmist was not a little quickened with; in Psalm. 119.139. My zeal
has consumed me, because my Enemies have forgotten thy words. Look upon our
Enemies; they endure all sorts of Travel and Hardship; they venture their All,
that they may d^ a mischief to us; and shall we venture Nothing on the other
side? If an Haman can disburse, above eighteen hundred thousand p^unds, if I
miscount it not, that he might bring an horrid Rout upon the People of God; and
shall an Esther now, altogether hold her peace? Or shall we hug our Dust so
fast as to let go none of it for the Deliverance of this people? There are
Tumultuous and Obstreperous persons (such Haman signifies in English) who stick
at nothing for the mischief of this people; and shall we stick at any thing for
their Service? Men will Expose themselves to Beggary, to Dis^redit, to untimely
Death, and to Eternal Damnation, that they may compass their Mischievous
Devices; v^ry shameful will be ou^ Crime, if we outdo them not in Studies for
the Good of our Israel.

I have no more now to do, but only to make you these five proposals.

The first Proposal.
Let us be One and All, that we may the more cheerfully and Readily Venture our
All. Alas, For the Divisions of New England, we have great Searchings of Heart*

The Great Austin would sometim^s address (...) Hearers in such pathetical
Terms as those, per tr^mendum Dei Iudicium vos Adjur^' Thus would I say; and
though I have no Commission from them for it, yet I would speak it in the Name of
all the Sen^ible persons in the Land; O our Brethren, We Adjure you by the
Tremendous Judgments of God, that you immediately Abate and Compose all your
Differences. Every Globule of the Blood shed by the French among the
Conten^ious Albanians the other day, makes a loud cry unto us; and methinks, I
hear that cry like the Groans of Deadly wounded Men, passing over the Woods
unto us, O do not quarrel any m^re; but unite immediately against your more
united Enemies. May this people become, Like a Bundle of Ar^ows bound a little
too fast and close, for the strongest Arm to break us; and may our God say of
New England, as in Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my Undefiled, is but One. What a sickly,
yea, wh^t a Ro^t^n Body have we, if our Flesh Rankle and Fester for a mere
scratch of a Pin? We have been giving our little scratches to one another,
while we have been managing the Deb^tes, tha^ the unsettlement of our
Go^e^nmen^ has furnished us withal; but what? Shall they ^urn into Gangre^^es
with us? It is an awful Intimation and Admonition, in Job. 19.29. Wrath brings
the punis^ments of the Sword. Are we not now Languishing under the Fulfilments
of that word? we have had wrath among us; all our Affairs have been Enflamed by
wrath one against another; and because of this, Behold, a Sword, a Sword is
fur^ished for the Slaugh^^r. Have done then, with all this wrath. M^thinks, the
Bell Rings very loud, that calls upon us, to put out all our Fires! When the
poor Spanards at Lima the other da^, felt the beginnings of an hideous Ear^hquake
round about them, one of the first things in their agonies was, To make
Reconciliations. May our Heart quake at this Day, put us upon doing so. Let u^,
in short, sacrifice all but Conscience, to peace among our selves Even, the Law
it self, notwithstanding the Exact Regard which ought to be had unto it, I say,
the Law it (...) in some Circumstances and Punctilio's, gives way to the
public safety, which is the supreme Law of all It was against Law, for Esther
to venture upon what she did: but it could not be avoided, or Omitted. How much
more, must our Will, and Humor, and Passion give way to the Good of the whol^?
My B^eth^en, The Canaanite and the Perizzite, is coming into the Land; and
therefore I accost you in those words of Abraham, Genesis 13.8. Let there be no
strife, I pray thee, between Me, and Thee; for we are (...).

The Second Proposal.
Let Mord^cai have the Dispose of Us and ou^ All. Our God has blessed this
People wit^ Prudent, Patient, Pious RULERS, to whom there belongs that
Character of Mordecai* in Esther 10.3. S^eking the Welfare of his Brethren and
speaking peace to all his Seed. It is pu^ely through our Fault, if the Rest of
His Character be not Theirs also, Accepted of the Multitude of his Brethren.
Let These be so acknowledged, Obeyed, as they ought to be. The Disrespect cast
upon Government, has been the thing tha^ has made naked those parts of the
Countr^ which most of o^r Disasters have Light upon and those Troublesome and
Implacable persons that seek to Enfeeble the ^uthor^ty into an incapacity of
Action at such a time as this* a^e to be stigmatized as Men far from seeking
the Welfare of the Children of Israel. Nor can any thing be more ^^boding to Us
and our All, than the cursed Murmurings* which the A^mighty God hears in our
Tents from Da^ to Day. Instead of praying to God for the Direction of our
Government, at this Extraordinary time, we spend our time in Fretting and
^ailing at them; Nothing they do can please*

And tho'l believe there is not such a well intending, n^r a better deserving
Governmen^ in this world, than that which New England now sits under the shadow
of, nevertheless, what is the whole business of many people, but a making (I
cannot say, finding) faults in their administrations* it is not at all admir^ble
to me, I tell you truly, I do not at all admire at it; that the Fiery Scorpions
of Canada, are now stinging of a Congr^gation thus Distempered.

But I pray, Are we not all in a Storm? And have not our own Vo^es placed at
the Helm, those worthy persons, that are in this Juncture at it? What? would
Every man think to St^er the Vessel? I can tell ^ou, That you* would soon be
weary of it. Nothing but a measure of Grace, which I doubt you are not
furnished with, would Enable you to undergo the Fatigues of so great a Slavery.
Pra^, mind the Business o^ your own Station; P^ll the Ropes, Pl^ the Oars, and
the Sails, as you are Commanded; but leave the Helm, where it is managed by those
that can have no other Interest, but what is yours.

I know not whether we have never been too like Issachar, for an^ other
Qualit^; but I would we were like Iss^^^ar for that* (...) 1 Chronicles. 12.2^. they
had und^rstanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to d^; and All their
Brethren were at their commandment. If the Members fall out with the Vitals,
the old Romans story tells you, the unhappy issue of it.

The Third Proposal.
Let our All in this World, be very Little in our opi^ion of it. The World, The
World, it is tr^ly a most B^witching t^^ng; and the Love of it, will be a Root
of all Evil to us But, is not the Spell over, is not the Charm broken yet?
Methinks, the Enchantm^nt should be Dis^o^^ed by the other Devils, that are
coming t^ t^ke This awa^* May we become Like Strangers in the World! We shall
be as ready to dispose well of our All, as the Psalmist was, who could say, in
Psalm 39 6.^2, They are di^quieted in vain, who heap up Riches, and know not who
shall gather them. Why, how came Rich^s to be so Little regarded with him? It
follows, I am a Stranger with thee, and a Sojourner* When we Look upon o^r
Earthly All, think we, I shall quickly be gone from it All, and think, I can do
well enough (...) it All; this will incline us to make Right Ventures of our
All. The Dutch have a saying, which ought to find a Ro^m with us, He that ^ath
Lost his Money, has Lost Not^ing; He that has lost his Credit, has lost Half;
but he only that has lost his Soul, has lost All. O make ^ure of a better, an
Higher, a Nobler All, than what our Ear^h affords; We shall then be Like those,
of whom 'twas said in Heb 10.34 Ye took joy ^ully the spoiling of your Goods,
knowing in your selves, that you in Heaven have a better and an Enduring
Substance. If we venture all our Goods, ^et still we shall have Heaven Left;
H^aven is, The good part which cannot be taken away. Make sure of Heaven, and
you may stand upon the Ruins of the World, with such Expressions as the
Minister of Nola had, when he was Ri^led of All he had; Lord, I am not
concerned about th^se things, ^or thou know (sa^d he, ^ointing to the
Heavens) that my All is there! Souls get i^t^ Christ* and ^he Romish Eagles
will do (...) no Hurt; when we are gathered into the shadow of His Bl^s^^d and
Saving Wings

The Fourth Proposal.
Let us not Lose our Time, that we may not Lose our All, when we venture All We
may say, with a spec^^l regard unto This Time, as in Ephesians. 5 15. Redeem the Time
because the Days are Evil. Every thing loudly ca^ls upon us, Make haste. It was
a wonder, that All was not Lost; when, as in Judge. 5.16, 17. Some Abode among
the Sheep-fold^, and others were intent upon Trading and Shipping, though the
Canaanite^ were upon their Backs. Common prudence now calls for Expedition; and
all things concur i^ that ^d^ice unto us, Be up and b^ doing S^all we be
drawing Circles in the Earth, when the City is j^st ^alling into the Hands o^
its Enemies. O That every Town in the Coun^ry, were so Nimble* in offering the
Service of their Quota, for the work of this Day, as they ought to be!

The Last Proposal.
Finally, Venture to speak for the People of God Let us make Esthers Ventur^ in
our Prayer^; and resolve, as in Isa 62 1 For Zions sake, I will not hold my
peace. Indeed we run somethin^ of a Venture in it, if our p^ayers become so
Frequent* and so F^rvent, as that the Om^ipotent God should be put upon saying,
Let me Alone! For then, if God have determined the Con^uming of this place, He
will first kill them that He shall find so standing in the Gap. But O tha^ I
may Die standing there! perhaps, it may Cost some o^ us our Lives, tha^ God may,
Ma^^ a way for his Anger; but it will co^t us our S^uls, i^ b^ o^r Negl^gence,
we Leav^ a wa^ for that Ang^r. Come th^n, (...) ^elves to ze^lous (...) tha^
never yet (...) He^rty Prayer, for (...) sa^e; now Begin. (...) ^ad a Dumb Son,
who though he never s^oke (...)* yet (...) a man go to kill his Father, ^is (...)
an^ sh^^^k, O don't kill my Father* poor people, if it could never hitherto be
said of you. Behold they pray! yet I beseech you, Be Now found upon your knees,
and beg, Lord, Let not all be ^ost. Eve^ the Pagan M^hawks upon the late
Calamities at Albany, have that Sentence in their Propositions, We must now
look up to the Heavens! O then, let us Christians be Looking there. May the
Wheel of P^ayer be set a going in all parts of the land; may our public
Lectures, and our private Meetings, in all places be turned into Days of
Prayer. A successful Battle once Commenced with that Watchword, Now for the
Fruit of prayer! Now for the Fruit of prayer! Why let us be plowing and
planting every Day for such Fruit. Even those who can do little or nothing else
but pray, may do much by their prayers. We find Esther and her Ma^dens at it.
The Devout Women may this way obtain the Favor of the Almighty for us.
Melancthon hoped the Reformation would be carried on, Because godly Women would
meet and pray for that Mercy. Our preservation may in like manner be promoted
Y^a, and Serious Children too, may make us all beholden to them. God spared
Ninive, because of the Children in i^; You Children that shall pray, and cry,
and call, as well as you can unto the Lord, ^ay have a great Influence upon the
sparing of New England.

Let me conclude my SERMON, as the Martyr his Letter, pray, pray, pray, Never
more need than NOW.

BY The GOVERNOR and GENERAL COURT Of the COLONY of the Massachusetts Bay, In
New England.
IT having been a thing too sensible and obvious to escape the Observation of
all who are not wholly strangers in our Israel; that this poor Land has
labored under a long Series of Afflictions and Calamities, whereby we have
suffered successively in our precious and pleasant Things, and have seen the
anger of the righteous God against us, expressed in Characters, which ought to
be as terrible as they must needs be visible unto us; it having also, both by
the Testimonies of those, that after the most humble and exact Enquiries into
the mind of God, have discovered the same unto us, and by their own general and
repeated Confessi^^ (...) undeniable; that a corruption of Manners attended
with inexcusable Degeneracies and Apostasies, found in too many of this People,
is the cause of that Controversy, which the God of our Fathers has, for many
years maintaining with us: It being likewise at this day, such a Probation time
with all New England as this Country has never before seen from the first
foundation of it, and the judgments of that Holy God, who has beheld how
incorrigible we have hitherto been under all His Dispensations, now arriving to
such an extremity, That the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, and we are in
imminent danger of perishing, if a speedy REFORMATION of our Provoking Evils
prevent it not:

This COURT have therefore thought it needful to praeface their other
Endeavors for the Public Welfare, with a very solemn Admonition unto this
whole People, that they every where give Demonstrations of a thorough
Repentance, without which we have little reason to hope for any good success in
our Affairs.

Wherefore it is Ordered, that the Laws of this Colony against Vice, and all
sorts of Debauchery and Profaneness (which Laws have too much lost their edg
by the late Interruption of the Government) be now faithfully and vigorously
put in Execution; Particularly the LAWS against Blasphemy, Cursing, Profane
Swearing Lying unlawful Gaming, Sabbath breaking, Idleness, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, and all the Enticements and Nurseries of such Impieties. Together
with all other the wholesome Laws and Orders agreeable to the present
Circumstances of the Country; by the Execution whereof, we may approve our
selves a peculiar People, zealous of good works.

And as all Persons are hereby warned to avoid those Vices which these Laws are
designed for the Prevention and Chastisement of (the Lovers of, and Pleaders
for, such Iniquities, being among the principal Troublers of their Country*)
So all inferior Officers are enjoined to perform their Duty in finding and
bringing out Offenders against the aforesaid Laws, and withal to give notice to
such Offenders that they must expect the Justice of an Exemplary Punishment.

And that no attempt toward Reformation, may want that Assistance which all
good men will be willing to give thereunto, it is hoped that the Ministers of
God will to the public Reading of this Proclamation, adjoyn their own fervent
Labors, not only for the Rebukeing and Suppressing of those Provoking Evils,
which are marked for common Hatred: but also to witness against the more
Spiritual Sins, which fall not so much under the cognizance of Humane Laws,
namely, such as Unbelief, Worldliness, Heresy, Pride, Wrath, Strife, Envy, and
the Neglect of communion with God, in both Natural and Instituted Worship, and
the Contempt of the everlasting Gospel, with a shameful want of due
Family-Instruction, which are the Roots of Bitterness in the midst of us.

Moreover, after the Example of Pious Rulers commended in Sacred Writ; the
Churches every where are hereby advised to give utmost Encouragement unto the
Faithful and Watchful Pastors of their Souls; to seek (where they lack) a full
Settlement and Enjoyment of such Officers, as the Lord Jesus Christ has
appointed for their Edification; to reflect seriously and frequently on their
Covenants, to sharpen their Discipline against those that walk disorderly; and
immediately to compose their Differences and Contentions (if such there be)
whereby any of them may be distempered and enfeebled, that so they may become
Terrible as an Army with Banners.

Furthermore it is Expected that the several Towns within this Jurisdiction do
speedily furnish themselves with all fit means for the good Education of Youth,
and take special care to avoid Factions and Quarrels in their other Town
Affairs; and all Plantations are strictly forbidden to continue without the
Advantages of having the Word of God constantly preached unto them, or without a
Sincere and Active Industry, to obtain the Presence of the Lord Christ in all
His blessed Ordinances.

And Finally, this whole People are hereby advertised, that if these Essays
for an universal Reformation, shall be obstructed (as those in the days of the
Reforming Josiah were) by Men's being settled on their Lees, and hating to be
Reformed, they can reasonably look for no other issue than this, that the
jealous God will punish them yet seven times more for their iniquities: But,
that if the God of Heaven shall grant unto them the Grace to Remember whence
they are fallen, and Repent and do the first Works, it will give a greater
Prospect of Prosperity, than can arise from the best Counsels, and biggest
Armies.

The Work of Reformation thus endeavored, is now recommended unto the blessing
of the Almighty, with whom alone it is, to Recover a Backsliding people;
persuading our selve^ ^h^t the Event thereof would be Salvation nigh unto us,
and Glory dwelling in our ^^nd.

Isaac Addington Secr.
March 13 1689./90.

