A Plain Short CATECHISM FOR Children and Youth,

That may be Serviceable to such Others, who need to be instructed in the First
Principles and Grounds of the Christian Religion.

To which is added, A short Paraphrase or Opening, by way of Meditation on that
Prayer which our Lord Jesus Christ taught his Disciples, commonly called, The
Lords Prayer.

By G. K.

Prove.22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is Old he
will not depart from it. Heb. 5. 12. For when for the time ye ought to be
Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which b^ the first Principles
of the Oracle, of God, and are become such who have need of Milk, and not of
strong Meat. Printed and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia in
Pennsilvania, 1690.

A Friendly Epistle to the READER.
Friendly Reader;
I Have writ the following Catechism with great freedom and clearness of Mind,
and in a sense of the good hand of the Lord as^sting me, according to the
measure of his heavenly Gift freely bestowed upon me. The service ^f it is
designed not only for Children, but such others come to Age, who need, and are
desirous to ^e instructed in the first Principles and Grounds ^f the Christian
Religion. The Questions are ^o framed, that the Answer to every one of them is
(...) simple Yea or Nay, that so the understanding of he Learners may be best
reached; and they may answer to many of them, rather from the Truth ^n their
Understanding, than from their Memory, ^r outward Instruction; for the divine
Principle ^f Truth, even that living Word of Truth, is ^laced, in some measure,
in all men; and when the ^oings of Truth are plainly and clearly held forth
(...) the Understanding of People, where the Eye (...) the Understanding is not
exceedingly blinded, and the inward Ear is not greatly stopped, the lord of
Truth within answers to the Words and ^estimonies of Truth without, as face
answers to face in Water, or as the Echo answers to the Voice of the Speaker.

I have ^^^esty endeavored to treat of the most Fundamental and Necessary
Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and which I did judge most proper and
suitable to those who are Young either in Tears, or in the Knowledge of the
Truth, well knowing that Babes are to be fed with Milk, as strong Men with
Meat; and as the good growth and thriving of Children o^twardly, and their
sound Health, does much depend on the Milk, or other suitable Nourishment to
their weak state, its being good and wholesome, so the growth of such who are as
Babes in Christ, does greatly require, that wholesome and sound Doctrine be
administered unto thom; for the Spirit and Power of Christ does accompany the
sound and wholesome Doctrine, delivered by men of a sound Mind, and is that
nourishing Virtue that feeds the Soul; but where the Doctrine is not sound
nor true, that pure and holy Spirit does not join with it, to feed and nourish
the Soul: And Doctrine and Words, without the Spirit of Christ, is as Milk or
Wine that is dead, and has not the nourishing Virtue in it. Very many of the
particular Heads and Doctrines treated of, are such as are generally assented
unto by most of these called Christians, of most sorts, being such as concern
the common grounds of the Christian Religion, generally acknowledged by all
such, whom we can in any Charity judge to be true Christians; the which seem to
me to be most Necessary to be known and believed, as much or more as some (...)
these peculiar things of difference, which are (...) Controversy, among the
several sorts of the Professors of Christianity; and it were well, if these
things, both of Doctrine and (...), that are generally assented unto by all or
most sorts, were more seriously minded, recommended and improved generally,
there would be more love and good Neighborhood, and Peace among professed
Christians. But when the common things and Practices of Christian Religion,
generally assented unto, are but too much neglected, and the particular
Differences, perhaps in smaller matters, too hotly and indiscreetly, and from a
zeal, without good Understanding, too much urged; and instead of seeking to
heal Breaches, by running into extremes, rather to widen them; this does hurt,
and lays a stumbling block before the weak.

The particular Differences that the Truth it self makes, betwixt things True
and False, Good and Evil, are so to be minded, and with a dis^rect and godly
Zeal to be contended for, that the common Grounds of Christian Religion, and
the common Duties and Practices thereof, generally acknowledged, by not
neglected, but duly regarded, recommended and improved; and where the things
that are common matters of Faith and Practice, among all or most sorts, are the
more weighty, they require to be the more weightily regarded: And who do
otherwise are greatly to be blamed, as such who take greater care of their
Garments than of their Bodies, or such who are more concerned about a Finger
and a Tot, to save it, than about the Head, and other principal Members. Most
of the Common Heads of Christian Doctrine, generally assented unto, are of
great weight, and therefore should be greatly minded and improved by all.
According to our S^viour's Doctrine, there are the weightier matters of the
Law, viz. Judgment, Mercy and Faith, and the lest weighty; and so in the
m^tters of Christian Doctrine, some are more weighty than others, and of
greatest Moment, and (...) these were duly regarded and improved, and received
in the love of the Truth, and a suitable walking according, to be sound among
Professors of Christianity, Charity should be allowed by them one to another,
and they should look upon one another as all Disciples in one School, and under
one Schoolmaster, the Lord Jesus Christ, though diversely classed, some in a
lower and some in a higher degree; or as diverse fields of Corn, where some
fields have much more Cockle and Tare than other, yet the Corn is good where
ever it is found; and it is an excellent field indeed where no Cockle is to be
sound, but all (...) Wheat; and such a Church God has promised to set up in
the Earth; see Isa. 60. 21. Zech. 14.21. Mat. 3. 12.

A Plain Short Christian Catechism FOR Children and Youth, That may be
serviceable to Others.
By George Keith.

Section I.
WHO made the Heavens, and Earth, and all things therein, did a God the great
Lord of all?

Answ. Yea.

Qu. By whom did God make all things, did he make them by b his Word and pirit?

A. Yea.

Q. What is the lord by which he made all things, is it c Jesus Christ his only
begotten Son? A Yea.

Q. Was Jesus Christ, the Son of God, d begot of God from Everlasting, or
before all Ages? A. Yea.

Q. Did the holy Spirit e proceed from the Father, and from the Son, from
Everlasting, or before all Ages? A. Yea.

Q. Are the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit f one only God? A. Yea.

Q. Is God a g pure Spirit, Light and Life? A. Yea.

Q. Is he h infinitely and unchangeably Good, Holy, Just, Wise, and Powerful?
A. Yea.

Q. Is he i every where present? A. Yea.

Q. Does he k know all things of himself, past, present and to come? A. Yea.

Q. In what estate did God create man ^n the beginning, was it in his l Image,
and after his similitude? A. Yea.

Q. Did God create Man m upright, holy, good and wise? A. Yea.

Q. Where did God place man, when he made him, was it in Paradise, or the n
Garden of God? A. Yea.

Q. And did he allow him to eat of o every Tree of the Garden, save one? A. Yea.

Q. What was that one Tree in the Garden, that he was forbid to eat of, was it
not p the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil? A. Yea.

Q. Was that q Tree evil in it self? A. Nay.

Q. Why was it called so, was it because it was not r good for man to feed
upon? A. Yea.

Q. Did man s continue in the state wherein God made him? A. Nay.

Q. How did man fall from his state, was it by t transgressing the Command of
God, and obeying the Counsel of the Serpent? A. Yea.

Q. Who was that u Serpent, was it the Devil? A. Yea.

Q. Was the Woman x first in the Transgression? A. Yea.

Q. What was the effect of that Transgression, was it not y Death? A. Yea.

Q. Was not that Death both z Spiritual and Temporal? A. Yea.

Q. Are z all dead in Adam? A. Yea.

(a) Genesis 1.1.2.3. Exodus 20.11. (b) Psalm. 33.6. Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.16. (c) John
1.1. 3. ^0.14. Rev. 19.13. (d) Prove. 8.22.23.24. Prove. 30.4. Psalm. 2.12. Micah
5.2. John. 17.5. (e) John 15.26. John 16.13. (f)I John 5.7. (g) John 4.^4. I
John 1.5. Deuteronomy. 30.20. (h) Psalm. 14.7.5. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Mal. 3 6. Exodus 34.6.
Isa. 6.3. Jo^ 11.7. Psalm. 91.1. Romans 11.33. I Tim. 6.15,16. (i)I Kings 8.27.
Psalm. 139.7.8,9. Jer. 23.23,24. Isa. 40.12,13. Acts 17.26,27,28. (k)I Sam. 2.3.
Psalm. 139.2. Heb. 4.12,13. Jer. 17.10. Amos 4.13. Isa. 40.13. Romans 11.34. (l)
Genesis 1.26. (m) Eccles. 7.29. Col. 3.10. (n) Genesis 2.15. (o) Genesis 2.16. (p) Genesis
2.17. (q) Genesis 1.31. (r) Genesis 2.17. Genesis 3.^. (s) Genesis 3.14.17. Psalm. 49.12.
(t) Genesis 3.17. (u) Rev. 20.2. (x) Genesis 3.6. (y) Gen 2.17. (z) Romans 5.12. 14.15.
Genesis 3.19. (...) 21,22.

Sect. II.
Q. D^^ God a utterly and finally cast off Mankind for that sin? A. Nay.

Q. What help or remedy did God provide to recover man, and his lost Posterity,
from their Misery, was it not b Jesus Christ his only begotten Son? A. Yea.

Q. How did God give his Son to recover lost men, was i^ not, that he was to
come both c outwardly in the ^e^h, and d inward^^ in Spirit in men's hearts to
restore and save them? A. Yea.

Q. When did Christ come in Spirit inwardly in men's hearts, in order to save
and restore them, e was it not in some measure or degree immediately after the
fall? A. Yea.

Q. Was not that f Seed of the Woman, which God promised, that he should bruise
the Head of the Serpent, Jesus Christ? A. Yea.

Q. What is required of men, that they may be saved by Christ, is not g Faith
in him, and Love and h Obedience to his Commands? A. Yea.

Q. Who is the i Author and Worker of true Faith, Love and Obedience in men,
and of all other good Fruits and Virtues mentioned in the Scripture, is it not
God, and Christ, and the holy Spirit? A. Yea.

Q. Are men to believe in Christ for Salvation, both as he is come k in the
Flesh, and as he is come in the Spirit inwardly into men's hearts?

Q. How does he come inwardly in the Spirit, into men's hearts, is it as the l
Word, and Life, and quickening Spirit, and as the true Lgiht that lights
every man that comes into the World. A. Yea.

Q. What inward Operation has Christ, as he is the Word, Light and Life, is it
not to m convince and reprove of sin, and to teach men to deny and forsake sin
of all sort, and to live righteously, soberly and godly in this present world?
A. Yea.

Q. What other Operation has Christ, the living Word, in men's hearts, is it,
not only to teach and convince, but n powerfully to incline and enable men to
forsake all sin, and keep Gods holy Law? A. Yea.

Q. Where has God put his Law, which men should obey, is it not in men's o
hearts? A. Yea.

Q. What is the sum of that Law, is it not^ the same p inwardly, for matter and
substance, which God delivered outwardly to Moses, in two Tables on Mount
S^nai? A. Yea.

Q. What did the first Table contain, was it Man's duty immediately to q God? A.
Yea.

Q. What did the second Table contain, was it man's duty r to his Parents and
Neighbors? A. Yea.

Q. Where does the second Table begin, is it not at the fifth Commandment, viz.
Honor thy Father and Mother, etc.? A. Yea.

Q. Why is our Duty to Parents placed next in order to our Duty immediately
unto God, is it not because we owe the greatest Duty first to God, and next to
our s Parents and t Magistrates? A. Yea.

Q. Seeing God has delivered his Law inwardly in men's hearts, why did he also
deliver it outwardly by Moses, was it not because of u man's weakness, that ever
since the fall needs outward Helps, and means of Instruction, as well as
inward? A. Yea.

(a) Isa. 57.16. Gen, 3.9. (b) John 3.14,15,16. (c) Heb. 2.14. I Tim. 3.16. I
John 4.2. (d) I Cor. 15.45. Ephesians. 3.8.17. (e) Genesis 6.3. and 3.15. Deuteronomy.
30.11,12,13,14,15. Romans 10.7,8. I Pet. 1.11. (f) Genesis 3.15. Heb. 2.14. Romans
9.29. Gal. 3.16. (g) John 1.12. John 3.16. I Tim. 3.16. (h) Heb. ^.9. John
13.8. (i) Heb. 12.2. Ephesians. ^.8. 2 Cor. 4.13. (k) Romans 10 8,9. I John 4.3. ^
John 1.1.9. John 11.25. I Cor. 15.45. (m) John 3.20. 16.8. 2 Tit. 10.11. (n)
Heb. 4.12. Ephesians. 3.7. 4.16. Romans 8.2,3,4. (o) Romans 1.18.19. and 2.14 15. (p)
Romans 7.7. Exodus 20.1.2. (q) Exodus 20. from ^.3. to 12. (r) Exodus 20. from 12 to
18. (s) Exodus 21.15.17. (t) Romans 13.1.23. I Pet. 2.13.14. (n) Gal. 3.19.24.

Sect. III.
^ WHat other outward helps and means has God given us, are they not, 1 st,
the a Book of the Creation, 2 div, b the holy Scripture^ of the Old and New
Testament, 3 dly, c good and holy men, whom God on raises up, and sends to
us? A. Yea.

Q. What outward helps had men before the Scriptures were writ, was not the
same Doct^in for d substance, outwardly delivered by word of Mouth, from holy
men? A. Yea.

Q But are not many, at present, left without either the e help of the holy
Scriptures, or holy Men? A. Yea.

Q. Why are many so f long left, does it belong to the secret Judgments of God?
A. Yea.

Q. But they who rightly improve that inward help of Christ's Light and Teaching
in their hearts, who have not the outward, are they not g accepted according to
that present state?

A. Yea.

Q. They who have the outward help of the holy Scriptures, and outward
teachings of holy Men, is it not a h great blessing of God, and a great
advantage unto them, if duly improved?

A. Yea.

Q. Does not the Scripture declare many things of great weight, respecting the
way of men's eternal Salvation, that are not inwardly revealed to all men? A.
Yea.

Q. What are these things, are they not principally that i great Mystery of
Christ, as he is God manifest in Flesh, and as he dyed for our Sins, and rose
again for our Justification, and is ascended into Heaven, whence he sent down
the holy Ghost, with most excellent Gifts to men, and where he remains our
Advocate and Propitiation with the Father, and yet is k inwardly and
spiritually present in all true Believers in him? A. Yea.

Q. Is not the l Knowledge and Faith of this great Mystery absolutely necessary
to make a perfect Christian? A. Yea.

A. They who have not that Faith and Knowledge at present, and yet have a
measure of sincerity, and live up ^ightly to wha^ is made known of God in them,
and of his Will and Law, are they not rather m Servants than Sons, or if Sons,
but Sons of the first Covenant, and not of the second Covenant? A. Yea.

Q. They who dye, not having had Christ outwardly preached unto them, but are
Sons or Children of the first Covenant, and retain their uprightness and
faithfulness, can they n perish in that state? A. Nay.

Q. Whence were the holy Scriptures given forth, were they not given forth from
the holy Spirit, by divine o Inspiration? A. Yea.

Q. How are they and the things declared in them to be p understood, and made
profitable unto us, is it not by our receiving a further measure of divine
Illumination, to enable us daily p more and more to understand them? A. Yea.

Q. What is the excellency of the q second Covenant, beyond and above the
first, is it not that it gives greater Illumination and Grace, and raises up
the Children of it to a higher degree of Perfection? A. Yea.

Q. And does it not make the Children thereof perfect in due time, and gives a
perfect r Freedom from sin, and victory over it? A. Yea.

Q. Is the Seed or Principle of the second or New s Covenant, after some
manner, in all men? A. Yea.

Q. And is that Seed or Principle, t Christ, the Word of Faith? A. Yea.

Q. But is that great Mystery greatly u revealed in all? A. Nay.

Q. Did not God x reserve the more full Revelation of it, in a more general
way, to the time after Christ should suffer Death for men's sins, and rise
again? A. Yea.

Q. Was not therefore Christ the y Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, until
the fullness of time, and that both as to his inward and outward Coming, for
most part? A. Yea.

(a) Psalm. 19.1,2,3. Romans 1.20. (b) 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17. (c) Luke 11.49. Ephesians.
4.11. (d) Rev. 14.6. Genesis 18.19. (e) Romans 2.12,13,14. and cap. 15.20,21. (f)
Romans 15.21. Romans 11.25,33. Mat. 24.14. (g) Acts. 10.1,2,34,35. (h) Psalm.
147.19,20. Romans 3.2. Romans 9.4. and 16.25,26. (i) I Tim. 3.16. Romans 4.25. Ephesians.
4.8. Heb. 7.25.26. I John 2.1,2. (k) John 17. 23. Ephesians. 3.17. (l) Isa. 53.11.
John 3.14,15. Romans 10.9. (m) Gal. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7. (n) Gal. 3.23. Acts 10.34,35.
(o) 2 Timothy 3.15,16. I Cor. 2.14. I Cor. 12.7. (p) Psalm. 119.18. Ephesians. 1.17,18.
(q) Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.6,7,8. John 1.16,17. Heb. 7,19,22. Heb. 8.6,7,8. (r)
Romans 8.^3,4. Joh. 8.36. Romans 6.18. Heb.5.14. Heb. 7.19. and 9.9,10,11. (s) John
1.9,10. Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.7. (t) Romans 10.7. (u) Romans 16.25,26. Ephesians. 3.9.
Col. 26. (x) Romans 3.25,26. I Tim. 2.6. I Pet. 5.20. Ephesians. 2.7. (y) Ephesians. 3.9.
Romans 16.26.

Sect. IV.
Q. BUt did not the Prophets, and many others, singularly and peculiarly
favored, know him and believe in him, both as he did come in Spirit into their
hearts, and as he was to come in the flesh, that promised Seed of the Woman,
that should bruise the head of the Serpent? A. Yea.

Q. Was not his outward Coming in that prepared Body, to do the will of God,
and to fulfill all Righteousness, b figured and held forth to the faithful of
the People of Israel, under the Sacrifices, and many other Types, Shadows and
Promises? A. Yea.

Q. And did he not come in the c fullness of time, as was prophesied of him, to
be a Sacrifice of a sweet savor to reconcile us unto God? A. Yea.

Q. As he came in the flesh, was he not the d Seed of Abraham and David? A. Yea.

Q. Had not that e Seed of Abraham and David, which the Word assumed, the
entire and perfect Nature of Man, in all its essential parts of Soul and Body,
made like to us in all things, but without sin? A. Yea.

Q. Was he not born f of a Virgin, called Mary, and conceived of the holy
Ghost? A. Yea.

Q. Was he not most g pure, and free from all sin, in his Conception, Birth and
Life, from first to last, even as a Lamp without Spot? A. Yea.

Q. Did he suffer h Death under Ponti^^s Pilate, and rose again the third day,
in the same Body, and ascended into Heaven? A. Yea.

Q. But is not his i Body glorified, and made most glorious, according to which
the Bodies of the Saints shall be made conform, at the Resurrection of the
dead? A. Yea.

Q. Is not the account of the Conception, Birth, Life, Doctrine, etc. of
Christ, and his Death, Resurrection, Ascen^ion, Intercession, and Coming to
judg^ the quick and the dead, as given by the four Evange^^^ts and Apostles, k
necessary matter of (...) Faith, in order to eternal Life and Salvation? A. Yea.

Q. How is that Doctrine made effectual to our Salvation, is it not by the
inward i op^^ing, Inspiration and Revelation of Gods Grace, Light, Life and
Spirit, accompanying that Doctrine, where ever it comes, by word or Writ, to
all who do not reject it? A. Yea.

Q. Does not Christ, in the pure Gospel Administration, give forth some m
peculiar Laws and Commands, under the New Covenant, not given to the Jews nor
Gentiles under the first Covenant? A. Yea.

Q. Which are these peculiar Laws and Commandments of Christ under the pure and
perfect Administration of the New Covenant, are they, u 1st, That we are not to
Swear at all: 2dly, That we are not to fight with carnal Weapons, nor carnally
to resist Evil; 3dly, That a man is not to marry, or have more Wives at once,
than one, nor that a man put away his Wife, save only for Fornication? A. Yea.

Q. Is Jesus Christ o both God and Man, and yet one Christ? A. Yea.

Q. Is any p other man, that ever was, is, or shall be, both God and Man, or
equal to him? A. Nay.

Q. Why is Christ both God and Man, is it not because of that q most high and
admirable Union of his Godhead and Manhood, that no Man nor Creature has or
shall have? A. Yea.

Q. But is r the Manhood of Christ changed into his Godhead? A. Nay.

Q. Is not the s Manhood of Christ, or Christ as Man, wonderfully exalted above
all Men and Angels? A. Yea.

Q. Is it not a great t Error in some, that say, there are two Christ's, one
Christ that is God, another Christ that is Man? A. Yea.

Q. Is u Christ in Heaven, one and the same Christ that is in the Saints? A.
Yea.

Q. How is Christ in the Saints and true Believers, is his x Body in them, that
was crucified, rose and ascended? A. Nay.

Q. Is his y whole fullness in them? A. Nay.

Q. Is there not in every true Believer a certain measure of Christ, as they
are able to receive, to wit, of his Light, Life and Spirit? A. Yea.

Q. What is the difference betwixt the manner of Christ's being in true Saints
and Believers, and y the manner of his being in the Unbelievers, and
Unconverted, is it not z That he is revealed in the Saints and Believers in
great Glory, and giving them great Peace, Joy and Consolation, and they are
united to him, and he unto them, and they are Members of him, and have
fellowship with the Father and the Son; But in Unbelievers he is not so
revealed, nor are they united unto him, nor he unto them, but there is a
distance (...) separation betwixt Christ and all Unbelievers? A. Yea.

(a) John 5.46. Luke 24.7. John 8.56. Genesis 3.5. I Pet. 1.11. (b) Col. 2.16,17.
Heb. 9.9,10, 11. and 10.1. (c) Gal. 4.4. Heb. 10.10,11,12. Ephesians. 5.2. I Pet.
1.19. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.16. Col^^. 20,21. (d) Heb. 2.16. Acts 13.23. Romans
1.3. (e) Heb. 2.17. Luke 23.46. Isa. 53.10. Mat. 20.38. (f) Mat. 1.18,23. (g)
Heb.7.2^. ^ Pet. 2.22,23. and 1.19. (h) Mat. 27.2. I Tim. 6.13. I Cor. 15.3;4.
Mat. 20.17,18. (i) Phil. 3.21. (k) John 20.31. Romans 16.25. (l) Luke
24.32,44,45,46,47. I Cor. 2.7,10,11,12,13,14, Job 32.8. mn) Mat. 5.34. Jam^s
5.12. Mat. 5.38,39. Isa. 2.4. Micah 4.3. 2 Cor. 10.4. Mat. 5.32. 1 Cor. 7.2.
Ephesians. 5.31,32. (o) I Tim. 2.5. Ephesians. 4.5. Romans 9.5. I Cor. 1.13. (p) Col.
1.^7,18. (q) Gal. 3.16. I Cor. 11.3. John 17,11. (r) Romans 1.23. I Cor. 11.3.
James 1.17. (s) Heb. 1.4,6,6,13. and 2.5,6,7. Phil. 2.10. Romans ^4.11. (t) Jude
4. (u) Ephesians. 4.5,6,7. (x) Mat. 2^.^. Joh. 14.28. (y) Ephesians. 4.7. Joh. 1.16. (z
Gal. 1.15. John 17.13,23. I Cor. 6.16,17. I John 1.2,3. 2 Cor. 6.14. Ephesians.
2.12,13.

Sect. V.
Q. DO all true Believers a eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood, that
they may have eternal Life in them? A. Yea.

Q. What is that a Flesh and Blood of Christ, is it not a great Mystery, only
known, tasted and re^^^ed by true Believers? A. Yea.

Q. Did not the Saints and true Believers from the beginning of the World, eat
a the Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood, as he is the Heavenly Man and Second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven? A. Yea.

Q. Is b Christ the Son of God, and who is the Son of Man, to be worshipped,
and prayed unto? A. Yea.

Q. And is not all true Worship, Prayer and Thanks giving to be offered up unto
God c through Jesus Christ, the one Mediator? A. Yea.

Q. Are d Saints and Angels to be prayed unto? A. Nay.

Q. Are the Saints on Earth united to Christ in Heaven? A. Yea.

Q. Have the Saints on Earth e fellowship with Christ in Heaven, and receive
living Refreshments and spiritual Blessings from him in Heaven, and an increase
of the holy Spirit that he sends down from Heaven unto them? A. Yea.

Q. Are not the Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, his
Intercession, and returning to Judgment, with whatever the Scripture declares
of him, as outwardly, f worthy and needful Subjects of every true Christians
frequent Meditation and Remembrance, to increase their Faith, Love, Devotion
and sincere Obedience? A. Yea.

Q. What makes a Christians g Meditation on these worthy subjects, living,
effectual, fruitful and profitable to him, is it not as the holy Spirit of
Christ inwardly opens the Mystery of them, and livingly and effectually
applies them to the Soul and Heart of Man? A. Yea.

Q. Is not the most h holy Life of Christ, as he lived and walked upon Earth,
to be the Pattern and Example of every Christian, to live and walk as he did,
as the holy Spirit of Christ in them, does (...) before them in their frequent
Meditation? A. Yea.

Q. How is all true prayer, Worship, Thanksgiving and Obedience unto God to be
performed, is it only and alone by the help of the i holy Spirit of Christ, in
some measure, as it is inwardly received and felt? A. Yea.

Q. What things are we k chiefly to pray for, are they not chiefly spiritual
Blessings, Mercies and Graces, and an increase of the holy Spirit, and is not
the sure of all necessary Prayer contained in th^^^ort Prayer which Christ
taught his Disciples, saying, Our Father, etc.? A. Yea.

Q. And is not all l true preaching and ^^^^hing to be performed by the inward
help, motion and assistance of the holy Spirit, that only makes it profitable,
^o^h to Speakers and Heat^rs? A. Yea.

Q. And when a Christian Preacher feels not a (...) present help and ability
to Preach or Pray in words, is he not to wait in silence to receive^t? A. Yea.

Q. What n enableth a man to wait for the help of the holy Spirit until he
receive it, is it not a measure of the same holy Spirit then received? A. Yea.

Q. Are only o holy men called to preach the Gospel of Christ? A. Yea.

Q. Ought not Christ's Gospel to be p f^e^ly preached? A. Yea.

Q. Ought People to be q forced, or their Goods strained, to pay for preaching?
A. Nay.

Q. Are r Tithes the Gospel Maintenance appointed by Christ to his Ministers?
A. Nay.

Q. Is not s Christ the great Shepherd, Pastor and Bishop of all the Souls of
his People, and their King, Priest, Prophet, Physician, Husband, Leader and
Captain of Salvation? A. Yea.

Q. What are t the principal parts of a Man, are they not Spirit, Soul and
Body, or Soul and Body, the Spirit being understood, as comprehended together
with the Soul? A. Yea.

Q. Does not Christ save, redeem, cleanse and sanctify both Soul and Body, and
is the Savior of both, and therefore is to be served, and honored, and obeyed
with both. A. Yea.

(a) John 6.50,51,52,53,54,55. Psalm. 23.5. Acts 15.11. I Cor. 10.17. (b) Acts
9.14. I Cor. 1.2. Acts 7.59. Mat. 2.11. and 9.21. Joh. 5.23. and 3.13,14,15.
Phil. 2.10. Rev. 5.9,12. and 2^.16. Isa. 11.1.10. Acts 13.23. (c) Heb. 13.15.
(...). 1.8. and 7. 25. Heb. 10.19,20,21,22. and 7. 25. and 4. 14, 15, 16. (d)
Deuteronomy. 6.13. 10.20. Mat. 4.10. Rev. 22.9. (e) Heb. 12.24. I John 1.3. I Pet.
1.12. I These. 1.10. John 16.7. and 1.16. Col. 1.19. and 2. 9. 19. (f) 2 Timothy
2.8. I Tim. 3.10. compared with c.4.6. 2 Pet. 1.12. and 3.1. John 14. 26. Luke.
2.19. I Cor. 11. 24,25,26. Heb. 3.1. and 12.3. I Tim. 4.15. Psalm. 77.12. and
143. 5. and 8. 3,4,5,6,7. Heb. 2. 6. (g) 2 Cor. 3.5. Romans 8.6. Col. 1.6.10. 2
John 15. 3. I Cor. 12. 7. John 6.63. Psalm. 119.16.18. (h) I John 2 6. I Pet. 2.
21. (i) John 4. 23. Ephesians. 6. 18. Romans 8.20. (k) Mat. 6.32,33. Luke 11. from I,
to 13. (l) I Cor. 2. 4. I Pet. 4.11. 2 Cor. 3. 6. (m) Acts 1.4. Ezekiel. 3.15.
Psalm. 39.3. (n) John 15. 5. Jam. 1.17. (o) 2 Pet. 1. 21. I Tim. 3. 2. Mat.
5.13,14. and 7.16. (p) Mat. 10.8. Acts 8.20. (q) I Pet. 5.2. (r) Heb. 7.^^. (s)
I Pet. 2.25. and 5. 4. Isa. 32.1. John 12. ^^. Rev. 17.14. Heb. 3.2. Psalm. 1
10. 4. Heb. 5.^^ (...). 1^.15. Acts. 3.22. and 7. 37. Mat. 9.12. Isa. 61.1. 2
Cor. ^^.^^. Ephesians. 5 31,32. Isa. 55 4. Heb. 1.10. (o) I These. 5. 23. Mat. 10.
28. (...) 20.

Sect. VI.
Q. Has not Christ a dyed for all men, ^ that all men may by (...) him having
a day of Visitation, and (...) of Salvation made unto them (...)? A. Yea.

Q. Shall only they be saved by (...) sincerely b believe in him, love and obey
him? A. Yea.

Q. Are the best c good Works of the Saints done by the help of the holy Spirit
in them, the ground and foundation of their Justification? A. Nay.

Q. Is Christ the alone ground and c foundation thereof, to wit, the whole
Christ, as he is both God and Man, and as he came in the Flesh, and suffered
Death, and as h^ i^ inwardly revealed to them, and the Mystery of him, and
benefit and worth (by Merits) of his Death and Obedience, is opened, and by
faith applied to them, through the holy Spirit? A. Yea.

Q. How are true Believers justified by faith in Christ, is it because faith is
the instrument whereby Christ is d received by us, and rested upon (even the
whole Christ, whole and undivided, with all his Merits, Blessings and Benefits)
for Justification? A. Yea.

Q. Is Faith the only e Instrument whereby Christ is received for
Justification? A. Nay.

Q. Are e Repentance, and Conversion from Sin unto Righteousness necessary v
Conditions and Instruments, whereby to (...) in perfect Fo giveness of Sins,
and Justification? A. Yea.

Q. But is not Faith the chief Instrument, and first, in order of working, in
that respect, and therefore is it (...) that men's Salvation and Justification
is so much attributed to faith, as the chief Instrument thereof, even as Faith
is called f the Saints Victory, in Scripture, and the Substance of things hoped
for, and the Evidence of things not seen? A. Yea:

Q. Are only such as are to be saved by Christ, g Gods Elect, who were chosen
in him before the Foundation of the World? A. Yea.

Q. Does not the great Mystery of Election h and Reprobation ^e chiefly in the
Good and Evil Seeds? A. Yea.

Q. These who shall not be saved by Christ at the end of the World, who are
they, and how called in Scripture, are they not the i Dross, Dung, the Chaff,
Tares, Evil Seed, Dogs, Swine, Goats, the bad Fish, the bad Ground that is
Cursed, whose end is to be burned, Seed of the Serpent, and Children of the
wicked One, reprobate to every good Work, Vessels of Wrath, having treasured up
Wrath against the day of Wrath, making up, as so many Members, the Body of
Antichrist, that man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, whom God will destroy, and
Mystery Babylon; also, Children of Belial, whose King to Abad ^o^ and Apollyon?
A. Yea.

Q. When do any become i Reprobate, i. e. utterly rejected or cast out, is it
not when they are finished, or consummated in Sin and Wickedness, having
finally rejected the offer of Grace, until their day of Visitation be expired,
and that Christ has wholly left them, and that they are become wholly as Dross
and Dreg, having no Seed nor Grain of good Nature, or true Humanity remaining
in them? A. Yea.

Q. Who are these who shall be saved by Christ, and how are they called in
Scripture, are they not k Gods elect Jewels of Gold, the Wheat, the good Seed,
the holy Seed, the Substance, Christ's Sheep, God's Flock, and Men (or Adam,
Hebr.) the Sons and Children of God, the good Fish, the good Ground, the whole
Seed, the whole Israel of God, whether Jews or Gentiles, the Lambs Wi^e, Zion,
the Body of Christ, the Church of God, who are to be prepared and adorned, as a
Bride for the Bridegroom, without Spot or Blemish? A. Yea.

Q. And seeing that in this World there has been, ever since the Fall, a great
Mixture betwixt these two sorts, and Seeds, not only in Nations, but in
Families, and as lying together in one Womb, and as coming out of the Loins of
one Man, shall there not a perfect l separation be made betwixt them, before
the end of the World? A. Yea.

Q. And in order to this perfect Separation, and for a Witness unto all
Nations, shall not the Gospel be m preached unto all Nations, and throughout
the whole World, before the end, that all the good Seed, elect and precious,
may be gathered into the Garner of God, and the Tares and evil Seed may be
bundled up together, to be burned? A Yea.

Q. Is the good Seed that is saved in Man, and washed and sanctified, a n
created substance and Nature, (to wit, the Soul of Man) the which, when it is
washed and cleansed from Sin, and sanctified by Christ, is joined unto him, the
Head, and is a Member of his Body, the Church? A. Yea.

Q. Do not the o Souls of Believers, who (...) in the holy Faith, immediately
afte^ Death, go unto God and Christ in Heaven? A. Yea.

Q. And are not the p Bodies of the Saints, at the Resurrection of the dead, to
be raised up to, Eternal Life and Glory, and the Mortal to put on Immortality,
and the Corruptible to put on Incorruption? A. Yea.

Q. Are they all must to be raised up in Vile and Dishonorable (...) to be
cas^ into Hell (...) forever (...) Ages of (...)? A. Yea.

(...) Romans 5.^8. (...) Mat. 25.10,41,42. (c) I Cor. 3.^0.^^ (...) I Cor. 4.4.
Gal. 2.17.21. (d) John.(...) Acts 2.38. and 3.10. (f) (...) (g) Ephesians. 1.4.
Mat. 24.31. (...) Tit. ^.^^. Romans 11.7.28. (h) Mat. (...) (^) Psalm. (...) Prove.
^5.4. (...) Mat. 3.12. Isa. 1.14. and 14.20. (...) 15. Mat. 25.33. Mat.
13.47,48. (...) 3.15. Romans 9.22. Job. 20.7. (...) ^7.12. 2 These. 2.3. Rev.
17.^^ (...) Rev. 9.11. (i) Jer. 6.30. Tit. 1.16. 2 Cor. 13. 5. I Cor. 9. 27.
Psalm. 7. 9. and 10. 15. Dan. 8. ^3. James. 1.15. Rev. 22.11. (k) Mat. 24.31.
Mal. 3.17. Rev. 21.18. and 1.20. Mat. 3.12. Isa. 6.13. Romans 4.16. Gal. 6.16.
Romans 11.26. Ezekiel. 37.11. and 34.31. Isa. 1.27. and 60.14. Rev. 21.9. I ^^es.
1.23. and 5.27. (l) 2 Cor. 6.17. Mat. 3.12. (m) Mat. 24.14. (n) Isa. 43.7. and
57.16. Acts 17.28. I Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 5.30. (o) Acts 7. 59. Phil. 1.23. Rev.
14.13. Luke 16.22. (p) I Cor. 15. 13, 38, 44, 53. (q) Acts 24. 15. Isa. 66. 24.
Mark 9.44.

Sect. VII.
Q. WHat is Christ's Baptism, is it with a Water? A. Nay.

Q. Is it with a the holy Ghost, and with fire? A. Yea.

Q. What is Christ's Supper, is it not a real b pa^taking of him, and feeding
upon his Body, and is not this spiritual food often administr'd to Bene^ers, both
when they do outwardly eat together, remembering his Death, and when they do not
outwardly eat? A. Yea.

Q. Was the Seventh day of the Week, which was enjoined to the Jews, to be
observed for a Sabbath, a c figure, or shadow and sign of the spiritual Rest in
Christ, the true Sabbath? A. Yea.

Q. But is it not altogether necessary that Christians should frequently d meet
together and have both places and times, wherein they should meet, to wait upon
God, and worship him, and edify and build up one another?

A. Yea.

Q. And is not the e first day of the week (on which Christ our Lord rose from
the dead, and on which the Christians did use to assemble in the days of the
Apostles, in honor of our Savior) worthily set apart from Bodily Labor, not
only to ease Servants and Cattle, but that both Masters and Servants, and
others, may be the more disposed, by outward Rest from Labor, to the Service
of God, and that both in public and private Religious Exercises? A. Yea.

Q. What is the true f Church of Christ, is it the whole Number of all the
Faithful, whose sincere faith in Christ is manifest, not only by the Confession
of the Mouth, but by their good Works, and holy and godly living according to
the Gospel of Christ? A. Yea.

Q. Has the true Church of Christ g continued in all Ages, and (...) continue
to the end of the World, built (...) the Rock, against whom the Gates of (...)
prevail? A. Yea.

Q. Has she been always (...) to be found in outward Gathering (...) ^^blies
of People, purely h gathered to (...)

Has not the state of the true (...) for many Ages past, as outward^^ (...)
and hid to observation, for most part, and as John prophesied of her, the Woman
fi^d into the Wilderness, where she had a place prepared o God, that they
should seed her there One Thousand two Hundred and Sixty Days, which is,
according to the Prophetical style of Scripture, so many years? A. Yea.

Q. Was not the i Church to return out of the Wilderness after the time
appointed, h^ving no less, but rather more Glory, as before she went into it?
A. Yea.

Q. And are not some already raised, and raising up to be as a first Fruits of
the Church that is coming out of the Wilderness, and when she is fully restored
and come out, in many Nations, shall not her k Light greatly shine and prevail
over Nations, to the Conversion of many Thousands, both of Jews and Gentiles,
and is not this time near at hard? A. Yea.

Q. Have not the true Believers and Sai^ts a l spiritual invisible Union and
Communion together in the holy Spirit of Christ, their He^d, by virtue of which
they give unto, and receive from one another spiritual invisible Communications
of Life, Light and Grace, all proceeding from Christ, the Head, principally,
and from them Ministerially, being only Instruments and Conduits, or Vessels of
onv^^^^e, whereby Life flo weth from Vessel to Vessel, by means whereof, as the
said Life, Light and Grace is perceived and felt to flow through (...) Members
of Christ ^ody, from one to another, they are greatly refreshed, edified, and
strengthened by o^e another, in Faith, Hope, Love, and all other Fruits of the
holy Spirit? A. Yea.

(a) Luke 3.16. A cts 1.5. (b) Rev. 3.20. (b) I Cor. 10.16,21. John 6.53. Luke.
14.16. I Cor. 1. 20. (c) Col. 2.16,17. Ezekiel. 20.12,20. (d) Heb. 10. 5. (e) M
at. 28.1. M ark 16.2,9. Luke 24.1. A cts 20.7. I Cor. 16.2. (f) I Cor. 1.2. A
cts 4.31,32. and 2.47. (g) M at. 16.18. (h) Joh 16.32. Re^. 1^.10, 11, 12. (i)
Rev. 19.6,7,8 (k) Romans 11.25,26. Rev.21 24,25,26. (^) Romans 12.4,5. I Cor.
2.12,14,22,26. Ep^es. 4. 25. and 5.30. Romans 11.11,12. Phil.6. A cts 11. 23. and
14. 9. Gal. 2. 9.

Postscript.
I Entreat the Readers, who desire to Profit which this small Catoenism,
diligently to compare the Scriptures quoted (as they are set down at the end of
every Section) with tho Answers given to the several Questions, and that they
diligently search the Scriptures, not o^l, these h^^e quoted, but throughout
the Old and New Testament, to see and find whether these things are so, ^^ke
the Noble Pereans of Old, A cts 17. 11. (...) within they m^st come to Christ
in their Hearts, to learn of him the true sense and understanding of them, who
has invited alt to come unto him, and who is near unto all, by his divine
Appearance, Light and Life in their hearts; so the Scriptures are as a sealed
Book, but where Christ does open them, who has the Key of the House of David,
and that Key is his divine Light in men's hearts, that ^ineth in men more and
more, the more it is ^^ieved, loved and obeyed, and which in a peculiar way
does enlighten the hearts of men, who receive the Doctrine of Christ, as
administered unto them, either by Word of Mouth or Writ.

I sh^ul a join a plain an worthy saying of William W^utaker, an English
Protestant of note, who ^ived not long ago in England, concerning the holy
Scripture, in his Disputation, concerning the holy Scripture, against
Bellarmine, Cont^ov. 1. Quest. 5. Cap. 1. he says, For the Scripture onsisteth
not in the bare Words, but in the SENSE, INTERPRETATION and (...) the Words;
And he cites Jerome, saying, in his Commentary on Cap. 1. Gal. Let us not think
that the Gospel is in the Word^^o, the Scripture, but in the SINCE, not in the
Sur^ave (or outside) but in the MARROW, not in the Leave; o the Sermones, but
in the ROOF o^^^ Reason. This we willingly assent unto, and therein we, agree
with them, and further say, That as the Bones, and Marrow are distinct things,
even as the Cup or Pipe are distinct from the Liquor in it, so the Lones are
useful to convey the Marrow to us, and the Cup or Pipe is useful to convey the
Liquor, when it is in it; so the Scripture words are really useful in the hand
and management of the holy Spirit that gave them forth, to convey unto us that
true Sense and Mind of the Spirit, by and through them, but not otherwise.

The holy Scriptures are generally acknowledged to be given by divine
Inspiration, and are writ for our learning and profi^ting, and have a great
Service, both to Unbelievers and believers, and both to the weak and strong in
the Faith; and there want not Examples to demonstrate, that God has made, not
only the preaching and expounding the Scriptures, but the reading and hearing
of them, Instrumental to he onver^on of many, as well as to their growth in
Faith, Knowledge and Virtue, when converted. It were well that the great (...)
and use of the Scriptures were more understood and valued by Christian
Professors in general, for then they would be more read and searched into; and
where the^ are much read and searched into, with a sincere and upon at Mu^d and
Intention, and with earnest Pray (...) to God, and a (...) land near clearing
unto (...) and dependence on him, to be helped and assisted by his holy Spirit,
in all then Reading, Searching and M^d^^a son, there God does give his
blessing, and an his crease of his Spirit, and does open the Scriptures unto
them, and makes them both plain, comfortable and delightful, yea, and
exceeding profitable, as many can witness from true Experience.

It does well become all Christians, and especially all Christian Teachers, to
he well skilled in, and acquainted with the words of the holy Scriptures,
throughout, that they might not only be mighty in the Spirit, but in the
Scriptures also, as it is said in commendation of Apelios, That he was mighty
in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. It is a great shame to many Professed
Christians, that they are less skilled and acquainted with the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, than the Jews generally are with the Letter of the
Old Testament, although the vall is over their hearts exceedingly, as to the
true sense of them, in many things. But when Israel shall turn to the Lord, as
it is promised, toe Vail shall be done away. Christ did blame the Saddnees,
That they erred, not knowing the Scriptures nor the ^ower of God. Therefore
Christians should have a good measure of the knowledge of the Scriptures, as
well as of the thing they declare; for these commonly go along together in all
good Christians. The words of Scripture are a certain holy Language, containing
a peculiar Style and Dial^ct, far exceiling that of all bare humane Writing,
yea, and any other Writings since, and may be said to be the Language of holy
men, to wit, the Prophet, and Apostles; and when God speaks to his Servants,
teaching them Doctrine by his divine Breathings and Inspirations, he does it
most commonly in Scripture Language and Words, which they have outwardly
learned, by hearing and reading, even as when God inspires and enableth a man
to preach by divine Inspiration, he does not, in one days, inspire him to
preach in a strange Language, but that he has outwardly learned, as an English
man to preach in English, etc. All which does greatly recommend unto us, duly
to value and esteem the holy Scriptures, and to make a due Improvement of them,
because it pleases God frequentl to make use of them, as Instruments in his
hand, for our profitting, althongh God also m^n, times speaks such words in
the hearts of his People, that are Spirit and Life, and cannot be uttered or
expressed in any words, that the Mouth of Man can speak, or the Ear can hear, 2
Cor. 12.4. I Cor. 2.9.

A Short Paraphrase, or Opening, by way of Meditation, on that Prayer which
Christ taught his Disciples, commonly called, The Lord's Prayer.
OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN.] It is the exceeding great and unspeakable
Love of God Aim, hey, that the allows us to call him Father, and to come unto
him, with the like confidence and freedom of Spirit, as Children come unto
their Fathers, when they desire to have what they need from them. This
Confidence we have, through the Spirit of his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ,
f^ee^y sent into our hearts. God is indeed our Father, first, by Creation, who
did create us after his own Image and Similitude, and next, by creating u^ a
new, and restoring n^ into the same, after we had fallen therefrom by
Transgression. We are his Offspring, and he is nor far from us, but near unto
us, for in him we live, move and have our being. And as Heaven is his Throne,
where he dwells, and the Earth is his Footstool, so as his dear Son Jesus
Christ has taughtous, his Kingdom of Heaven is in us, though not comprehended
or cont^i^ed by us, but far extended above all the visible Heavens, beyond all
thoughts of man's understanding. And therefore when we pray unto him, our Hearts
and Minds must be wrought into (...) measure of a heavenly frame, by the
operation of his heavenly and divine Power and Spirit revealed in us, that so
we may come and draw near unto him with heavenly Minds and Affections, putting
off the Shoes of our Earthly Affections and Desires, as Moses his Servant did
at his Command, when he spoke unto him at the burning Bush; for the place where
we stand, when we are admitted into his presence, is holy ground; And before we
speak unto him in Prayer, we must feel, in some measure, out Tongues and Lips
touched with a Coal from his Altar, and our hearts therewith inflamed, and a
living Voice and Utterance must be given us, by the help of his holy Spirit,
causing the Mouth of the Dumb to speak, the which I (...) Voice is raised and
begot in us by the heavenly in breathing and inspiration of his Spirit that
comes into us, as a heavenly and divine Air* and is as necessary to form the
heavenly Voice that ascends unto Gods heavenly Thron^ and Temple, as the
outward and natural Ai^ necessary to form the natural Voice. But ^he bare
natural and humane Voice cannot ascend unto God, nor unto the Heaven where he
dwells, so as to receive any favorable Return or Acceptance. And because God
is in Heaven, and we on Earth, therefore out words, when we pray, should be few
and savoury, and not as the Hypocrites, who think to be heard for their much
speaking; and no further ought we ^o proceed in words of Prayer, than that holy
Spirit of Prayer does enlarge us, and give the true opening of the Mouth.

SANCTIFIED BE THE NAME.] The Name of God is most holy forever, even from
Everlasting unto Everlasting. Nothing of Holiness, nor of Glory or Majesty can
be added unto the same, nor diminished therefrom, as in it self. But the sins
of men, and the workings of the Powers of Darkness, and of Unclean Spirits and
Devils, have greatly prevailed in the Earth, to va^l and hide the Holiness,
Glory, Beauty, Majesty and Splendour of his great and honorable Name, in and
among the Children of Men. The Eye that once did see him in his Glory, is
miserably darkened and blinded, and the Ear that did hear his glorious Voice and
Name founded forth and proclaimed, is exceedingly stopped and shut in many, and
Satan has so far prevailed with many, to make them believe, that God is no
more to be seen on men's hearts, and that his Name, and Word, and Voice is no
more to be heard upon Earth, as it was in the days past, when he revealed his
Name in the hearts of his Servants and Children, which was both seen and heard
by them and in them. We are therefore h^re taught to pray, That God would be
pleased to reveal his holy Name yet more abundantly in the Earth, that his way
may be known upon the Earth, and his ^aving Health in all Nations, that men,
who are ignorant o^ him, may know him, and the Soul of those who long for him,
and greatly desire to hear and see his glorious Name, may both hear and see it,
and rejoice and praise him. And thus, we are to pray, that His Name be
Sanctified, that the Holiness, Power and Glory of it may be revealed, and made
known to many Souls, tha^ the Earth may be filled with the Knowledge of (...)
Glory, as the Waters fill and cover the Seas, as he has graciously promised.

THY KINGDOM COME.] The Kingdom of God is an Everlasting Kingdom, and it rules
in all, and over all, according to (...) Sovereign Power, Authority, Justice,
Majesty and Dominion, who has the Wills and hearts of all men at his command,
according to his overruling Counsel and Providence, to turn them as the Rivers
of Water, and to order them to fulfill his holy will and pleasure, s^eing
without his permission and Providence they can do nothing, the Wicked being in
the (...) House of this World, as Vessels of Dishonor, which he does and can
use after a (...) holy and just manner, as his dear Servants and ^^^d^en, who
believe in him, fear and love (...); are his Vessels of Honon^. But the Kingdom
we are taught to pray for, is his Kingdom of Grace, Love and Life, Light, Truth
and Righteousness, that it may more come to be set up in the hearts of m^^ upon
the Earth, both of Jews and Gentiles, that the Kingdom of God, which (as h^ist
himself has taught) is as a grain o^ M^stard Se^d, the least o^ all See is,
being sown in the hearts o^ men, may grow and be the greatest of all Hero^, and
become a great Tree, so t^ at at the Fowls of the At^ lodge in the Branches of
it, That the Children of m^n, may, with the true knowledge, fear and love of
his great Name, serve and worship him, and most willingly, cordially and freely
now to his Scepte^, Dominion and Government, and gl^^ifie and acknowledge him,
who is the King of Saints, and King and Lord of Heaven and Earth, King of
Rings, and Lord of Lords. And also, we are to pray, that the Kingdom of Sin and
^^righteou^^ is may be brought down, and (...), and Anti-christ's Kingdom
(...), so as the Kingdom of Satan falls, the Kingdom of God (...) exalted,
and that Myst^^y (...) great, the (...) of Harlots and (...) of the Earth (...)
sits as a (...), and (...) in (...), she shall see no Widdow-hood) may come in
remembrance before God, that he may cause her to tall, as a Millstone fulseth
into the deep Waters; for her utter fall and ruin appro^cheth, and is nearer
than in Ages past; yea, many of Gods dear Servants have seen, and see her, in
the Spirit of Prophene, utterly fallen, and in the Light of his holy Word of
Truth, do see her judgment ^^^ning, and therefore they are emboldned and
encouraged thus to pray unto him, and call upon him. That the Kingdom of his
dear Son may stin, more and more, come, and that he would exalt him over all
upon his holy Hill of Sion, as he has promised, that the uttermest ends of the
Earth may be his Possession, and the Heathen his Inheritance, that every Knee
may how unto ban, and every I ongue confess to the Glory of the Earther; That
the Kingdoms of the World may be the Lords, and his Christ, Whose Right it is,
even from Sea to Sea, and from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the
same.

[THE WILL BE DONE IN EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN] The Will of God is perfectly
done in Heaven; all the holy Angels, and Spirits of just men made perfect, do
perfectly (...) him, and fulfill his holy Will, and it is most equal, just and
reasonable for them so to do; for he, is their God and King, and a most
bountiful Lord and Benefactor unto them, and therefore it is but their
reasonable Service to obey and serve him with their whole strength. Nor is
Mankind less bound and obliged to do his Win upon Earth, (...) is Angels are in
Heaven; for he is (...) and Lord of both, he preserves them both, (...)
nourishes them with suitable bread and food. He feeds the Angels with
heavenly bread, and Men he feeds, who believe and truth in him, both with
heavenly bread unto their Souls, and with earthly Bread unto their Bodies, so
that God is sufficiently and abundantly kind unto men, according to the
capacity they stand in, every one to receive his favor and kindness: He
offers his Love freely unto all, and gives to every one as full and large a
measure or his goodness, as they are able to receive, and if they could receive
more, they should have it from his free and bountiful hand; and withal, He has
given his Servants and Children the sure Promise and Hope, That he will make
them like unto the Angels at the Resurrection of the dead. And therefore men
have no less cause and ground to do his Will perfectly, without any reserve,
than his Angels have: His Will is most Pure and Holy, according to his most
wise and holy Counsel, and most just and reasonable Laws. The Will of God is
the Sanctification o his People: He requires us not to do his Will without a
regard to our good and profit; b^ his Will is our Happiness, when we fulfill
are perform it, and in obedience to the same through the Grace and Power of his
holy Spirit we are made like unto him, and recover his holy Image and Likeness,
and are again renewed into the same, even as by sin and disobedience we lost
it, and fell therefrom; and not only to bear the Image of the Earthly Adam, as
he was before the fall, but to bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam, Christ
Jesus, who never fell, and in him to possess everlasting Life and Happiness.
And we believe, that we may, by his Grace, obtain what we soek, That his Will
shall be done in Earth perfectly, as it is in Heaven; for he has not taught us
to pray for an impossible thing, or what we do not believe that we shall or can
attain unto upon Earth, and while in the mortal Body; and we have the noble and
excellent Pattern and Example of the Lord Jesus Christ, together with the help
of the holy Spirit of Promise, in our hearts, to move us to pray thus unto God
who said, He came down from Heaven not to do his own Will, but the Will of the
Father who sent him; and before he suffered Death on the Free of the Cross, for
our sins, when his Soul was exceeding heavy unto death, he ^a^, If it be not
possible, that (...) Compass from me, not my Will, but they Will be done. We
are therefore to pray, that such a Heart and Mind, like unto him, the Captain
of our Salvation, may be found in us, that as he denied his own Will, which was
without all sin, being conceived by the holy Ghost, and brought forth (...) of
the Virgin, a most pure Birth, and knew no ^n, so we may deny, not only our
un^ul Will, but may be^^et ^orthe^ perfected, and made conform unto him, to
deny even our lawful and innocent Will, in any things that he requires of us.

[GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD.] Since we cannot do his Will, but as we are
enabled by his Grace, and strengthened with that heavenly and spiritual Bread
of Life, which is Christ, who said, I am that Bread of Life, be were eats me
shall live by me. We are therefore to pray unto God, to give us evermore this
heavenly and spiritual bread, that it may be our daily portion, from his
heavenly and bountiful hand; for our Souls daily as much need that spiritual
Bread, as our frail and mortal Bodies need the outward Bread, which we also
receive from him: But as concerning the outward Bread, and what we shall eat or
drink, or put on, the Lord Jesus Christ has taught us, Not to take thought;
for that our heavenly Father knows that we need these things, and he has
promised to give us them freely, although we do not ask them; for the Gentiles
seek after these earthly things, but we being Christians, and followers of the
Lord Jesus, we seek the heavenly things, and that heavenly Bread, which
although we have it in measure already, yet we are to pray, That he would give
it unto us more abundantly, that our Souls may more abundantly be enlarged to
bless and praise his holy Name. That the Bread which we are taught to pray for,
here, is not the outward Bread, is clear, because of the excelle t^o der of the
words of this Prayer; and seeing that the Petition for the daily-Bread, go^th
in order before the Petition for Forgiveness of Sin, it cannot be understood to
be outward Bread; for outward Bread is not to be deared before forgiveness of
sin, but Christ, the Bread of Life, according to most excellent o der, is to be
desired before Forgiveness of Sin, because we can no otherwise have our sins so
given us, but as we have Christ, that heavenly Bread given unto us; for whoever
have Christ, by a true and living faith, being united unto him, have
forgiveness of sins, and none ease.

FORGIVE US OUR SINS, AS WE FORGIVE THEM THAT SIN AGAINST US.] Until men
attain to a perfect and sinless state, which most are not yet arrived unto,
diverse are the sins that they fall into, through humane frailty and weakness,
and therefore we need daily to pray this Prayer unto God; for granting that
some have all their sins forgiven them, yet seeing many others have not, who
have a measure of sincerity, (and in that respect belong to the Church of
Christ) and are greatly weighted and afflicted with the s^^ce of their sins,
and the heavy burden of sin that does lie on them, not yet removed. And seeing
we are not only to pray for our selves, but for all in the (...) h^, to more
esp^c^any for all who are (...) with the same of sin not yet removed not (...);
therefore it is a seasonable Prayer for all (...) to pray unto God, Forgive us
our sins, so because of that near unity and ampathy among all true believers,
what one Deedeth of want^^h, all need and want, and the Prayer of on is the
Prayer of all; as praying with one heart and one Mouth unto God. Thus, holy
David confessing the sins of the People, numbered himself with them, and so did
other Prophets; and more especially when one prays in a Christian Assembly,
he prays, as the Mouth of all the People unto God (as when he preach th, he
is as the Mouth or God unto all the People, if he be a true Preacher sent of
God, and that the Spirit of God speak in him and by him) and therefore it is
most proper to speak unto God in the Plural number, when we pray in an Assembly
of Christian People, saying, Our Father, rather than My Father, and, give, us
this day Our daily Bread, rather than givene, etc. and, forgive Us, rather than
forgive me or (...), etc. but in private of secret Prayer, a man may either
say, I or We, as he finds his heart inclined by the Spirit of God. And we are
only to pray unto God, and to Christ, or to God through Christ, for the pardon
of all sin, but not unto Angels or men, or any Creatures; for it is only God,
and Christ, his dear Son, to whom God ha^^ given all Power in Heaven and Earth,
who, by his own Power and Authority can (...), the best of Gods Servants can
only do it ministerially and instrumentally, as they receive the knowledge of
it from God, whose sins he has for given. And we are to pray unto God, so
forgive us our sins, a we do forgive them that sin against us; and such in the
Church who have received f^^l and clear forgiveness, and ^^^ssion of all sin,
and a clear sense and assurance of it, through Jesus Christ, feased and
confirmed to them by the holy Spirit, are to de^e and pray so to hold it, and
enjoy it, as they do hold and keep that Heart and Mind, which freely for
Christ's sake forgive^^ all their Enemies; and such who have the sweet and
clear sense of the forgiveness of all their sins, are to pray unto the Lord,
That it may remain and abide with them, and that they may not lose it. And
such, whose sins are a heavy b^ then upon them, and as a thick cloud, betwixt
the gracious Countenance of God, and their Souls, we are to pray unto God for
them, That he would undo and loose that heavy burden of their sins from off
them, and dispel and scutter that Cloud of their Iniquities, and give them a
heart to so (...) as they would be forgiven.

AND LEAD US NOT INTO TENTATION.] Many and great are the Tentations which
accompany and follow us in this present evil World, ^oth from without and from
within, visible and invisible: The World, and the evil Example, Customs and
Fashions of it, does often tempt us without, and the Flesh, until it be perfectly
crucified and subdued, does often tempt us within, and Satan, who waits all
becalions, does concur with both, and inwardly see^e^h to present his wretched
Tentations before us, and to throw his siery Da^s at us; and he are not able,
of our selves to withstand the weakest Tentation, even the strongest ^o us;
therefore we are to pray unto God, That he leave us not to our selves for one
Moment, and That he do not orsake us when we are tempted, but that he would
give us Grace and strength man ally to resist every Tentation, and to overcome
them. And though it may please him to suffer us to be persued with sundry kinds
of Tentations, for the trial of our Faith, Love Patience and sincere Obedience,
that he may permit the Enemy to cast them into our way, we are to pray unto
God, That he would not let them be such as may be above the strength he gives
us, whereby to wit-stand them; for he has graciously promised, That he will
suffer none of his to be tempted above what they are able to bear, but with
every Tentation will give a way to escape. And we are to pray, That the Lord
would not be provoked, by our former sins, to let the Enemy loose against us;
for so it happens unto many, as a just judgment and punishment upon them, for
(...) provoking God by former ^ransgressions, and especially (...) their
negligence and carelessness, in suffering themselves to be overcome, and
prevailed upon with ^^^ler Tentations, to commit that which they account
sm^^ler sins, that the Lord is provoked against them, that in his just judgment
he has suffered them to be led into great Tentations, and left them to fall
under the power of them, by taking away the help of his Grace, in his just
judgment, from them, so as they have committed great and heinous sins.
Therefore, we are to pray that the Lord be not provoked against us, to leave
us, or to take away his holy Spirit from us, but that the same may always
remain with us, to keep us in p^rseverance in our holy Faith, Love and
Obedience unto the end, and that still his Spirit may lead (...) into all
Truth, that so we may not be led at any time into Tentation. These words, Lead
us not into Tentation, Cypr^an quo^eth thus, Suffer us not to be led into
Tentation, and that, no doubt, is the true sense of them; for as James has
declared, Let no man say, he is tempted of God, for God temptet^ none to sin,
etc.

BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL.] The evil One, to wit, Satan is frequently near
unto us, seeking continually to destroy us, but the Lord God Almighty, the
Keeper of his People, and the Watchman of Israel, who neither sleeps nor
slumbreth, is (...) unto us, to save and deliever us; and (...) we cannot keep
or deliver our selves one (...) from Evil, and none can but the Lo^^ therefore
we are to pray unto him, (...) us from Evil, and to (...) ^^^ing of our Souls
unto him, as a (...). And th^^ (...) it pleases the Lord to (...) his Ange^s
to guard his People, yet they action ^s Instrument in his hand, and as workers
together with him, even as good men are, whom he has made to watch and oversee
(...); and notwithstanding of all help, whe^^er of Men or Angels, as
Instruments and (...) of our preservation, we need the Lords immediate help,
and assistance of his divine (...) and Spirit: And we are to pray unto God,
(...) bot^ our Souls and Bodies from the ^^file^^nt of Sin, which is the great
and only Evil that we have cause to f^ar; for no Evil thing (to speak strictly)
can befall them who are preserved from ^^ning against God; we are not to look
upon ^^^kness, Imprisonment, Spoiling and Loss of Worldly Good, or of the
outward Life it self, as evil, if we be kept and preserved with the Lord, and
in him, free from sinning; for all these things which many judge, as the
greatest Evils, are good to us, being blessed and sanctified unto us, who love
and fear God, and are made to turn to our good and advantage: And therefore as
to all outward Afflictions, Crosses and Losses, and all inward Tribulations and
Exercises, we are to pray unto God, To dispose of us, as he in his infinite
Wisdom and Counsel sees fit and convenient for us. we are not to pray to be
who y delivered from them, nor any further than he sees shall turn to his
Glory, and he serviceable to us for our spiritual good and advantage. For it
has been the Lot and portion of all the dear Servants and Children of God,
more or less, in all Ages, to meet with a manifold Tribulations, Afflictions
and Exercises, both inward and outward: We are therefore to pray, That in all
our Afflictions and Trials of an kind, God would be with us in them, and give
us strength, hour age and patience, as becometo true Christians and followers
of Christ to bear, and go through their, knowing that through many Tribulations
we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And we are not only to pray these
Petitions for our selves, but for all our Brethren and Sisters every where, and
for the whole Church of God, and all that sincerely love God and breathe after
him, in all Professions; Also, we are to pray for Kings, Rulers and
Magistrates, and also for our Enemies, and all men, that they may be saved, so
far as is possible, and whose day of Salvation is not expired.

FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOM, THE POWER AND THE GLORY, AMEN.] It is God (...)
through Jesus Christ, and the holy Spirit, who are one only God over all
blessed forever, who has power to answer and grant us these Petitions, and
relieve all our wants and necessities, who can do abundantly above all that we
can ask or think, and his Kingdom rules in all, and is exalted over all, and
his Glory shines over all, and through all, to the Eyes which can see it. The
Darkness cannot hide his Glory, nor e^^lips it, as in it self, hut it shines
in the Darkness, as in the Light, though the darkened Eyes of the Minds of such
who are blinded with sin, cannot see it; and the Glory of God is over and upon
all his Works, and belongs who^y and alone unto him, and therefore unto him
it is to be purely returned and acknowledged, all Power, Kingdom, and Glory,
Wisdom, Riches, Blessing, H^^^r and Majesty, through Jesus Christ, by the help
of the holy Spirit, from the Hearts and Mouths of all his Children, whom he
has made alive unto him, and who alone can praise him, and shall, throughout
all Ages, and for evermore. Amen.

The Order of this Prayer is most excellent, from first to last; for what is
must proper and necessary to be first sought by (...) of God in Prayer, our
that his Name be sanctified, honored and glorified, by his revealing and
making it known in and among the Children of (...). And when his Name is
revealed and made known, that makes way for the coming of his Kingdom, and the
setting up and exalting of it in the Earth, and that prep^^eth and enable (...)
men to do his Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven; and to such who do his
Will, God gives them plentifully of the heavenly Bread of Life, and forgiveth
(...) all these sins formerly committed, and also preserves and (...) them
from being led into Tentation, and (...) when from Evil. And so full and
comprehensive (...) that there is nothing belonging to our spiritual Well-being
and eternal Salvation, that we need to seek of God, but it is contained under
some of the heads of it, and may be early reduced to some of them. Wherefore it
is the worthy subject of the daily Meditation of every good Christian, whether
his (...) and Attainment be great or small. It was give (...) by him who had
the Spirit above measure and contains (...) excellent and necessary Matter that
it cannot be supposed, but (...) have any measure of the Spirit of Christ will
find his Heart and Mind most frequently inclined to (...) therein, and to pray
in either the same or the like words, as the Spirit of God shall be pleased to
enable. And though it is (...) be present had (...) a Form that Christians are
spirited unto set it is a excellent Pa^sern of Prayer unto all, so that (...)
of Prayer do not agree with the same in (...) it is not a true and right
Prayer. Also the brevity of it and few words contained in it. do profitably
(...) us, hot, that God Almigh^y requires not (...) made of us, when we pray
in words, but that our Hearts be (...) before him and our Desires living and
(...), and (...) we shall have good Acceptance of God in the (...) Christ, the
(...) that to conclude Prayer (...) AM^^ is to (...) that our Prayer is in the
Name of Christ, who is (...) AMEN, that (...), the TRUTH.

G. K.

THE END.

