By His Excellency.

I Order Benjamin Harris to Print the Acts and Laws made by the Great and
General Court, or Assembly of this Their Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, that so the People may be Informed thereof.

Boston December 16 th. 1692. William Phips.

ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusets-Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston, the Eighth Day of June, 1692. And Continued by Adjournment,
unto Wednesday the Twelfth Day of October following: Being the Second Sessions.

Anno Regni Gulielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Quarto.

BOSTON Printed by Benjamin Harris, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council, 1692.

The Contents.
A N Act, setting forth General Privileges Page 1 An Act, For the Quieting of
Possessions, and Setl^ng of Titles. page 2 An Act, For Building with Stone or
Brick in the Town of Boston, and preventing Fire. page 4 An Act, For the
Settling and Distribution of the Estates of Intestates. page ^ An Act, For
prevention of Frauds and Perjuries. page 9 An Act, For the Equal Distribution
of Insolvent Estates. page 12 An Act, For Regulating the Assize of Cask, and
preventing Deceit in Packing of Fish, Beef, and Pork, for Sale. page 13 An Act,
For Punishing of Criminal Offenders. page 16 An Act, For the Punishing of
Capital Offenders. page 21 An Act, For the Suppressing of Unlicensed Houses,
and the due Regulation of such as are, or shall be Licensed. page 26 An Act,
For Impost and Excise. page 28 An Act, For the better Observation and keeping
the Lords Day. ibid. An Act, For Prevention of Common Nusances arising by
Slaughter-Houses, Still-Houses, etc. Tallow Chandlers, and Currters. page 30 An
Act, For Affirming of Former Judgments, and providing for Executions. page 31
An Act, For the orderly Consumating of Marriages. page 33 An Act, For the
Settlement and Support of Ministers and Schoolmasters. page 34 An Act For the
Settlement of the Bounds, and defraying of the Public and Necessary Charges
arising within each Respective County in this Province. page 36 A n A ct For
Regulating of Townships, Choice of Town Officers, and setting forth their Power
page 37 An Act, For making of Lands and Tenements liable to the payment of
Debts. page 43 An Act For due Regulation of weights and Measures. page 45 An
Act, Against the Counterfeiting, Clipping, Rounding, Filing or impairing of
Coyns. page 47. An Act, For the Regulating and Encouragement of Fishery. page
48 An Act, For the Establishing of Judicatories and Courts of Justice, within
this Province page 49 An Act, Requiring the Taking the Oaths, appointed to be
taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy. page 56 An Act For the
establishing of Form's of Oaths. page 58 An Act, For the Establishing of
Presidents and Forms of Writts, and Processes. page 61 An Act For regulating
Fees. page 69 An Act, For ascertaining the number, and regulating the House of
Representatives page 75. An Act, For the Prevention of Danger by the French
residing within this Province page 78 A n A ct, against Conjuration, W
itchcraft, and dealing with evil and wi^hal Spirits. page 79 A n A ct, For
regulating the former assesiment and for granting an addition^^ Supply of
Money. page 80 A n A ct, For the better securing the liberty of the subject,
and for prevention of illegal imprisonment. page 85 A n A ct for the reviving
of an act for continuing of the Local Laws. And one other A ct for sending of
Soldiers to the relief of the Neighboring Provinces, and Colonies page 90
Acts and Laws, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusets-Bay, in New England. etc.
An Act, Setting forth General Priveledges.
B E it Declared and Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives, of
Their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, in General
Court, Assembled and by the Authority of the same. That all and every the
Rights and Liberties of the People, in this present Act mentioned shall be
firmly and Strictly holden and Observed.

That is to say,

THat no Freeman shall be taken and Imprisoned, or be Disseized of his
Freehold, or Libertys, or his Free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or in
any manner Destroyed, Nor shall be Passed upon Adjudged or Condemned, but by
the Lawful Judgment of his Peers or the Law of this Province.

Justice nor Right shall be neither sold denied or deferred to any Man within
this Province.

No Man shall be twice Sentenced for one and the same Crime, Offense or
Trespass.

No Aid, Tax, Tallage, Assessment, Custom, Loan, Benevolence, or Imposition
whatsoever, shall be Laid, Assessed, Imposed or Levied on any of Their
Majesty's Subjects, or their Estates, on any Color or Pretense whatsoever but
by the Act and Consent of the Governor, Council and Representatives of the
People, Assembled in General Court.

No Man of what State or Condition soever shall be put out of his Lands or
Tenement, nor be taken, nor Imprisoned, nor Disherited, nor Banished, nor any
ways Destroyed, without being brought to answer by due process of Law.

All Trials shall be by the Verdict of Twelve Men, Peers or Equals, and of the
Neighborhood* and in the County or Shire where the Fact shall arise or grow;
Whither the same be by Indictment, Information, or otherwise against the Person
Offending, except in Cases where the Law of the Province shall otherwise
provide.

In all Capital Cases there shall be a Grand Inquest who shall first present
the Offense and then Twelve Men of the Neighborhood to Try the Offender, who
after his Plea to the Indictment, shall be allowed his Reasonable Challenges.

In all Cases whatsoever, Bail by sufficient Sureties, shall be Allowed and
taken, Unless for Treason or Felony, plainly and especially expressed, and
mentioned in the Warrant of Commitment.

Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be understood to Extent to
Discharge out of Prison upon Bail, and Person taken in Execution for Debt, or
otherwise Legally Sentenced by the Judgment of any of the Courts of record
within this Province.

All Lands and Heritages within this Province shall be free from Year, Day, and
Wast, Escheats and Forfeitures, upon the Death of Parents, or Ancestors,
Natural, Casual, or Judicial, and that for ever: Except in cases of High
Treason.

An Act, For the Quieting of Possessions, and Settling of Titles.
WHEREAS for the Preventing of Contests and Lawsuits, referring to Housing and
Lands, (there having been a) Neglect in many Persons, in the Infancy of these
Plantations, to Observe a Legal Course and Method for the Passing and
Confirmation of Sales and Alienations.

It was Ordered and Enacted by the Late Governor and Company of the
Massachusets-Bay, in the Year 1657.

That any Person or Persons, who either by Themselves, ten years quiet
Possession to give a Tide.
or by their Grantees, or Assigns; before the Law made for direction about
Inheritances, Bearing Date October the Nineteenth, One Thousand Six Hundred
Fifty Two, have Possessed and Occupied as his or their own Proper Right, in Foe
Simple, any Houses or Lands within this Jurisdiction, and shall so continue,
whether in their own Persons, their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other Person or
Persons, from by, or under them, without Disturbance, Let, Suit, or Denial,
Legally made, by having the Claim of any Person thereto, Entered with the
Recorder of the County, where such Houses or Lands ly; with the Names of the
Persons so Claiming, and the Quantity and Bounds of the Lands, and Houses,
Claimed; And such Claim prosecuted to Effect within the Term of Five Years
next, after the Twentieth of May, One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty and Sever,
Every such Proprietor, His or Her Heirs, and Assigns, by Virtue of such
Possession, shall for ever after enjoy the same, without any Lawful Let, Suit,
Disturbance, or Denial, by any after-Claim of any Person or Persons whatsoever;
any Law, or Custom to the Contrary Notwithstanding.

Which before Recited Law referring to Possession, having been found by long
Experience, to be of great Benefit and Service, unto Their Majesty's Subjects,
within this Their Province.

It is Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, And by the Authority of the same. That the said Law be
and hereby is Ratifyed and Confirmed: And to Continue and Remain in Full Force
as Formerly.

And for the further Quieting of Possessions and Settling of Titles.

It is also Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid.

That every Person and Persons for the Future shall have the like benefit of
Possession, Three Years Quiet Possession to make a Title.
who by Him or Themselves, Grantees, or Assigns were Possessed of any Houses or
Lands, within this Province in His or Their own proper right; upon the (...)
Day of this Instant Month October. And shall continue in such Possession for
the Space of Three Years next after, without Disturbance or Action brought
against them.

Provided this Act shall not be understood to Bar the Title of any Infant,
Savings
Feme-Covert, or Person Non Compo^ Mentis: Imprisoned, or in Captivity, who
shall have the like time of Three Years next after such Imperfection Removed,
to pursue their Challenge to any Houses or Lands wherein they have Interest o^
Title. And for all Persons beyond Sea, the Time of Seven Years, from the Date
hereof, shall be allowed them to pursue their Challenge as aforesaid.

An Act, For Building with Stone or Brick in the Town of Boston, and preventing
Fire.
WHEREAS Great Desolations and Ruins have sundry times happened by Fire,
breaking out in the Town of Boston, principally occasioned by reason of the
joining and nearness of the Buildings, being mostly of Timber, and covered with
Shingle. For the better preventing of such Accidents for the future, and Damage
and Loss thereby.

Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor. Council, and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly. And it is Enacted by the Authority of
the same.

That henceforth no Dwelling House, Buildings in Boston to be of Brick or Stone
and covered with Slate.
Shop, Warehouse, Barn, Stable, or any other Housing of more than Eight Feet in
Length, or Breadth, and Seven Feet in Height, shall be Erected and Set up in
Boston, but of Stone or Brick, and covered with Slate or Tyle, unless in
particular cases where necessity requires; being so judged and signified in
writing under the Hands of the Justices, and Select-men of the said Town, or
major part of both; the Governor with the Advice and Consent of the Council
shall see cause to Grant License unto any person to build with Timber, or cover
with Shingle. Governor and Council to grant License to build with Timber^^ in
Case.
And if any person shall presume to Erect, or cause to be Erected, any Frame or
Building contrary hereto; upon Conviction thereof, before two Justices of Peace
( Quorum Unus) such Building shall be deemed a common Nuisance and the Owner of
such Frame or Building shall enter into a Recognizance to Demolish the same;
and in Default of Entering into such Recognizance, shall be Committed to Prison,
until he do cause the same to be Demolished; Penalty for transgressing this Act.
or else such Building shall be Demolished by Order of the Quarter Sessions of
the Peace within the said County, and the Charge thereof to be Levied by
Distress, and Sale of such Offenders Goods, by Warrant from the Court, of
Quarter Sessions.

And it is further Ordered and Enacted,

That in all Void and Unbuilt Places, which shall hereafter be improved for
Building, or when at any time any total Consumption or Desolation shall happen
in any Street or Lane within the said Town, it shall be in the power of the
Justices of the Peace of said Town then in being, together with the Select Men,
or the major part of both, to State and Lay out such Streets, Ways and
Passages, Justices and Select men to lay out Streets. etc.
as may be most for the Convenience and Accommodation of the Place: As also
where any Desolation has happened, to Regulate and Enlarge other narrow and
crooked Lanes or Passages. AND where any particular persons shall have their
Land taken away or lessened thereby; a Jury of Twelve Men shall be appointed by
two Justices of the Peace, and Sworn to Ascertain the value thereof, to be paid
by the person, to whose Land the same shall be added, A Jury to Asscertain the
Value of any Person^ Land laid to any Street.
or by the Neighborhood or Town, in proportion to the benefit or convenience
and shall have thereby. And every person Building as aforesaid with Brick or
Stone, shall have liberty to Set half his Partition W^ll in his Neighbors
Ground, so that he leave Toothing in the Corners of such Walls for his
Neighbor to adjoyn unto, who when he shall Build, such Neighbor adjoining,
shall pay for one half of the said Partition Wall, so far as it shall be Built
against. Party Wall to stand half in the Neighbors ground
And in case of any Difference arising, the Select men shall have power to
appoint meet persons to value the same, or lay out the Line between such
Neighbors. AND whereas several Houses and other Buildings have been Erected
and Set up since the year 1688 contrary to the Law made by the General Court of
the Massachusetts Colony;

It is hereby Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Owner of such House or Buildings so Set up, contrary to said Law,
shall cause the same to be Covered with Slate or Tyle; or otherwise such Houses
or Buildings shall be deemed a common Nuisance, and the Owner thereof Proceeded
against accordingly*

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,

That when any Fire shall happen to break out either in Boston, Two or 3 of the
chief Military Officers to Order the pulling down or blowing up of Houses to
stop Fire.
or any other Town within this Province, two or three of the Chief Military or
Civil Officers of the same Town, shall, or may, and hereby are Empowered to give
Directions for the pulling down, or blowing up any such House or Houses that
shall be by them adjudged meet to be pulled down or blown up, for the stopping
and preventing the further Spreading of the same. And if it shall happen that
the pulling down or blowing up any such House or Houses by the Directions
aforesaid, shall be the occasion of stopping the said Fire, or that the Fire
stop before it come to the same. That then all and every Owner of such House or
Houses, shall Receive reasonable Satisfaction, and be paid for the same, by the
rest of the Inhabitants; Where the Fire is stopped by pulling down or blowing up
any House the owner to be paid.
whose Houses shall not be Burnt; who are hereby Empowered to make such Rate or
Rates, for the Raising and Levying of such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be
thought convenient by the Select-Men and Justices of said Town for that end.

PROVIDED always, That if the House where the Fire shall first Begin and Break
out, shall be adjudged fit to be pulled down or blown up to hinder the further
spreading and increase of the same. That then the Owner of such House shall
receive no manner of Satisfaction for the same. Any thing in this Act contained
notwithstanding.

An Act, For the Settling and Distribution of the Estates of Intestates.
WHEREAS Estates in these Plantations do consist chiefly of Lands which have
been subdued and brought to Improvement, by the Industry and Labor of the
Proprietors, with the Assistance of their Children, the younger Children
generally having been longest and most Serviceable unto their Parents in that
behalf; who have not Personal Estates to give out unto them in Portions or
otherwise to Recompense their Labor.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Court or Assembly. And it is Ordained by
the Authority of the same.

That every person lawfully Seized of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
within this Province, Persons Seized of Lands in fee simple any dispose of the
same by will. etc.
in his own proper right in Fee Simple, shall have power to give, and dispose,
and devise, as well by his Last Will and Testament in Writing, as otherwise by
any Act Executed in his Life all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to and
among his Children or others, as he shall think fit at his Pleasure. And if no
such Disposition, Gift, or Devise be made by the Owner of any such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments; the same shall be subject to a Division, with his
Personal Estate, and be a like Distributed, according to the Rules herein after
Expressed for Intestate Estates. And when and so often as it shall happen, That
any person dies Intestate; Administrators to the Estate of Intestates how to be
granted
Administration of such Intestates, Goods and Estate shall be granted unto the
Widow or next of Kin to the Intestate, or both, as the Judge for Probate of
Wills, and granting of Administration^ shall think fit, who shall thereupon
take Bond with Sureties in manner as (...) directed by the Statute of the 22th
and 23th of Charles the Second, and shall and may proceed to call such
Administrators to account for, and touching the Goods of the Intestate: And
upon due Hearing and Consideration thereof, (Debts, Funeral and just Expenses
of all forts being first allowed) the said Judge shall, and hereby is fully
Empowered to Order and make a just Distribution of the Surplusage, or remaining
Goods and Estate ^s well Real as Personal in manner following: That is to say,
One Third Part of the Personal Estate to the Wife of the Intestate for ever,
Distribution of Intestate Estates
besides her Dower or Thirds in the Houses and Lands during Life, where such
Wife shall not be otherwise Endowed before Marriage, and all the Residue of the
Real and Personal Estate by Equal Portions to and among his Children, and such
as shall Legally Represent them; (if any of them be dead) other than such
Children, who shall have any Estate by Settlement of the Intestate in his
lifetime Equal to the others Shares. Children advanced by Settlement, or
Portions not equal to the others Shares, to have so much of the Surplusage as
shall make the Estate of all to be Equal, except the Eldest Son then Surviving,
(where there is no Issue of the Firstborn or of any other Elder Son) who shall
have two Shares, or a double portion of the whole; and where there are no Sons,
the Daughters shall Inherit as Coparceners. The Division of the Houses and
Lands to be made by five sufficient Freeholders upon Oath, or any Three of
them, to be Appointed and Sworn by the Judge for that end: unless where all the
Parties Interested in any Estate being Legally capable to Act, shall mutually
agree of a Division among themselves, and present the same in Writing under
their Hands and Seals; in which case, such Agreement shall be accepted and
allowed for a Settlement of such Estate, and be accounted valid in Law, being
Acknowledged by the Parties Subscribing before the Judge, and put upon Record.

PROVIDED Nevertheless, That where any Estate in Houses and Lands cannot be
divided among all the Children, without great prejudice to, or spoiling of the
whole; being so Represented, and made to appear unto the said Judge, the Judge
may order the whole unto the Eldest Son, if he accept it, or to any other of
the Sons successively, upon his Refusal: He paying unto the other Children of
the Deceased, their Equal, and proportiona^^e Parts or Shares of the true value
of such Houses and Lands. Upon a just Apprizement thereof, to be made by Three
Sufficient Freeholders upon Oath, to be Appointed and Sworn as aforesaid, or
giving good Security to pay the same in some convenient time, as the said Judge
shall Limit, making reasonable allowance in the Interim, not exceeding six per
Cent. per Annum. And if any of the Children happen to Dye, before he or she
come of Age, or be Married; the Portion of such Child Deceased, shall be
equally divided among the Survivors.

And in case there be no Children, nor any Legal Representatives of them, then
one Moity of the Personal Estate shall be allotted to the Wife of the Intestate
for ever; and one Third of the Real Estate, for Term of Life. The Residue both
of the Real and Personal Estate, equally to every of the next of Kin of the
Intestate, in equal degree, and those who Legally Represent them. No
Representatives to be admitted among Collaterals after Brothers and Sisters
Children. And if there be no Wife, all shall be Distributed among the Children,
and if no Child, to the next of Kin to the Intestate in equal degree, and their
Legal Representatives as aforesaid, and in no other manner whatsoever. And
every one to whom any Share shall be allotted, shall give Bond with Sureties
before the said Judge of Probate; if Debts afterward be made to appear, to
Refund and Pay back to the Administrator, His or Her Ratable part thereof, and
of the Administrators Charges. The Windows Thirds or Dower in the Real Estate,
at the Expiration of her Term to be alike Divided as aforesaid. Right of Appeal
saved.
Saving to any Person agrieved at any Order, Sentence or D^cres made for the
Settlement and Distribution of any Intestate Estate, their Right of Appeal unto
the Governor and Council. Every Person so appealing, giving security to
Prosecute the Appeal with Effect.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That if any Executor or Executors of the Will of any Person deceased,
Executors to cause Probate of Wills to be made in thirty days next after the
Testators Death.
Knowing of their being so named and Appointed, shall not within the Space of
Thirty days next, after the Decease of the Testator, cause such Will to be
proved, and Recorded in the Registers Office, of the same County where the
Deceased Person last dwelt; or present the said Will, and declare his or their
refusal of the Executor ship. Every Executor so neglecting of his or her Trust
and Duty in that behalf, (without just Excuse made and accepted for such delay)
shall forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds Per Month, from and after the Expiration
o^ the said Thirty Days, until he or they shall cause Probate of such Will to
be made, Penalty for Neglect.
or present the same as aforesaid. Every such Forfeiture to be had and
recovered by Action, or Information, in the Inferior Court of Pleas, in the
same County: And to be disposed of, one Moity thereof, to the use of the Poor
of the Town, where the Deceased Person last dwelt; and the other Moity to him
or them that shall Inform and Sue for the same. And upon any such refusal of
the Executor, or Executors, the Judge shall commit Administration of the Estate
of the Deceased, Cum Testament^ annexo unto the Widow or next of Kin to the
Deceased, Upon Refusal Administration to be committed: Cum Testamen to annexo
Executors by Wrong.
and upon their refusal to one or more of the Principal Creditors, as he shall
think fi^^.

And if any person or persons shall Alienate or Imbezel any of the Goods or
Chattels of any person Deceased* before he or they have taken out Letters of
Administration, and Exhibited a true Inventory of all the known Estate of the
party Deceased. Every person or persons so Acting, shall stand Chargeable, and
be liable to the Actions of the Creditors and other persons grieved, as being
Executors in their own wrong. And the Judge shall cause a Citation to be made
out unto the Widow, or next of Kin; and upon their Neglect of appearance, or
refusal, may Commit Adminastration of any such Estate, to some one or more of
the Chief Creditors, if accepted by them, or others, as he shall think fit,
upon their refusal.

And whereas, according to the former practice of the Courts, Bonds for due
Administration of the Estates of Intestates, Bonds for Administration to the
County Treasurer, to be put in Suit by the Judge.
were taken in the Name of the County Treasurer, and the Obligation made to
him, his Successors in Said Office or Assigns; many of which are still
depending.

It is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Judge for Probate of Wills, and Granting of Administrations in the
Countys respectively: be, and hereby are fully Empowered and Authorized, to call
all such Administrators to account, and if need be, to put the said Bonds or
any of them in suit, who shall be, and hereby are to be held and Esteemed the
Assignees of the County Treasurer in that behalf to all Intents: Constructions
and Purposes in the Law whatsoever.

An Act, For Prevention of Frauds and Perjuries.
FOR Prevention of many Fraudulent Practices which are commonly endeavored to
be upheld by Perjury, and Subornation of Perjury.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court, and by the Authority of the same,

That from and after the last Day of December in this present Year One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety and Two. Parole Leases and Interest of Freehold shall have
the force of Estates, at will only.
All Leases, Estates, Interests of Freehold, or Term of Years, or any uncertain
Interest of, in, or, out of any Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
made or created by Livery and Scis^^ only, or by Parole, and not put in writing
and Signed by the Parties, so making or creating of the same, or their A^^^ts
thereunto Lawfully Authorized by writing, shall have the Force and Effect of
Leases, or Estates at will only, and shall not either in Law or Equity be
deemed or taken to have any other or greater Force or Effect; any consideration
for making any such Parole Leases or Estates, or any former Law or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Except nevertheless, all Leases not exceeding the Term of Three Years from the
making thereof, Except Leases not Exceeding three years, etc.
whereupon the Rent Reserved to the Landlord, during such Term shall amount
unto two third parts at the least of the full improved value of the thing
Demised.

And moreover, That no Leases, Estates or Interests, either of Freehold, No
Leases or states of Freehold to be granted or surrendered by word.
or Term of Years, or any uncertain Interest of in, to or out of any Messuages,
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, shall at any time after the said last day of
December, be Assigned, Granted, or Surrendered, unless it be by Deed or Note in
Writing, Signed by the Party so Assigning, Granting or Surrendering the same, or
their Agents thereunto lawfully Authorized by Writing, or by Act and Operation
of Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That from and after the said last day of December, Promises and Agreements by
Parole.
no Action shall be brought whereby to Charge any Executor or Administrator
upon any special Promise, to answer Damages out of his own Estate, (2) or
whereby to Charge the Defendant upon any special Promise to answer for the
Debt, Default or Miscarriages of another person, (3) or to charge any person
upon any Agreement made upon consideration of Marriage, (4) or upon any
Contract or Sale of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or any Interest in, or
concerning them; (5) or upon any Agreement that is not to be performed within
the space of one year from the making thereof; (6) unless the Agreement upon
which such Action shall be brought, or some Memorandum or Note thereof shall be
in Writing, and Signed by the Party, to be Charged therewith, or some other
person thereunto by him lawfully Authorized.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That from and after the said last day of December, Devises of Lands to be in
Writing and attested by three or four Witnesses,
all Devises and Bequests of any Lands or Tenements, shall be in Writing, and
Signed by the Party, so Devising the same, or by some other person in his
presence, and by his express Directions, and shall be Attested and Subscribed
in the presence of the said Devisor, by three or four credible Witnesses, or
else shall be utterly void and of none Effect.

And moreover, no Devise in Writing of Lands, How the same shall be revocable.
Tenements or Hereditaments, or any Clause thereof, shall at any time after the
said last day of December, be Revocable, otherwise than by some other Will or
Codicil in Writing, or other Writing declaring the same, or by Burning,
Cancelling, Tearing or Obliterating the same by the Testator himself, or in his
presence, and by his Directions and Consent; (2) But all Devises and Bequests
of Lands and Tenements shall remain and continue in full force, until the same
be Burnt, Cancelled, Torn or Obliterated by the Testator, or his Direction in
manner aforesaid, or unless the same be altered by some other Will or Codicil
in Writing, or other Writing of the Devisor, Signed in the presence of three or
four Witnesses, declaring the same; any former Law or Usage to the contrary
Notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That from and after the said last day of December, All Declarations or
Creations of trust to be in Writing.
all Declarations or Creations of Trusts, or Confidences of any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, shall be manifested and proved by some Writing,
Signed by the Party who is by Law enabled to declare such Trust, or by his Last
Will in Writing, or else they shall be utterly void and of none effect.

Provided always, trusts arising, transferred or extinguished by implication of
Law excepted.
That where any Conveyance shall be made of any Lands or Tenements, by which a
Trust or Confidence shall or may arise or result by the Implication or
Construction of Law, or be Transferred or Extinguished by an Act or Operation
of Law, then, and in every such case, such Trust or Confidence shall be of the
like Force and Effect as the same would have been, if this Act had not been
made; any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted,

That all Grants and Assignments of any Trust or Confidence, Assignments of
trust shall be in writing
shall likewise be in Writing, Signed by the Party, Granting or Assigning the
same by such Last Will or Devise, or else shall be utterly void and of none
Effect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. Contract for Sale of
Goods for Ten Pounds or more.


That from and after the said last day of December, No Contract for the Sale of
any Goods, Wares and Merchandises, for the price of Ten Pounds, or upwards,
shall be allowed to be good, except the Buyer shall accept part of the Goods so
Sold, and actually receive the same, or give something in Earnest to bind the
Bargain, or in part of payment, or that some Note or Memorandum in Writing of
the said Bargain, be Made and Signed by the Parties to be Charged by such
Contract, or their Agents thereunto lawfully Authorized.

And for prevention of Fraudulent Practices, Nuncupative Wills.
in Setting up Nuncupative Wills, which have been the occasion of much Perjury.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That from and after the aforesaid last day of December, No Nuncupative Will
shall be good, whereby the Estate thereby Bequeathed, shall exceed the value of
Thirty Pounds, that is not proved by the Oaths of Three Witnesses (at the
least) that were present at the making thereof, nor unless it be proved that
the Testator at the time of pronouncing the same, did bid the persons present,
or some of them, bear witness, that such was his Will, or to that effect; nor
unless such Nuncupative Will were made in the time of the last Sickness of the
Deceased, and in the House of his or their Habitation or Dwelling, or where he
or she has been Resident, for the space of ten days, or more, next before the
making of such Will, except where such person was surprised or taken Sick,
being from his own home, and Dyed before he returned to the place of his or her
Dwelling.

And be it further Enacted,

That after six months passed after the speaking of the pretended Testamentary
Words, no Testimony shall be received to prove any Will Nuncupative, except the
said Testimony, or the Substance thereof were committed to writing within six
days, after the making of the said Will.

And be it further Enacted,

That no Letters Testamentary, or probate of any Nuncupative Will, shall pass
the Seal of any Court, Probate of Nuncupative Wills.
till fourteen days at the least after the Decease of the Testator, be fully
expired, nor shall any Nuncupative will be at any time received to be proved,
unless process have first issued to call in the Widow, or next of Kindred to
the Deceased, to the end they may contest the same, if they please.

And be it further Enacted,

That no Will in writing, concerning any Goods or Chattels, or Personal Estate,
shall be Repealed; (...) shall any Clause, Devise or Bequest therein, be
altered or changed by any ^^^ds, or Will, by word of mouth only, except the
same be in the Life of the Testator, committed to Writing, and Read to the
Testator, and allowed by him, and proved to be so done by Three Witnesses at
the least.

Provided always, Soldiers and Mariners Wills excepted
That notwithstanding this Act, any Soldier being in actual Military Service,
or any Mariner or Seaman being at Sea, may dispose of his Movables, Wages, and
Personal Estate, as he or they might have done before the making of this Act.

An Act, For the Equal Distribution of Insolvent Estates.
B E it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly. And it is Enacted and Ordained by the
Authority of the same. Insolvent Estates to be proportioned to the Creditors.
The Judge of Probate to appoint Commissioners.


That where the Estate of any person Deceased, Public notice to be given in
the County where the Deceased last dwelt, in the two next Counties.
shall be Insolvent or insufficient to pay all Just Debts, Six or twelve Months
to be allowed for bringing in of claims The Commissioners to make Report
which the Deceased owed, the same shall be set forth, and distributed to and
among all the Creditors in proportion unto the Sums to them respectively owing,
so far as the said Estate will Extend. For which end the Executors or
Administrators appointed to any such Insolvent Estate before payment to any be
made, shall Represent the Condition and Circumstances thereof unto the Judge
for Probate of Wills, and granting Administrations, within the same County in
which such Deceased person last dwelt, and the said Judge shall Nominate and
Appoint two or more fit persons to be Commissioners, with full power to
receive, and Examine all Claims of the several Creditors, and how they are made
out. And such Commissioners shall cause the time and place for their Meeting to
attend the Creditors, to be Published and made known, by passing up the same in
some Public places in the Shire Town of that County where such Deceased person
last dwelt, and of the two next adjoining Countys: And Six or Twelve Months
time (as the Circumstances of any Estate may require) shall be allowed by the
Judge unto the Creditors for the bringing in of their Claims, and proving their
Debts, at the end of which Limited time, such Commissioners shall make their
report, and present a Lift of all the Claims unto the said Judge, who shall
Order them meet Recompense out of the Estate for their Care and Labor in that
affair; as also shall Order the Sickness and necessary Funeral Expenses of the
Deceased, to be first paid, and the Residue and Remainder of the Estate to be
paid and distributed to and among the Creditors, that shall have made out their
Claims, in due proportion to the Sums to them respectively Owing, The Widows
Dower saved.
according as the Estate will bear; saving unto the Widow (if any be) her right
of Dower according to Law in Houses and Lands of the Deceased, the Widows Dower
at the Expiration of her Term, to be distributed among the Creditors in a like
Proportion. And no Process in Law shall be allowed against the Executors or
Administrators of any such Insolvent Estate so long as the same shall be
depending as aforesaid. And whatsoever Creditor shall not Enter and make out
his or her Claim with such Commissioners before the full Expiration of the
Limited time, such Person shall for ever after be debarred of his or her Debt,
unless he or she can find some further Estate of the Deceased, not before
Discovered, and put into the Inventory.

Further it is Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority aforesaid,

That Every Judge for Probate of Wills, and granting Administrations, within
the Respective Countys, be, and hereby are fully Authorized, The Judge of
Probate Empowered to Administer an Oath to persons suspected of Concealment.
and Empowered, to Require, and Administer an Oath, to any Person or Persons,
Suspected to have Concealed, Imbezelled, or Conveyed away, any of the Money,
Goods, or Chattels, left by any Person, or Persons deceased for the Discovery
of the same.

An Act, For Regulating the Assize of Cask, and preventing Deceit in Packing of
Fish, Beef, and Pork, for Sale.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives in
General Court assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That from and after the First Day of December next, all Sorts and Kinds, of
Thight Cask used for any Liquor, Fish, Beef, Pork, or any other Commodities,
Assize of Cask.
within this Their Majesty's Province, shall be of London Assize. That is to
say, Butts to contain One Hundred and Twenty Six Gallons. Gagers to be
appointed Cask to be marked by the Gager, and his Fee Every Cooper to have a
distinct brand Mark.
Puncheons Eighty Four Gallons. Hogsheads Sixty Three Gallons. Tearses Forty
Two Gallons Earrels Thirty one Gallons and a Half. And made of sound well
seasoned Timber, and into of Sap. And that fit Persons, be appointed, from time
to time, in all places needful, to View and Gage all such Cask; and such as
shall be found of due Assize, shall be Marked with the Gagers Mark, who shall
have for his Pains, Four pence Per Tunn, and every Cooper shall (...) his
distinct Brand-Mark on his own Cask; on Penalty of Forty Shillings. And
whosoever shall put to Sale any New Cask, Defective Cask to be Forfeited.
being defective, either in Workmanship, Timber, or Assize, as aforesaid; upon
Proof thereof, made before one Justice of the Peace, he shall Forfeit such
Cask, and be Fined the Sum of Ten Shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Justices of the Peace, Quarter Sessions to appoint gagers and
packers, and Swear them. Penalty of Refusal
at their First General Quarter Sessions, to be holden in each Respective
County, within this Province; shall Yearly, in every Town needful thereof,
Choose and Appoint a fit Person or Persons, to be Gagers and Packers, and them
to Swear to the Due Execution of their Office; which if any Person so
appointed, shall refuse, he shall pay the Sum of Forty Shillings, and another
shall be Chosen and Appointed in his stead. And every Gager and Packer shall
take care that all Cask in which he Packs Beef, Pork, Mackarel, Fish, or other
Goods committed to his care, be of true and full Assize, Ten Shilings penalty
for packing in any Cask under Assize.
and that he Pack the same in no other Cask whatsoever, on penalty of Ten
Shillings for every Cask by him Packed, that is or shall be defective in that
Respect. And if any of the beforementioned Provisions shall be packed into Half
Barrels, or Fi^kins, the same shall be made in Proportion to the Assize
aforesaid; and be marked by the Packer.

And for the preventing of Fraud and Deceit in the Packing of Pickled Fish;
Beef and Pork to be put to Sale.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That in every Town, The whole half and quarter of meat to be put up and not
the best left out Fish to be all of one kind
where such Goods are Packt up for Sale, the Gager or Packer of such Town, or
of the Town wherein they are put to Sale, or Shipped, shall see that it be well
and orderly Performed, (that is to say) Beef and Pork, the whole Half and
Quarter, and so proportionably, that the best be not left out, and so Fish and
Mackarel, that they be Packed all of one kind; and that all Casks so packed be
full, and the Fish sound and well Seasoned, Setting his Seal on all Cask so
packed, and he shall recieve of the owners for so Packing, Four Shil- per Ton
for packing and Sealing.
and Sealing, Four Shillings Per Ton. And if any such provisions, be put to
Sale, or Shipped off without the Packers mark, they shall be Forfeited.

And it is further Enacted,

That all sorts of green or pickled Fish, Fish, and Flesh for Transportation to
be Searched and Repacked by the Packer. Penalty on Masters and Mariners taking
any Provisions a B^ard, Unsealed
Sturgeon, or Flesh that shall be put up for Transportation to a Foreign
Market, shall be Searched, Surveyed and approved by a Sworn Packer, who shall
take strict care that the same be put up in Tight Cask of FullGage, Salted with
Suitable Salt. And such as shall be so saved, and for its Condition found
Merchantable, and full, the Packer shall Seal with such Brand-Mark, as shall be
assigned to the Town, and such other Cut-Mark added, as may denote the Sort of
Provision, and time when Packed. And all such other Provision as the Packer
shall find wholesome and useful, though for it is Q^ality it be not Merchantable;
he shall cause to be well Packed, Salted Filled, and Sealed with the Letter R.
and such other Letters as may sig^i^ie the Town, Specie, and time of Packing.
And if any Master of a Ship, or other Vessel, or any Officers, or Mariners,
belonging thereto shall recieve such Provisions not marked, and Sealed, as
aforesaid, aboard any of their Ships or Vessels, he or they who shall offend
therein, shall Forfeit Double the value of all such Provisions; and he that
owns the Provisions, shall Forfeit the same. Penalty for Shifting of Provisions
after Sealing.
And if any Cooper, or other person shall Shift any Fish or Flesh, either on
Board, or on Shore, after the same has been so Sealed and Marked by the
Packer, and Ship and Export the same, the Packer having not allowed thereof,
and anew Sealed and Marked the Cask where into such Provisions are Shifted: All
Persons Acting, Ordering, or Assisting therein, shall be Set in the Pillory,
not exceeding one hour, and shall likewise pay Double Damages to persons
wronged thereby.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That where any such Provisions have lain above three months under the Packers
Mark, Provisions that have lain three months packt in the Summer, to be
Reviewed.
betwixt the Months of May and October, they shall again, upon Exsportation or
Sale, be viewed or searched by the Packer, (that is to say) so many of them as
may probably discover the Condition of the whole; and if any be decayed or
deceitfully dealt with, the Packer shall Cull and Repack the same, so as to
distinguish, and mark them for Merchantable, or refuse, according to their
Condition. And if those who Ship or Export any such Provision, shall neglect or
refuse such second Search or Survey, the Packer is hereby Ordered and Empowered
to deface his former Mark, and for so doing, shall be paid as if he had Repackt
the same. And if the Owner Refuse to satisfy the Packer, such Packer shall
have Redress on Complaint to any justice of the Peace; who is hereby Empowered
to compel the payment thereof by Distress.

And it by further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Tarr that shall be Exposed to Sale, within this Province, shall be in
Barrels, half Barrels, Assize of Cask for Tarr.
and thirds of a Barrel of the Measure and Assize following; (that is to say)
the Barrel to contain Thirty Gallons, the half Barrel and third of a Barrel, of
the same Gage proportionably, and in no other Cask whatsoever. And all Cask to
be made of the same Assize, and Branded by the Cooper as aforesaid, on pain of
Forfeiture of all such Cask as are not of due Assize. And if any Tarr shall be
exposed to Sale in any Cask not branded as aforesaid, the same shall be
likewise Forfeited.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Fines, One half of the Fines and Forfeitures to be unto Their
Majesty's, and the other half to the Informer.
Penalties and Forfeitures arising by force and virtue of this Act, shall be
the one half to Their Majesty's, toward the Support of the Government of this
Province; and the other half to him or them that shall Inform and Sue for the
same in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That there be a Measurer of Salt, Measurer of Salt and Culler of Fish
and Culler of Fish in every Seaport Town within this Province, to be
appointed as aforesaid, who being likewise Sworn for the faithful Discharge of
that Office, shall Cull all Merchantable Fish, and Measure all Salt that shall
be Imported and Sold out of any Ship or other Vessel, and shall have
three-half-pence for every Hogshead of Salt by him so Measured, to be paid, the
one half by the Buyer, the other half by the Seller. And one penny per Quintal,
for every Quintal of Merchantable Fish by him Culled, to be paid, one half by
the Buyer, and the other half by the Seller.

An Act, For the Punishing of Criminal Offenders.
B E it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That if any person or persons shall profanely Swear or Curse in the hearing
of any Justice of the Peace, Cursing and Swearing
or shall be thereof Convicted by the Oaths of two Witnesses, or Confession of
the party, before any Justice or Justices of the Peace. Every such Offender
shall forfeit and pay unto the use of the Poor of the Town, where the offense
shall be Committed, the Sum of Five Shillings. And if the Offender be not able
to pay the said Sum, then to be set in the Stocks, not Exceeding two Hours. And
if any person shall utter more profane Oaths or Curses at the same time, and in
heating of the same person or persons, he shall forfeit and pay to the use
aforesaid the Sum of Twelve pence for every Oath or Curse after the first; or
be set in the Stocks three Hours. Presumption.
Provided that Every offense again this Law shall be Complained of and proved
as aforesaid within Thirty days next after the offense Committed.

Further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That every person, Convicted of Drunkenness by view of any Justice of Peace;
Drunkenness.
Confession of the party; or Oaths of Two Witnesses; Such Person so Convicted,
shall forfeit and pay unto the use of the Poor of the Town where Such Offense
is Committed, the Sum of Five Shillings for every such Offense: And if the
Offender be unable to Pay the said Sum; to be set in the Stocks, not exceeding
Three Hours; at the Discretion of the Justice or Justices, before whom the
Conviction shall be. And upon a second Conviction of Drunkenness, every such
Offender, over and above the penalty aforesaid, shall be Bound with two
Sureties in the Sum of Ten Pounds with Condition for the good Behavior: And
for want of such Sureties, shall be sent to the Common Goal, until he find the
same. PROVIDED, That no Person shall be Impeached or Molested for any Offense
against this Act, unless he shall be thereof Presented, Indicted or Convicted
within six Months after the Offense Committed. And the Justice or Justices
before whom Conviction of any of the aforesaid Offenses shall be, are hereby
Empowered and Authorized to Restrain or Commit the Offender, until the Fine
Imposed for such Offense, be satisfied; or to cause the same to be Levied by
Distress, and Sale of the Offenders Goods, by Warrant directed to the
Constable; returning the Overplus (if any be,) all such Fines to be Levied
within one Week next after such Conviction, and Delivered to the Select*Men, or
Overseers of the Poor, for the Use of the Poor as aforesaid.

It is further Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority aforesaid,

That whosoever shall Steal or Purloin any Money, Goods or Chattels, Theft
being thereof Convicted, by Confession, or Sufficient Witness upon Oath: Every
such Offender, shall Forfeit treble the value of the Money, Goods or Chattels
so Stolen or Purloined, unto the Owner or Owners thereof; And be further
punished, by Fine or Whipping; at the discretion of the Court or Justices, that
have Cognizance of such Offense; not exceeding the Sum of Five Pounds, or
Twenty Stripes. And if any such Offender be unable to make Restitution, or Pay
such Threefold Damages; such Offender shall be Enjoined to make Satisfaction be
Service: And the Prosecutor shall be, and hereby is Empowered to dispose of said
Offender in Service to any of Their Majesty's Subjects, for such Term as shall
be Assigned by the Court, or justices before whom the Prosecution was. And
every Justice of Peace in the County where such Offense is Committed, or where
the Thief shall be Apprehended, is hereby Authorized to Hear and Determine all
Offenses against this Law. PROVIDED, That the Damage exceed not the Sum of
Forty Shillings.

And if any Person shall Commit Burglary, by Breaking up any Dwelling House,
Burglary.
Warehouse, Shop, Mill, Malt-house, Barn, Out-House, or any Ship or other
Vessel, lying within the Body of the County, or shall Rob any Person in the
Field or Highways: Every Person so Offending, shall upon Conviction, be
Branded on the Forehead with the Letter B. and upon a Second Conviction, shall
be Set upon the Gallows for the space of one Hour, with a Rope about his Neck,
and one end thereof cast over the Gallows; and be severely Whipped, not exceeding
Thirty Nine Stripes: And upon a Third Conviction of the like Offense, shall
Suffer the pains of Death, as being Incorrigible; and shall likewise upon the
First and Second Convictions, pay treble Damages to the Party Injured, as is
Provided in case of Theft:

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That if any Man Commit Fornication with any single Woman; Fornication.
upon due Conviction thereof, they shall be Fined unto Their Majesty's, not
exceeding the Sum of Five Pounds; or be Corporally Punished by Whipping, not
exceeding Ten Stripes a piece; at the Discretion of the Sessions of the Peace,
who shall have Cognizance of the Offense. And he that is Accused by any Woman,
to be the Father of a Bastard Child, Begotten of her Body; she continuing
Constant in such Accusation, being Examined upon Oath, and put upon the
Discovery of the Truth in the Time of her Travail; shall be adjudged the
Reputed Father of such Child, Notwithstanding his Denial; and stand charged
with the Maintenance thereof, with the Assistance of the Mother; as the
Justices in the Quarter Sessions shall Order; and give Security to perform the
said Order; and to save the Town or Place where such Child is Born, free from
Charge for it is Maintenance; and may be Committed to Prison, until he find
Sureties for the same, unless the Plea's and Proofs made and produced on the
behalf of the Man accused, and other Circumstances be such as the Justices
shall see reason to Judge him Innocent, and acquit him thereof, and otherwise
dispose of the Child. And every Justice of the Peace upon his Discretion, may
Bind to the Next Quarter Sessions, him that is Charged, or Suspected, to have
Begotten a Bastard Child: and if the Woman be not then Delivered, the Sessions
may Order the Continuance, or Renewal of his Bond, that he may be forth coming
when the Child is Born.

Further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That every Justice of the Peace in the County where the Offense is Committed,
Power of the Justice of Peace.
may cause to be Staid and Arrested all Affrayers, Rioters, Disturbers, or
Breakers of the Peace, and such as shall Ride, or (...) Armed offensively
before any of Their Majesty's Justices, or other (...) Officers or Ministers
doing their Office, or elsewhere, by Night or by (...) in Fear or Affray of
Their Majesty's Liege People; and such others (...) shall Utter any Menaces or
Threatening Speeches: And upon view of such Justice or Justices, Confession of
the Party, or other Legal Conviction of any such Offense, shall Commit the
Offender to Prison, until he find Sureties for the Peace and good Behavior;
and Seiz and Take away his Armor or Weapons, and shall cause them to be
Apprized and Answered to the King as Forfeited: Breach of the Peace. Forcible
Entry and detainer
And may further punish the Breach of the Peace in any person that shall Smite
or Strike another, by Fine to the King, not exceeding Twenty Shillings; and
Require Bond with Sureties for the Peace; or Bind the Offender over to answer
it at the next Sessions of the Peace, as the Nature or Circumstance of the
Offense may be; and may make En^^iry of forcible Entry and Detainer, and cause
the same to be Removed; and make (...) (...) and Cries after Runaway Servants,
Thi^^s, and other Criminals.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That if any person or persons of the Age of Discretion (which is accounted
Fourteen Years, or Upwards) shall wittingly and willingly Make or Publish any
Lie or Libel, Lying and Libelling.
tending to the Defamation or Damage of any particular person or persons; Make
or Spread any False News, or Reports with intent to abase and deceive others:
Every such person or persons offending in any of the particulars
beforementioned, and being duly Convicted thereof, before one or more Justices
of the Peace, shall be Fined according to the degree of such Offense; not
exceeding the Sum of Twenty Shillings for the First Conviction; and find
Sureties for the good Behavior. And if the Party be unable to pay the said
Fine, then to be Set in the Stocks, not exceeding Three Hours; or be corporally
punished by Whipping, at the discretion of the Justice or Justices, before whom
the Conviction shall be; according as the Circumstances or Nature of the
Offense shall be. And the said Justice or Justices may Restrain and Commit the
Offender, until (...) pay the said Fine, and find Sureties for the good
Behavior; Or may cause the Fine to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods. And the Party or Parties grieved or injured by reason of any
of the Offenses aforesaid; shall or may take his or their Suit against any such
Offender or Offenders in any Court of Record.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person or persons upon his or their own Head or Imagination, or by
false Conspiracy and Fraud with others, shall wittingly, subtly, and falsely
Forge or Make; Forgery.
or subtly Cause, or wittingly Assent to be Forged or Made any False Deed,
Conveyance, or Writing Sealed, or the Will of any person or persons in Writing,
to the intent that the State of Freehold or Inheritance, Right, Title, or
Interest of any person or Persons of, in, or to any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments shall or may be Molested, Troubled, Defeated, Recovered or
Charged; or shall as is aforesaid, Forge, Make, or Cause, or Assent to be Made,
or Forged, any Obligation, or Bill Obligatory, Letter of Attorney, or any
Acquittance, Release, or other Discharge of any Debt, Account, Action, Suit,
Demand, or other thing personal; Or if any person or persons shall Pronounce,
Publish, or Show forth in Evidence, any such False and Forged Deed, Conveyance,
Writing, Obligation, Bill Obligatory, Letter of Attorney, Acquittance, Release
or Discharge, as true, Knowing the same to be False and Forged as is aforesaid,
to the Intent above Remembered; and shall be thereof Convicted, either upon
Action or Actions of Forger of False Deeds to be Founded upon this Act at the
Suit of the Pa^^y grieved, or otherwise according to the Order and due Course
of Law, or upon Bill or Information. That then every such Offender shall pay
unto the Party grieved his double Costs and Damages, to be found and Assessed
in such Court where the said Conviction shall be; and also shall be Set upon
the Pillory in some Market Town, or other open Place, and there to have one of
his Ears cut off, and also shall have and suffer Imprisonment by the space of
one whole Year, without Bail or Mainprize. And the Party or Parties grieved by
reason of any of the Offenses aforesaid, may take his or their Suit against any
such Offender or Offenders, in any Court of Record; where no Essoign,
Injunction or Protection shall be allowed the Party Defendant.

Provided always, and it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act,
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to charge any Judge of
Probate, or Register, with any the Offenses aforesaid, for putting their Seal
of Office to any Will to be Exhibited unto them, not knowing the same to be
False or Forged, for Writing of the said Will or Probate of the same. Nor to
any other Person or Persons that shall show forth or give in Evidence any False
or Forged Writing for true or good* being not party or privy to the Forging of
the same, nor knowing the same to be False or Forged, any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the authority aforesaid.

If Any Person or Persons; either by the Subornation, unlawful procurement,
reward, Sinister persuasion, or means of any other; or by their own Act,
Consent, or Agreement, shall Wilfully and corruptly; commit any manner of Wilful
Perjury, Wilful Perjury.
by his or their Deposition in any Court of Record, or being Examined Ad
Perpetuam rei memoriam, That then every Person and Persons so Offending, and
being thereof duly Convict, or Attainted By Law, shall for his or their
Offense, Loose and Forfeit +Twenty Pounds; the one Moity thereof, unto their
Majesty's, and the other Moity to such Person or Persons as shall be Grieved,
hindered or Molested by reason of any such Offense, that shall Sue for the same
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, Information, or otherwise, in any Court of
Record; in the which no Wager of Law, Essoign, Protection, or Injunction to be
allowed: And also to have Imprisonment by the Space of Six Months, without
Bail, or Mainprise. And the Oath of such Person or Persons so Offending, not to
be received in any Court of Record, until such time as the Judgment given
against the said Person or Persons, shall be reversed by attaint or otherwise;
and upon every such reversal, the Parties agrieved to recover his or their
Damages against all and every such Person and Persons, as did procure the said
Judgment so reversed, to be given against them or any of them, by Action or
Actions, upon his or their Case or Cases; according to the Course of the Common
Law.

AND if it happen, the Said Offender or Offenders, so Offending, not to have
any Goods or Chattels, to the Value of Twenty Pounds, that then He or they be
Set on the Pillory by the space of one whole hour, in some Market Town where
the Offense was Committed, or next adjoining to the place, where the Offense
was Committed; and to have both his Ears Nailed; and from thence forth to be
discredited and disabled for ever to be sworn in any Court of Record, until
such Time as the Judgment shall be reversed.

AND all and every person and persons who shall unlawfully and corruptly
procure any Witness or Witnesses, by Letters, Rewards, Promises, or by any
other Sinister and unlawful Labor or Means whatsoever; to Commit any wilful
and corrupt Perjury, in any Matter or Cause whatsoever Depending, or that shall
Depend in Suit and Variance, by any Writ, Action, Bill, Complaint, or
Information in any Court of Record; or to Testify in perpetuam rei memoriam:
Every such Offender, being thereof duly Convict, or Attainted by Law, shall
for his or their Offense be proceeded against, and suffer the like Pains,
Penalties, Forfeitures, and Di^ibility in all respects as abovementioned.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid,

That all the aforesaid Forfeitures and Sums of Money arising for any Offense
Mentioned in this Act, and every Branch thereof, and not otherwise disposed of;
shall be unto Their Majesty's, for and toward the Support of the Government of
this Province, and the Incident Charges thereof.

An Act, For the Punishing of Capital Offenders.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives in
General Court assembled. And by the authority of the same.

That all and every of the Crimes and Offenses in this present Act hereafter
mentioned be and hereby are declared to be Felony.

And every Person and Persons Committing any of the said Crimes or Offenses,
being thereof Legally Convicted, shall be Adjudged to Suffer the Pains of
Death. Idolatry.


IF any Man shall have or Worship any other god, but the TRUE GOD, he shall be
put to death.

If any Man or Woman be a WITCH; Witchcraft
that is, has or consulteth with a Familiar Spirit, they shall be put to death.

If any person shall presume to Blaspheme the Holy Name of GOD, Blasphemy
FATHER, SON or HOLY GHOST, either by wilful or obstinate denying the True God
or His Creation, or government of the World, or shall Curse God in like manner,
or Reproach the Holy Religion of God, as if it were but a Politic Device to
keep Ignorant people in Awe, or shall utter any other kind of Blasphemy of the
like nature or degree; he shall be put to death. High Treason


If any person or persons shall compass or imagine the Death of Our Sovereign
Lord the King or of Our Lady the Queen, or shall Levy War against Our said Lord
and Lady the King and Queen, or adhere unto Their Enemies, giving to them aid
and comfort, and thereof be attainted or convicted of open Deed by their Peers
upon the Testimony and Deposition of Two lawful and credible Witnesses on Oath,
brought before the Offender Face to Face, at the time of his Arraignment; or
Voluntary confession of the Party Arraigned: Then every such person and persons
so as aforesaid Offending shall be deemed, declared, and adjudged to be
Traitors, and shall suffer the Pains of death, and also Lose and Forfeit as in
cases of High Treason.

If any person shall commit Wilful-Murder upon premeditated Malice, Hatred,
Cruelty, Murder
or sudden Heat of Anger: Every such person shall be put to death.

If any person shall Slay another through Guile, Poisoning
either by Poisoning, or other Devilish Practice; every such person, their
Aiders, Abettors, Procurors, and Counselors, shall suffer death, as in case of
Wilful-Murder.

If any Woman be delivered of any Issue of her body, Male or Female,
Concealment of the Death of a Bastard Child, punished as in case of Murder.
which if it were born alive, should by Law be a Bastard; And that she
endeavor privately, either by Drowning, or secret Burying thereof, or any
other way; either by her self, or the procuring of others, so to conceal the
death thereof, that it may not come to light, whether it were Born alive or
not* but be concealed. In every such case the Mother so Offending, shall suffer
death as in case of Murder; Except such Mother can make proof by one Witness at
the least, that the Child whose death was by her so intended to be concealed,
was born dead.

If any Man lies with MANKIND, Sodo^^y.
as he lies with a Woman, they both shall be put to death.

If any Man or Woman have carnal Copulation with any BEAST, Bestiality.
or Bruit-Creature, they shall be put to death, and the Beast shall be slain
and burned.

If any Persons commit Incest in any of the particular instances, In^^ Levit.
^0. 11,12. etc.
made capital by the Law of God, they shall be put to Death.

If a Man shall Ravish any Woman committing carnal copulation with her by
force, Rape
against her will, he shall be put to death.

If any Man shall unlawfully and carnally know and abuse any Woman child, under
the age of Ten Years, every such unlawful and carnal knowledge shall be Felony:
And the Offender thereof, being duly convict shall suffer as a Felon.

If any Person of the Age of Sixteen Years, Burning
and upwards, shall Wittingly Willingly and Feloniously Burn or cause to be
Burned any Dwelling House, Meeting House, Storehouse, or Ship, or shall in
like manner set on Fire any Out-house, Barn, Stable, Stack of Hay, Corn or
Wood; Whereby any Dwelling House, Meeting House Storehouse, or Ship, shall
happen to be Burned: Every such Offender shall be put to death.

If any shall Piratically and Feloniously Seiz any Ship or other Vessel, Piracy
whether in the Harbor, or on the High Seas; Or shall Rise up in Rebellion
against the Master, Officer, Merchant or Owner of any such Ship, or other
Vessel and Goods, and Dispoil and Dispossess them thereof and Exclude the right
Owners or those betrusted on their hehalf, Every such Offender together with
their Accomplices, being Legally Convicted thereof, shall be put to death.

Provided always that any of such Company (who through fear or force have been
deemed to comply with such wicked Action) shall upon their first Arrival in any
Port or Harbor speedily repair to some Justice of the Peace and make Discovery
of such Piracy, they shall not be liable to the aforesaid Penalty of Death.

An Act, For the Suppressing of Unlicensed Houses, and the due Regulation of
such as are, or shall be Licensed.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court, and by the Authority of the same. None to keep a
house of Common Entertainment, or Sell strong Drink publicly or privately
without License on penalty of forty shillings.


That no person or persons whatsoever (other than such as upon producing (...)
from the Selectmen of the Town where they dwell, or who shall be otherwise,
thought fit by the Justices themselves, shall be Licensed by the said Justices
and Quarter Sessions) may presume to be a common Victualler, Inn^^^der,
Taverner, or Seller of Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider or strong Liquors by Re^^il: Nor
shall any presume without such License, to Sell Wine or Strong (...) privately
by a less Quantity than a Quarter Cask, and that delivered and carried away all
at one time: On pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Forty Shillings for every such
Offense upon due Conviction thereof; One half to the Informer and the other to
the use of the poor. Upon second conviction to give bond for the good
behavior. Licenses to be renewed yearly and bond given
One half thereof to the Informer, and the other half to the use of the Poor of
the Town where such Offense is committed. And upon a Second Conviction, besides
the Forfeiture of Forty Shillings as aforesaid, shall Enter into Recognizance
with one or more Sureties for the good Behavior, especially not to Transgress
the Law in that Respect.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Licenses be Renewed yearly, and Bond given for the due Observance of
the same, and of the Laws, and that the Person Licensed, shall use his License
in such House as shall be therein named, and no other.

And if the Justices in Quarter Sessions shall think fit to License any person
or persons not presenting a Certificate as aforesaid from the Select-men,
Justices may grant License without Certificate of the Select-men upon notice
given.
the Clerk of the Sessions, before granting License to any such, shall signify
the name and desire of every such person unto the Select-men of the Town where
such person dwells, one month beforehand, that so they may have opportunity
and liberty to offer their Objections against it, if any shall be.

And forasmuch as the ancient, and principal use of Inns, Taverns, Alehouses,
Victualling-Houses, and other Houses for common Entertainment is for the
Receipt, Relief and Lodging of Travelers and Strangers, and the Refreshment of
persons upon lawful Business; or for the necessary supply of the wants of such
poor persons as are not able by greater Quantities to make their provision of
Victuals, and are not intended for Entertainment and Harboring of Lewd or Idle
People to spend or consume their Money or Time there: Therefore to prevent the
Mischiefs and great Disorders happening daily by the abuse of such Houses:

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That no Taverner, Games and Gaming forbidden in Publick-houses, on pain of
Forty Shillings.
Innkeeper, Ale-house-keeper or Victualler, shall have or keep in or about
their Houses, Outhouses, Yards, Backsides, Gardens or Places to them
belonging, any Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls, Shuffleboard, Billiards, Coyts,
Cales, Logats, or any other Implements used in Gaming; nor shall suffer any
person or persons Resorting unto any of their Houses, to Use or Exercise any of
the said Games, or any other unlawful Game or Sport within their said Houses,
or any of the Dependences as aforesaid, or Places to them belonging; On pain of
Forfeiting the Sum of Forty Shillings for every such Offense, upon due
Conviction thereof; the said Fine to be disposed of as aforesaid. Penalty on
Gamesters
And every person convicted of Playing as aforesaid in any such Houses or
Dependences thereof, shall Forfeit the Sum of Six Shillings and Eight Pence, to
be disposed of as aforesaid.

And further it is Enacted by the authority aforesaid. Penalty for refusing to
give Evidence against persons Selling without License.


That any person duly Summoned to give in Evidence respecting the Breach of
this Act, in any of the Branches thereof, (other than the party himself, his
Children or Servants) that shall refuse to give in upon his Oath when so
required, what he knows relating to the Premises, shall Forfeit Forty Shillings
to the use of the poor of the Town as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That every Justice of the Peace in the County where he dwells, One Justice may
hear and determine all Offenses against this Act,
as well as the Justices in Quarter Sessions, are hereby respectively Empowered
to hear and determine all Offenses against this Act, and may Commit the
Offender to Prison, until he pay the said Fine, and Enter into Recognizance as
aforesaid for the good Behavior; Or may cause the Fine to be Levied by
Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, returning the Overplus, if any be.

An Additional Act, For Impost and Excise.
B E it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Court
assembled. And by the authority of the same

That there shall be paid by the Importer, for all Wines Imported into this
Province not particularly named, and mentioned in an Act Entitled, An Act for
Impost, Excise and To^^^age of Shipping, made at the first Sessions of this
Court, the Sum of Ten Shillings per Hogshead, and so proportionably for greater
or lesser quantities. And that there be paid by those that Sell any of the said
Wines by Retail, the Sum of sixpence per Gallon Excise, and so proportionably
for greater or lesser quantities. And to be under the same Regulation,
Inspection and Forfeitures as is provided by said Act; and the said payments to
be made unto the Commissioners appointed for the Receiving of the Rates and
Duties therein mentioned. This present Act to remain and continue in force only
during the time set for continuance of the Act before Recited, and no longer.

An Act, For the better Observation and Keeping the Lord's Day.
B E it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is Enacted by the Authority of
the same.

That all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, shall on that Day carefully
apply themselves to Duties of Religion and Piety, publicly and privately; and
that no Tradesman, Artificer, Labourer, or other person whatsoever, shall upon
the Land or Water, Do or Fxercise any Labor, Business, or Work of their
ordinary Callings; nor use any Game, Sport, Play or Recreation on the
Lord's Day, or any part thereof; Labor and Sports Prohibited on penalty of Five
Shillings
(Works of Necessity and Charity only excepted) upon pain that every Person so
Offending shall Forfeit Five Shillings.

Further it is Ordered and Declared,

Than no Traveller, Drover, Horse-Courser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or any
their Servants, Traveling prohibited on penalty of Twenty Shillings.
shall Travel on that Day, or any part thereof, except by some adversity they
were Belated and forced to Lodge in the Woods, Wilderness, or Highways, the
night before; and in such case, to Travel no further than the next Inn or Place
of Shelter, on that Day, upon the penalty of Twenty Shillings.

Further it is Ordered,

That no Vintner, Inn-holder, or other Person keeping any Publick-house of
Entertainment, Public houses not to entertain any others than Strangers and
Lodgers on penalty of Five Shillings for every person.
shall Entertain or Suffer any of the Inhabitants of the Respective Towns where
they Dwell, or others not being Strangers or Lodgers in such Houses, to abide
or remain in their Houses, Yards, Orchards or Fields Drinking, or idly spending
their time on Saturday night after the Sun is Set, or on the Lords Day, or the
Evening following; upon the pal^ and penalty of Five Shillings for every
person, payable by themselves respectively that shall be found so Drinking or
Abiding in any such Public House or Dependences thereof as aforesaid; and the
like Sum of Five Shillings to be paid by the Keeper of such House, for every
person Entertained by them.

And for the better Execution of all and every the foregoing Orders, One
Justice of the Peace may hear and determine any breach of this Act.
every Justice of the Peace within his County shall have Power and Authority to
Convent before them, any person or persons, who shall offend in any of the
particulars before mentioned, and upon his own view, or other legal Conviction
of any such Offense, to impose the Fine and Penalty for the same, and to
Restrain or Commit the Offender until it be satisfied; or to cause the same to
be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, returning the Overplus
(if any be) and in case any such Offender be unable or refuse to satisfy such
Fine, Fines for breach of this Act to be to the use of the poor.
to cause him to be put in the Cage or set in the Stocks, not exceeding three
hours: All Fines and Penalties accruing by this Act, to be to the benefit and
relief of the Poor of such Town where the Offense is committed; and delivered
into the hands of the Select-men, or Overseers of the poor for that end.

And all Masters and Governors of Families are hereby required to take
effectual care that their Children, Servants and others under their immediate
Government, do not transgress in any of the foregoing particulars.

And all and every Justices of the Peace, Constables and Tything-men are
required to take effectual care and endeavor that this Act in all the
particulars thereof be duly observed; Justices, Constables etc. required to see
that this Act be observed.
as also to restrain all persons from Swimming in the water, unnecessary and
unseasonable walking in the Streets or Fields in the Town of Boston, or other
places, keeping open their Shops, or following their Secular Occasions or
Recreations in the Evening preceding the Lord's Day, or on any part of the said
Day or Evening following.

And all persons are strictly required to be obedient to, and aiding and
assisting such Justices, Constables and other Officers herein, as they will
answer the contrary at their Peril.

An Act, For Prevention of Common Nusances arising by Slaughter-Houses,
Still-Houses, etc. Tallow Chandlers, and Curriers.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Select-Men of the Towns of Boston, Salem and Charlstown Respectively,
or other Market Towns in the Province; with two or more Justices of the Peace
Dwelling in the Town, or two of the next Justices in the County, shall at or
before the last day of March, Slaughter-Houses, Still-Houses, etc. to be in
certain places assigned, and no other.
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, Assign some certain places in each of
said Towns (where it may be least offensive) for the Erecting or Setting up of
Slaughter-Houses, for the Killing of all Meat; Still-Houses, and Houses for
Trying of Tallow, and Currying of Leather (which Houses may be Erected of
Timber, the Law referring to Building with Brick or Stone notwithstanding) And
shall cause an Entry to be made in the Town-Book, of what places shall be by
them so Assigned, and make known the same by Posting it up in some Public
Places of the Town. At which Houses and Places respectively, and no other, all
Butchers and Slaughter-men, Distillers, Chandlers and Curriers shall Exercise
and Practice their Respective Trades and Mysteries; on pain that any Butcher or
Slaughter-man transgressing of this Act, by Killing of Meat in any other place,
for every Conviction thereof before one or more Justices of the Peace, shall
Forfeit and Pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings. And any Distiller, Chandler or
Currier offending against this Act, for every Conviction thereof before Their
Majesty's Justices at the General Sessions of the Peace for the County, shall
Forfeit and Pay the Sum of Five Pounds; one third part of said Forfeitures to
be to the use of Their Majesty's, for the Support of the Government of the
Province, and the Incident Charges thereof; one Third to the Poor of the Town,
where such Offense shall be Committed; and the other Third to him or them that
shall Inform and Sue for the same.

And for preventing of Cruelty to Bruit Creatures.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. Cruelty to bruit Creatures
forbidden.


That all Calves, Sheep or Lambs brought alive to the Market, shall be either
driven; or carried in Carts, Sleds, Panyers or Boats, and not otherwise; on
pain of Forfeiting of all Calves, Sheep or Lamb, passing toward, or brought
alive to the Market, laid across, or hanging by the sides of Horses, (as has
been usual) or in any other way contrary to the true Intent of this Act: One
half of all such Forfeitures to be unto the Informers, who shall Seiz and
Prosecute for the same; and the other Moity to the use of the Poor of the Town,
where such S^^^ure shall be made, to be distributed by the Select-men or
Overseers of the Poor.

And all Select-men, Overseers of the Poor, Constables, Tythingmen and other
Officers in any Town upon their own view, or Information of any Transgression
of this Act within their respective Precincts; shall and hereby are Empowered to
Seiz or cause to be Seized all Calves, Sheep or Lambs that shall be carrying or
brought alive to the Market, in any other way than is before Directed. And upon
due proof thereof, made before one or more Justices of the Peace, shall be
Forfeited, and the same or the value thereof be disposed of as aforesaid.

And all Veal or other Meat exposed to Sale, that shall be blown up or winded,
shall be alike Forfeited and Disposed of.

An Act, For Affirming of former Judgments, and providing for Executions.
WHEREAS upon Trials had in the late Courts of Judicature within the several
Colonies, now by Their Majesty's Royal Charter United and Incorporated into one
Province, by the name of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, several
Judgments were obtained, of which Execution remains to be done, and some
others are depending by Appeal, according to the course and practice of the
Courts then in being. To the end that there be no failure of Justice for want
of a due course of Law, for the Prosecuting, Obtaining and Levying of the same.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That where any Appeal, as aforesaid, is depending, having not been heard;
every such Appellant shall have a Summons from the Clerk of the Superior
Court, unto the adverse party, to be Served upon him seven days inclusive
before the Courts Sitting, Requiring him to appear at the first Superior
Court, to answer the said Appeal; where the same shall be Heard and Tried
according to former Usage upon the first Evidence and no other: And the
Judgment to be Affirmed or Reversed as the Case shall there be Judged upon
Trial. And if the Appellant neglect to Appear or Prosecute his Appeal, the
former Judgment shall ^e Affirmed, and Execution Awarded accordingly.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That where Judgment has passed in any County Court, or Court of
Commissioners, and Execution has not been Taken out and Levied for satisfying
of the same; the Party for whom any Judgment was so given his Executors or
Administrators shall have a Writ of Scire Facias from the Clerk of the
Inferior Court of Pleas, within the same County, in which such Judgment was
obtained, unto the Adverse Party to appear before said Court, to show cause (if
any there be) why Execution should not Issue forth. And in case of Non
Appearance, or that sufficient cause be not shown to the Court, the former
Judgment shall be affirmed, and Execution granted accordingly, the Costs of
this Trial to be added unto the same* Provided, that the said Writ of Scire
Facias be Served seven days inclusive before the Courts Sitting.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That after one year Expired next after giving Judgment in any Court of Record
within this Province, No Execution after one year expired, to be granted
without a Scire facias.
no Execution for such Judgment shall be Issued out, until a Writ of Scire
Facias has been Granted out of the same Court, and Served upon the Adverse
Party, as is before directed, or left by the Sheriff, his Undersheriff or
Deputy, at his Dwelling, or Place of usual and last Abode, requiring him to
appear and show cause (if any he have) why Execution ought not to be done. And
upon his Non Appearance, or not showing of sufficient cause as aforesaid; The
Court shall thereupon Award Execution.

An Act, For the Orderly consummating of Marriages.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every Justice of the Peace within the County where he resides, Justices
of Ministers respectively to Solemnize Marriages
and every Settled Minister in any Town, shall and are hereby respectively
Empowered and Authorized to Solemnize Marriages, within their Respective Towns
and Counties, betwixt Persons that may lawfully Enter into such Relation,
having the consent of those whose immediate care and Government they are under,
and being likewise first Published by asking their Banns at three several
Public Meetings in both the Towns where such Parties respectively Dwell;
Publishment Low to be made.
or by Posting up their Names and Intention at some public place in each of
the said Towns, fairly written, there to stand by the space of Fourteen Days,
and producing Certificate of such Publishment under the Hand of the Town Clerk
or Constable of such Towns respectively.

And the Fee to be paid for every Marriage, shall be Three Shillings; Fee for
Marriage, etc.
and for Publishment and Certificate thereof, One Shilling.

And be it further Enacted

That whoever shall presume to deface or pull down any such Publishment,
Penalty for pulling down publishments
posted up in Writing, before the Expiration of the time, shall be Fined to the
use of the Poor of the Town, the Sum of Ten Shillings, being Convicted thereof,
before one or more Justices of the Peace: And if the Party be unable to pay the
said Fine, then to be Set in the Stocks one whole Hour.

And every Justice and Minister shall keep a particular Register of all
Marriages Solemnized before any of them, Marriages to be Registered.
and make a Return thereof at the end of each Quarter of a year unto the Clerk
of the Sessions of the Peace within the same County, to be by him Registered;
who is hereby Empowered thereto, and shall be paid by every such Justice and
Minister, Threepence for each Marriage so Returned.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That all Controversies concerning Marriage and Divorce, shall be Heard and
Determined by the Governor and Council. Divorce


An Act, For the Setlement and Support of Ministers and Schoolmasters.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same.

That the Inhabitants of each Town within this Province, shall take due care
from time to time, to be constantly provided of an Able, Learned Orthodox
Minister or Ministers, of good Conversation, to Dispense the Word of God to
them; which Minister or Ministers shall he suitably Encouraged and sufficiently
Supported and Maintained by the Inhabitants of such Town. Contracts and
Agreements to be made good
And all Contracts, Agreements and Orders heretofore made, or that shall
hereafter be made by the Inhabitants of any Town within this Province,
respecting their Ministers or Schoolmasters, as to their Settlement or
Maintenance, shall remain good and valid according to the true Intent thereof,
the whole time for which they were or shall be made, in all the particulars
thereof, and shall accordingly be pursued, put in Execution and Published. And
where there is no Contract and Agreement made in any Town respecting the
Support and Maintenance of the Ministry; or when the same happens to be
Expired, and the Inhabitants of such Town shall neglect to make suitable
provision therein; Upon Complaint thereof made unto the Quarter Sessions of the
Peace for the County where such Town lies; Neglect of making suitable provision
for Ministers to be redressed by the Quarter Sessions The Court of Quarter
Sessions to take care that no Town be destitute of a Minister.
the said Court of Quarter Sessions shall, and hereby are Empowered to Order a
Competent Allowance unto such Minister according to the Estate and Ability of
the Town: the same to be Assessed upon the Inhabitants by Warrant from the
Court, directed to the Select-men, who are thereupon to proceed to make and
proportion such Assessment in manner at is directed for other Public Charges,
and to cause the same to be Levied by the Constables of such Town, by Warrant
under the Hands of the Select-men; or of the Town Clerk by their Order.

Be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That where any Town shall be destitute of a Minister qualified as aforesaid,
and shall so continue by the space of six Months, not having taken due care for
the procuring, Settling and Encouragement of such Minister, the same being made
to appear upon Complaint unto Their Majesty's Justices at the General Sessions
of the Peace for the County, the said Court of Quarter Sessions shall, and
hereby are Empowered to make an Order upon every such defective Town, speedily
to provide themselves of such Minister as aforesaid, by the next Sessions at
the furthest; and in case such Order be not complied with, then the said Court
shall take effectual care to procure and Settle a Minister qualified as
aforesaid, and Order the Charge thereof and of such Ministers Maintenance to
be Levied on the Inhabitants of such Town.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Respective Churches in the several Towns within this Province, shall
at all times hereafter, Use, Exercise and Enjoy all their Privileges and
Freedoms respecting Divine Worship, Church Order and Discipline. Churches to
enjoy their Privileges and Freedoms.
And shall be Encouraged in the peaceable and regular Profession and Practice
thereof.

And further it is Enacted,

That every Minister being a person of good Conversation, Ministers Chosen by
the major part of the Inhabitants, to be the Minister of such Town.
Able, Learned and Orthodox, that shall be Chosen by the major part of the
Inhabitants in any Town, at a Town-Meeting duly warned for that purpose,
(notice thereof being given to the Inhabitants fifteen days before the time for
such Meeting^) shall be the Minister of such Town; and the whole Town shall be
obliged to pay toward his Settlement and Maintenance, each man his several
proportion thereof.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid*

That every Town within this Province, having the Number of Fifty House-holders
or upwards, School for Reading and Writing. Grammar School.
shall be constantly provided of a Schoolmaster to Teach Children and Youth to
Read and Write. And where any Town or Towns have the number of One Hundred
Families or Householders, there shall also be a Grammar School set up in every
such Town, and some discreet person of good Conversation well Instructed in the
Tongues procured to keep such School. Every such Schoolmaster to be suitably
Encouraged and Paid by the Inhabitants.

And the Select-men and Inhabitants of such Towns respectively shall take
effectual care and make due provision for* School masters to be Supported
the Settlement and Maintenance of such Schoolmaster and Masters.

And if any Town Qualified as before expressed, shall neglect the due Observance
of this Act, for the Procuring and Settling of any such Schoolmaster as
aforesaid, by the space of one year Every such Defective Town shall incur the
penalty of Ten Pounds for every Conviction of such Neglect, upon Complaint made
unto Their Majesty's Justices in Quarter Sessions for the same County, Penalty
for Neglect.
in which such Defective Town li^th; which penalty shall be toward the Support
of such School or Schools within the same County, where there may be most need,
at the discretion of the Justices in Quarter Sessions; to be Levied by Warrant
from the said Court of Sessions in proportion upon the Inhabitants of such
Defective Town, as other Public Charges, and to be paid unto the County
Treasurer.

An Act, For the Settlement of the Bounds, and Defraying of the Public and
Necessary Charges arising within each Respective County in this Province.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the authority of the same

That all Counties as they now lie, and are named, continue and remain distinct
Counties to all intents and purposes in the Law whatsoever. Counties to
continue as formerly
And that there be a County Treasurer annually Chosen for each Respective
County, being a Freeholder within the same; and to be Chosen by the Votes of
the Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of each Respective Town, duly qualified
as is Provided by the Act for the Choice of Select-men, and other Town
Officers; and at the same time, such Votes to be given in Writing, and Sealed
up by the Constable, by him to be kept and returned unto the next Quarter
Sessions, to be held for said County, there to be Opened and Sorted by such as
the Court shall Appoint, in presence of the Justices; Choice of County*
Treasurer
and the Person having the Majority of said Votes, shall be Treasurer of such
County for that year, and be Sworn before said Court.

And for the due and equal Raising of Moneys for Defraying of the Charges
arising within each Respective County for the necessary Repairs and Amendment
of Bridges, Prisons, the Maintenance of poor Prisoners, and all other proper
County Charges:

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That when and so often from time to time as there shall be need of raising
Money for the ends aforesaid, in any County; County Charges, how to be defrayed
the Justices in Quarter Sessions for such County, receiving Information
thereof from the County Treasurer, shall agree and determine the whole Sum to
be Raised, and each Respective Towns proportion of the same, as near as may be
according to the Rule for Raising of Money for the Province Charges, and shall
Issue forth their Order unto the Select-men of the Respective Towns to Asses
the same upon the Inhabitants of such Town, each one his due and equal
proportion thereof according to the Rule before mentioned, as near as may be,
to be paid in Money, or Equivalent thereto; and to make a distinct List of each
persons name and proportion, under their Hands; and such List Commit unto the
Constable or Constables of such Town, with a Warrant Signed by the Town Clerk,
directed unto the said Constable or Constables to Levy and Collect the said
Assessment of each one his respective proportion: And to pay in their said
Collections unto the County Treasurer, or his Order, within the time set for
the same: And to make distress upon every person neglecting or refusing to make
payment: And in default of Goods or Chattels whereon to make Distress, to
Commit the Party to the Common Goal of the County, until he make payment, or
otherwise be Released by the Justices in Quarter Sessions. And if any person or
persons think themselves Over-Rated in any such Assessment, they shall be Eased
by the Assessors, making the same to appear; or in default thereof, by the
Court of Quarter Sessions.

And further it is Enacted

That all Moneys so Collected, be Improved and Employed for the Ends within
mentioned, as the Court of Quarter Sessions shall from time to time by their
Order in Writing, direct and appoint. And the County Treasurer in each
respective County, shall Account unto the Court of Quarter Sessions, or whom
they shall Appoint, for all his Receipts and Payments.

An Act For Regulating of Townships, Choice of Town-Officers, and Setting forth
their Power.
B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the authority of the same. Bounds of Townships
to contiue as heretofore Granted and Settled. And to be run, and Marks Renewed
once in 3 years under a penalty.


That the Bounds of all Townships shall be, and continue as heretofore Granted
and Settled respectively, and shall be run betwixt Town and Town, and Marks
Renewed once in three years, by two of the Select-men of each Town, or any
other two persons whom the Select-men shall Appoint; the Select-men of the most
ancient Town to give Notice unto the Select-men of the next adjacent Towns, of
the time and place of Meeting for such Perambulation, six days beforehand, on
pain of Forfeiting Live Pounds by the Select-men of any Town, that shall
Neglect their Duty in any of the particulars aforesaid: Two Thirds thereof unto
the use of the Poor of such Town; and the other Third unto the Select-Men of
any of the next adjacent Towns, that shall Inform and Sue for the same, in the
Inferior Court of Pleas within the same County, to be Recovered by Action or
Information.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That each Proprietor of Lands lying Unfenced, Proprietors of Lands unfenced or
in common Fields to run the Lines once in two years.
or in any common Field, shall once in two years, on six days warning before
given him, by the next Proprietor or Proprietors adjoining, run the Lines, make
and keep up the Bounds between them, by sufficient met-Stones; on pain that
every Party so neglecting or refusing, shall Forfeit the Sum of Ten Shillings:
one half to the party moving, and the other half to the use of the Poor of the
Town, being Convented and Convicted of such Neglect or Refusal, before any
Justice of the Peace within the same County, who is hereby Empowered to Hear and
Determine the same.

And further it is Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That the Proprietors of the Undivided or Common Lands within each Town and
Precinct in this Province, where the same have been heretofore Stated, each
ones proportion being known, shall, and hereby are Empowered to Order, Improve
or Divide in such way and manner as shall be concluded and agreed upon by the
major part of the Interested; the Voices to be Collected and Accounted
according to the Interests. Some more Lands, how to be improved.
And the Proprietors of all Undivided or Common Lands not stated and
proportioned as aforesaid; shall, and hereby are Empowered to Manage, Improve,
Divide or Dispose of the same as has been, or shall be concluded and agreed on
by the major part of such Proprietors. That no Cottage or Dewlling Place in any
Town, shall be admitted to the privilege of Commonage for Woods, Timber and
Herbage, or any other the privileges which lie in Common in any Town, or
Peculiar, other than such as were Erected or Privileged by the Grant of such
Town or Peculiar before the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty One, or that
have been since, or shall hereafter be Granted by the Consent of any Town o^
Peculiar.

AND WHEREAS it has been a continued practice and custom in the several Towns
within this Province, annually to Choose Select-men or Townsmen, for the
ordering and managing of the prudential Affairs of such Town, and other
Town-Officers for the Executing of other matters and things, in the Laws
appointed by them to be done and performed.

Be it further Ordained and Enacted by the authority aforesaid. Qualification
of Voters in Town-Meetings.


That the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of each Town Ratable at Twenty
Pounds Estate, to one single Rate besides the Poll; shall some time in the
Month of March annually meet and convene together upon Notice given by the
Constable or Constables of such Town, or such others as the Select-men or
Townsmen shall appoint, to give Notice of such Meeting, and the time and place
for the same: Select-men, Constables and other Town-Officers to be annually
Chosen in March Town Clerk to be under Oath.
And by the Major Vote of such Assembly, then and there shall Choose Three,
Five, Seven, or Nine Persons, Able and Discreet, of good Conversation,
Inhabiting within such Town, to be Select-men or Townsmen, and Overseers of the
Poor, where other persons shall not be particularly Chosen to that Office
(which any Town may do as they shall find it necessary and convenient) as also
to Nominate and Choose a Town Clerk, who shall be Sworn truly to Enter and
Record all Town-Votes, Orders, Grants and Divisions of Land, made by such Town,
and Orders made by the Select-men; a Commissioner for Assessments, Constables,
Surveyers of Highways, Tything-men, Fence-viewers, Clerks of the Market
Sealers of Leather, and other ordinary Town Officers. And the Town, Clerk, or
two of the Select-men, shall forthwith make, and give out unto the Constable or
Constables of such Town, a List of the Names of those that shall be then Chosen
to the Office of Town Clerk, Constables, Tything-men, Clerks of the Market,
Sealers of Leather, and other Officers, of who^^ an Oath is by Law required;
Constables to Summon Town Officers to be Sworn under a penalty.
which Constable or Constables within the space of six days at furthest, shall
Summon each of them respectively to appear before the Quarter Sessions, if then
Sitting, or one of the next Justices of the Peace, to be Sworn to the faithful
Discharge of their Respective Offices and Trust, on penalty of Twenty Shillings
to the use of the Poor of the Town, to be paid by each Constable neglecting of
his Duty in that behalf, upon Conviction thereof before one Justice of the
Peace; and upon Non Payment, to be Levied by Distress. PROVIDED That no Person
in Commission for any Office, Person exempted from Serving as Constables.
Civil o^ Military, Church Officer, or Member of the House of Representatives
for the time being, nor any other who has Served as Constable within the space
of seven years before, shall be Chosen to the Office of Constable.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid* Towns or Select-men having
Instructions, to make Orders and Bylaws.


That the Freeholders and Inhabitants qualified as in this Act is mentioned in
each Respective Town, in any Town-Meeting, orderly warned according to the
Usage in such Town, or the major part so Assembled, or the Select-men having
Instructions given them in Writing by the Town for that purpose; Be, and hereby
are Empowered from time to time to make and agree upon such necessary Rules,
Orders and Bylaws for the directing, managing and ordering the Prudential
Affairs of such Town, as they shall judge most Conducing to the Peace, Orders
and Bylaws in Towns, to be approved by the Quarter Sessions. Penalty to be
Levied by Warrant from a Justice
Welfare and good Order thereof, and to annex Penalties for the observance of
the same, not exceeding Twenty-Shillings for one Offense, Provided that they be
not repugnant to the General Laws of the Province: And such Orders and Bylaws
being presented unto the Justices in Quarter Sessions, and approved of by them,
shall be Established, and Binding to all the Inhabitants of such Town, and the
penalty for breach of any of them by any of the Inhabitants, to be Levied by
Warrant of Distress from any Justice of the Peace before whom such Offender
shall be Convicted, to the use of the Poor of such Town.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Select-men or Townsmen Chosen as aforesaid, Select-men to make
Assessment for County and Town Charges
in each Town respectively, Be, and hereby and Empowered to assess the
Inhabitants and others Resident within such Town, and the Precincts thereof,
and the Lands and Estates lying within the Bounds of such Town, in just and
equal proportion as near as may be unto the County Charges, according as they
shall receive order from the Court of Quarter Sessions, to be held for the same
County; and to all Town Charges, each particular person according to his known
Ability and Estate, such Sum and Sums as has or shall be ordered, granted and
agreed upon from time to time by the Inhabitants in any Town-Meeting regularly
Assembled; or the major part of those present at such Meeting, for the
Maintenance and Support of the Ministry, Schools, the Poor, and for the
defraying of other necessary Charges arising within the said Town; Assessors or
Town Clerk to make out a Warrant for Levying the same
and thereof to make distinct and perfect Lists under their Hands, or the major
part of them, setting down every persons Name, and several proportion, and
shall thereupon make out a Warrant to be Signed by the said Assessors, or the
Town Clerk, by their Order (who are hereby respectively Empowered thereto)
directed unto the Constable or Constables of the said Town for the speedy
Levying and Collecting of such Assessments, and to pay in the same unto the
Select-men, or to such person as they shall appoint for Receiver, within the
time thereby prefixed. Distress to be made on Delinquents
And to make Distress upon all such who shall neglect or refuse to make
payment: And for want of Goods or Chattels whereon to make Distress, to Seiz
the person and Commit him to the Common Goal of the County, there to remain
until he pay the Sum upon him Assessed as aforesaid; unless the same or any
part thereof, upon application made unto the Quarter Sessions, shall be Abated.
Persons Over-rated to be Eased
And if any person think himself Over-rated, and make it so appear unto the
Assessors, he shall be Eased: And if they ^^fuse, such person agrieved may make
his Application unto the Justices in Quarter Sessions, who are hereby Empowered
to Rectify the same: And all Constables having any such Assessment committed
unto them, shall Settle and Issue their Accounts thereof with the Select-men,
or Receiver appointed by them, Constables to Settle and Issue their Accounts
with in 3 months after the Expiration of their year.
within three months after their time or year is Expired, on pain of Forfeiting
the Sum of Twenty Shillings per Month, for each Months Neglect afterward, to
the use of the Poor of such Town, and to be Levied by Distress upon such
Delinquent Constables Goods, by Warrant from one Justice of the Peace, being
Convented and Convicted of such Neglect before him, who is hereby thereto
Empowered.

Provided nevertheless, that every Constable at the end of every Three Months
shall pay in as aforesaid, so much as he shall have Collected within that time.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select-men or Overseers of the Poor in each Town (where there are
such Chosen, and specially Appointed for that Service) are hereby Empowered and
Ordered to take effectual care that all Children, Youth, Idle Persons and
Loiterers to be Employed. Upon refusal to labor, to be sent to the House of
Correction.
and other persons of able Body, living within the same Town or Precincts
thereof (not having Estates otherwise to Maintain themselves) do not live Idly,
or mispend their time in Loitering, but that they be brought up or employed in
some honest Calling, which may be profitable unto themselves, and the Public.
And if any person or persons ^it and able to work, shall refuse so to do, but
loiter and mispend his or her time, wander from place to place, or otherwise
misorder themselves; and thereof be Convicted before one or more Justices of
the Peace, such person or persons shall by such Justice or Justices be sent to
the House of Correction, and at their Entrance, be whipped on the naked back,
by the Master of such House, or such other as he shall procure, not exceeding
Ten Lashes; and be there kept to hard Labor, until he or she be discharged by
such Justice or Justices, or the Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the same
County. And it shall, and may be lawful for the Overseers of the Poor, or
Select-men in each Town, where there are no other persons specially Chosen and
Appointed to be Overseers of the Poor, Poor Children to be bound out
Apprentices.
and they are hereby Ordered with the Assent of two Justices of the Peace, to
Bind any poor Children belonging to such Town, to be Apprentices, where they
shall see convenient; a Man Child, until he shall come to the Age of Twenty One
Years, and a Woman Child, to the Age of Eighteen Years, or time of Marriage:
which shall be as effectual to all Intents and purposes, as if any such Child
were of full Age, and by Indenture of Covenant had Bound him or her self.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every person and persons, (except as in this Act is before excepted)
being duly Chosen as aforesaid, Penalty for not Serving in the Office of
Constable
to Serve in the Office of Constable, who shall refuse to take the Oath to that
Office belonging, and to Serve therein, if he be able in Person to) Execute the
same, shall pay the Sum of Five Pounds, to the use of the Poor of such Town.
And if in the Towns of Boston or Salem, the Sum of Ten Pounds, and shall
forthwith declare his acceptance or refusal, and the Town shall proceed to a
new Choice, and if such person refuse to pay down his Fine, he shall be
Convented before the next Sessions of the Peace, to be held for that County, in
which such Town (...), who upon Certificate under the Hand of the Town Clerk,
or two or more of the Select-men, that such person was Legally Chosen to the
Office of Constable, and showing no just cause to the Sessions for his Excuse;
the Justices shall Order a Warrant to be Signed by the Clerk of the Peace,
directed to only of the Constables then in being within such Town, to Levy the
said Fine by Distress and Sale of such Offenders Goods, returning the Overplus
(if any be) said Fine to be Delivered unto the Overseers of the Poor, or
Select-men, to the Use of the Poor of such Town.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person or persons come to Sojourn or Dwell in any Town within this
Province, Persons Entertained in any Town by the space of 3 months, and not
warned out, to be reputed Inhabitants.
or Precincts thereof, and be there Received and Entertained by the space of
Three Months, not having been warned by the Constable, or other Person whom the
Select-men shall Appoint for that Service, to leave the place, and the names of
such persons, with the time of their Abode there, and when such warning was
given them* returned unto the Court of Quarter Sessions; every such person
shall be Reputed an Inhabitant of such Town or Precincts of the same; and the
proper Charge of the same, in case through Sickness, Lameness, or otherwise
they come to stand in need of Relief, to be born by such Town; Unless the
Relations of such poor impotent person, in the Line or Degree of Father, or
Grandfather, Persons of Ability, to relieve their poor Relations.
Mother or Grandmother, Children or Grandchildren, be of sufficient ability;
than such Relations respectively shall Relieve such poor person, in such manner
as the Justices of the Peace in that County where such sufficient Persons
Dwell, shall Assess; on pain that every one failing therein, shall Forfeit
Twenty Shillings for every Months Neglect, to be Levied by Distress and Sale of
such Offenders Goods by Warrant from any two such Justices of the Peace (
Quorum Unus) within their Limits; which shall be employed to the Use and Relief
of such impotent poor person. PROVIDED nevertheless this Act shall not be
understood of any persons Committed to Prison, or lawfully Restrained in any
Town, or of such as shall come, or be sent for Nursing or Education; or to any
Physician or Chir^^geon to be Healed or Cured; but the particular persons who
Receive and Entertain any such, shall be the Towns Security in their behalf;
and be obliged to Relieve and Support them in case of need; upon Complaint made
to the Quarter Sessions, who shall accordingly Order the same.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That any porso^ orderly warned as aforesaid to depart any Town whereof he is
not an Inhabitant, Persons warned out of any Town; to depart in 14 days or else
to be sent by the Constable
and Neglecting so to do by the space of Fourteen Days (...) after such warning
given, may by Warrant from the next Justice of the Peace be sent and conveyed
from Constable to Constable, unto the Town where he properly belongs, or had
his last Residence, at his own Charge, if able to pay the same, or otherwise at
the Charge of the Town so sending him.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as there shall be occasion of a Town-Meeting for any
Business of Public Concernment to the Town, Constables to warn Town-Meetings.
there to be done. The Constable or Constables of such Town, by order from the
Select-men, or major part of them, or of the Town Clerk by their Order, in each
Respective Town within this Province shall warn a Meeting of such Town, having
order for the same in Writing; on pain that every Constable neglecting his Duty
in that respect; and being thereof Convicted before one Justice of the Peace,
shall Forfeit the Sum of Twenty Shillings, to the Use of the Poor of such Town,
Penalty for Neglect.
and to be Levied by Distress and Sale of such Offenders Goods, by Warrant from
such Justice of the Peace, upon Neglect or Refusal of payment. And in case the
Select-men in any Town shall unreasonably deny to call a Meeting of the
Inhabitants of such Town, upon any Public Occasion thereof, Justice to give
Warrant for Town-Meeting in case
the same being Complained of and made to appear to one of the next Justices of
the Peace within the same County; such Justice by his Warrant directed to the
Constable or Constables, may order a Meeting of the Inhabitants of such Town,
therein signifying the occasion thereof.

An Act, For making of Lands and Tenements liable to the Payment of Debts.
WHEREAS the Estates of Persons within this Province do chiefly consist of
Houses and Lands, which give them Credit, some being remiss in paying of their
just Debts; others happening to Dye before they have discharged the same.

It is therefore Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Court, and by the Authority of the same.

That all Lands or Tenements belonging to any person in his own proper right in
Fee Simple, shall stand charged with the payment of all just Debts owing by
such person, as well as his personal Estate, and shall be liable to be taken in
Execution for satisfaction of the same, where the Debtor, or his Attorney
shall not Expose to view, and Tender to the Officer Personal Estate sufficient
to answer the Sum mentioned in the Execution with the Charges. And all
Executions duly Served upon any such Houses and Lands, being Returned into the
Clerk's Office of the Court, our of which the same Issued, and there Recorded,
shall make a good Title to the Party, for whom they are so taken, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. Superior Court may Empower Executors, Administrators to Sell
Land for payment of Debts.
Also where the Goods and Movables of any person Deceased shall not be
sufficient to answer the just Debts which the Deceased owed: Upon
Representation thereof, and making the same to appear unto the Superior Court
within the County where such Deceased Person last Dwelt; the said Court are
hereby Empowered to License and Authorize the Executor or Administrator of such
Person Deceased to make Sale of all or any part of the Houses and Lands of the
Deceased, so far as shall be necessary to satisfy the just Debts which the
Deceased Owed at the time of his Death. And every Executor, or Administrator
being so Licenced and Authorized, shall, and may by virtue of such Authority
Make and Execute Deeds or Conveyance in due Form for such Houses and Lands as
they shall so Sell, which Instruments shall be a good Title to the Purchaser.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That where any person shall make Sale or other Alienation of any Lands or
Tenements to him of right belonging, with Intent to Defeat and Defraud his
Creditors of their just Debt, not Bona Fide for good and valuable consideration
paid. All such Sales and Alienations are to be deemed Covenous and Fraudulent,
and shall be of non; Effect to B^^ any Creditor from such Debt as is to him
Owing.

An Act For due Regulation of Weights and Measures.
TO the end that Weights and Measures may be one and the same throughout this
Their Majesty's Province.

B E it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Brass and Copper Weights and Measures formerly sent out of England,
with Certificate out of Their Majesty's Exchequer, to be approved Winchester
Measure according to the Standard in the Exchequer, be the public allowed
Standard throughout this Their Majesty's Province, for the Proving and Sealing
all Weights and Measures thereby. And the Constables of every Town throughout
this Province, not already Supplied, shall within three Months next coming,
provide upon the Towns Charge; One Bushel, one half Bushel, one Peck, one Half
Peck, one Ale Quart, one Wine-pint and Half-pint, One Ell^ one Yard, one Set
of Brass Weight, (...) Four Pounds, after sixteen Ounces to the Pound; with fit
Scales, and Steel Beam, tried and proved by the aforesaid Standard, and Sealed
by the Treasurer, or his Deputy in his Presence, (which shall be kept and used
only for Standards in the several Towns) who is hereby Authorized to do the
same, for which he shall receive from the Constables of each Town Twopence for
every Weight and Measure so Tried and Proved and Sealed. And the Constables of
every Town shall Commit those Weights and Measures unto the Custody of the
Select-men of their Towns for the time being, who with the Constables are
hereby Enjoined to Choose one Able Man for Sealer of all Weights and Measures
for their Town from time to time, and till another be Chose, who shall be
presented unto the next Court of Sessions, and there Sworn to the faithful
Discharge of his Duty: And shall have power to send forth his Warrants by the
Constable to all the Inhabitants of such Town, to bring in all such Weights and
Measures as they make use of, in the Month of April, from year to year, at such
time and place as he shall appoint, and make Return to the Sealer in Writing of
all persons so Summoned. That then and there all such Weights and Measures may
be Proved and Sealed with the Town Seal (which is likewise to be provided by
the Constables at each Towns Charge) who shall have for every Weight and
Measure so Sealed, one penny from the Owner thereof at the first Sealing. And
all such Weights and Measures as cannot be brought to their just Standard, he
shall Deface and Destroy, and after the first Sealing, shall have nothing, so
long as they continue just with the Standard.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That if any Constable, Select man or Sealer, do not duly Execute this Law so
far as to each and every of them appertains, they and each of them shall
Forfeit to Their Majesty's for every such Neglect, by the space of one Month
the Sum of Forty Shillings, toward the Support of their Government here. And
every person Neglecting to bring in their Weights and Measures at the time and
place appointed, being duly warned thereto, shall likewise Forfeit Three
Shillings and Four-pence; the one half whereof to be to Their Majesty's as
aforesaid, the other half to the Sealer aforesaid. And the penalty herein
mentioned, to be Levied by Distress by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid,

That in every Sea-port-Town within this Province, the Constable or Constables
are to provide upon the Towns Charge, One Hundred Weight, one Half Hundred, one
Quarter of an Hundred, and one Fourteen Pounds Weight made of Iron, to be
Tried, Proved and Sealed as aforesaid, and be kept as Standards in the said
several Towns to be used as before for other Weights and Measures is directed.

An Act, Against the Counterfeiting, Clipping, Rounding, Filing or Impairing of
Coins.
WHEREAS diverse False and Evil Disposed Persons have attempted and practiced
for Wicked Lucre and Gains sake, to Diminish Impair and Falsi^^e the Money, and
Coins Current within this Province, by Counterfeiting or Clipping, Rounding,
or Filing thereof, not only to the great Discredit of the Province, and the
Government thereof, but also to the great Loss and Damage of Their Majesty's
Subjects; and more is like to be if the same be not speedily met withal and
prevented.

For Remedy whereof,

B E it Enacted, and Declared, and Established, by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That the Coin of the Late Massachusetts Colony, Massachusetts Coin, and pieces
of Eight of 17 penny weight made current.
shall pass current at the rate it was Stamped for.

And Pieces of Eight, Sevil, Pillar, and Mexico, of full Seventeen penny
Weight, shall pass Current at Six Shillings Per Piece, and Half Pieces of Due
Weight Pro Rato, and Quarter Pieces of the same Coin, at Sixteen pence Per
Piece, and Realls, of the same Coin, at Eight Pence Per piece.

And whosoever from and after the Publication of this Act, shall Attempt and
Practice the Counterfeiting, or Clipping, Rounding, Filing, or otherwise
Diminishing, Penalty for Counterfeiting, Clipping etc. of Coyns.
or Debasing any of the Moneys and Coins Current within this Province; being
thereof Lawfully Convicted before the Justices of Assize; shall Forfeit double
the value of the Money, so Counterfeited, Clipped, Rounded or Filed; One Half
to Their Majesty's toward the Support of the Government; And the other Half to
the Informer. And shall also stand in the Pillory, in some open Place in the
Shire Town of that County where the Offense is Committed; and there have one of
His Ears Cut off.

An Act, For the Regulating and Encouragement of Fishery.
UPon Consideration of great Damage and Scandal, That has happened upon the
account of Pickled Fish, although afterward Dried and hardly discoverable; To
the great Loss of many, and also an ill Reputation on this Province, and the
Fishery of it.

B E it therefore Enacted, by the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
Convened in General Court, or Assembly, and it is Enacted by the Authority of
the same.

That no person or persons whatsoever, No Mackerel to be Salted up before the
first of July.
after the Publication hereof, shall Save or Salt any sort of Fish (that is
intended to be dried) in Cask or Fattes, or any other way) then what has
formerly and honestly been practiced for the making of dry Fish, on penalty of
Forfeiting all such Fish, so Salted and Pickled, whether it be Green or Dry:
How dry Fish shall be Saved.
The one Moiety thereof to the use of the Poor of the Town, where the Offense
is Committed, and the other Moiety to the person that shall Sue for the same.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That henceforth no Mackrel shall be Caught (except for spending whilst fresh)
before the first of July annually: And no person or persons whatsoever after
the publication hereof, shall at any time or place within this Province, Take,
Kill, or (...) ashore any Mackrell, with any sort of Nets or S^^ens whatsoever,
on penalty of Forfeiting all such Mackrel so Taken or Haled ashore, Penalty for
Taking Mackarel in Netts or (...)
and also all such Nets and Sa^ens which were so Employed: The one half thereof
to Their Majesty's, toward the Support of this their Government, and the other
half to him or them that shall Inform and Sue for the same. And all Justices
are hereby Empowered, and Required, to Grant their Warrants for the Seizing of
the same, and the aforesaid Forfeitures, or the Receiving of the like value in
Current Money of the Province.

An Act, For the Establishing of Judicatories, and Courts of Justice, within
this Province.
FOr the more Orderly Regulation and Establishment of Courts of Justice,
throughout this Province.

B E it Enacted and Ordained by his Excellency, the Governor, Council, and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly.

And it is hereby Enacted, and Ordained, by the Authority of the same.

That all manner of Debts, Trespasses, and other Matters not exceeding the
value of Forty Shillings, Justices Court
(wherein the Title of Land is not Concerned) shall and may be heard, Tried,
Adjudged, and Determined, by any of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, of
this Province, within the Respective Countys where he resides; Who is hereby
Empowered, upon complaint made, to grant a Warrant or Summons, against the Party
complained of, Seven Days before the day of Trial or Hearing, thereby
requiring him or them to appear and answer the said Complaint, and in case of
Non. Appearance, to Issue out a Warrant of Contempt, directed to the Constable
or other Officer, to bring the Contemner before him, as well to answer the said
Contempt, as the Plantiffs Action, and if he see cause to Fine the said
Contemner.

PROVIDED the said Fine Exceed not Ten Shillings, to be accounted for to the
Treasurer of the County, toward the Support of the Government, and after
Judgment given in either Case, may grant Warrants of Distress, directed to the
Constable or other Officer to Levy the said Fine, debt or damage with Charges,
upon the Defendants Goods and Chattels, who by virtue thereof shall expose the
same to Sale, returning the Overpl^s (if any be) to the Defendant. And for want
of such Distress to take the Body of such Defendant into (...), and him to
carry and convey to the common Goal, of the County or Preci^ct, there to
remain, until he has satisfied the Said Fine, Debt or Damage, with Charges.

And in case such Complainant be Nonsuited, or Judgment pass against him, then
the said Justice is hereby Empowered to Assess to the Defendant, reasonable
Costs against such Complainant, to be Levied and recovered in manner and form
above Expressed.

And the said Justice is hereby required to keep fair Records of all his
proceedings therein from time to time. Provided always nevertheless, That the
Party (...) have Liberty to Appeal to the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas,
to be Holden for the same County, He entering into Recognizance with one
sufficient Surety in double the value of the Debt or Damage Sued for, and
sufficient to answer all Costs to prosecute the said Appeal there with Effect,
and to abide the Order of the said Court; where such Case shall be Tried, there
to receive a Final Issue. Provided also, That the party Appealing, shall bring
the Copies of the whole Case to said Court; and each party shall be there
allowed the benefit of any further Plea or Evidence. And if upon any such new
Plea or Evidence, the Judgment happen to be Reversed, the Appellant shall have
no Costs Granted for the first Trial.

Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the authority aforesaid.

That there shall be Held and Kept in each Respective County within this
Province yearly, Quarter Sessions of the Peace
at the times and places hereafter named and expressed: Four Courts or Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, by the Justices of the Peace of the same County, who are
hereby Empowered to Hear and Determine all Matters relating to the Conservation
of the Peace, and Punishment of Offenders, and whatsoever is by them
Cognizeable according to Law. That is to say, For the County of Suffolk, at
Boston on the first Tuesdays in March, June, September and December. For the
County of Plymouth, at Plymouth, on the third Tuesdayes in March, June,
September and December: For the County of Essex, at Salem, on the last
Tuesdayes in June and December; at I^swich, on the last Tuesday in March, and
at Newbury, on the last Tuesday in September: For the County of Middlesex, at
Charlstown, on the second Tuesdayes in March and December; at Cambridge, on the
second Tuesday in September, and at Concord on the second Tuesday of June: For
the County of Barnstable, at Barnstable, on the first Tuesdayes in April, July,
October and January. At Bristol, for the County of Bristol, on the second
Tuesdays in April, July, October and January. For the County of York, at York,
on the First Tuesdayes in April and July; and at Wells, on the first Tuesdayes
in October and January; and for the County of Hampshire, at North-hampton, on
the First Tuesdayes in March and June; at Springfield on the last Tuesdayes in
September and December; and that there be a General Sessions of the Peace Held
and Kept at Edgar Town upon the Island of Capawock, alias Martha's Vineyard,
and on the Island of Nantucket respectively, upon the last Tuesday in March,
and on the first Tuesday of October yearly from time to time.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That at the times and places before mentioned, Courts of Common Pleas
there shall be Held and kept in each Respective County and Islands
before-named within this Province, an Inferior Court of Common Pleas, by four
of the Justices of, and Residing within the same County, and Islands
respectively; to be appointed and commissionated thereto; any Three of whom to
be a Quarum, for the hearing and determining of all Civil Actions, arising or
happening within the same, tryable at the common Law; of what na^^^^, kind, or
quality soever; and upon judgment given therein, to award Execution.

PROVIDED nevertheless That it shall be in the Liberty of the party cast in any
of the said Inferior Courts, Appeal to the Superior Court
to Appeal from the Verdict and Judgment given therein, unto the next Superior
Court, to be held within, or for the same County; the case there to be Tried to
a Final Issue. Or by a new Process, once and no more, Review
to review the said case in the same Court, where it was first Tried; and
within the space of ten days, after judgment given upon such Trial, by review;
the party agrieved may bring his Wri^t of Error, for a Trial of the said Case
at the next Superior Court, to be held within or for the same County, there to
receive a Final Issue and Determination.

PROVIDED also, that the Party Appealing, or bringing any Wri^t of Error as
aforesaid; shall first enter into Recognizance, with sufficient Sureties,
before one or more of the Justices of the Court appealed from, and upon Wri^t
of Error, before one or more of the Justices of the Superior Court in double
the value of the Debt or Damage recovered that he will prosecute the same
Appeal or Writ respectively with effect, and abide the Order of the Court; no
Appeal to be admitted after the time of the Courts Sitting, nor after Execution
Granted; and the Party Appealing, to bring the Copies of the whole Case unto
the Superior Court, where each Party shall be allowed the benefit of any new
and further Plea and Evidence. And if upon any such new Plea and Evidence, the
Judgment happen to be Reversed, the Appellant shall have no Cost granted him
for the first Trial.

PROVIDED also, That every Appellant as aforesaid, shall give in a Declaration,
(...) setting forth the Reasons of his Appeal, unto the Clerk of the Court
Appealed from, fourteen days inclusively before the Sitting of that Court,
where such Appeal is to be Tried.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid,

That there shall be a Superior Court of Judicature over this whole Province,
Superior Court
to be Held and Kept annually at the Respective Times and Places hereafter
mentioned, by one Chief Justice, and four other Justices, to be Appointed and
Commissionated for the same; Three of whom to be a Quorum, who shall have
Cognizance of all Pleas, Real, Personal, or Mixed, as well in all Pleas of the
Crown, and in all Matters Relating to the Conservation of the Peace, and
Punishment of Offenders, as in Civil Causes or Actions between Party and Party,
and between Their Majesty's, and any of their Subjects; whether the same do
Concern the Realty, and Relate to any Right of Freehold and Inheritance, or
whether the same do concern the Personalty, and Relate to matter of Debt,
Contract, Damage, or Personal Injury; and also in all Mixed Actions, which may
Concern both Realty and Personalty; and after Deliberate Hearing, to give
Judgment, and Award Execution thereon. The said Superior Court to be Held and
Kept at the times and places within the Respective Counties following: That is
to say, within the County of Suffolk, At Boston, on the last Tuesdayes of April
and October. Within the County of Middlesex, at Charlstown, ^n the last
Tuesdayes of July and January: Within the County of Essex, at Salem, on the
Second Tuesday of November; and at Ipswich, on the Second Tuesday of May.
Within the Counties of Plymouth, Barnstable and Bristol: At Plimonth, on the
last Tuesday of February, and at Bristol, on the last Tuesday of August.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid,

That the Trial of all Civil Causes by Appeal, or Writ of Error, from any of
the Inferior Courts within the Respective Counties of York or Hampshire, the
Islands of Capawock, alias, Martha's-Vineyard, and Nantucket, shall be in the
Superior Court to be Held at Boston, or Charlstown.

And further it is Enacted

That when, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery
and in what County soever, the said Superior Court shall Sit, the Justices
thereof shall Hold a Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery for the said
County, at the same time, as occasion shall be. And there shall be Held and
Kept a Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, for the Respective Counties
and Places of York, Hampshire, the Islands of Capaw^^k, alias,
Martha's-Vineyard and Nantucket within the same from time to time, as the
Governor and Council, advising with the Justices of the Superior Court, shall
Direct and Appoint, according as occasion may be.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That it shall be in the Liberty of any Maintiff, Plaintiffs liberty to begin
his Suit in the Inferior or Supe^^^^ Court.
to begin his Suit, either in the Inferior or Superior Court, at his
pleasure; and where the Original Process is made out of the Superior Court,
the Party Cast shall have Liberty to Review his Case in the said Superior
Court, ones and no more PROVIDED Nevertheless, That none of the said Inferior
Court shall Receive any Action under the value of Forty Shillings; nor shall
any Action under the value of Ten Pounds be brought into the Superior Court,
No Action under Ten Pounds to come originally to the Superior Court.
unless where Freehold is concerned, or upon Appeal.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Matters and Issues in Fact arising, Matters of Fact to be Tried by a
Jury.
or happening within the said Province, shall be Tried by Twelve Good and
Lawful Men of the Neighborhood. And that no person or persons shall be Chosen
and Returned to Serve upon any such Jury, but such as shall have a Real Estate
of Freehold worth Forty Shillings per Annum, or Personal Estate worth Fifty
Pounds. And for the more equal returning and appearance of Jurors to Serve in
the several Courts.

It is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That the Clerk of each Court respectively, Jurors how to be Chosen
in convenient time, before the Sitting of such Court, shall Issue out Warrants
directed to the Constables of the several Towns within the County, or
Jurisdiction of said Court, or the most principal of them, to Assemble the
Freeholders and other Inhabitants of each several Town, qualified as aforesaid,
to Serve as Jurors; Requiring them to Choose so many good and lawful Men as the
Warrant shall direct for Grand (...) (...) Jurors to serve at such Court, and
the Constable shall Summon the Persons so Chosen, to attend accordingly, at the
time and place appointed; and make timely Return of his Warrant unto the Clerk
that Granted the same. And no Person Serving as a Justice, Juror, Witness, or
otherwise, shall be obliged to use any other Ceremony in taking of their
Respective Oaths, then lifting up the Hand as has been ac^^^^ned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That all Processes and Writs shall Issue out of the Clerks Office of the said
Respective Courts in Their Majesty's Names, All Processes and Writs to Issue
forth in Their Majesty's Names Town Clerk to grant Attachments for Cases
triable before one Justice, and Summons for Witnesses
under the Seal of the said Office; and ^igued by the Clerk, and be directed to
the Sheriff or Marshal of the County, his Undersheriff or Deputy. And where
the Sum Sued for is under (...) Pounds, to direct also to the Constable of the
Town.

PROVIDED Nevertheless, That Replevins Summons and Attachments for any matter
or cause Tryable before one Justice of the (...) and Summons for Witnesses in
(...) Cases, may be Granted by the Town Clerk, and directed to the Constable of
such Town, or to the Party to be Summoned for Witness. And the Clerk of each
Town respectively within this Province, is hereby Empowered, to Make and Grant
such Writs and Processes as aforesaid; and the Constable or Constables of such
Town are Required to Execute them. And all Processes for Appearance, as well in
the Inferior Court of Pleas, as the Superior Court of Judicature, shall be
Served and Executed fourteen days before the Sitting of such Court, wherein
such Writs shall be returnable; and that all proper Original Processes in the
said Courts, shall be Summons, Capias or Attachment. And in case upon any such
Summons duly Served, and Affidavit thereof made in Court, the Defendant do not
appear by himself or his Attorney lawfully Authorized, Judgment shall pass
against him by Default.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid

That the Justices of the said several Courts be, and hereby are Empowered to
make necessary Rules and Orders for the more orderly practicing and proceeding
in said Courts; Justices of Courts to make necessary Rules and Orders.
and that no Summons, Process, Writ, Judgment, or other Proceeding in Courts,
or course of Justice, shall be abated, arrested or reversed upon any kind of
Circumstan^^al Errors or Mistakes where the person and case may be rightly
understood and intended by the Court, nor through defect or want of from only.
And all Writs, Processes, Declarations, Pleas, Answers, Replications and
Entries in all the said Courts shall be in the English Tongue and no other. And
that it shall be in the Liberty of every Plaintiff or Defendant in any of the
said Courts, to Plead and Defend his own Cause in his proper person, or with
the Assistance of such other as he shall procure, being a person not Scandalous
or otherwise offensive to the Court.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That there be a High Court of Chancery within this Province, Court of Chancery.
who shall have Power and Authority to Hear and Determine all Matters of Equity
of what nature, kind or quality soever, and all Controversies, Disputes and
Differences arising betwixt Co-Executors, and other Matters proper and
Cognizeable to said Court, not Relievable by common Law; the said Court to be
Holden and Kept by the Governor, or such other as He shall Appoint to be
Chancellor, Assisted with Eight or more of the Council, who may appoint all
necessary Officers to the said Court; which said Court shall Sit and be Held at
such times and places as the Governor or Chancellor for the time being, shall
from time to time Appoint.

PROVIDED Nevertheless, That the (...) in any of the Courts aforesaid, where
the Forfeiture of any Penal Bond is found, shall be and hereby are Empowered to
Chancer the same unto the just Debt and Damages.

Provided also, That either Party not resting satisfied with the Judgment or
Sentence of any of the said Judicatories or Courts in personal Actions where in
the matter in Difference does exceed the value of Three Hundred Pounds Sterling
(and no other) may Appeal unto Their Majesty's in Council, Appeal to Their
Majesty's in Council.
such Appeal being made in time, and Security given according to the Directions
in the Charter in that behalf.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid,

That Two Shillings Per Diem shall be accounted due satisfaction to any Witness
for his Travel and Expenses, Witnesses allowance.
and no more to be allowed in civil Causes; and if such Witness live within
Three Miles of the Place of the Courts Sitting whereto he is Summoned, and be
not to pass any Ferry, then One Shilling and Sixpence Per Diem shall be
accounted sufficient: And if any person or persons upon whom any Process out of
any Court of Record shall be Served, to Testify or Depose concerning any Cause
or matter Depending in any of the same Courts, and having tendered unto him or
them such reasonable Sums of Money for his or their Costs and Charges, as having
regard to the distance of the places, in necessary to be allowed in that
behalf, do not appear according to the Tenor of the Process, having no lawful
or reasonable Let or Impediment to the contrary; Penalty for Nonappearance.
that then the party so making Default, shall for every such Offense Lose and
Forfeit Forty Shillings, and shall yield such further Recompense to the Party
grieved, as by the Discretion of the Justices of the Court out of which such
Process Issued, shall be Awarded, according to the Loss and Hindrance that the
Party which procured the said Process shall sustain, by reason of the Non
Appearance of the said Witness or Witnesses; the said several Sums to be
Recovered by the Party so grieved, against the Offender or Offenders, by Action
of Debt, Fill, Plaint or Information in any of Their Majesty's Courts of
Record, in which no Wager of Law, Essoign or Protection to be Allowed. Justices
may Grant Summons, Capias or Attachment.


It is further Declared and Enacted by the authority aforesaid.

That every Justice of the Peace may Grant Summons, Capias or Attachment in all
Civil Actions Triable before him.

An Act, Requiring the Taking the Oaths, appointed to be taken instead of the
Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy.
WHEREAS Their Royal Majesty's in and by Their Charter for the Erecting and
Incorporating of Their Province, of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England have
Granted and Ordained That the Governor, or Lie^^enant, or Deputy Governor, of
Their said Province, or Territory, for the time being, or either of them or any
Two or more of the Council or Assistants for the time being, as shall be
thereunto appointed by the said Governor, shall and may at all times, and from
time to time, have full Power, and Authority, to Administer, and Give the
Oaths, appointed by an, Act of Parliament made in the First Year of Their
present Majesty's Reign (Entitled An Act for the Abrogating of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy and appointing other Oaths) to be taken stead of the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy^s to all and every person and Persons, which
are now Inhabiting, or Residing within the said Province or Territory; Or which
shall at any time or times, hereafter go or pass thither.

Now to the Intent that there he no failure herein, but that Their Majesty's
Subjects within this Their Province, may accordingly Recognize their Duty, and
Allegiance.

B E it Enacted, and Ordained by his Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled.

And by the Authority of the same.

That the (...) in said Act mentioned and thereby appointed to be taken in
stead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, All male persons of 18 years
and upwards to take the oaths*
and each of them be and shall be forth with Administered and given unto all
Male persons of the Age of Eighteen Years, or above, Inhabiting or Residing in
any Town or Place within this Province (that have not already taken the same,
and shall make it so appear) by his Excellency the Governor, or the
Lie^tenant, or Deputy Governor, or any two or more of the Council or
Assistants, or such others as shall be thereunto appointed by the Governor;
and the ^ist of the Names of all persons so Sworn, to be returned into the
Secretary's Office.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That if any person or persons shall refuse to take the said Oaths, Penalty for
refusing
or either of them, when tendered to him or them by any persons lawfully
Authorized, as is aforesaid; to Administer or Tender the same; the person or
persons so Tendering the said Oaths, or either of them, shall commit the said
person and persons so refusing to the Common Goal, or House of Correction;
there to remain without Bail, or Mainprize, for the space of Three Months;
Unless such Offender shall pay down to the said person or persons so Tendering
the said Oaths, or (...) of them, such Sum of Money, not exceeding Forty
Shillings; as the said person or persons so Tendering the said Oaths, or either
of them shall require such Offender to pay for his said refusal; which Money
shall be paid to the Select-Men, or Overseers of the poor of the Town, or place
where such Offender did last inhabit.

AND Unless every such Offender, shall also become bound, with two Sufficient
Sureties, with Condition to be of the Good Behavior; and also to appear at the
next General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be h^ld for the fame County,
where such Offender does Inhabit or Reside; at which Court of Quarter Sessions,
the said Oaths shall be again Tendered to every such Offender, by the Justices
of the said Court in open Sessions. And if the said Offender, shall refuse to
take the said Oaths or either of them, when Tendered to him by the said Justices
in open Sessions as is aforesaid; the said Justices Tendering the said Oaths;
shall Commit the said Person and Persons so refusing, to the Common Goal, or
House of Correction, there to remain for the space of six Months, unlest every
such Offender shall pay down to the Justices to Tendering the said Oaths, such
Sum of Money, not exceeding Ten Pounds, nor under Five Pounds, as the said
Justices shall require such Offender to pay for his Second Refusal; the said
Money to be disposed of in manner aforesaid; and unless every such Offender
shall likewise become Bound with Two Sufficient Sureties, with Condition to be
of the good Behavior, until he or they do take the said Oaths.

And whereas there are certain persons who scruple the taking of any Oath.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That every such Person shall Make and Subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity
following, viz. I. A. B. Declaration of fidelity.
Do sincerely Promise, and solemnly Declare before God and the World; That I
will be True and Faithful to King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY: And I do Solemnly
Profess and Declare, that I from my Heart, Abhor, Detest, and Renounce as
Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position. That Princes or
Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the SEA of ROME may be Depofed or
Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do Declare that no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate has, or ought to have any
Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, within the Realm of England, or any of Their Majesty's Dominions.

An Act, For the Establishing of Form's of Oaths.
B E it Declared and Enacted, by the Governor. Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled. And by the Authority of the same.

That the several Forms of Oaths here under Written, Be and are hereby
established.

To be Given and Administered unto the Respective Officers for whom they are
appointed. As follows,

YOU A. B. being Chosen, Counselors Oath.
and Admitted of Their Majesty's Council within this Their Province, do Swear
by the Everliving God. That you will to the best of your Judgment at all times,
freely give your Advice to the Governor, for the Good Management of the
Public Affairs of this Government; and that you will not directly nor
indirectly Reveal such Matters as shall be Debated in Council, and Committed to
your Secrecy. But will in all things be a True and Faithful Counselor when you
are thereunto Required. So Help you God.

YOU A. B. Swear, Justice of Peace Oath.
That as Justice of the Peace in the County of S. according to the Commission
given you. You shall Dispense Justice Equally and Impartially in all Cases. And
do Equal Right to the Poor and to the Rich, after your Gunning, Wit and Power,
and according to Law. And you shall not be of Council in any Quarrel that shall
come before you: You shall not Let for Gift or other Cause. But well and truly
you shall do your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf, taking only
appointed Fees. And (...) not direct or cause to be directed any Warrant (by
you to be made) to the Parties; but you shall Direct your Warrant to the
Sheriff, his Under Sheriff or Deputy, ^ything-men, or other Officers, proper
for the Execution of the same in the County. And this you shall do without
Favor or Respect to Persons. So help you God.

YOU Swear, That you will well and truly Serve the King and Queens Majesty's,
in the Office of the Sheriff of the County of S. And do the King and Queens
profit in all things that belongs to you to do by way of your Office, Sheriff
or Marshals Oath, Mix (...) Mutandi^.
as far forth as you can or may, you shall truly keep the King the Queens
Rights, and all that (...) to the Crown, you shall not Respite the King and
Qeens Debts for any Gift or Favor, where you may Raise them without great
grievance of the Debtors; you shall truly and uprightly Treat the people of
your Sheriffwick, and do Right as well to Poor as to Rich, in all that
belongs to your Office; You shall do no wrong to any man, for any Gift or
other Behalf or Promise of Goods, for Favor nor Hate; You shall disturb no
man's Right, you shall truly Acquit at the Treasury, all those of whom you shall
any thing receive of Their Majesty's Debts; you shall nothing ^ake whereby
Their Majesty's may lose, or whereby the Right may be Let or disturbed, or
Their Majesty's Delayed; you shall truly return, and truly Serve all Their
Majesty's Writs, as far forth as shall be to your Cunning; you shall take no
Bailiff into your Service, but such as you will Answer for, and of true and
sufficient men in the County, and shall cause each of your Bailiffs, to make
such Oath as you make your self in that belongs to their Occupation. And over
this in Eschewing and Restraint of the Man-slaughters, Robberies, and other
manifold Grievous: Offenses that be done daily. All these things you shall
truly observe and keep as God help you.

YOU as Foreman of this Inquest for the Body of this County of S. You (...)
diligently Enquire, Grand Jurors Oath
and a true Presentment make of all such Matter and Things as shall be given
you in Charge; The King and Queens Majesty's Counsel, your Follows and your
own, you shall keep secrot; You shall Present no man for E^^vy, Hatted or
Malice; neither shall you have any man Unpresented for Love, Fear, Favor or
Affection, or hope of Rewar^t; but you shall present things truly as they come
to your knowledge, according to the best of your Understanding* So help you God.

THE same Oath which you Foreman has taken on his part, you and every of you
on your behalf shall well and truly observe and keep. So help you God.

YOU shall well and truly try and true deliverance make between Our Sovereign
Lord and Lady, Petit Jurors Oath.
the King and Queen, and the Prisoners (...) the Bar, whom you shall have in
Charge according to your ^^vidence. So help you God.

YOU Swear, Jurors Oath in civil Cases
That in all Causes betwixt Party and Party that shall be Committed unto you:
You will give a true Veroict therein according to Law, and the Evidence given
you. So help you God.

YOU Swear, Town Clocks Oath.
That in the Office of Town Clark within the Town of B^ whereto you are Chosen:
You will diligently and faithfully Attend and Discharge the Duty to your Place,
and duly Observe the Directions of the Law in all things whereto your Office
has relation, and thereby Committed to your Care and Trust. So help you God.

YOU Swear, Oath of Leather Sealer Clerk of the Market, Culler of Eish, Packer,
Gager, Mutatis Mutandis
That you will from time to time, diligently faithfully Discharge and Execute
the Office of (...) within the Limits whereto you are Appointed for the Ensuing
Year, and until another be Chosen in your place; and that in and by all the
particulars mentioned in the Laws whereto your Office has Relation; and that
you will do therein Impartially according to Law, without Fear or Favor. So
help you God.

WHEREAS you A.B. are Chosen Constable within the Town of c. for One year now
following, and until other be Chosen and Sworn in your Place: You do Swear,
That you will carefully Intend the Preservation of the Peace, the Discovery and
preventing all Attempts against the same: That you will duly Execute all
Warrants which shall be sent unto you from Lawful Authority; and faithfully
Attend all such Directions in the Laws, and Orders of Court, as are, or shall
be Committed to your Care. That you will faithfully and with that Speed you
can, Collect and Levy all such Fines, Distresses, Rates, Assessments and Sums
of Money, for which you shall have sufficient Warrants according to Law;
Rend^ing an Account thereof, and paying in the same according to the Direction
in your Warrant. And with like faithfulness, Speed and Diligence will Serve all
Writs, Executions, and Distresses in Private Causes betwixt Party and Party,
and make Returns thereof duly into the same Court, where they are Returnable.
And in all these things you shall deal seriously and faithfully whilst you
shall be in Office without any Sinister Respects of Favor or Displeasure. So
help you God.

An Act, For the Establishing of Presidents and Forms of Writts, and Processes.
B E it Enacted and Declared by the Governor Council and Representations, in
General Court assembled: And by the Authority of the same.

That the several Forms of Writts and Processes, here under Written;

Be and hereby are Established to be the Forms to be observed by the Respective
Officers that are or shall be appointed and Empowered to grant the same.

W ILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc.

TO Our Sheriff or Marshal of Our County of Greeting:

WE Command that upon Receipt hereof, Writ for Calling an Assembly
You forthwith make out your Precepts, directed unto the Select-Men of each
Respective Town within your Precinct, Requiring them to cause the Freeholders
and other Inhabitants of their several Towns duly qualified as in and by our
Royal Charter is directed; to Assemble at such time and place as they shall
Appoint, to Elect and Depute one or more persons (being Freeholders within our
said Province) according to the Number Set and Limited by and Act of our
General Assembly within the same, to Serve for, and Represent them
respectively, in a Great and General Court or Assembly by us appointed to be
Convened, Held and Kept for our Service at the (...) House in Boston, upon
(...) the (...) Day of (...) ^^suing the Date of these Presents. And to cause
the person or persons of Elected, and Deputed by the major part of the Electors
present at such Election, to be timely Notified and Summoned by the Constable
or Constables of such Town to attend our Service in the said Great and General
Court or Assembly, on the Day above pre^^^^ nine in the morning; and so de Die
in Diem, during their Session and Sessions, and to Return the said Precepts,
with the Names of the Persons so Elected and Deputed unto Your self. Whereof
you are to make Return, together with this Writ, and of your Doings therein
under your Hand into our Secretary's Office at Boston, one day at the least,
before the said Courts Sitting. Hereof you my not Fail at your Peril. Witness
Sir W.P. Knight, Our Captain General, and Governor in Chief in and over our
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Given at Boston, under the
Public Seal of your Province aforesaid the (...) day of (...) 169 In the (...)
Year of our Reign.

By His Excellencies Command

IN Observance of Their Majesty's Writ to me directed.

These are in Their Majesty's Names to Will and Require you forthwith to cause
the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of your Town, Suffolk. ss
that have an Estate of Freeholders in Land within this Province or Territory,
of Forty Shilling Per Annum at the least, or other Estate to the value of Forty
Pounds Sterlings, to Assemble and meet at such time and place as you shall
appoint; then and there to Elect and Depute one or more Persons (being
Freeholders within the Province) according to the number set and Limited by an
Act of the General Assembly, to serve for and Represent them in a Great and
General Court our Assembly Appointed to be Convened, held and kept for Their
Majesty's Service at the Townhouse in Boston upon (...) the (...) day of (...)
next (...) Ensuing the Date hereof; and to cause the person or persons so
Elected and Deputed by the Major part of the Electors present at such Election;
to be timely Notified and Summoned by one or more of the Constables of the
Town; to attend Their Majesty's Service in the said Great and General Court or
Assembly; on the Day above prefixed, by Nine in the Morning; and so De Die in
Diem during their Session and Sessions. Hereof Fail not, and make return of
this Precept; with the Names of the person or persons so Elected and Deputed;
with their being Summoned, unto my self on or before the (...) day of (...)
abovesaid. Given under My Hand and Seal (...) the (...) Day of (...) 169^ In
the (...) Year of Their Majesty's Reign. To the Select-man of the Town of (...)
Greeting A. B. of the County of (...)

PUrsuant to the Proce^^ within Written, the Freeholders and other Inhabitants
of this ^ow^ ^^nalified as is therein directed, upon due Warning given,
Assemble and met together the (...) Day of (...) and then did Elect and Depu^e,
A. B. and C. D. to serve for and Represent (...) the session and Sessions of
the Great and General Court or Assembly appointed to be begun and head at
Boston on (...) the (...) day of (...) the said persons Being Chosen by the
major put of the Electors present at said Meeting. Date^ ^n (...) the (...) Day
of (...)

Select-Men. The Persons Chosen are Notified thereof, and Summoned to attend
accordingly. By me A. B. Constable of C.

To the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County, or either of their Deputies or
Constables of the Town of S. or to any or either of them. Summons for
appearance before a Justice.
In Their Majesty's Names, You are Required to Summon and give Notice unto T.P.
of (...) if he may be found in your Precincts) that he appear before me J. H.
Esquire one of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County aforesaid, at
my Dwelling House in S on (...) being the (...) day of (...) at (...) of the
Clock in the Forenoon, then and there to Answer E. E. in a Plea of (...) to the
value of (...) as shall then and there appear with all due Damages, making true
Return as the Law directs. You are also hereby further Required to Signify
unto the said T. P. That he may not Fail in the Premises, as he will Answer the
Contempt at the Peril of the Law in this case made and provided. Dated in (...)
the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of (...) Majesty's Reign.

TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County, or Constables of the Town of S.
Warrant for contempt.
or to any, or either of them Greeting. Whereas T. P. of (...) Cooper, was
Served with Summons, Granted by me J. H. Esquire one of the Justices of the said
County for his Appearance before me on (...) the (...) day of (...) past, to
Answer E. L. of (...) Merchant, in a plea of (...) to the value of (...) with
due Damages, the said T. P. making Default in appearance. These are in Their
Majesty's Names, to Will and Require you therefore to take the Body of the said
T. P. (if he may be found in your Precinct) and him safely keep, so that he may
be had before me on (...) being the (...) day of (...) at (...) of the Clock in
the Forenoon, as well to Answer the said E. L. of his Plea aforesaid, as for
his Contempt, making true Return of this Writ, as the Law directs. Dated at
(...) the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of Their Majesty's Reign.

TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County, or either of their Deputies or
Constables of the Town of B. or to any or either of them. Suffolk ss
In Their Majesty's Names, Attachment before a Justice of the Peace.
You are Required to Attach the Goods or Estate of J. N. of B. to the value of
(...)

And for want thereof, you are to take the Body of the said J. N. (if he may be
found in your Precincts) and him safely keep so that he may be had before J. E.
Esquire one of the Justices of the said County on (...) being the (...) day of
(...) at (...) of the Clock in the Forenoon, to Answer L. M. of (...) in a Plea
of (...) to the value of (...) as shall then and there appear, with all due
Damages, making true Return of this Writ as the Law directs. Dated at B (...)
the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of Their Majesty's Reign.

W ILLIAM and MARY, Suffolk ss
etc. To the Sheriff or Marshal our said County, Execution Granted by a Justice
of Peace
his Deputy or Deputies, or Constables of the Town of (...) or to any or either
of them. We Command you that without any delay, you Levy of the Money or Estate
J. N. of B. (...) (if it may be found in your Precincts,) Sum of (...) with
(...) Shillings more for this Writ, and deliver the same unto L. M. of (...) to
Satisfy a Judgment obtained against the aforesaid J. M. for (...) with his
Costs and Damages occasioned and accruing by a Suit Commenced against him
before J. E. Esquire one of our Justices Assigned to keep our Peace in our said
County the (...) day of (...) and in want of the said Money or other Estate to
the said L. M. his Satisfaction. We Command you to take the Person of the said
J. N. and him Commit to the Custody of the Keeper of our Prison in B. (...)
where he is to continue until the said Debt is satisfied, or that he be
Discharged by the Creditor, or otherwise by Order of Law. Hereof fail not at
your peril, making true Return of this our Writ as the Law directs. Witness our
said Justice at (...) this (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign.

W ILLIAM and MARY etc. Suffolk ss
To the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County, or either of their Deputies
Greeting, Attachment to the Superior or Inferior Court.
We Command you to Attach the Goods or Estate of D. T. of (...) to the value of
(...) and for want thereof to take the Body of the said D. T. (if he may be
found in your Precinct) and (...) safely keep, so that you have before our
Justices at our next (...) Court of (...) to be Holden at (...) within or for
our said County on the (...) day of (...) next, then and there to Answer to C.
L. (...) in an Action of (...) as shall then and there appear with Damages; and
have you there this Writ. Witness W.S. Esquire. At B (...) this (...) day of (...)
In the (...) Year of our Reign

W ILLIAM and MARY, etc. To A. B. of C. (...) Greeting. Summ^^ Appeara^^^ upon
Go^ Attached
Greeting. We Command you, That you appear at our (...) Court of (...) to be
Held at B. for or within the County of S. on the (...) Tuesday in (...) next,
to Answer unto C. D. of (...) in an Action of (...) to the value of (...) which
the said C. D. has Commenced to be then and there Heard and Determined, to
Respond which Action, your Goods or Estate are Attached to the value of (...)

Hereof fail not at your Peril. Witness W.S. Esquire At B. the day of (...) In the
Year of our Reign

W ILLIAM and MARY etc. To our Sheriff or Marshal of our County of E. or either
of their Deputies Greeting: Writ of Facias Habere Possessienem and Writ of
Flori Fa^ias for Damages and Costs.
Whereas A. B. of C. Yeoman before our Justices of our (...) Court of (...)
Held for, or within our said County of E. at S upon the (...) Tuesday in N
past, by the Consideration of our said Court, Recovered his Term yet to come of
and in (...) Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, or (...) Acres of
Land, Pasture or Meadow lying in the (...) of D. within your Precincts against
E. F. of G. Carpenter, who had unjustly put out and Amoved the said A. B. from
his Possession thereof; and also there Recovered (...) Pounds (...) and (...)
Pence for Costs, and Damages which he has Sustained by reason of the said
Offense and Ejectment, and Expended for the Removal thereof, as to us has been
made to appear of Record. We Command you therefore that without delay you cause
the said A B of and in the aforesaid I Tenement with the Appurtenances, or Land
to have Possession of his Term yet to come. We also Command you, that of the
Goods, Chatless or Lands of the said E. F. within your Precinct at the value
thereof in Money, you cause the said A. B. to be paid and satisfied the
aforesaid Sum of (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence; which to the
said A. B. in the said Court was adjudged for his Costs and Damages with (...)
Shillings more for this Writ, and thereof also to satisfy your Self for your
own Fees. And for want of such Goods, Chattels, or Land of the said E. F' s to
be by him shown unto you, or found within your Precinct to (...) the aforesaid
Sums. We then Command you to take the Body of the (...) E. F. and him Commit
unto the Keeper of your Goal in S. within (...) said Prison, whom we likewise
Command to receive him the said E. F. and him safely to keep, until he pay unto
the said A. B. the full Sum above mentioned, and be by him Released and also
satisfy your Fees. And this Writ with your doings, therein you are to Return
unto our said (...) Court of (...) to be Holden at S. upon the (...) Tuesday
in, N. next. Witness W. S. Esquire in S. the (...) (...) of (...) In the (...) Year
of our Reign.

W ILLIAM and MARY, etc. Execution.
To our Sheriff or Marshal of our County of S. or either of their Deputies
Greeting. Whereas A. B. of C. Yeoman Recovered Judgment against D. E. of F.
Carpenter before our Justices of our (...) Court (...) Holden for or within our
said County of S. on the last Tuesday in (...) Month past, for the Sum of
(...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence in Money Debt or Damage, and (...)
Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence for Costs of Suit as to us appears of
Record whereof Execution remains to be done. We Command you therefore, That of
the Goods, Chattels or Lands of the said D. E. within your Precinct, you cause
to be paid and satisfied, at the value thereof in Money the aforesaid Sum of
(...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence, with (...) Shillings for this
Writ, and thereof also to satisfy your self for your own Fees; and for want of
such Goods, Chattels or Lands of the said D. E's to be by him shown unto you,
or found within your Precinct to satisfy the aforesaid. Sums. We Command you^
to take the Body of the said D. E. and him Commit unto the Keeper of our Goal
in B. within the said Prison, whom we likewise Command to receive the said D.
E. and him safely to keep, until he pay unto the said A. B. the full Sum above
mentioned, and be by him Released, and also satisfy your Fees, and this Writ
with your doings therein you are to Return unto our said (...) Court (...) to
be Holden at B. upon the last Tuesday in (...) Month next. Witness J. R. Esquire
in B. the (...) day of (...) 169 In the (...) Year of our Reign

W ILLIAM and MARY etc. Scire Facias.
To our Sheriff or Marshal of our County of S. etc. Greeting. Whereas C. D.
before our Justices of our (...) Court of (...) Holden for or within our said
County of S (...) at B (...) the last Tuesday of (...) in the (...) Year of our
Reign^ By Consideration of our said Justices Recovered against A. B. of B (...)
Yeoman (...) Pounds, Debt, or Damage, and also (...) Shillings for Costs and
Charges by him about his Suit in that behalf. Expended whereof the said C.D. is
Convict, as to us appears of Record, and although the Judgment be thereof
Rendered, yet the Execution of the said Debt and Costs does yet remain to be
made, whereof the said C. D. has Supplicated us to provide Remedy for him in
that behalf. Now to the end, That Justice be done, We command you, that by
honest and lawful men of your Precinct, you make known to the said C D that he
be before our Justices of our (...) Court of (...) to be Holden in or for out
said County of S. at B. on the last Tuesday of (...) next, to show cause (if
any he have) wherefore the said C. D. ought not to have his Execution against
him of the Debt and Cost aforesaid. And further to do and receive that which
our said Court shall then Consider, and have there then the Names of them by
whom to him you make known the same, and this Writ. Witness J. R. Esquire at B. the
day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign.

TO A. B. of C. Suffolk ss
In Their Majesty's Summ^rs) to give Evidences
Names you are Required to make your Appearance before Their Majesty's justices
o^ the next (...) Court of (...) to be Holden for or within the County
aforesaid, at B upon the (...) Tuesday of (...) Instant, to give Evidence of
what you know Relating to a Plea or Action of (...) men and there to be Heard
and Tried betwixt R. S. Plaintiff, and S. T. Defendant. Hereof fail not as you
will Answer your Default under the Pains and Penalty of me Law in that be^ult
made and provided. Dated in B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of
Their Majesty's Reign.

TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County, Suffolk ss
or Constables of the Town of M. or to any or either of them. Replevin
In Their Majesty's Names You are Required to Replevin one (...) of T. P. now
Distreined or Impounded by J. G. and deliver the said (...) unto the said T.P.
Provided be give Bond to the value of (...) with sufficient Surety or Sureties
to Prosecute his Replevin at the next Inferior Court of Pleas to be Holden for
the said County at B on the last Tuesday of (...) and so from Court to Court
until the Cause be Ended; and do pay such Costs and Damages as the said J. G.
shall by Law Recover against him. Hereof fail not, and make true Return of this
Writ, with your Doings therein as the Law Directs. Dated in B. the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of Their Majesty's Reign.

W ILLIAM and MARY etc. To A. B. (...) Greeting, Whereas in the Record and
Process, and also in giving Judgment, Writ of Error.
and Issuing Execution of a Suit which was before our Justices of our Inferior
Court of Pleas, Holden at B within the County of S on the (...) Tuesday of
(...) last past, between C. D. Plaintiff, and F. G. Defendant of a Plea (...)
Error, Manifest does appear to have Intervened, to the grievous Damage of the
said F. G. as of his Complaint We have received. We willing that Error, if any
there be in this behalf, in due manner be Corrected, and speedy Justice
according to the Law, to the Party aforesaid, therein be done as it becomes
us. Command you, that if Judgment be thereon given, and Execution issued, that
the Record and (...) of the Suit aforesaid and also the Execution thereon
Issued, and all things touching the ^^me in any manner, you have before our
Justices of our Superior Cour^ o^ Judicature, at (...) in our said Province,
the (...) next, under your Seal; so that our said Justices of our said
Superior Court may then and there have them, and the Process and Record
aforesaid, and also the said Execution being inspected, may further therein do
what of right ought to be done. Have with you then this Writ. Witness (...) At
(...) this (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign (...)

W ILLIAM and MARY, etc. To the Sheriff of our County of Greeting, Whereas C. D
lately in our (...) Court of (...) has Recovered against F. G S^persede^s.
as well (...) Pounds Debt as his Damages, which by occasion of the Detaining
of the said Debt to him in our said Court were adjudged, whereof he is Convict,
as by the Record and Process of the Suit aforesaid, before our (...) Justices
of the said (...) Court fully appears, as from the grievous Complaint of the
said F. G We have received, and than in the Record and Process, and in Rendering
of Judgment of the Suit, (...) Error manifest has Intervened to the grievous
damage of the said F.G. and we willing that Error therein, if any be, in due
manner be Corrected, and to the said F. G full and speedy Justice in this
behalf to be done: have Commanded the aforesaid (...) by our Writ, that if
Judgment therein be given, he distinctly and (...) send the Record and Process
of the Suit aforesaid, with all things to (...) the same unto (...) under his
Seal, and that Writ, so that (...) may have (...) the (...) day of (...) next
Ensuing, where (...) that the Record and Process being inspected, we may cause
further therein to be done as of right, and according to Law ought to be done.
Nevertheless the Record and Process aforesaid, with all things touching the
same before the aforesaid (...) day of (...) into our said (...) Court of (...)
cannot conveniently be sent, and so Error therein, if any be, in the mean time,
cannot be discussed, and therefore we Command you that if before the Receiving
of that Writ you have not made Execution of this Judgment aforesaid then as
well from further taking, Arresting, Imprisoning, Exacting, Outlawing, or in
any thing molesting the aforesaid F G on the occasion aforesaid, as of taking
in Execution any Goods or Chattels, Land or Tenements whatsoever of the said F.
G. by occasion of the Judgment aforesaid, until the Plea upon our Writ of
Error to be corrected depending Undiscussed be fully determined, you altogether
Supersede, and have with you then and there this Writ. Witness W. S Esquire at
(...) the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign (...)

An Act, For Regulating Fees.
B E it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly.

And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same.

That the Establishment of the Fees belonging to the several Offices in this
Province; be as follows.

Justices Fees.
l s d FOr every Attachment or Summons for Actions not Exceeding Forty
Shillings, Sixpence. 00 00 6 S^b-Paena, each Witness, Twopence. 00 2 Entering
the Action, Three Shillings. 00 03 Every Execution, Two Shillings. 00 02 Filing
Papers, each Paper Twopence 00 2 Every Warrant for Criminals, one Shilling. 00
01 Bond for Appeal, one Shilling. 00 01 Copy of Evidences, the least Sixpence.
00 00 6 Copy of a Judgment, Sixpence 00 00 6 Every Recognizance, Two
Shillings. 00 02 Confessing Judgment; one Shilling. 00 01 Assidavit out of
Court, 00 01 Each Days attendance at the Sessions, to be paid (...) of the
Fines, Four Shillings. 00 04 Acknowledging of a Deed or Mortgage or any other
Instrument. 00 02

Coroners Fees.
l s d FOr taking every Inquisition, to be paid out of the Estate of the
deceased Thirteen Shillings and Four pence. 00 13 04 If no Estate, then to be
paid by the County Treasurer, Six Shillings and Eight-Pence. 00 06 08

Fees for Probate of Wills, granting Administrations. etc.
l s d FOr granting Administration, Bond and Letter of Administration, under
the Seal of the Office, in the Inventory amount to Thirty pounds or upwards, to
the Judge Four Shillings, to the Register Three Shillings, Sixpence. 00 07 06
If the Inventory be under Thirty Pounds, Five Shillings. 00 05 00 Probate of a
Will where the Inventory amounts to Thirty Pounds or upwards; to the Judge
Three Shillings and Sixpence to the Registes Two Shillings and Sixpence. 00 06
00 If under Thirty Pounds, Four Shillings. 00 04 00 Recording a Will or
Inventory of one page, and Filing the same, Two Shillings and Sixpence 00 02 06
If more, each page of Twenty eight lines eight words in a line, one Shilling.
00 0^ 00 For a Copy of a Will or Inventory, Twelve pence a page, each page to
contain as aforesaid. 00 01 00 Allowing Accounts, Settling and Dividing of
Intestate. Estates, Five Shillings. 00 05 00 Every Citation, One Shilling 00 01
00 Every Quietus, Four Shillings 00 04 00 Warrant for Apprizement, Two
Shillings 00 02 00 Making out a Commission to receive and Examine the C^^ims of
Creditors to Insolvent Estates and Regist^ing of the same, Three Shillings 00
03 00 Regist^ing of the Commissioners Reports after the Rate of One Shilling
Per Page, to be accounted as aforesaid. For Ent^ing an Order upon the
Administrator to pay out the Estate in proportion unto the several Creditors
Returned by the Commissions, One Shilling and Sixpence. 00 01 06

Secretarys Fees
l s d FOr Engrossing the Acts of Laws of the General Assembly, Ten Shillings
each, to be paid out of the Public Revenue 00 10 00 Every Commission for the
Justices of each County, and Commission of Oyer and Terminer Ten Shillings, to
be paid out of the Public Revenue 00 10 00 Every Commission for a Military
Officer, Three Shillings, to be paid out of the Public Revenue 00 03 00
Special Warrant or Mittimus by Order of the Governor and Council, each Two
Shillings and Sixpence. 00 02 06 Every Commission under the Great Seal for
Places of Profit, Ten Shillings 00 10 00 Every Bond Two Shillings 00 02 00
Every Order of Council to the benefit of particular persons, Two Shillings and
Sixpence. 00 02 06 Every Petition to the Governor and Council or General
Assembly according to the Import from (...) ^^^^ings and Sixpence to Ten
Shillings A Pass or Sea Brief, Three Shillings 00 03 00 A Fill of Heath, Three
Shillings 00 03 00 Every Writ for Electing of Assembly Men directed to the
Sheriff or Marshal, under the Province Seal, Five Shillings, to be paid out of
the Public Revenue. 00 05 00 For Transcribing the Acts or Laws passed by the
General Assembly into a Book, Twelve pence a Page, each page to contain Twenty
Eight Lines, Eight Words in a Line, and so proportionably, to be paid out of
the Public Revenue.

In the Superior Court
The Justices Fees.
ENtry of every Action for Trial, Twelve Shillings. 00 12 00 out of which to
the Clerk, Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Taking every Special Bayl, Two Shillings. 00
02 00 Allowing of a Writ of Error, Three Shillings 00 03 00 Allowing a Hebeas
Corpus, Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Confessing Judgment, Two Shillings 00 02 00
Acknowledging Satisfaction of a Judgment on Record one Shilling 00 01 00 In all
Criminal Cases where a Fine is set, Six Shillings 00 06 00 Taxing every Bill of
Cost, One Shilling 00 01 00

Clerks Fees.
Every Writ and the Seal, One Shilling and Sixpence. 00 01 06 Every Rule of
Court, Sixpence 06 Filling every Declaration, One Shilling 00 01 00 To the
Jury to be paid down by the Plaintiff, Six Shillings Sixpence 00 06 06 Entering
Appearance, Six pence 06 Signing a Judgment by Default, One Shilling 00 01 00
Taking every Verdict and Recording it, One Shilling 00 01 00 Copies of all
Records, Twelve-pence a page, each page containing Twenty Eight Lines 00 01 00
eight words in a Line. Less then One Page, One Shilling. Every Action withdrawn
^non Suit, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Every Petition Read, One Shilling. 00 01 00
Order thereon One Shilling 00 01 00 Filing the Records of each Action,
Twopence a Paper 00 03 00 Every Execution, Two Shillings 00 02 00

In Criminal Case
Drawing and Engrossing every Indictment or Information, Two Shillings 00 02 00
Every Appearance Sixpence. 00 00 06 For the Discharge of any person upon Bail
for the peace, good behavior, Contempt and the like and Warrant thereon, One
Shilling. 00 01 00 For Awarding and making forth Process against the Defendant
on Information, One Shilling 00 01 00 Every Warrant for the peace, or good
behavior One Shilling 00 01 00

In the Inferior Court
Justices Fees.
Entry of every Action, Ten Shillings. 00 10 00 Of which the Clerk is to have
Two Shillings 00 02 00 Taking Special Ball Two Shillings 00 01 00 Confessing
Judgment One Shilling of which the Clerk one Quarter Ackonwledging Satisfaction
of Judgment on Record, One Shilling 00 01 00 Taxing every ^ill of Cost, One
Shilling 00 01 00 whereof Sixpence to the Clerk 00 00 06 To the Jury to be
paid down by the Plaintiff, Six Shillings Sixpence. 00 06 06

Clerks Fees
For every Writ and Seal, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Entering Appearance sixpence
00 00 06 Eutring and Recording the Verdict, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Making up
the Record, One shilling 00 01 00 Copys of all Records Twelve Pence each page
as before 00 12 00 Every Action with (...) or Nonsuit, one shilling 00 01 00
Every Execution (...) shillings. 00 02 00

Clerk of the Sessions or Peace, his Fees.
Entering Complaint or Indictment, Two shillings 00 02 00 Discharge of a
Recognizance, One Shilling 00 01 00 Making forth Process against Criminals, One
shilling 00 01 00 Every Summons Threepence. 00 00 03 Every Warrant for the
Peace, or good Behavior, one shilling Every License for Houses of Public
Entertainment 00 01 00 or Retailing, Five shillings 00 04 00 whereof two to the
Clerk 00 02 00

Sheriff or Marshals fees
or Constables.
l s d FOr Serving every Summons for Trial, one shilling 00 01 00 Every Capias
or Attachment, Two shillings 00 02 00 And if above one Mile, threepence Per
Mile besides Bayl Bond, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Levying Execution, for the first
Twenty Pound or under, One shilling Per Pound, above that, not Exceeding Forty
Pound, sixpence per Pound. Above Forty Pound, not exceeding One Hundred Pound
Threepence per Pound, for whatsoever it exceeds One Hundred Pound, Twopence
per Pound. Besides Four-pence per Mile for Travel from Home. Every Trial, One
shilling 00 01 00 Every Precept for Choosing of Representatives Two Shillings,
to be paid out of the County Assessment. 00 02 00

Cryers Fees.
For calling of the Jury, sixpence. ^0 00 0^ Every Non Suit, Twelve-pence 00
01 00 Every Verdict, Twelve-pence. 00 01 00

Goalers Fees.
For Turning of the Key upon every Prisoner Committed five shillings, viz.
Commitment 2 s. 6 d. Discharge 2 s 6 d. 00 05 00 for Diet for each Prisoner,
Two Shillings and sixpence per 00 02 06 week, and so proportionable, he
finding the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority of the same.

That what Officer soever shall ask, demand and take any greater or other Fees
than are beforementioned for the matters aforesaid, or any of them, and be
thereof duly Convicted in any Court of Record within this Province, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of Ten Pounds current Money, One Moiety whereof to be
unto Our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, Their Heirs and Successors
for and toward the Support of the Government of this Their Province, and the
contingent charge thereof: And the other Moiety unto the Informer or (...) that
shall six for the sa^^ is any Court of Record; wherein no Essoi^^, protection,
or wager of law shall be allowed. And shall further pay unto the party grieved,
double the value of the excessive Fees so taken.

An Act, For Ascertaining the number, and Regulating the House of
Representatives.
WHereas Their Majesty's have been Graciously pleased by Their Royal Charter,
to grant power unto the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their Province
of the Massachusetts Bay; from time to time to direct, appoint, and declare,
what number of Represensentatives each County, Town or place shall Elect and
Dep^^e to serve for and Represent them Respectively, in the said Assembly.

B E it therefore Enacted and Ordained by his Excellency the Governor, Council
and Representatives, now in General Court Assembled. And by the Authority of
the same.

That henceforth every Town within this Province, consisting of the Number of
Forty Freeholders, and other inhabitants qualified by Chatter to Elect shall
and hereby are Enjoined to Choose and s^nd one-Freeholder as their
Representative; and every Town consisting of the Number of one Hundred and
Twenty ^^eeholders and other Inhabitants (...) as aforesaid, or upwards may
send Two ^^ch Representatives, and each Town of the number of Thirty
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants qualified as aforesaid, or upwards, under
Forty, are at liberty to send, or not; but may Choose and send one
Representative, if they think fit, to serve for and Represent them Respectively
in every Session of the Great and General Court or Assembly from time to time.
And all Towns under Thirty Freeholders may send one to Represent them, (...)
join with the next Town in the Choice of their Representatives, they paying a
proportionable part of the Charge. And no Town, shall at any time send more
than Two Representatives, except Boston, who are hereby granted to choose and
send Four.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That when and so often as His Excellency the Governor shall see cause to
Convent and Hold a Great and General Court or Assembly, Writts shall Issue out
from the Sec^^^rys Office under the Seal of the Province, and Signed by the
Governor, Thirty days at lea^^, before the time appointed for such Assemblys
meeting, directed unto the Sheriffs of the several Counties. And where there is
no Sheriff in any County or place, there to be directed to the Marshall,
commanding each of them respectively to send his Precepts to the Select men of
the several respective Towns within such County, to Assemble and call together
the Freeholders and other Inhabitants qualified as aforesaid, to Choose and
Elect one or more Freeholders, as the number in each Town is more or less, as
above, to serve for and Represent them in such Great and General Court or
Assembly: The major part of the Select-men in each Town respectively, to be
present a^ such Meeting, and to give Directions for the regular and orderly
Carrying on of the same: Who are to Return the said Precept, with the Names of
such as shall be Chosen by the major part of the Electors present at such
Meeting, under their Hands unto the Respective Sheriffs or Marshals, by them to
be returned into the Secretary's Office, one day, at the least, before the time
prefixed for the said Court o^ Assemblies Sitting.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That the Representatives Assembled in any Great and General Court, shall be
the Sole Judges of the Elections and Qualifications of their own Members; and
may from time to time Settle, Order and Purge their House, and make such
necessary Orders for the due Regulation thereof, as they shall see occasion.
And Forty Representatives at any time so Assembled, shall be accounted a Number
sufficient to Constitute a House, Pass Bills, and to Transact and Do Business
proper to be done in that House; and such Acts to be esteemed valid and of
Effect.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That each Town respectively shall pay unto their several Representatives,
during their Attendance o^ the Court, and for the necessary Time Expended in
their Journeying to and from thence; Three Shillings in Money Per. Diem within
one Month next after the (...) of each Session Commencing from his
Excellencies Arrival.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That every person Chosen to Serve for, and Represent any Town in the General
Assembly, and accepting thereof, shall give his constant Attendance, during
their Sessions, on pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Five Shillings Per Diem for
his Neglect (without just Excuse made and allowed of by the House of
Representatives) to be paid unto the Clerk of the said House, and (...) to be
disposed of and Employed as the House shall Direct; and in default of payment,
to be Levied by Distress upon such Delinquents Goods, by Warrant from the said
Clerk, by Order of the House, directed to the Sheriff of the County, his
Undersheriff or Deputy, or Constable of the Town where such Representative
Dwells: And no Representative shall depart or absent himself from the General
Assembly, until the same be fully Finished, Adjourned or Prorogued, without the
License of the Speaker and Representatives Assembled, to be Entered upon Record
in the Clerks Book, on pain to every one so Departing or Absenting himself in
any other manner, to lose his Wages. And the Inhabitants of such Town for which
he Serves, shall be clearly Discharged of the said Wages against such person
and his Executors for ever.

And further it is Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That no Member of the General Assembly, or his Servant during the time of
their Sessions, or going to and from thence shall be Arrested, S^ed,
Imprisoned, or any ways molested or troubled or Compelled to make answer to any
Suit, Bill, Plaint or Declaration, or otherwise: Cases of High Treason and
Felony Excepted.

An Act, For the preventing of Danger by the French Residing within this
Province.
THere having been frequent Complaints made to this Court, That although several
French Protestants who lately fled from Persecution; Come Over Sea into this
Province, and were Charitably Entertained and Succored here; yet since that,
many of a Contrary Religion and Interest, have been brought hither; and others
have Obtruded themselves; which (especially in this time of War, between the
Two Crowns of England and France) proves a grievous Inconvenience; and the
public safety is endangered, by suffering such a mint Company among us.

For Remedy ^^^ereof,

I T is Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
Convened, in General Assembly; and by the authority of the same.

Th^^ from and after the Second Day of January next Ensuing; none of the French
Nation be permitted to reside or be in any of the Seaport or Frontier Towns
within this Province; but such as shall be Licensed by the Governor and
Council. Nor shall any of said Nation open Shop, or Exercise any Manual Trade
in any of the Towns of this Province; without the Approbation of the
Select-Men, first orderly obtained in Writing under their hands, on pain of
Imprisonment.

And any Two Justices of the Peace Quorum Unus, within their Respective
Precincts, are hereby Empowered to Commit to Prison any Person or Persons
Legally Convicted of Offending against this Act; upon the Complaint of the^
Select-Men in any Town, or any Two of Them; and to remain i^ Prison until
Released by Order of the Governor and Council.

An Act, Against Conjuration, Witchcraft, and Dealing with Evil and Wicked
Spirits.
FOR more particular Direction in the Execution of the Law against Witchcraft.

B E it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, And by the Authority of the same.

That if any person or persons shall use, practice or Exercise any Invocation
or Conjuration of any Evil and wicked Spirit, or shall Consult, Covenant with,
Entertain, Employ, Feed or Reward any Evil and Wicked Spirit to or for any
intent or purpose, or take up any Dead Man, Woman or Child, out of his, her, or
their Grave, or any other Place where the Dead Body Rests, or the Skin, Bone,
or any other part of any Dead Person to be Employed or used in any manner of
Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charm or Enchantment, or shall Use, Practice or Exercise
any Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm or Sorcery, whereby any person shall be
Killed, Destroyed, Wasted, Consumed, Pined or Lamed in his or her Body, or any
part thereof: That then every such Offender or Offenders, their Aiders,
Abetters, and Counselors, being of any of the said Offenses duly and lawfully
Convicted and Attainted, shall suffer pains of Death, as a Felon or Felons.

And Further to the intent that all manner of Practice, Use or Exercise of
Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm or Sorcery, should be henceforth utterly
avoided, abolished and taken away.

Be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That if any person or persons shall take upon him or them by Witchcraft,
Enchantment, Charm or Sorcery to tell or declare in what place any Treasure of
Gold or Silver should or might be found or had in the Earth, or other (...)
places; Or where Goods or Things Lost or Stolen should be found or become; Or to
th^^^ntent to provoke any person to unlawful Love; Or whereby any Catte^ or
Goods of any person shall be Destroyed, W^^shed or Impai^ed; Or to hurt or
destroy any person in his or her Body, although the same be not effected and
done: That then all and every such person and persons so offending, and being
thereof lawfully Convicted, shall for the said Offense suffer Imprisonment by
the space of (...) (...) year, without Bail or Mainprize, and once in every
Quarter of the said Year, shall in some Shire Town, stand openly upon the
Pillory by the space of six hours, and there shall openly confess his or her
Error and Offense, which said Offense shall be written in Capital Letters, and
placed upon the Breast of said Offender.

And if any person or persons being once Convicted of the same Offense, and
shall again Commit the like Offense, and being of any of the said Offenses the
second time lawfully and duly Convicted and Attainted as i^ a foresaid, shall
suffer pains of Death, as a Felon or Felons.

An Act, For Regulating the former Assessment, and for Granting an Additional
Supply of Money.
WHEREAS by an Act of this Assembly, made at their First Sessions, begun the
Eight Day of June last past, Entitled, An Act for the Granting unto Their
Majesty's an Assessment upon Polls and Estates) There was Granted unto Their
Majesty's for the De^ence of their Subjects and Interests, and for Prosecution
of the War against the French and Indian Enemy, and the Defraying of other
Public Charges of the Province, a Rate or Tax of Ten Shillings Per Poll of all
Male Persons of Sixteen Years and upwards, and a quarter part of one years
value or Income of all Estates Real and Personal, to be Assessed and Levied in
manner as in and by the said Act is directed.

And forasmuch as it appears, That in prosecution thereof, the Rules therein
given have not been fully understood, or at least not attended which has
occasioned an Inequality, and the Sum thereupon returned, to fall greatly short
of what was expected, and of answering the necessity of the Public Occasions.
Therefore to the Intent that there may be a Regulation of the said Tax, and a
further Supply made for their Majesty's Service, to the ends before mentioned.

B E it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That there be Two (...) by this Court, for each County within the Province, to
pass into the several Towns lying within such County, at or before the Twenty
Second day of February (...) coming; Who, together with the Select-men and
Commissioner of each Town respectively, that made the Lists of said Assessment,
shall F^view the same; which the said Select-men and Town Commission^^ shall
then Exhibit and Expose in the particulars thereof, both of Polls And Estate
within such Town, with an Addition of all Polls and Estate which were before
omitted, as well Noting the Names of all person whom through Age and Infirmity,
they expect should be exempted from (...) Poll Tax, as others. And the said
Select-men, Town and County Commissioners, shall Regulate, Correct and Perfect
such Lists according to the Rates herein after-mentioned; setting down the Sums
both for Head^ and Estate in distinct Columns, That is to say, each Male Person
(...) sixteen Years old and upwards, (except such as are by Law excepted) at
Ten Shillings by the Poll, and all Houses, Warehouses, Tan-Yards, Orchards,
Pastures, Meadows and Lands, Mills, Cranes and Wha^s^s, to be Estimated at
seven years Income, as they are or may be Let for in the respective places
where they lie; which seven years Income is to be Esteemed and Reputed the
value of such Estate upon said Tax, and each Hundred Pound in value to be Rated
Thirty Shillings thereto; Cattle to be valued as follows: To wit, each Ox and
Horse kind of four years old or upwards, at Forty Shillings; each Cow of three
years old or upwards, at Thirty Shillings; all Sheep and Swine of one year old
or up wards, at Four Pound per Score. All Shipping, Goods, Wares, Merchandises
and Trading Stock and Estate by the Rule of common Estimation at the best
discretion of the Assessors. Every Handicrafts man for his Income at discretion
aforesaid: Every Male Slave of Sixteen Years Old or upwards, at Twenty Pounds
Estate. All which particulars of Estate aforesaid, as well Real as Personal,
shall be Assessed to said Tax, Thirty Shillings for each Hundred Pound in
value, and so proportionably; and where any Fermer or Occupier of Housing or
Lands lying within any Town or Precinct, shall be hereafter Assessed to any
Public Tax of the Province for such Housing or Lands in his Occupation, the
Landlord shall Reimburse the said Fermer or Occupier such Sum and Sums of Money
as he shall pay for the same, where no particular Contract is made to the
contrary.

And further it is Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That every person who shall Refuse or Neglect to render and give in to the
Select-Men a particular Account of his Estate, shall be Assessed as aforesaid
at discretion; and every person who sh^^ give in a partial account shall be
alike assessed doubly for so much as he leaves out; and if any Person find
himself agrieved at any sum or sums that shall be set upon him by the
Assessors, he may make application unto them for relief; and if he be not
thereby eased, may further apply unto the Justices of such County at the next
Quarter Sessions, and making it appear to them that he is over rated, they
shall order an abatement accordingly.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That the Lists of the Respective Towns being Examined, Regulated, and
Perfected as aforesaid; and Signed by the Select men, and Town Commissioner,
shall be delivered unto the Commissioners for such County, and by them brought
to Boston upon the First Wednesday in March next where the Commissioners for
each County or the Major part of them, then and there met shall be a Committee
to take an account or the sum total of each Lists, and if the whole shall not
amount to the sum of Thirty Thousand Pounds (including the Sum already returned
unto the Treasurer, for which his Warrants are gone forth) then the said
Committee are hereby Empowered to make a further addition upon each Town
Proportionably to what shall be wanting to make up Thirty Thousand Pounds in
the whole, including as aforesaid. And if it appear unto the said Committee,
that any Town or County shall have been generally defective in not attending
the Rules and Directions herein before given for the said Tax; then they are to
Report the same unto the General Assembly at their next sitting to be Rectified
and adjusted; but shall forthwith deliver the said Lists with the additional
Sums made to the same unto the Treasurer, who is hereby Ordered and Empowered
upon receipt thereof to Issue forth his Warrants affixed to said Lists and
directed to the Constables or Collectors for each Town Respectively, for the
Collecting and Levying of the same which is hereby granted to be paid in Money
or otherwise to the Treasurers Satisfaction, unto the Treasurer, his Deputy or
Deputys. And for manner and time as follows. That is to say,

Ten Thousand Pounds part of said Sum (besides what the Treasurers Warrants are
already out for) at or before the First day of May next; and the full remainder
of said Sum to make up the Thirty Thousand Pound as aforesaid; at or before the
last day of February, which will be in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety Three.

Provided nevertheless, where the Treasurer shall Order payment to particular
persons within their Respective Towns of Neighborhood, for Wages, or any other
Disbursements due, in such cases payment to be made in Merchantable Grain,
Provisions or Clothing, each at the c^^rant Money Price.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid

That (...) Commissioners for the several Counties, for the ends within
mentioned, be, as hereafter named, That is to say, For Suffolk, Captain Pen
(...), and Mr. Ti^^^ Til^stone: For Essex, Captain Samuel Gard^^ and Mr.
Nehemiah Jewe^: For Middlesex, Major Thomas Henri^^m, and Mr. Matthew Jel^s^^:
For Plymouth, Captain N^^haniel Thomas, and Mr. (...) Clip: For Barnstable,
Captain Thomas Tupper, and Mr. John (...): ^or Br^^^, Captain John Brown, and
Mr. Samuel Peek: For Hamps^one, Captain Samuel Partrig, and Mr. Joseph (...):
For Yorkshire, Mr. John Whe^^right, and Mr. James Emery: For (...) Vineyard and
Nant (...), Captain John Gardner, and Mr. Joseph Norton. And if any Select-men
or Assessors, or Town Commissioner, shall wilfully neglect (...) ref^se to
perform their Duty in the due and speedy Execution of this present Act, and be
thereof Convict upon Information and Prosecution before the Justices in Quarter
Sessions within the County whereto such person belongs; the said Court may
impose upon such person or persons so refusing, or neglecting any Fine, not
exceeding Five Pounds for any Offense; the same to be Levied and paid in to the
Treasurer for the Use of Their Majesty's, toward the Support of the Government
of the Province, and Incident Charges thereof.

And it is further Enacted

That the Select-men and Assessors in each Town, be, and hereby are Empowered
(if they think fit) to Nominate and Appoint one or more able and sufficient
persons within-the-Bounds and Limits of such Town, to be Collectors of the
Money due to Their Majesty's by this Act, for whose paying unto the: Treasurer,
his Deputy of Deputies, such Money as they shall be Charged withal, the Town by
whom they are so Employed, shall be Answerable.

And it is further Enacted

That if any Constable or Collector shall be Remiss and Negligent of his Duty
in not Levying and Paying unto the Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies, such Sum
and Sums of Money, as from time to time he shall have received, and as ought by
him to have been paid within the respective times Set and Limited by the
Warrant, or Estreat to him Committed, pursuant to the Acts of this Assembly,
referring to said Tax, and is not paid, by reason, of his falling in doing his
Duty according to the Directions and Command therein: The Treasurer is hereby
Empowered by Warrant under ^is Hand and Seal, after the Expiration of the time
so (...), (...) all such Sum and Sums of Money by Distress and Sale of such
Defective Constable or Collectors Goods and Chattels, re^^^ing the Overpl^s (it
any be) and for (...) of such Distress, to Commit the Offender to the Common
Goal of the County.

Be it further Enacted

That if any Person, o^ Persons, shall refuse to pay the Several Sum and Sums,
and Proportions, as have been, or shall be Further Assessed upon him or them,
to pay in per^^ance of this or the Former Act Relating to Said Tax, or
Assessment upon Demand made by the Constable or Collector of the Town, place or
precinct according to the precept or Estreats to him delivered. It shall and
may be Lawful to and for such Constable, or Collector, Constable or Collectors
Power to Distrein
who are hereby thereunto Authorized, and Required for Nonpayment thereof, to
Distrein the Person, or Persons so refusing, by his or their Goods or Chattels,
and the Distress or Distresses, so taken to keep by the Space of Four Days at
the Cost and Charges of the Owner thereof. And if the Said Owner do not pay the
Sum and Sums of money, so assessed upon him, within the said four days, then
the said Distress or Distresses to be apprized by two or three of the
Inhabitants where the Distresses is taken, and to be sold by the said Officer
for payment of the said mon^^, and the Overplus coming by the said Sale (if any
be) over and above the Charges of taking and keeping the said Distress or
Distresses to be immediately restored to the Owner: And if any person or
persons Assessed as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to pay the sum or sums
so assessed, by the Space of Twenty Days after demand thereof, where no
sufficient Distress can or may be found, whereby the same may be Levied, in
every such Case, For want of Distress to Commit the Person.
two or more of the Select-men or Assessors in such Town, are hereby
Authorized, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals to Commit such person or
persons to the Common Goal, there to be kept without Bail or Mainprize until
payment shall be made.

And it is further Enacted

That where any Person or Persons have removed, or shall remove from any Town
or place where he or they lived or had their residence at the time of making
the Lists of any Tax or Assessment, Provision in case of persons Removal
not having before paid the respective Sums or Proportion set upon them by said
Tax, it shall and may be lawful, to and for the Constable or Collector, to whom
any such Tax or Assessment is committed, with Warrant to Collect, who are
hereby Authorized and Empowered to demand the sum or sums Assessed upon such
person and persons, in what Town or place soever he or they may be found; and
upon refusal or neglect to pay the same, to Distrein the said person or persons
by his or their Goods and Chattels as aforesaid. And for want of such Distress,
to Commit the party to the Common Goal, there to remain until payment be made.

And for a present Supply of Moneys to carry on the Public Occasions of the
Government for the ends within mentioned.

It is further Enacted and Ordained by the authority aforesaid

That the Governor and Council may and hereby are Empowered to ^orrow and take
up upon Loan of any person or persons any sum and sums of money, not Exceeding
Five Thousand Pounds upon the Credit of this Act, and to make over and give for
Security unto the person and persons so Lending, the one Third Part of the
Moneys granted and to be Collected by virtue of the same, for the Repayment of
the Moneys that shall be lent; with Interest for Forbearance after the Rate of
Seven Per Cent, Per Annum; the said Interest Money to be paid at the end of
evey Three Months until repayment of the Principal.

AND WHEREAS much of the Arrears of the Rates and Assessments which were
granted as a Fund for the Bills of Credit Emitted by the Late Government of the
Massachusetts-Colony, have been and are daily bringing in to Their Majesty's
Treasury of this their Province, and Employed in Payment of the Public debts
thereof, Bills of Credit made current in Public Payments.
there being but few or those Bills now standing out; except what were borrowed
by the present Government. It is therefore Enacted.

That all the said Bills, as well those not Endors't, as others, shall be
received in payment of all Taxes, or Assessments, and other Public Payments
whatsoever at Five Pound per Centum advance; any Act or Law to the contrary
notwithstanding. And that those that have lent their Bills to the Treasury,
shall have the same allowance of Five Pound Per Centum; for so much as shall be
repaid them by discount, Bona Fide on their own account, with the Treasurer;
for Rates, Impost, or Excise.

An Act, For the better Securing the Liberty of the Subject, and for prevention
of Illegal Imprisonment.
FOr the speedy Relief of all Persons Imprisoned for Criminal, or supposed
Criminal Matters, in such Cases where by Law they are B^ilable.

B E it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General
Assembly Convened, and it is Enacted by the Authority of the same

That whenever any person or persons shall bring any H^bias Corpus Directed
unto any Sheriff or Sheriffs, Jailer, Minister or other person whatsoever, for
any person in his or their Custody, and the said Writ shall be served upon the
said Officer, or left at the Goal or Prison with any of the Underofficers,
Under-Keepers, Writs of Habeas Corpus within three days after service to be
returned and the body brought, if within 20 miles etc.
o^ Deputy of the said Officers or Keepers, that the said Officer or Officers,
his or their Under Officers, Under-Keepers or Deputies, shall within three
days after the Service thereof as aforesaid (unless the Commitment aforesaid
were for Treason or Felony, plainly and specially expressed in the Warrant of
Commitment) upon payment or Tender of the Charges of bringing the said Prisoner
to be Ascertained by the Judge or Court that Awarded the same, and Endorsed
upon the said Writ, not exceeding Twelve-pence per Mile, and upon Security
given by his own Bond to pay the Charges of carrying back the Prisoner, if he
shall be Remanded by the Court or Judge, to which he shall be brought according
to the true intent of this present Act, and that he will not make any Escape by
the way, make Return of such Writ; and bring, or cause to be brought the Body
of the Party so Committed or Restrained, unto or before the Chief Justice, or
any other of the Justices of the Superior Court; And shall then likewise
cer^^ie the true Causes of his Detaine^ or Imprisonment, unless the Commitment
of the said Party be in any place, beyond the distance of Twenty Miles from the
place or places where such Court or Person is or shall be Residing: and if
beyond the distance of Twenty Miles, and not above One Hundred Miles, then
within the space of Ten days, and if beyond the distance of One hundred Miles,
then within the space of Twenty days, after such the delivery aforesaid, and
not longer.

And to the Intent that no Sheriff, Jailer or other Officer, may pretend
Ignorance of the Import of any such Writ.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That all such Writs shall be signed by the person that Awards the same; Writs
of Habeas Corpus and the Proceedings there on in vacation time.
and if any person or persons, shall be or stand Committed or Detained as
aforesaid, for any Crime, unless for Felony or Treason, plainly expressed in
the Warrant of Commitment, in the Vacation time, and out of Term, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the person or persons so committed or detained (other
than persons convict, or in Execution) by Legal Process or any one on his or
their behalf, to appeal or complain to one or more of Their Majesty's Justices
of the Superior Court, and the said Justice or Justices upon view of the Copy
or Copies of the Warrant or Warrants of Commitment and detainer; or otherwise,
upon Oath made, that such Copy o^ Copies were denied to be given by such person
or persons in whose custody the Prisoner or prisoners is or are detained, are
hereby (...) and (...) upon request made in Writing by such person or persons
or any on his, her, or their behalf attested and subscribed by two Witnesses
who were present at the Delivery of the same, to award and Grant an Habeas
Corpus under the Seal of the said Court, to be Directed to the Officer or
Officers, in whose Custody the Party so Committed or Detained shall be,
Returnable immediately before the said Court, Justice, or Justices, and upon
Service thereof as aforesaid, the Officer or Officers, his or their
Under-Officer, or Underofficers, Under-Keeper, or Under-Keepers, or Deputy, in
whose Custody the Party is so Committed or Detained, shall within the times
respectively before Limited, bring such Prisoner or Prisoners before the said
Justice, before whom the said Writ is made Returnable, and in case of his
Absence, before any other of them, with the Return of such Writ, and the true
Causes of the Commitment and Detainer, and thereupon within two days after the
Party shall be brought before the said Court, Justice or Justices, the said
Court, or Justice, before whom the Prisoner shall be brought as aforesaid,
shall Discharge the said Prisoner from his Imprisonment, taking his or their
Recognizance, with one or more Surety or Sureties in any Sum, according to
their Discretions, Laying Regard to the Quality of the ^isoner, and nature of
the Obence, for his or their Appearance in the said Superior Court the Te^^
following, or at the next Af^izes, Sessions or General Goal Delivery within or
for such County, or place where the Commitment was, or where the Offense was
Committed, or in such other Court where the said Offense is properly
Cognizable, as the Case shall Require; and then shall Cer^^ine the said Writ,
with the Return thereof, and the said Recognizance or Recognizances, into the
said Court where such Appearance is to be made; unless it shall appear unto the
said Court of Justice, that the Party so Committed, is Detained upon a Legal
process, Order or Warrant out of some Court that has Jurisdiction of Criminal
Matters, or by some Warrant, Signed and Sealed with the Hand and Seal of any of
the said Justices, or some Justice or Justices of the Peace for such Matters
(...) Offenses, (...)
for the which by the Law the Prisoner is not Bai^able.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That if (...) person shall have wilfully
neglected by the space of two whole Terms after his Imprisonment, to pray a
Habeas Corpus for his En^argement; such Person so wilfully neglecting, shall
not have any Habes Corpus to be Granted in vacation time, in pursuance of this
Act.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Officer or
Officers, his or their Under-Officer or Underofficers, Under-Keeper or
Under-Keepers, or Deputy, shall neglect or refuse to make the Returns
aforesaid, Officers (...) to be precceded against for not obeying such Writs.
or to bring the Body or Bodies of the Prisoner or Prisoners, according to the
Command of the said Writ, within the Respective Times aforesaid, or upon Demand
made by the Prisoner or Persons in his behalf, shall Refuse to Deliver, or
within the Space of Six Hours after Demand, shall not Deliver to the Persons of
Demanding, a True Copy of the Warrant or Warrants, of Commitment, and Detainer
of such Prisoner; which he and they are hereby Required to Deliver according,
all and every the Head Goalers and Keepers of such Prisons, and such other
Person in whose Custody the Prisoner shall be Detained, shall for the First
Offense Forfeit to the Prisoner or Party grieved, the sum of Fifty Pounds; and
for the Second Offense, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, and shall and is hereby
made incapable to hold or execute his said Office; the said Penalties to be
recovered by the Prisoner or Party grieved, his Executors or Administrators,
against such Offender, his Executors or Administrators by any Action of Debt,
Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoign,
Protection, Privilege, Injunction, Wager of Law, or stay of Prosecution by Non
vult ulteri^s Prosequi or otherwise shall be admitted or allowed; and (...)
recovery or Judgment at the Suit of any Party grieved, shall be a sufficient
Conviction for the first Offense; And any after Recovery or Judgment at the
Suit of a party grieved for any Offense after the First Judgment shall be a
sufficient Conviction to bring the Officers or person within the said Penalty
for the second Offense.

And for the prevention Reasons set at large not to be Recommitted but by Order
of Court
of unjust vexation by r^iterated Commitments for the same Offense, Be it
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no person or persons, which shall be
delivered or ^^at large upon any Habeas Corpus, shall at any time hereafter be
again Imprisoned or Committed for the same Offense, by any person or persons
whatsoever, other than by the Legal Order and Process of such Court wherein he
or they shall be Bound by Recognizance to appear, or other Court having
Jurisdiction of the Cause: And if any other person or persons shall knowingly
contrary to this Act, Recommit or Imprison, or knowingly procure or cause to be
Recommitted or Imprisoned for the same Offense, or pretended Offense, any
person or persons delivered or set at large as aforesaid, or be knowingly
aiding or assisting therein, then he or they shall Forfeit to the Prisoner or
Party grieved, the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, any colorable pretense, or
variation in the Warrant or Warrants of Commitment notwithstanding, to be
Recovered as aforesaid.

Provided always, (...) be it further Enacted, That if any person or persons
shall be Committed for High Treason or Felony, Persons Committed for Treason or
Felony shall be Indicted the next Term or let to Bayl.
plainly and ^^cially expressed in the Warrant of Commitment, upon his Prayer
or Petition in open Court, the first week of the Term or first day of the
Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, or General Goal Delivery, to be brought to his
Te^al, shall not be Indicted some time to the next Term, Sessions of Oyer etc.
Terminer, or General Goal Delivery after such Commitment, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Justices of the Superior Court, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer or General Goal Delivery and they are hereby Required upon motion to
them made in Open Court the last day of the Term, Sessions or Goal Delivery,
either by the Prisoner, or any one in his behalf, to set at Liberty the
Prisoner upon Bail, unless appear to the Justices, upon Oath made, that the
Witnesses for the King could not be produced the same Term, Sessions or General
Goal Delivery: and if any person or persons Committed as aforesaid, upon his
Prayer or Petition in Open Court the first week of the Term or first day of the
Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and General Goal Delivery, to be brought to his
Trial, shall not be Indicted and Tried the Second Term, Sessions of Oyer and
Terminer, or General Goal Delivery after his Commitment, or up (...) his shall
be Acquitted, he shall be Discharged from his Impri^^^^ Provided always That
nothing in this Act shall extend to Discharge out of Prison, any person Charged
in Debt, or other Action, or with Process in any Civil Cause; but that after he
shall be Discharged of his Imprisonment for such his Criminal Offense he shall
be kept in Custody according to the Law, for such other Suit. Provied always,
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That if any of their Majesty's Subjects shall be committed to any Prison, or
in Costody of any Officer or Officers whatsoever, for any Criminal, or supposed
Criminal Matter, that the said Person shall not be Removed from the said Prison
and Custody, into the Custody of any other Officer or Officers, unless it be by
Habeas Corpus, or some other Legal Writ, or where the Prisoner is delivered to
the Constable, or other Inferior Officer, to carry such Prisoner to some
Common Goal; or where any Person is Sent by Order of any Judge of Assize, or
Justice of the Peace, to any Common Workhouse, or House of Correction, or
where the Prisoner is Removed from one Prison or Place to another within the
same County, in order to his or her Trial, or Discharge in due course of Law,
or in case of sudden Fire or Infection, or other necessity: and if any person
or persons shall after such Commitment aforesaid Make out and Sign, or
Countersign any Warrant or Warrants for such Removal aforesaid contrary to this
Act; as well he that Makes or Signs, or Countersigns such Warrant or Warrants,
as the Officer or Officers that Obey or Execute the same, shall suffer and
Incur the Pains and Forfeiture, in this Act before mentioned, both for the
First and second Offense respectively, to be precovered in manner aforesaid by
the Party grieved.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, Penalty,
etc. for denying an Habeas Corpus.
That it shall and may be Lawful to and for any Prisoner and Prisoners as
aforesaid, to Move and Obtain his or their Habeas Corpus. And if the said
Justices for the time being, or any of them, in or out of Court, upon view of
the Copy or Copies of the Warrant or Warrants of Commitment or Detainer, or
upon Oath made that such Copy or Copies were denied as aforesaid, shall deny
any Writ of Habeas Corpus by this Act Required to be granted, being moved for
as aforesaid, they shall severally Forfeit to the Prisoner or Party grieved;
the sum of One Hundred Pounds, to be Recovered in manner aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That (...) Person or Persons shall be
Sued, Imp^eaded, Prosecution for Offenses within what time to be made
Meles^ed or Troubled for any OFFENSE against this ACT, unless the Party
Offending be Sued or Impleaded for the same, within two years at the most after
such time wherein the Offense shall be Committed, in case the Party grieved
shall not be then in Prison, and if he shall be in Prison, then within the
space of two years after the Deocase of the Person Imprisoned, or his or her
Delivery out of Prison, which shall full happen.

And to the Intent (...) person may avoid his Trial at the Assizes or General
Goal Dest^^y, by procuring his removal before the Assizes at such time as he
cannot be brought back to received his Trial there.

Be it Enacted (...) (...)

That after the Assize proclaimed for or within that County where the Prisoner
is Ac^ained, no person shall be remb^^^ from the Common Goal, or upon any
Hebeas Corpus granted in ^^tance of ^his Act: but upon any such Habeas Corpus
shall be brought before the Justices of Assize in open Court, who are thereupon
to do what to Justice shall appertain.

Provided nevertherels, that after the Assizes are ended any person or persons
detained, may have his or her Habeas Corpus according to the direction and
intention of this Act.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Information, Suit, or Action shall be brought on exhibited against
any person or persons for any Offense committed or to be committed against the
form of this Law; It shall be lawful for such Defendants to plead the general
Issue, That they are not Guilty, or that they owe nothing, and to give such
special matter in Evidence to the Jury that shall try the same; which matter
being pleaded, had been good and sufficient matter in Law to have discharged
the said Defendant or Defendants against the said Information, Suit, or Action;
and the said matter shall be then as available to him or them, to all Intents
and purposes, as if he or they had sufficiently pleaded, (...) forth or
alleged the said matter in Bar or Discharge of such Information, Suit, or
Action.

AN ACT, For the Reviving of An Act for continuing of the Local Laws. And one
other Act, for sending of Soldiers to the Relief of the Neighboring Provinces
and Colonies.
WHereas at the Session of this County in J^^e last past: An Act was made,
Entitled an Act For continuing the Local Laws to stand in Force, till November
the Tenth One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Two, which Act is near Expired;
And Forasmuch as Provision in many Cases is not yet made.

B E it therefore Ordained by the Governor Council, (...) Representatives in
General Court Assembled, And by the Authority of the same.

That the Said Act and every part of it, Be and hereby is revived and Continued
in full Force to all intents, and Purposes from and after the Said Tenth Day of
November, and shall so Continue until the General Assembly shall take further
Order.

And Whereas at the aforesaid Session one Other Act (...), Made, Entitled an
Act son Transporting of part of the Militis of the Province or Obliging them to
March to the Relief of the Neighboring Provinces or Colonies, which Act is
also near Expired. And Forasmuch as in this time of War there may happen
Frequent Occasions for relief to be given unto the Neighboring Provinces.

It is therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Said Act and every part of it be and hereby is revived and Continued
in full Force to all intents and Purposes from and after the Expiration of the
Six Months in Said Act Mentioned, and shall so continue unto the First Day of
the Sessions of this Court, which shall be in May next, and no longer.

FINIS

