A JOURNAL of the PROCEEDINGS in the late EXPEDITION To PORT ROYAL, On board
Their Majesty's Ship, the Six-Friends, The HONORABLE SR. WILLIAM PHIPPS
Knight, COMMANDER in Chief, and c.

A True Copy, Attested by Joshua Natsto Clerk.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND,

Printed for Benjamin Harris at the London-Coffee-House. Anno Domini M DC XC.

A Journal of the Proceedings in the late Expedition to Port Royal etc.
Wednesday, April the 23, 1690.
THis Morning we set sail in the Road before Governors Island and Anchored in
Nantasket, and in the evening got on board our Soldiers from Governours-Island
and the Castle.

Monday 28. At six this morning we set sail from Nantasket Harbor the wind at
S S W fair weather. In Company with us the Porc^pine, Capt. Cyprian Southack
Commander, the Mary-Sloop, Capt. John Alden Commander; the Mary-Ann, Capt.
Gregory Sugars Junior; Commander; the Batchelour-Ketch, Capt. John Welsh
Commander; Capt. Cyprian Southack in the Afternoon was commanded to Casko-Bay,
there to make a false Alarm under the French colors against the Fort, in
expectation of drawing down the French and Indians, but the Enterprise failed,
the wind serving their order was not to stay, but hasten the Salem Vessels with
the soldiers, and meet us at Mount-Desart, which was the place appointed to
Rendez^ous. This night about twelve a clock we lost Capt. Welsh who went in to
Casko.

Tuesday 29. At seven this morning we set sail from the place aforesaid, the
wind at S S E, and S E, close and foggy weather which forced us into Sheepscutt
River.

Wednesday 30. At seven in the morning we set sail, the wind N W, fair weather,
steered to Mount-Hegan, where the Boat was set on (...), and brought off the
Island Carrats and Cabbages, and several sorts of Garden herbs.

Thursday, May 1st. At 10 in the morning we anchored at MountDesart, the place
appointed as aforesaid; in the evening Capt. John Alden who was sent within the
Islands and commanded to view Peno^scut-Fort, and to bring Tidings of (...),
brought us this Intelligence; That Casteen was gone from thence, and 200
Indians were in the Fort, and that the out-Centinels fired several muskets at
them along^t shore; whereupon the General and Council ordered the Major and the
several Captains with their respective Companies to prepare to attacque the
said Fort.

Friday 2. This Morning the wind came up at N F. we weighed and sailed up the
Harbor, which lies W N W, and intended that night to make an On-sett on the
aforesaid Fort, but by bad weather and a Contrary wind were hindered.

Saturday 3. This day all our soldiers were landed on an Island near us in
order to (...) themselves to attacque the said Fort, (...) were hindered by bad
weather that sprang up in the evening.

Sunday 4. This day much Rain till evening, and after the Duty of the day was
perform^d, it pleased God to send us fair weather, and about ^ in the evening
the Soldiers ^ere imbarqued for to engage the said Fort, some on board the
Sloop Mary, and some on board the Mary-Ann-Ke^ch, and some in our Longboat,
Barge, and Pin^^ce, distance from the Fort 4 Leagues. They were to land their
Men on this side the Fort, at some distance, the Fort being on a Neck of Land;
their Order was, that Capt. Edward Willy should (...) land his men, and march 2
a^breast double Distance athwart the Neck, and ly near the Fort on the west
side, and so every Company at the same distance, leaving 40 foot between each
Company; the Mary ^^oop to attacque the Fort with her Gunns, the Ketch to keep
between the Fort and Island, 20 men to be placed on each Island to keep off the
Cannoes, but when they came up with the Barge to view the S^ituation of the
Fort in the night, they passed along without Interruption^ hearing no noise in
the Fort, they fired a Musket, went a shore, and found no body in the Fort.
Some Indians had been there, it is guess^d about thirty.

Monday 5. About 12 at noon the Porcupine Capt. Cyprian Southack Commander, the
Salem Barque, Capt. John Brown Commander, the Salem Ketch Capt. John Walk
Commander, and Capt. John Wel^h with the Salem and (...) ^omp^^ies arrived
about 4 in the afternoon, the Sloop, Ketch and Boats came down the River from
the Fo^^, about 6 we weighed with the rest of the (...) Capt. Welsh was ordered
to make the best of his way on (...) Capt. Thomas Bernard and his Company on
board with him, (...) at Matchia^, and there to send our Pinnace with a flag of
Tru^ on shore to the (...) that inhabited there, and if they would not (...) to
attacque them, and when they came ashore they found but one house, and two
persons with whom they Treated who surrendered themselves: them and their goods
they brought away with them. From thence we steered E. and by S to avoid the
shoal point that lies 4 leagues distant, and then E and by N to Bull-head,
which is a small Island that makes the Entrance of the Bay of Pundee: the
Current runs here very strong the Flood setts E N E as the Course is:

(...) 12 Leagues, the Course E N E where we Anchored about 3 a clock in the
afternoon (...) (...) Earque into the (...) where some (...) plan^ers lived who
denied our Flagg of Truce our men landed in the evening and (...).

Wednesday 7. This morning our (...) Crew returned, and gave Account of our men
with some small matter of plunder.

Thursday 8. This morning we set ^ail and met with the rest of our Fle^t
(...) from (...) E S E. the wind variable.

Friday 9. At 9 in the morning being near the shore, we (...) in 40 fathom
water to westward of Port Royal entry, being calm weather. At 3 in the
afternoon we weighed, the wind at W S W, and about 6, en^red the River of
Port-Royal^ where the out-Centinels or Look-outs fired two Chambers, and got
into their Cannoe, there being two in number; the place where they fired was
distant from the Entry or Rivers mouth near a League. At 9 in the night we
anchored in the Bay, in 7 ^athom a^ high water, where we lay till next day.

Saturday 10. This morning at 4 a clock, our General sent the Barge on shore
with a Flag of Truce to Mr. Laverd^e's house to command him on board, who came
and gave a full account of the strength of Port Royal. At 5 in the Morning we
weigh^d, and turned up the River to Mr. Laverdure's House, where we anchored,
and immediately sent a shore the Flag of Truce, with a Demand to the Governor
to surrender the Fort; and in Answer he sent on board a Letter by one of his
Priests to aquaint our General that he was willing to surrender upon our Terms
and comply with the Proposals, the Priest was sent a-shoar, with a Letter to
the Governor; the boat returned, and brought Answer in a Letter with one of
the Governor's Officers to our General, That in the morning the Governor
would surrender, and that he and the Priest should come on board, which they
performed a^ the time prefixed.

Sunday 11. This morning we weighed, and turned up the river, to the Fort came
to an Anchor, landed our men near Mr. Nelson's Warehouse at Port Royal: our men
being (...), our General, the Governor and Priest went a (...), our (...)
drawn up, Possession of the Fort was given; the Governor and Officers
delivered their Swords to our General^ who returned the Governor his sword and
likewise to some of his Officers. The Soldiers laid down their Arms, and were
gaurded to the Church, where they were kept as Prisoners.

Monday 12. This Morning we went a-shoar to search for hidden goods, (for
during the time of Parley they had broke open the King's Store, and Merchants
Stores, and conveyed sundry Wares into the woods) We cut down the Cross, rifled
the Church, Pu'lld down the High-Altar, breaking their Images: and brought our
Plunder, Arms and Ammunition into Mr. Nelson's Storehouse;

Tuesday 13. And so kept gathering Plunder both by land and water, and also
under ground in their Gardens, all the next day

Wednesday, 14. Loading Mr. Welsh with salt, and ^itting him for his Return to
Boston with (...) expedition: also demolishing the Fort. Our Proclamation was
read at the Head of each Company, and on board our Ships: the Inhabitants came
in answer to the Summons sent them; they took the oath of Alegiance to King
William and Queen Mary, making great Acclamations and Rejoicings; our men being
drawn up fired three Volleys, our Ship also fired some Gunns. The President
chosen and appointed with the Magistrates, were sworn.

Thursday the 15. This day a Post was sent to Menus and the places adjacent, to
come to Port Royal, and take the oath of Allegiance. This afternoon Mr. Welsh
sailed, the wind at S W. The Prizes were haled off, and fit^ed with Rigging.
The Brigantine was apprais'd at 105 l. by Capt. Gregory Sugars Sen'. and
Lieut', Samuel Adams, who were appointed by the General and Council.

Friday. 16. This day our Regiment and Seamen were sworn to deliver into the
Store what plunder they had in their own custody, or to their knowledge in the
Custody of any other person. The Great Guns were brought out of the Fort, and
drawn down to the water side; the Fort was demolish't, and sundry Plunders
brought into the Stores: the same day one of Capt. Creek's men died, on board
the Hospital-Ketch the Mary-Ann.

Saturday, 17. This day Capt. (...) Southack's men were sworn and those of
other Vessels. Nine Pieces of Ordnance brought a board.

Sunday, 18. This Day the Re^erend Mr. (...) Moody (our Minister^ preached on
shore, at Mr. Nelson's Warehouse.

Monday, 19. The Inhabitants of Menus and places adjacent had the Oaths of
Allegiance administered to them, which they accepted with great Joy. Mr. (...)
man taken and brought in. Capt. Alden (who had been cruising and waiting for
(...)) came in this day. Mr. St.Casteen's daughter was brought on board in the
Evening; also the rest of the great Gunns and Plunder. Capt. Southack
discharged.

Tuesday 20. This day our Ships Crew was sworn. All the Palisadoes which the
French had to strengthen and enlarge the Fort, were burnt and cut in pieces.
Plunder put on board the Ketches. The same day one of Capt. Wade's men dyed of
the Small Pox on board the Hospital.

Wednesday, 21. Capt. John Alden was ordered to sail; and to send to all places
on the Coast of (...)-Scotta, to parley with the French and Indians, and cause
them to Submit and subject themselves to the Crown of England, and to swear
Allegiance; and upon refusal hereof, to burn, kill, and destroy them. And also
to cruise about for Perrot who is on that Coast. All our Soldiers and prisoners
were shipp't this day. And the President and Council of Fort Royal received
their Commission and Instructions; then we weighed and fell down the River, and
at night our men went with Boats to help off one of the prize Ketches, which
Capt. Southack's men had run so high a shore, that she could not be got off
without our Assistance.

Thursday, 22. This day we fell down with our Ship into the Bay, within the
Entry, and Capt. Southack, took his leave of us, with the Brigantine in
Company, the wind at N W, fair weather. At 6 in the evening the wind vere'd to
N N E, we^ weighed and got out of the Gut, and steered W and by N. Little wind
all night.

Friday, 23. This morning we were athwart the (...), at 10 a clock the wind
dyed away: the Isle of Long^ bare South, distant about 3 leagues, we had 13 or
14 fa^hom water, Lat. 44 d. 4' where we caught good store of C^d. At 12 in the
night, the wind sprang up: And at 12 in the night we tack,t near the Island
Grandmahane, and lay S and S S W. this night we lost the Company of Mr. (...)
in one of the prize Ketches.

Saturday 24. At 12 this day (by Judgment) the Grandmanhane bare of us N N W,
the wind at W N W; at 4 afternoon stood about to the Westward and lay N W, the
Wind w s w. foggy weather.

Sunday, 25. At 4 this morning, we tack't again and lay S S W, the wind at
West, at 6 we saw Mount-desart Hills, bearing N W ^ N. at 12, it fell calm. we
saw two of our vessels to Leeward.

Monday, 26. At 6 this morning we stood about to the Westward, and lay W, and W
S W. at 6 afternoon we tack't to the eastward and lay E S E, the wind at S put
by our Top sails, and under our Courses foggy till night, and then cleared up,
the wind w n w, we lay w s ^.

Tuesday 27. Thick weather again till night, then cleared up, the Wind as
aforesaid, steered S W.

Wednesday, 28. This 24 hours we had the wind betwixt the N W and the S W. fair
weather, Lat. 42 d. 40'. we saw several small sloops, but could speak with none
of them.

Thursday, 29. This 24 hours fair, but calm: at 8 in the morning we founded,
found 80 fathom. Lat. 42. 52. Hailed a shallop, who told us Cape Ann bare S W
and by W, distance 4 leagues. we tack't and stood away S W by W till two in the
morning; then we tackt, and lay S W the Wind at S S E.

Friday, 30. This Morning when light we saw Cape Ann bearing W of us with the
Wind at S S E about ten a Clock it blew very hard at E S E the Weather very
thick, we tackt off and handed our Topsails, afterward it proved a little
clear, and then we stood in, at I we passed by the Castle, they saluted us with
five Guns, and we them with the like. Near 2 we Arrived in Boston Harbor; the
Block-house saluted us with nine Guns, and we answered them with the like number.

A Copy of the Summons sent on Shore to Mr. Lavedure's, and to the rest of the
Inhabitants of Port Royal, and the Places Adjacent.
From on Board the Admiral May 10. 1690. Sir William Phipps Knight, Commander
in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces raised for this present Expidition, against
L'Acccad^^, or Nova Scotia, and particularly Port Royal.
These are to Summons you, forthwith to come in, and subject your selves to the
Crown of England, unto which this place of Right belongs, and some of you to
come immediately on Board our Ship for that end, and to require you not to
Appear in Arms against us, but to give your Advice in taking ^f the said Fort,
and Reducing it to the Service of the Crown of England; and upon so doing and
swearing Allegiance to their Majesty's, William and Mary, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King and Queen. Do faithfully Promise that you shall enjoy
the Lives, Liberties, and Properties under the Privilege of the English
Government, or otherwise you must expect no other Quarter, than what the Law of
Arms will allow you.

To the Planters at Port Royal and the places Adjacent.

From on Board the Admiral, May 10. 1690. Sir William Phipps Knight, Commander
in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces Raised by the Mass^^^^sets-Colony, against
Nova Scotia and L'Accad^e. Gentlemen,
There being War Proclaimed between our Sovereigns and Yours and (...) Acts of
Hostility done by the French inhabiting this Continent, upon the Subjects of
their most serene Majesty's, William and Mary of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King and Queen; And Assistance given by them unto the Heathen-Enemies
in their Bloody Invasions, and particularly, sundry of our Vessels being taken,
and our men Detained Prisoners by your selves, without any Provocation on our
part, and that before any War was Proclaimed between the two Nations. These are
therefore in the Names, and for the use of Their Majesty's of Great Britain, to
Command and Require the speedy Rendition of the Fort at Port Royal, with all
the great Artillery, small (...) and stores of War, and whatsoever else belongs
to the French King, promising upon so doing, to give you good Quarters, and to
as many of the Planters as will assist us and swear Allegiance to Their
Majesty's of England. And I also promise they shall enjoy their Liberties and
properties, and the benefit of peaceable living under the English Government;
otherwise I am resolved, by the help of God, on whom alone I trust for
Assistance, to attacque, kill, burn and destroy, and then you may, when too
late, wish for that favor which you now refuse. I expect your positive and
present Answer.

To the Planters of Port Royal and places adjacent.

From on board the Admiral, May 11th 1690.
These are to acquaint you, That according to the Messages received by your
Officer last night, I have sent my Barge on shore, in order to your coming on
board, whereupon I shall send my Forces, and expect a Surrender of the Fort,
and you shall not find me failing in one tittle of my promise.

To Mounsieur D'Menevall, Governor of Port Royal.

A Copy of Capt. Southack's Discharge.
To Whom it may concern.
KNOW Ye, That Capt. Cyprian Southack Commander of the ship Porcupine, (...)
faithfully and honestly served their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary of
England and c. by Order from the Honorable Simon Bradstreet, Esquire. Governor,
and the rest of Their Majesty's Council of the Massachusetts Colony, in this
expedition against Port Royal and the places adjacent; L' Accadie and Nova
Scotia: under the Command of the Honorable Sr. William Ph^pps Knight,
Commander in chief of Their Majesty's Forces) until this 19th day of May, anno
Dom' 1690, and in the second year of Their Majesty's Reign over England and c.

Given under my Hand and seal on board Their Majesty's Ship the Six Friends,
riding at Port Royal in Nova Scotia.

W.P

These are to Certify whom it may Concern, That the Brigantine Supply of
Boston, formerly taken by the French, and now re-taken by us: S r. William
Phipps Knight, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces at Port Royal in
Nova Scotia: at the request of Capt. Cyprian Southack, for his use, and against
the common Enemy, have with the Advice of my Council, appointed Capt. Gregory
Sugars sen'r, ^

W.P.

These are to Certify whom it may concern, That there are 117 (...) belonging
to Capt. Cyprian Southack of the one half of (...) plunder ((...) and Ammunition
of War (...) excepted) was taken at Port Royal in Nova Scotia, Given under my
hand and seal at Port Royal, this 19^ th day of May, 1690.

W.P.

A Copy of the Oath Administered to the Inhabitants of Port Royal, L'Accadie, or
Nova Scotia.
You and every one of you do swear by the dreadful Name of the everliving God,
That you will bear true Faith and Allegiance to Their most Excellent Majesty's
(...) and Mary, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King and Queen: so
help you God in our Lord Jesus Christ!

A Copy of the oath Administered to the Council at Port Royal.
Whereas you Mathieu De Goutine, Mr. Alexander de L'B^rgne. sr. De Beliske, Mr.
Prire du Brucil, Mr. Rene Laudris, Mr. Daniel L'Blane, are all chosen b^ the
Inhabitants of Port Royal, L'Accadie or Nova Scotia, to be of the Council for
the conservation of the peace (...) the said people, (...) choice is approved
by the Honorable Sr. William Phipps Knight, Commander in chief of their
Majesty's Forces for this (...), with the advice of his Council; You and each
of you do (...) by the dreadful Name of the (...) God, that you (...) (...)
true (...) Allegiance to their Majesty's of Great Britain King William and
Queen Mary, and that you will administer Justice to all (...), and (...) till
further Order from the Crown of England, so help you GOD, in our Lord Jesus
Christ!

A Copy of the Oath administered to the President
Whereas you Charles (...) St. de (...) (...) (...) Chat^ilion are chosen by
the Inhabitants of Port Royal, L'Accadie and Nova Scotia, to the place of
President of the Council for the (...) (...) of the Peace among the said
inhabitants; which Choice is approved by the Honorable Sir William Phipps,
Commander in Chief of their (...).

Capt. John Alden' s Orders.
By the General with the Advice of the Council to Captain John Alden Commander
of the Sloop Mary. These are to Order you forthwith to Sail to Saint John's
Pess^maquadie, Ma^^^as, and (...), and in all those places along the Shore, to
take all Advantages to promote the Business we came forth upon, viz. to Reduce
or Destroy our French and Indian Enemies, and Recover our Captives and you are
Diligently to endeavor the Seizing of Mr. Perrot, according to the Commission
already received. You are likewise to Summons the French in all these places as
you go along, to take the Oath of Allegiance to the Crown of England; which you
together with Captain Gardi^er, are Empowered to Administer, and upon their
Refusal, you are to treat them as Enemies, and in all places where you are, to
set up the Kings Jack in taken of your taking possession of them for their
Majesty's of Great Britain, particularly you are to Treat with Mr. St. Casteen,
for the Recovery of the Captives and promise him the Return of his Daughter in
exchange for them; and that upon his taking of the Oaths of Allegiance, he
shall have his Lands and Mills that were seized at Port Royal, restored to him;
to^ Treat with him also about going to Boston, promising to him the Liberty of
Return at pleasure, but if he give you sufficient and satisfactory Reason for
his not going to Boston; presently you shall allow him the Liberty of coming
within a short time after you; If there may be an honorable peace with the
French and Indians; you are to promote it in your Discourse to Mr. Casteen, or
otherwise and what in Justice, Equity and Necessity you shall covenant with him
or them shall be made good; always reserving the Terms of peace to be
propounded and concluded upon by the Honorable Governor and Council at
Boston; if (be^ides what we have advised to,) there be any more circumstantial
Things that we cannot (...) foresee or direct about, we leave it to your best
discretion to do what may best conduce to the behoof of our Nation. In all
these Matters, you are to make all possible Expedition, and put the Country to
no more Charge than needs must.

A Copy of the Oath administered to the Army at Port Royal, may 16 1690.
You and every one of you do here Swear by the Dreadful Name of the ever-living
God, that all the plunder you have taken from the French or Indians, our
enemies, from the Time of our Departure from Nantasket to the time of Capt.
Cyprian Southack's being discharged, you will forthwith give a true Account of
what you have in your Custody, or, to your knowledge, is in any other persons
Custody, and the same to deliver to the General, or whom the General has
appointed for that purpose. So help you God!

To Charles Lattoras appointed President for the Conservation of (...) Peace
within the precincts of Port Royal, or Nova Scotia, and (...) Matthieu de
Goutine, Mr. Alexander de Borgue, Sir de Beliske, Mr. ^ierie du Brucil, Mr.
Rene Laudres, Mr. Daniel le (...) appointed, of the Council by Sir William
Phipps, Knight, Commander in Chief of their Majesty's Forces, fitted out by the
Honorable Governor and Council, of the Massachusetts Colony, if at any time
hereafter (until you Receive further Orders from the Crown of England, or the
Power of the Massachusetts Colony) any Ships or Vessels belonging to the French
King, or to any French Merchant or Trader whatever, that does Ride within the
Harbor of Port Royal, or in any other Road or Harbor within your Precincts;
you are hereby Empowered and Authorized in the Names of their Majesty's of
GreatBritain 'O Raise the Inhabitants of Port Royal, and the places adjacent,
to Attacque such Ship or Ships, or Vessels, with all Diligence, Strength and
Force that in you lies; Commanding all the Inhabitants within your Precincts,
to Assist you in Assaulting of all such Vessels or Ships belonging to our
Common Enemies; and the same to keep safe in your Custodies, for the service of
their Majesty's, King William, and Queen Mary, of England, and c. and forthwith
to send a full account of your Proceedings in Writing, to the Honorable
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts Colony in New England.

Instructions for the President and Council appointed for Port Royal and the
places Adjacent.
First, That you Remember the Oath of God that is upon you, in which you have
sworn Allegiance to the Crown of England, and dem^an your selves with all
Loyalty and Fidelity according to the pourport of it, left you provoke Him to
Anger against you for your failure therein,

2. That you take care to prevent all profaneness, Sabbathbreaking, Cursing,
Swearing, Drunkenness, or Theeving, and all other Wickedness, and punish those
that you shall find guilty.

3. That you do not impose upon any person in point of Conscience, to constrain
him to the way of Worship which you have been brought up in, we hope you will
all ere long learn better than hi^ thereto you have been Taught.

4. That all Contest between Man and Man about his Land may be laid aside, and
every man maintained in the quiet Enjoyment of what men possess of, till a full
satisfaction and settlement be made.

5. That unto all others of the Inhabitants here, ^or in the parts Adjacent,
you shall tender to them the same Oath of Allegiance; which your selves have
taken.

6. That you take into your possession the Houses, Lands, Mills, and c.
belonging to Mr. Sr.Casteen, and give an account of the Improvement of them,
when demanded.

7. That in your Trading with the Indians, you let them have no Powder, nor
Shot, by which they may be furnished to War against the English, but that you
persuade them to carry it peaceably toward us and do your utmost for the
Recovery of any of our Captives, in their hands, or in the hands of any other
of their Indians or French Neighbors.

8. That inquiry or search be made after any stores of War or any other Goods
not yet Discovered, belonging to the French King; and them being found, to
secure, and give an account thereof, to the Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts Colony, for the use of their Majesty's.

9. That if Mr. Perrot, or any other person or persons who are at em^ity with
the Crown of England, shall come hither, you are to endeavor the seizing and
securing, both persons and vessels for Their Majesty's service, and in the
places Adjacent; shall empower meet (...).

10. That you send an account to the Governor of the Massachusetts, from time
to time how Matters are with you, in order to your Receiving further
instructions, and you may rest well assured, that if you be faithful to our
Government, they will seek your peace and prosperity as their own.

Here follows a List of the Mames of all the Superior Officers under the
Command of the Honurable Sr. William Phipps, Knight; General of their Majesty's
forces for this present Expedition, against Nova Scotia or L'Accadie^ and also
the Number of all the Inf^^^^^ Officers Seamen and private Sentinels belonging
to the said Forces both by sea and Land.
1st. The Admiral, the Six Friends, 42 guns mounted. (...) Gregory Sugars
Capt-Lieut^, Samuel Adams Lieut^. Samuel Emes Master, Briant Smith Mate John
Winslow, Richard Willy, William Gibbins, and Daniel Pounding Reformadoes.
Francis Knox (...) Joseph Fuller Carpenter. John Rose (...). Daniel St^ddard
(...) Philip Nineham Cook, with 106 inferior officers Seamen and Boys. 120

2. The Por^upine. 16 gunns and 6 petteraroes besides small (...) Capt. Cyprian
Southack Commander, David Mason Lieut^. David ^assot Master. with 114 inferior
Officers, seamen and boys. 117

3. The Mary Sloop. 8 gunns besides small Arms. (...) Capt. John Alden
Commander. William Alden Master. Isaac Reed ^^nner and 9 seamen 12, 12

4. The Ship Union, 4 gunns. Capt. John Brown Commander, Jonathan Gardner mate;
and 13 inferior Officer and seamen 15

5. The Mary Ann Ketch, 2 Gunns. Capt. Gregory Sugars Command^. Thomas Miller
mate, and 7 inferior officers and seamen. 9

6. The Lark Ketch, John Walk Command. William D^^nten mat^. and 5 Seamen. 7

7. The Batchelour- Ketch John Welsh, Commander, a Mate, 3 men and one Boy. 6

Belonging to the Fleet. 286

The Foot Regiment.

1. William Johnson, Major, Edward Willy, Captain-Li^^^ Edward ^eeden, (...).
Four Sergeants, Four Corporals, one Clerk, one Drum, and 53 private Sentinels.
6^

2. Nathaniel Wade, Captain. Nathaniel Barsham, Lieutenant Thomas Emmons,
Ensign. 4 Sarjeants. 4 Corporals. One Clerk one Dr^m, and 72 private Sentinels.
8^

3. Andrew Gardner, Captain, Samuel Craft, Lieutenant, Samue^ Sumner, Ensign,
one Clerk, one Drum, and ^1 private Cent. 64

4. Edward Creek, Captain, Richard Keates, Liutenant, Thomas Groce, Ensign, 4
Sarjeants, 4 Corporals, one Clerk, one Drum, and 55 private Sentinels. 68

5. Stephen Cross, Captain, Robert Knowlton, Lieut', Philip Nelson, Ensign, 4
Sarjeants, 4 Corporals, one Clerk; one Drum, and 44 private Sentinels. 57

6. Daniel King, Captain, Jonathan Gardner, Lieutenant, James Dennis, Ensign, 4
Sarjeants, 4 Corporals, one Clerk, one Drum, and 42 Sentinels. 55

7. Thomas Barnard, Captain, William Shiprive, Lieut', Joses Bucknam, Ensign,
4. Sarjeants, 4 Corporals, one Clerk, one Drum, and 38 private Sentinels. ^^

The Foot Regiment. 446

Belonging to the Fleet. 286

The Reverend Mr. Joshua Moodey, Minister, Mr. Henry Dearing,
Commissary-General, Caleb Ray Marshal, and Joshua Natstock Clerk.

4

The whole Mumber 736

GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MART.


