The Fundamental Truths of Christianity briefly hinted at, by way of Question
and Answer.
Quest. OF whom have we our Being, our Living, and Moving, and all the good
things wenjoy?

Answ. Of God.

Q. How know we that?

A. There is somewhat in our own hearts that declares it unto us.

Q. Is that our own Natural Reason, as Men.

A. Though we might gather it even from Reason, as men, yet there is somewhat in
us that does more convincingly and manifestly declare it unto us, than our own
Reason as men.

Q. How do we distinguish it from Reason?

A. Very plainly, because it often teaches us this, and many other true things,
when we are not exercising our Reason, but still and quiet in our Minds; yea,
it often preventeth all Reasonings in us, and in a more ready and immediate way
convinces us than Reason can do.

Q. How so?

A. Because Reason teaches us things by a way of Discourse and Inference,
gathering a second thing from a first, and a third from a second, and a fourth
from a third, etc. which way is but mediate, and commonly is wearisom and
tedious.

Q. How does that other teach us?

A. By setting things before our Understandings simply and immediately, even as
when the outward Light gives us to see the shapes and color of outward things
immediately; without the need or use of our Reason.

Q. How may this other thing be called which is in us, a dinstinct Principle
from our Reason, as men?

A. It may be called (according to Scripture) a spiritual and divine Light,
which has the same use to the Mind, that the outward Light has to the Eye.

Q. What other Names has it, according to Scripture?

A. The Word of God, because thereby God speaks his Mind and Will unto the
Hearts and Souls of men, as one man speaks his Mind to another by the word of
his Mou^h.

Q. Is this Light and Word God himself?

A. It is one immediate Manifestation of him, which though it may be
distinguished from him, yet is not, nor cannot be divided or separated from
him, for he is with it and in it, and is the Fountain and Life of it.

Q. What other difference is there betwixt our Natural Reason and this
Principle.

A. Our natural Reason may be corrupted, and is often corrupted, and so may teach
us contrary things, unto what this teaches, but this is altogether
uncorruptible.

Q. What other Difference is there betwixt them?

A. The Teachings of our natural Reason, even of things that may be true, are
but dry and barren, and void of that living Virtue, Influence and Vigor, which
the Teachings of this Principle have; for this Principle is quick and powerful
and pregnant, or full of heavenly and divine Virtue and Life.

Q. But do they not differ originally, as to their very Nature and Being?

A. Yea, they do; the one is Natural, the other Supernatural; the one is
Humane, the other divine; the one is an essential Property of the Humane
Nature, the other is the free Grace and Favor of God given unto Man to
dignifie and exalt him above his natural Estate and Condition; if so he may be
more than a natural Man, even a Son and Child of God, yea, to have a Name
better than of Sons and Daughters.

Q. Is this Principle given unto all men?

A. Yea, it is given unto all Men.

Q. For what end is it given unto all?

A. That they may become the Children of God thereby, and may live soberly,
righteousl^ and godly in this present World, as the Children of God, that so
after this Life in this present World) they may live with God in the World to
come, in the fullness of everlasting Joy, Peace and Happiness.

Q. By whom does this Grace or (...) come upon all Men?

A. By Jesus Christ, as John declared; The Law (said he) was given by Moses,
but Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ, and of his business have we all
received Grace for Grace.

Q. Is Jesus Christ himself given unto all Men, or only his Grace?

A. He is given unto all men, in so far as he is sent of the Father unto all,
and is come unto all, and is both offered of the Father as his Gift, and does
also offer himself unto all, so that his Grace is not alone without him, nor he
alone without his Grace, they are given together, and are offered together, and
are received together.

Q. How is Christ and his Grace to be distinguished?

A No otherwise than as the light, warmth and influence of the Sun is from the
Sun himself, which proceeds from the Sun, as out of his fullness, according
to John's declaration, who said, Out of his Fullness have we all received, and
Grace for Grace.

Q How is Christ Jesus come unto all? Is he come outwardly as a Man unto all?

A. He is not come outwardly as a Man unto all, though he is come even outwardly
as Man for all (so that all may receive the benefit of his outward Coming as
Man, who are not wanting unto themselves) but he is come inwardly unto all, as
the true Light that lightens every man that comes into the World, and not only
as the Light, but as the Resurrection and the Life.

Q How is he the Resurrection?

A. Because he quickens and makes alive the Soul unto God, and raises it
out of its sin, in which, as in a Grave, it has layn dead and corrupted as to
the Life of God.

Q. Is this the general Condition of Men?

A. Yea, the general Condition of Men in the first state, is, that they are
dead in their sins and trespasses.

Q. All men therefore do need Christ, not only to be a Light unto them, but to
be the Resurrection and the Life al^o.

A Yea, for they want not only Light unto their Understandings, but they want
Life unto their Hearts, and unto all their inward Powers and Affections, which
are dead (as unto God) so that they cannot move toward him, nor in his
Service, but as they are quickened and influenced by him.

Q How does Jesus Christ minister Light and Life unto the Souls of Men?

A. By his shinings and breathings in their hearts.

Q Is that Immediately, or Media^^ly, or both?

A. Both Immediately and Mediately.

Q. How Immediately?

A. Even without all outward Means, as by his free Love and Favor, preventing
them before the use of any outward Means, and by ministering unto them who have
not, nor never had the outward means, for he is the Light of the World,
according to his own Testimony, and as John declared of him, He lights every
man that comes into the World, that all through him might believe, and
believing might (...) Eternal Li^e. Now if he ligh^eth all men, then surely he
lights as well those who have means, as those who want them, and those who
want, as those who have them, as truly, though not as equally; And therefore
seeing they who want the outward means are immediately enlightened and taught,
then surely they who have the outward means are also; otherwise their
privilege should be less who have the outward m^^ns, and theirs the greater
who want them.

Q. How Mediately?

A. By the (...) and breathings of his own Light and Life, in and through his
faithful Servants and their Testimonies, whether by words or works; all which
have a manifestation and ministration of Light and Life in them, to increase
and raise up Light and Life in them, unto whom they minister.

Q. But i^ God and Christ minister Light and Life immediately unto men, are not
all means usel^ss and unnecessary?

A. We are to distinguish betwixt things that are absolutely necessary, and
things that are necessary in some respect; also, betwixt things absolutely
necessary, and things very useful and profitable; for many things are greatly
useful, which are not absolutely necessary. And thus, though men have no absolute
need of outward means for the conveyance of Light and Life unto them, yet the
outward means are very useful and helpful unto them.

Q. Give us one Example in another case.

A. All men have a Principle of Natural Reason in them, which without all
outward means (either of Men or Books) teaches them immediately some things
belonging to Natural Reason; and yet none will deny but that both Men and Books
are very useful and profitable to further us in the Knowledge of Natural
Things, and in the exercise of our Natural Reason, to the further improving the
same.

Q. But are the Immediate Teachings of God and Christ of absolute Necessity
unto every Man, to give him the true and saving knowledge o^ God?

A. Yea, they are; for indeed all outward Means could do nothing without the
immediate teaching and ministering of God and Christ, by his holy Spirit, Light
and Life; because the Immediate is the Ground and Foundation, or Principle, for
or because of which the outward means are useful and profitable.

Q. Give us one Example in another case.

A. The same as before; for if men had not an inward and immediate Principle of
Natural Reason in them, that taught them immediately some things belonging to
Natural Reason, all the Men and Books in the World, though never so convincing,
could not gain ground upon them; but because Men have a Principle of Reason in
themselves, therefore when things of Reason are presented and offered to them,
by Men and Books, they embrace them and receive them, not simply or only
because the Men and Books say so, but because the (...) Principle of Reason in
themselves faith so, and does witness and answer to the same things.

Q. By this it would seem that men are taught many more things immediately,
than mediately.

A Yea surely, for according to the aforesaid Example, what men are there
(except Fools and Idiots) but the Principle of Natural Reason in them, teaches
them, in the things of Natural Reason, above an hundred to one, more than any
Books or Men ever did, or can do? As is manifest in the daily Occurrances and
Occasions in the outward Life, a man's Natural Reason teaches him a Thousand
things which he never learned from Men or Books. Even so, the Children of God
are taught of God many Divine and Spiritual Things, which Men nor Books never
did, or could teach them.

Q. By all this it seems, that the Knowledge of Divine and Spiritual Things,
must flow from a divine and spiritual Principle in the Heart, and that they
cannot be known and learned sufficiently from or by the Natural Principle of
Natural Reason.

A. It is even so; for though the Natural Reason in a subservient way, may be
made use of, yet it can no more reach unto the things that are spiritual and
divine, nor indeed so much, as a blind Man by all his Reason can reach unto
Colors, to judge of them distinctly, or a Deaf man to judge of Sounds, etc.
for even as the things of Sense are judged or known by a Principle of their own
Nature, which Reason cannot immediately reach unto by descending; so the things
of Faith, which are divine and spiritual, are judged and known by a Princ^ple
of Faith that is of their own Nature also, to wit, divine and spiritual, which
Reason cannot immediately reach unto by its ascending; but as a man, having the
Natural exercise of his Senses, can use his Reason in Natural things that are
sensible; so he who has the use of his spiritual Senses, can use the same
Reason in Spiritual things, to wit, in a subservient and subordinate way.

Q. What is the first thing required of men, that they may learn of God and
Christ Jesus, so as to become wise through those immediate Teachings?

A. That they believe those Teachings, and receive them in the love of them.

Q. How can they do that?

A. Not of themselves, but there is a Virtue in all the Teachings of God and
Christ, that is operative and effectual to cause men to believe them and
receive them, and the Truth of them in love.

Q. What is next required of them?

A. That they continually apply their whole Minds, Souls* and Hearts unto this
spiritual and divine Principle in them, and unto God and Christ therein, that
it may have its universal influence in them and upon them.

Q. How can they do that?

A. By its own drawings, or rather by the drawings of God and Christ in it.

Q. What is the Universal Influence?

A. It is not only of an enlightening nature, as to give Knowledge, but it is of
a quickening Nature, and of a leavening, healing, and purifying and sanctifying
Nature; more particularly, it has these two Properties, 1. To kill, consume
and destroy sin, both in fruit and root, stock and branch; 2. To beget
Righteousness and Holiness, which com^^^hends all the Fruits of the Spirit.
such as Love, Meekness Temperance, Patience, Humility, Joy, Peace, Hope and
Confidence, etc.

Q How is the Grace or Gift of God conveyed unto men at first? and how is it
received?

A. As a small thing, even as a Seed, the least of all Seeds.

Q. And how is it multiplied and increased in men's hearts?

A. By its growth in them; for if it does not grow in them, it does not
multiply, but remains as dead and barren as unto them, though living in its
own Nature.

Q. How does it grow in Men?

A. By getting root in their hearts, even as a grain of Corn, by getting root
in the Earth.

Q. How does (...) get root?

A It has a native Virtue and Influence in it, whereby it takes root in the
heart naturally, if men do not resist it; and though the ground where it
seeks to take root, be foul and unfit, yet it has a cleansing and fitting
Virtue in it, to prepare the ground, and make it good and fit; but it requires
man's consent and concurrence, by which it acts, and God in it, and with it
draws and moves effectually the heart of man unto it.

Q. But may these drawings and movings be commonly resisted?

A. Yea, they may, and so the work of man's Salvation may be hindered by Man
himself, and that both in the beginning, or when begun in its progress.

Q. Does God teach men all things necessary unto Faith and Godliness by this
Principle?

A. Yea, as he is faithfully and chastely waited upon, believed and followed.

Q. But has he not his Order in teaching, or does he teach all at once?

A. He has his Order* and does not teach all at once, but line upon line, here
a little and there a little, according as a man can bear, through the gravity
of this Principle in them.

Q. What are the first things he teaches in and by this Principle?

A. To deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, to live soberly and Righteously, to
live Godly; and when they have ascended by th^se degrees, he brings them into
his holy Mountain, City, House, Kingdom, and Paradise, where he gives them to
enjoy of these pleasures and delights, that because of the sweetness, beauty
and glory of them, are beyond all utterance or thoughts of man's heart.

Q. What are the first beginnings of Gods work in the heart, after
convincement, o^ enlightening the Understanding?

A. Faith and Repentance?

Q What is Faith?

A. It is a cleaving of the Soul and Heart of Man unto God and Christ,
according to the inward Revelation of his divine Power, Mercy and Goodness, in
the shinings of his own divine Light, (...) and Spirit within him.

Q Is then the Object of Faith God and Christ, as inwardly revealed?

A. Yea.

Q. What Faith then have they, who say, inward and immediate Revelation is not
the common Privilege of Men, nay, not of the Saints in these days?

A. They have not the true Faith, which is the Faith of Gods Elect, that
works by love, and purifieth the heart, and is fruitful of good Works, but
their Faith is but a Dream and Imagination, which as it finds them in their
sins, so it leaves them to live and dye in them.

Q What is Repentance?

A. It is a change of the Mind, and of all the Powers of the Soul, and its
Affections, from Sin and Unrighteousness, unto Holiness and Righteousness; so
that whereas it loved, desired and rejoiced in sin before, and had a distaste
of all Righteousness and Holiness, and an aversion and alienation therefrom,
now it has a distaste of Sin universally, and an aversion and alienation from
it, and a true and intimate love of all Righteousness and Holiness, (...) after
it, and (...) therein, and more abundantly after and in God and Christ, whose
it is.

Q. How is this Repentance wrought?

A. By degrees, through the Power of God, his Life, his Love, his Judgment, his
Mercy, his Goodness, revealed in his own Light by his own Spirit, as the heart
is turned the^eunto, and continues in a steady and fixed application unto the
same; this naturally and gently melts and thaweth the heart, and breaks it
into pieces, yea, changes it from a heart of stone into a heart of flesh, and
makes it naturally to savor and relish the things of God, which it hated
before, and to dis-relish and dis-^aste the things of dishonesty and
Unrighteousness, which it loved before.

Q. What Rule (or Law) has God given unto men, to serve, obey and worship him?

A. Even the same divine and spiritual Principle aforesaid, the Word of God,
that is nigh unto us, even in o^r Mouths and in our Hearts, that we may know
it, believe it, and obey it* This is the Law or Rule of the New Covenant, who
walk after this Rule, Peace is and shall remain upon them* neither is there any
Condemnation unto them, but Justification and Approbation from hence forth and
forever.

George Keith.

Printed at London in the Year 1688 and Reprinted at Philadelphia by William
Bradford, in the Year 1692.


