AT THE GENERAL COURT Of Their Majesty's Colony of the Massachusetts BAY in
New England, Sitting in Boston by Adjournment. December. 10th. 1690.
WHereas for the maintaining and defending of Their Majesty's Interests against
the Hostile Invasions of Their FRENCH and INDIAN Enemies (Who have begun and
are Combined in the Prosecution of a Bloody War upon the English of Their
Majesty's Colonys and Plantations in New England:) This Colony has necessarily
(...) sundry considerable Debts; Which this Court taking into Consideration,
and being desirous to approve themselves Just and Honest in the discharge of
the same: And that every Person who has Credit with the Country for the use of
any of his Estate, Disbursments, or Service done for the Public, may in
Convenient time Receive due and equal Satisfaction; withal Considering the
present Poverty and Calamities of the Country, and (through Scarcity of Money)
the want of an Adequat Measure of Commerce; whereby they are Disadvantaged in
making present Payment as desired, yet being willing to Settle and adjust the
Accounts of said Debt, and to make Payment thereof with what speed they can.

IT is Ordered by this COURT, That Major Elisha Hutchinson, Major John
Phillips, Captain Penn (...), Mr. Adam Winthrop, and Mr Timothy Thornton, Or
any Three of them be and are hereby Appointed and Empowred a Committee for the
gran^ing forth of Printed Bills in such Form as is agreed upon by this Court
(none under Five Shillings; nor Exceeding the Sum of Five Pounds in one Bill)
unto all such Persons who shall desire the same, to whom the Colony is
indebted, for such Sum or Sums of Money as they shall have Debentures for
from the Committee or Committees that are or shall be Appointed to give out the
same; Every of which Bills according to the Sum therein Expressed shall be of
Equal Value with Money; And the Treasurer and all Receivers Subordinate to him,
shall Accept and Receive the same accordingly in all Public Payments. No more
of said Bills to be Printed or Granted forth than for the Sum of Seven
Thousand Pounds: And the Colony is hereby Engaged to Sa^i^fy the Value of said
Bills as the Treasury shall be Enabled: And any Person having of said Bills in
his hand may accordingly return the same to the Treasurer, and shall Receive
the Full Sum thereof in Money, or other Public Stock at the Money-Price as
Stated for that time: And if any of said Bills be worn in any Persons hands, so
as they desire to renew them, returning them to the Committee they shall have
new Ones of the same Numbers and Summ's given out.

Printed and Published by Order of the COURT. Isaac Addington Secr.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green. 1690.


