His Highness the Prince of Orange, His LETTER to the LORDS Spiritual and
Temporal Assembled at WESTMINSTER, In this present Convention.
My Lords,
I Have Endeavored to the utmost of my Power, to perform what was Desired of
me in Order to the Public Peace and Safety; and I do not know that any thing
has been Omitted which might tend to the Preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into my hands. It now lies upon you to lay
the Foundation of a firm Security for your Religion, your Laws, and your
Liberties. I do not doubt, but that by such a full and free Representative of
the Nation as is now made, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained. And
since it has pleased God hitherto to bless my good Intentions with so great
Success, I trust in him, that he will complete his own Work, by sending a
Spirit of Peace and Union to influence your Councils, that no interruption may
be given to an happy and lasting Settlement. The Dangerous Condition of the
Protestant Interest in Ireland, requiring a large and speedy Succor, and the
present State of Things abroad, oblige me to tell you, that next to the Danger
of unreasonable Divisions among your selves, nothing can be so fatal, as too
great Delay in your Consultations. The States by whom I have been Enabled to
Rescue this Nation may suddenly feel the ill effects of it. by being too long
Deprived of the service of the Troops, which are now here, and of your early
Assistance against a powerful Enemy, who has Declared War against them. And as
England, is by Treaty already Engaged to help them upon any such Exigences, so
I am confident that their cheerful Concurrence to preserve this Nation, with so
much hazard to themselves will meet with all the Returns of Friendship and
Assistance which may be expected from you as Protestants and Englishmen
whenever their Occasions shall require it.

Given at St. James's Jan 22 1688/9.
Boston, Printed by S. G. for S. Phillips at the Townhouse 1689.

THE ADDRESS Of the LORDS Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons.
Assembled at Westminster, in this present Convention. Jan. 23. 1688/9 To His
Highness the Prince of Orange,
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at Westminster,
being highly sensible of the great Deliverance of this Popery and Arbitrary
Power, and that our Preservation is (next under God) owing to Your Highness; do
Return our most Humble Thanks and Acknowledgments to Your Highness, as the
Glorious Instruments of great a blessing to us. We do farther Acknowledge the
great care Your Highness has been pleased to take in the Administration of the
Public Affairs of this Kingdom to this time; and We do most Humbly Desire Your
Highness, that You will take upon You the Administation of Public Affairs,
both Civil and Military, and the Disposal of the Public Revenues, for the
Preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties and Properties; and of
the Peace of the Nation. And that Your Highness will take into Your Particular
Care the present Condition of Ireland, and endeavor by the most speedy and
effectual Means, to prevent the Dangers Threatening that Kingdom. All which, we
make Our Request to Your Highness to Undertake and Exercise, till further
Application shall be made by Us, which shall be Expedited with all convenient
Speed: And shall also Use our utmost Endeavors, to give Dispatch to the
Matters Recommended to U s by Your Highnesses Letter.

The Princes Answer. Die Mercurij Jan 23, 1688/9.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am Glad, that what I have done has pleased You, and since you desire me to
continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to Accept it: I must
Recommend to you the Condition of Affairs Abroad, which makes it fit for you to
Expedite Your Business, not only for making a Settlement at Home upon a Good
Foundation, but for the Safety of all Europe.

William Henrick.

Die Mercurij January23.1689.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster, that no
Papist or Reputed Papist do presume to come into the Lobby, Painted Chamber,
Court of Requests, or Westminster Hall, during the sitting of this Convention:
And it is further Ordered, that this Order be Printed and Published, and left
upon the Doors of the said Rooms.

An Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled at Westminster, for
the Non-Observing the sixth of February.
Die Sabbati, Feb. 2. 1689.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster, That the
Day of Thanksgiving on the sixth of February Instant: on which Day the Late
King James the Second, came to the Throne, shall not be observed in this
Kingdom.

John Brown, Clericus Parliamentorum.


