Further Quaeries Upon the Present STATE of the New-English AFFAIRS.
Reader,
THough there be a Truth in the Proverb, That a Fool may ask more than a
Philosopher can answer; yet I that am one of the first sort, am going to ask
nothing but what a Person of as mean parts as my self, may answer. It Is a time
when every man should be active in pursuing the Peace of his Country; and I
have some hopes, that if my Country men give themselves the trouble of
Answering these Quaeries, the Effect will be but peaceable.

A Former Paper of Quaeries, written and published by one that had not been
half seven years in this Country, did the Country no harm. Which encourages
the Writer and Publisher of these further Quaeries (who also is not a Native of
New England, tho a great Observer of, and Well-wisher to it) to adventure a
second part of the same Tune: with no design but that of Service te the
Country; my good Friends, the New-Englanders, may see, that some obscure and
retired Persons unknown to them, do take more notice of their Circumstances
than they are well aware.

Of the GOVERNMENT.
Whether it be not a great Injury and Prejudice against the most Loyal People
in all the English Dominions, to represent New England as if it had the least
Inclination to deny a most obedient Submission or Subordination to the
Authority of England? and whether even the most Thinking part of the Country
ever thought of such a thing, till they heard it mentioned by the mouths of
their most malicious Adversaries? or have yet thought of it with any Passions
but those of Detestation?

Whether we have not all imaginable reason to embrace our ancient (however
condemned or vacated) CHARTERS, as the best Instrument of our Government, by
conformity whereunto, (tho there be one of them not yet so good in Law) we
shall most express our Allegiance to Their Majesty's, and our Dependence on the
Authority of England? Inasmuch as,

First, Even the late K. James in his Proclamation, Dated October. 17 th 1688.
did restore some (if not all) of our Charters, as far as a Proclamation could
go toward it. [ Quaere] whether they who thought an illegal Commission of K.
James could supersede our Charters, might not as well think an illegal
Proclamation of K. James could restore them?

Secondly, His Highness, the (then) Prince of Orange, Engaging in that glorious
Expedition, upon the first notice whereof, New England manifested an earlier
zeal for Him and It, than any of all the American Plantations, had these Words
in His Declaration; All Magistrates who have been unjustly turned out, shall
forthwith Resume their former Employments, as well (...) all the Buroughs of
England shall return to their ancient Prescriptions and Charters.

Now when we were Condemned, they found us in England, it was the Massachusetts
Colony in Westminster.

Thirdly, In our Address to Their Majesty's, Dated June 6 th 1689. our words
are these, Finding an absolute necessity of Civil Government, the People
generally manifested their desire and importunity once and again, that the
Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants, Chosen and Sworn in May 1688.
according to Charter and Court, as then formed, would Assume the Government:
The said Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants then resident in the
Colony, did consent to accept the present Care and Government of this People,
according to the Rules of the Charter.

Fourthly, In answer to that Address, His Majesty, in a most gracious Letter,
bearing Date, Aug. 12 th. 1689. does Authorize and Empower our present Rulers
to continue in His Name the Care in the Administration of the Government.

Which Letter is Superscribed [ To such as For the Time Being, take care for
preserving the Peace, and Administering the Laws, etc.] An Expression which
implies a Succession.

Fifthly, The Body of the English Nation Assembled in Parliament have Declared
the Invasion made upon our Charters, to be illegal and a grievance. And the
Bill for the Restoration of Charters, so far as New England is concerned in
it, has thrice passed the Honorable House of Commons.

These things are mentioned, not as if they were sufficient Deliverances of the
Massachusetts Charter, (as for the Charters of the other Colonies, it is
peevishness to question whether they be not in as good force as ever) from the
disadvantages with which a pretended but injurious form of Law has hampered it.
But they are produced as Intimations of the best Rule that our Government can
at present have, while in a conjunction with all these Encouragements, there is
the voice, and vote, and consent of the whole People, so far as it can be
legally understood, agreeing thereunto, So that we go on to enquire.

Whether the Foundations being every where overturned, and all things out of
course, it be not become utterly impossible at such an extraordinary Time, for
the Niceties and Punctilioes of Law, to be exactly observed? And, whether those
that are Baiting and Bantring at the present Government, for wanting some
Circumstances of Law, to strengthen the foundation which they act upon, can
suggest any other Foundations, but what would be a thousand times more feeble
and rotten, than those which we are now upon?

Whether it can be pleasing unto the Almighty God, or unto Their Majesty's, or
the Honorable Parliament; that this great Country should live from year to
year without any Civil Government? Or whether one of these Colonies, which
never had any Charter at all, did not Comfortably jog on for one threescore
years in an innocent and laudable Administration of Government without ever
being blamed for it?

Whether the best Course that we can at present steer, be not for us to observe
the allowed methods of the whole English Nation, in this wonderful and Critical
time of Confusions, and to learn by the best Hints we can get, what will be
most agreeable to the Glorious Designs of Their Majesty's, King William and
Queen Mary, and the Parliament of England; managing of our selves with a most
Loyal and Religious Conformity thereunto? And whether it be not something worse
than Ignorance to say that we are not now steering of such a Course?

Whether it can be a fair thing, for a Company of Strangers, who have had all
manner of Civility and Protection, and are growing rich under the present
Government, yet out of their antipathy to the good Order and the good people
here, to send home Addresses for the imposing of such a Form of Government upon
us, as the biggest part of the Plantation more than seven to one, humbly but
warmly Deprecate?

Whether Considering the Ancient Enjoyments, and the present Constitution and
Inclination of this People, and the Circumstances of our Lands, etc. Those Men
are not under the power of a mere Phrenzy who desire not the Restoration of our
Charters?

Whether those few little men who now pretend that they are bound in Conscience
to Declare against this Government, because they imagine some Circumstantial
Forms of Law not exactly observed in our Settlement, thought themselves under
any Obligations of Conscience to appear against the late Government, wherein
all English Laws, and English Liberties, were perfectly overthrown?

Of the ELECTION.
Whether our Government being now so allowably taken up, according to the Rules
of our Charter, it has been amiss, for the General Court to Remember, that an
Anniversary Election is among the most Fundamental Rules of our Charter?

Whether all the Corporations in England, none of which have their Charters
Restored, go not on with their Elections* as well as we?

Whether the greatest Objection against an Election, be not the inconvenient
Choice which Distemper and Faction may be too ready, to precipate this people
unto? And whether all good men, ought not with a serious watchfulness over
their own passions, to endeavor the prevention of that Inconvenience?

Whether the Arduous Affairs which the Approaching Summer is like to entertein
us with, will not be so perplexed, as to require the ablest and wisest men in
the Country to go through with them?

Whether the Gentlemen that are now in the Government being by uncomfortable
Experience, thus well acquainted with Government, (for Governing is a skill, as
great as any of the Liberal Arts) It would not be a madness to make too
Essential or Considerable Alterations, in our New Election?

Whether in our Choice of Magistrates there should not be a special Eye to this
that as they be persons of great affection to the True Interest of their
Country, so they may be for the most part, of good Fashion and Quality, and
such as may maintain the due Grandeur of a Government?

Of the Present War.
Whether we are not now evidently Reduced unto that extreme Dilemma, that
either New England or New-France must unavoidably perish?

Whether all our Encounters with several Bodies or Nations of Indians that may
quarrel with us, be not merely a lopping of Branches, whereas by an Attack upon
Port Royal and Canada, we fall upon the Root of all our Miseries?

Whether it be not Good Husbandry, in a manner to throw up all Business, and
apply our selves one and all to this French War, in which if God give us
Prosperity, we shall get more from our Enemies by Fighting, than we can get of
one another by Trading?

Whether in all parts of the Country it be not incumbent on well affected
persons immediately (with the Countenance of Authority) to List themselves, and
humbly offer to our Honorable Rulers and Fathers, their best Service, in the
Expedition which is now propounded?

Whether if we make a vigorous Assault upon our French Neighbors, we may not
by the blessing of God, hope to be victorious over them?

Whether a thousand things do not now Conspire to invite us unto such an
Expectation?

Especially, These Four:

First, That the Wheel of Divine Vengeance is now Turning apace upon the French
Papists, for their late Bloody and Matchless Persecutions: in which
Persecutions, Our French Neighbors have had a very peculiar share: Why may not
we hope to be the Executioners of Gods wrath upon them?

Secondly, A great part of the French People, which we propound to invade are
such as would see it their happiness to come under the English Government?

Thirdly, The English Arms in other parts of the West Indies are now very
prosperous against them; It Is probable, their time is come to go down the Wind.

Fourthly, The Mohawks now offer that at the same nick of Time, when we visit
them by Sea, they will be upon them by Land; and they will certainly be so
discouraged, as wholly to desert us, and unite with our Enemies, if we are now
wanting to our selves^

Whether our subduing the French Territories will not be a thing as acceptable
to the Crown of England, as profitable to the people of New England?

Whether it would not be a Generous, and most Christian Service, for some well
disposed New-Englander, to undertake the Gospellizing of the Mohawks, who,
though much Tampered withal by the French Papists, express an inclination to
the Protestant Religion?

Whether there would not be a great piece of Policy as well as of Piety in such
an Undertaking? And whether all Orders of men among us, would not study to
support and honor the Undertaker with the extremest Gratitude?

Whether the advantages, which the French have against us, do not proceed very
much from the Conduct of that Gentleman, whose unwearied Industry and Mediation
procured of the French King the Return of those Mohawks which had been carried
unto France?

Whether there be not these words to be read in a Memorial presented lately to
Their Majesty's against that Gentleman by one Mr. P. -- R -- y.

The Petition (concerning Salt Ponds about New York) was never returned, but
the Design put by, because 'twas against the Interest of France. It Evidently
appears that he had a Correspondency with the Governor of Canada. Hearing of
several Protestant People that deserted Canada, to find it out, he makes his
Application to a Merchant at New York, saying, he heard that several
Discontented Persons Deserted Canada; some of them Laboring Men; and that he
had occasion for a Gardener, some presented themselves, but instead of
employing them, he sends them to the Western Islands.

The King of France has for diverse years sent several Companies of Soldiers to
Canada; among which are many Protestants; several young men of Good Families,
who think themselves not men, except they have seen a Campaign. But when they
are got into Canada, they are kept there, and cannot Retreat, nor have any
Exercise of their Religion, but are Compelled to go to Mass. So that several
did endeavor to come to New York; but Sir Edmond Andross, having thus acted
has prevented them. The King of France is so great in those parts, that every
year, he sends Soldiers, and when they are there, they are encouraged to
Marry, having Land and Houses given them, with other Necessaries; they daily
increase, at the Backside of New England, and New York, extending to the
Backside of Virginia. They grow so numerous, that they will in few years be
Masters of all these Countries, if a speedy care be not taken.

They have now a Fort, sixty miles within the English Empire. The Governor of
Canada was Required to Demolish his Fort by Colonel Dungon, then Governor of
New York. And Order came from King James to the Governor of New York and New
England, to Retreat, and lay down their Arms; and the like from the King of
France to the Governor of Canada. And that the two Kings would end the
Controversy in Europe. Notwithstanding all that, they kept their Ground, and a
Fort, and a Cloister of Jesuits. Sir Edmond Andross, who pretends to be a
Protestant, found fault with Governor Dungon, who is a Roman Catholic, for
making War with Canada, notwithstanding the Reasons above written: alleging
that the two Kings were in great Alliance and Friendship.

Whether the Consideration of such things as these, may not more than a little
endear the present Government of New England unto all that would be loath to
see the Country given away to its greatest Enemies?

Whether in Conjunction with the Indian Testimonies, which were so much
despised this time twelve month, persons a few months ago escaped from a French
Captivity have not given upon Oath, such farther Testimonies as these?

J n. L. d. of Salem testifies, that being on Board the (French) Admiral, viz.
The Lumbuscado, and in said Ship carried a Prisoner to Port Royal, he did then
hear several of the Company on Board said Ship, say, That they came directly
from France, and that there was Ten or Twelve Sail of them, Ships of War, that
came in Company together, but some of them were taken upon the Coast of France,
and some were lost since; and that they were all bound directly for
New England; and that Sir Edmond Andross, late Governor of New England, had
sent to the French King for them to come over, and the Country should be
delivered up into his hands, and that they expected that before they should
Arrive, it would have been delivered into the hands of the French.

B n. m. y. of Salem Testifies, That he heard the same related by several on
Board the other French Ship of War that was in Company, with the Lumbuscado,
namely, the Frugum. And also, that they had lost most of their Ships coming
over.

Sworn, Nov. 23. 1689.

P p. H. p. of Salem Testifies, That being carried on Board the Lumbuscado, he
heard several of the Company say, as above. Sworn Nov. 22. 1689.

J n. C t. Testifies, That being Carried to Port Royal a Prisoner, one Mr. M.
O. told him, that the French on Board the Lumbuscado, told him as above. And
that the ( French) having lost several of their Ships in their Voyage, and
hearing that Sir Edmond Andross was taken and now in hold, they should not
proceed at present, but threatened what they would do the next Summer.

Sworn, Nov. 23. 1689.

The same is Testified by M l. C n.

J s A n. Of Salem testifies, That the Lieutenant of the Lumbuscado told him as
above.

J C s Testifies, That on Board the Lumbusado; one Peter Goit told him, there
were thirteen Ships of them came out of France in Company together, and that
they were bound directly for Boston in New England, expecting that the Country,
was before, or would be delivered up to the King of France; and told him,
before they could get clear of the Coast of France, several of their Ships were
taken by the English Ships of War, and the rest of their Fleet taken or
dispersed and lost, about Newfoundland.

Sworn Nov. 23. 1689.

Whether the Consideration of these things, be not enough to awaken and animate
the utmost Efforts that we can make toward the preservation of our Country?

Of our Union and Subjection.
Whether all sorts of men among us, were not by the late Government annoyed
with Oppressions, which were then thought intolerable?

Particularly,

Whether Husbandmen do need to be put in mind of the blessed Privilege to
which they were advancing, of taking Patents for their Lands, at a rate which
would have reduced them to a meaner Estate than the Famine once brought the
Egyptians unto? And whether Mariners do need to be put in mind of a thing
called an Act made by a juncto of Blades at New York, by virtue of which the
Masters of all the Vessels in New England, were put unto Thousands of Pounds
annual Charges, for their Bonds, to lay us all under Bondage, and make a Prison
of the Territory?

And whether Merchants and all other Dealers forget what a discouragement all
manner of business lately had upon it?

Whether we did not in our Distresses promise to the Almighty God, that if he
would rescue us, we would prize our old enjoyments more than ever we did?

Whether any part of Gods Earth have a more easy, a more faithful, a more
paternal, and well-intending Government than what New England is now happy in?

Whether the Government have had any requital for the incredible toil and time
which they have spent for us the last year, but only unreasonable Railings and
Complaints?

And whether such requitals will not at last make all sensible men to say, I
will not be an healer to this people? so that we must perish, because no man of
sense will serve a people so dis-ingenuous?

Whether it be possible for this Country to be defended from Ruin, without
various (and at this juncture, heavy) Taxes upon us all?

Whether it be not better to give a shilling to a public Account with our own
consent in a general Assembly, than to have a penny forced from us without it,
as in the late Arbitrary Government?

Whether some little inequality's in the Rating of men, be not a thing so
unavoidable, that the discontents which are sometimes thereat, show much folly
and baseness in us?

Whether they that refuse to pay the Debts and Rates of the Country, especially
at such a time as this, when if every one should so do, we should all be
undone, are not worthy to be hissed out of our common conversation, as the
Wens, or the Scabs, rather than the Members of this body politic?

Whether the great Sect of Grumbletonians in the Country whom nothing will
satisfy, been't the worst Enemies which this Country can have?

Whether we had not better come to part cheerfully with all we have, even to
our very Rings, and Buckles, and Bodkins, to defray Public Charges, than
suffer our French Enemies to come and rifle us of what is nearer to us than our
very Shirts, our Skins.

Whether those Towns in the Country which Rant and Tear at a great rate,
because of a small Rate, not much exceeding a score of Pounds, laid by absolute
necessity upon them, would not afford a Booty of many hundreds of pounds, when
our common Enemy breaks in upon us?

Whether Covetousness has not ruined New England, in an hundred lesser
Instances already? and whether the Country will not shortly deserve that goodly
Epitaph, A People which died to save Charges?

Whether the Summer which is now advancing, be not like to be the blackest
Summer that ever New England saw, if by the firmest unity, we prevent it not?

Whether for One County in the Colony to go to overreach any other of the
Countries, as to their Propo^tions in the Public Charges, be not a thing as
provoking to God, as it is offensive and odious in the resentments of all sober
men?

Whether for one Colony in the Country to go to shake off the other (once
united) Colonies, in the assistance, which the common dangers have called for,
would not be to invite all kinds of miseries on the whole?

Whether we are not all very loudly admonished, by the late Disasters at
Shenectady, where the People were so shamefully divided, and contentious about
matters of Government, that they whole omitted all that belonged unto the
common Safety, and became a Prey to Barbarous French men?

Whether an old Opinion among us, that the Generality of the Merchants in
Boston, pursue designs which it is the interest of the Gentlemen abroad in the
Country, to be in all things thwarting of, be not a foolish, and groundless
imagination? And whether the generality of good men in the Country, are not
really of one mind, in the most of that which concerns the good of the whole?
And whether they would not be visibly so, if without mutual jealousies they
would consult one another?

Whether it would not be convenient for Salem, the oldest Town in the Colony,
to go before us all in an Example of unanimous endepvours for the public
welfare?

Whether when Chickens are picking at one another, the Kite will not see it
then a time to carry them both away?

Humbly Propounded to the public. By S. E.


