BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
WHEREAS it has been of absolute Necessity, that a certain Number of men
should be Impressed, for the Service of Their Majesty's, in Defense of this
their Province both at Sea and Land, against the common Enemy. And that some
persons employed therein, have passed the Bounds of their Duty, and my Order,
by putting the same in Execution in a violent and disorderly manner, to the
great Grievance of Their Majesty's good Subjects.

For preventing such Disorders for the future, and rendering to all injured
Persons due Satisfaction, I do hereby Publish and Declare.

THat as such violent and undue methods have been used without my Knowledge,
and to my great Disturbance, there shall be effectual care taken, that such as
have received Damage thereby, shall Be Relieved, and all those that have been
the occasion thereof shall be severely punished.

And all people whatsoever are to take notice, that no person shall hereafter
be Pressed into their Majesty's Service, but by a particular Warrant to the
Military Officers, or Constables, for that Purpose.

And if any shall presume to Act contrary to their Duty upon any such occasion,
all Justices of the Peace and all Officers Military and Civil, are Required in
the Name of their Majesty's to cause them to be Seized, and Secured, in order
to their being punished, according to the utmost severity of the Law.

And whereas diverse Soldiers Entered in their Majesty's Service and Pay, have
presumed to leave their Posts, and some have out staid their Pass, without
leave from their Commanders, others Impressed for their Majesty's Service, have
absented and not appeared according to Order.

I do therefore Order and strictly Command, all such Soldiers, forthwith to
Repair unto their Respective Posts, and Duty, as they will answer their Neglect
at their Peril, and all Officers Military and Civil, that shall know, or be
informed of any such Deserters or Runaway Soldiers, are to cause them to be
taken up, and conveyed before the next Justice of the Peace, in order to their
being Returned, and sent unto their Respective Officers, and every Justice of
the Peace, is hereby Empowered and Required to deal effectually, in this matter;
and no Soldier may presume to leave his Post, or absent himself from his Duty,
on pain of being proceeded against with utmost severity of Law.

And whereas a vigorous Endeavor to suppress the Growth of Wickedness and
Profaneness in this Territory, is not only the way to obtain the gracious
Presence of Almighty God, without which we can expect no good Success of our
Affairs, but also a thing for which Their Majesty's have given their particular
Instructions.

IT is hereby Required, That all the wholesome Laws here in Force against Vices
of all kinds, and particularly the Laws against Blasphemy, Swearing, Cursing,
Lying, unlawful Gaming, Sabbath-breaking, Idleness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
and all Nurseries and Inticements of such Impietys, be in their Majesty's Name
immediately, and impartially put in Execution. And all Justices, of the Peace,
Constables, Tithing men, or whatever other Officers, as well Civil as
Military, as are therein concerned, are hereby directed, enjoined, and in Their
Majesty's Name Required, in this matter to discharge the Duty of their places,
with all fidelity, and all sorts of persons to conform themselves accordingly:
And it is hereby signified, that upon Complaint made, and proved against any
Officers; of having neglected their Duty, the utmost mark of Displeasure shall
be set upon them, while those that are found faithful, shall be encouraged with
all fit Acknowledgments. Given at Boston, and Dated the 27th day of July, 1692.
In the Fourth Year of Their Majesty's Reign.

God Save King William and Queen Mary.
Printed by Benjamin Harris, Printer to his Excellency, the Governor and
Council. 1692.


