A VISION Concerning The Mischievous Separation AMONG FRIENDS IN Old England.

Printed and Sold by Will. Bradford at Philadelphia, 1692.

A VISION Concerning The Mischievous Separation, In Old England
Dear Friends and Brethren,
AS I was at Prayer in my Chamber upon the twenty third Day of the Twelfth
Month, in the Year 1678. and making Intercession to the Lord for Friends, his
People, That the Lord would be pleased to preserve them from this Rough and
Foul Spirit that was risen up; and the Lord did answer me in my Prayer, That
this Spirit was risen up for the Trial of his People, in the Life, and Light,
and Power, and Grace, and Truth. And I saw more than can be expressed in words;
for it was risen for to try them, and that they might keep in the Power of the
Lord, and in their Habitations.

And so, when the Lord has tried his People, and their singleness to him, and
when this Spirit has spent its Strength, and gone the Way of all that has
risen before it, Then they may see how all things work together for the good of
them that love God. And therefore stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made you free, in his Light, Grace and Truth, and Power, and Spirit, and
Faith, to Christ, from whence it comes, Christ your Rock and Foundation, that
cannot be shaken, and in whom is your Election, Life and Salvation. So that all
may stand to Christ their Lord and Master, to be ordered by him, with his
glorious Gospel, which is not of Man, but from Heaven.

For I saw all Friends as if they were bedewed from Heaven, and they sat as in
a Valley, and wet with the Dew of Life; and the other hard dead Spirit was
floating a top with the Words of Truth, which Spirit is for the Trial of his
People, of their standing singly in the Life, to God, upon their own Foundation.

So as I was at Prayer, the Lord answered me, That this Spirit of J. S. J. W.
and their Company, were raised up for the Trial of Friends, their standing to
God: for it was High, and Friends were Low, in the Power and Spirit of God, and
wet with his Dew, and sat in the Valley, and will rise when their Height will
fall; and therefore Friends are to stand to God.

G. F.

A General EPISTLE AGAINST Separation.
Dear Friends and Brethren;
IN the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom you have all Peace and Life, and in him
there is no Division, nor Schism, nor Rent, nor Strife, nor Separation; for
Christ is not divided, and there can be no Separation in the Light, Grace,
Faith and holy Ghost, but Unity, and Fellowship, and Communion; for the Devil
was the first that went out of the Truth, and separated from it, and tempted
Man and Woman to disobey God, and to go from the Truth into a false Liberty,
and to that which God forbad. And so, it is the Serpent now that leads Man and
Woman into a false Liberty, the God of the World, from which Man and Woman must
be separated by the Truth, and then for Christ the Truth to make them free, and
then they are free indeed; and then they are to stand fast in the Liberty in
which Christ has made them free; and in him, as I said before, there is no
Division, nor Schism, nor Rent, nor Separation, but Peace, and Life, and
Reconciliation to God, and one to another; so that in Christ Male and Female
are all one; another they be Male or Female, Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, they
are all one in Christ; and there can be no Schism, Rent or Division in him, nor
in the Worship of God in his holy Spirit and Truth, nor in the pure undefiled
Religion that keeps from the spots of the World, nor in the Love of God that
bears and endures all things, nor in the Word of Gods Grace; for it is pure,
and endures forever. Many, you see, have lost the Word of Patience, and the
Word of Wisdom, that is pure, and peaceable and gentle, and easy to be
entreated; when they are gone from the Word of Patience, then we have seen
their own Patience quickly worn out, when they turn from the Word of Wisdom
that is pure, and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to be entreated, then they
run into the Wisdom that is below, that is earthly, sensual and devilish, and
very uneasy to be entreated; they are gone from the Love of God that bears
all things, and endures all things, and thinks no evil, and does not behave
it self unseemly; then they (...) bear, (...) grow brittle, and are easily
provoked, and (...) into unseemly things and vaunteth it self, and (...) up,
and is Rash, H^^dy, High-minded, and Fierce, and becomes like sounding Brass,
or a Tinkling Simbal; and this is contrary to the Nature of the Love of God,
which is kind, and endures all things, and bears all things.

And therefore all Dear Friends and Brethren, dwell in the Love of God; for
they who dwell in Love, dwell in God, and God in them, and keep in the Word of
Wisdom, which is gentle, pure and peaceable, and the Word of Patience that
endures and bears all things; and this Word of Patience the Devil, and the
World, and all his Instruments can never wear out, it will wear them all out,
and was before they were, and will be when they are gone, the pure holy Word of
God, by which all Gods Children are born again, and feed on the Milk of the
Word of Life, and grow by it. And so my desires are, That you be all of one
Heart, Mind, Soul and Spirit, in Christ Jesus. Amen.

You may Read this in your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings.

Bednell-Green, near London, the 25. 10. Mo. 1686.
THE END.

