THE LAWS and ACTS OF THE General Assembly FOR Their Majesty's Province OF
NEW YORK, As they were Enacted in diverse Sessions, the first of which began
April, the 9th, Annoque Domini, 1691.

At New York, Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to their Majesty's,
King William and Queen Mary, 1694.

A Table of the Contents of the Laws.
AN Act for Quieting and settling the D^sorders that have lately happened
within this Province, and for the establishing and securing their Majesty's
present Government against the like Disorders for the future, page 1. An Act
for establishing Courts of Judicature, page 2, 64. An Act for the settling,
quieting and confirming unto the Cities, Towns, Minnors and Freeholders within
this Province, their several Grants, Patents and Rights respectively, page 6.
An Act for the enabling each respective Town within this Province to regulate
their Fences and Highways, and make prudential Orders for their Peace and
orderly Improvements, page 7. An Act for defraying the public and necessary
Charges throughout this Province, and for maintaining the Poor, and preventing
Vagabonds, page 8. An Act for settling the Militia, page 10. An Act declaring
what are the Rights and Privileges of their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting
within this Province of New York, page 15. An Act for the Allowance to the
Representatives, page 19. An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to
defray their necessary Charge, page 20. An Act for establishing a Revenue upon
their Majesty's for defraying the public and necessary Charges of the
Government, page 21, 58, 80, 84. An Act to enable his Excellency (...) defray
his extraordinary Expen^e, and to indemnifie the Collector for the Receipt of
several Sums of Money on pretense of Customs, page 26. An Act for raising two
Thousand Pounds, etc. page 27. An Act to ease People that are scrupulous in
Swearing, page 30. An Act for Pardoning such as have been active in the late
Disorders, page 31. An Act for the re^^lating Damages done in the time of the
late Disorders, and for Uniting the (...) of their Majesty's Subjects within
this Province, and for calling Home (...) of their Majesty's Subjects that have
lately absented themselves from their Habitations and usual places of Abode.
page 34 An Act to divide this (...) Dependencies into (...) and (...), page 39.
An Act for the raising and paying 150 Men for the D^fenc^ of Albany, page 40 An
Act for the Regulating the Buildings, Streets, Laws, Wharffs, D^rks and Allies
of the City of New York, page 43. An Act for the raising 200 men for the
Defense of Albany, page 46 An Act for the destroying of Wolves, page 52. An Act
for the raising 220 Men with their Officers, for the security of the Fronteers
of this Province, page 53 An Act for the raising and paying 80 Men in Ulster
and Duchess County, page 57 An Act for restraining and punishing Privateers and
Pirates. An Act for granting their Majesty's the Rate of one Penny per Pound
upon all the Real and Personal Estates within the Province of New York. An Act
for raising six Thousand Pound for the payment of 300 Volunteers, for the
Reinforcement of Albany, etc. An Act for settling Fairs and Markets in each
respective County throughout the Province, page 6^ An Act for the Supervising
Intestates Estates, and regulating the Probate of Wills, and granting Letters
of Administration, page 72 An Act for the Encouraging a Post Office, page 74.
An Act for the satisfying and paying the Debts of the Government, page 77 An
Act for calling Long Island, the Island of Nassaw. page 79 An Act for
establishing certain Rates and Duties upon such Goods, Wares and Merchandise as
shall be brought unto their Majesty's Beam in the Weigh-House at New York, page
80 An Act for settling a Ministry and raising a Maintenance for them, page 81.
An Act continuing the Revenue unto their Majesty's five Years longer than the
former Act, page 84 A Catalogue of Fees established by the Governor and (...)
at the (...) request o^ the Assembly.
An Act for the quieting and settling the Disorders that have lately happened
within this Province, and for the establishing and securing their Majesty's
present Government against the like Disorders for the future.
FOrasmuch as the Good and Quiet, Ease, Profit, Benefit and Advantage of the
Inhabitants within this Province does chiefly consist in, and altogether rely
and depend upon their bearing true Faith and Allegiance unto their Majesty's
Crown of England, which is, and can only be the support and Defense of this
Province. And whereas the late hasty and inconsiderate Violation of the same,
by the setting up a Power over Their Majesty's Subjects, without Authority from
the Crown of England, has vitiated and debauched the Minds of many People,
etc. and has also brought great Waste, Trouble and Destruction upon the good
People of this Province, their Majesty's Loyal Subjects. For the Prevention
whereof, in time to come, Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor
and Council, and Representatives met in General Assembly, And it is hereby
Published, Declared, Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority of the same, That
there can be no Power and Authority held and exercised over their Majesty's
Subjects in this their Province and Dominion, but what must be derived from
their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors. And we do hereby Recognize and
Acknowledge, That Their Majesty's, William and Mary, are, and as of Right they
ought to be by the Laws of the Realm of England, our Liege Lord and Lady, KING
and QUEEN of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, etc. That thereby their Princely Persons are only invested with the
Right to Rule this their Dominions and Province, and that none ought or can
have Power, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to use or exercise any Power over
Their Subjects in this Province, but by their Immediate Authority under Their
Broad Seal of Their Realm of England, as now established.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whatsoever Person
or Persons shall by any manner of way, or upon any pretense whatsoever,
endeavor by Force of Arms or otherways, to disturb the Peace, Good and Quiet
of this Their Majesty's Government, as it is now established, shall be deemed
and esteemed as Rebels and Traitors unto Their Majestie^, and incur the Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures, as the Laws of England have, for such Offenses, made
and provided.

An Act for Establishing Courts of Judicature for the Ease and Benefit of each
respective City, Town and County within this Province.
WHereas the orderly Regulation, and the establishment of Courts of Justice
throughout this Province, as well in the respect of Time as Place, does tend
very much to the Honor and Dignity of the Crown, as well as to the Ease and
Benefit of the Subject, Be it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same, That every Justice of the Peace that
resides within any Town or County within this Province, are hereby fully
empowered and authorized to have Cognizance of all Causes, Cases of Debts and
Trespass to the value of Forty Shillings, or under; which Causes and Cases
shall be heard, tried and finally determined without a Jury, by every Justice
of the Peace that resides within any Town or County within this Province, he
taking to his Assistance, at the time of his hearing and determining such Cause
or Cases of Debt and Trespass to the value of Forty Shillings and under, one of
the Free holders of the Town and place where the cause of Action does arise.
The Process of warning, shall be by a summons under the Hand of the Justice,
directed to the Constable of the Town or Precinct, or any deputed by him, where
the Party complained against does live. Which Summons being Personally served,
or left at the Defendants House two days before the Day of Hearing of the
Plaint, shall be sufficient Authority to and for the said Justice, assisted
with one of the Freeholders as aforesaid, to proceed on such Cause and Causes,
and determine the same in the Defendants absence; and to grant Execution
thereon, against the Defendants Person, or for want thereof his Estate, which
the Constable of the Town or Precincts, or his Deputy, shall and may serve.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
the Plantiff or Defendant shall desire a Jury, it shall be allowed, but at the
proper Cost and Charges of the Person desiring the same.

And for the Increase of Virtue and Discouraging of Evildoers throughout this
Province, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be
held and kept in every respective City and County within this Province (at the
Times and Places hereafter named and expressed) a Court of Sessions of the
Peace, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, at the City Hall of the said City four
times every Year, viz. The first Tuesday in May, the first Tuesday in August,
the first Tuesday in November, and the first Tuesday in February.

For the City and County of Albany, at the City Hall of the said City, the
first Tuesday in June, the first Tuesday in October, and the first Tuesday in
February.

For Westchester at Westchester the first Tuesday in June, and the first
Tuesday in December.

For Vlster, at Kingston the first Tuesday in September, and the first Tuesday
in March.

For the County of Richmond, at the Courthouse, the first Tuesday in
September, and the first Tuesday in March.

For Kings County at Flatbush (alias Midwout) the second Tuesday in May, and
the second Tuesday in November.

For Queens County, at Jamaica, the third Tuesday in May, and the third Tuesday
in September.

For Suffolk County, at Southold, the last Tuesday in September.

And the last Tuesday in March at Southampton. Orange County to be annixed to
the County of New York, and Duchess County to the County of Vlster.

Which Sessions of the Peace shall only hold and continue for the space and
time of two Days, and no longer.

And for the more regular and beneficial Distribution of Justice to the
Inhabitants of each respective City and County within this Province, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be kept and held a Court
of Common Pleas in each respective City and County within this Province, at the
Times and Places hereafter named and expressed: That is to say, At such places
in each respective County as the said Court of Sessions are to be kept; and to
begin the next day after the Sessions terminates, and only to hold and continue
for the space and time of two days, and no longer; And that there be one Judge,
with three Justices, in each County, Appointed and Commissionated to hold the
same Court of Pleas; Three whereof to be a Quorum. And that the several and
respective Courts, hereby established, shall have Jurisdiction to Hear, Try,
and finally to Determine all Actions or cause of Actions, and all Matters, and
Things, and Causes Tryable at the Common Law, of what Nature or Kind soever.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, That there shall not be any
Appeal, or Removal by Habeas Corpus, of any Person, or of any Action or Suit,
or of any Judgment or Execution, that shall be determined in this Court to the
value of Twenty Pounds or under, any thing contained herein to the contrary in
any ways notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That the Courts of Mayor and
Aldermen of the respective Cities of New York and Albany, shall have in each of
their respective Cities the Power and Authority to Hear, Try, and finally to
Determine all such Actions and Suits, as is commonly cognizable before them;
from which final Determination, there shall no be any Appeal or Removal by
Habeas Corpus. of any Person, or of any Action or Suit, or of any Judgment or
Execution, to the value of Twenty Pounds, or under, any thing contained herein
to the contrary in any ways notwithstanding.

To which respective Court of Common Pleas there shall belong, and be appointed
and commissionated for that purpose, one Clark of the Court, to draw, enter and
keep the Records, Declarations, Pleas, and Judgments, there to be had and made.
And one Marshal or Crier of the Court, to call the Jurors, and proclaim the
Commands and Orders of the Court.

And for the more regular Proceedings in the said Court, all Processes and
Writs, of what Nature soever, for the Command of Persons to appear, and to
execute the Judgments and Executions of the respective Courts aforesaid, shall
be directed to the respective Sheriffs of each City and County within this
Province, and executed by them, their Under-Sheriffs, or Deputy or Deputies. A^
(...) Processes and Writs for Actions betwixt Party and Party in the said
Court, shall issue out of the Office of the Clark of the Court in each City and
County respectively, signed Per Curiam.

And that Their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within this Province, may have
all the good, proper and just ways and means for the securing and recovering
their just Rights and Demands within the same, Be it further Enacted, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained, by Authority aforesaid, That there shall be held
and kept a Supreme Court of Judicature, which shall be duly and constantly
kept at the City of New York, and not elsewhere, at the several and respective
Times hereafter mentioned. And that there be five Justices at least appointed
and commissionated to hold the same Court, Two whereof, together with one chief
Justice, to be a Quorum. Which Supreme Court is hereby fully Empowered and
Authorized to have Cognizance of all Pleas, Civil, Criminal and Mixed, as fully
and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of Kings Bench,
Common Pleas and Exchequer, within Their Majesty's Kingdom of England, have, or
ought to have. In and to which Supreme Court all and every Person and Persons
whatsoever, shall or may, if they shall so see meet, commence or remove any
Action or Suit, the Debt or Damage laid in such Action or Suit being upwards of
Twenty Pounds, and not otherwise; or shall or may by Warrant, Writ of Error, or
Certiorari, remove out of any of the respective Courts of Mayor and Aldermen,
Se^^ions and Common Pleas, any Judgment, Information or Indictment there had or
depending; and may correct Errors in Judgment, or Reverse the same, if there be
just cause. Provided always, That the Judgment removed shall be upwards of the
value of Twenty Pounds

Always provided, and be further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this
Supreme Court shall be duly and constantly kept once every six Months, and no
oftener; That is to say, On the first Tuesday of October, and on the first
Tuesday of April annually, and every Year, at the City Hall of the said City of
New York: provided they shall not sit longer than eight days

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be
lawful for any Person or Persons whatsoever, appointed, or elected, or
commissionated to be a Justice or Judge of the aforesaid Courts, to execute or
officiate his or their said place or Office until such Time he or they shall
respectively take the Oaths appointed by Act of Parliament, to be taken in
stead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and subscribe the Test in open
Court.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
the Justices or Judges of the several Courts beforementioned, be and are
hereby sufficiently empowered to make, order and establish all such Rules and
Orders, for the more orderly practicing and proceeding in their said Courts, as
fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as all or any of the
said Judges of the several Courts of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequer in England legally do.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
no Persons Right or Property shall be by any of the aforesaid Courts
determined, except where matters of Fact are either acknowledged, or passes by
the Defendants Fault for want of Plea or Answer, Unless the Fact be found by
the Verdict of Twelve Men of the Neighborhood, as it ought of Right to be done
by the Law.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be a Court
of Chancery within this Province, which said Court shall have Power to Hear and
Determine all Matters of Equity, and shall be esteemed and accounted, The High
Court of Chancery of this Province.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor and
Council be the said High Court of Chancery, and hold and keep the said Court;
and that the Governor may depute, nominate and appoint, in his stead, a
Chancellor, and be assisted with such other Persons of the Council as shall by
him be thought fit and convenient, together with all necessary Officers,
Clerks, and Registers, as to the said High Court of Chancery are needful.

Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That any Freeholder, Planter, Inhabitant or Sojourner within this Province,
may have Liberty, if he or they see meet, to make his or their Appeal or
Appeals, from any Judgment obtained against him or them, in case of Error, in
the several ^ourts aforesaid, in such manner and form as is hereafter
expressed, That is to say, From the Court of Mayor and Alderman, and Courts of
Common Pleas, To the Supreme Court, for any Judgment above the value of Twenty
Pounds; And from the Supreme Court at New York, to the Governor and Council,
for any J^dgment above the value of One Hundred Pounds; And from the Governor
and Council To their Majesty's Council, for any Decree or Judgment above the
Value of Three Hundred Pounds, as in Their Majesty's Letters Patents to his
Excellency does and may more fully appear. Always provided, That the Party or
Parties so Appealing, shall first pay all Cost of such Judgment or Decree from
which the Appeal arises, and enter into Recognizeance, with two sufficient
Sureties, for double the value of the Debt, Matter or Thing recovered or
obtained by Judgment or Decree against him or them, to the said Court from
which they Appeal, That they will prosecute the said Appeal or Appeals with
Effect, and make Return thereof within Twelve Months after the said Appeal or
Appeals here made. And if Default happen thereon, then Execution to issue out
upon the Judgment, against the Party, or their Sureties, in course, without any
Scire facias. Provided always, That the establishing of these Courts shall not
be or remain longer in force than for the time and space of two Years, and
until the end of the sitting of the next Assembly after the expiration of the
said two Years.

An Act for the Settling, Quieting and Confirming unto the Cities, Towns,
Mannours and Freeholders within this Province, their several Grants, Patents
and Rights respectively.
FOrasmuch as the many Changes, Alterations and Disturbances that have been
lately given unto their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within this their
Province, etc. has and does very much discourage the settling, improving and
the growth and strength thereof; and that it is now absolutely necessary for
the quieting and satisfying their Majesty's good Subjects within the same, that
the Rights and Privileges formerly held by and granted to the respective
Cities, Towns, Manors and Freeholders within this Province, etc. should be
now ratified and confirmed,

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, And it is hereby Enacted and Declared by the
Authority of the same, That all the Charters, Patents, Grants made, giv^ (...)
granted, and well and truly executed under the Seal of this Provi^^e,
constituted and authorized by their late and present Majesty's, the Kings of
England, and Registered in the Secretary's Office, unto the several and
respective Corporations or Bodies Politic of the (...), Towns and Manors, and
also to the several and respective Freeholders within this Province, are and
shall forever be deemed, esteemed and reputed good and effectual Charters,
Patents and Grants authentic in the Law, against their Majesty's, their Heirs,
and Successors forever, notwithstanding of the want of Forms in the Law, or the
Non-seizance of any Right, Privilege, or Custom, which ought to have been done
heretofore by the Constitutions and Directions contained in the respective
Charters, Patents and Grants aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Charters,
Patents and Grants, made, given and granted, as aforesaid, unto all and every
the several and respective Corporations or Bodies Politic of the Cities, Towns
and Manors, and their Successors, and also unto all and every the respective
Freeholders, their Heirs and Assigns forever within this Province, are to all
intents and purposes whatsoever hereby Ratified and Confirmed, To Have, Hold,
Exercise, Occupy, Possess and Enjoy all their, and every of their former
Rights, Customs, Prerogatives, Privileges, Preheminencies, Practices,
Immunities, Liberties, Franchises, Royalties and Usages whatsoever, in as full
and ample manner, as if none of these Changes, Alterations, Disturbances, want
of other Forms in the Law, or the Non-seizance of any Rights, Privileges or
Customs of any of the Corporations aforesaid, had never happened, or been
neglected, any thing herein contained, or in any other Law to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. Provided, That nothing herein contained shall be
construed or taken to bar any person or persons of his or their former and just
Right, or pretenses to any House, Tract or parcel of Land within this Province.
Always provided, That he or they that have any such just Right or Pretense* do
make his or their Claim within the space of five Years next after the date
hereof. And also provided, That nothing herein contained shall be intended or
construed to the prejudice or hindrance of the Title or Claim of any Person
under Age, Feme Covert, Non Compos Mentis, Imprisonment, or beyond the Sea.

An Act for the enabling each respective Town within this Province to Regulate
their Fences and Highways, and make prudential Orders for their Peace and
orderly Improvements.
WHereas the respective Towns within this Province, etc. are so circumstanced
as to have different and distinct ways in their Improvements of Tillage and
Pasturage, and that it is altogether necessary that they may be qualified and
made capable in the Law to make such prudential Rules and Orders for the better
Improvement of their respective Towns, and the Regulating their Fences and
Highwayes accordingly. Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council,
and the Representatives met in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the Freeholders of every respective Town with this Province are
hereby Empowered and Authorized to meet and assemble themselves together at
such times and places as are appointed and expressed in their respective Grants
and Patents, and when so assembled to make, establish, constitute and ordain,
from time to time, such prudential Orders and Rules, for the better improving
of their respective Lands in Tillage, Pasturage, or in any other reasonable
way, as shall by the Majority of the Freeholders, so assembled or convened as
aforesaid, be thought good and convenient.

And also, when the Freeholders of each respective Town within this Province,
etc. are assembled, as aforesaid, they are hereby further authorized and
empowered to make choice, and nominate in each of their respective Towns,
annually, and once every Year, Three Persons to be Surveyors and Orderers of
the Work for the laying out and the Amendment of the Highways and Fences
within the Bounds and Limits of their respective Towns within this Province.
Which Persons, so Nominated and chosen, shall take upon them the said Office,
and are hereby empowered to lay out, set forth, regulate and amend all such
Highways and Fences as shall be established, in such manner, form and way as
shall be agreed upon and directed by the Majority of the Freeholders of each
respective Towns, as aforesaid. Always provided, That such Orders as are made,
constituted and ordained, shall be kept and Registered in the Town's Books for
that purpose, and consented to and approved by the next Court of Sessions of
the Peace in the Counties where the respective Towns are, otherwise to be of no
Force nor Virtue whatsoever.

An Act for Defraying of the Public and Necessary Charge throughout this
Province, and for maintaining the Poor, and preventing Vagabonds.
FOrasmuch as it is necessary that each respective County within this Province
should have Power to establish a Rate, for the Defraying of their respective
and public Charge, Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That there be elected and chosen annually, and once every Year, in each
respective Town within this Province, Two Freeholders, who are hereby
empowered to assess and establish a certain Rate upon each of the Freeholders
and Inhabitants within their Respective Towns; which Assesment or certain Rate,
shall upon a certain day, as the Inhabitants of the respective Towns shall
appoint, be delivered to a certain Freeholder, which shall ^^ likewise chosen
in each respective Town aforesaid, to supervise and (...) the public and
necessary Charge of each respective County Which Persons, so duly chosen,
shall elect and constitute a certain Treasurer for each respective County,
which Treasurer shall make such payments for the defraying of all the public
and necessary Charges of each respective County, as shall be appointed and
ordered by the Persons so chosen for the supervising the public Charges of
each respective County.

And be it further provided by the Authority aforesaid, That any such Assesment
or Rate, made, ordained or appointed, by the Persons so chosen, shall be
collected and gathered by the Constable, or any other Person chosen or
appointed thereunto; as also, if any person or persons shall refuse to pay the
said Assesment or Rate, that it may be lawful for them that are chosen as
aforesaid, and they are hereby Authorized to issue out their Warrants to the
Constable, under their Hands and Seals, or any other Persons appointed by them,
to collect and levy the same by Distress on their Goods and Chattels.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer of
each respective County within this Province, shall keep a distinct Book of
Accounts, containing a particular Account of all the Money, Rates and
Assesments aforesaid, and also of all Disbursments and Payments by warrant
aforesaid, and once every Year he shall bring in his Accounts, to such persons
as shall be appointed for the audit of the same, under the Penalty of one
Hundred Pounds, except prevented by Death or Sickness.

And further, whereas it is the Custom and Practice of their Majesty's Realm of
England, and all the adjacent Collonies in America, That every respective Town
and Parish does take care and provide for the Poor, who do inhabit in their
respective Precincts, as aforesaid, Therefore it is Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That for the time to come, the respective Freeholders, elected and
chosen as aforesaid, in every Town, Parish and Precinct, shall make provision
for the maintenance and support of their Poor respectively.

And for the Prevention and Discouragement of Vagabonds and Idle Persons to
come into this Province, from other parts, and also from one part of the
Province to another, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons
that shall come to inhabit within this Province, or any part or place thereof,
and has not a visible Estate, or has not a manual Occupation, shall, before
he be admitted an Inhabitant, give sufficient Surety, That he shall not be a
burden or Charge to the resp^ctive place he shall come to inhabit. Which
Security shall continue for two Years.

Provided always, That all those that have manual Crafts or Occupations, may
at all times come and inhabit in any place within this Province, and be always
admitted, provided he makes Application within eight days after his arrival in
any City, Town or County, as aforesaid, unto such person or persons as are
appointed for Governing the respective parts.

And also, all Vessels that shall bring any Passengers into this Province, the
Masters of such Vessels shall within four and twenty Hours after arrival, bring
a List of such Passengers he brings into the Province, with their Quality and
Conditions, unto the chief Magistrates of each respective City, Town or County,
as aforesaid, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds current Money of this Province.

Always provided, That if any Vessel bring in any Person as aforesaid, not
able ^o give Surety for their well demeanor, that then, and in such case,
(...) the Master of such Vessel or Vessels shall be obliged to Transport all
such to the place from whence they came, or at least out of this Province and
Dependencies.

And als^ if any Vagabonds, Beggars, or others, remove from one Town to
a^^^her, and cannot give Security, as aforesaid, It shall be lawful to the
^onstable to return such Persons to the Town from whence they came.

An Act for settling the Militia.
WHereas the present State and Condition of this Province does of necessity
require, that the Inhabitants thereof should be well armed, and trained up in
Art Military, as well for the Honor and service of their most excellent
Majesty's, as the Preservation of their own Lives and Fortunes, Be it Enacted
and Ordained by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the
same, That no Person whatsoever from Fifteen to Sixty Years of Age remain
unlisted by themselves or Masters, Mistrisses or Imployers, under the Captains
in their respective p^aces of abode, in Foot or Horse, the space of one
Kalander Month after their arrival, or coming to reside or sojourn in any
place within this Province, on Penalty of Twenty Shillings, and so for every
Month such Person shall remain unlisted. And that every Foot Soldier be
provided with a well fixed Musket or Fusee, or if the Officer so appoint, with
a good Pike, or Sword, or Lance and Pistol; each Musqueteer six Charges of
Powder, and one Cartouch Box, and so shall appear when and where appointed,
upon penalty of five Shillings for his default in not appearing, and three
Shillings for want of each Charge of Powder, Gun, Pike, Sword, Pistol or
Cartouch Box, so as the whole Penalty for any Person at one time exceed not ten
Shillings. And that every Soldier belonging to the Horse, shall, when and
where commanded, appear, and be provided with a good serviceable Horse of his
own, covered with a good Saddle, with Holsters, Breast Plate and Crupper* and a
Case of good Pistols, Hanger, S^ord or Rapier, and half a pound of Powder, with
twelve serviceable Bullets, on penalty of Ten Shillings for each times absence,
and five Shillings for default of each of the particulars above mentioned, so
as the whole Penalty for one time exceed not fifteen Shillings. And that every
Foot Soldier shall have at his Habitation and Abode one pound of good Powder,
and three pound of sizeable Bullets. And every Trooper have at his usual place
of Abode, a well fixed Carbine, with Belt and Swivel, and two Pounds of fine
Powder, with six pounds of sizeable Bullets, on penalty of ten Shillings for
each default; and that each of them shall bring the same into the Field, when
commanded, upon Penalty of answering the same at a Court Martial.

And for the supply of the Troops of Horse in the Cities of New York and
Albany, and County of Vlster, it shall be in the Power of the Collonol or chief
Officer of the Militia of the City of New York, County of Albany, and County of
Vlster, for the time being, whenever any of the said Troops shall not
complete the Number of Fifty, To present double the Number, instead of such as
are dead, removed, or wanting, out of the principal Inhabitants and Gentlemen
of the respective Cities and Counties aforesaid, unto the Governor for the
time being, who from time to time may list and order so many of them to be of
the said respective Troops, as may complete the Number of Fifty for their
Majesty's service, and the security of this Province. And every Person so
presented to the Governor for the time being, and by him listed and ordered to
be of the said respective Troops, shall be, and are hereby obliged to serve in
the said respective Troops, upon the Penalty of five Pounds. Provided
nevertheless, That nothing herein be construed to extend to force or compel
any Person that has or shall be in Commission in this Province, to list
themselves in any Company or Troop, or to serve in any Capacity beneath their
former Commission, unless such person has been degraded by a Court Martial.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person, so
listed as aforesaid, shall depart thence, without a Discharge from the
Commander of the Company or Troop, where listed, on Penalty of Twenty
Shillings. And that no Commander of any Company or Troop shall refuse, when
desired, to give a Discharge in Writing, to any that is removing his Abode out
of the Precincts or Province, under the penalty of five Pounds.

And whereas at the City of New York, Guards and Watches are every Night set
and appointed, Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That it shall and may be lawful for any person or persons listed in the
Reigment of the City and County of New York, (except on Extraordinary
Occasions) to put a well Armed Man in their Room, who, if approved of by the
Captain of the Guard* shall excuse his or their Absence. Provided always, That
the Commission Officers and Serjants of the respective Companies, be obl^ged in
their respective Turns to mount the Guard in their proper Persons. And that no
Person shall refuse to be a Serjant, Corporal or Drummer in the Company wherein
he is listed, under the penalty of Forty Shillings.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Captains of Companies of Foot, or Troops of Horse, shall within twelve Months
from and after the Publication of this Act, provide for their Companies and
Troops, Drums and Colors, Trumpets, Trumpeters, and Banners, at the proper
Charge of the respective Officers, Troops and Companies, under the Penalty of
Ten Pounds, and so for every four Months such Commanders shall remain
unprovided. And that all the Colonels of the respective Regiments, or next
chief Officers in their absence, shall once every Year at least issue out their
Warrants to their Inferior Officers, commanding them, To make diligent search
and inquiry in their several Precincts, that all be duly Listed, Armed and
Equipped; And to return to them such Defects as shall be found, to the end the
same may be reformed, on penalty of Twenty Pounds. And and that once every
three Months, or oftener, as Occasion shall require, and command be given by
the Captain General or Commander in chief, the several Companies and Troops in
each Regiment, shall meet at the next and most convenient places to he
appointed by the respective Officers, to be then and there by them mustered and
exercised.

And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That during
the time the said Officers and Soldiers are in Arms, they shall observe and
keep all and every of the Laws and Articles of War, and give all due Obedience
to their superior Officers: Which Laws and Articles the Captain General or
Commander in chief, with Advice of a general Council of War, is to make and
establish, and the Commanders of the several Regiments to give out Copies of
the said Articles unto the respective Officers, that the same may be publicly
read once every three Months unto the Soldiers, whilst they are in Arms, that
all Persons may the better know and observe their Duties. And if it shall
happen that any of the Officers or Soldiers, shall, when they are out of Arms,
endeavor to take Revenge by force, for any thing his or their superior
Officers lawfully did in pursuance of his or their Duty, and this Act, The said
Officers and Soldiers shall be brought to a Court Martial, and there punished,
as if the Offense had been done in Time of Service or Exercise; provided that
the said Punishment do not extend to Life or Limb.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That once every Year, or
oftener, it thereunto commanded, each particular Captain shall give to his Field
Officer, and the Field Officer to the Captain General or Commander in chief,
fair written Rools of their respective Companies and Regiments. And if any
Field Officer, Captain or other inferior O^^^cer or Soldier shall neglect, or
contemn performing the lawful Commands of their respective superior Officers,
he or they shall be punished by Fine, Casheering, or other Punishment,
according to the Discretion of a Court Martial, which the Captain General, or
the Commander in chief is to appoint and establish. And the Orders of the said
Court Martial, are hereby declared to be binding in all Military Affairs.

And if any Person upon any Invasion, or other public Military Service, be
wounded or disabled, he shall be cured and maintained out of the public
Revenue.

And if any Person whatsoever shall be sued, molested or impleaded for any
thing lawfully commanded in the Execution and Pursuance of this present Act, he
shall plead the general Issue, and give this Act in Evidence; and shall
thereupon, if found for him, recover costs of Suit, and Trible Damage.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That the several Fin^s and Forfeitures mentioned in this Act, shall
be recovered and disposed of as follows, viz. That all such as do relate to
any Person under the degree of a Captain, shall be to the respective Captains,
to defray the Charges of their Companies or Troops, and to be livied before the
next Exercising day, by Distress and Sail of the Offenders Goods, by the
Captains Warrant to the Serjant or Corporal; and if ^o Distress be found, the
punishment to be by riding the Wooden Horse, or being tied Neck and Heels, not
exceeding one Hour, at the Discretion of their Officers. But if the offender be
a Servant, the Owners Goods shall be liable to the Distresses and Sales, as
aforesaid, so that Satisfaction may be made. And for all other Penalties
mentioned in this Act, the same shall be levied by Distrrss and Sale of the
Offenders Goods and Chattels, by the Provest Marshal, by Warrant from the
Captain General or Commander in chief, or the chief Field Officer, where such
Offenders ar^; one half thereof shall be to the Captain General, and the other
half unto the said Field Officers of that Regiment where the Offense is
committed And if the Fines that do relate to any Person under the degree of a
Captain, shall not amount to a sum sufficient to defray the Charge of the
Captains Companies or Troops, that then the overplus wanting be levied upon
the several Soldiers equally, by Warrant or Order of the Colonel or chief
Officer of the Regiment, Troops or Companies.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for any Commission Officer, belonging to the Regiment of the City of
New York, under the degree of a Captain, in the absence of the said Captain, to
grant Warrants of Distress against any Person whatsoever, that shall absent
themselves from their Duty on the Night Guard, without sending a sufficient
Person to serve and watch in their stead; which said Warrants so granted, shall
be as effectual, to all ^ntents and purposes whatsoever, as if the (...) ^^^m
had been granted by the Captain^ themselves.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That nothing in this Act contained be expounded, construed or
understood, to diminish, alter or abridge the Power of the Captain General or
Commander in chief for the time being, but that in all Things and upon all
Occasions he may act as fully and freely, as Captain General and Commander in
chief, to all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been made, any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons listed,
as aforesaid, shall readily attend and serve on the Watches when appointed,
under the Penalty of Three Shillings for each default.

And it is also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
whatsoever presume to fire any small Arms after Eight of the Clock at Night,
unless in case of any Alarm, Insurrection, or any other lawful Occasion: And in
either of the said Cases four Muskets or small Arms, distinctly fired, or
where great Guns are, the firing of one great Gun, and two Muskets or small
Arms, distinctly, and beating of a Drum shall be taken for an Alarm. And every
person that shall neglect his Duty in taking and giving forward an Alarm, by
firing, as aforesaid, or shall be guilty of firing any small Arms after Eight
of the Clock at Night, unless as aforesaid, shall be fined, or otherwise
punished, at the Discretion of a Court Martial, not extending to Life or Limb.
And in case of such Alarm every Soldier is Immediately to repair armed to his
Colors or Court of Guard, upon the penalty of Five Pounds.

And for the better Prevention of false Alarms, That no Captain, Master or
Commander of any Ship or Vessel riding at Anchor in any the Harbors, Ports or
Bays within this Province, or any other Person, fire any Gun after eight of
the Clock at Night, under the Penalty of Forty Shillings for every Gun so fired
to be levied by Warrant from the chief Officer, not under the Degree of a
Captain, who is hereby empowered to administer an Oath, and give Judgment
thereupon by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods; and for want of Distress
the said chief Officer is hereby empowered to commit such Offenders to the
Goal, there to remain until payment be made of the same. And that in case the
said chief Officer shall not perform his Duty therein, he shall forfeit ten
Pounds, to be levied by Warrant from the Captain General or Commander in chief
for the time being. Provided always, That this clause shall in no ways concern
or extend to any Captain or Officer of any of his Majesty's Ships of War, for
their firing at setting of the Watch.

Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted and Declared by the
Authority aforesaid, That all Trumpeters and Drummers lately in service, or
that shall by the several Captains be put into that service, during the
Captains pleasure, shall serve upon the Sallary of forty Shillings per annum
for a Trumpeter, and twenty Shillings per annum for a Drummer, finding their
Trumpet and Drum; and twenty Shillings for a Trumpeter, and ten Shillings for
Drummer, if the Captain find them, upon Penalty of forty Shillings.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted and Declared, That all the Members
of Their Majesty's Council, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Coroners, and all
other Officers of Courts, Ministers, Schoolmasters, Physicians and Chyrurgions
shall be free from being listed in any ^roop or Company within this Province,
any thing contained herein to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act declaring what are the Rights and Privileges of Their Majesty's
Subjects inhabiting within Their Province of New York.
Forasmuch as the Representatives of this their Majesty's Province of New York,
now convened in General Assembly, are deeply sensible of their Majesty's most
gracious Favor, in restoring to them the undoubted Rights and Privileges of
Englishmen, by declaring Their Royal Will and Pleasure in their Letters
Patents to his Excellency, who they have appointed their Captain General and
Governor in chief ^ver this their Province, That he should, with the Consent
of Their Council, from Time to Time, as need shall require, to summon and call
General Assemblies of the Inhabitants, being Freeholders, according to the
Usage of Their Majesty's other Plantations in America: And that this most
excellent Constitution, so necessary, and so much esteemed by our Ancestors,
may ever continue unto Their Majesty's Subjects within this Their Province of
New York* The Representatives of this Their Majesty's Province, convened in
General Assembly, do with all Duty and Submission humbly pray, That the Rights,
Liberties, Privileges and Franchises, according to the Laws and Statutes of
their Majesty's Realm of England, may be confirmed unto Their Majesty's most
Dutiful and Loyal Subjects inhabiting within this their Province of New York,
by Authority of this General Assembly, Be it Enacted by the Governor and
Council, and Representatives met in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted
and Declared by the Authority of the same, That the Supreme Legislative Power
and Authority, under Their Majesty's, William and Mary, King and Queen of
England, etc. shall forever be and reside in a Governor in Chief and Council
appointed by Their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors; and the People by
their Representatives met and convened in General Assembly. That the Exercise
and Administration of the Government over the said Province, shall, pursuant to
Their Majesty's Letters Patents, be in the said Governor in Chief and Council,
with whose Advice and Consent, or with at least five of them, he is to Rule and
Govern the same, according to the Laws thereof, and for any defect therein,
according to the Laws of England, and not otherwise. That in case the Governor
in Chief should dye, or be absent out of this Province, and that there be no
Person within the said Province commssionated by Their Majesty's, Their Heirs
or Successors, to be Governor or Commander in chief, That then the Council for
the time being, or so many of them as are in the said Province, do take upon
them the Administration of the Government, and the Execution of the Laws
thereof, and Powers and Authorities belonging to the Governor in chief and
Council; the first in Nomination in which Council is to preside until the said
Governor shall return and arrive in the said Province again, (or the pleasure
of their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors be further known.

That for the good Government and Rule of their Majesty's Subjects, a Session
of a General Assembly be held in this Province once every Year. That every
Freeholder within this Province, and Freeman in any Corporation shall have
his free choice and Vote in the Electing of the Representatives, without any
manner of constraint or imposition; And that in all Elections the majority of
Votes shall carry it.

And by Freeholders is to be understood every one who shall have forty
Shillings per annum in Freehold.

That the Persons to be elected to sit as Representatives in the General
Assembly from time to time, for the several Cities, Towns, Counties, Shires,
Divisions or Manors of this Province, and all places within the same, shall be
according to the Proportion and Number hereafter expressed. That is to say, For
the City and Country of New York Four. For the County of Suffolk Two. For
Queens County Two. For Kings County Two. For the County of Richmond Two. For
the County of Westchester Two. For the County of Vlster Two. For the City and
County of Albany Two. For the Collony of Ranslae^wick One.


And for Dukes County Two. And as many more as their Majesty's, their Heirs and
Successors shall think fit to establish.

That all Persons chosen and assembled, in manner aforesaid, or the major part
of them, shall be deemed and accounted the Representatives of this Province in
General Assembly.

That the Representatives convened in General Assembly may appoint their own
Times of meeting, during their Sessions, and may adjourn their House from time
to time, as to them shall seem meet and convenient.

That the said Representatives, as aforesaid convened, are the sole Judges of
the Qualifications of their own Members, and likewise of all Under-Elections;
and may from time to time purge their House, as they shall see occasion.

That no Member of the General Assembly, or their Servants, during the time of
their Sessions, and whilst they shall be going to and returning from the said
Assembly, shall be arrested, sued, imprisoned, or any way molested or troubled,
nor be compelled to make answer to any Suit, Bill, Plaint, Declaration, or
otherwise (cases of High Treason and Felony only excepted.)

That all Bills agreed upon by the said Representatives, or the major part of
them, shall be presented unto the Governor and Council for their approbation
and consent. All and every which said Bills, so approved of and consented to by
the Governor and Council, shall be esteemed and accounted the Laws of this
Province. Which said Laws shall continue and remain in force until they be
disallowed by their Majesty's, their Heirs or Successors, or expire by their
own Limitation.

That in all cases of Death or absence of any of the said Representatives, the
Governor for the time being shall issue out a Writ of Summons to the
respective Cities, Towns, Counties, Divisions or Manors, for which he or they
so deceased or absent, were chosen, Willing and Requiring the Freeholders of
the same to elect others in their place and stead.

That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be deprived of his Freehold
or Liberty, or free Customs, or Outlawed, or Exiled, or any other ways
destroyed; nor shall be passed upon, adjudged or condemned, but by the lawful
Judgment of his Peers, and by the Law of this Province

Justice nor Right shall be neither Sold, Denied or Delayed to any Person
within this Province.

That no Aid, Tax, Talliage or Custom, Loan, Benevolence, Gift, Excise, Duty or
Imposition whatsoever shall be laid, assessed, imposed, levied or required of
or on any of Their Majesty's Subjects within this Province, etc. or their
Estates, upon any manner of Color or Pretense whatsoever, but by the Act and
Consent of the Governor and Council, and Representatives of the People in
General Assembly met and convened.

That no Man, of what Estate or Condition soever, shall be put out of his
Lords, Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor banished,
nor any ways destroyed or molested, without first being brought to answer by
due course of Law.

That a Freeman shall not be amerced for a small Fault, but after the manner
of his Fault, and for a great Fault after the greatness thereof, saving to him
his Freehold; and a Husbandman, saving to him his Wainage; and a Merchant,
saving to him his Merchandise; and none of these Ame cements shall be assessed,
but by the Oath of Twelve Honest and Lawful men of the Vicinage. Provided, the
Faults and Misdemeanors be not in Contempt of Courts of Judicature. All Trials
shall be by the Verdict of Twelve Men, and as near as may be Peers or Equals,
and of the Neighborhood of the place where the fact shall arise or grow,
whether the same be by Indictments, Declaration, Information, or other ways,
against the Person Offender or Defendant.

That in all Cases Capital and Criminal, there shall be a grand Inquest, who
shall first present the Offense, and then Twelve Good Men of the Neighborhood
to Try the Offender, who, after his Plea to the Indictment, shall be allowed
his reasonable Challanges.

That in all Cases whatsoever, Bayl by sufficient Sureties shall be allowed and
taken, unless for Treason and Felony, plainly and specially expressed and
mentioned in the Warrant of Commitment, and that the Felony be such as is
restrained from Bayl by the Laws of England.

That no Freeman shall be compelled to receive any Soldiers or Mariners,
except Inholders, and other Houses of public Entertainment, who are to quarter
for ready Money into his House, and there suffer them to sojourn again their
Wills; provided it be not in time of actual War within this Province.

That no Commission for proceeding by Martial Law, against any of Their
Majesty's Subjects within this Province, etc. shall issue forth to any Person
or Persons whatsoever, least by color of them any of their Majesty's Subjects
be destroyed or put to Death, except all such Officers and Soldiers that are
in Garrison, and in pay during the time of actual War.

That all the Lands within this Province shall be esteemed and accounted Lands
of Freehold, and Inheritance in free and common Soccage, according to the
Tenor of East-Greenwich in their Majesty's Realm of England.

That no Estate of a Feme Covert shall be sold or conveyed, but by Deed
acknowledged by her in some Court of Record, the Woman being secretly examined,
if she does it freely, without threats or compulsion of her Husband.

That all Wills in Writing, attested by three or more credible Witnesses, shall
be of the same force to convey Lands, as other Conveyances, being proved and
Registered in the proper Offices in each County, within days after the
Testators Death.

That all Lands and Heritages within this Province and Dependencies shall be
free from all Fines, Lisences upon Alienations, and from all Heriots,
Wardships, Liveries, Primiers, Seizins, Year and Day, and Waste, Escheat and
Forfeiture upon the Death of Parents and Ancestors, Natural, Unnatural, Casual
or Judicial, and that forever, Cases of High Treason only excepted.

That no Person of what Degree or Condition soever throughout this Province,
chosen, appointed, or commissionated to officiate or execute any Office or
Place, Civil or Military within this Province, etc. shall be capable in the Law
to take upon him the charge of such Place before he has first taken the Oaths
appointed by Act of Parliament to be taken in lieu of the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and subscribe the Test.

That no Person or Persons which profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ his only
Son, shall at any time be any way molested, punished, disturbed, disquieted or
called in question for any Difference in Opinion, or matter of Religious
Concernment, who do not under that pretense disturb the Civil Peace of the
Province, etc. And that all and every such Person and Persons may from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, freely have and fully enjoy his or their
Opinion, Persuasions and Judgments in matters of Conscience and Religion,
throughout all this Province; and freely meet at convenient Places within this
Province, and there Worship according to their respective Persuasions, without
(...) hindered or molested, they behaving themselves peaceably, quietly,
modestly and Religiously, and not using this Liberty to Licentiousness, nor to
the civil Injury or outward Disturbance of others. Always provided, That
nothing herein mentioned or contained shall extend to give Liberty to any
Persons of the Romish Religion to exercise their manner of Worship, contrary to
the Laws and Statutes of their Majesty's Kingdom of England.

An Act for the Allowance to the Representatives.
WHereas the several Representatives of the Assembly cannot officiate and
discharge that honorable and great Trust reposed in them, without being at
great Charge and Expense, Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council,
and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by
the Authority of the same, That the Wages or the Allowance to each
Representative of the People, shall be Ten shillings current Money of this
Province per Diem, to commence from their coming out, till their return Home.
Always provided it shall not exceed eight days before the meeting of the
Assembly, and eight days after their adjourning, proroguing or dissolving of
the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each respective
City and County throughout this Province, shall bear and defray the Charge of
their own Representatives; which Charge or Allowance, as aforesaid, shall be
paid to the respective Representatives by the Treasurer of each respective City
and County, by warrant under the Hand and ^eal of the Mayor of the respective
Cities for the time being, and by Warrant of any two Justices of the Peace, to
the Treasurer of the respective Counties, within ten days after the Return of
the said Representatives from the Assembly

An Act to Enable the City and County of Albany to defray their necessary
Charge.
FOrasmuch as the Inhabitants of the City and County of Albany have been,
during the time of the late Disorders, very much agrieved, wasted, destroyed
and impoverished by the Incursions of the French, their Majesty's declared
Enemies, and that it is absolutely necessary that some suitable and convenient
way should be found out for their Relief and more easy defraying of the
necessary Charge of that City and County, Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Imposition or Rate of
Two per Cent. shall be raised and levied upon all Indian Goods that are brought
up to that City and County of Albany, and there sold or consumed. And also,
That the Impost of Three Pence be raised and levied upon each Gallon of Rum
that is sold and consumed within that City and County. And for the due and
orderly collecting of the said respective Imposts and Rates, the Treasurer of
the said City for the time being, or any appointed by him, and the Mayor of the
said City, under the public Seal of the said City, are hereby empowered and
authorized to appoint, constitute and establish a Collector or Receiver of the
Rates and Imposts aforesaid, who shall have Power to receive the same, and to
enter in a fair Book, kept for that purpose, all such Sum and Sums of Money as
shall be so entered and received for the respective Duties aforesaid; the said
Collector or Receiver appointing certain convenient Times and Places for the
keeping of the Office, as shall be directed by the Court of Mayor and Aldermen,
and Assistance of the said City. And all Persons that Trade and bring up to the
said City and County the aforementioned Indian Goods and Rum, are hereby
required to make a Report of the Quantity and Value of such Goods and Rum they
so bring up and sell in the City and County aforesaid, and pay the Duties and
Imposts hereby established, without being at any further Charge than the said
Duty. And in Default hereof it shall be lawful for the Mayor, Treasurer, or any
other Officer hereby Authorized, to issue out his or their Warrant, under his
or their Hand and Seal, for the seizing of all such Goods and Rum as shall be
imbezeled, and not pay the Duties aforesaid, One Third to the Imformer, One
Third to the said City and County of Albany, and One Third to his Excellency
the Governor or Commander in Chief for the time being. Provided, That all the
Sum and Sums of Money that are hereby received, shall be only appropriated and
applied to the defraying of the necessary Charges of the City and County
aforesaid. And that the Treasurer, Collector or Receiver for the time being,
shall not pay any of the Money received as aforesaid, but by Warrant from the
Mayor of the said City, and approved by the Court of Aldermen and Assistants.
Provided, That this Act shall only remain in force for the space of three
Yearr, and no longer, any thing contained herein to the contrary in any ways
notwithstanding.

An Act for Establishing a Revenue for the defraying the Public Charges of the
Province.
FOr the better defraying of the public and necessary Charges and Expenses of
this Province, which cannot otherwise be effected, without great Charge unto
Their Majesty's, Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives
now met in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Duties,
Customs and Excise hereafter specified, be given and granted unto their said
Majesty's, to the intent aforesaid That is to say,

For every Gallon of Rum, Brandy and Distilled Liquors* that shall be imported
into this Province and Dependencies, the Sum of four Pence current Money of
this Province.

And for every Pipe of Madera Wine, Fy^ll, St. Georges^ Canary, Malleg^,
Sherry, and all sweet Wines, the Sum of Forty Shillings current Money aforesaid.

And for every Hogshead of White, Red and Rhenish Wine, the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, current Money aforesaid.

And upon all other Merchandise imported into this Province and Dependencies,
the Sum of Forty Shillings, current Money aforesaid, for every Hundred Pound
value at the prime Cost, except these hereafter specified, viz. Salt, Brick,
Pantills, Coals, Fish, Sugar, M^^ossos, Cotton-Wool, Ginger, Logword
Brazelletto, Fustick, or any other sort of Doing Wood, Coccoa, Hydes, Tobacco,
Bullion and Plate, Pork* Oil, Tar, Flax, Soap, Candles, Cheese, Butter, Beef,
Fish, Whale-Bone, Hopps, Apples, Pears, Sider, Firewood, Planks Boards,
Peltry, Beaver, Sheeps Wool, Onions, Dressed and Undressed Deer Skins, T^lloy*
H^des, Salt, Honey, Beeswax, Ray-Wax, Indian Corn* Wheat, Barley, Rye, Pease,
or any other sort of Grain, or any other thing of the Growth and Production of
our Neighboring Collonies and Pla^^ations in (...).

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That there be also given
and granted unto their said Majesty's* for the intent aforesaid, upon all
Merchandise, commonly called by the Name of Indian Goods or Duffils, Stroads,
Blankets, Plains, half Thicks, Woolen Stockings, White Ozenburgs, Kettles,
Hatchets Hoes, Knives, Red Leid* Vermilion, Cotton, Red Kersies, Indian
Haberdashery, and other Indian Goods, the Sum of Ten Pounds current Money
aforesaid, for every (...) Pounds Value prime cost, that shall be carried up
H^dsons Rover in any Vessel, Sloop, Boat or Cano^, or any other way. And that
the Value of the prime Cost shall be at the Rate hereafter mentioned provided,
That all Kettles that shall contain above eight Gallons, shall pay none of this
Duty, viz. Indian Duffils to be valued at Two Shillings and Four Pence the
Yard. Indian Stroad, half a piece, Four Pound. A whole piece Eight Pounds.
Indian Blankets, each piece four Pounds. Indian plain Cotton, per Yard one
Shilling and six Pence. Indian half thick'd, per Yard one Shilling and ten
Pence. Indian White Ozenburgs, the English Ell eight Pence. Indian Kettles,
each hundred weight, six Pounds. Indian Hatchets, the dozen, twelve Shillings.
Indian Hoes, the dozen, twelve Shillings. Red Lead, each Hundred weight twenty
Shillings. Vermillion, per Pound four Shillings. Cotton per Yard one Shilling
and four Pence. Red Kersey per Yard two Shillings and six Pence. Knives per
dozen three Shillings. Indian Shirts per dozen twenty Shillings. Indian Drawing
Knives, Looking-Glasses, Indian Wooden Combs, Indian Beeds, Tobacco in Rolls,
Indian Bells, Scissars, Jews Harps, Indian Points, Drills, Tobacco Pipes,
little painted Boxes, Auls, Sword Blades, Copper Tobacco Boxes, Tinsey Lace,
Indian Gimp Lace, Needles, Tobacco Tongues, Indian Powder Horns, Indian Woolen
Stockens, and Indian Steels, the sum of ten Pound current Money aforesaid, for
every hundred Pounds Value prime Cost, that shall be carried up, as aforesaid.
And for every Barrel of Powder six Shillings. For every hundred weight of Leed
six Shillings. For every Gun with or without a Lock, six Shillings, which shall
be carried up Hudsons River, as aforesoid. And also, for every Gallon of Rum
which shall hereafter be carried up Hudsons River, as aforesaid, four Pence.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be given and
granted, and there is hereby given and granted unto them, for the Use
aforesaid, an Excise upon all Brandy, Rum, and all other Distilled Liquors, to
be retailed within this Province, under fifteen Gallons, the Sum of twelve
Pence, Money aforesaid, for each Gallon so retailed.

And also, an Excise of twelve Pence, current Money aforesaid, on each Gallon
of Wine, under the Quantity of five Gallons, so retailed, as aforesaid.

And also, That all Beer and Syder retailed throughout this Province and
Dependencies, shall pay six Shillings for each Barrel so retailed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be given and
granted, and there is hereby further given and granted unto Their said
Majesty's, for the use aforesaid, a Custom and Duty, that is to say, Upon every
Beaver Skin, commonly called a whole Beaver, the Sum of Nine Pence, current
Money aforesaid.

And that all other Furs and Peltry be valued and rated accordingly, That is to
say, For two half Beavers nine Pence. For four Laps nine Pence. For three
Drillings one Shilling and six Pence. For ten Raccoons nine Pence. For four
Foxes nine Pence. For four Fishers nine Pence. For five Cats nine Pence. For
six Minks nine Pence. For one Otter six Pence. For two Bear Skins nine Pence.
For four Wolfes nine Pence. For four and twenty Musk-Rats nine Pence. For ten
Matters nine Pence. For every Twenty four Pounds of Muse and Deer Skins nine
Pence. And for Ox, Bull and Cow Hides, six Pence per Hide, Spanish and
West India Hides only excepted. And all other Peltry to be valued equivolent to
a whole Beaver, nine pence, to be exported out of this Province.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the due and
orderly collecting of the aforesaid Duties, Customs and Excise, and also for
the preventing of Fraud and Imbezelments of the said Duties, Customs and
Excise, That all Ships and Vessels whatsoever that shall come to any Port,
Creek or Harbor within this Province and Dependencies, to Trade or Traffic,
the Master, Mate or Purser shall come to such place or places as shall be
appointed by the Governor or their Majesty's Collector for the time being, and
there make Report of all such parcel or parcels of Merchandise and other
things, as he has on board such Ship or Vessel, and also declare upon his
Corporal Oath, That he has not broke Bulk since his arrival within this
Province, before he made such Report as is required.

And also, all Merchants that have any Goods or Merchandise whatsoever, shall
at such place or places as is above directed, make a true and distinct Entry of
all such parcel or parcels of Goods or Merchandise he has on board such Ship
or Vessel, according as they cost him at prime cost; and if any Difference
shall a^ise about the value of the said Goods and Merchandise, then the
Collector, or any appointed for the Collection of the said Duties or Customs,
may administer to all o^ any such Person or Persons, making such Entry, their
Corpo^al Oaths, That the said Entry is according to the Invoice or Invices
sent to him or them from the place or places from whence such Goods did come.

And further, It is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master,
Mate or Purser of any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, or any Merchant, Factor, or
other, shall, contrary to the Rules above prescribed, break Bulk or Land any
Goods or Merchandise whatsoever, before he or they make such a Report or Entry,
and pay such Duties as required by this Act, then and in such case the Master
of such Ship or Vessel that s^^ll break Bulk before making such Report, as
above, shall, upon proof of two Evidences, forfeit his Ship or Vessel, with all
her Tackle, Furniture and Ammunition, one third part to their Majesty's, one
third to the Governor of this Province, and one third to the Informer, to be
sued for in any Court of Record within this Province, by Bill, Plaint or
Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And also, all such Goods as shall be landed, without Entry made, as before
directed, shall be forfeited, on the Testimony of two or more sufficient and
credible Witnesses, one third to their Majesty's, one third to the Governor,
and one third to the Informer, that shall sue, as above.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Masters of
Ships or Vessels that are within this Province, and do not belong to this
Province, or any part thereof, and bound to any Port within or without this
Province, shall, before they take in any merchandise above expressed, come to
such place or places as shall be appointed for the collecting the Rates
established by this Act, and there make Entry and Report of their design, and
enter into Bond to the value of one Thousand Pounds, with sufficient Sureties,
That he or they shall not take on Board, directly or indirectly, without such
Permit or Certeficate from the Collector, or some one having Authority under
him for the same. And if he or they do take on board any Goods or Merchandise,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Law, then he or they shall
forfeit his or their said Bond, to be sued for within three Months after such
fact committed, or otherwise to be void, and of none effect.

And also, for the due and orderly Collection of the Excise above granted, Be
it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Retailers of Wine, Rum,
Brandy, or any other strong Liquor within this Province, shall, upon their
purchase and receipt of all such Liquor or Liquors before expressed or
Exciseable, come to the Office or Officer of the Excise, and there or with him
make Entry of all such Liquor or Liquors as they shall buy and receive, and pay
such Duties as are hereby appointed, within four and twenty Hours, or as soon
as may be, without great Inconveniency; Provided an Officer for that purpose be
established in each Town throughout the Province; and on default thereof, all
such Liquors as shall be found in any Retailers House within this Province or
Dependencies, as have not been duly entered and paid the Rates above expressed,
Then and in such case on the Testimony of two or more substantial Witnesses,
the said Retailer or Retailers, so offending in the Premises shall forfeit such
Liquors. And in case the value thereof shall be under the sum of five Pounds
current Money aforesaid, shall likewise, and beyond forfeit, pay the trible
Value of such Liquors, one half to the Informer, and the other half to public
Treasury of this Province, to be sued for in any Court of Record within each
County where any such Action or Actions shall arise, wherein no Essoin,
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons within this Province
and Dependencies, not being thereunto duly Lisenced, shall at any time
hereafter presume to sell by Retail the Liquors aforesaid, that is to say, less
quantity at ^ne time than fifteen Gallons, the Person so offending, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of five Pounds for every such Offense, being thereof
convicted by the Oaths of two or more substantial Evidences, to be sued and
employed for in such manner and proportions as is last aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That all Masters and Commanders of Ships, Sloops,
Boats, or any other Vessel belonging to this Province, and its Dependencies,
shall repair to the said Custom-House, or other place or places that shall be
appointed for that purpose, and there enter into Bond of one Hundred Pounds,
That they shall not directly or indirectly take on Board or carry away out of
this Province and Dependencies, any of the aforsaid Goods or Merchandises,
without paying such Customs and Duties as are before expressed.

Provided also, That all Indian Traders throughout the whole Province and
Dependencies do pay for the value of each hundred Pounds prime cost, they so
Traffic with the Indians, the sum of Ten Pounds, Money aforesaid.

Always provided, and it is further Enacted by the Authority afore^said, That
if any of the Goods, Merchandise, Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other distilled
Liquors, for which the Duties, in this Act mentioned, is paid, or secured to be
paid at the Importation, be Exported out of this Province, within six Months
after their Importation, then the moiety, or one half of the aforesaid Duties,
in this Act mentioned, shall be returned, for as much as shall be so exported,
the Exporter making Oath in the Custom House. That the whole Duty has been
wholly paid for the said Wines and Liquors, at the Importation; and that there
has been no Fraud or Mixture used to increase the said Liquors, to be
exported. And that thereupon he bring a Certificate from the Surveyor or
Searcher, That the said Wines or Liquors are accordingly Shipped. Any thing
contained here unto the contrary in any ways notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, and all things therein contained, shall only
continue and remain in force for the time and space of two Years next and after
the Publication thereof, and no longer, any thing (...) herein to the contrary
in any ways notwithstanding

An Act to enable his Excellency to defray his extraordinary Expense, and to
Indemnifie the Collector and Receiver General for the Receipt of several Sums
of Money on pretense of Custom and Duty.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly, being very sensible that the
great Confusions and many Disorders that were in the Province on your
Excellency's arrival, must needs occasion unto your Excellency an extraordinary
and great Expense; and they being likewise well assured of the good Affection
your Excellency has for the Inhabitants of this Province, and for the great
Care your Excellency has taken for the conserving the Peace thereof. And
forasmuch as their Majesty's Collector and Receiver General has since the 29th
of January, exclusive, last past, received from the Inhabitants of this
Province several Sums of Money for Duties, Customs, and other Impositions,
formerly accustomed to be taken, but not warrantable by the Law. For the
removal of the many Controversies and Disputes that may arise hereby, and also
for the better defraying the extraordinary Expenses your Excellency has been
at, do pray that it may be Enacted by your Excellency and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly,

And be it hereby enacted by the Authority of the same, That all the Sum and
Sums of Money for any Duty, Custom, Imposition. or any other pretense
whatsoever, received by their Majesty's Receiver General, since the twenty
nineth day of January, exclusive, now last past, until the day of a Publication
of a certain Act now made and established in this present Sessions of Assembly,
entitled, An Act for the establishing a Revenue, for the defraying the public
and necessary Charges of the Province, are hereby given and granted unto his
said Excellency, for the intent aforesaid. And the said Collector and Receiver
General is hereby required and authorized to account and pay unto his said
Excellency, when he shall be thereunto required, all and every of the said Sum
and Sums of Money, so by him received, within and during the time
aforementioned. And for his so doing, this Act shall be a good and sufficient
Warrant unto him the said Collector, his Executors and Administrators forever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That their Majesty's
Collector and Receiver General aforesaid, is hereby indem^sied from all manner
of Plaints, Suits or Demands whatsoever, from any Person or Persons on the
account of any Sum or Sums of (...) to received by him, during the time
aforesaid; and (...) if any (...) Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought,
moved or prosecu^^^^ any time hereafter against the said Collector, his
Executors or Administrators, for or concerning any Sum or Sums of Money so
received by him, during the time aforesaid, he or any of them so sued and
prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue, Not
Guilty, and upon any Issue joined, may give this Act, and the special matter in
Evidence. And if the Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be Nonsuited, or forbear
further Prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or Verdict pass against him, the
Defendant or Defendants shall recover their trible Costs, for which they shall
have like Remedy as in case where Costs by the Law are given to Defendants.

And whereas there are several Arrearages of Customs and Duties in the Month
of June, which was in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty
Nine, formerly used to be taken, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all such Person or Persons that remain endebted for any Duty or
Custom arising and due in the Month of June aforesaid, which was in the Year
of our Lord 1689. are hereby required to make their several and respective
Payments unto their Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, for the intent
aforesaid. And their Majesty's Collector and Receiver General is hereby
Authorized and Empowered to receive the same, and in default thereof, to sue
for and recover the same, in such manner and form as is usual and practicable
in recovery of all just Debts due to the King.

And forasmuch as the Representatives now met in General Assembly are likewise
sensible of the signal service done and acted by Major Rich-Ingoldsby and Cap.
William Kidd, before your Excellency's arrival, therefore pray that it may be
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be paid out of the Money
given to your Excellency, by virtue of this Act, unto Major Richard Ingoldsby
the Sum of one Hundred Pounds, and to Capt. William Kidd the Sum of one Hundred
and Fifty Pounds, as a suitable Reward and Acknowledgement for the good
Services done by them before your Excellency's arrival here.

An Act for the raising of two Thousand Pounds for paying and defraying the
Incidental Charges, according to establishment of one hundred Fuzileers, with
their proper Officers, for one who e Year.
FOr the securing the Fronteers of this Province in the Country of Albany, it
is thought convenient, that his Excellency, the Captain General do raise one
Company to consist of one hundred Fuzileers, with their proper Officers; which
shall remain in the said County, for the defense thereof, one whole Year, to
commence on the 28th day of March now last past, Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor (...) Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, And
it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That a Levy of two Thousand
Pounds current Money of this Province, be laid, assessed, raised and levied
upon all and every of the Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of and in
this Province, for the paying and defraying the incidental Charges of the said
Company of Fuzileers, and their Officers for one whole Year, as aforesaid, and
for no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. To be laid, assessed, raised,
levied and paid unto their Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the
time being, at their Majesty's Custom-House in the City of New York, at the
times hereafter mentioned, That is to say, one half or Moiety of the said two
Thousand Pounds at or before the 25th of July now next ensuing, and the other
moiety or half part at or before the 25th day of March, which shall be in the
Year of our Lord 1692. according to the Rates and Proportions following, that
is to say. For the City and County of New York, Four Hundred Pounds. For the
City and County of Albany One Hundred and Eighty Pounds. For the County of
Westchester, one hundred and forty Pounds. For the Country of Richmond one
hundred and twenty Pounds. For the Country of Vlster and Duchess County two
hundred and fifty Pounds. For the Country of Suffolk, three hundred and fifty
Pounds. For Kings Country, two hundred and sixty Pounds. For Queens County, two
hundred and sixty Pounds. For the County of Orange, fifteen Pounds. For Dukes
County, twenty five Pounds.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, raising and rating the Sum of two thousand Pounds aforesaid, the
Mayor and Aldermen within the City of New York, the Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Albany, with the Justices of the Peace for the City and County of
Albany for the time being; and the Justices of the Peace for the time being,
for the several respective Counties aforesaid, for the several Counties
respectively for which they shall be Justices of the Peace, do forthwith, upon
the Publication hereof, assemble and meet together at the Court-Houses, for the
several respective Cities and Counties, or such other place or places as they
shall agree upon amongst themselves, and shall there o^der, that the Assessors
and Collectors for the several respective Cities, Towns, Manors and Liberties
within their several Jurisdictions, for the Assessing, Collecting and receiving
of the public Rates, for the defraying the pubick and necessary Charge of each
respective City and County aforesaid, be the Assessors and Collectors, for the
assessing, collecting and receiving the Sum or Sums of Money herein before
mentioned, according to the Proportions before expressed, as to the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Justices shall seem meet and reasonable.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That the said Mayor,
Aldermen, and Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities, Counties,
Manors and Jurisdictions, have, and shall have Power and Authority, by virtue
of this Act, each of them by himself, to adm^nister an Oath to the said
Assessors, Well, truly, equally, and according to their best Understanding, to
assess and rate the Inhabitants, (...) Free-holds of the respective places for
the which they shall be chosen Assessor.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons who shall be chosen Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect or
refuse to take Oath, as aforesaid, or shall in any ways deny, neglect, or
refuse to make such Assesment as by this Act is required, or shall deny,
neglect or refuse to collect any Sum or Sums of Money, in form before mentioned
assessed, that then and in such case it shall and may be lawful for any two of
their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, of the County where such Offenders shall
happen to dwell or reside, and who by virtue of this Act are required and
empowered to do the same, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals to commit such
Assessor or Assessors, Collector or Collectors, so denying, refusing or
neglecting, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, till
he or they shall make Fine and Ransom to their Majesty's, for such Contempt as
abovesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Quality soever he or they be of, within this
Province, who shall be assessed or rated any Sum or Sums of Money, by virtue of
this ^ct to be raised or levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay and
satisfy the same, That then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector,
by virtue of a Warrant under the hand and seal of any Justice of the Peace for
the City and County where such Offenders shall dwell or reside, who, by virtue
of this Act are required and authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrants,
to levy the same by distress and sale of such Person or Persons Goods and
Chattels, returning the overplus of such Goods and Chat^les to the owners, the
sum assessed, and Charges of Distress and Sale being first deducted, if any
such overplus shall happen to be.

And also, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to take effectual care that this Act, and every
^rticle and Clause therein be truly executed, according to the true and genuine
sense and intent thereof, shall deny, refuse, neglect or delay to do, perform,
fulfill and (...) all and every, or any the Duties, Powers and Authority by
(...) required and empowered by him or them to be done, (...) fullfilled and
executed and shall thereof be lawfully (...) any of their Majesty's Courts of
Record within this (...) they shall suffer such Pain, by Fine, Imprisonment, as
by the discretion of the Justices of the said Courts shall be adjudged.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or presented at any time
hereafter against any person or persons, for any matter, cause or thing done or
acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such person or persons so sued or
presented in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue, Not
Guilty, and upon any Issue joined, may give this Act and the special matter in
Evidence; and if the Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be nonsuited, or forbear
further Prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or Verdict to pass against him,
the Defendant and Defendors shall recover their Trible Costs, for which they
shall have the like Liberty as in any case where Costs by Law are given to the
Defendant. Provided always, That no Mayor, Aldermen or Justices of the Peace
shall be troubled, sued, prosecuted or molested for any Omission, Offense or
Neglect, by virtue of this Act, but within the space of one year after such
omission, offense or neglect, and not at any time hereafter, any thing herein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act to ease People that are scrupulous in Swearing.
FOrasmuch as there are sundry Persons within this Province and Dependencies,
out of a tender Conscience refuse to give their Evidence on Oath in any matter
or thing depending in any of the Courts within the same, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives now met in General
Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That in such case the person or
persons so refusing the same, shall give in or deliver their Evidence or
Testimony in manner and form following, that is to say, ^ A. B. do solemnly
promise, as in the presence of God, to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth to the matt^^ or thing in question.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such person
or persons, so refusing as aforesaid* shall be summoned to serve upon any Jury
in any Court within this Province, then such person or persons shall make the
Engagement following, that is to say, I A. B. do solemnly promise, as in the
presence of God, that ^ will well and truly try the Issue between C. D
Plantiff, and H. I. ^efendant, according t^ Evidence. And in case any such
person or persons so called to Evidence, and to serve upon any Jury, and
declaring as aforesaid, shall afterward be convicted of wilful Falsehood,
that then and in such case such person or persons shall undergo the same
punishment as in case of wilful (...) appointed and provided.

An Act for Pardoning such as have been active in the late Disorders.
THe Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly,
taking into their serious Consideration the many great Troubles and Disorders
that have been lately within this Province, and that by occasion thereof, and
otherways, many of their Majesty's Subjects are fallen into danger of and lie
open to great Penalties and Forfeitures. And withal, considering the Ignorance
of many, and the dutiful Affections of others of their Majesty's Subjects, out
of an earnest desire to deliver them from the Penalties and Forfeitures
aforesaid, and to the intent that their Offenses may not hereafter be brought
in Judgment, Question or Remembrance, to the least endamagement of them, either
in their Lives, Liberties, Estates or Reputations, but that they, having an
entire Confidence in their Majesty's, and perfect Union among themselves, may
be encouraged in their Duty to their Majesty's Government, and more fully and
securely enjoy the benefit of it, It is therefore necessary, that there be
extended unto them a general and free Pa^don, that all their Majesty's Subjects
by this Clemency and Indulgence may be the better induced henceforth more
carefully to observe the Laws, and perform their Loyal and due Obedience to
their Majesty's, Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That all and every of the said Subjects inhabiting within this Province, their
(...), Executors and Administrators, and every of them shall be, and are by the
Authority of this present Assembly acquitted, pardoned, released and
discharged, against their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, and every of
them, of and from all manner of Treasons, Fellonies, Misprisons of Treason,
T^e^sonable or Seditious Words and Libills, Misprisons of Felony, Se^itious
and Unlawful Meetings, and of all Offenses whereby any person may be charged
with the penalty and danger of Praemunire; And also, from and of all Riots,
Routs, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses, Entries, Wrongs, Deceits Misdemeanors,
Forfeitures, Penalties, Pain of Death, Pains Corporal and Pains Pecunary; and
Generally, of and from all other Things, Causes, Quarrel^, Suits, Judgments and
Executions, in this present Act not hereafter excepted, which may be or can by
their Majesty's in any ways, or by any means pardoned before the 19 th day of
March last past, to any of the Subjects aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Pardon shall
be as good and effectual in the Law to every of their Majesty's said Subjects,
in, for and against all things which (...) no^ hereafter in this present Act
excep^ed, as the same Pardon (...) have (...), if all Offenses, Contempts,
Forfeitures, Causes, Matters, Suits, Quarrels, Judgments, Executions,
Penalties, and all other things not hereafter in this present Act excepted, had
been particularly, singularly, specially and plainly named, rehearsed, and
specified, and also pardoned by express words and names, in their kinds,
natures and qualities, by words and terms thereunto requisite to have been put
in and expressed in this present Act of Pardon. That their said Subjects, or
any of them, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, or any of them, be not,
or shall be sued, vexed, or unquieted in their Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands
or Tenements, for any manner of Matter, Cause, Contempt, Misdemeanour,
Forfeiture, Trespass, Offense, or any other thing suffered, done, committed or
omitted, before the 19 th. day of March, against their Majesty's, their Crown,
Dignity, Prerogative, or the Laws or Statutes of their Majesty's Realm of
England, and this Province, but only for such Matters, Causes and Offenses as
be rehearsed, mentioned, or in some ways touched in the Exceptions of this
present Act excepted, and for none other, any Statute, Law, Custom or Usage
heretofore had, made or used, to the contrary in any ways notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every their Majesty's Subjects may by
him or themselves, or by his or their Attorney or Attorneys, according to the
Laws of England and this Province, plead and minister this present Act of
Pardon, for his or their discharge of or for any thing that is by virtue of
this Act pardoned, discharged, given or granted, without any Fee, or other
thing paying to any person or persons, for writing or entering of the Judgments
or other Cause concerning such Plea, Writing or Entry, but only three Shillings
to be paid to the Officer or Clark that shall enter such Plea, Matters for
Judgment, or the party's Discharge in that behalf, any Law, Custom or Usage to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Pardon by the
general Words, Clauses and Sentences before rehearsed, shall be reputed, deemed
and adjudged, expounded, allowed and taken i^al manner of Courts of their
Majesty's, most beneficial and available to all and singular the said Subjects,
and to every of them in all things, not in this present Act excepted, without
any ambiguity, questions, or other delay whatsoever, to be made, pleaded,
objected or alleged by their Majesty's, their Heirs or Successors, or their or
any of their General Attorney or Attorneys, or by any person or persons for
their Majesty's, or any of their Heirs and Successors.

Excepted, and always for-prized out of this general Pardon all and every the
Persons hereafter named and expressed.

Jacob Leyster, Jacob Millbourn, Gherrardus Beckman, Abraham Governeer, Abraham
Brasier, Thomas Williams, Minarde Coerten, Johannis Wermilis^en, already
attainted of Treason and Murder. Nicholas Blank, Gerret Du^kin, Henrick Jansin,
John Coe, William Lawrance of East-Jarsey, Cornelius Plevier, William
Churchill, Joost Stoll, Samuel Staats, Jacob Mauritz, Robert Leacock, Michael
Hausen, Richard Pouten, of the County of Westchester. Joseph Smith, John Baily,
Roulous Swartwood, Anthony Swartwood, Johannes Provest, Jacob Mullein, Benjamin
Blagg, Joachem Staates, And Richard Pretty.
The End of the First Sessions.
Several Acts made by the General Assembly in their Second Sessions, begun the
8 th. of September, Annoque Domini 1691. and in the third Year of Their
Auspicious Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary.
An Act for the Regulating Damages (...) in the time of the late Disorders, and
for the (...) the Minds of their Majesty's Subjects within th^s Province, and
for calling home such of their Majesty's Subjects that have lately absented
themselves from their Habitations and the usual places of their Abode.
FOrasmuch as many of their Majesty's Subjects have lately absented themselves
from the usual places of their Abode, and others, through causless fears, have
also withdrawn themselves out of this Province, by which means Trade is
lessened, the Strength of the Province is weakened, and their Families injured.
And whereas it is highly necessary at this Juncture, being a time of War and
great danger, that the Minds of the Subjects in this Province should be
heartily united. And forasmuch as in the time of the late Disorders, when Jacob
Leyst^r, lately attainted and executed, had usurped a Power, and pretended a
Government over their Majesty's Subjects within this Province, many Hurts,
Injuries, Wrongs and Damages were done unto their Majesty's good and faithful
Subjects by those that were aiding and assisting unto him in his usurped Power
and Government, as aforesaid. And it being likewise necessary, that all their
Majesty's Subjects, as aforesaid, should have some just and reasonable
Satisfaction from those that have injured them; and that it is apparent that
many through Ignorance and Fear, have been led aside to do the Hurts and Harms,
as aforesaid, and if such be prosecuted by the common Process of the Law, may
tend to the (...) Ruin of them and their Families, and no ways recompense the
Injuries done, and those that are most able to satisfy the Damages* and have
been most active in prosecuting the same, escape free. And forasmuch as the
general Peace and Security of their M^^esties Government over this (...) cannot
be firmer established, than that all those that have so absented themselves,
return again to their ^espective Abodes and Habitations, and that al their good
Subjects heartily unite in the common Defense of the same against all Enemies
whatsoever. And for the effectual doing thereof and that a just and equitable
Satisfaction may be made to the Person injured, by those that have been active,
as aforesaid, in such equal and just Proportions, as the Circustances of the
Fact will admit.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Commander in chief and Council and the
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That in each of the respective Cities and Counties hereafter named and
expressed, there shall be constitu^ed (...) commissionated, under their
Majesty's Seal of this Province, (...) Commissioners, who are hereby empowered
and authorized, at (...) certain days and places as they shall conveniently
appoint, to me^t and assemble together, and at such their Assemblies and
Meetings to receive in Writing the Claims and Demands of such of their
Majesty's Subjects that have been hurt, or have received Damage in the^*
Estates by the force or violence of any Person or Persons employed, or
pretended to be employed by Jacob Leysler, lately attainted and executed, or
any under, or associated with him: And after they have received such Claims and
Demands, as aforesaid, they are then to cause the Constable of the respective
Towns, where the Persons complained against do reside, or any other Person the
said Commissioners shall think fit to appoint, to summon the parties complained
against, to make their Personal Appearance before them at a certain day, of
which the Complainants shall have notice, and be likewise present; and upon
their appearance strictly to examine, and to enquire into the matter of Fact
and Damage alleged; and upon denial of the Fact, to summon and call before
them such Person or Persons* that know any thing of the Fact or Damage
alleged, or can give Evidence thereof; and the said Commissioners are hereby
empowered and au^horized to administer an Oath or Oaths unto such person or
persons that shall be so summoned before them, that the Truth may be the better
discovered. And upon their hearing and examining of the Parties, and enquiring
into the matters of Fact and Damage, as aforesaid, they are hereby f^rther
empowered and authorized to assess the Damage in Truth and Equity, as it shall
appear unto them, and not otherwise; and such ^ssessments of the Damages shall
be taxed on the O^fendo^s in such just and (...) Proportions, as to them shall
seem meet, in equity and good Conscience; and after such their Assesment and
T^xation, as aforesaid, shall order and decree the Offenders or Defendants to
pay the sum so assessed and taxed in manner aforesaid, unto the Complainants,
or give sufficient security that they shall pay the same at a reasonable day
after this their Decree and Determination. All which Assesments, Taxations,
Decrees and Determinations done and made in manner and form, as aforesaid,
shall be good and effectual in the Law, and a good and sufficient Discharge
unto the Defenders forever, according to the true intent and meaning hereof,
any thing contained herein, or in any other Law to the contrary hereof, in any
wise notwithstanding.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Persons that have been harmed, injured and damaged in manner aforesaid, and
are at the publication hereof within this Province, shall bring in their Claims
and Demands into such place or places, as shall be appointed by the
Commissioners in the respective Cities and Counties hereafter named, within
forty days, otherwise they shall forever be barred their Claim. And upon any
future Peosecution, the Defendants may plead the general Issue, and give this
Act and the special matter in Evidence, and if the Plantiff shall become
Nonsuit, or forbear further Prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or if
Verdict pass against him, the said Defendant shall recover his double Corts,
for which he shall have the like remedy as in case where Costs by Law are given
to Defendants.

And all Person or Persons that are out of the Province at the Publication
hereof, and have been wronged or injured in manner aforesaid, shall within one
Year after the Publication hereof, give in their Claim and Demand, as
aforesaid, otherwise shall forever be barred their Claims, and be under the
Restriction of this Law to all intents and purposes, as aforesaid.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
if any Person or Persons that have offended in manner aforesaid, and have been
personally summoned, or had a Summons left in Writing at their Habitations, or
usual places of their Abode, and do not appear to make their Defense, or show
some lawful cause why they could not appear, shall be deemed and esteemed as
Defaulters, and Sentence and Decree shall pass upon them on default
accordingly, and Executions issue thereupon, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
hereafter named, for the putting this Act in Execution, shall be commissionated
under the Seal of this Province. And there is hereby nominated, constituted and
appointed for the Execution of this Act, and the Clauses therein contained,

For the City and County of New York, Capt. Jacobus van Courtland, Peter
Jacobus Marius, Lawrance Read, Thomas Coderington, and Adolph Phillips, Esqrs.
or any three of them, whereof Jacob van Courtland is to be one.

For the City and County of Albany, Peter Schuyler, Martin Gerrets, Albertus
Rykman, Henrick Ranster, and Gerret Rereson, Esqrs. or any three of them,
whereof Peter Schuyler is to be one.

For the County of Vlster. Thomas Garton, Tyneijck, William Leg, William
Harnes, Wessel Ty^brook, Esqrs. or any three of them, whereof Thomas Garton is
to be one.

For the County of Richmond, Elias Duxberry, Dennis Te^^son, (...) Cannon,
Abraham Lackman, John Shad^eell, Esqrs^ or any th^^eof the^, whereof Elias
Duxberry is to be one.

For the County of Westchester, John Palmer, John Hunt, John Drake, Joseph
Theal, Johnathan Heart, Esqrs. or any three of them, whereof John Palmer is to
be one.

For Kings County, Jaques Cortilew, John Tennison, Nicholas Stillwell, Lucas
Stevinson, Joseph Hegmen, Esqrs. or any three of them, whereof Jaques Cortilew
to be one.

And for Queens County, John Robinson, Nathaniel Pierson, James Clements,
William Hallet, jun. Johnathan Smith, Esqrs. or any three of them, whereof John
Robinson is to be one.

Provided always, That in case of Death, it shall be in the Power of the
Commander in Chief and Council, to nominate and appoint other Commissioners,
instead of the Commissioners deceased, at their own discretion. Which said
Commissioners, so as aforesaid nominated and appointed, or in case of Death to
be nominated and appointed, shall in the respective Cities and Counties
respectively, meet together, and perform the several Powers, Authorities and
Directions, in and by this said Act given and appointed. For the true and
faithful Execution thereof, they shall at the time they receive their
Commission, take this following Oath, Viz.

YOU shall Swear, That you to your Cunning, Wit and Power, shall truly and
indifferently execute the Powers and Authorities given you by this Commission
and Act of Assembly, without any Favor, Affection, Corruption, Dread or Malice
to be born to any manner of Person or Persons. And as the case shall require,
ye shall consent and endeavor your self, for your part, to the best of your
knowledge, to the assessing and taxing the Damage of such Claims and Suits,
that shall be brought before you, according to Truth, Equity, and the Evidence
given you, and in such due and equal Proportions, as in good Conscience shall
seem meet unto you: and the same Powers and Authorities, to your Cunning, Wit
and Power, cause to be put in due Execution, without Favor, Dread, Malice or
Affection. So help you God.

Always provided, and be it hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That in case of Error, any Person or Persons shall have Liberty to make his or
their Appeal unto the Governor and Council. Provided, the Value appealed for
exceed the sum of one hundred Pounds and that Security be first given by the
Appellant, to answer such Charges as shall be awarded, in case the first
Sentence or Decree be affirmed.

And in regard some Persons have commenced and prosecuted, and threaten to
commence and prosecute Actions and suits against such of their Majesty's
Subjects, for and by reason of their acting and doing, as aforesaid; Therefore
for the preventing the Trouble and Charges which the said Subjects might be put
to, by means of such Suits, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all Personal Actions, Suits, Molestations, Prosecutions whatsoever, and
Judgments and Executions had thereupon, if any be, for or by reason of any of
the Premises, are, and be hereby discharged and made void. And if any Action or
Suit, declared, or intended to be discharged, shall be commenced or prosecuted
in any other Court, or after any other manner, than what is declared and
appointed by this Act, then every Person so sued, may plead the general Issue,
and give this Act, and the special matter in Evindence. And if the Plantiff
shall become Nonsuit, or forbear further Prosecution, or suffer
Discontinuance, or if a Verdict pass against him, the said Defendant shall
recover his double Costs, for which he shall have the like Remedy as in ease
where Costs by Law are given to Defendants.

And since it is the general Peace of this Government, and the good, ease and
benefit of all their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within the same, that is
only intended by this Act, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all Judges and Justices of their Majesty's Courts of Records, and all
Mayors and Aldermen of the respective Cities, and all Sheriffs, Clarks, and
other Officers within this Province, do take notice of the said Act, and see
the same truly executed, according to the Powers, Authorities and Clauses
therein contained, any thing contained herein, or in any other Law to the
contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And that all their Majestes Subjects concerned in the Premises, and who for
these causes have absented themselves from the usual places of their Abode, or
have withdrawn themselves out of this Province, may have all their causless
fears removed, and f^lly enjoy all the Benefits, Privileges and Advantages
intended them by this Act, Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and every of such Persons concerned in the Premises, as
aforesaid, do within forty days after the Publication hereof, return and repair
to their respective Habitations or places of their Abode within this Province,
and there use, exercise and follow their respective Occupations, as accustomed,
where they shall remain without any other let or molestation than what is
required by this Act, and freely possess and enjoy all their Benefits and
Protections of their Majesty's Laws of England and this Province.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
if any Person or Persons concerned in the Premises, as aforesaid, shall neglect
to return or repair to their respective Habitations or places of their Abode in
this Province, within the time limited and expressed, except all such as shall
be at the Publication hereof, beyond the Seas Then and in such case such Person
or Persons shall be deemed and esteemed Contemners of their Majesty's Authority
and Government over this Province, and loose all the Benefits and Advantages
intended them by this Act; and all and every of their respective Estates, both
Real and Personal, shall be liable and extended to make Satisfaction to all
such Suits or Demands as shall be made in due Form of the Law against them, any
thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act to divide this Province and Dependencies into Shires and Counties.
FOrasmuch as Mistakes may arise about the Limits and Bounds of the respective
Counties within this Province, for Prevention whereof, Be it Enacted by the
Commander in Chief and Council, and Representatives, and by the Authority of
the same, That the said Province be divided into twelve Counties, as follows.

The City and County of New York to contain all the Island commonly called
Manhattans Island, Manmings Island, the two Barran Islands and the three Oyster
Islands, Manhattans Island to be called the City of New York, and the rest of
the Islands the County.

The County of Westchester to contain East and Westchester, Brouxes Land,
Fordham, Manor of Pellham, M^nfords Island Richbills Neck, and all the Land on
the Main to the Eastward of Manhattans Island, as far as the Government at
present extends, and the Yonkers Land. And Northwards along Hudsons River as
far as the High-Land.

The County of Vlster to contain the Towns of Kingstone, Harley and Marble
Town, Foxhall and the New Pellz, and all Villages, Neighbourhoods and Christian
Habitations on the West side Hudson's River, from the Murderers Creek, near the
High-Lands, to the Sawyers Creek.

The County of Albany to contain the Manor of Ransteerswick, Schanactady, and
all the Villages, Neighbourhoods and Christian lantations on the East side of
Hudsons River, from the Roel of Jans^^s ^reek: And on the West side, from the
Sawyers Creek to the (...) end of Sarraghtoga.

The Duchess County to be, from the Bounds of the County of Westchester, on the
South side the High Lands, along the East side of Hudsons River, as far as Roel
of Jansens Creek. And Eastward (...) the Woods twenty Miles.

The County of Orange to begin from the Limits and Bounds of East and West
Jarsey, on the West side of Hudsons River, alon^ ^he said River to the
Murderers ^reek, or Bounds of the County of Vlster And Westward, into the Woods
as far as Delaware River.

The County of Richmond to contain all Staten Island, Shooters Island, and the
Islands of Meddow on the West side thereof.

Kings County to contain the several Towns of Bushwick, Bedford, Brookline,
Flatbush, Flatlands, Neuwtrucht and Graves-End, with the several Settlements
and Plantations adjacent.

Queens County to contain the several Towns of Newtown, Jamaica, Flushing,
Hemstead, Oyster-Bay, with Horse Neck, and the several out-Farms, Necks,
Settlements and Plantations adjacent, and the Island called the Two Brothers,
and Hullets Island.

The County of Suffolk to contain the several Towns of Hantington, Smithfield,
Brookhaven, Southampton, Southold, Easthampton to Montauk Point, Shelters
Island, Isle of Wight, Fishers Island and P^umb Island, with the several
Out-Farms, Settlements and Plantations adjacent.

Dukes County to contain the Island of Mantucket, Martins Vineyard, Elizabeth
Island, and No Man's Land.

The County of Cornwall to contain Pemy Quid, and all the Territories in those
parts, with the Islands adjacent.

An Act for the raising and paying one Hundred and Fifty Men, to be forthwith
raised, for the Defense and Re-inforcement of Albany for six Months.
WHereas the Fronteers of Albany are in eminent danger to be lost, being daily
threatened to be invaded by the French, their Majesty's declared Enemies. And
forasmuch as the safety of this, and all their Majesty's Neighboring
Plantations, does only depend on having that place well secured; and for the
effectual doing thereof, Application has been made unto the Neighboring
Plantations, but has had no effect; and there being now an absolute necessity
for the Re-inforcing of the Fronteers of this Province in the County of Albany,
as well for the securing their Majesty's neighboring Plantations, as for the
preserving the Indians and this Province. Be it therefore Enacted by the
Commander in chief and Council, and Representatives convened in General
Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Commander in chief do
raise one hundred and fifty Men, with their proper Officers, for the
Reinforcement of the Fronteers of this Province in the County of Albany
aforesaid, which shall remain in the said County, for the Defense thereof, six
Months, to commence on the first day of November next, and to end the first
day of May then following.

And for the paying and maintaining the said one hundred and fifty men, and
their proper Officers, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
a Levy of fifteen Hundred Pounds current Money of this Province, be laid,
assessed, raised and levied upon all and every of the Inhabitants, Residents
and Freeholders of and in this Province, for the paying and maintaining of the
said one hundred and fifty men, and their proper Officers, for six Months, as
aforesaid, and for no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. To be laid,
assessed, raised, levied and paid to their Majesty's Collector and Receiver
General for the time being, at their Majesty's Custom-house in the City of
New York, on the 25th day of March next ensuing, which shall be in the Year of
our Lord 1692. according to the Rates and Proportions following, that is to
say, For the City and County of New York, Three Hundred Pounds. For the City
and County of Albany one hundred and thirty Pounds. For the County of
Westchester, one hundred and five Pounds. For the County of Richmond, Ninety
Pounds. For the County of Vlster and Duchess County, one hundred and eighty
seven Pounds ten Shillings. For the County of Suffolk, two hundred and sixty
two Pounds ten Shillings. For Kings County, one hundred ninety five Pounds. For
the County of Orange, eleven pound five Shillings. For Dukes County, eighteen
pound fifteen Shillings.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, raising and paying the sum of one thousand five hundred Pounds
aforesaid, The Mayor and Aldermen in the City of New York, the Mayor and
Aldermen within the City of Albany, with the Justices of the Peace for the City
and County of Albany for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace, for the
time being, for the several respective Counties aforesaid, for the several
Counties respectively, for the which they shall be Justices of the Peace, do
within forty days after the publication hereof, assemble and meet together in
the Court Houses for the several respective Cities and Counties, or such other
place or places as they shall agree upon among themselves, and shall there
order that the Assessors and Collectors for the several respective Cities,
Towns, Manors or Liberties, within their several Jurisdictions, for the
assessing, collecting and receiving of the public Rates, for the defraying of
the public Charge of each respective City and County aforesaid, be the
Assessors and Collectors, for the assessing, collecting or receiving the sum or
sums of Money herein before mentioned, according to the Proportions before
expressed, as to the said Mayors, Aldermen and Justices shall seem meet and
reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Manors and Ju^isdic^^ons within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who neglect or do not elect annually or once
every year Assessors or Collectors, whereby the intent of this A^^ may be
frustrated, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority ^foresaid, That if the
respective Manors and Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid,
shall refuse (...) to elect Assessor^ and Collectors, for assessing of their
respective Mann^rs o^ Jurisdictions, and for the collecting the same, according
to the intent and direction of this Act, then and in such case the Justices of
the Peace in the Counties where such Manors or Jurisdictions are, are hereby
empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and Collectors for
such Manors or Jurisdictions as shall neglect or refuse, as aforesaid. Which
Assessors and Collectors, shall, to all intents and purposes observe the
directions of this Act, any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in
any ways notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors,
Aldermen and Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities, Counties, Manors
and Jurisdictions, have, and shall have Power and Authority, by virtue of this
Act, each of them by himself to administer an Oath to the said Assessors, Well
and truly, equally, impartially, and in due Proportion, as it shall appear to
them, according to their best Understanding, to assess and rate the
Inhabitants, Re^dents and Freeholders of the respestive places for which they
shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who shall be chosen Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect, or
unequally and partially assess, or refuse to make such Assessment as by this
Act is required, or shall deny, neglect, or refuse to collect any sum or sums
of Money, inform before mentioned assessed, that then and in such case i^ shall
and may be lawful for any two of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
Cities and Counties where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and
who by virtue of this Act are required and empowered to do the same, by Warrant
under their Hands and Seals to commit such Assessors or Collectors, so denying,
neglecting, or unequally and partially assessing* or refusing to collect, as
aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise till
^e or they shall make Fine or Ransom to their Majesty's for such Contempt as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Quality soever he or they be within this Province,
who shall be assessed or rated any sum or sums of Money, by virtue of this Act
to be raised and levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay and satisfy the
same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector, by virtue
of a Warrant under the Hand of any of the Justices for the City and County
where such Offenders shall dwell or reside, who, by virtue of this Act are
required and authorized to grant and issue forth Warrant, to levy the same, by
distress and sale of such Person or Persons Goods and Chattels, returning the
Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, the sum assessed and Charges of Distress
and Sale being first deducted.

And also, be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to take effectual care, that this Act and every Clause
therein be duly executed according to the true and genuine sense and intent
thereof, shall deny, refuse, neglect or delay to do, perform, fulfill and
execute all or every or any of the Duties, Powers and Authorities by this Act
required and empowered, by him or them to be done, performed, fullfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be lawfully convicted before any of their Majesty's
Courts of Record within this Province, he or they shall suffer such pain by
Fine or Imprisonment, as by the Discretion of the Justices of the said Courts
shall be adjudged.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or presented at any time
hereafter against any Person or Persons, for any matter, cause or thing done or
acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such Person or Persons so sued or
prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue, Not
Guilty, and give this Act and the special matter in Evidence; and if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or
suffer Discontinuance or Verdict to pass against him, the Defendant or
Defendors shall have trible Costs, for which they shall have like liberty as in
case where Costs by Law are given to Defendants. Provided always, That no
Mayor, Aldermen or Justices of the Peace shall be troubled, sued, prosecuted or
molested for any omission, offense, or neglect, by virtue of this Act, but
within the space of one year after such omission offense or neglect, and not at
any time thereafter, any thing herein contained to the contrary hereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the several Collectors of each respective City and County as aforesaid, shall
have the liberty to pay the several and respective sums assessed, as aforesaid,
at the day aforementioned, in Silver Money, or for want thereof in good
sufficient and merchantable Provisions at the current Market Price in Silver
Money at New York, any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any
ways notwithstanding.

An Act for the Regulating the Buildings, Streets, Lanes, Wharffs, Docks and
Allies of the City of New York.
WHereas the City of New York, and Metropolis of this Province, was chiefly
erected by the Inhabitants (...) and encouragement of Trade and Commerce, and
for the good, benefit and welfare of their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting
within this Province. And forasmuch as it is very necessary for Traffic and
Commerce, that Buildings, Streets, Lanes, Wharffs, Docks and Allies of the said
City be conveniently regulated with Uniformity, for the accommodation of
Habitations, Shipping, Trade and Commerce, and that all Impediments and
Obstructions that may retard so necessary a Work, may be removed, Be it Enacted
by the Commander in Chief and Council, and Representatives met in general
Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council of the said City, shall and may, at their will and pleasure,
elect, nominate or appoint one or more discreet and intelligent Person or
Persons to be the Surveyors or Supervisors of their Buildings, Streets, Lanes,
Wharffs, Docks and Allies, and to see that the Buildings, Streets, Lanes,
Wharffs, Docks and Allies of the said City be conveniently regulated with
Uniformity for the Accommodation of Habitations, Shipping, Trade and Commerce,
according to such Rules and Orders of Building and laying out of Streets,
Lanes, Wharffs, Docks, and Allies, as shall be established by the Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council of the said City, who are hereby authorized and
empowered to make such Rules and Orders for the better Regulation, Uniformity
and Gracefulness of such New-Buildings as shall be erected for Habitations, and
also of such Streets, Lanes, Wharffs, Docks and Alles, as shall be found
convenient for the good of the Inhabitants. And it shall be lawful for the
Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, or for the Mayor and Aldermen in their
Court, to administer an Oath upon the holy Evangelists, unto the Surveyors or
Supervisors, of the true and impartial Execution of their Office in that behalf.

And whereas in the laying out of the New Lots for Buildings, some Controversy
may arise, by a Lot or Lots of Ground, which if built upon, would be very
incommodious and prejudicial to one of the principal Streets of this City, and
hurtful to the Trade and Health of the Inhabitants, Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the
said City, for the time being, in Common Council assembled, shall, and may, and
are hereby empowered and required to obstruct any Building or Buildings that
may narrow the said Street, or any other Street within the said City. And the
said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council shall, and may by virtue of this
present Act, continue the said Street, commonly called the Broad Street,
according to its present Dimensions, and if in the doing thereof, or in the
laying out for the future any Streets, Lanes, Wharffs, Docks or Allies, and
they do take any Persons Ground, they are to give Notice to the Owners or
Parties Interested in the Ground, to be so taken for the intent as aforesaid;
and to the end that reasonable ^atisfaction may be given for all such Ground as
shall be taken and employed for the Use aforesaid, the Commander in chief and
Council, may assess the value of the Lots now in Controversy; and for other
Ground, the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council shall and may treat and agree
with the Owners and others interested therein; and if there be any Person that
shall refuse to treat in manner aforesaid, that in such case the Mayor and
Aldermen in their Court, are hereby authorized, by virtue of this Act to issue
out a Warrant or Warrants to the Sheriff of the said City, who is hereby
required to impannel and return a Jury before the said Court of Mayor and
Aldermen. Which Jury, upon their Oaths, to be administered by the said Court,
are to enquire and assess such Damages and Recompense as they shall judge fit
to be awarded to the Owners and others interested, according to their several
and respective Interests and Estates of any such ground, or any part thereof,
for their respective Interests and Estates in the same, as by the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council shall be adjudged fit to be converted to the
purposes aforesaid; and such Verdict of the Jury, and Judgment of the said
Court of Mayor and Aldermen thereupon, and the payment of the said sum and su^s
of Money so awarded or adjudged, to the Owners, or others having Estate or
Interest, or tender; or refusal thereof, shall be binding to all intents and
purposes, against the said Parties, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and all others claiming any Title and Interest to the said Ground, and
shall be a full Authority to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council to
cause the said Ground to be converted and used for the purposes aforesaid, any
thing contrary herein, or in any other Law to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as the Filth and Soil of the said City, lying in the public
Streets thereof, does often prove a common Nuisance unto the Inhabitants and
Traders to and from the said City, and very prejudicial to their Health; For
the Removal thereof, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Numbers and places for all common Severs, Drains and Vaults, and the O^der and
manner of Paving and Pitching the Streets, Lanes and Allies of the said City,
shall be designed and set out by the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the
said City, together with the said Surveyors or Supervisors appointed in manner
aforesaid; and when they assemble shall have Power and Authority to order and
direct the making of Vaults, Drains and Sever^, or to cut into any Drain or
Sever already made, and for the altering, enlarging, amending, cleansing and
scouring of Vaults, Sinks or common Severs. And for the better effecting
thereof, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council, together with the Surveyors and Supervisors, at their said
Meeting, to impose any reasonable Tax upon all Houses within the said City, in
proportion to the benefit they shall receive thereby, for and toward the
making, cutting, altering, enlarging, amending, cleansing and scouring all and
singular the said Vaults, Drains* Severs, Pavements and ^itching aforesaid. And
in default (...) said sum to be charged, it shall and may be lawful (...) Mayor
and Aldermen, etc. so authorized as aforesaid, by Order or Warrant under their
Hands and Seals, to leavy the said sum and sums of Money, so assessed, by
distress and sale of the Goods of the Parties chargeable therewith, and
refusing or neglecting to pay the same, rendering the overplus, if any be.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing herein contained shall be construed to change, alter, shorten,
lengthen, narrow or enlarge any of the Streets, Allies and Lanes within this
City, as they are now laid out and remain at the Publication hereof. Nor to
break through any Persons Ground now in Fence or Enclosed, or to take away any
Persons House or Habitations, any thing herein contained to the contrary hereof
in any ways notwithstanding.

Acts passed in the third Sessions of the General Assembly, begun in the City
of New York, April 19. 1692.
An Act for the raising two hundred Men with their proper Officers for the
securing and re-inforcing of Albany in the Fronteers of this Province.
WHereas the Forces lately raised for the Re-inforcing and Securing the
Fronteers at Albany, are not to continue in that service any longer than the
first of M^^ next ensuing. And forasmuch as it is still absolutely necessary
for the safety of all their Majesty's Neighboring Collonies and Plantations,
as well for the security of this Province, that there be and remain at that
place sufficient Force for the Defense thereof. And whereas the present State
and Condition of this Province is such, that they are not able at this time to
make sufficient Provision of Men and Money, for the re-inforcing of that place,
as is truly necessary for the maintaining such a considerable Post, which is
the only Bull-work of Defense for all their Majesty's Neighboring Collonies
and Plantations in this main of America; yet that the said place may not be
deserted, nor the Indians, who have been so constant to us discouraged, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Commander in chief and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the
Commander in chief do issue out his Warrants to the chief Military Officers in
the respective Cities and Counties under-named, for the raising of 200 men,
armed as the Law directs, with their proper Officers, in such Proportions
hereafter mentioned, to consist and make two distinct Companies of Fuzileers,
for the Reinforcement and Security of the Fronteers of this Province in the
County of Albany aforesaid, which shall continue and remain in the said County
of Albany, for the Defense and Security thereof for the term and space of five
Months, to commence on the first day of May next, and to end and terminate on
the first day of October then following.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who in pursuance of such Warrant or Warrants, to be by the Commander
in chief issued out to the chief Military Officer of each respective City and
County or Counties, as aforesaid, shall be warned to appear in Arms, in order
to the raising the 200 men aforesaid, shall neglect delay or refuse to appear,
or otherwise absent him or themselves shall forfeit the sum of five Pounds
current Money, to be levied by Distress, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
any Justice of the Peace within this Province, on the Goods and Chattels of
every such Person or Persons so offending as aforsaid, upon a Certificate of
such Default, from the Captain or chief Officer of such Company, in or to which
the said Offender shall be lifted or belong, under his Hand and Seal, which
said sum of 5 l. shall be employed for the encouragement and raising the Quota
of men, by this Act, in each respective City and County or Counties to be
raised, as aforesaid. And in case such Person or Persons so offending as
aforesaid, shall not have Goods and Chattels to be found to pay and satisfy
the sum of five Pounds aforesaid, such Person or Persons, upon such
Certificate, and by such Warrant as aforesaid, shall be committed to the common
Goal of the same City or County or Counties there to remain without Bail or
Mainprize for the space or term of five Months, or until he or they shall
satisfy the sum of five Pounds aforesaid.

And for the paying and maintaining the said two hundred men, and their proper
Officers, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a Levy of
fifteen Hundred Pounds current Money of this Province, be laid, assessed,
raised and levied upon all and every the Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders
of and in this Province, for the paying and maintaining of the said two hundred
men, and their proper Officers, for five Months, as aforesaid, and for no other
use, intent or purpose whatsoever. To be laid, assessed, raised, levied and
paid to their Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time being, at
their Majesty's Custom-house in the City of New York, on the first day of
September, next ensuing, which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1692. according
to the Rates and Proportions following, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, 345 l. for the paying and maintaining 46
men, being their Quota and Proportion of the 200 men aforesaid.

For the County of Westchester, 127 l. 10 s. for the paying and maintaining 17
men, being their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Richmond, 67 l. 10 s. for the paying and maintaining of nine
men, being their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Vlster and Duchess County, 210 l. for the paying and
maintaining 28 men, being their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Suffolk, 300 l. for the paying and maintaining 40 men, being
their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For Kings County, 210 l. for the paying and maintaining 28 men, being their
quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For Queens County, 225 l. for the paying and maintaining 30 men, etc.

For the County of Orange, 15 l. for the paying and maintaining two men, being
their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

And also, be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such sum or sums of
Money of the several sums of 2500 l. lately raised by the Act of General
Assembly, for the paying and defraying of the Charges of 250 Fuzileers, with
their Officers, raised for the securing and defense of Albany, which shall and
does remain undisposed of, and not employed for the Uses aforesaid, shall be
laid out and applied toward the defraying the incidental Charge or Expense
which shall or may happen or be occasioned by the raising, transporting and
maintaining of the two hundred Fuzileers, with their proper Officers, before in
this Act mentioned and expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, raising and paying the sum of one thousand five hundred Pounds
aforesaid, The Mayor and Aldermen in the City of New York, for the time being,
and the Justices of the Peace, for the time being, for the several ^^spective
Counties aforesaid, for the several Counties respectively, for the which they
shall be Justices of the Peace, do within forty days after the publication
hereof, assemble and meet together in the Court Houses for the several
respective City and Counties, or such other place or places as they shall agree
upon among themselves, and shall there order that the Assessors and Collectors
for the several respective City, Towns, Manors or Liberties, within their
several Jurisdictions, for the assessing, collecting and receiving of the
public Rates, for the defraying of the public Charge of each respective City
and County aforesaid, be the Assessors and Collectors, for the assessing,
collecting or receiving the sum or sums of Money herein before mentioned,
according to the Proportions before expressed, as to the said Mayor, Aldermen
and Justices shall seem meet and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Manors and Jurisdictions within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who neglect or do not elect annually or once
every year Assessors or Collectors, whereby the intent of this Act may be
frustrated, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, said, That if
the respective Manors and Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to elect Assess^rs and Collectors, for assessing of
their respective Manors or Jurisdictions, and for the collecting the same,
according to the intent and direction of this Act, then and in such case the
Justices of the Peace in the Counties where such Manors or Jurisdictions are,
are hereby empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and
Collectors for such Manors or Jurisdictions as shall neglect or refuse, as
aforesaid. Which Assessors and Collectors, shall, to all intents and purposes
observe the directions of this Act, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors,
Aldermen and Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities, Counties, Manors
and Jurisdictions, have, and shall have Power and Authority, by virtue of this
Act, each of them by himself to administer an Oath to the said Assessors, Well
and truly, equally, impartially, and in due Proportion, as it shall appear to
them, according to their best Understanding, to assess and rate the
Inhabitants, Re^dents and Freeholders of the respective places for which they
shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who shall be chosen Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect, or
unequally and partially assess, or refuse to make such Assesment as by this Act
is required, or shall deny, neglect, or refuse to collect any sum or sums of
Money, in form before mentioned assessed, that then and in such case it shall
and may be lawful for any two of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
Cities and Counties where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and
who by virtue of this Act are required and empowered to do the same, by Warrant
under their Hands and Seals to commit such Asse^sors or Collectors, so denying,
neglecting, or unequally and partially assessing, or refusing to collect, as
aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise till
be or they shall make Fine or Ransom to their Majesty's for such Contempt as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That if any Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Quality soever he or they be within this Province,
who shall be assessed or rated any sum or sums of Money, by virtue of this Act
to be raised and levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay and satisfy the
same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Colle^tor, by virtue
of a Warrant under the Hand of any of the Justices for the City and County
where such Offenders shall dwell or reside, who by virtue of this Act are
required and authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrant, to levy the
same, by distress and sale of such Person or Persons Goods and Chattels,
returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, the sum (...) and Charges of
Distress and Sale being f^rst deducted.

And also, be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within his Province, who are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to take effectual care, that this Act and every Clause
therein be duly executed according to the true and genuine sense and intent
thereof, shall deny, (...), neglect or delay to do, perform, fulfill and
execute all or every or any of the Duties, Powers and Authorities by this Act
required and empowered, by him or them to be done, performed, f^^lfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be lawfully convicted before any of their Majesty's
Courts of Record within this Province, he or they shall suffer such pain by
Fine or Imprisonment, as by the Discretion of the Justices of the said Courts
shall be adjudged.

And whereas there has been great neglect in the Justices of the Peace,
Collectors and Assessors, who have delayed executing their respective Duties,
according to the true intent and meaning of the former Acts made in several
Sessions of this present Assembly; For the prevention of the like for the
future, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any of the
respective Cities and Counties aforesaid shall refuse, neglect or delay to have
their respective Quota or Proportion of Men at the City of New York, or at the
City of Albany, on or before the 20th day of May now next ensuing, pursuant to
the Warrant directed to them from the Commander in chief, as aforesaid; And
also, if any of the respective Cities and Counties aforesaid, shall refuse,
delay or neglect to make payment of the several respective Sums or Proportions
of Money, by them respectively to be paid, as aforesaid, at the time and place
above mentioned and appoin^d, That then, and for every day after the said day
aforementioned and appointed for the payment thereof, or until the whole Sums
and Proportions of each respective City and County shall be fully paid and
satisfied, such City and County or Counties that shall be defective therein,
shall each and every of them forfeit and pay for the intent aforesaid, the
farther Sum of five Pounds current Money aforesaid, for each days default or
neglect of having their quota of Men or Payment of their respective Proportions
at the times appointed.

And for the enabling the Commander in chief to borrow Money, or to agree for
Provisions for the maintaining of the two Companies aforesaid, that the
purposes of this Act may be truly attended and executed, Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful for any Person or Persons
to advance and lend to the Commander in chief, etc. upon the Credit of this Act
any Sum or Sums of Money, not exceeding the Sum of 700 l. and to have and
receive for the forbearance of all such Money as shall be lent, Interest not
exceeding the Rate of Ten per Cent. per Annum.

And to the end that all Monyes and Provisions which shall be so lent unto the
Commander in chief, etc. may be well and sufficiently secured out of the Moneys
arising and payable by this Act, with the Interest for the same, not exceeding
Ten per Cent. per Annum, a aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That their Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time
being, shall separate and keep apart all the Money arising by the Rates and
Proportions hereby gran^ed, as the same shall arise and be paid unto him by the
Receivers or Collectors of the same, or by any other Person whatsoever, keeping
a perfect and distinct Account, as the same shall come in: Which Sum or Sums of
Money, so by him received, as aforesaid, shall not be separated or paid unto
any other Person or Persons whatsoever, but unto such as shall lend any Money
to the Commander in chief, etc. upon the Credit of this Act, who shall
immediately have a Warrant and an Order for the Repayment, bearing the same
date in which he paid his Money, wherein shall likewise be contained the
Interest for forbearance; and that all Orders for Re-payment shall be
Registered in course, according to the date of the Warrant respectively,
without preference of one before another. And that all and every Person or
Persons shall be paid in course, according as their Orders shall stand
Registered or entered; and that the Money to come in by this Act shall be in the
same Order liable to the satisfaction of the said respective Parties, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, successively, without preference of one
before another, and not otherwise; and not to be divertible to any other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or presented at any time
hereafter against any Person or Persons, for any matter, cause or thing done or
acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such Person or Persons so sued or
prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue, Not
Guilty, and give this Act and the special matter in Evidence; and if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or
suffer D^scontinuance or Verdict to pass against him, the Defendant or
Defendors shall have trible Costs, for which they shall have like liberty as in
case where Costs by Law are given to Defendants. Provided always, That no
Mayor, Aldermen or Justices of the Peace shall be troubled, sued, prosecu^ed or
molested for any omission, offense, or neglect by virtue of this Act, but
within the space of one year after such omission offense or neglect, and not at
any time thereafter, any thing herein con^^^^ed to the contrary hereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the several Collectors of each respective City and Coun^y as aforesaid, shall
have the liberty to pay the several and respect^ve sums assessed, as aforesaid,
at the day aforementioned, in Silver M^ney, or for want thereof in good
sufficient and merchantable Provisions at the current Market Price in Silver
Money at New York, any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any
ways (...)*

An Act for the destroying of Wolves.
BE it Enacted by the Commander in chief and Council, and Representatives
couvened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That for the
destroying of Wolves, who have lately increased very much, to the great
discouragement of Pasturage, and increase of Sheep and Cattle, That whatsoever
Christian shall kill a grown Wolf upon Long Island or Staten-Island, he shall
have for each Wolf that shall be killed twenty Shillings, to be paid out of the
public Treasury of each respective County where the Wolf shall be killed; aad
for a Wolf Whelp above half a year old, there shall be paid, as aforesaid, ten
shillings. And whatsoever Indian shall in like manner kill any Wolf, shall have
for his Reward, one Matchcoat or twelve Shillings, and for a Wolf Whelp five
Shillings, to be paid him as aforesaid. And if any other County in the Province
have a mind to encourage the destroying of Wolves, they shall do it in such
manner and way as to them shall seem meet. And the Justices of the Peace, and
other Officers of the respective Counties aforesaid, shall take effectual care
to see this Act and every clause therein duly executed accordingly.

Acts passed in the fourth Sessions of the General Assembly, begun in the City
of New York, the 14 day of August, Annoque Dom. 1692. in the 4th Year of their
Majesty's Reign, King William and Queen Mary, under the Government of his
Excellency Benjamin Eletcher, Esquire Captain General and Governor in chief in and
over their Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories thereon depending in
America.
An Act for the raising and pay two hundred and twenty Men with their proper
Officers, together with the incidenta Charges that shall arise thereon, for the
Re-inforcement and Security of the Fronteers of this Province, at Albany, for 7
Months.
WHereas the Levys appointed for the Defense of the Fronteers of this Province
at Albany, do expire on the first day of October next, and that it is
absolutely necessary that there should be continued at that place a
considerable Force for the ^ecurity of this Province, as well as for the
necessary Defense of their Majesty's Neighboring Plantations, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives convened in General
Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That his Excellency the Captain
General do immediately upon the Publication hereof, issue out his Warrants
under his Hand and Seal, to the several and respective Military Officers of the
several and respective Counties hereafter named, for the raising of 220 men,
well provided with Arms, to be peremptorily at Albany on the first day of
O^tober next ensuing, and there to continue and remain for the Reinforcement
and Security of this Province, for the term and space of seven Calendar
Months, to commence on the said first day of October, and to expire on the
first day of May then next ensuing, in such quota's and proportions in each
respective County, as is hereafter specified and expressed, to wit, For the
City and County of New York, sixty effective men. For the County of
Westchester, twenty five effective men. For the County of Richmond, ten
effective men. For Kings County, thirty four effective men. For Queens County,
forty four effective men For the County of Suffolk, forty five effective men.
For the County of Orange, two effective men.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any of the
respective Military Officers in the respective Counties aforesaid, shall after
the Receipt of the Warrants from the Captain General, in manner aforesaid,
fail, neglect, refuse or delay to execute the said Warrants, according to the
true intent and meaning thereof, shall for such their failure, or neglect,
refusal or delay, answer the same before the Captain General or such other
Officers as he shall appoint, and there suffer such Mulo^s, Pains and
Punishment, as by the Captain General shall be thought convenient, according to
the Laws and Articles of War in that case made and provided in their Majesty's
Realm of England, any thing contained herein, (...) any other Law to the
contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And for the paying and maintaining the said two hundred and twenty men, and
their proper Officers, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a
Levy of two Thousand eight Hundred and sixty Pounds current Money of this
Province, be laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every the
Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of and in this Province, for the paying
and maintaining of the said two hundred and twenty men, and their proper
Officers, together with the incidental Charges that shall arise thereon, for
seven Kalendary Months, as aforesaid, and for no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever. To be laid, assessed, raised, levied and paid to their Majesty's
Collector and Receiver General for the time being, at their Majesty's
Custom-house in the City of New York, on the first day of April next ensuing,
which will be in the Year of our Lord 1693. according to the Rates and
Proportions following, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, 780 l. for the paying and maintaining 60
men, being their Quota and Proportion of the 220 men and Officers aforesaid.

For the County of Westchester, 325 l. for the paying and maintaining 25 men,
being their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Richmond, 130 l. for the paying and maintaining of ten men,
being their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Suffolk, 585 l. for the paying and maintaining 45 men, being
their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For Kings County, 442 l. for the paying and maintaining 44 men, being their
quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

For Queens County, 572 l. for the paying and maintaining 34 men, being their
quota and proportion aforesaid.

For the County of Orange, 26 l. for the paying and maintaining two men, being
their quota and proportion, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, raising and paying the sum of two thousand eight hundred and sixty
Pounds aforesaid, The Mayor and Aldermen in the City of New York, for the time
being, and the Justices of the Peace, for the time being, for the several and
respective Counties aforesaid, for the several Counties respectively, for the
which they shall be Justices of the Peace, do within forty days after the
publication hereof, assemble and meet together in the Court Houses for the
several respective Cities and Counties, or such other place or places as they
shall agree upon among themselves, and shall there order that the Assessors and
Collectors for the several respective Citys, Towns, Manors or Liberties,
within their several Jurisdictions, for the assessing, collecting and receiving
of the public Rates, for the defraying the public and necessary Charges of
each respective City and County aforesaid, be the Assessors and Collectors, for
the assessing, collecting or receiving the sum or sums of Money herein before
mentioned, according to the Proportions before expressed, as to the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Justices shall seem meet and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Manors and Jurisdictions within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who neglect or do not elect annually or once
every year Assessors or Collectors, whereby the intent of this Act may be
frustrated, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
respective Manors and Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to elect Assessors and Collectors, for assessing of
their respective Manors or Jurisdictions, and for the collecting the same,
according to the intent and direction of this Act, then and in such case the
Justices of the Peace in the Counties where such Manors or Jurisdictions are,
are hereby empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and
Collectors for such Manors or Jurisdictions as shall neglect or refuse, as
aforesaid. Which Assessors and Collectors, shall, to all intents and purposes
observe the directions of this Act, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors,
Aldermen and Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities, Counties, Manors
and Jurisdictions, have, and shall have Power and Authority, by virtue of this
Act, each of them by himself to administer an Oath to the said Assessors, Well
and truly, equally, impartially, and in due Proportion, as it shall appear to
them, according to their best Understanding, to assess and rate the
Inhabitants, Re^de^ts and Freeholders of the respective places for which they
shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who shall be chosen Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect, or
unequally and partially assess, or refuse to make such Assesment as by this Act
is required, or shall deny, neglect, or refuse to collect any sum or sums of
Money, in form before mentioned assessed, that then and in such case it shall
and may be lawful for any two of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
Cities and Counties where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and
who by virtue of this Act are required and empowered to do the same, by Warrant
under their Hands and Seals to commit such Asse^^ors or Collectors, so denying,
neglecting, or unequally and partially assessing, or refusing to collect, as
aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise till
^e or they shall make Fine or Ransom to their Majesty's for such Contempt as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Quality soever he or they be within this Province,
who shall be assessed or rated any sum or sums of Money, by virtue of this Act
to be raised and levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay and satisfy the
same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector, by virtue
of a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any of the Justices for the City and
County where such Offenders shall dwell or reside, who, by virtue of this Act
are required and authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrant, to levy the
same, by distress and sale of such Person or Persons Goods and Chattels,
returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, the sum assessed and Charges
of Distress and Sale being first deducted.

And also, be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to take effectual care, that this Act and every
Article and Clause therein be duly executed according to the true intent
thereof, shall deny, refuse, neglect or delay to do, perform, fulfill and
execute all or every or any of the Duties, Powers and Authorities by this Act
required and empowered, by him or them to be done, performed, fullfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before his Excellency the Captain
General and Council, or before any of their Majesty's Courts of Record within
this Province, he or they shall suffer such pain by Fine or Imprisonment, as by
the Discretion of the said Governor and Captain General and Council, and the
Justices of the said Courts shall be adjudged.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill. Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or presented at any tim^
(...) against any Person or Persons, for any matter, cause or thing done or
acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such Person or Persons so sued or
prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue, Not
Guilty, and give this Act and the (...) matter in Evidence; and if the Plantiff
or Prosecutor shall be nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or suffer
Discontinuance or Verdict to pass against him, the Defendant or Defendants
shall have t^be Costs, for which they shall have like Remedy, as in case where
Costs by Law are given to Defendants. Provided always, That no Mayor, Aldermen
or Justices of the Peace shall be troubled, sued, prosecuted or molested for
any omission, offense, or neglect, by virtue of this Act, but within the space
of one year after such omission offense or neglect, and not at any time
thereafter, any thing herein contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Always provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
several Collectors of each respective City and County, as aforesaid, shall have
the liberty to pay the several and respective sums assessed, as aforesaid, at
the day aforementioned, in current Silver Money, at New York, or for want
thereof in good sufficient and merchantable Provisions at the Rates and Prices
hereafter specified and expressed, to wit, good and merchantable Pork at the
Rate of Fifty Shillings per Barrel, the Barrel well Re-packed by the sworn
Packer of New York, and the Barrel containing thirty one Gallons and half
Winchester Measure, at least. Beef at the Rate of thirty two Shillings and six
Pence per Barrel, well re-packed by the sworn Packer of New York aforesaid, the
Barrel to contain thirty one Gallons and half Winchester Measure, at least.
Good merchantable Winter Wheat at four Shillings per Bushel. Tried Tallow at
four Pence half Penny per Pound.

An Act for the raising and paying of Eighty Men in Ulster and Duchess County,
to be employed for the Re-inforcing and Security of Albany, from the 15th Day
of December next, to the first of March then next ensuing.
WHereas it is convenient that the County of Vlster and Duchess County should
be exc^sed from their Quota's of 300 Men, since they are to provide eighty men
for the Re-inforcement of Albany in the time of the most eminent danger, Be it
Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General
Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Governor do issue out his
Warrant under his Seal to the Military Officers of Vlster and Duchess County,
to levy eighty effective Men, with their Arms to be peremptorily at Albany on
the 15th day of December next, and there to continue and remain for the
Re-inforcement, Security and Defense of the Fronteers there, until the first
day of March then next following And also that the said Captain General would
form the said Number of eighty effective men into such Companies as he shall
think convenient, and to Commissionate and appoint so many Officers over them
as he shall think needful in the said County.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Counties
of Vlster and Duchess County, shall at their own proper Cost and Charge well
and sufficiently provide, that the said eighty effective men be well supplied
with good and wholesome Provisions of Beer, Bread and Meat, and Ammunition,
during the time that they shall be employed in the service aforesaid, and also
take effectual care that all and every of the said effective Men be well paid,
according to the Kings establishment, after the expiration of the said Service;
and likewise, that they shall pay and satisfy such Officers as shall be
Commissionated and appointed over them, according to the Kings establishment
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Officer,
Civil or Military, within the said County, shall delay, neglect or refuse to
perform and execute the several and respective Articles and Clauses of this
Act, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, he or they so
neglecting* refusing or delaying, shall be liable to such Penalties
respectively, as are in case of such refusal, neglect or delay provided in the
other Act of this present Sessions, entitled, An Act for raising and paying
two hundred and twenty Men, etc.

Acts passed in the fifth Sessions of General Assembly, begun in the City of
New York, the 24 th of October, 1692.
Act for establishing a Revenue upon their Majesty's, and for defraying the
public and necessary Charges of the Government.
THe Representatives of their Majesty's Province of New York, convened in
General Assembly, taking into their Consideration that the Act made for
establishing a Revenue for the defraying the public Charges of the Province,
does expire and terminate, according to the Limitations in the said Act made
and provided, on the eighteenth day of May next. And they being likewise
sensible of the great and urgent occasions which do daily press the^r Majesty's
to an extraordinary Expense for the Defense of this their Province and
Dominion, against the Designs and Invasions of the common Enemy: and finding
(...) necessary that in this time of so great and emin^nt Danger, that their
Majesty's Government over this Province should be honorably supported and
maintained, They, in most Thankful Acknowledgment of their Majesty's tender
care of the Welfare of their Subjects in this Province, have cheerfully and
unanimously, for the purpose aforesaid* given and granted, and do hereby give
and grant to their Majesty's, the several Rates and Duties of Excise
hereinafter mentioned, and do most humbly beseech that it may be Enacted* And
Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives now
met in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, that from and after
the 8 th Day of May next, which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1693. There
shall be throughout this their Majesty's Province of New York and the
Territories depending thereon in America, Raised, Levied, Collected, and Paid,
for the purpose and intent aforesaid, during the space and term of Two Years,
from the eighteenth Day of May aforesaid, and no longer, the Rates and Duties
of Excise herein after mentioned, in manner and form following, that is to say,

For every Gallon of Rum, Brandy and Distilled Liquors that shall be Imported
into this Province and Dependencies aforesaid, the sum of Four Pence current
Money of this Province.

And for every Pipe of Mader^, Malmsey, Fyall, St. Georges, (...), Canary,
Mallego, Sherry, and all ^orts of Sweet Wines, the Sum of Forty Shillings
current Money aforesaid. And so in proportion for all greater and smaller
Quantities Imported as aforesaid.

And for every Hogshead of Red, White and Rhenish Wines, the Sum of Twenty
Shillings current Money aforesaid. And so in proportion for all greater and
smaller Quantities, Imported aforesaid.

And upon all other Merchandise Imported into this Province and Dependencies
aforesaid, the Sum of Forty Shillings current Money aforesaid, for every
Hundred Pound prime Cost, except these hereafter specified, (viz.) Salt, Brick,
Pantyle, Coals, Fish, Sugar, Malossos, Cotton Wool, Ginger, Logwood,
Brazelletto, Fustick, o^ any other sort of Dying Wood, West India Hydes,
Tobacco, Bull on, Plate, Cacco, Pork, Oil, Tar, Flax, Soap, Candles, Tallow,
Cheese, Butter, Beef, Whalebone, Hops, Apples, Pears, Syder, Firewood, Planks,
Boards, Pleltry, Beaver, Sheeps Wool, Onions, Dressed and Undressed Deer Skins,
Honey, Bees Wax, Bar Wax, Indian Corn, Wheat, Barley, Rye Pease, or any other
sort of Gran, or any other thing of the Growth and Production of our
Neighboring Collonies and Plantations in America.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be also given
and granted unto their said Majesty's, for the intent aforesaid, upon all
Merchandise, commonly called by the Name of Indian Goods, as Daffils, Stroads,
Blankets, Plains, half Thicks, Wool^^ S^ockins, White Ozenburgs, Kettles,
Hatchets, Hoes, Red L^ad, Vermili^n, Cotton, Red Kersies, Knives, Indian
Haberdashery and other Indian Goods, the ^um of five Pounds current Money
aforesaid* ^or every hundred Pound prime Cost, which shall be imported into
this Province and Dependencies aforesaid, over and above the forty Shillings
for every hundred Pounds prime Cost before gven and granted to their Majesty's
by his present Act. And that the value of the prime Cost shall be at the Rates
^ereafter mentioned, Viz. Indian Duffills to be valued at Two Shillings and 4
pence per Yard. Indian Strouds, half a piece four Pounds, a whole piece eight
Pounds. Indian Blankets, each piece four Pounds. Indian plain Cotton, eighten
Pence per Yard. Half Thicks, two Shillings and two Pence per Yard. Indian white
Ozenburgs, the English ell, eight Pence. Indian Kettles, under eight Gallons,
six Pounds per hundred weight. Indian Hatchets, twelve Shillings per Dozen.
Indian Hoes, twelve Shillings per Dozen. Red Lead, twenty Shillings per Hundred
weight. Vermilion, four Shillings per Pound. Cotton, sixteen Pence per Yard.
Red Kersey, two Shillings six Pence per Yard. Knives, three Shillings per
Dozen. Indian Shirts, twenty Shillings per Dozen. Indian Drawing Knives,
Looking-Glasses, Indian Wooden Combs, Indian Beeds, Tobacco in Rolls, Indian
Bells, S^issars Jews Harps, Indian Points, Drills, Tobacco Pipes, little
painted Boxes, Auls, Sword Blades, Copper Tobacco Boxes, Tinsey Lace, Indian
^imp Lace, Needles, Tobacco Tongs, Indian Powder Horns, Indian Woolen
Stockings, and Indian Steels, the Sum of six Pounds current Money aforesaid,
over and above the two per Cent. aforesaid, for every Hundred Pounds value
prime Cost.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be also given
and granted unto their Majesty's for the intent aforesaid, for every Barrel of
Powder, six Shillings, For every Hundred Pound of Lead, six Shillings. For
every Gun, with or without a Lock, Six Shillings. For every Gallon of Rum, four
Pence, current Money aforesaid that shall be carried up Hudson's River in any
Vessel, Sloop or Canow or any other way whatsoever.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be also given
and granted unto their said Majesty's, for the purpose aforesaid, the Duties of
Excise upon all Liquors retailed throughout the Province and Dependencies
aforesaid, under the Quantity of five Gallons, the Sum of Twelve Pence current
Money aforesaid, for each Gallon so Retailed (Beer and Syder only excepted.)
And likewise the Sum of Six Shillings for each Barrel of Beer and Syder sold by
Retail throughout the Province.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be given and
granted, and there is hereby further given and granted unto their said
Majesty's, for the Use aforesaid, a Rate and Duty upon the Furs and Peltry
hereafter mentioned, that shall be exported out of this Province and
Dependencies, that is to say,

For every Beaver Skin, commonly called a whole Beaver, the sum of Nine Pence
current Money aforesaid. And that all other Furs and Peltry be rated
accordingly, that is to say, For two half Beavers, the sum of Nine Pence
curra^s Money aforesaid. For four Laps, Nine Pence. For three Drillings,
Eighteen Pence. For ten Raccons, Nine Pence. For four Foxes, Nine Pence. For
four Fishers, Nine Pence. For five Cats, Nine Pence. For six Minks, Nine Pence.
For one Otter, six Pence. For two Bear Skins, Nine Pence. For twenty four Musk
Rats, Nine Pence. For ten Matters, Nine Pence. For every twenty four Pound of
Deer and Muse Skins, Nine Pence. And for every Ox, Cow and Bull Hide
slaughtered in the Province and Dependencies, six Pence. And all other Peltry
to be valued to a whole Beaver, nine Pence.


And for the due and orderly collecting of the aforesaid Rates and Duties of
Excise, and also for preventing of Frauds and Imbezelments of the said Rates
and Duties of Excise, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Ships and Vessels whatsoever that shall come to any Port, Creek or Harbor
within this Province and Dependencies to Trade or Traffic, the Master, Mate or
Purser shall come to such place or places as shall be appointed by the
Governor for the time being, and there make Report of all such parcel or
parcels of Merchandise and other things, that he or they have on Board the said
Ship or Vessel, and also declare upon their Corporal Oath, That he or they have
not broke Bulk since his Arrival within this Province, before he or they made
such Report as aforesaid.

And also, all ^erchants that have any Goods or Merchandise on Board such Ships
or Vessels, as aforesaid, shall, at such place or places as is above directed,
make a true and distinct Entry of all such parcel or parcels of Goods or
Merchandise he has aboard such Ship or Vessel, according to the prime Cost.
And if any Difference should arise about the Value of the said Goods, Their
Majesty's Collector for the time being is hereby Autho^ized to administer to
all or any such Person or Person^ making such Entry, their Corporal Oath That
the said Entry is accord^^g to the Invoice or Invoices sent to them from the
place or places from whence such Goods or Merchandise did come.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master, Mate
or Purser of any Ship or Vessel whatever, or any Merchant, Factor, or other,
shall, contrary to these Rules above directed, break Bul^, or Land any Goods or
Merchandise whatsoever, before he or they make Report or Entry, and pay such
Duties as is required by this Act, then and in such case the Master of such
Ship or Vessel that shall break Bulk before making such Report, as aforesaid,
shall upon Proof made thereof by two sufficient and lawful Evidence, forfeit
his said Ship or Vessel, with all her Tackle, Furniture and Ammunition, one
Third unto their Majesty's, one Third unto the Governor, and one Third to the
Informer; To be sued for in any Court of Record within this Province, by Bill,
Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed. And also, all such Goods as shall be Landed without Entry made, as
aforesaid, shall be in like manner forfeited, one Third unto their Majesty's,
one Third to the Governor, and one Third to the Informer, to be sued as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Masters of
Ships or Vessels that are within this Province, and do not belong unto the
same, or any part thereof, and bound to any Port within or without this
Province, shall, before they take any Merchandise above expressed, come to such
place or places as shall be appointed for the collecting the Rates and Duties
established by this Act, and there make Entry and Report of their Design, and
enter into Bond, to the value of One Thousand Pounds, current Money of
New York, with sufficient Sureties, That they shall not take on Board, directly
or indirectly, any Goods or Merchandise, before recited and expressed, without
such Permit or Certificate from the Collector, or any having Authority under
him, for the same. And if they do take on Board any Goods or Merchandise before
recited and expressed, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act,
then they shall forfeit their said Bond, to be sued within three Months after
such Fact committed, or otherwise to be void, and of no force and virtue.

And all Masters of Shins, Sloops Boats, or any other Vessel belonging to this
Province and its Dependencies, shall once in the Year repair to the
Custom-House, or to other place or places that shall be appointed for that
purpose, and there enter into Bond, to the value of One Hundred Pounds, current
Money aforesaid, That they shall not directly or indirectly take on Board and
carry away out of this Province, any of the aforesaid Goods and Merchandise,
without first making Entry thereof, and paying such Rates and Duties as are
before recited and expressed. And if they do take on Board any of the aforesaid
Goods or Merchandise, without making Entry thereof, or paying the Rates and
Duties aforesaid, then the said Bond shall be forfeited.

And for the due and orderly collecting of all Duties of Excise hereby given
and granted, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Retailers of Wine, Rum, Brandy, or any other strong Liquors, within this
Province or Dependencies, shall upon their purchase and receipt of all such
Liquor or Liquors before expressed and Exciseable, come to the Office or
Offices of the Excise, and there, or with him, make Entry of all such Liquor or
Liquors as they shall buy or receive, and pay such Duties as are hereby
appointed, within twenty four Hours, or at such convenient time as the Officer
of the Excise shall appoint* And on Default thereof, all such Liquors as shall
be found in any Retailers House or Warehouse, Celler, or other place belonging
unto him within this Province or Dependencies, and have not been duly entered
and paid the Duties and Excise, as aforesaid, Then and in such case, upon the
Testimony of two Evidences before any Justice of the Peace within this Province
and Dependencies, the said Retailer or Retailers so offending in the Premises,
shall forfeit all such Liquors, and three times the value thereof, one third to
their Majesty's, one third to the Governor, and one third to the Informer, who
shall prosecute the same before any Justice of the Peace throughout this
Province and Dependencies, who are hereby Authorized and Empowered to hear and
determine the same, and if need be, to issue out their Warrant for the seizing
and condemning of all such Liquor forfeited, as aforesaid, and for committing
to Goal all such Retailers of Liquors who have not entered and paid the Duties
of Excise in manner aforesaid, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until
they shall satisfy and make payment of three times the Value of such Liquors
seized and forfeited, as aforesaid.

And be it furrher Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons within this Province and Dependencies, not being duly Lisenced, shall
at any time hereafter presume to sell by Retail any the Liquors aforesaid, that
is to say, a less Quantity at one time, than five Gallons, the Person so
offending shall forfeit and pay the sum of Five Pounds current Money aforesaid
for every such Offense, being thereof convict by the Oath of two or more
Evidences, to be sued as aforesaid before any Justice of the Peace throughout
the Province, and to be employed in such manner and proportion as aforesaid.

Always provided, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Act* That no
Retailers of Liquors under five Gallons, or any other that sell any Liquor or
strong Liquors, shall take any such Liquor into their Houses, Cellers or Ware
houses, or into any other place belonging unto them, in New York and Albany,
but by the hands of the sworn Porters, under the Penalty aforesaid, to be sued
and recovered for the Uses aforesaid, in manner and form as aforesaid. Always
provided, and it is hereby understood, that there shall no Duty be paid, nor
Forfeiture upon any Goods or Merchandise, that are not landed within this
Province and Dependencies. Always provided, That all Merchants qualified to
(...) the Acts of Naviga^ion and Regulating the Plantation Trade, coming into
this Province or any part thereof, be well and honestly treated and demeaned
for such things as by this Act is granted, without Oppression to be done to
them, paying the Duties aforesaid.

An Act for the Establishing Courts of Judicature for the ease and benefit of
each respective City, Town and County within this Province.
WHereas the Act for settling Courts of Judicature within this Province, does
expire by its own Limitation in April next. And whereas the orderly Regulation,
and the Establishment of Courts of Justice throughout this Province, as well in
respect of Time as Place, does tend very much to the Honor and Dignity of the
Crown, as well as to the Ease and Benefit of the Subject, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General
Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same,
That every Justice of the Peace that resides within any Town or County within
this Province, are hereby fully empowered and authorized to have Cognizance of
all Causes, Cases of Debt and Trespass to the Value of Forty Shillings or
under, which Caus^s and Cases shall be heard, tried and finally determined
without a Jury, by every Justice of the Peace that resides within any Town or
County within this Province, etc. he taking unto his Assistance, at the time of
his hearing and determining such Causes or Cases of Debt and Trespass to the
value of Forty Shillings or under, one of the Freeholders of the Town and
Place where the Cause of Action does arise: The process of Warning shall be by
a Summons under the Hand of the Justice, directed to the Constable of the Town
or Precinct, or any deputed by him where the the Party complained against does
live; which Summons being Personally served, or left at the Defendants House
two days before the Day of Hearing of the Plaint, shall be sufficient
Authority to and for the said Justice, assisted with one of the Freeholders,
as aforesaid, to proceed on such Cause and Causes, and determine the same in
the Defendants absence, and to grant Execution thereupon against the Defendants
Person, or for want thereof, his Estate, which the Constable of the Town or
Precinct, or his Deputy, shall and may serve. Always provided, and be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Plantiff or Defendant
shall desire a Jury, it shall be allowed, but at the proper Cost and Charges of
the Person desiring the same.

And for the increase of Virtue and the discouraging of Evildoers, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be held and kept
in every respective City and County within this Province, (...) and places
hereafter named and expressed, a Court of Ses^^^^ of the Peace, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York and Orange County, (...) the City Hall of
the said City, four General Quarter Sessions of the (...) annually, and every
Year, upon the first Tuesday of May, the first Tuesday in August, the first
Tuesday in November, and the first Tuesday in February.

For the City and County of Albany, three General Sessions of the Peace, at the
City Hall of the said City annually, and every Year (...) the first Tuesday in
June, on the first Tuesday in October, and on the first Tuesday of February.

And for the County of Westchester, two General Sessions of the Peace annually,
and every Year at Westchester, on the first Tuesday of June and on the first
Tuesday of December.

And for the County of Vlster and Duchess County, two General Sessions of the
Peace annually, and every Year at Kingston, on the first Tuesday of March, and
the first Tuesday of September.

And for the County of Richmond, two General Sessions of the Peace annually,
and every Year at the Court House in the said County, on the first Tuesday in
March, and the first Tuesday of September.

And for Kings County, two General Sessions of the Peace annually, and every
Year at Flatbush, on the second Tuesday of May, and on the second Tuesday of
November.

And for Queens County, two General Sessions of the Peace annually, and every
Year at Jamaica, on the first Tuesday in May and on the third Tuesday of
September.

And for Suffolk County, two General Sessions of the Peace annually, and every
Year, on the last Tuesday in March at Southampton, and on the last Tuesday of
September at Southold. Which General Sessions of the Peace in each respective
City and County aforesaid, shall only hold and continue for the space and time
of two days, and no longer.

And for the more Regular and Beneficial Distribution of Justice to the
Inhabitants of each respective County aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That there shall be kept and holden a Court of Common
Pleas in each respective County aforesaid, at the Times and Places* hereafter
named and mentioned, That is to say, At such Places in each respective County,
as the said General Sessions of the Peace are to be kept, and to begin the next
day after the Sessions terminate, and then only to hold and continue for the
space and time of Two Days after, and no longer. And that there be a Judge,
assisted with three Justices of the Peace in each respective County appointed
and commissionated to hold the same Court of Pleas, three whereof to be a
Quorum. And that the several and respective Courts of Pleas hereby established,
shall have Power and Jurisdiction to Hear, Try, and finally determine all
Actions or Cause of Actions, and all Matters and Things and Causes tryable at
the Common Law, of what Nature or Kind whatsoever; so that the Action or Cause
of Action, (...) Matter, Thing and Cause Tryable^ (...) Kind (...) does not
relate to or concern Titles of Land. Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted,
That there shall not be any Appeal or Removal by Habeas Corpus, of any Person,
or of any Action o^ Suit, or of any Judgment or Execution, that shall be
determined in the said Courts of Pleas, to the Value of Twenty Pounds or under,
any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Courts of
Mayors and Aldermen of the respective Cities of New York and Albany, shall have
in each of their respective Cities the Powers and Authorities to Hear, Try and
finally to Determine all such Suits and Actions of their Corporations, as is
commonly cognizable before them. From which final Determination there shall not
be any Appeal or Removal by Habeas Corpus, of any Person, or of any Action or
Suit, or of any Judgment or Execution to the value of Twenty Pounds or under,
any thing herein contained to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.
To which respective Courts of Common Pleas there shall belong, and be appointed
and commissionated or that purpose, one Clark of the Court, to draw, enter and
keep ^he Records, Declarations, Pleas and Judgments, there to be had and made;
and one Marshal or Crier of the Court, to call the Jurors, and proclaim the
Commands and Orders of the Court. And for the more regular proceedings in the
said Court, all Process and Writs, of what Nature soever, for the command of
Persons to appear, and to execute the Judgments and Executions of the
respective Courts aforesaid, shall be directed to the respective Sheriffs of
each County aforesaid, and executed by them, their Under-Sheriffs or Deputy or
Deputies. And all Process and Writs for Actions betwixt party and party in the
said Court, shall issue out of the Office of each respective Clark of each
respective Court, signed, Per Curiam. Provided always, That nothing herein
contained shall be taken or construed to take away the Privilege of the Town
of Kingston in the County of Vlster, for the hearing and determining all
Actions and Cause of Actions arising within the Liberties of the said Town, to
the value of five Pounds and under, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And that all their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within this Province may have
all the good, proper, just, easy and beneficial ways for the securing and
recovering their just Rights and Demands within the same, Be it further
Enacted, and it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That there shall be at New York a Supreme Court of Judicature, the
which shall consist of five Justices, which shall be appointed and
commissionated for that purpose, two whereof, together with one chief Justice,
to be a Quorum. Which Supreme Court are hereby fully empowered to have
Cognizance all of Pleas, Civil, Criminal and Mixed, as fully and amply to all
intents and purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequor within their Majesty's Kingdom of England, have or ought to have. In
and to which Supreme Court all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, shall
or may, if they shall see meet, commence or remove any Action or Suit, the Debt
or Damage laid in such Action or Suit being upwards of Twenty Pounds, and not
otherwise; or shall or may, by Warrant or Certiorarie, remove out of any of the
respective Courts of Mayor and Aldermen, Sessions of the Peace and Common
Pleas, any Judgment, Information or Indictment there had and depending:
Provided always, that the Judgment removed be upwards of the Valve of Twenty
Pounds. Out of the Office of which Supreme Court at New York, aforesaid, all
Process shall issue out under the Test of the Chief Justice of the said Court;
and to which Office all Returns shall be made. Which Supreme Court shall be
holden at such Times and Places as herein after is limited appointed: For the
City and County of New York, and County of Orange, on the first Tuesday in
April, and on the first Tuesday in October, annually and every Year. For the
City and County of Albany, the first Tuesday in May. For Vlster and Duchess
County, the third Tuesday in May. For the County of Westchester, the last
Tuesday in June. For Kings County, the first Tuesday in August. For Queens
County, the second Tuesday in August. For the County of Suffolk, the third
Tuesday in August. And for the County of Richmond, the second Tuesday of June.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
the Justices or Judges of the several Courts aforementioned, be, and are
hereby sufficiently empowered to make, ordain and establish all such Rules and
Orders, for the more Regular practicing and proceeding in their said Courts, as
fully and amply, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as all or any of the
Judges of the several Courts of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequor in
England legally do.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
no Persons Right or Property shall be by any of the aforesaid Courts
determined, except where matters of Fact are either acknowledged by the
Parties, or Judgment be acknowledged, or passes by the Defendants Fault, for
want of Plea or Answer, unless the Fact be found by the Verdict of Twelve Men
of the Neighborhood, as it ought to be done by the Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one of the Justices
of the said Supreme Court, commissionated as aforesaid, shall once in every
Year, at the aforesaid Times and Places, in each respective County aforesaid,
go the Circuit, and at the places and times aforesaid, there hold the Supreme
Court, being then assisted by two or more of the Justices of the Peace of the
several respective Counties where the said Supreme Court is to be holden, and
shall there hear and determine all Process and Pleas there depending and
issued, as aforesaid. Always provided, That in such County where there is no
Process issued or Pleas depending, That the Justice shall not be then obliged
to go the Circuit to the said County, any thing contained herein to the
contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding. Always provided, the Sessions of
the said Supreme Course shall not continue nor hold longer at New York than five
days, and at the other respective places in each respective County, than two
days, and no longer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be a
Court of Chancery within this Province, which said Court shall have Power to
hear and determine all Matters of Equity, and shall be esteemed and accounted
The High Court of Chancery of this Province.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor and
Council be the said High Court of Chancery, and hold and keep the said Court;
And that the Governor may depute, nominate and appoint in his stead a
Chancellor, and be assisted with such other Persons of the Council as shall by
him be thought fit and convenient, together with all necessary Officers, Clerks
and Registers, as to the said High Court of Chancery are needful.

Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That any Freeholder, Planter, Inhabitant or Sojourner within this Province may
have liberty, if he or they see meet, to make his or their Appeal or Appeals
from any Judgment obtained against him or them, in case of Error in the several
Courts aforesaid, in such manner and form as is hereafter expressed. That is to
say, From the Courts of Mayor and Aldermen, and Courts o^ Common Pleas, to the
Supreme Court, for any Judgment above the Value of Twenty Pounds. And from the
Supreme Court at New York, to the Governor and Council, for any Judgment above
the value of One Hundred Pounds. And from the Governor and Council, to Their
Majesty's in Council, for any Decree or Judgment above the Value of Three
Hundred Pounds, as in their Majesty's Letters Patents to his Excellency does
and may more fully appear. Always provided, That the Party or Parties so
appealing, shall first pay all Costs of such Judgment or Decree from which the
Appeal arises, and enter into Recognizance, with two sufficient Sureties, for
double the value of the Debt, Matter or Thing recovered or obtained by Judgment
or Decree against him or them, to the said Court from which they appeal, That
they will prosecute the said Appeal or Appeals with Effect, and make Return
thereof within twelve Months after the said Appeal or Appeals here made. And if
default happen thereon, then Execution to issue out upon the Judgment, against
the Party or their Sureties in course, without any Scire facias. Provided
always, That the establishing of these Courts shall not be or remain longer in
force than for the time and space of two Years from and after the Expiration of
the former Act beforementioned, and no longer

An Act for settling Fairs and Markets in each respective City and County
throughout this Province.
WHereas great Inconveniency does arise unto the Inhabitant of the Province for
want of certain Market days in each respective City and County throughout the
same, and the Trade of the Province is likewise very much discouraged for want
thereof, as well as for the want of public Fairs in each respective City and
County, to be held and kept at least once in every Year. For Remedy whereof,
and that Tra^^ and Commerce may be the better encouraged and propagated, for
the good and weal of all the Inhabitants aforesaid, Be it therefore Enacted by
the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly,
and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That there shall be held
and kept in the respective Counties aforesaid, upon every Thursday of the Week
at Jamaica within Queens County on Long Island; and on every Saturday of the
Week at Kingston in the County of Vlster; on every Wednesday of the Week at
Westchester in the County of Westchester, public and open Markets, to which
Markets it shall and may be lawful for all and every the Inhabitants and
Sojourners of this Province to go, frequent and resort, and th^ther to carry
all sorts of Cattle, Grain, Victuals, Provisions, and other Necessaries,
together with all sorts of Merchandise whatsoever, and at the public
Marketplace that shall be assigned and appointed in each respective Town
aforesaid, them to expose to sale or barter in gross or by retail between the
hours of Eight of the Clock in the Mor^i^g and Sunset of the same day, without
the payment of any Toll, or any other let, hinderance or molestation whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall
likewise be held and kept in each respective City and County throughout the
Province, and at the Times and Places hereafter named, Twice yearly and every
year a Fair. To which fair it shall and may likewise be lawful for all and every
Person or Persons, Inhabitants, Strangers or Sojourners of this Province, etc.
to the said Place and Places, at the said Time and Times where the said
respective Fair and Fairs are to be held and kept, to go, frequent and re^or^,
and thither to carry, or cause to be carried all sorts of Cattle, Horses,
Mares, Colts, Grain, Victuals, Provisions, and other Necessaries, together with
all sorts of Merchandise, of what Nature soever, and them to expose to Sale or
Barter in Gross or by Retail, at the Times, Hours and Seasons that the
Governors or Rulers of the said respective Fairs for the Time being shall
proclaim and appoint.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be kept
Yearly, for the City and County of New York, two Fairs at the City of New York.
The first Fair a^^ually to commence the last Tuesday of April in every year,
and to end upon the Friday then next following, being in all four days
inclusive, and no longer And the second Fair to commence the first Tuesday of
November in every year, and to end upon the Friday then next following, being
in all four days inclusive, and no longer.

And also, That there be held and kept one Fair annually and once in the Year
for Kings County on Long Island at Flatbush in the said County, to commence the
second Tuesday of October every Year, and to end upon the Friday then next
following, being in all four days inclusive, and no longer.

And also, That there be held and kept two Fairs yearly for Queens County on
Long Island, the first Fair to be held annually at Jamaica within the said
County on the first Tuesday in May in every Year, and to end on the Friday then
next following, being in all four days inclusive, and no longer. The second
Fair to commence on the third Tuesday of October, and to end on the Friday then
next following, being in all four days inclusive, and no longer.

And also, That there be held and kept two Fairs yearly for the County of
Suffolk on Long Island; the first Fair to be held annually at Southhamption,
the first Tuesday of July in every year, and to end on Friday then next
following, being in all four days inclusive, and no longer. And the second
Fair at Southold, to commence the second Tuesday of September, and to end upon
the Friday then next following, being in all four days inclusive, and no
longer.

And also, That there be held in the City and County of Albany two Fairs
yearly, the first Fair to be kept at Albany, and to commence the third Tuesday
of July, and to end on the Friday then next following, being in all four days
inclusive, and no longer. The second Fair to be held at Crawlier in
Ranslaerswick on the third Tuesday in October, and to end on the Friday
following, being in all four days inclusive, and no longer.

And also, That there be held and kept two Fairs yearly for the County of
Vlster, the first to be kept at Kingstone on the third Thursday in March, and
to end on the Saturday then next following, being three days inclusive, and no
longer. And the second Fair to begin the second Thursday in October, and to end
on the Saturday following.

And also, that there be held and kept two Fairs yearly for the County of
Westchester, the first to be kept at the Town of Westchester in the said
County, on the second Tuesday in May, and to end on the Friday following, being
in all four days inclusive, and no longer. And the second Fair to be kept at
Rye, in the said County, on the second Tuesday of October yearly, and to end
the Friday then next following, being in all four days, and no longer.

And also, that there be held and kept two Fairs yearly in the County of
Richmond, the first on the North side of the Island, on the last Tuesday in
June, and to end on the Friday following, being in all four days inclusive, and
no longer. And the second Fair to be kept at the said place on the last Tuesday
in September, and to end on the Friday then next following, being in all four
days inclusive, and no longer. All which Fairs at the Times and Places
aforesaid, in each respective County respectively, shall be holden, together
with a Court of Pypouders, and with all Liberties and Free Customs to such
Fairs appertaining, or which ought or may appertain, according to the Usage and
Customs of Fairs holden in their Majesty's Realm of England.

And for the more regular Government of the several and respective Fairs
aforementioned, the Governor shall commissionate and appoint such person or
persons in each respective County aforesaid, where such Fairs are to be holden
and kept, to be Governors and Rulers of the said Fairs respectively. Which
Governor or Ruler, so appointed and commissionated as aforesaid, is hereby
authorized and empowered to have and hold a Court of Pypouders, together with
all Liberty and free Custom to such appertaining. And that they and every of
them may have and hold there, at their and every of their respective Courts the
said (...) days* from day to day, and hour to hour, from time to time, upon
all occasions, Plaints and Pleas of a Court of Pypouders, together with all
Summons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Fines, Redemptions and Commodities, and
other Rights whatsoever to the same Court of Pypouders any way pertaining,
without any impediment, let or hinderance whatsoever. Always provided, That
the Governor or Ruler of the said respective Fairs aforesaid, shall, or cause
Cry and publish within and without the Liberties of the said respective Fairs,
Where they shall hold the same, the time that they ought to hold it, and no
longer. And that every Governor or Ruler of the respective Fairs aforesaid, at
the beginning of his Fair shall there cry, proclaim and publish how long that
Fair shall endure, to the intent that Merchanrs and others shall not be at the
same Fairs over the time so published, upon pain of being fined for the same.
Nor that the said Governor or Ruler shall not hold their respective Fairs over
the due time hereby limited, upon pain of forfeiting the keeping of the said
Fairs, unto their Majesty's.

And for the preventing of Abuse in any of the aforesaid Fairs and Markets, Be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the Governor or Ruler of the
respective Fairs aforesaid, shall yearly appoint and limit out a certain and
special open place within the respective Towns aforesaid, where the respective
Fairs are to be held and kept, where Horses, Mares, Geldings, Colts, and other
Cattle may be sold; In which said certain and open place, as aforesaid, there
shall be by the Governor or Ruler aforesaid, put in and appointed one
sufficient Person, or more, to take Toll, and keep the same place from ten of
the Clock in the Morning until Sunset of every day of the aforesaid Fairs and
Markets, upon pain to loose and forfeit upon every default forty Shillings And
that every Toll-gatherer, his Deputy or Deputies, shall during the time of
every the said ^airs, take the sum of Nine Pence as one and lawful Toll for
every such Horse, Mare, Gelding or Colt, at (...) to be appointed, as
aforesaid, (...) the C^^^k in the Morning, and Sunset of the (...), if it
(...), and not at any other time and place; and (...) present before him or
them, at the taking of the same Toll* the (...) to the Bargain, Exchange, Gift,
Contract, or putting away of every such Horse, Mares Gelding or Colt, and also
the same Horse, Mare, Gelding or Colt so sold, exchanged or put away; and shall
then write, or cause to be written in a Book, to be kept for that purpose, the
Names, ^^^names and dwelling Places of all the said Parties; and the Color,
with one special Mark at least, of every such Horse, Mare, Gelding or Colt, on
pain to forfeit at and for every default, contrary to the intent hereof, the
sum of forty Shillings current Money aforesaid. And the said Toll-Gatherer or
Keeper of the said Book, shall within one day next after such Fair, bring and
deliver his said Book to the Governor or Ruler of the said Fair, who shall then
cause a Note to be made of the true Number of all Horses, Mares, Geldings and
Colts sold at the said ^air, and shall there subscribe his Name, upon pain to
him that shall make def^ult therein, to lose and forfeit for every default, the
sum of forty Shillings current Money aforesaid, and also to answer to the party
grieved by reason of the same his Negligence in every behalf. And the said
Governor or Ruler, his Deputy or Deputies shall take for the entering of every
Horse, Mare, Gelding and Colt, sold in the respective Fairs, as aforesaid, for
Toll of the same, the sum of Nine Pence, the one half to be paid by the Buyer,
and the other half by the Seller. Provided always, That nothing herein
contained shall be taken or construed to infringe upon the Rights and
Privileges of the Cities of New York, Albany, and Ranslers-wick, but that the
Mayor and Aldermen, and the Proprietor of the Manor of Ransl^ers-wick, of
their respective Cities and Manor, for the time being, shall always be
pursuant to the Directions of their respective Charters and Grants, the only
Rulers or Governors of the aforementioned Fairs to be held in their
respective Cities and Manors, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for the supervising Intestates Estates, and Regulating the Probate of
Wil^s, and granting Letters of Administration.
WHereas the Right of Orphans, and the Estate of such as dye Intestate
throughout this Province and Dependencies, are often concealed, wasted,
imbezeled and destroyed, to the utter Ruin of many Orphans, and the prejudice
of the next of Kin to such as dye Intestate, for want of having good and
sufficient Persons in each respective County throughout the Province, for the
due and regular Enquiry after the same, Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That on or before the 25th day
of March next, in the Year of our Lord 1693. there shall be elected or
appointed in each respective Town throughout the Counties within this Province,
two able and sufficient Freeholders, who shall upon the Death of any Person or
Persons in their respective Towns, repair unto the House, Place, or Habitation
where the deceased did reside, within forty eight hours after the Interment of
the said deceased, and there make Enquiry, If the deceased made any Will, or
had any Real or Personal Estate, not devised by him at the time of his or their
Death? And if upon Enquiry, that he made no Will, but dyed Intestate, then and
in such case it shall be lawful for such Person or Persons, elected or
appointed in each respective Town, as aforesaid, to make strict and diligent
Search and Enquiry into all the Real and Personal Estate that the said
Intestate dyed possessed of, and the same to Inventory, and bring, or cause to
be brought unto such Person or Persons, in the County where such Intestate dyed
who shall by the Governor for the time being, be delegated, on purpose for
supervising Intestates Estates, etc. in each respective County throughout the
Province, and the same with him file, declaring upon their Oaths* That the
said Inventory does contain a true and per^est Account of the said Intestates
Estate, that has come unto their Knowledge. Whereupon the Person or Persons so
delegated, as aforesaid, shall issue out his or their Warrant to two good and
sufficient Freeholders inhabiting within the Town where the Intestate dyed,
for the Appraisment of the Goods and Chattels left by the Intestate, and
Inventoryed as aforesaid. And upon the Return thereof to him, he shall cause
the same to be secured, or sold for the most of their Value, and the produce
thereof to remain in his hands, or put out into good and sufficient hands, who
shall be able to produce the same again, when the next of Kin shall appear in
right to claim the same. And if the said Intestate, at the time of his Death,
did leave a Wife and Children behind him, then and in such case the Wife shall
only have the Right of Administration upon the said Intestates Estate, as the
Law does direct, and not otherwise. But if the said Intestate did leave only
Orphans behind him, and has no Relations or Kindred who will administer upon
the said Intestates Estate, then the Superviser of each respective County,
delegated as aforesaid, shall only have the Administration and Care of the said
Intestates Estate, and the same shall secure as aforesaid, for the use, benefit
and behoof of the said Orphans, and no^ otherwise. And the said Intestates
Estate, so Inventory'd as aforesaid, shall cause to be well secured, and
improved to the best Advantage for the behoof of the said Orphans, until they
Marry or come to the Age of One and Twenty Years. And that he shall likewise
take take effectual care for the Educating and Instructing the said Orphans in
the Holy Protestant Religion, and that they be honestly maintained, according
to the Capacity of the said Intestates Estate, and not otherwise.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Probate of all
Wills and Letters of Administration shall be from hence forth granted by the
Governor, or such Person as he (...) delegate under the Seal of the
Prerogative Office, for that purpose appointed. And the all Wills relating to
any Estate within the several Counties of (...) Richmond, Avest, Chester, Kings
County, shall be proved at (...) before the Governor, or such Person as he
shall delegate, as (...). But in regard of the Remoteness of the other Counties
from (...), and to prevent the great Charge and Inconveniencys of bringing
Witnesses so far, the Court of Common Pleas in each of these remote Counties,
are hereby empowered and authorized to take the Examination of Witnesses to any
Will within their respective Counties* upon Oath, and the same, with the Will
to certify to the Secretary's Office at New York, with all convenient speed,
under the Hand of the Judge and Cl^rk of the said Court, that the Probate
thereof may be granted accordingly. And in the time of the vacancy of the said
Courts of Common Pleas, or upon any extraordinary Occasion or Necessity, the
respective Judges of the Inferior Courts, assisted with two Justices of the
Peace, within the said remote Counties, may, and are hereby empowered and
authorized at any time, during the vacancy of the said respective Courts, to
take the Examination of Witnesses, to any Will produced before them, upon Oath,
and to certify the same, as aforesaid. And in case any Debate or Controversy
shall arise about Swearing and Examining such Witnesses, or allowing the Will,
the said Court, or Judge and Justices may hear and determine the same. And if
any be unsatisfied with their Proceedings therein, they may appeal to the
Governor, or to such other Person delegated as aforesaid, before the Probate
of such Will be granted.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Judges
of the respective Courts within the said remote Counties, in open Courts, and
on extraordinary Occasions or Necessity, out of Court, assisted with two
Justices of the Peace aforesaid, may, and are hereby authorized and empowered
to grant Probates of any Will, or Letters of Administration to any Person or
Persons, where the Estate of the Person making such Will, or of the Intestate
on which Letters of Administration is desired, does not exceed the value of
Fifty Pounds, any thing herein contained to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding Provided always, That any Person or Persons concerned in the
Probate of such Wills or Letters of Administration to be granted by the Judge
of the said Courts, as aforesaid, may within three Months after the granting
thereof, bring his or their Appeal or Appeals therein before the Governor, or
such other Person delegated, as aforesaid.

An Act for the Encouraging a Post Office.
WHereas their Most Excellent Majesty's by Their Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, bearing date the 17 th day of February, in the Year of
our Lord 1691. have given unto Thomas Neal, Esquire his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns full Power and Authority to erect, settle and establish within the
chief Ports of their said Majesty's Collonies and Plantations in Amerira, an
Office or Offices for the Receiving and Dispatching of Letters and Pacquets,
and to receive, send and deliver the same, under such Rates and Sums of Money
as the Planters shall agree to give, etc. to hold and enjoy the same for the
term of one and twenty Years, with such Powers and Clauses as are necessary on
that behalf, as by the said Letters Patents, relation being thereunto had, may
more fully and at large appear. And whereas Andrew Hamilton, Esquire is deputed and
constitued to govern and manage the said General Post Office, for and
throughout all their Majesty's Plantations and Collonies upon the main Land or
Continent of America, and Islands adjacent thereunto, pursuant to the
directions of the said Letters Patents. And whereas he the said Andrew Hamilton
has made Application to his Excellency, the Governor, and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, That they would ascertain and
establish such Rates and Sums of Money upon the Letters and Pacquets that shall
be received and dispatched by the said Office and Offices, for the effectual
encouraging of the said General Post Office, and for the quicker maintenance of
mutual Correspondency amongst all our Neighboring Collonies and Plantations
aforesaid, and that Trade and Commerce may be the better preserved, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That there shall be from
henceforth a General Letter-Office erected and established in some convenient
place within the City of New York, from whence all Letters and Pacquets
whatsoever, may be with speed and expedition sent into any part of our
Neighboring Collonies and Plantations on this main Land and continent of
America, or unto any other of their Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions beyond the
Seas. At which said Office all Returns and Answers may be likewise received.
And that one Master of the said General Letter-Office shall from time to time
be appointed by the said Andrew Hamilton; which said Master of the said Office,
or his Servant or Agent, and no other Person or Persons whatsoever, shall from
time to time have the receiving, taking up, ordering, dispatching, sending Post
or with speed, and delivering of all Letters and Pacquets whatsoever, which
shall from time to time be sent to and from all and every of the adjacent
Collonies and Plantations on this main Land and Continent of America, or any
other of their Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions beyond the Seas, where he the
said Postmaster General shall settle, or cause to be settled Posts or Running
Messengers, for that purpose, except such Letters of Merchants and Masters,
which shall be sent by any Masters of any Ships, Barques, or other Vessels of
Merchandise, or by any other Person employed by them for the carriage of such
Letters aforesaid, according to the respective Directions; and also except
Lettets to be sent by any private Friend or Friends, in their ways and Journies
or Travel, or by any Messenger or Messengers sent on purpose for or concerning
the private Affairs of any Person or Persons.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Postmaster
for the time being, and no other Person whatsoever, shall prepare and provide
Horses and Furniture to let to hire unto all through Posts and Persons riding
in Post, with Commission or without, to and from all and every of the adjacent
Collonies and Plantations on this main Land or Continent in America, where any
Post Roads are or shall be settled and established.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Postmaster General aforesaid, and his Deputy and
Deputies by him thereunto sufficiently authorized, to demand, have, receive and
take for the Portage and Conveyance of all such Letters which he shall so
convey, carry or send Post as aforesaid; and for the providing and furnishing
Horses for through Posts, or Persons riding in Post, as aforesaid, according to
the several Rates and Sums of current Money of this Province, hereafter
mentioned, not to exceed the same, that is to say, That the Port of every
single Letter to or from Europe, the West Indies, or elsewhere to and from
beyond the Seas. Nine Pence, current Money aforesaid, and so in proportion to
the greatness or quantity of said Letters. And for the Port of every single
Letter from Boston to New York, or from Maryland to New York, Nine Pence,
current Money aforesaid, and so in proportion, as aforesaid. And for the Port
of every single Letter from Virginia to New York, Twelve Pence, current Money
aforesaid, and so in proportion, as aforesaid. And for the Port of every single
Letter to or from any place not exceeding Eighty Miles distant from New York,
Four Pence Half Penny, current Money aforesaid, and so in proportion, as
aforesaid.

And for the more effectual encouragement of the said General Post Office, Be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the respective
Post-Masters that shall be settled in the respective Stages for the purpose
aforesaid throughout, the Province, shall, during the space and time that this
Act shall be in force, be freed and exempted from Excise and all Public
Services whatsoever, except the Postmaster of the City of New York, who is
only exempted from Public Services.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons whatsoever, or Body Politic or Corporate, other than the Post Master
General aforesaid, shall presume to carry, re-carry or deliver Letters for
hire, other than as before excepted, or to set up, or employ any Foot-Post,
Horse-Post or Packet Boat whatsoever, for the carrying, conveying and
re-carrying of any Letters or Pacquets by Sea or Land within this Province, or
shall provide and maintain Horses, and Furniture for the Horses of any through
Posts, or Persons riding Post with a Guide and Horn, as is usual in their
Majesty's Realm of England, upon pain of forfeiting the sum of One Hundred
Pounds current Money aforesaid, for every several Offense against the Tenor of
this present Act, to be sued and recovered in any Court of Record within this
Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn* Protection or
Wager of Law shall be admitted, one half of the said Forfeiture to the
Governor, and the other half to the Postmaster General, who shall sue and
(...) the same*

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Letters and
Pacquets that by any Master of any Ship or Vessel, or any of his Company, or
any Passengers therein, shall or may be brought to this Port of New York, other
than such Letters as are before excepted, shall by such Master, Passenger or
other Person, be forthwith delivered unto the Postmaster of New York for the
time being, or unto his Servant or Servants, and by him or them to be delivered
according to the several and respective Directions of the same. Provided, That
no Letters going up or coming down Hudson's River, and going to or from
Long Island, shall be carried to the Post-O^ce, any thing herein contained to
the contrary hereof notwithstanding. Provided always, That nothing herein
mentioned shall be in force longer than three Years next and after the
Publication hereof, any thing to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding.

An Act for the satisfying and paying the Debts of the Government.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly, being willing that all such
as have advanced Money for the support of the Government, should be well and
truly paid and satisfied; and for that purpose have agreed that the Rates and
Duties herein after mentioned should be levied and collected and pray that it
may be Enacted, And be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That the Rates and Duties herein after-mentioned, shall be levied and
collected, and be only appropriated and applied to the payment of such Debts
due for the support of the Government, aforesaid, and the said Rates and Duties
herein after-mentioned, hereby authorized to be levied and collected, shall be
quarterly paid to such Person or Persons who are now the present Creditors, and
have advanced their Money, as aforesaid, their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, in two years from the Publication hereof, in eight quarterly Payments,
and in equal proportions, according to the greatness and smallness of the Sums
due, without any priority or respect to Persons, and not otherwise. And that
the residue of the Money arising and payable by this Act, if any be, shall be
appropriated and applied, from and after the payment of the several Debts, as
aforesaid, unto the support of the Government, and for no other use or purpose
whatsoever, any thing in this or any other Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And that from and after the Publication hereof, there shall be raised, levied,
collected and paid unto their Majesty's, during the space and term of two
years, after the publication hereof, as aforesaid, and no longer, the several
Rates and Duties herein after-mentioned, over and above all other Duties,
Charges and Impositions by any former Act and Acts set and imposed, that is to
say, The Rate and Duty of Two Pence, current Money of New York, for every
Gallon of Rum, Brandy, and other distilled Liquors. And the Rate and Duty of
thirty Shillings for every Pipe of Wine. And five Shillings for every Hogshead
of Malossos, and so in proportion for any greater and lesser Quantity that
shall be Imported into this Province and Dependencies, from and after the
Publication hereof. And also the Rate and Duty of Two per Cent. prime Cost,
upon all other Goods of the Growth, Production or Manufacture of Europe, that
shall from and after the Publication hereof be Imported, as aforesaid. And
also, the Rate and Duty of Six per Cent. prime Cost, of the Goods and
Merchandise of the Growth, Production and Manufacture of Europe, that shall
from and after the Publication hereof, be imported into this Province and
Dependencies, from any other part or place than their Majesty's Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesad, That the several Rates
and Duties hereby imposed on the Liquors and Merchandise aforesaid, shall be
raised, levied, collected, recovered and paid unto their Majesty's Collector
and Receiver General for the time being, during the term before mentioned, and
in the same manner and form, and by such Rules, Allowances, Ways and Means, and
under such Penalties, Fines and Forfeitures as are mentioned, expressed and
directed in and by one Act of General Assembly made in this present Sessions of
Assembly, entitled, An Act for establishing a Revenue to defray the public
and necessary Charges of the Province.

And forasmuch as it is manifest that there are several Sums of Money collected
and received by sundry Persons, and not paid unto their Majesty's Receiver
General: And also, that there are several Persons that continue and remain
indebted for the several Duties and Impositions, and Excise upon Liquors, which
were formerly established by the late Government, for defraying the public
Charges thereof, and that it is most reasonable and just that all the arrears
of the same should be raised, levied, collected, answered and paid unto their
Majesty's Receiver General, for and toward the Debt aforesaid; Be it therefore
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Person or Persons who
have received any Sum or Sums from any of their Majesty's Subjects within this
Province, or under pretense of any Duties, Impositions, or Excise, formerly
established by the late Government, from the 11th day of August, in the Year of
our Lord 1688. until the 20th day of March, in the Year of our Lord 1691. And
likewise, all and every Person and Persons that are in arrears for any of the
Duties, Impositions or Excise, as aforesaid, shall within four Calendar Months
after the publication hereof, come unto their Majesty's Receiver General at
New York, and there account with him for all and every Sum or Sums of Money, so
collected and received by them, and every of them: And also, for what they are
in arrears for any of the Duties, Impositions or Excise, as aforesaid, and pay
the same unto him, without any further delay. And if any Person or Persons
shall refuse or neglect, upon summons of their Majesty's Receiver General, to
account and pay the sums of Money found due in arrears, as aforesaid, it shall
then be lawful for their Majesty's Receiver General, who is hereby authorized
to do the same, to issue out his Warrant under his Hand and Seal, to make
Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of such person or persons that shall be
found indebted, or in arrears, as aforesaid, and the same to expose to Sale by
Public Outcry, and the produce thereof to take, until he be satisfied for the
Sums of Money due and in arrears, as aforesaid. All which Sum and Sums of Money
so received by him, shall be paid and employed to the Uses aforesaid, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. And all the Acts and Ordinances made
by the late Governor and Council for and concerning any of the Duties,
Impositions and Excise aforesaid, shall remain and continue in full force and
virtue until all the said Sums of Money, and arrears due thereupon be fully
paid and satisfied, according to the tenor of this Act, any thing contained
herein, or in any other Act, to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding. Provided, That all Merchants and others, who are to pay the
additional Rates and Duties hereby established, shall have the time of three
Months after their respective Entries made, for the Duties aforesaid, for the
payment of the Rates and Duties aforesaid, any thing contained to the contrary
hereof notwithstanding.

Acts passed in the Fifth Sessions of the General Assembly, begun at the City
of New York, the 22 th day of March, 1692.
An Act for calling Long Island the Island of Nassaw.
BE it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same That the Island, commonly
called and known by the Name of Long Island. shall from henceforth be called,
The Island of Nassaw. And that after the Publication hereof, all their
Majesty's loving Subjects are hereby required, in all Grants, Patents, Deeds,
Conveyances, Bargains of Sale, Bills, Bonds, Records, and other Instruments in
Writing that shall hereafter be made, granted, conveyed, bargained, sold and
executed, for or concerning the said Island, or any part or place within the
same, or in any County thereof, to call and denominate the said Island in all
such Deeds and Escripts, as aforesaid, The Island of Nassaw, any thing
contained in any former Act to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for establishing certain Rates and Duties upon such Goods, Wares and
Merchandise as shall be brought unto their Majesty's Beam in the Weigh-House at
New York.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly being sensible of the great
Charge that is requisite for the present support of the Government in this time
of War, and being also willing at all times to manifest their most dutiful
Affections unto their Majesty's, with an humble and thankful Acknowledgment of
their Majesty's most gracious and tender regard to their Subjects within the
same, have cheerfully and unanimously given and granted unto their Majesty's an
Aid and Assistance for the better defraying the necessary Charge of the
Government, to be raised and levied upon all such Goods, Wares and Merchandises
that shall be brought unto their Majesty's Beam in the Weigh-House at New York,
according to such Rates and Duties, and during such Time, and in such manner
and form as herein after follows. And they humbly pray that it may be
Enacted, And be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives con^ned in General Assembly, And it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That all the Goods, Wares and Merchandises herein after
named and expressed, that shall from and after the Publication hereof be
Imported to, and Exported from this City, or that shall be bought and sold,
bartered or exchanged within the same, shall be first brought unto their
Majesty's Beam at the Weigh-House aforesaid, and be there weighed. And for
weighing the same there shall be answered and paid unto their Majesty's
Collector and Receiver General for the time being, or to such Person or Persons
as he shall authorize for the attending and receiving the same, the Rates and
Duties hereafter named, established and expressed, that is to say, For all
sorts of Silk Ware above one Hundred weight, Nine Pence per Hundred Weight;
Floret or Worsted, the same; Cochanella, the same; Saffron, the same. Indigo
exported only, six Pence per Hundred Weight, nothing for Importation;
Confectures, the same; all sorts of Spices, the same; Spanish Leather, the
same. Sugar, Two Pence half penny per Hundred weight exported, nothing at
Importation; Candles, the same. Tobacco, two Pence, the same. Sarsaparilla,
three pence, the same; Ivory, the same. All sorts of Dye Wood, three half pence
per Hundred weight, exported only. Wool and Cotton Wool, three pence, the same.
Dry Hides, (...) and Deer Skins, two pence, the same. Butter, three pence, the
same* Cheese, the same; Starch, the same* both exported and imported* also
Tallow, three pence, exported; Ginger* the same; Hops, the same, Day ^ish, two
pence, the same; Brimstone, two pence, the same, imported* Rozen, two pence the
same, exported only. Cordage three pence, the same; Grocery Ware, two pence,
the same; Bread, one penny, the same; Flower, the same; Pitch, two pence, the
same. And that all broken Weights shall pay in proportion accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all other species
of Goods, Wares and Merchandises that are not herein named and expressed, and
shall voluntarily be brought by any Person or Persons within the same, to be
weighed, as aforesaid, shall for such their weighing pay after the Rates and
Duties hereby established, and not otherwise.

And for the better collecting and paying the Rates and Duties aforesaid, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Person or Persons
that from and after the time aforesaid, That shall import to or export from
this City, or shall buy, sell, barter or exchange within the same, any the
Goods, Wares and Merchandises aforementioned, enumerated and expressed,
without bringing the same unto their Majesty's Beam, aforesaid, and there
answer and pay the Rates and Duties hereby established* as aforesaid, shall
then and for so often as he or they shall neglect or refuse to do the same, pay
or forfeit unto their said Majesty's the sum of two Shillings and six Pence,
current Money aforesaid, for each Hundred weight of such Goods, Wares and
Merchandises, as aforesaid, that shall be denied or refused to be weighed as
aforesaid, to be recovered before any Justice of the Peace within the said
City, or in any Court within the same, by Bill, Plaint or Information, one half
unto their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, and the other half to the
Informer or Prosecutor, who shall sue for the same, together with costs of
Prosecution. Provided always, That the Regulation, nor any part thereof, shall
not extend to compel any Freeholder within this Province to bring his Goods
to be weighed, who shall swear upon the holy Evangelist, bona fidae, That all
such Goods exported or imported* are his own proper Estate, and that no other
Person has d^restly or indirectly any Interest therein, but that they are
exported or imported upon his own proper Account and ^^sco. Which if such a
Person shall be found falsely to swear in the Premises, shall be prosecuted
against as one convict of wilful Perjury. And that the Collector, or such
Person as he shall appoint, shall be empowered to administer such an Oath.

Acts passed in the sixth Sessions of General Assembly, begun the 12th of
September, 1693.
An Act for settling a Ministry and raising a M^i^tenance for them in the City
of New York, County of Richmond, Westchester and Queens County.
WHereas Profaneness and Liscentiousness has of la^e overspread this
Province for want of a settled Ministry throughout the same, To the end the
same may be removed, and the Ordinances of God daily administered, Be it Enacted
by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly,
and by the Authority of the same. That in each of the respective Cities and
Counties hereafter mentioned (...) expressed, there shall be called, inducted
and established a good sufficien^ Protestant Minister, to officiate and have
the care of Souls, within one year next and after the publication hereof, That
is to say, In the City of New York One, in the County of Richmond one, in the
County of Westchester two, one to have the care of Westchester, Eastchester,
Yeanches and the Manner of Pellham, the other to have the care of Rye,
Manereneck and Bedford; in Queens County two, one to have the care of Jamaica,
and the adjacent Towns and Farms, the other to have the care of H^mpsted, and
the next adjacent Towns and Farms.

And for their respective Encouragement, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That there shall be annually and once in every Year in every of the
respective Cities and Counties aforesaid, assessed, levied, collected and paid
for the maintenance of each of their respective Ministers the respective sums
hereafter mentioned, that is to say, For the City and County of New York, One
Hundred Pounds; for the two Precincts of Westchester, one hundred Pounds, to
each fifty Pound, to be paid in Country Produce at Money price. For the County
of Richmond forty Pound, in Country Produce at Money price. And for the two
Precincts of Queens County one hundred and twenty Pounds, to each sixty Pound,
in Country Produce at Money price.

And for the more orderly raising the respective Maintenances for the Ministers
aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
respective Justices of every City and County aforesaid; or any two of them,
shall every year issue out their Warrants to the Constables, to summon the
Freeholders of every City, County and Precinct aforesaid, together on the 2d
Tuesday in January, for the choosing of ten Vestry-men and two Churchwardens,
and the said Justices and Vestry men or major part of them, are hereby
empowered, within ten days after the said day, or any day after, as to them
shall seem convenient, to lay a reasonable Tax on the said respective Cities,
County, Parish or Precinct, for the Maintenance of the Minister and Poor of
their respective places. And if they shall neglect to issue their Warrants, so
as the Election be not made that day, they shall respectively forfeit five
Pound current Money of this Province. And in case the said Freeholders duly
summoned, as aforesaid, shall not appear, or appearing do not choose the said
ten Vestry-men and to Churchwardens, that then in their default, the said
Justices shall within ten days after the said second Tuesday, or in any day
after, as to them shall seem convenient, lay the said reasonable Tax on the
said respective places, for the respective Maintenances aforesaid. And if the
said justices and Vestry-men shall neglect their Duty herein, they shall
respectively forfeit five Pound current Money aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such of the Justice
and Vestry-men that shall not be present at the time appointed, to make the
(...) Tax* and thereof be convicted, by a Certificate under the hands of such
as do appear, and have no sufficient Excuse for the same* shall respectively
forfeit five Pound current Money aforesaid. And a Roll of the said Tax, so
made, shall be delivered into the hands of the respective Constables of the
said Cities, Counties, Parishes, and Precin^s, with a Warrant signed by any two
Justices of the Peace, impowering him or them to levy the said Tax, and upon
refusal to distrain, and sell by public Outcry, and pay the same into the
hands of the Churchwardens, retaining to himself 12 d. per Pound, for levying
thereof. And if any Person shall refuse to pay what he is so assessed, and the
said Constables do strain for the same, all his Charges shall be paid him, with
such further allowance for his pains as the said Justices or any of them shall
judge reasonable. And if the said Justice or Justices shall neglect to issue
the said Warrant, he or they respectively shall forfeit five Pound current
Money aforesaid. And if the said Constables, or any of them fail of their Duty
herein* they shall respectively forfeit five Pound current Money aforesaid. And
the Churchwardens so chosen shall undertake the said Office, and receive and
keep a good Account of the Monyes or Goods levied by virtue of this Act, and
the same issue by order from the said Justices and Vestry-men of the respective
Cities, Counties, Precincts and Parishes aforesaid, for the purposes and
intents aforesaid, and not otherwise. And the Churchwardens shall, as often as
thereunto required, yield an Account unto the Justices and Vestry-men, of all
their Receipts and Disbursements. And in case the Churchwardens or any of them
shall neglect their Duty herein they shall respectively forfeit five Pound
current Money aforesaid, for every refusal.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Churchwardens in their respective Precincts aforesaid, shall by Warrant as
aforesaid, pay unto the respective Ministers the Maintenance aforesaid, by four
equal and quarterly Payments, under the Penalty and Forfeiture of five Pound
current Money aforesaid, for each neglect, refusal or default; The one half of
all which Forfeitures shall be disposed of to the use of the Poor in each
respective Precinct where the same does arise, and the other half to him or
them that shall prosecute the same.

Always provided, and Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all and every of the respective Ministers that shall be settled into the
respective Cities, Counties and Precincts aforesaid, shall be called to
officiate in their respective Precincts, by the respective Vestry-men and
Church Wardens aforesaid. And always provided, That all former agreements made
with Ministers throughout this Province, shall continue and remain in their
full force and virtue, any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any
ways notwithstanding.

An Act confirming and continuing unto their Majesty's the Revenue established
by an Act of General Assembly, made in the 4th Year of their Majesty's Reign,
for defroying the public and necessary Charges of the Government, five Years
longer than the Term therein mentioned.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly taking into their serious
Consideration the extraordinary Expense that the Defense of this Province
requires from their Majesty's, during this term of War, and being willing on
all occasions to give Demonstration of their constant Loyalty and dutiful
Affections unto their most Excellent Majesty's, do humbly pray and beseech that
the Revenue given and granted unto their most Sacred Majesty's for the term of
Two Years, by an Act of General Assembly made in the fourth Year of their
Majesty's Reign, Enituled, An Act for establishing a Revenue upon their
Majesty's for the defraying the Public and Necessary Charges of the
Government, may be continued and confirmed unto their most Excellent Majesty's
for the time and space of five Years next after the expiration of the Term of
the two Years aforesaid, and humbly beseech that it may be Enacted, And be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Rates, Duties and
Excise made payable upon Merchandises, Furs and Liquors, shall be levied,
collected and paid unto their most Excellent Majesty's for the term and space
of five years next and after the expiration of the term limited in the said
Act, to commence and be computed from the 18th day of May, which shall be in
the Year of our Lord 1695. according to such Rules and Directions, and under
such Pains and Forfeitures as is contained and enjoined by the said Act. And
the aforesaid Act, and every Article, Rule and Clause therein mentioned shall
be, abide and remain in full force and effect, to all intents and purposes,
during the said Term of five Years, and no longer, as fully and in like manner
as if the same were particularly and at large recited and set down in the Body
of this Act, any thing contained therein to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding.


