ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston the Twenty-ninth Day of May, 1695. and continued by
Adjournment until Wednesday the Fourteenth of August following.

Anno Regni Guilielmi, Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Septimo.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green and John Allen, Printers to the Governor
and Council. 1695.

Anno Regni Guilielmi, Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Septimo.
An Act, To Prevent the Supplying of His Majesty's Enemies.
W HEREAS the French of Port Royal and parts Adjacent in Accadie or Nova
Scotia, within this His Majesty's Province, that have Sworn Allegiance to the
Crown of England, have dependence on this Government, to be furnished with
necessary Supplies for their Subsistence; which is meet should be under due
Regulations: To the intent that on pretense thereof Supplies may not be
conveyed to His Majesty's Enemies, for their Support.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That from and after the Publication hereof during the continuance of the
present War with France; the French of Port Royal and parts Adjacent in Accadie
or Nova Scotia, be and hereby are Inhibited all intercourse of Trade to Boston
or other parts of this Province to the Westward of Monhegin: And that no other
Person or Persons whomsoever (without special License first had and obtained
from the Governor, with advice and consent of the Council) shall or may
presume to hold any Commerce or dealings with the said French or any others at
Port Royal, or in any of the parts Adjacent in Accadie or Nova Scotia; Or to
Convay any Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions unto them by Land or Water,
but by License as aforesaid; On Pain of Forfeiting One hundred Pounds; and all
such Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Provisions, together with the Vessel or
Vessels and all their Tacklin, Apparel and Furniture on which they shall be
laden, and all Peltry or other Goods traded for; one Moiety of said Forfeitures
to be unto His Majesty, for and toward the Support of the Government of the
Province, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall Inform or Sue for the
same, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record.

An Act, For the further Contituance of an Act passed at the first Session of
this present General Court or Assembly, Entitled, An Act, For the Continuation
of several Acts therein mentioned that are near Expiring.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the said Act of Continuation, and the several Acts therein mentioned,
That is to say, The Act for Encouraging the prosecution of the Indian Enemy and
Rebels, and preserving such as are Friends, with the several Proviso's and
Additions thereto in the said Act of Continuation expressed: As also the Act
Entitled, An Act, For the giving Succors and Assistance to the Neighboring
Provinces and Colonies, against His Majesty's Enemies; to Extend only unto
Succors and Assistance for the Province of New Hampshire, as need may require;
and the Governor with advice and consent of the Council shall direct and
order: Be and hereby are Revived and further continued to be, remain, and abide
in full force, unto the end of the next Session of the General Court or
Assembly, and no longer.

FINIS.

