ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.

Begun at Boston, the Thirtieth Day of MAY, 1694. And Continued by Adjournments
unto Tuesday the Sixteenth Day of October following: Being the Third Sessions.

Anno Regni GUILIELMI, et MARIAE, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Sexto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council. 1694.

Anno Regni Regis et Reginae, Gulielmi et Mariae, Sexto.
AN ACT, To Enable Towns, Villages and Proprietors in Common and undivided
Lands etc. to Sue and be Sued.
WHEREAS amongst other things in Their Majesty's Royal CHARTER, for
Incorporation of this Province; it is Contained and Granted in these words
following, that is to say, Provided nevertheless, And we do for Us Our Heirs
and Successors, Grant and Ordain that all and every such Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and other Estates, which any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic
or Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools, Do hold and Enjoy or
ought to have hold and Enjoy within the bounds aforesaid, by or under any Grant
or Estate, duly made or Granted by any General Court, formerly held or by
virtue of the Letters Patents herein before Recited, or by any other Lawful
Right or Title whatsoever; shall be by such Person (...) Persons Bodies
Politic and Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools, their
Respective Heirs Successors and Assigns for ever hereafter, held and enjoyed
according to the Purport and Intent of such Respective Grant, etc.

And whereas by one Act of the General Court, Entitled, An Act, for the
Regulating of Townships etc. Amongst other things, It is Enacted, That the
Proprietors of the undivided or Common Lands within each Town or Precinct in
this Province, where the same have been heretofore Stated, each ones Proportion
being known, shall and hereby are Empowered, to Order, Improve or divide in such
way and manner, as shall be concluded and agreed upon by the Major part of the
Interested. And the Proprietors of all undivided or Common Lands not Stated and
Proportioned as aforesaid, shall and hereby are Empowered to manage, Improve,
Divide and Dispose of the same, as has been or shall be concluded and agreed
on by the Major part of such Proprietors. Now for the better Enabling the said
Persons, Towns, Villages, Trustees for Schools and Proprietors aforesaid, to
manage, maintain, Recover and Defend their Grants, Lands, Interests, and
Estates.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That it shall and may be Lawful for all and every the said Persons, Persons,
Towns, Villages etc can Sue or defend in any Court.
Towns, Villages, Precincts, Trustees for Schools, and Proprietors in Common
and undivided Lands, Grants and other Estates or Interests whatsoever, To Sue,
Commence and Prosecute any Suits or Actions, in any Court proper to try the
same, either by themselves or their Agents or Attourneys, to be appointed by
such as have in them the Major part of the Interest: And in like manner to
Defend all such Suits and Actions as shall be Commenced against them or any of
them.

And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all and every Town, Village and Precinct, and Proprietors in Common or
undivided Lands, Towns, Villages etc. to chose Agents or Attournys to Prosecute
for, or defend them.
which shall have Occasion to Sue or shall be Sued, may at a Meeting of the
Inhabitants of such Town, Village or Precinct, or Proprietors aforesaid,
Orderly Warned, by the Major Vote of such as shall meet, chose Agents or
Attourneys to Prosecute for or defend them; such choice being Certified by the
Clerk of such Town, Village, Precinct or Proprietors, or by such other Person
as they shall appoint.

And when any Town, Village, Precinct or Proprietors aforesaid, shall be Sued,
it shall be sufficient notice to Oblige them to appear and Answer, How Summons
shall be given to oblige Towns etc. to answer.
to leave a Writ or Summons with their Clerk or other Principal Inhabitant or
Proprietor (briefly declaring the Case) fourteen days before the Sitting of
the Court, where the Case is to be heard; as in other Actions is Provided.

AN ACT, For Regulating Ferrys.
T O the intent that all Ferrys within this Province be duly kept, and
constantly attended for the ends whereunto they are Appointed.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That hence forth no Person or Persons whatsoever, shall attempt to keep a
Ferry (so as to demand pay) without special License first had and obtained from
their Majesty's Justices in Quarter Sessions of that County where such Ferry
is; Ferrymen to be Licensed by the Quarter Sessions.
who are hereby Empowered to grant Licenses to such Person as they shall judge
meet for that Service, in their respective Counties; and to state the Fare or
Prises of each Ferry, both for Man and Beast, according to the nature and
breadth of such River, or water they are to pass over; taking Bond of each
Ferryman, to give Send.
for the faithful discharge of his place (except such Ferrys as as are already
stated and settled, either by the Court or Towns to whom they appertain) And
all Ferry men are hereby enjoined to keep a good Boat or Boats in good repair,
suitable to the waters they are to Ferry over; and also to give ready and due
attendance on Passengers upon all Occasions, on penalty of Five Shillings, for
every default of non attendance; Penalties for non attendance and not keeping
good Boats.
and for want of a good Boat kept in good repair, to pay Five Pounds; the one
half to Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government; the
other half to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same, before a
Justice of the Peace or at the Quarter Sessions respectively, besides what
damage may accrue to any Person through the Ferry man's default.

And further it is Enacted,

That the General Post that is settled for Their Majesty's, Penalty for
delaying the Post.
and the Countries Service, be readily dispatched, and set over by all Ferrymen
where they shall come, without any delay. And if any Ferryman shall be
complained of and duly convicted before any Justice of the Peace, for delaying
any Post, and not forthwith Ferrying of him over, he shall Forfeit the Sum of
Twenty Shillings, unto Their Majesty's (...) and toward the support of the
Government,

And that Boats be constantly kept on either side of the water at Charlestown
Ferry, for the more speedy Transportation of Passengers, the Ferry men on each
side to have a separate Interest; and that the Ferry be not from hence forth
Leased out otherwise. (...)
And all the Members of the General Assembly shall be Ferrage free at all
Ferrys in their passing to and from the Assembly, and shall be Transported
without any unnecssary delay, on pain of Forfeiting Twenty Shillings as
abovesaid.

AN ACT For granting a Township within the County of Bristol, to be called
Attleborough.
W HEREAS there is a certain Tract of Land Commonly called by the name of the
North Purchase lying within the County of Bristol, containing in Length about
Ten Milles from Patucket River to the Bounds of Tanuton, and extending about
Eight Miles in Breadth from the Line or Boundary betwixt the two late Colonies
of Massachusetts and Plymouth, to the Bounds of the Town of Rehoboth; being a
Convenient Tract for a Township, and more than Thirty Familyes already Settled
thereupon.

For the better Encouragement and Settlement of the said Plantation.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That henceforth the said, Tract of Land as above described, and Bounded by
the Townships of Taunton and Rehoboth (no ways to entrench upon either of their
Rights) be and shall be a Township, and called by the name of Attleborough; and
shall have and enjoy all such Immunities, Privileges and Powers, as generally
other Towns within this Province have and do by Law Enjoy. Providedthat it be
not in Prejudice of any former Grant. Provided also that the Inhabitants of
said Place do continue under the Power and directions of the Select men,
Assessors and Constables of Rehoboth (whereto they were formerly annexed) as
well referring unto any Assessments and Arrears thereof, as all other things
proper to the duty of Select men, Assessors and Constables respectively, until
they are Supplied with such Officers among themselves, according to the
directions in the Law is that case made and Provided.

AN ACT In further Addition to the Act for Establishing of Judicatories and
Courts of Justice within this Province.
W HEREAS by the said Act amongst other things therein Contained, It is
granted, That it shall be in the Liberty of the party Cast in any of the
Inferior Courts to Appeal from the Verdict and Judgment there given unto the
next Superior Court, to be held within or for the same County, the Case there
to be tried to a final Issue; Upon Experience of sundry Inconveniences arising
by so Conclusive a Determination.

It is Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the authority of the same,

That it shall and may be Lawful, Review of Appeal at the Superior Court.
for either party Appellant or Defendant, That knee the making of the said Act,
has been or at any time hereafter shall be agrieved by any Verdict and
Judgment given in any Superior Court of Judicature within this Province,
within the space of Eighteen Months next after such Judgment given and not
afterward, to Review such Action by Process out of the same Court, once and no
more, the case upon such Action of Review, to be finally issued and determined.
Saving always a right of Appeal unto Their Majesty's in Council, in such cases
only as the Law has Provided for. Twenty days allowed to bring a writ of Error.
And whereas by the said Act the bringing of a Writ of Error is limited to Ten
days after Judgment given; Be it Enacted, That it shall be allowable for any
party in pursuance of said Act, to bring his What of Error at any time within
the space of Twenty days next after such Judgment given, any Law or usage to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That Attournys Fees to be allowed at the Superior Court of Judicature shall
be Twelve Shillings, Attournys Fees.
and at the Interfiour Court (...), and no more; and but one Attourny to be
paid for in any (...) and not any allowance to an Attourny in any case before a
Justice of the Peace. And that the Fee for a Writ in any case to be Tried
before a Justice of the Peace shall be One Shilling, and for Serving of said
Writ One Shilling and no more, Justices Fee for a Writ etc.
any Law usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT For Payment of the Province Debts.
W HEREAS this Province is indebted to sundry Persons Considerable Sums of
Money taken up upon Loan at Interest: For the Payment and Discharge of which
Debts, and to no other end, until the (...) be fully satisfied. We the
Representatives of Their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, in General Court Assembled, Do grant unto Their most Excellent
Majesty's, to the end before mentioned, A Rate or Tax of Four Thousand eight
hundred and Forty one Pounds Ten Shillings in Money.

And be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General
Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the said Sum of Four Thousand eight hundred and Forty one Pounds Ten
Shillings, be Proportioned upon the several Towns and Precincts within this
Province, in manner following. That is to say,

In the County of Suffolk.
l. s. d. Boston, Nine hundred and nineteen Pounds. 919 00 00 Roxbury, Eighty
seven Pounds. 87 00 00 Dorchester, One hundred Twenty four Pounds. 124 00 00
Milton, Forty four Pounds. 44 00 00 Brantrey, Seventy Pounds. 70 00 00
Weymouth, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Hingham, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Dedham, Sixty
four Pounds. 64 00 00 Medfield, Thirty six Pounds. 36 00 00 Wrentham, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 Mendon, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Hull, Twenty one Pounds Ten
Shillings. 21 10 00 In the County of Essex.
Salem, One hundred and Ninety Pounds. 190 00 00 Ipswich, Two hundred thirty
three Pounds. 233 00 00 Newbury, One hundred sixty one Pounds. 161 00 00
Salisbury, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Almsbury, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00
Haverhill, Forty three Pounds. 43 00 00 Andover, Forty eight Pounds. 48 00 00
Bradford, Eighteen Pounds 18 00 00 Bexford, Twenty four Pounds. 24 00 00
Topsfield, Forty Pounds. 40 00 00 Marblehead, Ninety two Pounds. 92 00 00 Lyan,
Ninety two Pounds. 92 00 00 Wenham, Thirty six Pounds. 36 00 00 Beverly, Sixty
seven Pounds. 67 00 00 Gloucester Forty Pounds. 40 00 00 Manchester, Ten Pounds.
10 00 00 Rowley, Fifty five Pounds. 55 00 00 In the County of Middlesex.
Charlestown, One hundred and sixty Pounds. 160 00 00 Watertown, One hundred
and twenty Pounds. 120 00 00 Cambridge, Ninety five Pounds. 95 00 00 Concord,
Sixty eight Pounds. 68 00 00 Woburn, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 00 Marlberow, Forty
one Pounds. 41 00 00 Groton, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Reading, Fifty three
Pounds. 53 00 00 Chelmsford, Forty six Pounds. 46 00 00 Sudbury, Fifty seven
Pounds. 57 00 00 Malden, Forty eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Medford, Seventeen
Pounds. 17 00 00 Billerica, Thirty four Pounds. 34 00 00 Lancaster, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 Stow, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Newtown, Forty seven Pounds. 47 00
00 Sherbourn, Twenty eight Pounds. 28 00 00 In the County of Hampshire.
Springfield, Sixty two Pounds. 62 00 00 Northempton Fifty eight Pounds. 58 00
00 Had^^^ Thirty six Pounds. 36 00 00 Hatfield, Thirty two Pounds. 32 00 00
Southfield, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Westfield, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Enfield,
Three Pounds. 3 00 00 In the County of Plymouth.
Plymouth, Fifty five Pounds. 55 00 00 Situate, Eighty two Pounds. 82 00 00
Duxbury, Thirty three Pounds. 33 00 00 Marshfield, Forty five Pounds 45 00 00
Bridgwater, Thirty five Pounds. 35 00 00 Middleborough, Sixteen Pounds. 16 00
00 In the County of Barnstable
Barnstable, Sixty four Pounds. 64 00 00 Yarmouth, Forty two Pounds. 42 00 00
Eastham Forty four Pounds. 44 00 00 Sandwich, Fifty two Pounds. 52 00 00
Falmouth, Eleven Pounds. 11 00 00 Manama^t, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Rochester,
Eleven Pounds. 11 00 00 Harwich, Sixteen Pounds. 16 00 00 In the County of
Bristol.
Bristol, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Taunton, Sixty seven Pounds. 67 00 00
Dartmouth, Fifty two Pounds. 52 00 00 Freetown, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00
Rehobeth, Forty four Pounds. 44 00 00 Swansey, Forty four Pounds. 44 00 00
Little Compton, Twenty seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Tiverton, Fourteen Pounds. 14 00
00 Attleborough. Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 In the County of York.
York, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Wells, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Kittery, Twelve Pounds.
12 00 00 Isles of Sholes, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 On Marthas Vineyard.
Edgar Town, Twenty three Pounds. 23 00 00 Tisbury, Sixteen Pounds. 16 00 00
Chilmark, Sixteen Pounds. 16 00 00 Nantucket, Forty five Pounds. 45 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer do send forth his Warrants unto the Select-men or Assessors
of each Town and Precinct aforesaid, Treasurer to (...) the last day of March.
at or before the last day of March next, requiring them to Assess the
aforementioned Sum set and proportioned to such Town or Precinct respectively,
upon the Polls and Estate within the same, in manner following, That is to say,
Two Shillings on each Poll qualified as in a former Act of this Court made and
Passed at their Sessions, begun and held the Thirtieth day of May last,
Entitled, An Act, For granting unto Their Majesty's a Tax of Twelve Pence a
Poll, and One Penny on the Pound for Estates; and the remaining part to
complete their said proportion upon all Ratable Estate without any Exception,
according to the Valuation in said Act mentioned, (...)
and to transmit and cause to be delivered unto the Treasurer the Lists of
their Assessment so made and perfected, at or before the Sixteenth day of April
following, together with the names of the Constables or Collectors of such Town
or Place for that year. And the Treasurer is hereby further empowered and
Ordered to issue out his Warrants, (...)
directed unto the Constables or Collectors of the several Towns and Precincts
aforesaid, requiring them to Collect and gather the said Assessment, and pay in
the same unto himself his Successor or order, at or before the last day of June
thence next ensuing, by which time they are to make up and issue their Accounts
of the same.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Treasurer, Select-men or Assessors, Constables and Collectors in the
several Towns and Precincts, (...) power.
be and hereby are respectively Authorized and Empowered to take, use, and
exercise the same methods, directions and powers contained in the several
Sections and Paragraphs, in the before recited Act, for the Levying Collecting
and gathering of this present Tax or Assessment, Penalty.
and shall be under the same Obligation to duty and suffer the forfeitures and
penalties in case of default, as is thereto respectively annexed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Treasurer be and hereby is Empowered to issue forth and pay a certain
number of the Bills of Credit of the late Colony of the Massachusetts.
Treasurer is (...) Bills of Credit.
Endorst in manner as is directed by the Act Entitled, An Act, For a present
supply of the Treasury, To the Sum of Three Thousand Pounds and no more,
toward the payment of said Debts; which bills, shall pass out of the Treasury
at the value therein expressed. The Treasurer to have Credit in his Account
after the rate of Five Pounds Per Cent, more for such Sum in said Bills as he
shall so issue forth as aforesaid, having been received into the Treasury at
that value; and the said hills shall be taken and accepted in all Public
payments with the advance of Twelve Pence on the Pound, over and above the Sum
therein expressed. And this present Tax is hereby granted as a Fund for the
repayment of all such Sums in said Bills as shall be in the hands of particular
Persons, in current Money of this Province.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That in all Towns or Precincts where there has been an Omission or neglect of
Assessing their proportion to any Public Tax heretofore granted as by any
former Act of this Court they were enjoined. Injuction upon Select men,
Assessors and Constabl^ etc. that have not attended their duty.
The Select men or Assessors of such Town or Precinct that then were or the
Major part of them, shall forthwith attend their duty in that respect, and make
the said Tax or Assessment, and commit the same unto the Constables or
Collectors that then were, on pain of Forfeiting unto Their Majesty's the Sum
of Twenty Pounds, by each Person that shall be duly Convicted of neglect or
refusal, upon complaint or Information of the Treasurer unto the Court of
General sessions of the Peach held for that County: and such Constables or
Collectors as then were shall be and hereby are Obliged to Collect and gather
in the same Tax or Assessment, the Treasurer to Enable and Empower them mereto
by his Warrant, containing the usual Powers and Authorities, and shall have and
receive as a gratification for their trouble and Service therein, Six Pence on
the Pound for all Sums which they shall so Collect, to be paid unto them, or
recovered by Action from the Select men or Assessors, who formerly omitted or
neglected their duty.

And where any Constables or Collectors in any Town are dead before their
perfecting of the Collection of any Public Assessment, Provision where
Constables or Collectors are dead.
the Select men of such Town shall procure and appoint at the Towns charge,
some other fit Person or Persons to perfect the same Collection, and present
their names unto the Treasurer, who is hereby Authorized to Enable and Empower
them thereto by granting them a Warrant.

FINIS.

