TO Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and GOVERNOR In CHIEF Of the
Province of New York, Province of Pennsilvania, Country of New Castle, and the
Territories and Tracts of Land thereon depending, in AMERICA, And Vice Admiral
of the same.
The Address of some of the Peaceable and well Affected Freeholders and
Inhabitants of the Town and County of Philadelphia.
WE being deeply sensible of the KING and QUEEN's great Care and Concern for
our Safety and Preservation, by taking us under their immediate Care and
Government, do cheerfully embrace the same with great Thankfulness* and in
Sincerity of our Hearts do declare, That we shall be ready to support and
maintain the same, as much as in us lies (in all things consistent with the
Persuasion of our tender Consciences) according to our Duty.

Since thy Arrival in America (Worthy Governor) we have often heard a very
great and good Character of thee, both for thy Exemplary Life and Conversation,
(...) Management in composing and putting an end to the Fewds and Disorders
that were amongst the People in NEW YORK before thy Arrival there; the which
excellent Character being abundantly Confirmed by thy D^screet Behavior and
Deportment since thy coming amongst us, gives us great Hope, That the
Confusions and Disorders, under which we have labored for some time past, will
by means of thy Administration under God, be stopped and extinguished, That so we
may live in Peace and Safety, and in the Fear of God, paying that Duty to our
Rulers and Magistrates, which becomes True Christians.

And since, according to the King and Queens Power given thee, thou have made
choice of a Lieutenant Governor to Rule over us in thy Absence, we cannot
(without taking to our selves the Odium of Ingratitude), forbear, to express
our Humble and Hearty Thanks to thee, That th^^ have not put a Stranger to
Govern us, but our Worthy Friend WILLIAM MARKHAM, a Person who has not only
lived many (...) amongst us, but of whose Civility and Moderation toward all
(...) of People, we have had good and long Experience, which has begot in us
toward him, a very great and worthy Esteem. And as we have great cause to
acknowledge thy good Affection toward us therein, and thy tender Regard to our
Peace and Liberty, so we will endeavor, by the help of God, to dem^^n our
selves toward the King and Queens Laws and Government, as becomes our Duty,
as true Christian Subjects.

Signed by Us, in behalf of Our Selves, and Others,
Thomas Paschall, Griffith Jones, Charles Pickering, John Duploveys, James
Poulter, Andrew Robeson, Alexan^ (...), Henry Furnis. John (...), Henry
Johnston, Thomas Hill, John Rodman, Charles Sanders, Joseph Pidgeon, Joseph
Wille^^, Patrick Robinson, Nicolas Rid^^^^, John Steph^^s, John Wait^, James
Frap^ll, William Paschall, Thomas Jenner, Joseph Knight, Thomas James, Robert
Turner, Phillip England, Thomas ^ress, Joseph Yard, John Brooks, Francis Cook,
O^sar Ghife^n, Henry Flower, (...) Rowland, Richard Wall, Jeremiah Elfreth,
Robert ^ret, Thomas Peart, Nath. Thornton, Ralph Ward, Anthony Tailor, John
Furnis, Samuel Griffith, Simercy Adams, Jeremiah Price, Edward Smoute, Robert
Adams, Edmund Dutton, Joseph Cross, Herbert Corrie, Daniel Cook, John M^comb,
Thomas Willard, William Say, Benjamin Whitehead, Thomas Harding, Richard
Tucker, D^niel Jones, Richard Worthington, Thomas Dennis, Henry Laking, Teniss
Lines, Benjamin Thomas, Adam Butcher, John Fisher, Abraham Hooper, Joseph
Brown, John Fellows, Hermen D^och, Jeremiah Osbourn, James Standfield, William
Lee, William Snead, William Dyre, Thomas Herris, William Bevon, Richard Cocke^,
Richard Barnes, John Haywood, Thomas Grove, John Herris, Casper Carstense,
Mones Cock, John Test, Joseph Ambl^r, Samuel Atkins, Martin Hoult, William
Salsberry, Michael Nellson, Samuel Meals, William Crewse, Francis Rawle,
Thomas Marriet, Francis Jones, Samuel Hoult, William Bradford, Thomas Wait,
Richard Roberts, John Southworth, Theodor Roberts, Daniel van Beek, John
Morrey, Joshua Carpeenter, Abraham Carpenter, John Claypoole, John Townsend,
Edward Farmer, Thomas Ahelleys, Thomas Makin, Mouns Jones, Matthew Clemison,
John Ch^^^^er, Isaac Warner, Thomas Cli^ford, Edward Do^^y.


FINIS.

