ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.

Begun at Boston, the Eighth Day of November, 1693. And Continued by
Adjournment unto Wednesday the Fourteenth Day of February following: Being the
Second Sessions.

Anno Regni Guilielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Sexto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and Sold by Samuel Phillips. 1694.

Anno Regni Regis et Reginae, GULIELMI et MARIAE, Sexto.
AN ACT, For the better Rule and Government of the Indians in their several
Places and Plantations.
TO the intent that the Indians may be forwarded in Civility and Christianity,
and that Drunkenness and other Vices be the more effectually Suppressed amongst
them.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority of the same,

That His Excellency the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the
Council, may and is hereby empowered to appoint and Commissionate one or more
discreet Persons within several parts of this Province, Commissioners to be
appointed in several parts to have the more particular care and Government of
the Indians
to have the inspection and more particular care and Government of the Indians
in their respective Plantations; and to have, use and Exercise the power of a
Justice of the Peace over them in all matters Civil and Criminal, as well for
the hearing and determining of Pleas betwixt party and party, and to award
Execution thereon, as for the Examining, hearing and punishing of Criminal
Offenses according to the Acts and Laws of the Province, so far as the power of
a Justice of Peace does extend. As also to nominate and appoint Constables and
other proper and necessary Officers amongst them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no Person or Persons whomsoever, shall directly or indirectly Sell,
Truck, Barter, or give to any Indian, any Strong Beer, Ale, Cider, Penalty for
selling strong drink to be Indians.
Perry, Wine, Rhum, Brandy or other Strong Liquors, by what name or names
soever called or known, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Forty Shillings for
every Pint, and proportionably for any greater or lesser quantity so Sold,
Truckt, Bartered, given or delivered to any Indian, directly or indirectly as
aforesaid, upon Conviction thereof before a Justice of the Peace, where the
penalty does not exceed Forty Shillings: And if it exceed that Sum, at the
Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the same County where the offense is
committed: One Moiety of all such Forfeitures to be unto Their Majesty's for
and toward the support of the Government, and the other Moiety to him or them
that shall inform and prosecute the same by Bill, Plaint, or Information. And
if the offender be unable or shall not forthwith pay and satisfy the said
Penalty or Forfeiture, then to be committed to the Goal of the County; there to
remain until he pay and satisfy the same, or suffer two Months imprisonment.

Provided this Act shall not be intended or extend to restrain any Act of
Charity for relieving any Indian (Bona fide) in any sudden Exigent of Faintness
or Sickness, not to exceed one or two Drams; or by Prescription of some
Physician in writing, or by the allowance of a Justice of Peace.

And for the better discovery of such ill disposed Persons, who through
greediness of filthy Lucre, shall privately Sell or deliver Strong Liquors or
other Strong Drink, to any Indian or Indians ( of which it is difficult to
obtain positive Evidence other than the Accusation of such Indian or Indians)
And to the intent that Murders and other outrages frequently occasioned thereby
may be prevented.

It is Ordained and Enacted,

That the Accusation and Affirmation of any Indian, with other concurring
circumstances amounting to an high Presumption, Indian accusation with
concurring circumstances, to amount to a conviction, unless etc
in the discretion of the Court or Justices, who have cognizance of the Case
(the Accuser and Accused being brought face to face at the time of Trial) shall
be accounted and held to be a legal Conviction of the Person so accused of
giving, Selling, or delivering Wine, Rhum, or any other Strong Drink or
Liquors, to such Indian; Unless the party accused shall acquit him or her self
thereof upon Oath; which the Court or Justice respectively, are hereby empowered
to require, and Administer unto the Person accused, in form following: That is
to say.

YOU A. B. do Swear, That neither your self nor any other by your order,
general or particular, assent, privity, knowledge or allowance, directly or
indirectly, Form of the Oath.
did give, Sell or deliver any Wine, Cider, Rhum, or other Strong Liquors or
Drink, by what name or names soever called or known, unto the Indian by whom
and whereof you are now accused. So help you God.

And further it is Enacted,

Strong drink found with Indians, to be Seized.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Person or Persons, to Seize any
Wine, Strong Liquors or Cider, which he or they may find in the Custody of any
Indian, not obtained by allowance as aforesaid, (other than Cider made of Fruit
of their own growth) and to deliver the same unto the Constable, or one or more
of the Select men of the Town, where the same shall be Seized, to and for the
use of the poor of such Town: And to apprehend such Indian, and to cause him or
her to be conveyed before the next Justice of the Peace, to be Examined where,
and of whom they had such Strong Drink.

And every Indian convicted of Drunkenness shall forfeit and pay unto the use
of the poor of the Town or place where such offense is committed, the Sum of
Five Shillings, Penalty for Indians convicted of drunkenness.
or else be openly Whipped by the Constable of such Town or place, or some
other that he shall procure* not exceeding Ten Lashes, as the Justice of Peace
before whom such Conviction is, shall determine.

AN ACT For the Relief of Idiots and Distracted Persons.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That when and so often as it shall happen any Person to be naturally wanting
of understanding, so as to be incapable to provide for him or her self; Or by
the Providence of God, Select men or overseers of the poor to make necessary
Provision for the Relief of Idiots and distracted persons.
shall fall into Distraction and become Non compos mentis; and no Relations
appear that will undertake the care of providing for them; Or that stand in so
near a degree as that by Law they may be compelled thereto: In every such case
the Select men or overseers of the poor of the Town or Peculiar where such
Person was born, or is by Law an Inhabitant, Be and hereby are Empowered and
Enjoined to take effectual care and make necessary Provision for the Rielef,
support, and safety of such Impotent or Distracted Person, at the charge of the
Town or place whereto he or She of right belongs; If the party has not Estate
of his or her own, the incomes whereof may be sufficient to defray the same:
And the Justices of the Peace within the same County, at their General Sessions
may Order and dispose the Estate of such Impotent or Distracted Person to the
best improvement and advantage toward his or her support; Court of quarter
Sessions to order the Estate of such persons for improvement.
as also the Person to any proper work or Service he or She may be capable to
be employed in, at the discretion of the Select men or overseers of the poor.
And where the Estate of any such Person consists of Houseing or Land, in every
such case the Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature, upon Application
to them made, may and hereby are Empowered to License and Authorize the Select
men or overseers of the Town or place whereto such Person belongs; or such
others as the said Justices shall think fit, to make Sale of such Houseing or
Land; the produce thereof upon Sale to be secured, improved, The Justices of
the Superior Court to License the Sale of Houseing or Land of distracted
persons, in case.
and employed to and for the use, relief, and safety of such Impotent or
Distracted Person (as the said Justices shall direct) as long as such Person
shall live, or until he or She be restored to be of sound mind. And the
overplus (if any be) to and for the use of the next and right Heirs of such
party.

And the like power and Authority is hereby granted unto the Justices of the
Superior Court with reference to any Person or Persons now under Distraction
or Non compos mentis, as well for the satisfying of the charges already past,
as for what may be future, for the Support, Relief, and safety of any such
Person.

AN ACT, To Restrain the Exportation of Raw-Hides and Skins out of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, and for the better Preservation and Increase of Deer
in the said Province.
WHEREAS the Exportation of Raw-Hides and Skins out of this Province into
Holland, and diverse other Places, has been found to be very much to the
Prejudice of this Province.

For Redress whereof. Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That from and after the first day of July now next ensuing, no Person or
Persons whatsoever, shall Carry, Convey, or Transport out of this Province, or
Ship or Load on board any Vessel whatsoever with intent to Carry, Convey, or
Transport out of this Province, the Skins, or Hides, Raw-hides or Skins, about
to be transported, to be forfeited.
Untanned, or Undressed, of any Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow, Heifer, or Calfe, or of
any Buck, Do, or Fawn, under the Penalty of the forfeiture and loss, of all
such Raw-Hides, and Skins, as shall be so Transported, or Laden with intent to
be Transported as aforesaid: the one Moiety thereof to Their Majesty's to be
employed toward the support of the Government of this Their Majesty's
Province, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall Seize, or shall inform
and sue for the same, in any Court of Record, within this Province, by Bill,
Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be Lawful for any Person, or Persons whatsoever, Hides
or Skins imported, may be exported, Oath being first made.
to Ship, Load, or Transport out of this Province any Hides, or Skins, which
have been imported into this Province, from any other Province or place
whatsoever, upon Oath first made before the Naval Officer that the said Hides,
or Skins, were Imported into this Province, from some other Province or Place.

And Whereas the Killing of Deer at unseasonable times of the Year, has been
found very much to the Prejudice of this Province, great numbers thereof having
been Hunted and Destroyed in deep Snows when they are very Poor, and bigg with
Young, the Flesh and Skins of very little value, and the Increase thereof
greatly hindered.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person or Persons whatsoever within this Province, from and after
the first day of January One thousand Six hundred ninety and four, No Deer to
to be killed from the first of January to the first of July.
till the first day of July One thousand Six hundred ninety and five, and so
from the first day of January to the first day of July following, annually for
ever hereafter, shall any ways whatsoever, Kill any Buck, Do, or Fawn, such
Person or Persons shall forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings for the first
offense, Three Pounds for the second offense, and Five Pounds for the third
offense, and so for every offense after; One Moiety thereof unto Their
Majesty's to be employed toward the support of the Government of this Their
Majesty's Province; and the other Moiety to him or them, that shall inform and
sue for the same in any Court of Record.

And if any Person or Persons, offending as aforesaid, shall not have
wherewithal to pay their Fines, Persons not able to pay the Fine, to be set on
work.
they shall for the first offense work Twenty days, for the second Thirty, and
for the third offense Fifty days; as shall be directed by the Justices before
whom the cause shall be heard and determined; to be employed for the uses
before mentioned.

And if any Venison, Skin or Skins of any Buck, Do, or Fawn, newly Killed,
shall at any time in any of the aforesaid Months wherein they are by this Act,
Prohibited to be Killed, be found with or in possession of any Person or
Persons whatsoever, such Person or Persons shall be held and accounted in the
Law, to be guilty of Killing Deer contrary to the intent of this Act, as fully
as if it were proved against such Person or Persons by sufficient witness Viva
voce, except such Person or Persons, do bring forth, and make proof, who was
the Person, or who were the Persons that Killed the same.

Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, That any Person or Persons
whatsoever, who shall Keep, or Breed, any Deer, Tame, or in any Park, or
Island, it shall and may be lawful for any such Person or Persons, at any time,
to Kill any Buck, Do, or Fawn, so Kept or Bred: And also any Person or Persons
whatsoever to the Eastward of Piscataqua River, have free liberty of Hunting
as formerly, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT, Of Supplement and Addition to several Acts and Laws of this Province.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, it is Ordained and Enacted, In
Addition to the Act Entitled, AN ACT, for the Suppressing of Unlicensed
Houses, and the due Regulation of such as are, or shall be Licensed.

THAT all Innholders, Taverners, and common Victuallers, shall at all times be
furnished with suitable Provisions and Lodging for the Refreshment and
Entertainment of Strangers and Travelers, Innholders etc. to be provided for
the Entertainment of Travelers etc. and their horses.
Pasturing, Stable Room, Hay and Provender for Horses; on pain of being
deprived of their License; and no such Licensed Person shall Sell Oats for
more than One Penny the quart.

And that no Person who is or shall be Licensed to be an Inholder, Taverner,
common Victualler, or Retailer, shall suffer any Apprentice, Servant, or Negro,
to sit drinking in his or her House; or to have any manner of drink there, Not
to give Entertainment to Servants etc.
otherwise than by special Order or Allowance of their respective Masters: On
pain of forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings for every such offense.

Nor shall any such Licensed Person, suffer any Inhabitant of such Town where
he dwells, or coming thither from any other Town, to sit Drinking or Tippling in
his or her House, Nor to suffer Inhabitants to sit drinking or Tippling
or any of the dependences thereof; or to continue there above the space of one
Hour (other than Travelers, Persons upon business, or extraordinary Occasions)
On the like Penalty of Ten Shillings for every offense.

And every Person as aforesaid, who contrary to this Act shall continue in any
such House Tippling, or drinking or otherwise misordering him or her self or
above the space of one Hour (other than as aforesaid) shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Three Shillings and four pence, or be set in the Stocks not exceeding
four hours time.

That no Person Licensed as aforesaid, No person licensed may suffer drunkness
or Entertain guests on the Lords day.
shall suffer any Person to Drink to drunkenness or excess in his or her house;
nor shall suffer any Person as his or her guest to be and remain in such house
or any the dependances thereof on the Lords day (other than Strangers,
Travelers, or such as come thither for necessary Refreshment) on pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Five Shillings, for every offense in that kind.

All Fines and Forfeitures arising for any of the offenses before mentioned,
shall be, Fines etc how to be disposed
one Moiety thereof to the use of the poor of the Town where the offense is
committed, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and prosecute
the same (except where such offenses are presented by a Grand Jury, in such
case the whole forfeiture to be to the use of the Town) And every Justice of
the Peace within his Precincts is hereby Empowred to hear and determine
concerning any of the offenses aforesaid, and to restrain and commit the
offender to Prison, one Justice to hear and determine the offenses before
mentioned.
until he pay and satisfy the penalty or forfeiture, or otherwise by warrant
cause the same to be Levied by distress and Sale of the offenders goods.

And further it is Enacted,

That before any Person shall receive License to be an Innholder, common
Victualler, Taverner or Retailer, All persons taking License to become bound.
every such Person shall become bound by Recogniscance to Their Majesty's, in
the Sum of Ten Pounds, the Principal, and two Sureties in Five Pounds a piece;
before one or more of the Justices of the quarter Sessions. On Condition
following.

That is to say.

THE Condition of this Recogniscance is such, That whereas the above-bounden A.
B. is admitted and allowed by the Justices in quarter Sessions to keep a common
Inn, Ale house or Victualling house, Form of the Recogniscance.
and to use common Selling of Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider etc. or to Retail, Wine,
and Strong Liquors out of doors, for the space of one whole year next ensuing,
and no longer, in the now dwelling house of the said A. B. in (...) commonly
known by the Sign of (...) and no other. If therefore the said A. B. during the
time aforesaid, shall not permit, suffer or have any Playing at Dice, Cards,
Tables, Quoits, Loggets, Bowls, Shuffle-board, Ninepins, Billiards, or any
other unlawful Game or Games in his or her House, Yard, Garden, Backside, or
any of the dependances thereof; nor shall suffer to be or remain in his or her
house, any Person or Persons not being of his or her ordinary Household or
Family, on the Lords day or any part thereof contrary to Law; nor shall Sell
any Wine, Liquors, or other Strong drink, to any Apprentices, Servants, Indians
or Negros; nor shall suffer any Person or Persons to be there Tippling,
Drinking, or continue there after Nine of the Clock in the night time, or
otherwise contrary to Law: And in his or her said House, shall and do use,
maintain and uphold good Order and Rule, and do Endeavor the due Observance of
the Laws made for Regulation of such Houses. Then this present Recogniscance to
be void, or else to stand and abide in full force and Virtue.

For which Recogniscance, the party to whom such License is granted, shall pay
Two Shillings, Fe*
to be divided betwixt the Justice and the Clerk.

AND for the better Inspection of Licensed Houses, and the discovery of such
Persons as shall presume to Sell without License; Tythingmen their power and
duty.
The Select men in each Town respectively, shall take due care, That Tythingmen
be annually chosen at the general Meeting for choice of Town Officers, as is by
Law provided; who shall have power and whose duty it shall be carefully to
inspect all Licensed Houses and to Inform of all disorders or misdemeanors,
which they shall discover or know to be committed in them or any of them, to a
Justice of the Peace or the Sessions of the Peace within the same County; As
also such as shall Sell by Retail without License, and other disorders or
misdemeanors committed in any such House: And in like manner to present or
inform of all Idle and disorderly Persons, profane Cursers or Swearers,
Sabbath breakers and the like offenders; to the intent such offenses and
misdemeanors may be duly punished and discouraged. Every of which Tythingmen
shall be sworn before a Justice of the Peace, or at the Sessions of the Peace;
to the Faithful discharge of his Office, in manner following.

That is to say.

YOU A. B. being chosen a Tythingman within the Town of C. for one year next
ensuing and until another be chosen and Sworn in your stead, Do Swear that you
will faithfully Endeavor and intend the duty of your Office, Oath.
according to Law. So help you God.

Which Tythingmen shall have a black Staff of two foot long, Tip't at one end
with brass about three Inches, Staff.
as a badge of their Office.

And if any Person being duly chosen to the said Office, shall refuse to take
his Oath or Serve therein he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings
to the use of the poor of the Town whereto he belongs, Penalty for not serving.
upon conviction of such refusal before the Justice of the Peace or Sessions of
the Peace, where he is summoned to be Sworn; Certificate being produced under
the hand of the Town Clerk, that such Person was legally chosen to that Office.
And the said forfeiture to be levied by distress and Sale of such Persons
goods, by Warrant from a Justice of the Peace or Sessions of the Peace
respectively, and delivered to the Town Treasurer or overseers of the Poor for
the use aforesaid.

And all Tythingmen that shall Inform and Prosecute for the breach of any Penal
Act, shall have the benefit of such part of the forfeiture as does by Law
accrue to the Informer. Tythingmen allowed the benefit of Informers.
And all Persons prosecuted for breach of the Act relating to Excise and
Retailers without License, the penalty whereof for one offense exceeds not
Forty Shillings besides charges, may be convicted by two single Evidences upon
Oath though but one to one breach of said Act and both the breaches be within
one Month, the Person accused or complained of, not plainly and positively
denying the Fact.

And further it is Enacted,

That the Clerk's of the Peace respectively in each County by direction of the
Court, shall by Writ of Scire Facias, Clerk of the Peace to put in Suit
Recogniscances where default is made
put in S^i^ all such Recogniscances as shall be taken in Court, or before any
Justice of the Peace for such County, whereof default is made in not performing
the Condition of the same, and upon Execution awarded, the Sheriff of the
County is to levy the same, and to account for the Monyes or Estate received
thereon, as by Law he is Obliged.

And in Addition to the Act Entitled, An Act, For the Punishing of Criminal
Offenders.
IT is Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Justice of
the Peace according to the power given him by the said Act for the Enquiry and
Removing of Forceible Entryes and detainer; Laws of England to be attended in
removing forceable Entry etc.
do therein proceed according to the Rules and Methods in such case provided by
the Laws of England.

AND for the Preventing of Trespasses by ill disposed Persons, coming upon
other men's Lands, and cutting and carrying away the Wood and Timber thereof, to
the great hurt and damage of the Owner.

It is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty for cutting or carrying of
wood or Timber from another persons Land.


That if any Person or Persons hereafter, shall cut or carry off any manner of
Wood or Timber from another Person or Persons Land, or the Commons of an other
Town then which he does belong to, without the leave or License of the owner or
owners of the Land where such Wood or Timber shall be fallen, cut down or
carried off; every Person so offending, shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, for every Tree above one Foot over, and Ten Shillings for every Tree
under that bigness, to be recovered by due Process of Law: And if any Person
shall be convict of such offense the Second time besides the above damage to
the party; shall forfeit and pay to the use of the poor of such Town where the
offense is committed the Sum of Twenty Shillings, or suffer one Months
imprisonment. And every Justice of the Peace within the County, is hereby
Empowered to hear and determine all offenses against this Act, where the
forfeiture does not exceed Forty Shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person or Persons, shall presume either openly or privately to
receive or buy of or from any Indian Servant, Penalty for receiving or buying
of Negros etc.
or Negro, or Molatto Servant or Slave, any Goods, Wares, Merchandises, or
Provisions; and it appear such Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions to have
been Stolen: Every Person and Persons convicted of receiving or buying such
Stolen Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions, or any part or parcel thereof,
shall restore the same in Specie if not altered, and the value thereof over and
above, unto the party injured; Or double the value where the Goods or
Provisions so Stolen are made away. And such Indian, Negro or Molatto Servant
or Slave shall be openly Whiped, not exceeding Twenty Lashes.

And in Addition to the Act Entitled, An Act, For Enabling the Treasurer to
call in the Arrears of Public Rates, and discharging of Public Debts.
IT is further Enacted, That the Select men, Constables and Collectors in the
several Towns and Places within this Province, Constables etc. power about the
Arrears of Public Rates.
be and hereby are fully Empowered and Authorized to take and use the same
Methods and Directions in all Respects, for the Collecting of the Arrears of
all former Rates or Assessments, by making of distress or granting a Warrant of
Commitment in case no distress can be found; as is provided and directed by the
Act Entitled, An Act, For Regulating the former Assessment, and for granting
an Additional Supply of Money.

And in Addition to the Act Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of Town-ships;
Choice of Town Officers, and Setting forth their Power.
IT is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there be annually chosen in each Town at the time, and in the same
manner, as other Town Officers; Town Treasurer how to be chosen and his power.
a suitable Person for Town Treasurer, who shall have Power to demand and
receive all Debts and dues belonging or owing to such Town or the poor thereof;
and to Sue for and Recover the same by due Process of Law: And shall pay out
such Moneys according to Order from the Select men or overseers of the Poor, as
they shall receive Instructions from the Town; and such Treasurer shall make a
true account to the Town of all his Receipts and payments annually, when
required: to be under Oath.
Every such Treasurer to be Sworn before a Justice of the Peace to the faithful
discharge of his Trust, and shall have such allowance for his Service, as the
Town shall agree to.

In Addition to the Act Entitled, An Act, For Establishing of Judica^^^ies and
Courts of Justice within this Province.
IT appearing that the time Stated by Law for the holding of the Superior
Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and general Goal delivery, in some
Counties does fall inconvenient in respect of the season of the year, and
otherwise.

It is therefore Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and general Goal
delivery, for the County of Essex, to be holden at Ipswich, The time for
sitting of the Superior Court etc. at Ipswich, Kettery, Plymouth and Bristol.
be henceforth holden upon the third Tuesday in May annually: And for the
County of York, at Kettery upon Thursday in the week immediately preceding the
sitting of said Court at Ipswich: For the Counties of Plymouth, Barnstable and
Bristol, to be holden at Plymouth, upon(...) the second Tuesday in March
annually, and at Bristol upon the second Tuesday in September annually.

And it is further Enacted,

That the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal
delivery, for the County of Middlesex, Superior Court etc. for Middlesex, to
be held at Cambridge
be hence forth holden and kept at Cambridge, the Shire Town, upon the last
Tuesday in July, and on the last Tuesday in January annually, any Law usage or
custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the better Preventing of Fraud in Cord Wood.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Cord Wood brought into any Town and exposed to Sale, shall be four
foot long one with another, and when Corded up, Measure of Cord Wood.
shall measure Eight foot in length, and four foot in height. And all Fire Wood
(except Faggots) brought in Carts, shall be Sold after the same Rate as Wood is
Sold for by the Cord in proportion: And if it hold not out such part of a Cord
as it is Sold for, it shall be forfeited; one half thereof to the party
injured, who shall Inform and Prosecute for the same before a Justice of the
Peace within the same County, and the other half to the use of the poor of the
Town where it is exposed to Sale.

FINIS.

