ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.

Convened and Held at Boston, on Wednesday the Thirtieth of MAY. 1694. Anno
Regni Guilielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et
Hiberniae, Sexto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council. 1694.

Anno Regni Regis et Reginae, Gulielmi et Mariae, Sexto. ACTS and LAWS, Passed
by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, in New England etc.
AN ACT, For the Reviving and continuing of the Duties upon Goods, Impost,
Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, and the Acts for granting of the same.
B e it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor Council, and Representatives,
Convened in General Court, and it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority of
the same,

That the several Rates, Duties, Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping
mentioned to be granted unto Their Majesty's in and by one Act made and passed,
at the Session of the Great and General Court begun and held at Boston, the
Eight day of June, in the Fourth Year of the Reign of Their present Majesty's
KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY, Entitled An Act, For Impost, Excise and Tunnage
of Shiping, Be and hereby are continued and further granted unto Their said
Majesty's, to the ends and intents in the said Act mentioned from and after the
Twenty ninth day of June, Reviving and Continuation of the Duties upon Goods,
Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping unto the 29 th. day of June 1695. etc
in this present year, One Thousand Six hundred ninety four, unto the
Twenty-ninth day of June, in the year, One Thousand Six hundred ninety five,
and no longer. And the before recited Act, for Impost, Excise and Tunnage of
Shipping, and all and every the Branches, clauses, powers and parts thereof
(other than such as in and by this present Act shall be repealed, altered, or
in any other manner provided or directed) As also one other Act, Entitled, An
Additional Act, for Impost and Excise, made and passed in the Fourth Year of
Their said Majesty's Reign. And one other Act, Entitled, An Act, for the
better Collecting the Impost and Excise and preventing Frauds, made and passed
in the Fifth Year of Their said Majesty's Reign, and every the Branches,
Articles and Powers therein contained, be and are hereby Revived and continued
to abide and remain in full force and virtue, from and after the said
Twenty-ninth day of June, One Thousand Six hundred ninety four, unto the
aforesaid Twenty-ninth day of June, One Thousand Six hundred ninety five, and
not afterward, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, That the Clause or Branch in the first recited Act,
Repeal of the Governor and Councils power to appoint Commissioners and the
Allowance to such Commissioners.
for Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, relating to the Governor and
Council, their nominating and appointing Commissioners, to transact and manage
the same, and the allowance thereby granted to the Commissioners, shall and
from and after the said Twenty-ninth day of June, in this present year, One
Thousand Six hundred ninty four, be and hereby is repealed and discontinued.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there he one fit Person and no more nominated and appointed by this Court
as a Commissioner and Collector to have the general Inspection, care, and
management of the said Office of Impost Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, To
General Court to nominate and appoint one Commissioner and no more.
and whatsoever relates thereunto, who shall receive Commission for the same
from the Governor for the time being, with power to nominate appoint and
employ such and so many Officers under him, as the said Commissioner with the
advice of the Treasurer for the time being of this Their Majesty's Province,
shall think necessary for the well ordering and managing of the Affairs
relating to said Office and the better to prevent Frauds; And to grant them
warrants for Executing of the same; The Commissioner with advice of the
Treasurer to appoint under Officers and grant them warrants.
which Commissioner and all other under Officers before their entering upon the
Execution of their respective Offices, shall take the Oaths appointed to be
taking instead of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and repeat and
subscribe the Declaration before the Governor or Lieutenant Governor, or two
members of the Council: As also shall be Sworn to deal truly and faithfully in
the Execution of their respective Offices. And the said Commissioner shall have
and receive for his Service, Labor, Care and Expenses in this affayre,
Commissioners allowanc.
the Sum of the Hundred and Thirty Pounds, and no more: All other Officers to
be paid for their Service as the Commissioner with the Treasurer shall agree
upon reasonable Terms. The said Commissioner to keep fair Books of all entryes
and duties arising by virtue of this Act; which Books shall lie open at all
seasonable times, Commissioner to account with the Treasurer.
to the view and perusal of the Treasurer; and the said Commissioner shall also
account with the Treasurer upon Oath for all Collections and Payments at the
end of every three Months, the said Oath to be Administered before the Governor
and Council, and pay in all such Moneys, as shall be in his hands, as the
Treasurer shall demand it.

And for and toward the Reimbursing of the Charge of building and setting
forth of the Province Galley, and toward the defraying of the charge of
maintaining her abroad, to Cruise on this Coast, for the securing of Trade and
Navigation, and to no other end.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

(Oyer and above the Tunnage or Powder duty mentioned in the before recited Act
Entitled, An Act, For Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, to be paid for
all Ships or other Vessels arriving within this Province, whereof the Major
part of the Owners do not belong to the Province) That from and after the said
Twenty-ninth day of June in this present year, One Thousand Six hundred ninety
four, until the Twenty-ninth day of June, Duty upon Ships etc of Six pence per
Tun,
One thousand Six hundred ninety five, and no longer nor at any time
afterward; there shall be paid by the Master or Owners respectively of all
Merchant Ships or other Vessels whatsoever (Except Boats employed for the
fetching of Wood, Timber, Stones, or Fish to be made use of and spent in the
place only) that shall Sail from any Port, Haven, River or Creek within this
Province, the Sum of Six Pence Per. Tun, for every Tun such Ship or other
Vessel does measure according to her dimentions of length, breadth and depth
within board (the length to be reckoned from the inside of the Post,
Computation of Tunnage
unto the first rising of the Stem, computing after the usual manner of
multiplying and dividing the product by one hundred) for every time and so
often as such Ship or Venel shall go forth; which payment is to be made unto
the Commissioner for the time being for managing of the Impost Office, his
Deputy or Deputies, to be paid before Clearing.
who on receipt thereof shall give a Certificate that the said duty is paid,
and such Certificate to be produced and delivered unto the Naval Officer before
he grant any Clearing for such Ship or other Vessel.

Provided nevertheless, That no Coasting Vessels within this Province, or
Vessels arriving from the Province of New Hampshire, the Colonies of
Connecticut or Rhode Island, the Province of New York, or East or West Jearsy,
shall be obliged to pay the said Sum of Six pence Per. Tun more than twice in
the said year.

And for the better ascertaining of the Tunnage of any Ship or other Vessel
liable to the duty aforesaid, Masters or Owners to render an account under bind
of their Vessels dimentions before they begin to lade.
every Master or Owner of such Ship or Vessel before any lading be taken on
board her shall give an account under his hand of her dimentions as aforesaid,
to the said Commissioner his Deputy or Deputies; and if such Officer does
apprehend and suspect that the account given is short of the true dimentions,
the said Officer repairing unto one of the next Justices of the Peace, such
Justice shall and hereby is empowered to grant his Warrant to some able Ship
Carpenter, requiring him to repair on board such Ship or other Vessel, and to
measure the same in manner as is before expressed, A Justice to Empower a
measurer.
and to make his report thereof unto the Commissioner for the Impost Office his
Deputy or Deputies; and such Justice is further Empowered to Administer an Oath
unto the measurer to deal truly and faithfully therein, for which Warrant and
Oath Administered there shall be paid unto the Justice two Shillings, Fee for
the Warrant to a measurer and his Oath.
and the measurer for his Service shall have and receive the Sum of Five
Shillings, all which charge (where the Master or Owner is found to have given a
short account of the dimentions) shall be paid by the Master or Owner before
such Ship or Vessel be cleared; if otherwise by the Officer for managing of the
Impost Office, who is allowed to bring such charge to account of the Public.
And for Vessels not obliged by Law to clear at the Naval Office, and all others
for which clearings may be taken out there before the time of this Act taking
place, that shall then be in Port: Officers Power to Sue in Case
In case of neglect or refusal of the Master or Owner of any such Vessel to pay
the aforesaid duty of Tunage, the Commissioner for managing the Impost Office
his Deputy or Deputies may recover the same by Action or Information before any
Justice of the Peace within the County, so that the Sum sued for exceed not
Forty Shillings, if it be above Forty Shilling, before the Inferior Court of
Pleas.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Fifteen hundred Pounds in Endorst Bills of Public Credit lately
Ordered by an Act of this Court to be Emitted for a present supply of the
Treasury, shall from and after the Twenty-ninth day of June in this present
year, One Thousand Six hundred ninety four, be accepted and received in all
Public payments, as well for Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, as for
any Province Tax or Assessment, at the just Sum therein mentioned and no more:
And Seven hundred Pounds more of said Bills over and above the Five hundred
Pounds formerly applied, A further grant of 700 Pound for setting forth the
Galley.
are hereby granted for the Equipping and seting forth of the said Province
Galley built for the securing of Navigation: And the Treasurer is hereby
Ordered to take care to call in the said Bills that shall be in the hands of
particular Persons and to pay them the full Sum thereof in Money out of the
first Moneys coming into the Treasury from and after the aforesaid Twenty-ninth
day of June, One Thousand Six hundred ninety four, for Impost, Excise Tunnage
of Shipping or Taxes.

AN ACT, For granting unto Their Majesty's a Tax of Twelve Pence a Poll, and
One Penny on the Pound for Estates.
WE Their Majesty's Loyal and dutiful Subjects the Representatives of Their
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Assembled in General Court,
do Unanimously grant unto Their most Excellent Majesty's, for and toward the
repair of Their Majesty's Castle, upon Castle Island, near Boston, and the
support of the Garrison there: For the subsistence and paying of Wages to
Seamen and Soldiers, that are and shall be employed in Their Majesty's
Service, for the defense of this Their Province: For a Stock to manage the
Indian Trade: For payment of Salaries and other grants made and to be made by
this Court: For the discharging the Public Debts now due from this Province,
and for answering of other Contingent Charges of this Government, and to no
other ends and intents; A Rate or Tax of Twelve Pence on the Poll, and One
Penny on the Pound, upon all Estate herein after mentioned, to be Assessed on
the Freeholders, Inhabitants, and other Their Majesty's Subjects Resident
within this Province, according to the Rules hereafter set down, and pray that
it may be Enacted.

And it is Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General
Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer do forthwith send his Warrants to the Select men or
Trustees of each Town or Precinct requiring them to cause the Inhabitants of
such Town or Precinct who are by Law qualified to Vote in Town Affairs,
Treasurer to send forth warrants for choice of Assessors
to Assemble and meet together sometime in July next, who being so Assembled
are required to choose Three, Five or Seven able and discreet men of good
Conversation being Freeholders and Inhabitants within such Town or Precinct, to
be Assessors, and no Person shall be capable to serve in said betrustment,
Qualifications of Assessors.
in any Town or Precinct under Forty Families, unless reputed worth Fifty
Pounds Estate, no* in any other Towns, unless of One hundred Pounds Estate, nor
in Boston under Three hundred Pounds Estate: And if any Person be chosen to
said place, Penalty for not serving.
and refuse to attend said Service (which he shall forthwith declare whether he
accept or no) he shall pay as a fine Five Pounds, if in Boston, Charlstown,
Salem, Ipswich or Newbury, and in any other Town Forty Shillings; and the said
Town or Precinct shall choose others, until some do accept; which fines shall
be to the use of the Poor of said Town or Precinct, to be recovered by the Town
Treasurer, before the Inferior Court of Pleas, or a Justice of the Peace
within the same County respectively; and if any Town or Precinct shall neglect
to choose such Assessors Fourteen days after Receipt of the Treasurers Warrant,
they shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Pounds to Their Majesty's, (...)
for and toward the support of the Government of the Province, to be recovered
of the Select men, Trustees or Town Treasurer, by Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information at the Inferior Court of Pleas within the same County, and such
Select men, Trustees or Town Treasurer shall be reimbursed the Sum of said
(...) with charges, to be Assessed and Proportioned upon the Inhabitants of
such Town or Precinct as by Law is directed for other Town Rates. And upon
Information to the Justices of the County (in which such Town or Precinct lies)
of such neglect, Two Justices to appoint Assessors in case.
the said Justices or any two of them ( Quorum unus) shall have Power to
appoint three or more Assessors for said Town, and Administer the Oath for the
due Execution of their Office, who shall be also obliged to attend the said
Service, being so appointed, under the penalty in this Act provided.

And be it further Enacted,

That every Person chosen to be an Assessor in any Town or Precinct and
accepting said Office, shall take the Oath following.

That is so say.

Y OU A. B. being chosen on Assessor for the Town of C, for this present year,
Oath of Assessor
do Swear, that is the discharge of said Trust, you will deal Impartially and
equally therein, recording to the Rules and directions set down on this Act,
after the best of your discretion and judgment, So help you Bob.

Be it further Enacted,

That in any Town or Precinct, where there is no Justice of Peace, the Town
Clerk is hereby allowed and Empowered to Administer said Oath to the Assessors,
of such Town or Precinct.

And every such Assessor attending that Service, shall be paid by the Town
Treasurer, Two Shillings and Six pence Per day, their allowance
for each day he spends in said Service.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the said Assessors at or before the Sixteenth day of August next ensuing
shall make a true List of all Male Persons in their respective Towns and
Precincts, from Eighteen years old and upwards (Except Elders of Churches,
Assessors work.
setleds Ministers and others devoted to the Ministry, the Praesident, Fellows
and Students of Harvard College, Grammar Schoolmasters, and such who through
Age, Infirmity or extreme Poverty in the discretion of the Assessors are
rendered uncable to contribute toward the Public charge) And a true Estimation
of all Estates both Real and Personal, being or reputed to be the Estate of all
and every the Persons of the same Town or Precinct, or otherwise under their
custody or Management, according to the Valuations hereafter mentioned. That is
to say, All Male Persons of the Age above said (Except as is before Excepted)
and all Negro's, Molatto's and Indian Servants as well Male as Female of
Sixteen years old and upwards, Twelve Pence Per. Poll.
at the Rate of Twelve Pence Per. Poll; All Real Estates, as Houses,
Warehouses, Mills, Cranes, Wharffes, Tan yards, Arable, Pasture, and Meadow
ground, and all other Lands enclosed or under improvement, other than such as
lie common to the use of the Inhabitants in general, Horses etc. at one Penny
on the Pound for Fourteen years income, Lands for Twenty years income.
that the owners have not particular benefit by, at the Rate of One Penny on
the Pound for the value thereof; which value is to be computed and reckoned
according as they are or may be let for in the places where they lie. Viz.
Houses, Warehouses, Tan yards, Mills, Cranes and Wharffes, at Fourteen years
Rent or income without any allowance or subduction for Repairs; All Lands at
Twenty years Rent or Income. The Fermer or Occupier of any Houses or Lands
being Assessed for the same in his Occupation, to be reimbursed the one half of
what he shall so pay toward the said Assessment by the Land lord or Lessor,
The Fermer to be allowed one half of the Assessment.
where there is no particular Contract to the contrary, and shall be allowed to
discount the same out of his Rent, producing a Certificate from the Assessors,
Collector or Constable what the whole amounts unto.

All Goods, Wares, Merchandises (Except such as have or shall have paid Impost,
lying in the Importers hand undisposed of) Trading Stock, Goods etc. to be
Assessed by the Rule of common Estimation.
Money at Interest; in whose hands soever it be, and all Boats and small
Vessels not liable to the duty of Tunage; every of the Particulars aforesaid,
at one Penny on the Pound by the Rule of common Estimation, at the discretion
of the Assessors; endeavoring the best Information they may (where no
particular Invoyce of the Species and worth is presented to them) Every
handicraft man at one Penny on the Pound for his Income at the discretion of
the Assessors.

Each Ox and Horse Beast exceeding four years of Age, at Forty Shillings: Each
Cow exceeding three years at Thirty Shillings; Rate of Cattle;
All Sheep above one year old at Four Pound Per. Score; All Swine above one
year old at Six Pounds Per. Score; to be Assessed at one Penny on the Pound
after the said Estimation.

Provided nevertheless, That no Estate belonging to any Minister in the Town
where he lives, being in his own actual improvement; Ministers Estates exempted
or belonging to the Widow of any Minister deceased, in the Town where she
lives, and under her own improvement, shall be Rated unto the said Tax.

Provided also, That all such Town's and Places, Allowance formerly ordered to
Towns.
as by the Vote of this Court at their Sessions in May or November the last
year, were judged to have been Assessed over and above their due proportion to
the last Tax, shall have the allowance and abatement then Ordered them
respectively, out of the next Tax or Assessment that should be granted; which
is this present Tax. Assessors to call in a particular List of each persons
Ratable Estate.


Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Assessors in each Town and Precinct, be and are hereby are Empowered
and Required to call for a particular List of each Persons Ratable Estate
within the same, and of those dwelling next them not belonging to any
Town-Ship, by posting up the notification of the time of their meeting, ten
days at the least before hand in some Public Places of the Town: Penalty for
not giving in a List
And if any person shall neglect to give in a List of his Ratable Estate
aforesaid, every such Person shall be rated at the discretion of the Assessors;
And if any Person shall give in a false List of the same, For giving in a False
Last.
he shall be alike Assessed at discretion, and pay Five Shillings Fine, one
Moiety thereof to the use of the poor of the Town or Precinct, and the other
Moiety to him or them that shall Inform and prosecute the same before any
Justice of the Peace within the same County; and be further Assessed to the
said Tax four times so much in value as the Estate left out should have been
Rated.

And if any Person having given in a true List of his Ratable Estate complain
to the Assessors and make it appear that he is over Rated, so much shall be
abated him by them, Persons overrated to be abated upon making Oath etc.
he making Oath to his List; and in case they refuse to abate him, he shall be
heard and relieved by the Quarter Sessions showing just cause for the same. And
the Assessors in each Town and Place are hereby required to finish and perfect
the Assessment of their several Towns or Precincts and to transmit and safely
deliver the same unto the Treasurer, together with the names of each Collector
or Constable in the said Town or Precinct, The Tax to be made and transmitted
to the Treasurer by the first Wednesday in September
and the respective Sums to them committed to gather, at or before the first
Wednesday in September next. And the Treasurer upon Receipt thereof, shall
issue out his Warrants directed to the Constables or Collectors of the several
Towns and Precincts, requiring them forthwith to Collect and gather the said
Assessments and to pay in the same unto the Treasurer or his order at or before
the first day of November next ensuing, to be paid in and accounts issued by
the first of November.
by which time they are to make up and issue their accounts of the whole with
the Treasurer; which aforesaid Warrants being sent to the Sheriffs of the
respective Counties, they are required immediatley to disperse and safely
transmit them to the Constables or Collectors of the several Towns and
Precincts, according to the direction thereon.

And it is further Enacted,

That the Select men in each Town be and hereby are Empowered (if they think
fit) to nominate and appoint one or more able and sufficient Persons within the
bounds and Limits of such Town to be Collectors of the Money due to Their
Majesty's by this Act, Select men's power to appoint Collectors
for whose paying in the same to the Treasury, the Town by whom they are so
employed shall be answerable for their proportion thereof.

And if any Constable or Collector shall be remiss and negligent of his duty,
Penalty on defective Collectors or Constables
by not levying or paying into the Treasury such Sum and Sums of Money as from
time to time he shall have received and as ought by him to have been paid
within the time set and limited by the Warrant or Estreat to him committed
pursuant to this Act, and is not paid by reason of his failing of doing his
duty according to the directions and Command therein; the Treasurer is hereby
Empowered after the Expiration of the time so set, by Warrant under his hand and
Seal directed unto the Sheriff his Deputy, or Deputies, to cause all such Sum
and Sums of Money to be levied by distress and Sale of such defective
Constables or Collectors Goods and Chattels, and if none such, or not
sufficient can be found, then upon his Lands or Tenements, returning the (...)
(if any be) And for want of such distress to commit the offender to the common
God of the County, there to remain until full payment be made.

Be it further Enacted,

That if any Person or Persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the several Sum
or Sums whereat he shall be set to this present Assessment, Constables or
Collectors Power to distrein
and is to pay toward the same, upon demand made by the Constable or Collector
of the Town Place or Precinct where such person has his dwelling or Residence,
according to the Precept or Estreat to him delivered; It shall and may be
Lawful to and for such Constable or Collector who is hereby thereunto
Authorized and required for non payment to distrein the Person or Persons so
refusing of neglecting by his or there Goods or Chattels, and the distress or
distresses so taken to keep by the space of four days at the cost and charges
of the Owner thereof; and if the said Owner do not pay the Sum and Sums of
Money so Assessed upon him within the said four days, then the said distress
or distresses to be apprized by two or three of the Inhabitants where the same
is taken, and to be Sold by the said Officer for payment of the said Money, and
the overplus coming by the said Sale (if any be) over and above the charges of
taking and keeping the said distress or distresses, to be immediately restored
to the Owner. And if any Person or Persons Assessed as aforesaid, shall refuse
or neglect to pay the Sum or Sums so Assessed, by the space of Twenty days
after demand thereof where no sufficient distress can or may be found whereby
the same may be levied, in every such case two or more of the Assessors in each
Town or Precinct, are hereby Authorized by Warrant under their hands and Seals,
to commit such Person or Persons to the common Goal of the County, there to be
kept without Bail or Mainprize until payment shall be made of the Sum or Sums
so Assessed, with the incident charges.

And it is further Enacted,

That where any Person or Persons shall remove from the Town or place were he
or they lived or had their Residence at the time of making the List of said Tax
or Assessment, To distress persons removing.
not having first paid the respective Sums or proportion set upon him or them
thereby: It shall and may be Lawful to and for the Constable or Collector to
whom the said Tax or Assessment is committed with Warrant to collect the same,
and they are hereby Authorized and Empowered to demand the Sum or Sums Assessed
upon such Person or Persons, in what Town or Place soever he or they may be
found within this Province, and upon refusal or neglect to pay the same, to
distrein the said Person or Persons by his or their Goods and Chattels as
aforesaid, and for want of such distress to commit the party to the common
Goal, there to remain as aforesaid, until payment he made of the Sum or Sums so
set upon him with all charges arising by reason of such commitment.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer do pursue the calling in the Arrears of all former Public
Rates or Assessments by all such ways and methods as the Laws in that case
made and provided do direct, Treasurer to pursue the gathering in of Mercers.
having respect to the allowances made by this Court upon the Report of their
Committee formerly appointed, as well to Towns, Constables or particular
Persons, and where any allowance is made to any Constable or particular Person
and judged by this Court to be the Town's due to make good, the Treasurer is
hereby Empowered and Ordered to issue forth his Warrants to the Assessors to be
appointed for such Town to Assess and proportion the Sum thereof upon their
Inhabitants: As also the Assessors of such Towns upon which any Additional Sum
was formerly set and not hitherto Assessed, forthwith to Assess the same,
requiring them to return the Lists thereof unto himself together with the List
of this present Tax, and the Treasurer shall therewith make out his Warrants
for the speedy Collecting and paying in the same into the Treasury.

An Addition to the Act Entitled, AN ACT, For the setting forth of General
Privileges.
Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the House of Representatives of the People of this Province being a part
of the Great and General Court or Assembly, have by Their Majesty's most
Gracious Charter, undoubted right to all the Liberties and Privileges of an
English Assembly, and to have and use Freedom of debate and suffrages in all
matters proper to them as such; and the choice and appointment of all Civil
Officers not particularly directed to and Enumerated in the Charter, does of
right belong to the Great and General Court or Assembly: And that when and so
often as any motion is made to the house of Representatives, for the granting
of any Money to be levied of the People of this Province, the said House of
Representatives ought particularly to be advised what uses and improvement such
Money is to be raised for.

And further be it Enacted,

That the Appointment and Establishment of all Salaries of any Officers within
this Province, be and hereby is declared to belong to the said General Court or
Assembly; and that no public Money be or ought to be disposed of by His
Excellency the Governor and Council, but for the uses and intents of and
according to the Acts by which the said Money is raised: Orders for payment of
Moneys to express the Act by which the same was raised and the particular
Serviced designed for.
And that no Money may or ought to be drawn or paid out of the Public Treasury
of this Province, but by Warrant or Order of the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Council for the time being, expressing particularly the Act by
which the said Money was raised, and for what particular Service the same is
designed, and to be applied pursuant to the said Act or Acts (other than
Contingent charges for the support of the Government of this Province for the
time being)

AN ACT, For Ascertaining the Fees of the Messenger attending the House of
Representatives.
B e it Enacted and Ordained by the Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority
of the same,

That there shall be paid to the Messenger attending upon the House of
Representatives for the time being, Messengers Fee 3 Shillings Per. Diem.
out of the Public Revenue of this Their Majesty's Province, the Sum of 'three
Shillings Per. diem for every day that the said Messenger shall attend upon, or
be employed in the Service of the said House of Representatives: 3 Shillings
for Service of a Warrant of Arrest.
And further that the said Messenger shall and may demand, recover and receive,
of all and every Person Arrested, Imprisoned or taken into Custody by Warrant
from the House of Representatives, three Shillings for the Service of such
Warrant of Arrest, Traviling Fees 3 Pence Per. (...) out.
with traveling Fees after the Rate of three Pence Per. Mile out, and also
three Shillings Per. Diem for safe keeping and providing for such Person so
apprehended and taken into Custody; 3 Shillings Per. Diem for each Person in
Custody etc.
and three Shillings more upon the dismission or release of the party, any Law
Custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding, except it be a member of the
House that is so sent for, and then the Fees to be paid, shall be less, as the
House shall appoint.

And it is hereby further Declared, That the Travailing Fees mentioned in the
Act for Regulating Fees, Sheriffs etc travaling Fees, only 3 Pence Per. Mile
out.
allowed to Sheriffs, Marshals, or Constables for the Service of Writts, is to
be alike understood of three Pence Per. Mile from home, and no more.

AN ACT, Against Adultery and Polygamie.
W HEREAS the Violation of the Marriage Covenant is highly Provoking to GOD,
and destructive to Families.

Be it Therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That if any man be found in Bed with another man's Wife, the man and Woman so
Offending being thereof convicted, shall be severely Whipped, not exceeding
Thirty Stripes, unless it appear upon Trial that one party was Surprised and
did not consent; which shall abate the Punishment as to, such party.

And if any man shall commit Adultery, Punishment for Adulterers.
the man and Woman that shall be Convicted of such Crime before Their Majesty's
Justices of Assize and general Goal delivery, shall be set upon the Gallows by
the space of an Hour, with a Rope about their Neck, and the other end cast over
the Gallows: And in the way from thence to the common Goal, shall be Severely
Whipped, not exceeding Forty Stripes each: Also every Person and Persons so
Offending, shall for ever after wear a Capital A of two Inches long and
proportionable bigness, cut out in Cloth of a contrary Color to their
Clothes, and Sewed upon their upper Garments, on the out side of their Arm, or
on their Back, in open view. And if any Person or Persons, having been
Convicted and Sentenced for such Offense, shall at any time be found without
their Letter so worn, during their abode in this Province; they shall by
Warrant from a Justice of Peace, be forthwith apprehended and ordered to be
Publicly Whipped, not exceeding Fifteen Stripes; and so from time to time
toties quoties.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person and Persons within this Their Majesty's Province, being
Married, or which hereafter shall Marry, do at any time after the first of July
in this present year, Polygamie to be Punished as Felony.
One thousand Six hundred ninety four, presume to Marry any Person or Persons,
the former Husband or Wife being alive, or shall continue to live so Married;
That then every such Offense shall be Felony, and the Person and Persons so
offending shall suffer Death as in cases of Felony. And the party and partios
so offending shall receive such and the like Proceeding, Trial and Execution in
such County, where such Person or Persons shall be apprehended, as if the
Offense had been Committed in such County where such Person or Persons shall be
taken or apprehended.

Provided always, Saving for Persons where Husband or wife shall be absent
Seven years etc
That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not extend to any Person or
Persons whose Husband or Wife shall be continually remaining beyond the Seas,
by the space of Seven years together; or whose Husband or Wife shall absent him
or her self the one from the other by the space of Seven years together in any
part within Their Majesty's Dominions, or else where, the one of them not
knowing the other to be living within that time.

Provided also that this Act or any thing therein contained shall not Extend to
any Person or Persons, Saving for Persons divorced, or Married within the Age
of Consent.
that are or shall be at the time of such Marriage, Divorced, by any Sentence
had, or hereafter to be had, as the Law of the Province in that case has
provided: Or to any Person or Persons, where the former Marriage has been or
hereafter shall be, by such Sentence had, declared to be void and of no Effect.
Nor to any Person or Persons, for or by reason of any former Marriage had or
made; or hereafter to be had or made within the Age of Consent, That is to say,
the Man Fourteen years of Age, the Woman Twelve.

AN ACT For Regulating of Trade with the Indians.
W HEREAS the Indians within the Eastern Parts of this Province under the
Obedience of the Crown of England have dependence upon the English for supplies
of Clothing and other necessaries, as formerly they have been accustomed; which
that they may not want, and to the intent that the Christian Religion be not
Scandalized nor any Injustice done to the Indians by Extortion in the taking of
Unreasonable and Excessive Prices for the Goods and Supplies Sold unto them.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That all Trade with the said Eastern Indians be managed and carried on at the
charge of and with the Public Stock in Their Majesty's Treasury within this
Province, Indian Trades to be managed by the Treasurer etc. with the Public
Stock
and for the benefit and advantage of the same, by Suitable Truck Masters, such
as the Treasurer of this Their Majesty's Province and the Commissioner for the
Impost Office for the time being shall appoint and agree with under a certain
Salary, and to be no otherwise concerned or interested; who shall be Sworn to
the faithful management of the said Trade according to such Instructions as
shall be given them by the said Treasurer and Commissioner in that behalf; by
direction and approbation of the Governor and Council, and to render and
deliver a just and true Account of the same, with all the proceeds and profits
arising thereby from time to time unto the Treasurer; the said Accounts to be
exhibited and laid before this Court for their perusal when required. The Stock
to be advanced for beginning of said Trade, not to exceed the Sum or Value of
Five hundred Pounds; which may be continued and made good out of the returns
and proceeds thereof: No Trading allowed within any Fort or Garrison.
And the profits arising thereby to be employed for and toward the support of
the Government of this Province. No Trading to be allowed within any of Their
Majesty's Forts or Garrisons, but near to the same and under Command thereof;
nor shall any Officer or private Soldier employed in Their Majesty's Service
be employed in the management of said Trade. Nor shall any Powder, Ammunition
and Liquors forbiden in any Quantity etc.
Shot, Lead, or any kind of Ammunition (more than may be necessary for their
hunting) nor any Quantity of Strong Liquors of any sort, where with they may be
made Drunk or exposed to Quarrelings and Fightings, be Traded with or delivered
to any Indian or Indians or any others for them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no Person or Persons whatsoever other than those to be employed as
aforesaid, Penalty for persons Trading, other than such as shall be appointed.
shall or may presume by themselves or any other for them directly or
indirectly to Truck, Barter, Buy, Sell, deal or Trade with any Indian or
Indians, within any of the Eastern Parts of this Province, under the penalty of
Fifty Pounds over and above the Forfeiture of all such Goods of any sort or
kind, and the Vessel and Vessels, as any Person or Persons shall have been or
are found Trading in or with, or the value thereof; one Moiety of all such
penalties and Forfeitures to be unto Their Majesty's for and toward the
support of the Government of this Province, and the other Moiety to him or them
that shall inform and Sue for the same in any of Their Majesty's Courts within
this Province, that shall have proper Cogniscance thereof.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in force during one whole year from the
Publication thereof, and until the next Sitting of the Great and General Court
and no longer, any thing therein contained notwithstanding.

AN ACT, For better Enabling the Treasurer to answer present demands.
W HEREAS this Court have provided to Raise Moneys for supplying the Public
Occasions of this Their Majesty's Province and Government, and paying of the
just Debts Owing from the same, by reviving and continuing of the Duties upon
Goods, Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, and further granting of the same
for one year yet to come: And by granting of a Tax of Twelve Pence a Poll and
one Penny on the Pound for all Estates: But forasmuch as the same cannot be
Collected and drawn into the Treasury timely enough to answer the demands
there. Wherefore upon the Fund and Credit of the said Duties upon Goods,
Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, and the said Tax or Assessment; As also
upon the Arrears of all Taxes formerly granted and not yet paid in. And to the
ends and uses in the said several Acts mentioned for granting of the said
Moneys.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority of the same.

That the Treasurer for the time being, do Issue forth and pay out of the
Treasury in the Bills of Public Credit of the late Colony of the Massachusetts
to such Value as shall be needful, not exceeding the Sum of Five thousand
Pounds (including the Sum of Fifteen hundred Pounds formerly Ordered by this
Court) said Bills to be Endorst by the Treasurer in manner as is directed by
the Act, Entitled, An Act, For a present supply of the Treasury, made and
passed at the Sessions of the Great and General Court begun and held at Boston
the Eighth day of November, in the Fifth year of the Reign of Their present
Majesty's; to be paid out according to the Orders of the Governor and Council
at the Sum in each Bill respectively set down and no more, and shall be
Received by the Treasurer and all Subordinate Receivers whomsoever, in all
Public payments whatsoever (Except for such and so much Money as is or shall
be Owing for Impost and Excise, at or before the Twenty-ninth day of this
present Month of June) at the same Value, with the advance of one Shilling more
on the Pound, any Law Custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And all Persons having any of the said Bills in their possession not being
Endorst in manner as before directed, shall return the same unto the Treasurer
to be Endorst or Exchanged for such, within the space of three Months next
after Publication of this present Act, on pain of loosing the same, which are
hereby declared to be of no Value or worth after the Expitation of the said
three Months.

AN ACT For Granting a Township in the County of Bristol, to be Called Tiverton.
W HEREAS there is a certain Tract or Tracts of Land called by the Indians
Pocasset and Puncateese, Situate lying and being between the Bounds of Little
Compton, and Freetown, within the County of Bristol, bordering upon the Sea, or
Salt Water toward the West, extending along the Shore between the Towns
aforesaid, about Twelve Miles Northerly and Southerly, and from the Salt Water
toward the East into the Country about four Miles till it meet with Dartmouth
line; which Land belongs to sundry Persons the Proprietors thereof, and was put
under the Constablewrick of Little Compton aforesaid, who upon their Petition
to this Court are reduced to their former State. Now forasmuch as there are
already a Competed member of Inhabitants, and a good quantity of Land
Convenient for a Township.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same it is Enacted,

That henceforth the said Tract or Tracts of Land as now Bounded by the Limits
and Bounds of Little Compton, Freetown and Dartmouth aforesaid, is and shall be
a Township, and called by the name of Tiverton; and shall have and enjoy all
such Immunities, Privileges, and Powers as generally other Towns within this
Province have and do enjoy: And Joseph Palmer the late Constable is hereby
Required forthwith to warn the Inhabitants of the said Town to meet together to
choose Select men, Constables and other Town Officers, to carry on and manage
their Prudential Affairs in an orderly way as the Law directs, until the next
annual day of Election for Town Officers: and the said Inhabitants are enjoined
accordingly to Assemble and attend the work.

And it is further Declared, That the Constable or Constables of said Tiverton,
shall Collect all such Arrears of Public Rates, as were Assessed and
Proportioned upon the Inhabitants of said Town by the Select men of Little
Compton, whilst they were annexed to that Town according to the Lists then
made, which the said Select men are to furnish them with; and the Treasurer is
Ordered to Issue out his Warrant to the Constable or Constables of said
Trverton, for Collecting the same accordingly.

FINIS.

