A Paraphrastical Exposition ON A LETTER From a Gentleman in PHILADELPHIA To
his Friend in BOSTON Concerning a certain Person who compared himself to
Mordecai.

Printed in the Year 1693.

Proemium.
Strange Topsy-Turvey Words I hear of late!
And that from a great Man in Church and State;
More like Proud Haman than poor Mordecai,
Unto whom he compared himself, some say,
Even in a Public Meeting, where most kne^
Let him say it never so often, it was not True.
J Wonder such words could from him proceed,
Except he had been much Reformed indeed:
Nor wrong I him when boldly I say this,
No Man's more like Proud Haman than he is:
If but with Haman's State you his compare,
Note how exactly parrallel they are
Give heed to what here follows, and then you
Shall see by many things that it is True
A Paraphrastical Parrallel bitwixt Haman and Mr. --
HAMAN was of an Unbelieving Race,
As all may know who have the Scriptures read
This Man against the Faith of Christ set his face
(...) to keep Believers all in dread.
Haman to Worldly Greatness did aspire,
(...) to make all others to it submit:
This to the same has such a strong Desire
That he seeks all means to accomplish it;
3.
Haman arrived to be very great,
And partly gratified his own Ambition:
This is already high in Church and State,
Yet thinks himself in a too low Condition,
4.
Haman with Mordecai was sorely vexed,
'Cause of Ambition he had not his fill:
This with a Person here as much perplexed.
Because he cannot subject him to his Will.
5.
Haman was likewise Wroth with Mordecai
Because Respect to him he would not give
This is so (...) with those (...)
His Humor, (...) hates they (...)
6.
Haman was no Friend to the Jewish Nation,
But sought to Ruin them by many Plots:
This Man before and since he is in this Station,
Has been an Enemy unto the Scots.
7.
Haman pretended the Jews kept not the Laws
(...) Land wherein they then did dwell:
The Man (...) pretends the same Cause,
Concerning some whose Lot in this Land's fell.
8.
Haman was so Enraged, he Persecutes,
Poor Mordecai, for Conference, not for Crimes
This Man for the same Cause now Executes
His Vengeance on the Christians of these Times.
9.
Haman did threaten those who him Offended,
Although for Threats they never gave him cause
This Threaten all who have with him (...)
Though rather than Frowns they deserved Applause.
10.
Haman against the poor Jews was very hot,
And resolutely bent to work their Fall:
This says, If he stretch out his Arm he would not
Pull't in again till he has quelled them all.
11.
Haman the Jews Religion did decry,
Because they could not stoop to his Ambition
This Clamours against True Christianity,
Because it will not suit his high Condition
12.
Haman then quickly grew extremely Diseased
In's Mind, his Will had not its through (...)
This Man, in the like case is much displeased
He cannot fulfill all that he does project
13.
Haman (...) Letters next about the Jews,
And sent abroad that People to destroy:
This Man has writ, and spread abroad false News,
That the poor Christians here he might annoy.
14.
(...) Ambition noted was by some,
(...) Byword he therefore did pass:
(...) Man, for it a Proverb is become,
(...) thought as Proud as ever Haman was.
15.
Haman's Wife against Mordecai was bent.
But 'twas to gratify her Husbands Will:
This has a Wife against some is most intent,
But it is her Husband's humor to fulfill.
16.
Haman, no doubt, was a brisk Jolly Blade,
And much in Wine and Feastings took delight:
This Jovial Fellow does not hate that Trade,
But lives in splendour to the very hight.
17.
Haman in Worldly Power took great pleasure.
And loathed much Competitors to have.
This prizeth it above all Earthly Treasure,
and would have each compared with him, a Slave.
18.
Haman when at his Hight, began to Fall,
His Loftiness and Pride soon came to naught:
This Man knows not how soon decline he shall,
And be down equal to his Neighbors brought.
19.
Haman was after that by Justice sought,
And for his Sin received due Recompense:
Let this take his Example into Thought,
Lest Justice find him void of Penitence.
20.
Haman's Pride ended in his Overthrow,
And with his Loftiness, his Life he lost:
Let this then leave it, and learn to be low,
Lest when too late, he Rue it to his Cost.
So now my Promise being at an end,
I have almost fullfill'd what I intend;
For by what is done, most evident it is,
Haman and he has great Resemblances,
And that he is no whit like poor Mordecai,
I judge most men, who read these Lines, will say,
I mean such who know this Character's True,
They Will also say he has not half his due;
Which is most certain, for I Have things in store
Will equal him with many Tyrants more;
But there are Proofs enough, and so apparent,
That Twenty more will give no better Warrant;
For he that is guilty of what here is writ,
What horrid Crimes is it he will not commit?
But yet I hope by this he will warning take,
How he such like Comparisons does make
For time to come, seeing hereby he will find
That his false words will not the People blind,
Nor make them think, whatever he may say,
That Haman's Spirit dwells in Mordecai.
FINIS.

