By His Excellency ^^j^min Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of
Their Majesty's Province of New York, Province of Pennsilvania, Country of
New Castle, and the Territories and Tracts of Land depending thereon in
America, and Vice Admiral of the same, Their Majesty's Lieutenant and Command^^
in Chief of the Militia, and of all the Forces by Sea and Land within Their
Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and places of Strength
within the same.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas I am given to understand that sundry Soldiers and Mariners have
deserted Their Majesty's Service, from their Garrisons and Ships of War in the
Province of New York, and (...) sheltered and protected by diverse Inhabitants
in Remoter parts under my Government an^ Command. For Prevention where of, and
of all idle Vagabonds for the future, and to the end (...) Fugitive Servants
may be taken up and restord to their Masters, as also (it being time of A^tual
Wa^) (...) the Prevention of S^^es that may sojourn in the Province of
New York, Province of Pennsilvania, and Country of New Castle, etc. under False
Pretenses, to give Intelligence to the Enemy; I have therefore thought fit, and
do hereby strictly require all Officers, Civil and Military, under my Command,
That for the Future, from Time (...) th^^ take a strict Account of all
Travelers ^o Passengers to and from, or within any the Provinces aforesaid;
And if the said Travelers and Pass^nger cannot produce a Pass or give a
sufficient Account of themselves, That then they cause such (...) to be
secured, as Deserters from Their Majesty's Service, Fugitive Servants, or
Spies, until they she give Satisfaction to the contrary.

Given under my Hand and S^al at Fort William Henry, the Thirteenth Day of
November, 1693. Anno Regni Regu and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae, Angliae, etc.
Quinto. Ben. Fletcher.

God Save King William and Queen Mar^
Printed and (...) by William Bradford, (...) Their Majesty's, King (...) Mary
at the Sign of the Bible (...) of New York, (...)


