ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND, Convened and held
at Boston, the Thirty-first Day of May. 1693.

Anno Regni Guilielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Quinto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and Sold by Samuel Phillips. 1693.

ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND etc.
AN ACT, For the Restraining the taking Excessive Usury.
FORASMUCH as the abatement of Interest has always been found Beneficial to
the Advancement of Trade, and Improvement of Lands by good Husbandry; and
whereas the taking of Eight in the Hundred for the Interest of Money, tends to
the great discouragement of Ingenuity and Industry in the Husbandry, Trade, and
Commerce of this Province.

Be it for the Reasons aforesaid, Enacted by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and it is Enacted by the
Authority of the same,

That no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the first day of August
in the year of our Lord, 6 pound per. Cent. Interest per. annum for loan of
Money.
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three; upon any Contract to be made after that
time, shall take directly or indirectly, for Loan of any Moneys, Wares,
Merchandise, or other Commodities whatsoever, above the value of Six Pounds for
the forbearance of one Hundred Pounds for a Year; and so after that Rate for a
greater or lesser time, or for a longer or shorter time; and that all Bonds,
Contracts, Mortgages and Assurances whatsoever, made after the time aforesaid,
for the payment of any principal or Money Lent or Covenanted to be lent, upon
or for Usury, whereupon or whereby there shall be Reserved, or taken above the
Rate of Six Pounds in the Hundred as aforesaid, Penalty for Contracting for
more.
shall be utterly void; and that all and every Person and Persons whatsoever,
which shall after the time aforesaid, upon any Contract take, accept, and
receive by way or means of any Corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange, or by Covin, or
deceitful conveyance, or by any other way or means whatsoever, for the
forbearing or giving day of payment for one whole Year, of, and for their Money
or other thing or things, above the sum of Six Pounds for the forbearing of one
Hundred Pounds for a Year; and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser Sum,
or for a longer or shorter time; shall forfeit and loose for every such Offense
the full value of the Goods, and Moneys, or other things so lent, Exchanged,
Bargained, Sold, or agreed for; one Moity thereof to Their Majesty's, toward
the support of the Government of this Province, and the contingent charges
thereof, the other Moity to the Informer, that shall sue for the same; any
Custom, Usage or Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, A Saving.
nothing in this Act shall extend to the letting of Cattle, or other Usages of
like nature, in practice amongst Farmers, or Maritime Contracts among
Merchants, as Bottommary, or course of Exchange, as has been heretofore
accustomed.

AN ACT, For Regulating the Building of SHIPS.
FOrasmuch as the Building of Ships is a business of great Importance for the
Common Good, and therefore according to the Course and Practice of Their
Majesty's Kingdom of England, Suitable Provision is necessary to be made, that
it be well Performed.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives Convened
in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That when and so often as any Ship or Vessel of thirty Tuns or upwards,
Vessels of thirty Tuns or upwards to be Surveyed by Warrant from a Justice of
Peace
is to be Built, and set up in any Town or Place within this Province; before
any Plank be brought on, the Builder or Owner shall repair unto one of the next
Justices of the Peace within the same County, who upon Request made, is hereby
Empowered to appoint and Authorize one or more able Shipwrights, to be Surveyors
of the said building, and of all the Materials and Workmanship in and about the
same from time to time as often as the Builder or Owner sees cause to call
them; who are to take care that all the Materials be sound, sufficient and
suitable for the Occasion, and that the works be done and performed Strong,
Substantial and according to the Rules of their Art, and to direct that all
insufficient and defective Timbers Plank or other Materials be taken out and
amended; no Timber or Plank of Oak to be allowed other than White Oak: which
Surveyers so appointed shall have an Oath Administered unto them, to be Faithful
and Indifferent between the Builder and the Owner.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Builder upon the advice and direction of such Surveyer or
Surveyers shall neglect to reform and amend what is judged to be defective or
amiss in any Materials or Work-man-ship shall forfeit and pay the Sum of five
Shillings per diem to the use of the poor of that Town where such Vessel shall
be in Building until the defects be amended; Builders penalty for neglect of
Amendment
being Convicted of such neglect before one or more Justices of the Peace,
unless such Justice or Justices upon hearing of the Builder shall see cause to
allow him some further reasonable time for doiing of the same. And if any
Builder shall bring to, and fasten any Plank upon any Ship or Vessel of the
Burden aforesaid, before a Warrant of Survey be obtained as aforesaid, (...) a
Survey.
and the Surveyer, or Surveyers have been to view the Frame: Every Builder
Offending herein, shall Forfeit and Pay the sum of Ten Pounds; the one Moiety
thereof to the use of Their Majesty's, for Support of the Government of the
Province and Contingent Charges thereof, and the other Moiety to him or them
that shall Inform and Sue for the same, by Bill, Plaint or Information in any
of Their Majesty's Courts of Record.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That when any Surveyer or Surveyers are called upon by the Builder or Owners,
to Survey the Work or Materials, Surveyers allowance.
as is provided in this Act, every such Surveyer shall have for his Care and
Attendance when called, three Shillings for every Survey; which Charge of
Surveying is to be born by the Builder when he is defective; but when the
Builder is not in fault, then by the Owner or Owners, And in case of Travail
out of Town, to be further allowed for their time and necessary Charges.

AN ACT Encouraging a Post Office.
WHEREAS Their Most Excellent Majesty's by Their Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Seventeenth Day of February in the Year
of out Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety One. Have given unto Thomas Neale
Esquire. His Executors Administrators and Assigns full Power and Authority to Erect
Settle and Establish within the Chief Ports of Their said Majesty's Colonies
and Plantations in America, an Office or Offices for the Receiving and
Dispatching of Letters and Pacquets, and to Receive, send and Deliver the same
under such Rates and Sums of Money as the Planters shall agree to give etc. To
hold and enjoy the same for the Term of Twenty One Years, with such Powers and
Clauses as are necessary on that behalf; as by the said Letters Patents,
Relation being thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear: And whereas
Andrew Hamilton Esquire. is Deputed and Constituted to Govern and Manage the said
General Post Office (...) all Their Majesty's Plantations and Colonies in the
(...) of America and the Islands Adjacent thereunto (...) of the said Letters
Patents: and whereas (...) has made Application to His Excellency (...) and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, that they (...) and Establish
such Rates and Sums of Money upon Letters and Pacquets that shall be Received
and Dispatched by the (...) Officers; For the Effectual Encouragement of the
said General Post Office; and for the quicker Maintenance of mutual
Correspondence amongst all the Neighboring Colonies and Plantations aforesaid;
and that Trade and Commerce may be the better preserved.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives Convened
in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That there be from henceforth a General Letter-Office Erected and Established
in some Convenient place within the Town of Boston, A General Letter Office
Erected in Boston.
from whence all Letters and Pacquets whatsoever may be with speed and
Expedition, sent into any part of the Neighboring Colonies, and Plantations on
the Main land and Continent of America, or unto any of Their Majesty's Kingdoms
and Dominions beyond the Seas; at which said Office all Returns and Answers may
be like wise Received, and that one Master of the said General Letter Office,
shall from time to time be appointed by the said Andrew Hamilton, which said
Master of the Office or his Servant, or Agent and no other Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall from time to time, have the Receiving, taking up, Ordering,
Dispatching, sending Post, or with speed, and delivering of Letters and
Pacquets whatsoever, which shall from time to time be sent to and from all and
every the Adjacent Colonies and Plantations on the Main land and Continent of
America, or any other Their Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions beyond the Seas,
where he the said Post-Master-General, shall settle or cause to be settled,
Posts, or Running Messengers for that purpose, except such Letters of Merchants
and Masters which shall be sent by any Masters of any Ships, Boat, or other
Vessels of Merchandise, or by any other Person Employed by them for the
Carriage of such Letters aforesaid, according to the Respective directions; and
also except Letters to be sent by any private Friend, or Friends, in their way
of Journey, or Travail, or by any Messenger, or Messengers, sent on purpose
for, or or Concerning the private Affayrs of any Person and Persons.

And be it Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be Lawful to, and for the Post Master General aforesaid,
the several Rates for Portage of Letters.
and his Deputy and Deputyes, by him thereunto Sufficiently Authorized, to
Demand, have, Receive and take for the Portage and Conveyance of all such
Letters, which he shall so Convey Carry or send Post as aforesaid; according to
the Several Rates and Sums of Current Money of this Province hereafter
mentioned, nor to Exceed the same; that is to say, for the port of every single
Letter from Europe, the West Indies, or other posts beyond the Seas, Two pence;
and all Letters are to be accounted single, though they Contain Bills of
Loading, Gazets, Invoyces, etc. and for each Packet of Letters from the places
aforesaid, Four-pence; and a Packet shall be accounted three Letters at the
least, and for the Port of every single Letter from Rhode Island to Boston, or
from Boston to Rhode Island, Sixpence, and so in proportion to the greatness
and quantity of Letters, and for the Port of each single Letter from the
Post-Road in Connecticut Colony, to Boston, Nine-pence, and so in proportion as
aforesaid; and for the port of each single Letter from the City of New York,
Twelve-pence, and so in proportion as aforesaid; and for the Port of each
single Letter from the Provinces of East or West Jersey, or Pensilvania,
Fifteen-pence, and so in proportion as aforesaid; and for the Port of each
single Letter from Maryland or Virginia, Two Shillings each single Letter, and
so in proportion as aforesaid; and for the Port of each single Letter from
Salem, Threepence; From Ipswich, Newbury, or other places Eastward of Salem,
within this Province, Four-pence; and from Piscataqua, Sixpence, and so in
proportion as aforesaid; And if any Letters or Pacquets, shall Lie and Remain
in the Office Uncalled for, by the space of Forty Eight Hours, the Postmaster
then sending them forth to the Respective Houses of the persons to whom they
are Directed, shall have and receive one penny more for each Letter or Packet.

And for the more Effectual Encouragement of the said General Post Office.
Be it Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all such persons as shall be Employed by the Postmaster General in the
several Stages within this Province, Post, to pass Ferrage free
shall and may Pass and Repass all and every Ferry within this Province, at any
time during the Continuauce of this Act in Force, without paying any Rate or
Sum of Money, either for his own or his Horses Passage.

And be it Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no person or persons whatsoever, or Bodies Politic or Corporate, other
then the Postmaster General aforesaid, Penalty for any to Erect a Post Office,
other than the Postmaster General herein named.
shall presume to Carry, Recarry or Deliver Letters for hire, other then as
before excepted, or to Set up or Employ any Foot-Post, Horse-Post or
Pacquet-Boat whatsoever for the Carrying, Conveying, and Recarrying of any
Letters or Pacquets by Sea or Land within this Province, or shall provide and
maintain Horses and Furniture for the Equipping of any persons Riding Post,
with a Guide and Horn as is usual in Their Majesty's Realm of England, upon the
pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Forty Pounds Current Money of this Province, for
every several Offense against the Tenor of this present Act to be Sued and
Recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, by Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be Allowed:
one half of the said Forfeiture to Their Majesty's, toward the support of the
Government of this Province, and the Contingent Charges thereof; the other half
to the Post-Master-General, who shall sue and prosecute for the fame.

And be it Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Letters and Pacquets that by any Master of any Ship or Vessel,
Masters of Ships etc. to deliver in their Letters to the Post Office.
or any of his Company, or any Passengers therein, shall or may be brought to
this Port of Boston, (other than such Letters as are before Excepted) shall by
such Master, Passenger, or other Person, be forthwith delivered to the
Postmaster of Boston, for the time being, or unto his Servants or Agents by
him or them to be delivered according to the several and respective directions
of the same; the said Postmaster, or his Servants paying to the Master of any
such Ship or Vessel, so delivering in his Letters, a halfpenny for every
Letter or Pacquit.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Post-Master-General, his Officers or Servants, shall continue
constant Posts, Penalty for the Post masters neglect of continuing constant
Posts and delivering Letters.
for the carriage of Letters to the several Places and Stages above mentioned;
and shall seasonably and faithfully deliver forth the Letters, according to the
Intent of this Act, upon pain of forfeiture for every Omission Five pounds, to
be recovered as aforesaid, and to be disposed the one half to Their Majesty's,
as aforesaid; the other half to the party aggrieved, who shall sue for the same.

And it is Further Enacted,

That the said Postmaster, Letters to be marked.
his Agents or Servants, upon the coming in of every Post, do mark every Letter
with a Print, to show the day of the Month, and Year when every Letter came in.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Ferry-man within this Their Majesty's Province, Penalty for
Ferry-mens neglect.
shall at any time neglect, refuse, or delay the conveying over this, or their
Ferry any Post-man, or his Horse, he shall forfeit the sum of Five pounds, to
be recovered and disposed; as the penalty before by this Act, laid upon such as
shall set up any Post or Packet Boat.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Letters of Public concernment for Their Majesty's Service, Public
Letters to go free.
from time to time, and at all times shall be received, dispatched away, and
delivered with all possible speed, according to the respective directions
thereon free of all charge; and without demanding or receiving any Money or pay
for the same, any thing herein before contained notwithstanding.

Provided, that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall continue in
force any longer than three Years from and after the Publication thereof, any
thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT, For Confirmation of Titles within the Islands of Capawock, alias
Marthas Vineyard and Nantuket.
WHEREAS Their Most Gracious Majesty's, our Sovereign Lord and Lady KING
William and QUEEN Mary, in and by Their Royal Charter, or Letters Patents,
bearing date at Westminster the seventh day of October. In the third year of
Their said Majesty's Reign: for the Uniting, Erecting and Incorporating of the
Colonie of the Massachusetts Bay, and Colonie of New Plymouth, the Province of
Main, the Territory called Acada or Nova Scotia, and all that Tract of Land
lying between the said Territories of Nova Scotia, and the said Province of
Main, into one real Province by the name of the Province of the Massachusetts
Bay, in New England: have therein particularly named, comprehended and included
the Islands of Capawock and Nantucket as part of the said Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and annexed the same thereto. And also all Islands and
Islets, lying within Ten Leagues directly opposite to the main land within the
said Bounds.

And whereas Their said Majesty's have also been graciously pleased in and by
Their said Letters Patents; to grant and ordain that all and every such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments and other Estates, which any Person or Persons, or
Bodies Politic and Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools, do hold
and enjoy or ought to have, hold and enjoy within the bounds of the said
Charter, by or under any Grant or Estate duly made or granted, by any General
Court formerly held, or by virtue of the Letters Patents herein before recited,
or by any other lawful right or title whatsoever; shall be by such person or
persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools,
their respective Heirs Successors and Assigns for ever hereafter held and
enjoyed according to the purport and intent of such respective Grant, under and
subject nevertheless to the Rents and Services thereby reserved or made payable
etc. as in and by the before recited Charter or Letters Patents reference
thereto being, had does and will more fully and at large appear.

But forasmuch as the said Island of Capawock, alias Martha's Vineyard, and the
Island of Nantuket, were for some time under the Rule and Government of the
Province of New York, and the properties and Titles of the Lands upon the said
Islands respectively being derived and founded upon several Grants and Patents
made and granted by the Succesive Governors of the said Province of New York,;
and so legal there according to the constitutution, usage and custom of the
Government of said New York. And the Inhabitants and Proprietors of Lands
within the said Island of Capawock, alias Martha's Vineyard and the Island of
Nantuket; for their better quiet and satisfaction, desiring this Courts
confirmation of the same.

It is therefore Declared, and Enacted by the Governor Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That all Lands Tenements, Hereditaments and other Estates held and enjoyed by
any person or persons, Towns, or Villages within the said Islands of Capawock,
alias Martha's Vineyard and Nantuket, and each of them respectively, by or
under any Grant or Estate duly made or granted by any former Government, or by
the Successive Governors of New York, or any other lawful right or Title
whatsoever; shall be by such person or persons Towns or Villages their
respective Heirs, Successors and Assigns, forever hereafter held and enjoyed,
according to the true purport and intent of such respective Grant, under and
subject nevertheless to the Rents and Services thereby reserved or made
payable: And are hereby ratified and confirmed as fully and amply to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as the Lands in any other parts or places
within this Province, by virtue of Their Majesty's Royal Charter.

AN ACT, For the better Collecting the Impost and Excise, and Preventing Frauds.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, Convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That such Officer or Officers as are or shall be Empowered and appointed by the
Commissioners for Impost and Excise, shall have power and are hereby
Authorized, Officers Empowered to enter and search Vessels
to enter on Board any Ship or Vessel, There to make search, or to attend the
unloading of any such Ship or Vessel, the better to prevent fraud, and to
secure the true payment of the Duties; as by Act or Acts, for, or relating to
the Impost and Excise, is imposed.

And all Masters of Ships or other Vessels coming in to any of the Harbors or
ports within this Province, before they break Bulk shall make a Report to the
Commissioners for Impost and Excise, Masters of Ships to Enter at the Impost
Office before breaking bulk.
or such as are by them appointed to Receive the same, the Contents of the
Loading; without any charge or fee to be demanded or paid for the same. And if
they have on Board any goods liable by Law to pay Impost; They shall then also
give an Account under their Hands, to the best of their knowledge, of the
quantities, Species, and to whom the goods are consigned, with the marks
thereof, after which they may unload and not before, on pain of Fifty pounds to
be forfeited and paid by each Master, who shall neglect his duty in this behalf.

Be it Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no Goods that by Law ought to pay Impost unloaden out of any Ship or
Vessel; Goods to be landed in the day time only.
shall be landed on any Wharfe or into any Warehouse or other place, but in the
daytime only, and that after Sun rise, and before Sun set; unless in the
presence of, and with the consent of the Officer appointed to inspect such
affairs, on the Forfeiture of such goods.

And it is Further Enacted,

That every Master or Head of a Family, Masters of Families to be accountable
for breach of the Law.
shall be accountable for the Transgression of the Law Relating to Retailing
without License, whether it be by his Wife, Children, Servants, or any other
Employed by him.

And all Persons Retailers of Wines, Liquors, Beer, Ale, or Cider, shall make
entry and Pay as per. Law, The Excise for the same, before they receive it into
their Houses, Cellers, Shops, Warehouses, or other rooms or places, on the
penalty of forfeiture of the same, (unless they have agreed by the year with
the Commissioners) any Law or usage to the contrary notwithstanding: And
whatsoever Wines, Liquors, Cider, Beer, or Ale, that is bought by, or for any
Retailers and shall not be entered, but is concealed; the Commissioners for the
Impost and Excise, or any Empowered by them, may on Their Majesty's behalf sue,
and recover of such Retailer every such sum or sums, as should have been paid
for such Wines, or Liquors so bought and concealed; by Information, Plaint, or
action of debt, in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Retailers that refuse to open the Doors of their Houses, Cellers,
Justice of Peace to grant Warrant for breaking open doors.
Vaults, Rooms, or other places suspected by the Commissioners, or persons by
them Empowered to inspect the Excise; to have Wines, Liquors, Beer, or Cider
concealed, with intent to defraud Their Majesty's of the duties required and
laid by the Act for Impost and Excise, upon complaint made to a Justice of the
Peace, it shall and may be Lawful for, and such Justice is hereby required to
Issue out a Warrant to such Officer complaining, thereby to enable him with the
Assistance of a Constable in the day time, to break open the Doors of such
Houses, Cellers* Vaults, Rooms, or other places, where they are denied
entrance; and finding any Wines, Liquors, Beer, or Cider concealed that ought,
but yet has not been entered, and the duty of Excise paid as the Act provides;
they are to seize and secure the same in order to Trial and Condemnation; and
all Constables and others are to be aiding and assisting to them therein.

And if any Wines, Liquors, Beer, or Cider, be Seized for any Offense committed
against the Act for Excise, In case of Seizure the proof of duties being paid,
to lie on the Claimer.
in any of the particulars thereof; the proof whether the duties be paid, or
secured to be paid, shall lie upon the Claimer, and shall not be Incumbent on
the prosecutor, or informer, in behalf of Their Majesty's and himself:
Provided, such Seizure be made, or Action brought within Ten days, after the
ground for such forfeiture, or action did arise.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all penalties and forfeitures arising for the breach of this Act, or any
Clause or Article therein, shall enure and accrue one half thereof to Their
Majesty's, Forfeitures how to be disposed.
toward the support of the Government of the Province; the other half to him,
or them, that shall inform and sue for the same.

Provided nevertheless, that this Act shall continue in force, until the Twenty
^^^th day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, and no longer, any
thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

AN ACT, Encouraging the Killing of WOLVES.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, Convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That whosoever has since the Fourteenth day of May Wolves to be paid for out
of the Town Stock.
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Two, or shall hereafter Kill any grown Wolf
within this Province, and bring the head thereof unto the Constable of the
Town, in which such Wolf shall be Killed, or to the Constable of the Town next
Adjacent unto the place of Killing such Wolf, without the bounds of any
Town-ship, shall have a Receipt of the Constable for the same, and the
Constable shall cut off both the Ears from such Head; And the party producing
the Constables Receipt unto the Select men of said Town, or some one of them,
shall be allowed and paid out of the Towns Stock, the sum of Twenty Shillings
for every head, as aforesaid, of a grown Wolf by him killed, and the sum of
Five Shillings for every Wolves Whelp.

And the better to furnish the Select men with a Stock sufficient, to answer
such payments.
It is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select men of each Town respectively, Select men to Assess their Town
yearly for this Occasion, to be reinbur'st out of the Public Treasury.
shall be, and hereby are, Sufficiently Authorized and Empowered, to Assess the
Inhabitants of their Town yearly, in due proportion as near as they can, such
sum and sums as they shall judge necessary, to serve that Occasion, together
with other charges of the Town, and to cause the same to be Collected in manner
as is by Law directed for the gathering of Town Rates: And all such sum and
sums of Money, so paid out of any Town Stock, for the Killing of Wolves, the
same being made to appear, shall be allowed unto such Town by the General
Treasurer of the Province out of the Public Revenue.

FINIS.

