Monthly Observations AND Predictions, For this Present Year, 1692. WITH
Astrological Judgments On the whole Year.

All Taken from Mr. P atridge's ALMANAC:

To which is Added, an Account of a Plot Which was lately Discovered in
England: And which was Foretold by the said John Patridge, in his this Years
Almanac.

Published for General Satisfaction.

Printed at Boston: And are to be Sold by Benj. Harris, at the
London-Coffee-House.

1692.

Monthly Observations
Come mighty Muse! assist me once again,
Touch thou my Crenium and Inspire my Pen;
And let the Black mouthed Tribe again reflect,
Tho I don't Prophecy, I may Predict.
And that it may with Truth and Good be blessed
Heaven guide my Hand, let mighty Jove assist.
January's Observation
It is now just a year since our May Plot was discovered, when Passive
Obedience was turned into Rebellious Resistance, and a design laid to destroy
the bravest Prince in the World, and this done by those who in their public
Auditories had be-rebell'd all mankind but their own faction; by those, I say
at whose Doors lies all the Blood and miseries of Ireland.

If we consider that the Ingress was attended with a Conjunction of the Sun and
Mercury, and a Trine of Jupiter and the Sun; those things compared with the
beginning of this month, seems to show us much news discoursed of among all
People; and especially about Peace, and such Affairs as relate thereunto, as
Truces, Cessations of Arms, and the like; and do you think there is any thing
in it? Vix Credo.

For the Sun and Moon are Cadent, and the old plotting Knave Saturn is in
Opposition to Mars; from the third and ninth, the house of Religion: I hope we
have no more holy Plots coming abroad again, and yet I dare venture a Wager
there is something in it, but it will be smoothered in the Birth: he that plots
for the Church plots safe.

The Councils of Europe very hush.

Of late, Heav^ns Cob^rts did each other greet,
And at their General Rendevouz did meet,
Mavors in Gemini; there still resides,
While Chronos on his Half-bors'd Bowman rides
The Effects lie snug and hush; and then begins,
When Sol and Stilborn do embrace the Twins.
February's Observations
At the Ingress in December we find the Moon void of course, but the Sum is
going to the Trine of Jupiter, and on the Cusp of the Ascendant in Taurus, but
the Sun lately separated from the Opposition of Mars, and the Body of Mercury,
and this so near the Tropic, that I fear will spoil the Influence of Jupiter's
Balsa^uick Rays, which indeed tend to peace.

But here we find the Moon going to the square of Saturn and Mars, and toward
the end of the month we shall see the Effects of it in London among the New
Non-Cons, and the murmuring Crew, and it will be about some seditious thing in
reference to the Government; perhaps meeting to affront the King and Queen, as
they have done before; but I remember when a Gallows used to be the reward of
such things in the two late pious Reigns; but the case is altered, the
Murderers then are the Traitors now.

It also shows some sudden surprise or treachery in ^landers; perhaps the
French Tyrant may go to mar^^t about this time to take Towns after his usual
way of fighting without Blood. And it also shows the death of old and aged
People in and about London and this by some unusual Sickness and Accident.

With full career Sol to the Ram does hie,
He being there the Judge of Equity.
But ere he does his Regal throne possess,
Grim furious Mars disturbs his happiness.
Hence Feuds and Difference, hence too, Treach'ry flow
Perfidious friends are worse then open foes.
March's Observations.
At the Lunation now approaching we find both Sun and Moon in exact square to
Mars from Pisces and Gemin^ Lites Rixoe Inter factiones multas in ^h^^'tis
Locis. Mar is in a humane Sign from whence we usually find Quarrels and
Contentions, as well Public as Private, from whence also we shall hear of
Duels and Murders, about this time in diverse parts: also Skirmishing by Parties
o^ those Soldiers that guard the frontiers of Countries and Garrisons. We may
also expect to hear of some Cruelty, Murder or other villainies committed by the
blood Ripparee Papists in Ireland. In short, mankind in General are about this
time inclined to Violence, and Vil^nies R^bberies, and Blood; as besides this
Lunation the square of Saturn and Venus, and the square of the Sun and M^rs
shows.

Whatsoever the discourse is about a Peace at th^^ time, will end in words and
noi^e, and have no other effect, for I can see no real ground to judge any such
thing, and besides the War has not traveled its full Journey yet.

Much lying News spread abroad to the abuse o^ the Credulous, and this about
some considerable thing as they report. Clippers detected, an Eminent man br.

The Orbs and Stars how steadfastly they are hurled?
Those Arks where Codli^^s j^udgments for the world
That shake its Pillars, yet themselves w^ s^^d,
Beyond the Rage of Thun^er, (...) and wind
And when The Almighty, through these Trumpets calls
Po^r Totterig man h^ staggers and he falls
April's Observations.
Holland seems active and early in their preparations for this Summers Affairs;
and this as well for Land as Sea-service which is aptly enough showed by Mars
being in Cancer in Sextile to Jupiter, and the Moon applying.

Mars in Cancer a Northern Sign, with North Latitude free from all Affliction,
and in Sextile to Mercury, Lord of the tenth, shows that, the Armies of Europe
are endeavoring to take the Field betimes, and that the P rinces of Europe are
making vigorous Preparations for the following Campain; and this the rather,
because Mars is also Angular in the tenth house, and their applying to the
Sextile and Parallel of Jupiter, Lord of the 7th, which they say is the House
of War. But this Appl^cation between Mars and Jupiter, seems also to show some
Propositions for Peace but I think it is for no other end, but to protract time
till some other design is ready.

Is it possible there should be an Opposition of Saturn and Venus, from Gemini
and Sagitarius, and no Knavish Villainies acted or discovereed in or about
London at such a time! if there is any Roguery now against the Government, be
sure there is a Woman up to the Ears in it; but be it what it will, 2 woman is
at the bottom, and the thing is villainous.

As the Sun's Rays and heat without control,
Dissolves the frozen Mountains near the ^ole.
So it is his Beams refreshes Earth and air,
Excites to motion, calls our men of War.
In thy good time O Lord, let mankind be
From Rage, Oppression force, and madness free.
May's Observations
Some mighty Action near, of the nature of Mars that is, fighting either by
sea, or land, notwithstanding the Sun is in Conjunction with Jupiter and
Sextile to Mars and Jupiter in Sextile to Mars likewise. And I really judge the
Arms of the victorious King of England is about this time successful against
the Christian Turk, he I mean that scorns to be just or honest, the French
Tyrant; and I judge also, there is a probability of the Effusion of much Blood,
as well as a prospect of a victory.

On May 20, and 22. 1685. Dr. Oats was whipped; being tried by a Protestant
Jury, and Protestant Judges, such as they were; and found guilty on Popish
Evidence; he had 2256 Lashes with a Whip of six Thongs knotted, which amounts
to 13536 Stripes: his Judges were Jefferies, Withins, Walcot and- Holloway.

There is now an Opposition of Saturn and the Sun; this makes a great Man
frown, etc. There is work for the Messengers abroad if they will but look out
sharp.

Saturn and Jove confront each other's rest,
One nature's Statesman, the other her High Priest.
Thy fall at odds, ay, let them quarrel too,
If mankind suffered not for what they do.
They more and scatter what they have in store,
And snatch those joys away, they gave before.
June's Observations
The affairs of this Month seem to concern Spain in their Millitary and Martial
Negotiations, France in every thing that relates to her Government and Quiet;
Hun^^ary and Da^natis, etc. are affected with some Dissent^ons, either about
settling their Government, or about some poin's of Religion. London is also
disturbed with some Divisions in her peculiar Government: uneasy ^^^^^ing
Spirits are still trying their Tricks to destroy their own Quiet, and the peace
of all besides, Poor Men they want a Hobby Horse; but the best on it is, they
are men of more Hope than Courage, etc. Is London (...) (...) credo.

^et all the Plagues of Murder now be flung
^n those cursed Knaves from whence those Mischiefs sprung
There Is ruffling work above; and hence must flow,
Mutations here; some Tyrants overthrow:
Tho at this distance, yet methinks I hear
Most pleasant News, some Abdication near.
Julys Observations
Although the Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, ^ve a large share in the Actions
and Affairs of this ^^ner, as the other Rays and Lamations have; yet (...) to
be considered differently from them, they being both of a slower Motion and
greater Bodies than the rest; and always with their present Influx stamp a new
face on the public Affairs of the World, and at this time of Europe in
particular, as a few Months hence will inform us; for there are three
Oppositions as well as there were three Conjunctions.

But at present all things tend to Violence and Blood, the real Effects of War
and Confusion: Pax queri^^^ (...), after a Storm comes a Calm The quartile of
Saturn and Mars, and Jupiter and Mars from Humane Signs, shows great Effusion
of Blood by fighting; quando cum b^ste ma^us cons^rer^nt.

This Month is attended throughout with much News and In^elligence Some removes
among the Clergy, etc. and a merry Couple much talked of.

Is London free from Traiters? is that Crew
Still seeking that, some years has been their due
Alas Good men! the Passive cant's laid by,
And now Resistance is no Blasphemy.
Well! they are men of Noise, and so it proves
Pray ask abroad how the grand Tyrant moves
August's Observations
At the Lunation that begins this Month we find n^ Planet angular; and
therefore do I Judge no considerable thing that is really n^w can be expected at
this tim^ and notwithstanding the (...) so many Aspects in the Month, yet it
will follow the fate and effect of the Revolutional Ingress next proceeding and
the Opposition (...) Saturn and Jupiter the Quartile of Saturn and Mercury from
Libra and Sagitarius, gives abundance of l^ing al^^ News and Rumors, some about
Sea-Affairs, (...), Merchandising, and the like; and I (...) be ^^^tive almost
that there will be some n^t^ri ^s pi^ce ^f (...) acted and brought about under
the (...) (...) M^sk of Religion.

The Quan^^e of the Sun and Saturn creates abundance of Difference in London,
Hears in their Councils, and (...) should be about something that relates to
its Government, but it will be for the City's Advantage in ^^e Conclusion, and
I think for the Establishment of (...) future Peace.

^ath Europe's Toes laid by their Murdering laws,
And the grand Murderer dilown'd his cause?
^o Popish Projects with their Plots decrease,
And Noah's Dove bring in the Branch of Peace?
Pray then inquire; ask if it can be;
If England's Monarch says it, I agree,
Septembers Observation
The Quartile of the Sun and Saturn, and the Sun and Jupiter will in some
measure influence September so, and yet I do not think it will give any
considerable Action abroad either as to the Wars, by Sea or and, or to the
state of Affairs and Councils of Eu^^pe, and yet it seems to show Difference
and Quarrels, (...) they will be in and among private Companies and ^cieties
which may prove the cause of Duels, Murders, etc. The quartile of Saturn and
Mercury as they are ^^alified at the last New Moon, shows the Death of ^^me
Eminent Lady; and the Misfortunes and Trou^^s of others. If Mars be in the
seventh, as I do ^^lieve he is in Conjunction with Mercury, and both ^^regrine,
he shows much Robbing and Mischiefs toward the end of the Month

There Is mighty News abroad, it is come from far
About some King's affairs of Peace or War:
Jove's in the Twins: Methinks I hear the voi^^
Of the cursed Murmuring Crew the rest rejoice.
God save the King, and he that will not say so,
Burton and Graham's Blessing with him go:
Octobers Observations
At the Ingress of the Sun into Libra, we find a very peaceable position: the
Moon who is in Opposition to the place of the last Conjunction in 1682. is
(...) Trine to Jupiter, Mars and Mercury; why shou^^ there not be Propositions
made for Peace about the time, and that with success too? it seems very
probable God grant it may succeed, if it is for the advantag^ of the true
Protestant Religion, and the beating dow^ of Tyranny, Popery, and all Arbitrary
Power. And if is now effected, the Illustrious and Valiant King (...) England
will be the only Man to do it.

Sol, Mars, and Saturn in a fiery Sign,
What e're their Project is do there combin^
Something they will do, perhaps you will wonder what
Why then Ill tell you it is some knavish Plot
And something else too, will by them be done
They real in Quartile to the French Kings Son.
Novembers Observations
About the middle of the Month the Sun comes (...) the Conjunction of Mars,
near that eminent fixe^ Stur called the Storpions Heart, which gives villan^
and treacherous Designs and Conspiracies against t^ F^owers and Government of
England in particular Here is some cursed piece of Roguery at the door, but
judge it will be discovered; and the best way to prevent any more Plots, is to
hang all you catch, by what Name or Title soever dignified or distinguished.
But ^his Month will but give a beginning to these Affairs, and therefore you
must expect its further Management and Prosecution in the next.

Motion and Time, those Twins, older than Man;
When the Dark Chaos altered they began.
^hey lurked throughout the whole, but to appear,
God spoke them into being, and they were,
These are the two that work, though different ways.
And as they do begin conclude our Days.
Decembers Observations
It Is ten to one but there may be a fine stroke of ^usiness at the Old-Bayly
this Sessions.

The Last Lunation is perhaps as remarkable a one (...) will happen again in
many years: for here we find (...) falls upon an Opposition of Saturn and
Jupiter, and ^^turn, Mars, the Sun and Moon all in Conjunction (...) Sagitarius
and Jupiter near the Stars of Orion in ^pposition to them all, he above the
Earth in the tenth Reception with Mercury, and they all under the ^arth
peregrine: In a word, it shows Violence and ^^olent Deaths: Let the rebellious
Party take it among 'em.

Astrological Judgments
MArs just leaving the Sign Gemini, and going into Cancer direct and increasing
in motion, shows ^^thinks as if those Armies who are now ready to (...) the
Field are designed to attempt some new Stra^^^em, or else to transfer the
Violence and Devastation of the War into some other Nation, Kingdom or Country;
for the Armies seem to b^ early at work this Spring, and as they are early out,
so they will immediately fall to some considerable Action both by Sea and Land;
and I do really think thi^ Year will give strange Changes in the public
Affair^ of Europe, either in pulling down or setting up Prino^^ palitics and
Powers, perhaps both. And seeing I have said so much, and also spoke before of
the good Influences a certain King in Europe is now under, pray give me also
leave to recite one Paragraph out of Mr. W^ Lilly's Monarchy and no Monarchy,
page 62. Printed in the year 1651. Were I intended (says he) to weary my self
in relating the woeful Calamity which sha^^ in less than half a Century of years
befall the French Nation, I might write a large Volume thereof, and tel^ them a
certain Prince, as religious as a Turk, sh^^^ overspread that Peoples most
fruitful Territories, and all these Wa^s and Disolations will be occasioned by
the unruly Nobility, who by their Civil Dissension shall'occasion the Ruin of
the French Monarchy and if you would know near the time when thi^ great
Mutation shall be, it shall happen when (...) certain King called Henry, is
twice made King, and (...) Duke of Florence turned Protestant. And at thi^ time
there is no King in Europe of that Name, but the Valiant and Illustrious King
of England. William Hendrick Prins vast Orangien hu Koningh van Engelant E^de
lk hope dat by sa^ Koning van Uranckrick oock wo^den. And in the next Page
after that before mentioned, Mr. Lilly says, The King of France shall be d^^ven
out of his Country by his own Subjects; for he shall exercise great Tyranny
against his Subjects, (...) the Church of Christ, being-instigated and stirred
(...) thereto by the Bishops and Priests of Reme^ who sha^^ seduce him and
betray him traitorously with Briber^ of Money: But those Misdemeanors he does,
shall seem to be done in favor of his Kinsmen or Allies. But when he shall be
removed and like a false Man, forsaken and left alone in Exile, even by those
in whom he confided: These things shall come to pass in the end of his second
Ingress to the Kingdom.

FINIS.
On the Fifth of this Instant August, Arrived at Boston, a Vessel that came
from Hull in England, Capt. Walley Commander. Which came from thence on the 19
th of May last, The News that he brings by Letters, is as follows.

April, 21 st.

SEveral Papers said to be King James' Declarations have been scattered about
the Streets, and on Sunday last, there were some of them sent to the Lord
Mayor, Sheriffs and several other Persons, who carried them to White Hall, to
Her Majesty. Here has been a Discourse for these Two Days that the French were
landing in the West, but there is no Credit given to it. All the Millitia, of
the City and Suburbs, have Order to be completed, and speedily Mustered, and
to be in readiness upon all occasions. The Council sat late on Sunday night,
and Three Persons were brought before them, Two French, and One Dutch. They are
said to come from Portsmouth, being taken thereabout for Spies their
Examination is kept secret, and they again committed to the Custody of
messengers. On Friday Nine persons were brought by messengers before the
Council, Five English, and Four French, belonging to the Spye-Ship, that came
to see what number of Ships we had; and what readiness we were in, which struck
upon the Goodwin Sands, and there they were taken, they were there again
Examined last Night. Capt. Medford Commander of the Privateer, that struck upon
the Goodwin Sands; being last Night Committed to Newgate, I am credibly
informed, He will make an Ingenious Confession to what he knows relating to the
affairs of France. This Evening several Messengers being assisted by
Musketeers, are gone out to take up Diverse Persons Disaffected to the
Government.

May, the Third. Her Majesty likewise received an Express from the King, which
advises that he is so well informed of the Intreagues of the French Descent,
that some Regiments that the (...) Countermanded from going to ^^^nders; are
Re-ordered to Embarque.

London 7 th. of May.

We are Alarmed with a Damned plot, and are taking up all those that are
Informed against, and also all that are Suspected, Marlborough and Huntingdon,
were sent to the Tower, two days since Fans^^y and Salisbury this morning and
several were sent to Newgate, several of our Officer^ are in the Custody of
some of our Messengers (...) Scotland Yard. May 5 th, The fa^a^ Blow wa^ to
(...) given the Queens Majesty was (...) be Siez'd the Guards to be Murdered,
and all Persons that were not of their Party to be knocked on the head. The
Guards are Doubled, the Great Guns drawn out, and about 16 more brought from
the Tower to White Hall. There are several Lords and others that have made
their Escape, who were of the Damnable Conspiracy; and a Proclamation is Issued
forth for^ the apprehension of their Persons, 6 Lords, and two other Persons of
Quality, are already Committed to the Tower, besides many others committed to
Newgate, amongst whom are several Officers, many more are siezed in the
Country all about, and betwixt 39 or 40 Persons in and about North-Hampton,
being all Strangers, and will give no account of themselves, Fifty French men
of war, were seen yesterday a little off from Breast, and it is hoped our Fleet
is by this time up with them. Just no^^ the Beadle is going about to warn every
Housekeeper to send a Watchman in every Parish to be upon Guard.

London May 5th. By an Express this Morning, Her Majesty was Informed, That the
French Fleet of Men of War, (but not King James's Transport Ships) were upon
our Coasts at the Start Point; the News came from Dartmouth and Plymouth. They
Report, their Number is upward of an Hundred Sail. Our Admirals, Sir Ashby
Rook, and Sir Cloudesly Shouel, Sailed through the Downs. On Sunday Morning there
was with them Twenty Sail of our Capital Ships, Forty Sail of Frigates, Tenders
and Fireships, and Thirty Six Dutch Men of War. On Monday morning they joined
Sir Rulph Delavall with his Squadron and Carter; so that if the Pl^ets meet,
and the French will stand a Fight, there is like to be her Service. God send us
Victory.

By other hands we have Advice, That a Woman, none of the mearest Orb, was one
of the Chiefest Conspirators: And God in his Providence was pleased so to Order
it, that a Woman was the First Discoverer, not above two Days before the
Designed Execution

God save the King, that King that saved the Land;
When James your Martyr^s Son, your Laws had shamm'd.
That saved your Babes, your Lands, Escates, and Wives,
And your own Threats too from dispencing Knives.
When bloody. Priests did expedite your doom,
And Castlemain in state was sent to Rome.
When plotting ^ly felt His Master's Hate,
And Saucy Pen and Peter's rul^d the State.
'Twas then He said us from those Beasts of Prey,
Then wa: The Time, And That without delay.
He spared no T^il, no Danger did He dread,
He came and saw His foes with Terro^^r fled
That Prince who never run, con boldly Fight,
Deserves a Crown, he dares defend His right.
Lord! let His Fort be wrapped in slavish Fears,
And Storms of Terror rattle in their ears;
Confound their ^lets, and Projects that they do,
And if need be confound their Persons too.
But let His Days be long, His Fame increase,
Add to His Conduct many Victories,
Lord, keep Him safe fixed in his Subjects love,
And to his Crown below, add one above.
Heaven bless his Arms, preserve Him in his own,
And God and Angels, guard his Tent and Throne.
FINIS.

