AN ACCOUNT OF THE TREATY BETWEEN His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher Captain
General and Governor in Chief of the Province of New York, etc AND THE INDIANS
OF THE Five Nations, VIZ. The Mohaques, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cajouges and
Sennekes, at Albany, beginning the 15 th of August, 1694.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to Their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary, at the Sign of the Bible in New York, 1694.

Lisenced,

David Jamison, Cl. Concilij.

THE ANSWER OF The Five Nations, VIZ. The Mahaques, Oneydes, Onnondages,
Cajouges and Senekes, TO THE QUESTION Put to Them in May last By His Excellency
Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Province of
New York, Province of Pennsilvania, Country of New Castle, and the Territories
and Tracts of Land depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same;
Their Majesty's Lieutenant and Commander in Chief of the Militia, and of the
Forces by Sea and Land within Their Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of
all the Forts and Places of Strength within the same.
Given at Albany the 15th day of August, 1694.

PRESENT
His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of
East and West-Jarsey. Of Their Majesty's Council for the Province of New York.
Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll William Smith, Chidley
Brook, Esquire Major Peter Schuyler,
Commissioners from the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
Coll. John Pincheon, Samuel Sewell, Esquire Major Penn Townesend,
Commissioners from Connecticut Collony.
Coll. John Allyn, Capt. Caleb Stanley,

The Sachims or Indian Kings.
Mohaques, Rode, Sinnonquiresse, Onnuchwarranore, Tosoquatho, Tassorandese,
Oneydes. Adogounwa, Carnquarie, Sahorochjondie,
Onnondages. Sadekanacktie, Dekanissore, Canadgegai, Carathkindie,
Tagorasuitho, Odaniende, Orondisachti,
Cayouge Sorichnowanne, Dekacjow, Tanerisso, Cadgisso,
Senekes, Rasadste, Radondaresax, Ostewatte, Ohawad^ge, Tehondaissen,
A Queen. Carachquinno,
The Foot Guards were drawn up before the place of Audience, and a Troop of
Dragoons on the Right Hand.

The Sachims, by a Messenger, acquaint his Excellency, that they are ready to
wait upon his Excellency, and give their Answer to that Question proposed to
them the 7th of May last.

His Excellency sent word, he was ready.

The Sachims, attended by their other Indians, came in order, two and two,
Rode, the first Sachim of the Mohaques being Leader, singing aloud as they
marched, Songs of Joy and Peace. Then the Indians took their places upon Planks
laid upon the Ground, Rode walking round them, and singing, until all were set
down.

Dekanissore rose up, and desired liberty from his Excellency to sing a Song or
two of Peace before they begin their Discourse. Which was granted. Then he took
his place.

Rode rose up, addressing his Discourse to the Sachims of the five Nations,
told them what great Reason they had to rejoice to see their Brother
Caijenquirago with so many that were of the Covenant Chain attending him, to
consult of Matters relating to the public Good. After which the whole Company
of Indians sung two or three Songs of Joy and Peace. Then

Sadekanacktie, the Speaker, rose up, and first turning to the Indians,
repeated how long the five Nations had been in Amity with the Inhabitants of
the Province of New York, and the Subjects of the Crown of England In America;
with a Narrative of the many Acts of Friendship happening mutually from time to
time, and how the Covenant Chain was first made.

Then turning to his Excellency, said,

Brother Cajenquirago, You expected to see us here, and we the Sachims of the
five Nations are come accordingly to speak to you.

Brother Caijenquirago, You appointed us to meet you here in one hundred Days,
to give you our answer, Who will be for you, and who against you? This is the
hundredth Day, and we are come with the Representatives of the five Nations to
give an unanimous Answer.

This Spring we gave you an account, that we had sent Messengers to Canada to
treat with the French; for which ill management you gave us a Rebuke, but
withal you did receive us again into your Favor, and embraced us, promising
not to break the Covenant Chain so long as you had Blood in your Veins, and
gave a Belt of Wampum in Confirmation of it.

Brother Caijenquirago, You see that the Number of our People are much
diminished; some of them have been out a Hunting lately, and have caught a
small matter, we do present your Excellency with some part of what we have got.
Then gave some Beaver and Peltry.

B rother Caijenquirago, I shall be brief in what I have to to say. In the days
of Old, when the C hristians came first into this River, we made a Covenant
with them, first with the Bark of a Tree, afterward it was renewed with a
twisted with; but in process of time, lest that should decay and rot, the
Covenant was fastened with a Chain of Iron, which ever since has been called
the Covenant Chain, and the end of it was made fast at Onnondage, which is the
center of the five Nations. And therefore it was concluded, That whoever should
violate or molest that Chain, or any part of it, the parties linked in the
Chain should unanimously fall upon such, and distroy them* they should
certainly dye the Death.

Since the time that the Governors have been here from the great King of
ENGLAND, we have made a general and more firm Covenant, which has grown
stronger and stronger from time to time; and our Neighbors seeing the
advantage thereof, came and put in their Hands into the same Chain,
particularly they of New England, Connecticut, New-Jarsey, Pennsilvania,
Maryland and Virginia. But since that time that all our Neighbors have put in
their Hands into the Covenant Chain, we have had great struggling and trouble
from the common Enemy, the French; Our B rother C aijenquirago's Wrist, and
ours, are tired, and stiff with holding fast the Chain alone, whilst the rest
of our Neighbors sit still and smoke it. The Greese is melted from our Flesh,
and drops up on our Neighbors, who are grown fat, and live at ease, while we
become lean: They flourish, and we decease.

Then naming all the English Plantations, said,

B rethren, we are envied by our Enemies round about, and particularly by the
French, who are very unconstant* and if the French or any other Enemy fall upon
us, let us all join together, and take up the Hatchet in our hands, and then we
shall be strong enough to destroy our Enemies, and live in Peace afterward.

B rother C aijenquirago, and the rest of the Brethren that are in covenant
with us, It has been an ancient Custom to renew the Covenant Chain, and to make
it clean and bright, that it may shine like Silver. And we promise, That it
shall be on our parts so strong and inviolable, that the Thunder itself shall
not break it.

B rother C ajenquirago, and the rest of our B rethren, We have, in the time
that the Governors of this Province were called Corlaer, planted here in this
place a Tree of Peace and Wellfair, whose Roots and Branches extend themselves
as far as New England, Connecticut, N ew-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and
Virginia, and whoever touches that Tree, which now we make green and sapid, or
any of the Roots of it, we must not only be sensible, to feel and resent it,
but rise up, and unanimously fall upon them that make that breach, to distroy
them.

We must acquaint you, That it has been an ancient Custom among the five
Nations to keep their Meeting at Onnondage, which we are resolved to continue
there, and if upon Occasion any be sent for from hence, to be present at our
General Meeting, we desire that they may come up.

B rother C aijenquirago, We have been disobedient to your Commands, in going
to Canada to teat with the French. We thought, because our Brethren of
New England had treated with the Enemy, the F rench, to the Eastward, we might
go and see whether these was any Peace concluded, or Treaty made to our
prejudice; our jealousy arising by reason of the F rench telling us, that
Chavaleer Deaux was sent back to C anada by them of N ew-England (whom we saw
in C anada, giving us a piece of Money, as a Token that he was freed by the
English) and therefore they told us, it was in vain for us to war against them,
for the English will set them at liberty again, as soon as they are taken.

B rother C aijenquirago, We pray that your Excellency may order that Powder,
Lead, Guns, and other Ammunition may be sold cheaper; and since Arnout is
coming with some of the far Nations, it will be requisite that such Goods may
be sold cheap, for their encouragement, that they may be thereby the easier
induced to come and live among us.

Brethren of N ew-England, C onnecticut, the Jarseys, Pennsilvania, Maryland
and Virginia, Hearken to what we now say, We have renewed the Covenant Chain
with you all: We always depended much upon N ew-England to be the chief of them
that put their hand into the Covenant Chain; we put more than ordinary
confidence in your Integrity and readiness to assist us in the common Defense;
and that you may see we are not forgetful of your Engagements, here is your
Token of your being in the Covenant Chain, which ( being a Salmon painted upon
a blank Paper) you sent us; look upon it, B rother C aijenquirago: And we
present to you, our B rother C oijequirago a belt of Wampum, as a token whereby
we acknowledge you to be the Head of Covenant Chain, and that we desire you to
give notice to all the Governments, that we have renewed the Covenant Chain
with them, and desire their assistance against the common Enemy; which we pray
you to put them in mind of.

B rother Caijenquirago, We have said what we design to say to Night, and shall
speak to morrow concerning what has been transacted at Canada, by our People,
and what Tokens we have from the far Nations of Twichtwichs and Dionondades, to
whom the Belts of Wampum were sent. And we follow your custom in giving our
Present altogether. So gave a parcel of Beaver and Peltry.

At a Meeting at Albany the 16th Day of August, 1694.
PRESENT
His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of
East and West-Jarsey. Of Their Majesty's Council for the Province of New York.
Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll William Smith, Chidley
Brook, Esquire Major Peter Schuyler,
Commissioners from the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
Coll. John Pincheon, Samuel Sewell Esquire Major Penn Townesend,
Commissioners from Connecticut Collony.
Coll. John Allyn, Capt. Caleb Stanley,
The Sachims or Indian Kings.
D ekanissore (one of the Sachims of Onnondage) rose up, and said, Brother
Caijenquirago, We, the five Nations of Indians Westward, viz. the Mohaques,
Oneydes, Onnondages, Cajouges and Senekes, did conclude to send Messengers in
the Spring to treat with the Governor of Canada; and I Dekanissore having been
one of their Agents, am now come to relate what has passed between him and me
at Quebeck; therefore we pray our B rother Caijenquirago and our Brethren and
Neighbors of New England, Connecticut, New-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and
Virginia, to heaken what we shall say.

Since the Governor or C anada has so often sent for us to come to C anada, to
treat with him, we went thither, and told him that we were come to speak of
Peace; then made these following Propositions to him, saying,

Father, If we do not conclude a Peace now, it will lie at your door, and not
ours; for we have already taken the Hatchet out of the Hands of the River
Indians, (whom we invited to the War) in order to make Peace. But we must tell
you, that you are an ill man, for you have given the Hatchet into the Hands of
the Doweganhaes to hurt and distroy us: you are unconstant, and not to be
trusted.

We have had War so long together, which was begun by your means, but we never
hated the House of Ockquese our Son (a Gentleman who lives in Mont Real) let
him come that toylsome Journey to our Castle at Onnondage if he please, he
shall be welcome.

F ather, We are now speaking of Peace, and I must speak a word to your Praying
Indians of the first Castle (called C achannage.)

You Praying Indians of C anada, you know our customs and methods of acting
better than your Governor, therefore we desire you to make him acquainted
therewith, and be assistant in the prosecution of this good work of Peace that
we are about.

And you Praying Indians of the second Castle (called C annasdage) you are
worse than the F rench themselves, you deserted from us, and sided with our
Enemies to distroy us; we tell you now to assist and give your helping hand in
the prosecution of this good Work of Peace that we are now about with your
Governor.

F ather, You have almost eat us up, all our best men are distroyed in this
bloody War, but we forget all that is past, we threw the Hatchet in the River
at C ajohage, where there was a great current but you found it again, and
betrayed our People at C adaracqui, after that you sent for us to fetch Home
our Prisoners, whom you restored. Then the Hatchet was thrown into the sky, but
you held your hand at a string that was fastened to the Helve of the Hatchet,
and pulled it down again, and fell upon our People; whereupon we took an
opportunity to fall upon you at the Island of Mount Real, where we distroyed
many of your People and Houses. Notwithstanding all that has passed, we wipe
away and cover all the Blood that has been shed on both sides, during this War.

O nondio, We have had Wars together a long time, we give you now a Cordial or
Drink to drive away all ill Thoughts, and to purge your heart, that it may be
clean, and restored to its former state, and that all ill Thoughts may be
vomited out.

O nondio, We will admit of no settlement at Cadaracqui; you have had your
fires there twice, which we have quenched, and therefore will not consent to
any rebuilding Cadaracqui. We clear the River that you may have a clear Passage
throw it, and come freely to Ounondage.

O nondio, We make the Sun clear, and dissipate all Clouds and Darkness, that
the Light may appear without any interruption.

O nondio, During this War we have taken Prisoners from one another; we
delivered over ours to the Families that lost their People in the War,
according to our Custom, who may deliver them, if they please, they are none of
ours; and your People may do the same. Here are two Prisoners which we have
brought along with us, whom we deliver unto you.

Then related the Discourse the Governor of Canada made to him.

After I had made an end of speaking, the Governor of C anada told me, he
would not make Peace with Caijenquirago. Whereupon I answered, These words do
not please me, you shall keep Peace with him.

O nondio said, I must fight against Cajenquirago, I am not Master to make
Peace, that belongs to my Master the King of France that lives over the great
Water.

I replied, I do not like this Discourse, if you should fight him now, and not
stay till I get Home, all the Country will esteem me a Traitor, and that I have
betrayed my Country; I cannot meddle to treat with you. This Discourse lasted
between the Governor of Canada and me three days* but I convinced the
Governor of C anada at last, who said, I will not make war with Caijenquirago
this Summer, but wait to hear what he will say.

The Governor of Canada insisted three days to have two Hostages left, which I
denied, but they agreeing themselves freely to tarry, were left there; one is
an O nnondage, the other a Seneke.

As soon as the two Hostages agreed to tarry, the Governor of Canada said, I
accept of the Peace as you offer it.

Son, Bring all the Prisoners home that you have taken from me, and your
Prisoners shall have their liberty to go home, if they please.

Children, I erect my Fire again at C adaracqui, and plant there a Tree of
Peace. Then laid down a Belt of Wampum. And desired that C aijenquirago would
send a Wise Man to speak to him, who should have free protection, as is
customary among Christians.

C hildren of the five Nations, If C ajenquirago should employ you to do any
thing for him with me, don't accept of the service, let him send people of his
own, there are eighty days appointed me for an answer. Then laid down the
Governor of C anada his Belt of Wampum to Caijenquirago.

The Sachims of the Dionondades were at C anada, and said to me, Let this which
you have said of Peace be from your Heart; we fear it is but Words, and not
Real, do not let us feel the smart of the Hatchet any longer. Then they laid
down a Belt of Wampum, which I show unto your Excellency, laying it down.

The second Castle of praying Indians, said, B rethren, Our Father O nondia has
told you to bring Home all the Prisoners taken from hence by the five Nations,
do not fail to do it. Then gave two Belts of Wampum.

B rother C aijenquirago, What I have now said, is contained in the Paper which
the Governor of Canada gave me, which paper I deliver to your Excellency, and
tell you withal, that I brought Letters to the Jesuit Mil^t at O neyde, who
was to inform us what is in the paper.


His Excellency said then, Brethren, I reject this Belt of Wampum sent by the
Governor of Canada, and will give you my Reasons for it, upon a Conference
with the Sachims, or when I make my Reply to the whole five Nations.


At a Meeting at Albany the 17th Day of August, 1694.
Present His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, and those who were at the Meeting
yesterday.

S Adekanacktie song a long Song of Peace, and said, I shall now relate what
has passed between the Dowaganhaes, the Dionondades, and us, to whom we sent
some Belts of Peace.

They said, You had some prisoners of the Dionondades in your Castles, whom you
sent Home to their Country with the Belts of Wampum from Caijenquirago and You
to speak of Peace, fearing to bring the Belts your selves* the War was so hot.
And after you had sent the said Prisoners back, some of your People being out
hunting, two were taken prisoners by the Dionondades, and brought to their
Castles, but were civilly used, and not like prisoners. The Dionondades said to
the two Prisoners that were brought thither, We are glad that we have an
opportunity to speak to you face to face, the Sun has been to propitious to us
to send us Home our prisoners. Then gave a few strings of Wampum.

We are glad of this occasion to speak to you here. We have been drunk and
distracted in waring one against the other. We give you now a Cordial and
Potion to settle your heart, that there may be no more War between us. They
gave a Belt of Wampum.

We are glad to see you here, and that you tell us, that your Doors are open as
far as Caijenquirago's House at N ew-Y ork, that we may freely see through
thither. They gave this belt of Wampum.

Brethren, We are thankful that you have prepared a Room for us at Onondage,
where we may speak freely to one another: Our whole Country is free for you to
come and treat with us; we make room for you accordingly. Then gave a Belt of
Wampum.

B rethren, We are glad that you invite us to your Country, quite even to the
House of Caijenquirago: All our River is rejoiced at it; be not afraid to come
hither, you shall be freely admitted, without any molestation. Then gave
another belt of Wampum.

B rethren, We are thankful for your putting us in mind of what we have
transacted formerly, That if any Mischief happened between us, we are to meet,
and compose Differences. We are now met together to put a period to all our
Mis-understandings, which is a matter of great Rejoicing to all our River. Then
gave a belt of black Wampum.

B rethren, Hearken to us, All the Nations between Us and New-Y ork, we rent
the Clouds asunder, and drive all Darkness out of the Sky, that the Sun of
Peace may shine clear and bright over us all, without interruption. Then gave a
stone Tobacco pipe, representing the Sun, of the breadth of the Seal of the
Province.

B rethren, We put the Hatchet into the Hands of the Kichtages, Twichtwiches
and Odsirages, to war against the five N ations, but now we will go in three
days to these Nations, and take the Hatchet out of their hand, (Then took hold
of the middle of a stone Tobacco-pipe in form of a Hatchet) You Senekes are
stupid Creatures, we warn you in the mean time not to go hunting far from your
Castles, that you be not hurt by the said Nation, and then accuse us. Then gave
the Tobacco-pipe.

I have done what passed between our two Indians and the Dionondades. Now I
apply my self to your Excellency.

B rother Caijenquirago, We desire the said (...) Indians may be admitted to
come no further than the Senekes Country; for if they should come quite down so
far as this place, they will see what a poor mean condition we are in, and be
Spies, and so discover our Nakedness; see these Indians are Allies of the
Governor of C anada.

His Excellency said, Brethren, Your Discourse has been very long, and consists
of many Heads; it will require some time for my consideration. I will give you
Notice when you shall attend for my Answer.


A Conference held at a private House in Albany the 20th of August, 1694.
Between his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. and the Sachims of the five
Nations.
In the Presence of
Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of the Jarseys. The Council of the Province of
New York. And the Commissioners from Boston and Connecticut. Sadekanacktie,
Speaker of the Indians.
His Excellency said, I Do very well approve of what you said the first day, in
renewing the Covenant Chain, which shall always be kept inviolably by me and
all the English Plantations.

Is Peace firmly concluded?


Sadekanacktie, We have made Peace, provided you approve of it; and the reason
of our going to C anada was to found the Governor of Canada's mind, because we
had no body but Caijenquirago's People that went out to war with us against the
French, and it is impossible for us to be any longer the Barrier between the
English and F rench. We have now brought our Enemies Answer, which is laid at
Caijenquirago's feet, and refer the whole matter to your prudent management.


His Excellency, Why do you say you have made Peace, provided I approve of it?
You know you have sent Sachims to C anada, contrary to your promise, and my
express command; you have made a Peace without any proviso, you have delivered
Hostages, and released Prisoners, and declare that you are weary of the War,
and not able to hold it longer, so that there is nothing left for me, but
either to acquiese with what you have done, or to make war upon you. But since
you have renewed the Covenant Chain, and while you preserve that inviolable, I
shall (to use your own Expression) tie up my Hatchet from hurting you. I can
make no Peace with the Governor of Canada.


Sadekanacktie, Why do you doubt our integrity and fidelity in keeping the
Covenant Chain firm* and inviolable with all our Brethren that are linked
therein? The least Member cannot be touched, but the whole Body must feel and
be sensible; if therefore an Enemy hurt the least part of the Covenant Chain,
we will join to distroy that Enemy; for we are one Head, one Flesh, and one
Blood.


His Excellency, I shall also maintain the Peace with all those Nations of
Indians which you have entered into Alliance with upon your Engagement that
they commit no acts of Hostility against any of their Majesty's Subjects.


Sadekanacktie, We thought that our Treaty with the French would have had no
success, because your Excellency rejected the belt of Wampum which the
Governor of C anada sent to your Excellency, to desire a Messenger may be sent
thither; and since the Governor of C anada forbids us to bring any Message
from you to him, we think it will be requisite that you should send some body
to a neutral place, where there may be a Conference between the two Governments.


His Excellency, I say again, what I said before, I cannot treat of Peace with
the Governor of C anada, nor receive any Message from him, and therefore I did
reject this belt of Wampum, as I do renounce any correspondence with him; the
Governor of Canada has put this fallacy upon you to bring this belt unto me,
which he knew I could not receive. I find by what the Governor of C anada
says, he intends to rebuild C adaracqui.


Sadekanacktie, We have told the Governor of C anada already; that he shall
not rebuild C adaracqui, and if we come to discourse him again, shall tell him
plainly, that we will not suffer it.


His Excellency, You will do very well to hinder him from building that Fort,
or any other near the Lake; if you suffer it, 'twill be a breach of the
Covenant Chain, and bring a Slavery upon your selves and Posterity. I am bound
to make war, and prevent any Incroachment upon this Province; it is your Duty
to give me notice, so soon as you hear of their motion that way, that I may
bring Forces to obstruct them; and I expect that you shall join your Forces
with me, otherwise all your pretenses to the Renewal of the Covenant Chain are
fallacious.


Sadekanacktie, We are glad you renew that to us, we shall never suffer that
place to be built, it has been Omnious to us, our people having been betrayed
there.


His Excellency, I have often cautioned you from giving credit to the Jesuit
Milet, who has always betrayed you, therefore you must suffer none of that
Tribe of Jesuits to come into your Castles. I have formerly warned you of
this, and now you see the evil of it. It is not for your Honor, that you who
are the antientest and most Warlike Nations of Indians upon this Continent,
should creep follow, as to go and ask a Peace from the Governor of Canada; I
expect that the French Indians should likewise come and creep to me, and ask
Peace, as you have basely done to the Governor of Canada


Sadekanacktie, Since you cannot send Messengers to C anada, we desire that you
would write to the Governor of Canada, and also to the great King, your
Master; and we desire the Governor of Canada write to his Master, That there
may be Peace concluded in these parts.


His Excellency, Let me first see the French Indians come down and desire Peace
of me; as you have gone to Count F rontimac, and then I will consider what may
be proper for me to do.


Sadekanacktie, You say, we have stoopt so low to the F rench for Peace, but
before ever we went thither, they had sent two Messengers for us to our Castles.


His Excellency, The French paper you brought from Canada, says, you bowed low
to C ount F rontimac, and stoopt as if he were your sovereign Prince, and made
show of your Repentance for all what you have done against him.


Sadekanackti, The Governor of Canada need not to reflect upon us with his
Writing, for how often has he sent Belts of Wampum to us by all Occasions, to
make Peace with him?


His Excellency, But he makes you his Children, and so you are liable to his
correction when he pleases.


Sadekanacktie, It is only a Name that we have given him, because he calls us
Children, not that we own him as our Father.


His Excellency, But I expect an Answer from you, that the French Indians
should come to me, and desire to bury the Hatchet, as you have gone to Canada
to do the like* it is for your Honor that you make them do it.


Sadekanacktie, The Praying Indians of C anada said to Dekanissore, when he was
there, That they would hold the Peace fast which their Father, the Governor of
Canada, had made with the five Nations, yea, as firm as they do the Christian
Faith; and that sundry of them were ready to come hither a fighting, but were
stopped upon Dekanissore's coming thither, and our Indian Prisoners, that were
taken by the French and Indians, were set at liberty.

How shall we behave our selves? If we do not go to Canada there will be no
confirmation of the Peace; and if they come to us in our Country, and ask what
our Governor says to the matter, What shall we say?


His Excellency, It is possible they may keep the Peace with you, but if any of
them commit the least Outrage upon any of their Majesty's Subjects in the
Covenant Chain, you must be accountable for it; for the only Reason why I
acquiese with this Peace you have made, contrary to my command and your own
Engagements, is, because I am unwilling to make war against you, or spill your
Blood; I rather choose to forgive what is past, and advise you for the future,
that you may not be brought into Slavery, which is by keeping a strict and
vigilent Eye upon the deceitful French, and their Indians, as when they were in
War with you.


Sadekanacktie, We thank you for your caution about the French, and desire you
and the Neighboring Collonies may take care of this place; that it may be
fortified, least they should surprise it.


His Excellency, It shall be done. The Garrison shall be secured against all
the force of C anada. The Eastern Indians have fallen upon N ew-England,
notwithstanding the Peace so lately made with that Collony, who are part of the
Covenant Chain, and have spilt much Blood; you must therefore consider of a way
to make them bury their Hatchet, and not to war upon our Brethren of New-E
ngland.

Afternoon the same day. The Sachims came together to give an Answer to the
Proposal concerning the Eastern Indians. S adekanacktie Speaker.


Sadekanacktie, We cannot send to the Eastern Indians, having no Men fit for
that purpose, but being now bound to C anada, will tell the Governor of Canada
to charge these Eastern Indians to lay down their Hatchet; for if we go first
to the Eastern Indians, they can do nothing without the Governor of Canada,
and that would but prolong time, therefore it will be best to do it directly by
the Governor of Canada.


His Excellency, You must not think that ever Count F rontimac will cause the
Eastern Indians make Peace, you must therefore think of some other way to
oblige them to lay down the Hatchet; for the Governor of Canada must not be
depended upon: You will always find him unconstant, as hitherto.


Sadekanacktie, We desire to know whether we shall speak to the far Indians,
the Dionondades at C anada, if we shall see them there, (which we expect) since
they are the Governor of C anada's Indians, or that we pursue the method we
have begun, and speak to them in their own Country?


His Excellency, Though you have Peace with the F rench and their Indians, you
must not expect that it will be lasting, if the French Indians should continue
to do Mischief to the Brethren of New England. As for Peace with the far
Indians, I leave you to your own Methods, with this caution, that you be not
rocked a sleep by it.


Sadekanacktie, We desire that Goods may be sold cheap when those far Indians
come, then this place will be desirable, like a fair Maid that has many Lovers,
so all people will flock hither; also, that those Indians that come with
Arnout, may be civilly entertained, then they will settle amongst us.


His Excellency, I doubt not but they will find content in the Rate of Goods.

The Peace made sometime a go between the Indians to the Eastward and
New England, did no ways hurt the Covenant Chain; for those Indians were at
that time in Peace with you of the five Nations. And as for what you say of
Chavaleer Deaux, it is nothing but French fallacy, he was not set at liberty by
the people of New-Englaad, (as I am informed) but broke Prison, and was pursued.


Sadekanacktie, When we come to our Country, we will consult what to do about
the far Indians; and when we come to Canada we will speak to the Praying
Indians to come hither and make Peace with your Excellency; we wish we had one
that could write all what has passed, but will, never the less, bring an
account to your Excellency of all what occurs.


His Excellency, It behooves you to be upon your guard, notwithstanding the
Peace, to keep your Gates shut at Night, and good Scouts out, and if there be
any party, either French or Indians approaching, forthwith give me an account,
and frequently correspond with me. I will strengthen this Garrison, and secure
it from all attempts of the Enemy.

As for your meeting at Onnondage, I am not against it, neither did I ever
oppose your consulting of your own private Affairs, yet I cannot send up any to
your Meeting at O nnondage, to consult of those Affairs which concern the whole
Covenant Chain, wherein so many Provinces are included, whereof you own me to
be the, Head. I always expect to be Personally present on such Occasions.

I will renew the Covenant Chain to morrow, and give you some Presents from
their Majesty's of Great Britain.


Sadekanecktie, We are obliged, to your Excellency for your good Advice, not to
be too secure, but to keep watch and look out, which we promise to do; and if
we see any Troops of French and Indians, we have but one Eye and one Ear,
whatever we see and hear, your Excellency shall see and hear forth with we will
immediately acquaint your Excellency. And since it is probable that there may
be some amongst us that will give the F ronch an account of all, we desire that
your Excellency in your public Discourse to morrow will pass it by.


His Excellency, The Senekes of late have sent a Belt of Wampum to the Indians
of Delaware River, requiring them to take up the Hatchet of War, and fight
along with them, which frightened those peaceable Indians, that live among a
peaceable People, who are no Warriors. And since they are in my Government of
Pennsilvania, I charge the Senekes not to frighten them, but to let them alone.


Sadekanacktie, We know nothing of any such Belt sent by us, probably those
Indians that are fled from us, and live upon the Snsquahannah River may have
sent such a Message.


His Excellency, I enjoin you, in renewing the Peace with those Indians, to let
them know, that they must not disturb the Delaware Indians, nor the Inhabitants
of the Province of Pennsilvania.


Sadekanacktie, We think we have discoursed of all matters, and those things we
made no Response to must be taken for granted.

We desire that your Excellency will begin early tomorrow to speak, and give
such Presents as you will bestow upon us; for we will send a Post to the
Seneket Country to prepare all things for our Journey and Negotiation with the
far Indians and Canada.


At a Meeting at Albany, the 22th Day of August, 1694.
Present,
His Excellency B enjamin F letcher, etc. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of
the Jarseys. The Council of N ew-Y ork, Commissioners from B oston and
Connecticut, The Sachims and Indians of the five Nations.
His Excellency, BRETHREN,

I Am now to repeat in public part of what passed in my private Conference
yesterday with your Sachims.

I do approve of what you said to me, in renewing the Covenant Chain; I shall
always inviolably preserve it on my part, but must declare my dislike to your
proceedings toward the Peace, and do appeal to the wisest of your Sachims,
whether you have not broke it on your parts; but since you confess your error,
and say you are weary of the War, and solemnly engage to be stestfast to the
Covenant Chain, I am unwilling to pursue you with Rigor, but rather acquiesce,
though at the same time you must allow we have always made your Quarrels our
own, and espoused the War you had against the French of Canada, in friendship
to you, when the Crowns of England and F rance were in perfect Peace.

B rethren, The Reasons for my rejecting the Belt pretended to be sent by the
the Governor of Canada, I have given already to the Sachims: I shall only say
here, I cannot make peace with him.

But as it is to your shame and dis-honour, who are the Antientest and most
Warlike Nations of Indians, to have bowed so low to the Governor of Canada,
and ask his Peace, as from a Father, so you ought to do your selves that
Justice and Honor, to cause the Praying Indians of C anada to come and ask me
to bury my Hatchet against them.

Dekanissore did well and prudently to tell the Governor of Canada* That you
will not admit him to rebuild Cadaracqui (which is his intention) If you suffer
the F rench once to settle a Garrison there, or hear the Lake (be their
pretenses never so plausible) they will bring you and your Posterity into
perpetual Bondage and Slavery.

Brethren, You must unite your force and oppose this Design; I shall be ready
to defeat it, if you will give me timely Notice, and your Assistance.

I do not pretend to hinder your ancient custom of Meeting at O nnondage, to
consult of your own Affairs, only when Peace and War is treated of, I am
obliged to be present, and expect these Treaties shall be held at Albany, where
the Covenant Chain had its first Birth.

B rethren, That Peace which N ew-England some time a go made with the Eastern
Indians, did no ways hurt the Covenant Chain, for these Indians were then in
Peace with the five Nations.

These Indians have lately taken up the Hatchet again, and shed much Blood in
that Province, who are Members of the Covenant Chain, you must therefore
consider, of a way speedily to snatch the Hatchet out of their hands, that all
the Covenant Chain may enjoy Peace.

Chavaleer Deaux was not (as you allege) set at liberty by the People of N
ew-E ngland, but made his escape to Canada.

I shall take care that the far Indians, to come with Arnout, be civilly
treated, and have their Majesty's Protection.

B rethren, You have made a Peace which cannot last, if you suffer the French
or any of their Indians to commit the least Outrage or Act of Hostility against
any of the Subjects of my great Master and Mistress, the King and Queen of
England, I must take up Arms for their Defense.

I have a few words of Advice to give you.

You are going to Canada; you must not trust too many; of your Sachims there,
it is too great a stock to venture at once.

You must not, during their absence, suffer your Young Men to depart from your
Castles. You must not hearken to the Counsel of the Jesuit Milet, nor suffer
any of that Tribe to live amongst you.

And you must look out, and be sure give me timely Notice of the French
approaching to rebuild Cadaracqui, or marching against any of their Majesty's
Provinces, that I may move with force to repel them.

And now, B rethren, I do hereby renew the Covenant Chain, in the Names of
their Majesty's of Great B ritain, on behalf of their Subjects of New-Englaad,
C onnecticut, N ew-Y ork, East and West-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and
Virginia, and all other their Majesty's Dominions on this Main of America; and
I lay down this Belt of Wampum as a Seal.

B rethren, You have declared me the Head of the Covenant Chain; I do declare
that I will inviolably defend and preserve it, to the outmost drop of my Blood,
while you on your parts perform your agreement. And in the Name of their
Majesty's, the great King and Queen of England, and for their Majesty's
Subjects of New England, C onnecticut, N ew-York, East and West-Jarsey,
Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia, lay down these Presents.


The Address of the River Indians, to his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. at
Albany, August 18th, 1694.
PRESENT
His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of
East and West-Jarsey. Of Their Majesty's Council for the Province of New York.
Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll William Smith, Chidley
Brook, Esquire Major Peter Schuyler,

A Sachim Speaker. Father,

IN the time of Old, we River Indians were a strong Nation, but are much
decayed by the War, and are now become a weak mean People, as you see we are,
insomuch that we dare not shake Hand with your Excellency. Then gave two Beaver
Skins.

F ather, We are come hither as your Children, according to our Duty; we have
been Obedient to all your Commands, which Major Schuyler can witness, and shall
continue to be Obedient, and firm to the Government* We never have been ordered
out upon occasion of any incursions of the Enemy, but we were always ready.
Then gave some more Beaver.


His Excellency Answered, I do accept of the Testimony of your Obedience
kindly, as if your Presents were a Thousand times more: you shall not want the
Protection of this Government, which shall be able to secure you from any force
that can be brought against you. I shall, before I go, give some Testimony of
that Respect my great Master and Mistress, the King and Queen, bear to them
that are Obedient Subjects.


The Answer which his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. gave to the River
Indians at Albany, August the 22th, 1694.
Present,
His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Addrew Hamilton, Governor of the
Jarseys. Of Their Majesty's Council for the Province of New York.
Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll. William Smith, Chidley
Brook, Esquire Major Peter Schuyler,
The River Indians,
His Excellency, I Am informed, that one of your People this last Winter was
accidentally killed by the Slay of a Christian, which drove over him upon the
Ice unawares. I give this bundle of Wampum to wipe off that Blood.

Children, I have heard a good Character of you, that you have behaved your
selves like obedient Children and good Subjects to the great King and Queen of
England: I charge you to keep a good Watch abroad, that you be able to
advertise me of any approach of the Enemy; and, if you find any skulking
Parties, you are to distroy them. And further, you are to obey such Orders and
Commands as you shall receive from time to time from the Commander in chief of
this Garrison of Albany, in my absence.

I hear, that when you go a hunting, before you come Home to your Castles, you
slip aside into New England, and there get drunk, and squander away all what
you have got, then come home poor to your Families, and become a burden to
your Neighbors, let me hear no more of this.

I renew the Covenant Chain with you, and promise you all Protection from this
Government, I hope you will behave your selves so as to deserve it, and be good
Soldiers, and keep firm to the Covenant Chain. And in the Name of their
Majesty's of Great B ritain, I lay down these Presents.


A Conference had between his Excellency Benjamin Fltcher, etc. and the
Mahikander's or lower River Indians, and Showanno's or far Indians, at
Kingstone in the County of Ulster, the 28th of August, 1694.
PRESENT
His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of
East and West-Jarsey. Of their Majesty's Council for the Province of New York.
Coll. Stephen Courtland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll. William Smith, Childley
Brook, Esquire William Nicoll, Esquire
Mahikanders and far Indians.
The Sachim of the Mahikinders Speaker. FATHER;

YOU are Governor of this Province of New York, some of your Christian People,
that undertook this tedious Journey with us, last Year, are killed by the way
by our Enemies, for which we are very sorry; some also of the Mahikanders and
far Indians are likewise killed. I now wipe off your Tears for that Blood. Then
gave two or three Beavers.

F ather, We have had great sorrow for the loss of these Men which were killed,
which is now wiped off. We have had great difficulty to bring the Showannoes
and far Indians to see your Excellency, and desire shelter under your Wings,
which will wipe off all the sorrow from us. We desire your Protection. Then
gave a few more Beaver.

Father, We expected a great Hunting, but have got little more than Blows from
an Enemy that pursued us, and with a small share of what we have got, we are
come to renew the Covenant Chain of Peace with you, and desire we may be as one
Heart, one Blood and one Soul with the English, the Mohaques, River Indians,
and all the Indians of this Government. Then gave a few more Beaver.


His Excellency, Children, I am sorrowful for the loss of the Christians and
Indians of either Nation; you are as welcome to me as Children to a Father. I
shall always protect you, while you behave your selves well, and take you and
the far Indians into the Covenant Chain, and be as tender of you as a Father of
his Children.

Children, If you had come to me earlier, before I came from New York or
Albany, I had been better able to signify my Affection to you, than now, I am
upon my Return from my Journey, having disposed of the Presents I had provided
for the present time. I give you this bundle of White Wampum as a Token that I
receive you into the Covenant Chain, for the Province of New-Y ork, and all
their Majesty's Governments in America. And you must look upon all these as
your Friends and Brethren.

Children, I do not question but you remember, that when you were last year at
Albany, Major Schuyler was kind to you, and let you have things needful to fit
you out for this Journey; I therefore expect, that now you will take care to
re-pay him.

Children, If hereafter you are set upon, or interrupted in your Hunting, by
any Enemy, so soon as you can give me notice of it, I shall be ready to come
and assist you with Men and Arms, to repel any Force that shall endeavor your
hurt,


The Sachim, Father, Being this time so harrassed with an Enemy, in our
Journey, we were interrupted from Hunting, we are not now able to pay Major
Schuyler, but we expect three hundred far Indians to follow, and come up
quickly after us, and when they come, we intend to repay him honestly, for what
he supplied us.


His Excellency, It is well, I will order some Presents for you Albany. I bid
you Farewell.


FINIS.

