THE PSALMS HYMNS AND Spiritual Songs, OF THE Old and New Testament, Faithfully
Translated into English Meter.

For the use, edification and Comfort of the Saints in public and private;
especially in New England.

2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Col. 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell in you richly in (...)
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, singing to the Lord with grace in your hearts. Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. (...)
filled with, etc. James 5. 13. The Eighth Edition.

Boston, Printed by John Allen, and (...) Harris, for Samuel Phillips, at the
Brick-Shop, near the Townhouse. 1695

To the Godly Reader.
W E know that these Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, though in other
Languages (and so consequently in other poetical measures) were inspired by the
Holy Ghost, to holy men of old, for the edification and comfort of the Church,
and People of God in all ensuing ages, to the end of the world. And for these
holy ends, we have with special care and diligence translated them into such
Meeters as are most usual and suitable for such holy Poems, in our own
language, having a special eye both to the gravity of the phrase of sacred
writ, and sweetness of the verse. And for fuller satisfaction of the godly
desires of all, we have added sundry interpretations, according to the latitude
of the significations of the Hebrew Text, commonly noted with an Asterism thus
[*] and some other various readings, though not so noted.

Deuteronomy. 32, 33.
How should one chase a thousand, two ten thousand put to flight.
Psa. 4. 4.
Stand you in awe, and do not sin, etc.
Psalm. 11 3.
If that the firm foundations shall wholly ruined be;
As for the man that righteous is, what then perform can he?
v. 4 His eyes behold, and his eye lids the sons of men do try.
Psalm. 12. v. 5.
Thus says the Lord, for cry of poor for spoiling of the meek.
I Will rise now, him in safety set, that boldly he may speak.
Or,
Thus says the Lord, for poor men's cry, for spoiling them that are
The meek; I Will rise now, set him free from him that would him snare.
Psalm. 17. 13.
The wicked by thy sword,
v 14 From mortals by thy sword, O Lord
Their sons are filled, their excellence.
Psalm. 21. 12.
For them thou sett'st a butt,
Ps. 22 Title, Concerning the morning hind,
v. 6 ^2 of men a very shame:
And I contemptuously despi^'d amongst the people am.
Psa. 27. 13.
I should have fainted but that I
Psa. 29. v 7.
Jehovahs voice parts flames of fire
v. 9. And in his temple every one his glory does declare
Psa 34. 5. and flowed near. Psa 35. 16.
They mocking hypocrites among.
Psa 37. v. 40.
From wicked men them save he shall because they trust in him.
Psa. 45. 5.
Thy shafts are sharp within their heart foes to the king that be;
Whereby the people overcome, shall fall down under thee.
Psa. 51 17 1 m.
A contri^e spirit, broke contrite heart
Psa 68 27.
And Naphth'lies Lords there were,
v 31. From Egypt shall come messengers
Psa. 77. 10.
Then in my self I said should this cause mine infirmity;
That changed now the right hand is, of him that is most high.
Psa 106. 45, 46.
And in's much mercies did repent and made them piti'd be
Of all those that did carry them into captivity.
Psa. 11. ^.
I love the Lord, because he does, etc.
Psa. 119. 30. 2 m
Thy Judgments viewed I have
Psa. 145. 9.
The Lord is good to all, over all, etc.
Isai. 25 2.
For thou a city made an heap, a City fenced to fall;
The strangers palace, City none, be built it never shall.
Hab. 3. 9.
His chariots of salvation were,
Streams by thy bow their channels leave
The o^ths words to the tribes that thou did swear
Thou did the earth with rivers cleave
v 13 Did wound, thou the foundation
Have to the neck discovered.
The Song of Moses, Exodus 15 (...) sang Moses and the children of Israel this
song unto the Lord, and spoke, saying:

The horse he and his rider down into the Sea did throw.

My God he is, I Will him prepare an habitation.
My Fathers God he is also, I'^^ him exal^ the same.
3. Jehovah is a man of war, Jehovah is his name

And his choice captains drowned were as in the Red Sea they past


Lord thy right hand in pieces dashed those that against thee rose.

Thou did send forth thy wrath, which as the stubble did them waste,

The floods stood upright as an heap, the depths in mi^-sea froze.

My lust on them shall filled be, my sword draw out will I:
My hand shall them again possess, or ^troy them utterly.
Thou with thy wind did on them blow the Sea them covered.
They in the mighty waters sunk as if they had been lead. (2)
who is like thee amongst the gods who is like thee glorious
In holiness, fearful in praise, in doings mavelous.


Thou by thy strength shall guide them to that holy seat of thine,


Trembling shall seiz: away shall melt all Canaans dwellers then.

They shall lie still as does a stone, until thy people pass:
Until thy people, Lord shall pass which thou have purchased:

The mount of thine inheritance, O Lord the place wherein
Thou have prepared thy sanctuary for thee to dwell therein:
Lord which thy hands established

For evermore through ages all for ever Sovereign.

Into the Sea, Jehovah then the Sea upon them ^ent.

But on dry land in midst of Sea, the sons of Israel past.
Miriams Answer.
Sing ye unto the Lord, for he triumphed in glory so:
The horse he and his rider down into the Sea did throw.
The Prophetical Song of Moses. Deuteronomy. 32.
OH heavens give ye attentive ear to what I shall declare,
And also thou O Earth shall ^ear what my mouths* sayings are.

The dew, as rain on tender herbs and like the showers on grass.

See that ye greatness attribute therefore unto our God.

A God of truth, and without sin, both just and right is he.

A crooked generation they and froward do remain.

Thy father that thee bought and made and stablish'd, is not he?

Thy father ask, and he will thee show; thine elders will thee tell.

When as the separation he did make of Adams sons.
The borders of the people he did set, where they should dwell
According to the number of the sons of Israel.

The Lot of his Inheritance Jacobs Posterity.

He Le^ him round; him taught, him kept, as the apple of his (...).

Spreads out her wings, and takes them up ^ears them (...) wings upon.
Even in such wise Jehovah led him up and down alone.
A fo^reign God also with him, there was not any one.

That with the increase of the fields he might be satisfied.
The honey from the rock also, to suck he did them make,
He from the flinty rock likewise, did make him oil to take.

With fat of lambs, and goats, and rams, that were of Ba^^ans breed.
Together with the fatness of the wheaten kidneys fine;
Thou of the grapes did also drink the blood, refined wine. 2

Thou art grown fat, thou gross art grown, art closed with fatness thick.
Then he forsook the mighty God, who had (...) magnified,
The Rock of his salvation: he also villifi'd.

And with abominations they did provoke his (...).
17 They did to devils, not to God, their sacrifices there;
To gods unknown, n^w-upstarts, whom their fathers did not fear.

The mighty God who formed thee, thou also have forgot.

Because of the provoking of his sons and daughters both.

For they a very froward race, they faithless children be.

They have provoked me to wrath, with idols vanity.
With what is no people I Will provoke, them unto jealousy;
Them with a foolish nation to anger move will I.
(3)

And waste the earth with her increase, hills bottoms fire also.

With hunger burnt, with heat devoured, with bitter plagues them end.

The poison of the serpents too, which on the dust do go,

Which neither shall the sucking babe, nor hoary-headed leave.

I Will their remembrance make to cease from amongst the sons of men.

And say, our high hand, not the Lord, it is, wrought all this change.



Had not their Rock them sold, and them Jehovah shut up quite.

Yea though our enemies themselves, as judges shall be heard.

Their grapes are grapes of gall, to them they bitter clusters yield.


(4)

For their wo^day is nigh and soon mishaps shall them be^ide.

When none shut-up or left he sees, and that their power is spent,

Where is the rock on whom they did their expectation stay?

Let them arise, help you and be a hiding place for you.

I kill, and quicken; wound and heal, none from my hand can free:
For I to heaven lift mine hand, and say I live for aye,
41 If my bright sword I whet, and if my hand on judgment stay.
I Will render vengeance to my foes, I Will pay them that me hate,

For blood of slain, and of them that are in captivity.
More than from first revengers were upon the enemy.

Because that of his servants all revenge the blood will he.
And to his adversaries he, will render vengeance due,
And he will mercy to his land, and to his people show.
The song of Deborah and Barak, Judges 5. Then song Deborah and Barak the son
of Abinoam, o^ that day, saying,
IN that (...) has revenged, bless ye therefore the Lord:
In that the people offered, themselves of free accord.

I even I Will sing to the Lord, the God of Israel.

The earth did shake, the heavens did drop, the clouds their showers distilled

Even Sinai from before the Lord, the God of Israel.

Untrodden were: the passengers did travel through by-waies.

Till that I Deborah rose; I rose, a mother in Israel.

Amongst forty thousand Israelites, was shield or spear then seen?

Present themselves amongst the folk bless ye therefore the Lord.

Ye that in judgment sit, and ye that walk the way beside
were freed there shall they now record,
In places where they waters draw, the just acts of the Lord.
His righteous acts to them that dwell In Isreal's towns relate,
Then shall the people of the Lord go down unto the gate.
(2)

Abinoams son and captive lead thou thy captivities.

Amongst the folk the Lord gave me rule over mighty men.

Thy followers O Benjamin amongst thy folk did pass,
From out of Machir governors descended also then,
And out of Zebulun came they, that handle writers pen.

And also Barak was on foot into the valley sent:
Because of those divisions that, in Reuben did appear,
Full many great impressions of heart amongst us were.
Why did thou amongst the sheep-folds stay, the bleating flocks to hear?
For Reuben his divisions, heart searchings great there were.

On Seashore Ashur did remain, and in his creeks abide.

Their lives in danger unto death upon the open field.
(3)

In Taanach by Megiddo's streams, no money-gain they wan.


O thou my soul have trod down strength,

By plunging pransings, pransings of their mighty horses there.

For they came not to aid the Lord; against might the Lord to aid.

Above the women in the Tent a blessed one is she.


Her right hand to the workmans maul, and Sisera hammered:
She pierced and struck his temples through and then cut off his head.

He fell: whereas he bowed down he fell destroyed there.
(4)

The lattess through, in coming why, so long his chariot staid.
His chariots wheels why tarry they?

Yea she turned answer to her self,

The prey by poll, a maid or twain, what parted have not they?
Have they not parted Sisera a party colored prey,
A party colored nield work prey of neild work on each side
That Is party-colored meet for (...) of them that spoils divide?

That do him love, be like the Sun that goes out in his might.
The song of Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. And Hannah prayed, and said,
MY ^eart does in Jehovah joy,
My horn in Jah is lift on high
My mouth enlarged is over my foe
For in thy health rejoice do I.

Because there is none else but thee;
And other rock there is not one,
That to our God compared may be.
Speak ye out no presumptuous word,
No harshness from your mouth proceed,
For God of knowledge is the Lord,
Also by him are actions weighed.

And they that slipped are girt with might:

And ceased has the hungry wight.
So that the barren seven bare.
The fruitful woman weak is grown.

He lifts up, and to grave brings down.
7 The Lord both poor and rich does make*
He raises up, and brings low*

The beggars lifts the dun^ghil ^ro.
To give them place with princely lords,
To make the^ heirs of glorious throne;
For the ear (...) foundations are the Lords,
And he has set the world thereon.

Preserve so, that they shall nor fail,
The vile an darkness shall be still,
For no man shall by strength prevail.

Shall broken (...) pieces small:
And he from Heaven shall accord.
To thunder forth upon them all.
The borders of the earth the Lord
Shall justly judge, and he likewise
Unto his king (...) strength afford,
And make his Oynteds horn to rise.
David's Elegy 2 Samuel 1. 17. And David Lamented with (...) Lamentation ever Saul
(...) over Jonathan his son.
Pon (...) places high is slain the flower of Israel.
How are the mighty fallen down!
In Gath this never tell,
Nor shew't in streets of Ashkelon, lest Philistines rejoice:
Lest daughters of the uncircumsised should make triumphant noise.
Ye mountains high of (...), Let there be never dew.
Nor rain, nor fields of offerings let ever be on you:
For there the mighty me hi^ shield received disgraceful feil:
The shield of Saul as he had not anointed been with oil.
The ^ow of Jon'than did not turn back from the blood of the slain,
From far of the mighty, and Saul's sword did not return in vain.
Most lovely Saul and Jonathan, and pleasant did abide
While they did live, and in their death them nothing did divide.
They swifter than the Eagles were, the Lions did excel
In strength, O weep ye over Saul, daughters of Israel:
Who did in scarlet you array, with deckings manifold,
Who did on you apparel ^ay the Ornaments of Gold.
In midst of the (...), how the mighty fallen (...).
O Jonathan out off w^^t thou upon thy places high!
O thou my brother Jonathan, I am distressed for the^,
A loving kind companion thou ^ast been unto me.
Thy love to me in wonder p^st the love of women far,
How are the mighty fallen and waste the weap^ns be of war!
Psalm. I.
O Blessed man that walks not in the advice of wicked men,
Nor stands in the sinners nor scorners seat sits in. (way

And in his law does meditate, both in the day and night.

In his due season yield his fruit, whose leaf shall never fall:
And all he does shall prosper well.

But they are like unto the chaff, which wind drives to and fro.

Nor in the assembly of the just shall stand the sinful wight.

Whereas the way of wicked men shall utterly decay,
Psalm 2.
WHY rage the heathen furiously, vain things the people mute,

With one consent against the Lord; against his Christ also,





The Lord to me said, you are my son, this day I thee begot,
Ask thou of me and I will give the heathen for thy lot:
And of the earth thou shall possess.

Thou shall them break as potters sheards




When his wrath but a little burns, blessed all that on him ^^ay.
Psalm III, IV. A Psalm of David when he fled from the face of Absalom his Son.
O Lord my foes how great are they, How many up against me stand,

In God for him at any hand.

Lord and the up-lifter of my head

From's holy hill me answered. Selah.

For me Jehovah up did bear,

Ten thousands of them I Will not fear.

For all mine enemies thou have stroke
Upon the cheek bone thou likewise
The teeth have of the wicked broke.

Unto Jehovah does pertain:
Thy people specially upon
Thy blessing does and shall remain.
Psalm. IV. To the chief Musician on Neginoth. A Psalm of David.
GOd of my justice when I call O hear me; when distressed
Thou have enlarged me, show me grace, and hear thou my request.

How long will ye love vanity, and still deceit pursue? Selah.

The Lord will hear when unto him I pour out my complaint.

Within your heart with silence deep when on your bed you lie.

And confidently put your trust upon the Lord do ye.

The light Lord of thy countenance let on us lifted be.

Their corn and their new wine also have much increased been.
I will ^lie down and I my sleep will take:
For me in confidence to dwell, thou, Lord, alone do make.
Psalm. V. To the chief Musician on Nehiloth: A Psalm of David.
O Lord give ear to what I say, My meditation understand.
I pray
Voice of my cry do thou attend

O thou Jehovah shall it hear:
I will to thee in the morning time
Address, and will mine eyes up rear.

In sin; nor ill dwell with thee shall.

Who mischief work thou hat'st them all

Them that do lying falsehood prate:
The man of blood, and of deceit,
Jehovah will ab^minate.

Enter into thy house will I:
I in thy fear my self will bow
Before thy house of sanctity,

(...) me forth in thy righteousness:
Before my (...) thy way likewise
Do thou Jehovah straight express.

Their inward part iniquities;
Their throat is as an open grave.

O God make thou them wholly wast,
From their own plots let them fall far:
^ut in their heaps of sin them cast,
^or they against thee rebels are.

Rejoice and ever shouting be
For thou defend'st them, yea, let those
That love thy name, be glad in thee

A blessing to the righteous one.
And wilt him crown as with a shield,
With gracious acceptance.
Psalm V. Second Meeter.
JEhovah to my words give ea r, my meditation weigh
I to thee will pray.
I
Will unto thee direct my prayer, and will look up on high.

Nor shall with thee dwell any ill.

Craftsmen of sin thou hat'st all them Thou shall him stroy that lies:
The Lord will loath the bloody men, and them that guile devise.
I will to thy house draw near in thine abundant grace;
And I will worship in thy fear toward thy holy place.

O Lord thy ways most straight express also before mine eyes.

Their throat is as an open grave they flatter with their tongue.

Out in their heaps of (...) them cast, for against thee fr^t they all.

For thou defend'st them: glad let be in thee, that love thy name.
Lord wilt thy blessing yield unto the righteous one:
And wilt him crown as with a shield with acceptance.
PSALM. VI. To the chief Musician on Neginoth upon sheminith, a Psalm of David.
LOrd, in thy wrath rebuke me not,
Nor in thy hot wrath chasten me,

Lord heal me, for my bones vexed be.

How long, Lord, will thou me forsake?

O save me for thy mercies sake.

And who shall praise thee in the grave?

Swims: I wish tears my couch washed have

Because of all mine enemies.

All ye that work iniquities.
Because Jehovah now has heard
The voice of these my weeping tears:

Jehovah will receive my prayers

And greatly troubled let them be:
Yea let them be returned back,
And be ashamed suddenly.
Psalm. VI. Second Meter.
JEhovah, O rebuke me not when thou shall angry be:
And in thine indignation hot, O do not chasten me:
2 O Lord, because that weak am I; be gracious unto me:
Jehovah, heal thou me, for why? my bones they vexed be.
Lord, how long space!


With thanks confess to thee who shall that is within the grave?

Throw all the night my couch likewise with tears I watered.

And they are old and dim become amongst all mine enemies.

Because the Lord has heard the (...) of my complaining moan,
My humble suit for grace also, Jehovah does it hear,
Jehovah will my prayer unto vouchsafe a gracious ear.

Let them return, and suddenly let them be shamed likewise.
Psalm. VII. Shiggaion of David, which he s^ng unto the Lord concerning the
words of Cush the Benjamite.
O Lord my God I do repose my confidence in thee
From all my persecuting Foes, save and deliver me.
Lion he my soul in pieces tear,
He tears, and to deliver me there does not one appear.
I,
And if that in my hands there be wrongful iniquity.

(Who causs^ss was mine enemy, yea I did him release.

My life, and in the dust also let him my honor lay.

A wake thou up for me likewise, thou Judgment did command.

And for the same return do thou unto thy place on high.
Lord the peoples Judge shall be Jehovah judge thou me,
After my righteousness in me, and mine integrity.
(2)

Because, O righteous God, even thou the hearts and reins do try



Already he his bow has bent, and has it ready set,

His arrows ready makes for them that persecutors are.

And mischief sore conceived has he, but shall bring forth a lie.

But fallen into the ditch he is that he himself did frame.

His dealing violent shall fall like wise upon his crown.

And to his name a Psalm address, who is the Lord most high.
Psalm VIII. To the chief Musician upon Git^ith. A Psalm of David.
O Lord our Lord in all the earth how does thy name excel!
Who have above the heavens set thy Majesty to dwell!

That thou might still thine enemies and self-avenging foe.

The (...) together with the stars, the which thou did prepare:
4 O what is wretched man that (...) in mind thou should him have?
And what the son of man whom th^^ to visit do vouchsafe?

With glory thou have crowned him, with majesty also.

All things thou have under his feet, put in subjection.



O Lord, our Lord, in all the earth O how thy name excels!
Psalm. IX. To the chief Musician upon Much Laben, a Psalm of David.
LOrd I Will thee praise with all my heart, thy wonders all proclaim.


4 For thou maintain'st my right and cause in throne sit'st judging right.

For ever and for evermore, thou have their names made void.

Thou have stroy'd cities, they are gone, with their memorial.

And unto judgment he his Throne prepared has most sure

Unto the people judgment give he shall in uprightness.

A refuge high he is to them in seasons trouble some.

For them that do thee seek, O Lord, forsake thou never do.
(2)

The deeds also that he has done, among the people tell

He also never does forget the crying of the meek.

Mark mine afflictions that arise, thou lift'st me from deaths gate.

And that in thy salvation I may rejoice also.

Their foot is taken in the ^et which privily they laid.

The wicked's snared in's handy work, Deep Meditation.

And all the nations of the world that do not God remember.

The expectation of the poor for aye shall not decry.

The heathen people in thy sight let judged be likewise.

That so the nations they may know that they be sorry men. Selah.
Psalm X.
WHy stand'st thou Lord far off? why hid'st thy sel^ in times of straight
In pride the wicked persecutes the poor afflicted wight:
Caught be they in their plots forecast.

The wicked boasts; and bless he does the churl, that stirs Gods i^e.

Will not inquire: that there is no God so all his thoughts abide.

Above his sight: his pressing foes puff at them all will he.

From age to age that am not yet in ill adversity

Under his tongue perverseness is, also iniquity.

He slays the harmless, against the poor his eyes down sli^y bonds

He lurks and trapping them in's net the afflicted poor does snatch.

That so a multitude of poor in his strong paws may fall.

So that he will not see this thing unto eternal aye.
(2)

Cast not the meek afflicted one out of thy memory.

He in his heart says, thou will not make inquisition.

The poor leaves it to thee: thou art of fatherless the stay

Search thou out his impiety, until thou fi^dest none.

Out of his land the heathen folk are perished away.

Thou firmly do prepare their heart, thou make attent thine ear.

The man of sorrows from the land with terror to dismay.
Psalm. XI. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.

Unto my soul, like as a bird fly to your hid away?
2 For ^o the wicked bend their bow, their shafts on string prepare:
That they may shoot in the dark at them in heart that upright are.

Yet for the man that righteous is, what is it he has done?

His eyes will view, his eie-lids too the sons of men will try.

His soul the wicked hates, and him that violence does love

And burning tempest of their cup shall be the portion.

His countenance the upright one beholding does approve.
Psalm. XII. To the chief Musician upon (...), A Psalm of David.
SAve O Jehovah now because the godl y one does cease;
For from amongst the sons of men the faithful do decrease

They with a flattering lip do speak; with double heart likewise.

And he shall cut off every tongue which boasts of great things.

Are not our lips our own? for who lord over us is set?

I now will rise, from such as puff at him, will give him rest.

In earthen furnace seven times that has been purified.

For evermore in safety from this generation.

When vileness by the sons of men exalted is on high.
Psalm. XIII. To the chief Musician A Psalm of David.
JEhovah, O how long will thou forget me? what for aye?
How long will thou so closely hi^ from me thy face away?

How long exalted over me shall be my deadly foe?
Consider me, O Lord my God, and answer me likewise,
Lest that I sleep the sleep of dea^ enlighten thou mine (...)

Lest those that trouble me rejoice if being moved, I fail.

My heart shall very much rejoice in thy salvation.
Unto Jehovah songs of praise sing joyfullie will I,
Because that he has dealt with me exceeding bounteously.
PSALM XIV. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
THe fool in's heart says, there is no God they are corrupt each one,
(...) works they do; (...) does ^ood there is none.

If any that does understand, that seeks God there be.

There is not any that does good, no not so much as one.

That eat my folk, as bread they eat, on God they do not call,

For God in the generation is of such as righteous are.

And that because Jehovah he does for his refuge take.

When God shall turn: Jacob shall joy, glad Israel shall be.
Psalm. XV. A Psalm of David.
O Lord who in thy tabernacle a sorjourner shall be?
And who is he inhabit shall thy hill of sanctity?

And he who from his heart does speak the words of faithfulness.

Nor yet against his neighbor does take up an ill report.

He honors them, and changes not, though to his hurt he swear.

Against the harmless: thus who does shall never moved be.
Psalm. XVI. Mi^tam, or a Golden Psalm of David.
O Mighty God, preserve thou me for upon thee I rest:

My goodness reaches not to Thee, But to the saints on earth;
And to them that are excellent in whom is all my mirth.
Who to strange gods do hasten gifts, their griefs shall multiply:
Their blood drink offerings I Will not pour their names my lips shall fly.
Jehovah is the portion of mine inheritance
(...) is he likewise of my cup thou do maintain my chance.

Yea, goodly is the heritage that (...) to my shar e.

My reins also do me instruct in seasons of the ^ight.

Because he is at my right hand, I shall not slide therefore.

Moreover also dwell in hope my flesh securely shall.

Nor suffer wilt thy holy one corruption for to see.

Thy presence: and at thy right hand are pleasures evermore.
Psalm. XVII. A Prayer of David.
JEhovah hearken to the right, attend unto my cry:
Give ear unto my prayer that goes from lips that do not lie.

Mine heart thou have examined, and visited by night,
Thou have me as in furnace tried, and yet shall nothing find:
For that my mouth shall not transgress, I am resolved in mind.

The paths of him that does destroy observed heedfullie.

(...) at any time my (...) go astray.

^^line thou unto me thine ear hear thou my speech withal.
(2)
Show forth thy wondrous grace on them that trust on thee repose:
(...) thou that sav'st by thy right hand from self up-lifting foes.
As the apple of thine eye me keep, in thy wings shade me hide:
From wicked men my deadly foes, who waste me on each side.
(...) Closed in their fat they are, and they boast with their mouth likewise:
(...) They round us in our steps, on earth they set their bowed down eyes.

(...) secret places sits as he a renting lion were.

(...) set my soul at freedom from the wicked one thy sword.

(...) of this passing world who have within this li^e their share.
Thou with thine hidden treasure do their bellies fill also:
(...) sons are filled their (...) they leave their babes unto.
15 In righteousness thy favor I shall very clearly see:
And waking with thine Image I shall satisfied be.
Psalm. XVIII. To the chief Musician, (...) Psalm of David the Servant of the
Lord, (...) spoke unto the Lord the words of this song, (...) the day that the
Lord delivered him from (...) enemies, and from the hand of Saul, and he said.
ILL dearly love the Lord my strength,

And Savior (...), my God, my strength*
My sh^^ld on whom my trust relies.
My safeties (...), my Tower likewise,

Who to be praised worthy is
So from my foes be saved I shall.

And floods of belial frighted use.

The snares of death prevented me.

And to my God cried; he did hear
My voice from's Temple and my Cry
Before him came into his ear:

Moved hills foundations shook at's (...)
Smoke from his nostrils ^id arise
And from his mouth devouring fire,
By it the coals enkindled were.

(...) he descended; also there
Was at his ^^et a gloomy cloud.

Yea on the wings of wind he flew,

His covert round about him drew
Dark waters, and thick clouds of skies:

His thickened clouds did pass likewise
^lail-stones, and coals of fire did pass.
(2)

Within the heavens in his ire,
The Highest caused his voice to go
Hailstones and burning coals of fire.

And bruising he them scattered:
And lightnings he did hurl about
And them with dread discomfited.

Were seen, the ground-works of the world
Appeared at thy rebuke, at blast
Of thy displeasures breath, O Lord.

The waters great he drew me fro:

From them that hated me also.
For they were mightier than I.

Of that my dark calamity,
Yet was the Lord for me a stay.

He saved me, for he did delight.

According as I did aright.
After the pureness of my hands,
He gave a recompense to me:

Nor I from God went wickedly

Nor from me his decrees put I:

Me kept from mine iniquity.
(3)

According as I did aright:
After mine hands integrity,
That did appear before his sight.

Thou merciful thy self wilt show.
Thou upright wilt thy self declare,
With such as upright are also.

That thou art pure thou will declare;
Bu^ thou (...) self awry
Against them (...) that froward me.

To poor (...); but high looks suppress?

(...) God will lighten my darkness.

And (...) my God (...) over a wall.

(...), shield to all.

Or who (...) our God beside?

(...) does guide.

And on my high place makes me stand.

So well to war he learns my hand.

Thou have bestowed upon me.
And thy right hand has me upheld,
Thy meekness made me great to be.
(4)

So that mine ankles did not slide.

I turned not till they were destroyed.

They at my feet did fall subdued.

Unto the war with fortitude.
Thou have su^d^ed under me
Those that did up against me rise,
y foes their necks thou gave me,
That I might wast mine enemies

To God, but with no answers meet.
I beat them then as dust in the wind,
And cast them out as dirt in the street.

From people that contentious be:
Thou of the heathen made me head,
The folk I knew not, shall fear me.

Themselves shall strangers yield to me:

And from their closets frighted be,
(5)

God of my health exalted be.

And brings down people under me.

And thou did lift me higher then
Those that did up against me rise;
And freed'st me from the violent men.

With thanks the heathen folk among;
Jehovah to thy name express,
My praises will I in a song.

Unto his King; and does display
His mercy to's anointed one
To David and his seed for aye.
Psalm XIX: To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.
DEclare abroad the heavens do the Majesty of God:
And forth the firmament does show his handiwork abroad.



The ends of all the world about, their words do reach unto

Who bridegroom like from's chamber goes glad giants race to run.

To the ends thereof, from's heat also there hidden is no thing.
(2)

Jehovah's Testimony sure makes wise the simple heart.
Lord are right, and do rejoice the heart
The Lord's command is pure, and light does to the eyes impart.

The truth Jehovah's judgments are and righteous altogether.

Than honey sweeter manifold, and honeycomb they are.

In keeping of the same likewise, great is the Recompense.

And from presumptuous sins also, keep thou thy servant free.

Then clear and upright shall I be from great transgression.

Lord in thy sight, my Rock who art and my redeemer free.
Psalm. XX: To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.

The name of Jacob's mighty God, thee mightily defend.




And in the name of our God we our banners will erect,
When as thy supplications all Jehovah shall effect.
I that Jehovah does save his anointed dear,
With saving strength of his right hand, from's holy heaven he will hear.

But of the Lord our God the Name we never will forget:


Psalm. XXI. To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.
JEhovah in thy strength the King shall joyful be:
And joy in thy salvation, how vehemently shall he?

And thou have not with holden back that which his lips required. Selah.

Thou on his head of finest gold have set a Diadem.

Even length of dai^s to him, that he (...) for evermore should live.

Thou honor have and majesty likewise upon him set.

Thou make him with thy countenance to be exceeding glad.

Through mercy of the highest one, shall not removed be.

And thy right hand shall find out them of thee that haters be.

The Lord will swallow them in's wrath and them consume with fire.

From off the earth, and from amongst the sons of men their seed.

A wicked plot they have devised, but cannot work their end.
12 For thou shall turn their back whenever thou shall place
Thine arrows ready on thy strings, full right against their face.

And we will sing; yea praise with psalms, thy mighty power will we.
Psalm XXII. To the chief Musician upon Aijeleth shabar. A Psalm of David.
MY God, my God, wherefore have thou forsaken me? and why
Art thou so far off from my help, and from words of my cry?

Also by night, and unto me no quiet rest is there.

Among the thankful praises of thy people Israel.

They trusted have, and thou to them did give deliverance.

In thee they put their confidence, (...) naught did them confound.
6* But I (...) worm and not a man, of men a very scorn:
And I among the people am despised as forlorn.

They with the lip do ^^ake a mow the head in scorn they shake.

Let him deliver him because in him he does delight!

When I was or my mothers breasts, to hope thou did me make.

Yea from my mothers belly thou have been a God to me.
(2)

Approaches very near at hand, and helper there is none.

The mighty bulls of Bashan have (...).

As if that each a ravening and roaring lion were.

Like unto melted wax my heart amidst my bowels lies.

Unto my jaws; and to the dust of death brought me thou have.

Of wicked ones, they pierced through my hands and eke my feet.
I may them number all; they looked, they did me view.




For thou from horns of V^icorns did me vouchsafe to hear.

Amidst the congregation I will praises give to thee.
(3)

Him glorify; and dread him all ye Isreal's feed that be

Nor hides his face from him, but hears when unto him he cries.

Before them that him reverence, perform my vows I will.

That do him seek: your heart shall live unto perpetual aye.

And thee all heathen families to worship shall accord.

Likewise among the nations he is Ruler Sovereign.

(Who cannot keep alive his soul) before his face shall bend.

Which to the Lord shall counted be a generation.

Unto a people yet unborn that done this thing has he.
Psalm. XXIII A P^a^m of David.
THe Lord to me a Shepherd is, want therefore shall not I:

He leads me to the Waters still

In paths of righteousness he will for his names sake lead me.

For thou with me, thy rod also thy staff me comfort will.

Thou do a^oint with oil mine head my cup it overflows.

And in the Lords house dwell I shall so long as d^ies shall be.
Psalm. XXIV. A Psalm of David.
THe earth Jehovah's is with all the store of it.
The habitable world is his, and they thereon that fit.

And it the water floods upon, most solidly has staid.

Within his place of sanctity, who shall there stand also?

Who has not lift his soul to lies, nor sworn deceitfully.

From God of his salvation he his righteousness shall have.

That for thy face inquiring be this Jacob is, Selah.
(2)

(...) ye lift up, that enter in, the King of Glory may.

And valiant Jehovah is, in battle valiant.

Do ye lift up that enter in the King of Glory may.

The Lord of armies in array the glorious King is he. Selah.
Psalm. XXV. A Psalm of David.
I Lift my soul to thee, O Lord,

Let me not be ashamed nor let my foes joy over me.

But let them all ashamed be, who causlesly transgress.



Thy bowels, Lord, and mercies mind, for they have been for aye.

O mind me in thy tenderness, Lord, for thy goodness sake.



To them that keep his covenant, and testimonies do.

To pardon mine iniquity, for it is very great.
(2)



And of his covenant he to those will give intelligence.

For it is he that will set free my feet out of the net.

For I am in a lonely case, afflicted poor also.






Psalm. XXVI. A Psalm of David.
JUdge me, O Lord, for walk I do in mine integrity.
Upon the Lord I trust also, slide therefore shall not I.
Search me, O Lord, prove me likewise, my reins and my heart try*
I.

5 Church of malignants I do hate, and sit the wicked from
I will so Lord thy altar round.


The place and Tabernacle where resides thy Majesty.



My foot stands right, the Lord will I in Church-assembly bless.
Psalm. XXVII. A Psalm of David.
THe Lord my light is, and my hea^ what shall make me dismayed*
The Lord is of my life the strength, who shall make me afraid?

Against me to eat up my ^esh, they stumbled and fell down:

(...) against me should arise, I am secure in this.
One thing I asked of the Lord, which still I will request,
(...) I of all my life the days ^ay in the Lord's house rest.
To view the beauty of the Lord, and in his Temple seek.

He will me hide in secrecy of his pavillion;
And will me highly life upon the rocks munition.

Above mine enemies who do about encompass me.
Therefore in's tent I Will sacrifice of joy an offering;
Unto Jehovah sing will I, yea, I will praises sing.

Have mercy also upon me and unto me give ear.

Lord, I will seek thy countenance, mine heart did answer thee.

Thy servant put thou not away in thy displeasure sore.
O God of my salvation, do not from me depart:
Nor yet forsake me utterlie, for thou my he^per art.

Yet will Jehovah gathering unto himself me take.

In righteous paths, because of them that mine observers be.

For witness false against me stand, and breathe out cruelties:

Jehovah's goodness in the land of them that living be.
Do thou upon Jehovah wait, thy self there strengthening stay:
And so thy heart he strengthen shall: wait on the Lord I say.
Psalm XXVIII. A Psalm of David.
JEhovah unto thee I cry,
My rock be (...) not deaf from me:
Le^t thou be (...) from me, and I
Like them to pit that go should be.

For grace when unto thee I cry;
When I lift up my hands unto
Thine Oracle of Sancti^ie.
With ill men draw me not away,
(...) workers of unrighteousness:
That peace unto their neighbors say,
(...) in their hearts is wickedness.
Give thou to them like to their works
And like the evil of their deeds;
Give them like to their handy-works
And render unto them their ^eeds.
Because unto Jehovahs work
(...) did not wise attention yield
Neither unto his handiwork,
He will them wast, and not up-build.

The voice of my request for grace:
The Lord's my strength, and shield to me
My heart staid on him, helped I was.
Therefore my heart will gladness show,
And with my song I Will him confess Jehovah his anointed to
Their strength and tower of safety is.
Salvation on thy folk bestow,
And bless thou thine inheritance, into eternity also
^o thou them feed and them advance.
This in any common Tunes.
Save Lord thy people, bless also thou thine inheritance.
And even eternity unto them feed and them advance.
Psalm XXIX. A Psalm of David.
O Ye the (...) of mighty ones Jehovah give unto,
Unto Jehovah glory give, and (...) also.

In because of his holiness bow to Jehovah down.

Does thunder forth, Jehovah is on many waters set



And like a youthful Unicorn, the hill of Syrion,



(...) his whole glory he within (...) Temple does declare.
Jehovah on the deluge fate, the Lord sits ever King,
The Lord to's folk gives strength, the Lord (...) blessed peace will bring.
Psalm XXX. A Psalm; a Song of the Dedication of the (...) of David.
LORD, I will thee extol on high, for thou have made me rise:
And joyful have not made to be over me mine enemies.
Lord my God to thee cried have, (...) thou have made me whole.
Jehovah thou out of the grave has raised up my soul:
From pits descent thou quicknedst (...) O sing unto the Lord,
(...) ye his saints give thanks when ye his holiness record.
For's wrath does but a while abide, (...) in his love does stay:
(...) weeping lodge an evening tide, yet joy at break of day.
For in my prosperous (...) I said, now shall I never (...)
Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain fast abide.
Thou hid^st thy face, I troubled was, Lord, I to thee did cry;
Also my humble suit for grace unto the Lord made I.

Shall dust give glory unto thee? shall it thy truth make known?

To me, Jehovah be thou near, an helper me to save.

With joy thou did me gird also, and off my sackcloth cast.

Jehovah, O my God always I will give thanks to thee.
Psalm. XXXI. To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.
IN thee, O Lord, I put my trust, ^et me be shamed never:
Accordingly as thou art just, O do thou me deliver.

My rock of strength, and house of fence O be thou me to save.

Therefore for thy Names sake O do thou lead and guide thou me.

Full privily for me have set, because thou art my stay.

Jehovah God of verity, thou have redeemed it.

But as for me, I wholly place my trust upon the Lord.

Did view my straits, in anguish sad my soul thou did know.

But in the place of liberty thou made my feet to stand.
(2)
I, in mercy send relief:
My soul, my belly, and mine eye, consumed are with grief

And for my sins my vigor fails, my bones do pine away.

A fear to friends, they that me spy, without did flee me fro,

And like unto a broken pot, even such an one am I.

On every side me round about there was a trembling fear.
While as that they against me did together counsel take,
They craftily have purposed my life away to make.

I said thou art a God to me

From the hands of my enemies do thou deliver me,
And from the hand of them likewise that my pursuers be.
(3)

O give to me salvation even for thy mercies sake.

Oh let the wicked men be shamed, and silent in the grave.

That do such grievous speeches spread, in pride and in despite.

Who fear and trust in thee before the sons of earthly men!

From strife of tongues in covert place thou shall them safely hide.

His kindness wonderful to me, within a fenced town.

My suit for grace yet heard thou have, when I to thee did ^^y.

But he unto proud doers grants a plentiful reward.
24 See that encouraged you be, and let your heart wax strong:
All whosoever hopefullie do for Jehovah long.
Psalm. XXXII. A Psalm of David, (...).
OH blessed is the man to whom trespass is pardoned,
And he to whom transgression is wholly covered.

And he who (...) a spirit (...) that guile is not therein

By reason of my roaring cry, continuing (...) the day.

That into summers scorching drought my moisture turned quite, Selah.

And my (...) iniquity I have not covered.
Against my self my sins said I, I Will to the Lord confess;
And then of mine iniquity (...) did the (...) release. Selah.

Surely in floods of waters great, come nigh him shall not they,

Thou with songs of deliverance shall round encompass me. Selah.

The way wherein thou should go I Will guide thee with mine eye.

Whose mouths with bridle-bit we rule to bring them to command.

But him that on the Lord relies, shall mercy compass round.

And all in heart that upright be, shout forth with cheerful voice.
PSALM. XXXIII.
YE just in God rejoice, praise well the upright does suit,

3 A new song sing to him, aloud play skilfullie:


The earth is fully furnished with the Lords benignity.

And by the spirit of his mouth, a (...) armies of the same.

Together as in storehouses he lays up the deep.

Let all the dwellers of the world unto him reverence bear.

He did give out commandment, and it was firmly staid.

He makes to be of no effect what people do devise.

The cogitations of his heart to generations all.
(2)

And people whom for heritage he chosen has for his.
Lord from heaven looks, all sons of men views well.


And all their operations he well does mind the same.

Nor yet by multitude of strength, they strong deliverance have.

Nor shall he work deliverance by greatness of his power

Upon them that do place their hope on his benignity,

20 Our soul does for Jehovah wait, our help and shield is he.

Thy mercy Lord let be on us, like as we trust in thee.
PSALM. XXXIV: A Psalm of David when he changed his behavior before Abimelech,
who drove him away, and he departed.
I Will the Lord in seasons all bless in humility,
And in my mouth his praises shall abide continually.

The humble shall great pleasure take when they hereof shall hear.

And let us all herein agree to life his name on high.
I Jehovah sought unto, then he to (...) gave ear:
He me delivered also from all that was my fear


7 The Lord his Angel every where incampeth round about:
Each one of them that do him fear, from ill to free them out,

O great is that man's blessedness who trust on him relies!

Because that such as do him fear, no want at all shall see.

But they that fear the Lord no want shall have of any good.
(2)
O come ye children unto me, give you attentive ^ar;
And I will you instruct how ye the Lord aright shall fear.

Who loves days, and has intent prosperity to see?


15 Upon the men that righteous are, the Lord does set his eye;
And likewise he does how his ear when unto him they cry.

That he of them from off the land may ^ut the memory.

And gives to them delivery out of their troubles all.

Whose spirit contrite is also, even such ones save will he.



The righteous man, even all of them shall sure be desolate.

Nor utterly shall any swerve, that put their trust in him.
PSALM. XXXV. A Psalm of David.
PLead Lord with them that with me plead
Against them fight, that fight with me

Stand up my helper for to be.

Against them that my pursuers be;
And to my soul oh do thou say,
I am salvation unto thee.

That seek my soul how they may spill:
Let them be turned back and shamed
That in their thoughts devise mine ill.

God's Angel let them drive also

God's Angel drive them to and fro.

They hidden have for me a net:
They causelessly have ^igged it,
That (...) the in my soul may get.

Destruction; let his not withal
That he has hid himself ensnare,
Into that ruin let him fall.

In his salvation joyful be

Jehovah, who is like to thee
Who ser'st the poor (...)
From him that is for him too strong;
Yea, such as poor and needy be,
From him that spoileth him with wrong.
(2)

What I know not they charged on me,

Whereby my soul might spoiled be,

My clothing then of Sackcloth was
My soul I bowed with fasts, my prayer
Did back into my bosom pass.

So m y behavior I have kept:
I bowed down with heavy cheer
As one that for his mother wept.
y woe to see,
And the y together gathered were
Yea, the abjects against me gathered be,
And restless me unwitting tear.
*16 They mocking parasites among,
In feasts do gnash their teeth at me.

M y soul from their destruction free:
My Darling free from Lions set:

Within the Congregation great,
Amongst much People I Will thee Praise
(3)

That are my wrongful enemics:
And they that hate me Causl^^ly
Let them not Twinkle with their eyes.

But in their thoughts they do invent
Against them Plots of Guilefulness.
That in the land for peace are bent.

And said, ah, ah, our eye it saw.

Lord, do not far from me withdraw.

My God and Lord unto my Plea.

My God, lest over me joy should they.

Aha, our souls desire have we,
Now have we quite up-swallowed him,
Oh let them never say of me.
Shamed let them and Confounded be,
At once, who at my hurt are glad,
Let such as boast themselves against me,
With shame and with disgrace be c^ad.

That favor do my righteous cause:
Yea let them say continually,
Extolled be the Lord with Praise
Who in his Servants faring well,
Does his delightful pleasure take.

And of thy praise all day shall speak.
Psalm. XXXVI To the chief Musician, (...) of David, the servant of the Lord.
THe (...) of the wicked one (...) in assured wise,
Within my heart the fear of God is not before his eyes
Because (...) he in his own eyes himself is flattering,
Until that his (...) be found an hateful thing.

He has left off for to be wise, and do the godly deed.

He sets himself in no good way, he does not evil hate.
(2)

Thy faithfulness does reach likewise unto the cloudy sky.

The mighty deep; thou sav'st, O Lord, both man and beast also.

Therefore in shadow of th y wings, mens^ons put confidence.
y house, unto the full shall take;
And of the rivers of the joys to drink thou shall them make.

O stretch thy loving kindness forth to such as 'cknowledge thee



They are cast down, and never shall be able to arise.
PSALM XXXVII. A Psalm of David
FRet not thy self because of them that evil workers be;
Nor envious be against the men that work iniquity.

And like unto the tender herb, they wither shall away.

So shall thou dwell within the land, and faith shall be thy food.

And then the wishes of thy heart, to thee he will afford.

y justice he will bring forth, thy judgment as Noon-Days.

Fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his way.
Nor at the man who brings to pass, the crafts he does devise.


But those that wait upon the Lord, the land inherit shall.
(2)

Yea, thou shall diligently mark his place and it not see.

Also they shall themselves delight. in multitude of peace.


y
To cast the poor and needy down, to kill the upright in wa y.





And when the days of Famine come, then shall they have their fill.

They shall consume; yea, into smoke, they shall consume away.
(3)

Whereas the just man mercy shows, and freely gives away.

And they that of him cursed are, by cutting down shall fall.

Even by the Lord, and also he does in his way delight.

Because Jehovah with his hand does yet uphold him fast.

The just man left, so that his seed for bread have beggars been



Kept ever are they; but cut off the sinners seed shall be.


The Law of his God is in's heart, none of his steps shall stray.
The wicked watches for the just, and seeks him to slay.
Jehovah will not such an one leave up into his hand;
For any such will he condemn when judged he does stand.
(3)
Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall thee exalt,
^earth to inherit; when cut off the wicked see thou shall.

And spreading so himself abroad, like as a Green Bay Tree.

Foreover I did seek for him, but found he could not be.

cause that unto such a man peace is the latter end.

The latter end shall be cut off. of men ungodly all.
39 But the salvation of the just, does of Jehovah come.
He is their strength to them in times, that are most troublesome.

From wicked men because that they do put their trust in him.
PSALM. XXXVIII. Psalm of David to bring to Remembrance
IN wrath, Lord, do not me chastise,
And in thy rage correct not me,

In me thine arrows fastened be.

Because thy wrath on me does lie:
Nor in my bones is any rest,
Because of mine iniquity.

Above my head ascended are;
Like as an heavy burden lies,
Too heavy they for me to bear.

M y foolishness does make it so

I all day long a mourning go.

And there is no soundness in my flesh.

By reason of m y hearts distress.
9 (...) they, Lord, is all m y desire,
My (...) is not hid from thee.

And mine (...) sight is (...) from me.

My friends stand off, My kinsmen eke.

Who seek mine hurt, the y mischief speak;
And all day long imagine guile.

I as a dumb man was the while,
Whose mouth at all not open were.

And in whose mouth reproofs none were.
I, O Lord on thee rely;
O Lord m y God thou will me hear.

Else they will joy over me with pride:
Themselves against me they magnify,
When as my foot does slip aside.

Also my grief abides with me.
y trespass will,
And for my sin will sorry be.

They lively are, and strong also,
Who causlesly me hate likewise,
In number mightily do grow.
my good,
Do render evil unto me:
Because that I do follow good,
To me they adversaries be

From me, O do not far depart.

O Lord, who my salvation art.
PSALM XXXIX. To the chief Musician, to (...), A Psalm of David.
I Said I will look to my ways, lest I sin with my tongue:
I Will keep my mouth with bit while I the wicked am among.

From speaking of the thing that is go^ and stirred was my pain.

In me the fire inkind^ed was, then sp^ke I with my tongue.

That what a moment any thing I am, I may discern.

(...) best estate sure every man is wholly vanity.

Who heap up wealth, but do not know who shall the same up take.
(2)





Thou blasts his beauty like a moth, sure each man's vanity.

For as my fathers all am I. strange sojourner with thee.

Before that I from hence shall go, and be no more at all.
PSALM XL. A Psalm of David.
WIth expectation for the Lord, I waited patiently;
And he inclined unto me, he also heard my cry

And on a Rock he set my feet, he stablished my way.

Which many shall behold and fear, and trust upon the Lord.
Lord does make his trust abide;
Nor does the proud respect, nor such to lies as turn aside.
(2)

And likewise toward us thou have conceived many a thought.
Their sum cannot be reckn'd up in order unto thee;
Would I declare and speak of them, beyond account they be.

Thou boarst mine ear, no sin-offering nor burnt one do require.
Lo I come: it is writ in the books roll thus of me,


Lo I have not refrained my lips, Jehovah thou do know.

I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation.
I have not from the assembly great thy grace and truth concealed.

Let both thy kindness and thy truth, keep me my life throughout,

My sins have caught me, so that I not able am to see:
More are they than hairs of mine head, therefore my heart fails me.
(3)



Let them be waste to quit their shame, that say to me, Fie, fie.

Who thy salvation love, the Lord be magnified alwaie.

My help and my deliverer thou, my God no tarrying make.
PSALM. XLI. To the chief Musician, (...) Psalm of David.
O Blessed is he that wisely does: unto the poor attend:
The Lord will him deliverance in time of trouble send.

And give him not unto the will of his sore enemy.

Thou also wilt make all his bed within his sickness time.
I crave:
Heal thou my soul, because that I against thee sinned have.

When will the time come he shall die, and perish shall his name?

He heapeth evils, then he goes, abroad them to impart.
(2)

Against me they imagine do to me ^^falicious (...).

And seeing now he lies down, he shall rise up no more.

His heel against me listed up who of my bread did eat,


For over me triumps not my foe,

In mine integrity, and set^'st me thee before for aye.

And unto everlasting is, Amen, yea, and amen.
The Second Book of PSALMS.
PSALM, XLII. To the chief Musician, (...), for the Sons of Korah.
LIke as the panting heart does bray after the waterbrooks;
Even in such wise, O God my soul after thee panting looks.

Oh when shall I come and appear, the face of God before?

While all day long they unto me, where is thy God do say.

Then I pour out my soul in me, for I with troops did go.
With them unto Gods house I went with voice of joy and praise:
I with a multitude did go, that did keep hol^e days.

In God, for praise him yet shall I for health is in his face.
(2)

From Jordans land, and Hermonites, and from the little hill,
7 At sounding of the water spouts, deep unto deep does call:
Thy waves pass over me likewise thy breaking billows all.

And in the night his song's with me, to God my life I Will pray.

For pressure of the enemy, why should I mourning be?

While all the day, where is thy God? they unto me have said.

And wherefore in me make thou a stir tumultuouslie?
Hope thou in God because I shall with praise him yet advance;
Who is my God (...) also is health of my countenance.
PSALM XLIII
Judge me, O God, and plead my cause from nation merciless;
Both from the man of guile and wrong, O lend thou me redress.
2 For of my strength thou art the God, why casts thou me thee fro?
Why go I mourning for the sore oppression of the foe?

Unto thy holy hill, and where thy tabernacles be.

Yea, thee to praise, O God my God, I will my harp employ.

And wherefore in me make thou a stir tumultuouslie?

Who is my God, he also is health of my Countenance.
PSALM. XLIV. To the chief Musician, for the Sons of Korah, Maschil.
WE with our ears have heard, O God our fathers have us told,
What works thou wroughtest in their days even in the times of old.

How thou the people did afflict, and out thou did them cast.

Nor was it their own arm that did work their salvation!
But thy right hand, thine arm also, thy countenances light;
Because that of thine own good will thou did in them delight.

For Jacob by commandment deliverances procure.

We through thy name will tread them down that up apainst us rise.

Nor is it any sword of mine, that shall at all me save.


(2)

Nor with our Military troops, gone forth to battle have.
10 Back from before the enemy, thou make us to recoyl:
They also that our haters be, do for themselves us spoil.

Thou have us also scattered the heathen folk among.

And by their prices no increase of riches do obtain.

A scorn we are and mocking stock to them that us enclose.

Also among the Nations, at us their heads do shake.

And likewise with confounded shame, over covered is my face.

By reason of the enemy, and self-revenging wight.
(3)

Likewise against thy covenant, (...) have we Hot.







Why do thou mindless of our grief, and sore distress abide?


PSALM XLV. To the chief Musician upon (...) for the Sons of Korah, Maschil, a
Song of loves.
My heart good matter boyleth forth my works I utter then
Concern the King; my tongue is like a ready writers pen.

Upon thy lips; God therefore has thee blessed for evermore.

Thy glorious magnificence, and comely Majesty.

And thy right hand shall lead thee forth in works of dreadfulness.

Yea, in the heart (they shall fall down) ^oes to the King that be.

A Scepter is of righteousness

And love Justice God therefore thy God has ^inted thee
With oil of gladness them above that thy companions be.

Out of the ivory palaces, whereby they made thee glad,
9 Among thy honorable maids Kings daughters present stand;
The Queen in finest Ophir gold is set at thy right hand.
(2)

See thine own people thou forget, and fathers house most dear.

And bowing down, him worship thou because he is thy Lord.

The rich amongst the people they thy favor shall desire.

And with imbroideries of gold her garments wrought have been.

Her fellow-vlrgins following her shall unto thee be brought.

So to the palace of King, they entering have access.

Whom thou may place in all the earth in princely dignity.

Therefore for ever and for ay^ the people praise thee shall.
PSALM. XLVI. To the chief Musician (...) the sons of Korah, A Song upon Alamoth
GOd is our refuge, strength and shield in troubles very near.

Though mountains move to midst of feat,

And troubled be, though at their waves the mountains trembling shake.

The holy place where the most High, does settle his abode.

When early morning does appear, God shall her helper be.

He did give forth his thundering voice, the earth did melt with fear.
7 The God of armies is with us, the everlasting Jah:
The God of Jacob is for us a refuge high. Selah.

The fearful desolations which on the earth he brought.

The spear he cuts, the bow he breaks in fire the chariot burns.

Among the heathen: through the earth I Will be extolled high.

The God of Jacob is for us a refuse high, Selah.
PSALM. XLVII. To the chief Musician, a Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
CLap hands all people, shout for joy,
To God with voice of singing mirth,

A king most great over all the earth,

And nations at our feet do lie.

His loved Jacobs glory high,

Jehovah with the trumpets noise.

Sing praises to our King with voice.

Praise him each understanding one.

God sits upon his holy throne.

Princes of people gathered be:
For shields of the earth to God belong,
Exalted mightily is he
PSALM XLVII. To the chief Musician, A Song and Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
GReat is Jehovah, greatly he is to be praised still:
Within the City of our God, wilt in His Holy Hill.

The city of the Mights King is on the Northern side.



They also hasted fast away,

As on a woman traveling, they such a pain did find.

(2)

In The city of our God, God will establish it for ay.

And that within the midst of thy house of Sanctity.

The ends of the earth, thy right-hand's; full of righteousness also

They that of Judah daughters are, even for thy judgments sake.

And do ye reckon up thereof the towers that therein be.

That to the generation to come ye may it tell.

And he will be a guide to us, even to our dying day.
PSALM. XLIX. To the chief Musician, (...) Psalm for the Sms of Korah.
HEar this all people and give ear all in the world that dwell


Of understanding much shall be the musing of my heart.

I will upon the harp withal, my doctrine dark declare.

When that my heels iniquity about shall compass me.
(2)

Who in the plenty of their wealth, themselves do boast also.

His brother, nor to God can give a ransom meet for him.



Do perish, and their rich estate to others leave they do.

Their dwelling places, and their lands, they by their names do call:
But man in honor being set abides not a night:
But he becomes like unto the beasts that perish quite.

Delighting in that which they say, approve it vehemently.

And the upright over them in the morn. shall have dominion.
And from the place whereas they dwell, the beauty which they have
Shall utterly consume away, within the rotting grave.

Even from the graves prevailing power for he will me receive.
(3)

And when the glory of his house abundantly does flow.

Nor shall there after him descend his glorious array.

And men will praise thee when as tho^ much of thy self do make.

In honor man that knows not, is like beasts that perish quite.
PSALM L. A Psalm of Asaph.
THe mighty God Jehovah spoke, and he the earth does call.
Even from the rising of the Sun, thereof unto the fall.

Which of all beauty excellent, does the perfection ^ill.

And round abol^t him shall be raised a storm of wondrous might.



Because the mighty God himself is righteous judge alone.
I will testify:
Also to thee, O Israel.
God, even thy God am I.
I will find no fault with thee:
Or thy burnt-offrings to have been continually with me.


I know:
And wild beasts in the field that lie, they are with me also.
12 If I were hungry I would not it unto thee declare;
For mine the habitable world, and fullness of it are.



And I Will deliver thee, and then thou shall me glorify.
(2)

Of statutes mine? why in thy mouth should thou my covenant take?


And like wise with adulterers, thy part has been the same.


The son of thine own mother thou with slander do defame.

One like thy self, I Will thee reprove, and rank them in thine eyes.

Left that in pieces I you tear and there be none to save.

Who orders right his way likewise, shall Gods salvation see.
PSALM. LI. To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David, when Nathan the Pro^ (...)
came to him after he had gone in to Bathsheba. First Meter.
O God have mercy upon me,
According to thy kindness dear
And as thy mercies many be,
O do thou my transgressions clear.

And from my sin me purify.

My sin is still before mine eye.

And done this evil in thy sight:
That when thou speak thou just may b^
And when thou judge, cleared quite,

Was that estate I shaped was in:
My mother that conceived me,
Even she did me conceive in sin

Desire in the inward part;
And thou shall make me wisdom (...)
Within the secret of my heart.

With hyssop, clear I shall be so:
O wash thou me, and so shall I
In whiteness go beyond the snow.
(2)

Thou me to hear again the voic^
That so the bones which erst thou (...)
Again they gladly may rejoice.

Blot out all mine iniquities.

In me renew right spirit likewise.

Not from me take thy spirit away,

And me with thy free spirit stay.

And sinners shall be turned to thee

From guilt or (...) deliver me.
Thy righteousness aloud record
In singing shall my tongue also
15 Set open thou my lips, O Lord,
And forth thy praise my mouth shall show

Or else I would it freely bring:
Nor yet a sacrifice require,
Thou take no delight therein.

Well pleasing is a broken sprite:
O God thou never wilt despise,
The heart that is broken and contrite,

(...) thy good pleasure bounteously:
And of Jerusalem up still
Do thou the Walls repair on high.

Then please thee, with burnt-offering
And whole burnt-offring: then they shall
Their calves unto thine Altar bring.
PSALM. LI. Second Meeter.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy grace:
According to thy mercies great, my trespasses deface.



When thou speak just thou art, and (...) when thou do judge therefore;

Also my mother that me bare in sin did me conceive.

And thou shall make me wisdom know in secret of my heart.

O wash thou me and then shall I be whiter than the snow,

That so the bones which thou have broke may cheerfully rejoice.

Likewise all mine iniquities O do thou clean deface.
(2)



Of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy Spirit free.

And by this means shall sinners be converted unto thee.

And so my tongue shall joyfully sing of thy righteousness.


Burnt-offerings thou delight'st not in.

God, thou will not despise.

The walls of thy Jerusalem, O do thou build up still.

And whole burnt-off'ring: then they shall calves to thine altar bring.
PSALM. LII. To the chief Musician, Maschil, a Psalm of David, when Do^g the
Edomite came (...) told Soul and said unto him, David is unto the house of
Abimelech.
O Man of might, wherefore do then thus boast thy self in ill?
The goodness of the mighty God endures ever still.

And like unto a razor sharp it works deceitful lies.



He shall thee take away, and pluck thee from thy dwelling place.
Out of the land of the living ones, he also will root thee. Selah


His store of wealth; he strengthened was in his transgression.

In Gods benignity for ay and ay my trust has been.

And on thy name will wait, for this is good thy saints before.
PSALM. LIII. To the chief Musician upon Mahalath Maschil, A Psalm of David.
THe fool in's heart faith there is no God, they are corrupt each one:
Abominable sin they do, that does good there is none.

If any that does understand, that seeks God there be.

There is not any that does good, no, not so much as one.

Who eat my people, even as bread, on God they do not call.

His bones God scattered, and them shamed, for God does them despise

His manifold salvations from out of Sion hill.
When God his people shall return, that have been captive led,
Then Jacob shall therein rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
PSALM LIVE. To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Masehil, a Psalm of David, when
the Ziphims came and said to Saul, Does not David hide himself with us?
SAve thou me by thy Name, O God, and judge me by thy power.


Pursue my soul; the mighty God they set not them before. Selah.



I will thy name confess, O Lord, because that good it is.

And its desire mine eye has seen upon mine enemies.
PSALM. LV. To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, a Psalm of David.
O God do thou give ear unto my supplication.
And hide not thou thy self away from my petition.

I in my meditation do make a noise and mourn.

For wickedness on me they cast, and me in wrath detest.



That I might fly away, and might in quiet dwelling live.


(2)

For strife and violence I within the city have espied.

Mischief also and sorrow do in midst of it stay.

Likewise out of the streets thereof guile turns not aside.

Nor did my hater vaunt over me, from him I could me hide.

Which wast to me my special guide, and mine acquaintance near.

And we did walk into the house of God in company.

For wickedness among them is, in places where they dwell.
(3)


And he also will hear my voice,

In peace from war that was against me for many were with me.

Because that they no changes have, God's fear they laid aside.

He also has the covenant which he had made profaned.
more smooth than butter were his words:
His words more soft than any oil, but yet they were drawn swords.

He will not give the righteous man to be removed at all.

And guile shall not live half their days, but I will trust in thee.
PSALM. LVI. To the chief Musician upon Jonath Elem Rechokim Michtam of David,
when the Philistines took him in Gath.
O God upon me mercy have, for man would swallow me:
He fights against me all the day, oppress me sore does he
2 Throughout the day mine enemi^ to swallow me devise:
Who fight against me O most high, they many are likewise.

And I in God his word will praise, in God my trust is staid:



Because they watch this soul of mine, into my stops they pried.

O God in wrath without delay, the people down depress.

My tears thy bottle put into, are they not in thy book?

This I know in assured wise, that God will be for me.

11 In God I Will trust, nor be afraid what man can do me ill.

Because that thou my soul from death have set at liberty.
And wilt not thou also my feet, from falling set them free?
That I before God may walk in the light of, them that living be.
PSALM LVII To the chief musician, At asthith Michtam of David when he fled from
Soul in the cave.
O God to me be merciful, be merciful to me:
Because my soul for shelter safe betakes it self to thee.
Yea in the shadow of thy wings my refuge I have placed
Until these sore calamities shall quite be over-past.


Of him that would with greedy haste me swallow utterly:
God will send forth his mercy kind, likewise his verity.

Men's sons whose teeth are spears and (...) and as sharp swords their tongue.

O let thy glory be extolled over all the earth abroad.

They dig'd a pit for me; but they in midst thereof are thrown. Selah


A vake both Psaltery and harp, my self i will early wake:
I will confession make.

Is great to heaven, thy truth likewise does reach the cloudy sky.

O let thy glory be extolled over all the earth abroad.
PSALM. LVIII. To the chief Musician, Altaschith Michtam of David.
Do ye, O congregation, speak righteousness indeed?
In Judgment do ye sons of men (...) proceed?

The (...) of your hands violence weigh out in the land do ye.

And even from the belly they their fa^shood do display.

They are like as the adder deal that stops up her ear.

Although the charmer in his charms none of his cunning spare.

Do thou, O Lord, the mighty teeth break of the Lions young.

And when he bends his shafts, let them as cut asunder be

Like women's timeless birth, that they may never see the Sun.

As with a whirlwind; both alive, and (...) most wrathful wise.

He shall his feet wash in the blood of them that wicked be.

Sure there is a God that in the earth does judgment execute:
PSALM LIX. To the chief Musician, Altaschith Michtam of David, when Saul sent,
and they watched the house to kill him.
MY God from them deliver me, that are mine enemies:
Set thou me up on high from them that up against me rise.

And be to me a Savior from such as bloody him (...)

Against me, not for trespass, Lord, nor any sin of mine.

Themselves: do thou behold, also unto my help awake.

All heathens; who sin wickedlie to them show grace no more. Selah.

As does a Dog, and so they go about the city round.

For who is he that does us hear? these are their very words.


(2)

God shall give me upon my foes my full desire to see.

By thy strong power, and bring them down our shield and Lord who art.

And for the cursing and their lies, which in the^ speech they make.
13 Consume thou them, in wrath (...) and let them be no more:
So they, that God in Jacob rules, shall know the earth all over. Selah

And so about the city round a compass they shall take.

And if they be not satisfied, then shall they grudge thereat.

For thou my tower and refuge art when as I am forlorn.

For God is my high tower, the God of mercy mine is he.
PSALM LX. To the chief Musician upon Shusha^ Eduth, Michtam of David to teach
when he strove with Arum (...), and with Arum Zobah, when Joab returned and
smote of Edom in the valley of Salt twelve thousand.
O God thou have rejected us, and scattered us al road:
Thou have displeased been with us, return to us, O God,

Do thou the breaches of it heal, for it does moving shake.

And thou have caused them to drink the wine of trembling fear

That it on high before the truth displayed may appear. Selah.

O do thou save with thy right hand, and answer give to me.

Shechem divide, and mete the vale of Succoth out I will.

Ephraim the strength is of my head, Judah my law prescribes.

O Palestine because of me, be thou triumphant too.

And into Edom who is he that will me lead along?
10 Is it not thou, O God, who did us cast away thee fro?
And thou, O God, who would (...) forth with our armies go?

Through God we will do great acts, he shall our foes tread with disdain.
PSALM. LXI. To the chief Musician upon Negin^th, a Psalm of David.
GIve our, O God unto my cry, unto my prayer attend

Lead thou me up into the rock that higher is than I,


Within the covert of thy wings I Will seek my self to hide. Selah

The heritage to them that fear thy name thou given have.

His years as generation and generation be.
7 In presence of the mighty God he shall abide for aye:
Benignity and truth prepare, that him preserve they may.

That I the vows that I have made perform may all my day^.
PSALM. LXII. To the chief Musician, is Jeduthun, a Psalm of David.
Truly my waiting soul relies in silence God upon
Because from him there does arise all my salvation.
He only is my rock, and he salvation is to me;
And he is my defense that I moved greatly shall not be.

All as a tottering fence you be, and like a bowing wall.

They lies do love, with mouth they bless, but curse within their heart. Selah.


7 On God does my salvation and glory make abode:
The Rock of my muni^ion, my refuge is in God.

Pour out your hearts before him ye God is our hopeful stay. Selah.

When jointly they in bal^ance lie, more light than vainitie.

If wealth increase, yet do not set your hearts delight thereon,

I plainly heard, that powerful might does unto God pertain.

For even as his work shall be thou rendrest man again.
PSALM. LXIII. A Psalm of David (...) he was in the wilderness of Judah.
O God thou art my God I will betime for thee inquire:
My soul does thirst for thee, thee still my flesh does much desire,
(...) land whereas no waters be, that thirsty is and dry.
As in thine house I saw, to see O thy strength and Majesty.
Because thy loving kindness more in goodness does excel.
Than life it self: my lips therefore thy praises forth shall tell.
Thus I Will thee bless continually whilst that alive I am:
And I these hands of mine on high will lift up in thy name.
So as with marrow and with (...) my soul shall filled be:
With joyful lips my mouth also shall render praise to thee.
When thee I to remembrance call, as on my bed I lie;
In watches of the night withal when on thee muse do I.





Shall likewise glory, but their mouth be stopped that lies declare.
PSALM. LXIV. To the chief Musician A Psalm of David.
O God when I my prayer make, my voice then do thou hear,
Also do thou preserve my life safe from the enemies fear.

From the insurrection of all them that work iniquity.

And bend their bows to shoot their shall a very bitter word.

They suddenly do shoot at him, nor are afraid of it.

Lay snares in secret; it is their talk who shall them see? they say.

The inward thought of every man and heart is also deep.

So as they shall their own tongue make upon themselves to fall.
(...) that them see away shall flee.

The works of God: for of his deed they shall consider well.
The just shall in the Lord be glad and trust in him he shall:
(...) they that upright are in heart, in him shall glory all.
PSALM. LXV. To the chief Musician, a Psalm and Song of David.
^ence to thee; the praise O God, in Sion paid shall be
The vow to thee who hear prayers all flesh shall come to thee.
Works of iniquities prevail against me sore do they:
(...) as for our transgressions, thou shall them purge away.
O blessed is the man of whom thou thy free choice do make.
And that he may dwell in thy Courts, him near to thee do take.
(...) with the good things of thy house, be satisfied shall we;
And with the holy things likewise that in thy temple be.
(...) righteousness thou by the things that dreadfullie are done,
Wilt answer give to us, O God of our salvation.
On whom the ends of all the earth do confidentlie stay;
And likewise they that are removed far off upon the sea.


(2)

The morns outgoings, and the night thou to rejoice do make.

Thou make it rich, then corn prepar^ when so thou have it tilled.

With showers thou make it soft to be her springing blessed thou have

Also the paths where thou do tread, the fatness do drop down.

(...) girt with joy on every side is every little hill.

The valleys is, so that for joy they shout and also sing
PSALM LXVI. To the chief Musician, A Song or Psalm.
O All ye Nations unto God a noise triumphant raise.
(...) Sing forth the honor of his Name, make glorious his praise,
How dreadful in thy works art thou thus unto God say ye,
Through greatness of thy might, thy foes shall yield themselves to thee.
All they to thee shall how themselves that dwell upon the earth:
And sing unto thee, they shall sing unto thy name with mirth. Selah.



On foot to pass the river through, there we in him were glad.
He rules by his power for aye, his eyes the Nations spy.
Let not those that rebellions are, lift up themselves on high. Selah.





Did we; but us thou brought into a place that wealthy was.



Of rams the incense: Bullocks eke, with goats I will prepare. Selah.

And what he has done for my soul to you I will declare.


19 But now assuredly God has vouchsafed me to hear:
He to my supplications voice, did give attentive ear.

Not turned away: nor yet his own benignity from me.
PSALM. LXVII. To the chief Musician in Neginoth, a Psalm or Song.
GOd gracious be to us, and give his blessing us unto;
Let him upon us make to shine his countenance also. Selah.

And also of thy saving health in every nation.
O God let thee the people praise, let people all praise thee.
O let the Nations rejoice, and glad O let them be.
For judgment thou with righteousness shall give thy folk unto;
The Nations that are on the earth, thou shall them lead also.
O God, let thee the people praise let people all praise thee.
Her fruit abundant by the earth shall then forth yielded be.
7 God even our own God shall (...) God bless us surely shall:
And of the earth the utmost coasts they shall him reverence all.
PSALM LXVIII. To the chief Musician on Neginoth, a Psalm or Song.
LEt God arise, his enemies let them dispersed be;
Let them also that do him hate, away before him flee

As wax at fire melts, wicked so let in Gods sight decay.

Before Gods face let them also rejoice exceedingly.

Exalt ye him by his name Jah; before him joy likewise.

God is a Judge and that within his holy dwelling place.

He frees; but those that rebels are, dwell in a barren ground,
(2)

When through the desert wilderness, in marching thou did walk. Selah.

Sinai it self did move before the God of Israel.

Whereby when as it weary was thou it confirmdst again.

Of thy benignity, for them that poor afflicted are.



With silver decked, her feathers eke, with yellow gold that be.
scattered kings 'twas white as Salmons snow.

16 Why do ye leap, ye lofty hills? this is the very hill
In which God loves to dwell, the (...) dwell in it ever will.
(3)

With them as in his holy place, on Sinai's mount is he.

For men, yea for rebellious ones thou did gifts receive.

With benefits, the Lord be blessed, even out salvations God. Selah

And to the Lord Jehovah does issues from death belong.

Of him that in his trespasses, on forward still does go.
(4)

My people from the depths of seas bring back again I will.
23 That thou may dip thy foot in blood thy dogs their tongues likewise,
May be imbrued in the same blood of thine enemies.

Even of my God, my king within his place of holiness.

The Damsels that on Timbrels play: were them the midst among.

Even bless the Lord who from the spring of Israel do arise.
Benjamin their chief, there Judahs Lords, and there
Their counsel, Lords of Zebulon and (...) there were.
God, the same commanded was:
Confirm, O God, the thing which thou for us have brought to pass.
(5)


With peoples calves, and him that (...) with silver pieces bow.
The people that themselves delight in war, O scatter thou.
*31 From Egypt there shall princes (...) and the Ethiopians land
Shall speedily unto the Lord reach her outstretched hand.

on (...) of heavens that were of ancient says.
Lo, he his voice a strong voice gives,

His excellence over Israel is, his strength is in the height.

Gives strength, and to his people power, O let God blessed be.
PSALM. LXIX. To the chief Musician upon Shushannim, a Psalm of David.
THe waters in unto my soul, are come, O God me save.
I no standing have;
Into deep waters I am come, where floods me overflow.
I of my crying weary am, my throat is dried so.
Mine eyes fail, for my God I wait

Without a cause, than mine heads hairs they more in number be.
Also mine enemies wrongfully they are that would me slay,
They mighty are, then I restored what I took not away.


O never suffer them who do for thee inquiry make,
O God of Israel to be confounded for my sake.
(2)

Confusion my Countenance has over-covered.

Unto my mothers children I an alien am also.

And on me their reproaches fell that have reproached thee.
10 In fasts I wept, and spent my soul; this was reproach to me.
I my (...), yet must their proverb be.

Unto the drinkers of strong drink I was a song also.
I in an accepted time to thee Lord make my prayer:
O God me in thy saving truth, and in much mercy hear.
(3)

Let me be freed mine haters from, and out of waters deep,

The deep, and let not thou the pit her mouth upon me shut.

After thy mercies multitude, O turn thy face to me.

Because that I in trouble am, hear me without delay.

Deliver me, because of them that are mine enemies.

Mine adversaries every one, they are before thy face.
(4)

But none there was, and sought for some to comfort, but found none.

They gave me vinegar to drink, to quench my thirst withal.

And that let be a trap which should have been for their welfare.

With trembling also make their loins to shake continually.


26 Because they do him persecute, on whom thy stroke is found:
Also they talk unto the grief of them whom thou do wound.

Into thy righteousness for them let entrance none be had.

And them amongst that righteous are be written let them not.
(5)



Than any ox or bullock young that horned and hoofed are.

Also, your heart shall ever Live, that after God do seek.



That they may dwell therein, and may it in possession have.

Also therein inhabit shall they that do love his name.
PSALM LXX. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, to bring to Remembrance.
O God to rescue me; Lord, to mine help make haste.

Turned back, and shamed be they that in my hurt delight.


Who love thy health, say still they shall, God magnified be.

Thou art my help and liberty, O Lord do not delay.
PSALM LXXI
JEhovah, I for safety do betake my self to thee.
Confusion to be put unto O never suffer me.

O bow thou down thine ear to me also do thou me save.

Thou me to save commanded have, for you are my Rock and fort.



Out of my mothers bowels: ay my praise shall be of thee.
(2)



And do thou not abandon me when my strength does decay.

Who for my soul lay wait likewise, together counsel take.

And apprehend ye him, for none there is to set him free.


Yea, let them quite consumed be, let them he covered eke
With foul disgrace and infamy, that for my hurt do seek.
(3)

And more and more yet add I will to all the praise of thee.

From day to day; for of the same no numbers do I know,

I will thy righteousness record, yea even thine alone

I hitherto has showed abroad the wonders wrought by thee.

Forsake me not till I have told thy mighty power abroad
Unto this generation, and unto every one
That shall hereafter be to come, thy strong dominion.

Great are the things that thou have wrought O God, who is like to thee?
(4)

Shall turn and quicken me; and me from depths of the earth restore.


O thou my God, sing forth will I to thee my harp upon:
Thy faithfulness and verity, O Isreal's holy one.
I to thee shall sing.
My soul which freely thou from thrall, to liberty did bring

Because that they confounded are, and shamed that seek my wrong.
PSALM. LXXII. A Psalm for Solomon.
O God thy judgments give the King;
Thy justice likewise to his son.

And to thy poor see judgment done,

Unto the people bring forth peace;
The little hills accordingly
By executing righteousness.

And children of the needy save:
He shall to pieces break even all
Them that with fraud oppressed have.
They shall thee fear while sun and moon
Endure, through generations all.

As showers on earth distilling fall.

And store of peace till no moon be.

From flood to lands-end reign shall he

Themselves before him bow they must;
And they who are his enemies
They verily shall lick the dust.
(2)

Of Tarshish and the Isles the Kings:
Sheba's, and Seba's kings also
Shall unto him give offerings

And serve him every nation;

The poor and helper that has none.

The souls to of the needy save.
Their souls from fraud and wrong set free,
By him shall they redemption have:
Their blood shall be in his eyes dear.

They shall him give, still by him prayer
Shall be, and daily be extolled.

In The land the mountains tops upon;
Whose fruit in shaking shall appear,
Like as the trees of Lebanon:
And who are of the city they
Like grass on earth shall flourish all.

As long as Sun continue shall.
Even so his name continue shall
And men in him themselves shall bless;
And of the world the nations all
Shall him the blessed one profess.

The God, the God of Israel,
For by himself alone does he
Work things that wondrous are to tell.

For ever, let the earth filled be
Fell with the glory of the same,
Amen, also Amen, say we.
For common Tunes.
And ay be blessed his glorious Name, let all the earth filled be
Likewise with glory of the same, Amen, Amen say we.
The Third BOOK of PSALMS.
PSALM. LXXIII. A Psalm of Asaph.
SUre God is good to Israel, even to the clean in heart.




Nor stricken with like plagues are they, as other mortals be.
6 Pride therefore like a chain does fence them on each side about!
And like a garment violence does cover them throughout.

They do enjoy more prosperous state than what their hearts devise.


(2)

And waters of their cup overflow, that are to them wrung out.
And they have said, how can it be that God this thing should know?
Is there in him that is most high, hereof the knowledge too?

They do within the word increase in rich ability.



Lo, of thy sons I should offend the generation,


(3)

To desolations suddenly, thou do them also cast.

And how are they consumed away with sad confusion?

When thou awak'st their Image then, O Lord thou shall despise.


(4)

Thou have upheld me steadfastly also by my right hand.
24 Thou with thy prudent counsel (...) direction to me give:
Up afterward also thou shall to glory me receive.

And there is nothing the earth upon besides thee that I crave.

The mighty God he is my part, and strength of heart for ever.

All that a whoring go from thee thou shall consume away.

I do on God the Lord rely, thy works all to declare.
PSALM LXXIV. Maschil of Asaph
O God why have thou cast us off? thy rage why do thou keep,
For evermore thus smoking our against thy pasture-sheep?

Which thou redeem'st, this Sions Mount, wherein thou have abode.

All that the foe has evilly done, within thy Sanctuary.

Thine enemies roar: their ensigns the^ for tokens have up set.



By casting down unto the ground, they do profanely raze.

Gods Synagogues throughout the land all in the flames they laid.
(2)

Nor with us any to be found, that understands how long.

Thine enemy for evermore, shall he blaspheme thy name?



The Dragons heads in pieces thou did break the waters under.

To people that in deserts dwell for meat thou did him make.



The Summer and the Winter both the same thou formed have.
(3)

Jehovah, and the foolish folk blasphemed have thy Name.

The congregation of thy poor, forget not thou for ever.

Throughout the earth, they filled are, with seats of cruelty.

O let the poor and needy one give praise unto thy name.

How day by day the foolish man with scorn reproacheth thee.

Continually ascends on high, that rise thee to oppose.
PSALM. LXXV. To the chief Musician, Altaschith, A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
O God to thee give thanks we do, we do give thanks to thee;
How that thy name is near also. thy wonders show to be.



Also unto the wicked ones, lift not the horn on high.
5 Lift ye not up your horn on high; with stifned Neck speak not:



Of mixture full, he pours there out; but yet the wicked all
That are on earth, the dregs thereof wring out, and drink them shall.

And I will sing a Psalm of praise to him that is Jacobs God

But of the righteous onces the horns shall be exalted high.
PSALM. LXXVI. To the chief musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
IN Judah God is known: his name is great in Israel,



Unto the kings on earth that are, he shall most dreadful be.
PSALM LXXVII. To the chief Musician to Jeduthun, A Psalm of Asaph.
MY voice was to the mighty God, yea, cried out I have:
My voice was to the mighty God, an ear to me he gave,

And ceased not; my soul also refused comfort quite.

I did complain, my spirit also, o'r^whelm'd was heavily. Selah.


(2)

I commun'd with my heart also strict search my spirit made.

His render mercy is it ceast to perpetuity.


Has God forgotten? and shut up in wrath his bowels thus?

Will call the years of the right hand, of him that is most High.

Thy wondrous work of ancient time, I surely will record.


(3)

Thou God have done amongst the folk thou do thy strength declare,

Of Jacob and of Joseph too those that the children be. Selah.

They were afraid, the deeps also could not but troubled be.
17 With waters were the clouds poured forth the skies a sound out-sent:
Also thine arrows on each side abroad dispersed went.

The world enlightened, and the earth did tremble and did shake.

Moses, and by Aarons hand, thou ledst thy folk like sheep.
PSALM LXXVIII. Maschil of Asaph.
GIve listening ear unto my law, ye people that are mine:
Unto the sayings of my mouth do you your ear incline.



The Lord his praise, his strength and works of wonder he has done.

He gave, which he our fathers charged they should their children tell.

That they who should arise, the same might to their children show.

Gods works and his commandments might keep and not forget.

That set not right their hearts, not firm: with God their spirit was.
(2)

Did turn their back the day wherein they did to battle go.



Within he land of Egypt seen, in Zoa^ field likewise.

And he the waters made to stand, that as an heap it was.


In Wilderness as from great deeps, drink unto them he gave.

And caused water to run down, like as the rivers do.
(3)

By their provoking the most High, the wilderness within.

By asking earnestly for meat, their lusts to satisfy.

Within the desert wilderness, to furnish us a table?

Can he for's people flesh provide can he give bread also?

Against Jacob, and against Israel there came up wrathful ire.
22 For they in God believed not, nor in his health did hope.
above he charged the clouds, and doors of heaven set open.





Even round about on every side, their dwelling places all.

For that which was their own desire, he di^l on them bestow.
(4)

But while their meat was in their mouth.

And slew their fat ones, and smote down the choice of Isreal's men.


And he their years brought hastily unto a fearful end.

And they returned and after God they early did enquire.

And how that their redeemer was, the mighty God most high.



Yea, often he turned his wrath aside, nor raised all is anger hot.

And as it were a passing wind that does no more appear.
(5)


42 His hand they did not keep in mind, nor on the day they thought
Wherein he from the enemy for them deliverance wrought.

And also in the fields of Zoan his fearful prodigies.

And so as that they could not drink the waters of the flood.

And to destroy them, them amongst he sent the Frogs likewise.


(6)

And he their herds of cattle gave hot thunderbolts unto.

And sore distress by sending forth ill angels them among.

From death, but unto Pestilence their lively ones he gave,

Those that within the tents of Ham, were chiefest of their might.

And in the desert like a flock he guided them also.

But in the sea their enemies, he overwhelmed there.

Yea, even to his mountain which by his right hand he bought.

By line, and Isreal's tribes he made in their tents to abide.
(7)

Also his testimonies they kept not attentively.
57 But like their fathers, back they turned and faithlessness did show;
They turned were aside even like unto a warping bow.

And with their graven images moved him to Jealousy.



Also into the enemies hand his glorious Majesty




Like as a strong man after wine

His foes behind; so gave he them an everlasting blot.

68 But did the tribe of Judah choose, mount Sion which he loved

Like to the earth which he did set to perpetuity.

And from the place of folding in the sheep he did him take.

His people Jacob for to feed, Isr'els inheritance.

And by his skilfulness of hand them led accordingly.
PSALM. LXXIX. A Psalm of Asaph.
O God the heathen entered have thine heritance, and defiled
Thine holy temple: they on heaps Jerusalem have pil'd

To the souls of heaven to the beasts of the earth flesh of thy saints to eat.

Like unto waters, and there was none for to bury them.

A scoffing and a scorn to them that round about us be.

For ever? shall thy jealousy burn forth like unto fire?

Upon the kingdoms that have not called o^^ Thy Name also.

To utter desolation did wonderfully raze.
(2)

Us to prevent, because we are near utterly laid waste.

Free us also, and purge away our sin even for the same

The vengeance of thy saints bloodshed and that before our sight.

As mighty is thine arm; save those that are designed to die.

Their vile reproach wherewith O Lord, reproached thee have they.

And unto generations all we will show forth thy praise.
PSALM. LXXX. To the chief Musician upon S^^shannim Eduth a Psalm of Asaph.
THou that lead'st Joseph as a flock, O if 'els shepherd hear.
Who dwell'st between the Cherubims,
O shine thou forth most clear.

O stir thou up thy strength and come for us salvation show.

To shine forth upon us, that we may have deliverance.

5 Thou make them to feed upon the bread of mournful tears.
And giv'st them many tears to drink,

Thou make us, and amongst themselves do laugh our enemies

To shine forth upon us, so we shall have deliverance
(2)

The heathen people, in their room the same thou planted have.

Thou did it cause deep root to take, and it did fill the land.



So that all those do pluck at her that in the way pass by?

And wild beasts of the field the same devouringly destroy.

To look from heaven, and behold, and visit thou this vine.

That branch likewise which for thy self confirm'dst thou strongly have,

They perish do, and that because thy countenance does frown.

Upon the son of man whom thou have made so strong for thee.

O do thou quicken us, and we upon Thy Name will call.

To shine forth upon us, so we shall have deliverance.
PSALM. LXXXI. To the chief Musicia^ upon Gittith, a Psalm of Asaph.
UNto the mighty God our strength sing with a shouting voice:
Unto the God of Jacob so make ye a joyful noise

Together with the Psaltery, and Harps sweet sounding string.

As in appointed time and day of our solemnity.

And by the God of Jacob this, did for a judgment pass.

Whereas a language I did hear, but knew not what it meant.

His hands also were from the pots delivered by me.

I answered thee at Meribah it is waters proved thee. Selah.
(2)

If that thou will, O Israel, hear me attentively.

Nor unto any foreign god thou bowing down shall fall.

Thy mouth open wide, and thou by me with plenty shall be fed.
I spoke:
And Israel would not in me, their full contentment take.

And let them walk on in the way which their own counsels gave.

And O that Israel he had walked my ways within!

I should have turned my hand upon such as did them oppose.

But unto perpetuity their time should have remained.
16 And with the finest of the wheat have nourished them should he:
With honey of the rock I should have satisfied thee.
PSALM. LXXXII. A Psalm of Asaph.
THe mighty God does stand within the assembly of the strong.
And he it is that righteously do Judge the gods among.

Will ye accept the countenance of those that wicked be?.

Unto the afflicted justice do, and to them in distress.

And them redeem out of the hand of such as wicked be.

The earths foundations all of them quite out of course are gone.


8 That thou may judge the earth, O God do thou thy self advance:
For thou shall have the Nations all for thine inheritance.
PSALM. LXXXIII. A Psalm or Song of Asaph
O God do not thou silence keep, no longer speech refrain
O mighty God do thou likewise no longer still remain

And they that haters be of thee, have lift the head on high.

Also against thy hidden ones they consultation make.

That in remembrance Isra'ls name may not be any more.

And in confederacy close they are against thee bent

The people of the Hagarens, and of the Moabites.

The Philistines, with them that be inhabitants of Tire

And they have been an arm of strength to Lots posterity.
(2)

As Jabin to, and Sisera, at Kishons brook, so do.

Who also did become as dung. that on the earth is spread.

As Zeba and Zalnu^^a too make thou their Princes all.




16 Do thou their faces all fill full of ignominious shame;
That so they may, O Lord, be made to seek unto thy Name.

Yea, let them unto shame be put, and utterly decay.

Art over all the earth throughout advanced the highest One.
PSALM. LXXXIV. To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
HOw amiable, Lord of Hosts, thy Tabernacles be!

Unto the strong and living God, my heart and flesh do shont.

Wherein she may her young ones lay, thine alters near unto:
O thou that art of armies Lord my King my God also.



Also the pools that are therein, (...) fill or rain do take.


(2)


I rather had a doorkeeper be (...) the house of my God,
Than in the tents of wickedness to settle mine abode.

Jehovah to his people grace and glory will bestow:
No good thing will he hold from them that do walk uprightly.

PSALM LXXXV. To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
O Lord thou favored have thy land: Of Jacob the captivity
Thou have returned with thine hand.

Have of thy people pardoned:
Thou all their sin have covered. Selah

From thy fierce indignation
Thou turned have thy self away.

Convert thou us, and do thou make.
Thine anger toward us to slake.

Will thou thine indignation,
Draw out to generation,
And unto generation?

That joy in thee thy folk may thus?
(2)

Thy saving health on us bestow,

For he will speak peace his folk unto,
And to his saints: but let not them
To foolishness return again.

Surely to all that do him fear,
That glory may dwell in our Land

Prosperity and righteousness,
Embracing did each other kiss.

From heaven looks righteousness.

And our land shall yield her increase.

And in the way her steps shall place.
PSALM LXXXV. Second Meeter.
O Lord thou favored have thy Land Jacobs captivity:

Thou have close covered all their sin

Thou from the fierceness of thine ire, thy self returned have.
Turn us again, O thou the God of our salvation;
And toward us cause thou to cease shine indignation.
Will thou be angry still with us for evermore: what shall
Thine anger be by thee drawn out to generations all?

Show us thy mercy, Lord on us thy saving health bestow.
(2)
I Will hear what God the Lord will say, because he will speak peace.
Unto his folk, and saints, lest they return to foolishness.

That glory may within our land have habitation.




PSALM. LXXXVI. A Prayer of David: First Meeter.
BOw down, O Lord thine ear, hear me attentively:
For I am poor afflicted sore, and needy too am I.
I.
My God save thou thy servant now, that does on thee rely.

Because that I aloud do cry through all the day to thee.

Because that I, O Lord on high do lift my soul to thee.

And to them all on thee that call in mercy rich art thou.

Attend unto the voice also of my requests for grace.

Because that thou will me unto an answer give again.

And no works are that may compare with those are wrought by thee.
(2)

Shall come adore, even thee before, and glorify thy Name:

They wondrous are, and do declare that thou art God alone.

Thine holy name to fear the same mine heart in union ty.

And also I will glorify thy holy Name always.

My soul set free has been by thee, even from the lowest hell.

My soul seek they to take away, and before them set not thee.

Long-suffering too, in mercy thou and truth art plenteous.

Thy strength give thou thy servant now thy handmaids son O save.

Be shamed also: because Lord, thou do help and comfort me.
PSALM LXXXVI. Second Meeter.
LOrd bow thine ear, hear me, because I needy am and poor:
2 Because a gracious Saint I am, preserve my soul therefore.
O thou my God, thy servant save, that does on thee rely.

I do:

And to them all in mercy rich thou art that on thee call.




Before thee shall bow down themselves, and glorify thy Name.

They wondrous are, and do declare that thou art God alone.
I:
With reverence to fear thy Name my heart in union ty.
(2)

I will confess with praise:
And likewise I will glorify thy holy name always.

And thou have from the lowest hell my soul delivered free.

Have sought my soul and they have not thee placed before them.

Long-suffering too: in mercy thou and truth art plenteous.

Unto thy servant give thy strength, thine handmaids son O save.

And be ashamed, because Lord thou do help and comfort me.
PSALM. LXXXVII. A Psalm or song for the Sons of Korah.
HIs ground-work's in the holy hills,

To Sions gates, more than to all the tents where Jacob dwells.


Behold Philistia and Tire, with Ethiopia, there

Of Sion thus it shall be said, and he that is most high.
Even he himself shall her prepare a place of constancy.


PSALM LXXXVIII. A Psalm or Song for the sons of Korah to the chief Musician
upon Mahalath Leanoth, Maschil, of Heman the Ezrahite.
LOrd God of my salvation,
Before thee day and night cried I:

Incline thine ear unto my cry.

And to the grave my life draws nigh.

As one that has no strength am I,

Like to the slain in grave up-shut;
By thee no more remembered,
And by thy hand that off are cut.

In darknesses within deep caves,

Thou me afflict'st with all thy waves.

Away from me thou far have put:
To them thou loathsome make me,
From coming forth I am up shut.

Mine eye with mourning pines away:
Jehovah I thee call upon;
And to thee stretch my hands all day.
(2)

Shall dead men rise and thee confess? Selah.

In lost estate thy faithfulness?

What shall in darkness they be known?
And shall thy righteousness be seen
In that land of oblivion.

At morn my pray' (...) ^^enteth thee.

Why do thou hide thy face from me?
15 I Am poor afflicted, and to die
Am ready from my youthful years:
Distraught with troubles sore am I,
While I do bear thy horrid fears.

Thy terrors they do me dismay.

Together they surround all day,

Removed off away from me;
To those that mine acquaintance are
I am in dark obscurity.
PSALM. LXXXIX, Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite.
THe mercies of Jehovah sing for evermore will I:
I Will with my mouth thy truth make known to all posterity.

Establish in the very heavens thy faithfulness thou will.

And to my servant David I by oath this promise gave.

Likewise to generations all thy throne I Will build up still. Selah,

Within the assembly of the same likewise thy faithfulness.

Who Is like the Lord among the sons of them that mighty are?
(2)

And to be reverene'd of all those that round about him are.

Thy faithfulness on every side, does round encompass thee.

When as the waves thereof arise by thee they stilled are.

Thou have dispersed thine enemies, even by thine arm of might.

The world with fullness of the same by thee they founded be.
12 The north together with the south, thou did create the same:
Tabor likewise and Hermons hill rejoice shall in thy Name.
(3)

And also that right hand of thine aloft on high is set.

Their way before thy face to go both grace and truth prepare.

Lord, in thy countenances light they up and down shall go.

And in thy righteousness they shall be lifted up on high.

Our horn it shall exalted be in thy benignity.

And he that is our sovereign is Isr'els holy one.
(4)

On such an one as mighty is I have salvation laid.
I raised, my servant David I
Have found, him I anointed with my oil of sanctity.


Nor shall the sons of wickedness afflict him any more


His horn likewise shall be on high exalted in my Name.

Likewise within the rivers I will settle his right hand.


28 My mercy I will keep for him to times which ever last:
With him also my covenant shall be established fast.
(5)

And I his throne establish will like as of heaven the days.



Likewise with stripes I visit will their cross iniquity.

Nor suffer will in any wise my faithfulness to lie.

That which is gone out of my lips I never will revoke


And like the Sun before me his throne,

And as in heaven a witness true shall stablish'd be for ay.
(6)


By casting it unto the ground thou have profaned his crown.






All over with confusion thou have him covered.
(7)

Like as a burning fire abide shall thy displeasure sore?
47 To thy remembrance do thou call how short a time have I:
Wherefore have thou created all men's sons to vanity?

That from the hand of grave shall set his soul at liberty;

Which in thy truth and faithfulness to David thou did vow?

How in my breast I have it born, from mighty people all.

Wherewith they do reproach the steps of thine anointed one.

Amen, so let it be also: Amen, be so it shall.
The Fourth Book of Psalms.
PSALM. XC. A Prayer of Moses the Man of God.
THou Lord our stay, have been an house of habitation.
From generation, unto us, to generation.

Thou formed had, thou art a God from ay for evermore.

Ye sons of men, then do thou say, return ye back again.

As yesterday when it is past, and as a watch by night.

Like sleep they are, and as the grass, which in the morning grows

Which is cut down at evening, it withers up likewise

And by thine angers burning fire we speedily decay.

Our secret evils are likewise before thy faces light.

We spend away our years withal like as a tale that is told.

And if through strength they fourscore been, their strength is grief and pain.
For soon its gone and hence we pass,

Thine angers strength? according as thy fear, thy wrath is so.

That we our hearts may thereupon turn into wisdoms ways.

And let it thee repent for them that servants are to thee.

That so through all our days we may joy and make melody.

And years wherein ill we have seen now also make us glad.

And show thy comely glory to those that their children are.

Confirm our handy work on us, confirmed be it by thee.
PSALM. XCI.
HE that within the secrecy of the highest does reside,
In shadow of the Almighty he shall lodging safe abide
y:
He is m y God, and in him I my confidence will sta y.

And from the infectious pestilence he also shall thee free.

His strength shall as a shield abide, and buckler unto thee.

Nor of the arrow be afraid, that has by da y his flight.

Nor for the sore destruction that does at noon-da y wast.

At th y right hand; but yet it shall not unto thee come near.

Thou shall behold how that likewise the wicked have reward.
y protection:
The highest one thou make also thine habitation.

Nor yet shall any plague come nigh th y dwelling place at all.

That the y ma y thee preserve from ill whereas th y wa is shall be.
y shall up-bear;
Lest thou thy foot against a stone should dash at unaware.

The Dragon and the Lion young thou trample shall also.
14 Foe he has set his love on me, him therefore free will I;
Because that known m y name has he, I will him set on high.
y'r call on me, and I will answer him:
I will with him in trouble be, I Will freely him redeem,
And I will honor him also, 16 Him I will satisfy
With length of days, and to him show my saving health will I.
PSALM. XCII. A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day.
UNto Jehovah thanks to give, it is a comely thing:
And praises forth O Thou most high, unto th y name to sing.
Th y loving kindness forth to show within the morning light;
Th y truth and faithfulness also to show forth every night.

Upon the solemn sounding harp, with meditation.

And also in th y handle work I will triumph with voice.



When they are in a flourishing case that work iniquities.

But thou Jehovah, do abide, for evermore most high.

The workers of iniquities, they shall be scattered all.
(2)

And with fresh oil when I am old anointed be shall I.

(...) wicked men likewise shall hear that rise against me.

He shall be like the cedar-trees, in Lebanon that grow.
13 They that within Jehovahs house are planted steadfastly,
They in the court-yards of our God shall flourish pleasantly.

They shall be fat, yea likewise they shall still be flourishing.

And that he from unrighteousness is altogether free.
PSALM. XCIII.
JEhovah reigns, he clothed is with lofty majesty:
Jehovah clothed and begirt with strength himself has he:
The world also is stablished, that it unmoved shall stay.


The floods on high have lifted up their waves with dashing noise.

Yea, than the mighty breaking waves of the oceans roaring voice.

Does suitably become thine house unto eternity.
PSALM. XCIV.
LOrd God to whom does appertain the recompense of wrongs:
O mighty God, shine clearly forth, to whom revenge belongs.



How long shall all such boast themselves as do work wickedness?






(2)



Until the pit be dug for such as do wickedly.

Nor yet will he forsake his own inheritance for ay.

Likewise all upright ones in heart they shall pursue it then.

Who will stand up for me against them that work iniquities?


(3)

Still from thy consolations my soul delight does find,
20 What shall the throne of wickedness have fellowship with thee?
Mischievous molestation which forgeth by decree.

The soul of him that righteous is, and damned the guiltless blood,

My God he also is the Rock, where I for safety fly.

Shall cut them off, the Lord our God even he shall them suppress.
PSALM. XCV.
O Come let us unto the Lord shout forth with joyful voice:
To the Rock of our salvation let us make triumphant noise.

Let us with Psalms triumphantly unto him sing also.


5 The sea to him belonging is, because he made the same;
And also the dry land is his, for it his hands did frame.
(2)

Him that our Maker is, the Lord, O let us kneel before.

(...) of his hands the sheep: if ye, to day his voice will hear,

As in the day of Massah they did in the wilderness.

I forty years was grieved by that generation.


PSALM. XCVI.
SIng to the Lord a new song; sing all the earth the Lord unto.

3 His glory to the heathen folk, to all, his wonders spread.


But yet Jehovah he it is that did the heavens frame

Both fortitude and beauty are within his holy place.

Both Majesty and mightiness give ye unto the Lord.
The glory to Jehovah give that to his Name is due.
And bringing an oblation, into his Courts come you

The universal earth likewise in fear stand him before.

It shall not move: in righteousness the people judge shall he.

Let seas and fullness of the same, with roaring make a noise.

Then all the trees within the wood they joyfully shall shout.

The world with justice, and the folk to judge with equity.
PSALM. XCVII. First Meeter.
THe Lord does reign, the earth
O let hereat rejoice;
The many Isles with mirth
Let them lift up their voice.

Dark clouds there went: right and judgme^^
His throne do four

And burns his foes about.

By lightning he sent out
The earth it saw
Did tremble too. 5 Hills melt also
Like wax away.
At presence of the Lord
At his presence who is
(...) all the earth the Lord,
That righteousness of his,
The heavens high
They forth do show: All folk also
His glory see.
Who graven images
(...) serve, on them remain
(...) dreadful shamefulness
(...) who in idols vain
Themselves do boast:
(...) worship bow: To him all you
God's Angels host
Sion heard, and was glad
(...) Judah's daughters were:
(...) cause O Lord they had
(...) judgments did appear.

(...) earth set over, All gods before
In dignity
Ye that do love the Lord,
The evil hate do ye:
To his saints souls afford
Protection does he:
He will for them
Freedom command Out of the hand
Of wicked men.

There surely is sown light,
And gladness for their share
That are in heart upright

Ye just confess His holiness,
While ye record.
PSALM XCVII. Second Meeter.
JEhovah reigns, therefore let hereat rejoice the earth:
O let the Islands multitude be glad with cheerful mirth.

Justice and Judgment for his throne a stable place prepare.



Before the presence of the Lord, that all the earth does stay.

His glorious Majesty to all the people does appear,
To all that graven Idols serve word^ confusion let befall:
That boast themselves in Idols vain, (...) ye gods him worship all.
(...) When Sion heard, she did rejoice, rejoice with one accord
Did Judahs daughters, and the cause thy judgments were, O Lord.

Likewise above all gods thou art extolled mightily.

That are his saints, he will them save from hands of wicked men.

And joyfulness for all of them that are in heart upright.

And thankfully confess when ye his holiness record.
PSALM. XCVIII.
UNto the Lord a new song sing, for wonders he ha^^ done
His right hand and his holy arm him victory has won.
2 Jehovah his salvation has made for to be known
His righteousness in th heathens sight he openly has shown.

The ends of all the earth have seen our Gods salvation.

Shout ye with earnest fervency, sing praises and rejoice.





With justice he shall judge the world and folk with equity.
PSALM. XCIX.
JEhovah h^ as King does reign O let the people quake:
He sits (...) the Cherubims, the earth then let is shake.
2 Jehovah great in Sion is and over all people high.


Both judgment thou and righteousness in Jacob do maintain.

Before the footstool of his throne: the holy one is he.

Upon his Name: called on the Lord, and he them answered all.

They kept his witness and decree which he for them did make.

Although on their inventions thou vengeance taken have.
Lord our God also before his holy hill;
Bow down your selves, because the Lord our God is holy still
PSALM C. A Psalm of David. First Meeter.
SHout to Jehovah all the earth.
With joyfulness the Lord serve ye
Before his presence come with mirth.

It Is he that made us, and not we,
His folk his pasture sheep also.

With praises to his Court-yards go.

Because Jehovah he is good.
His mercy ever is the same
His truth throughout all ages stood.
PSALM. C. Second Meeter.
MAke ye a joyful noise unto
Jehovah all the earth.
With joyfulness Jehovah serve before him come with mirth

His folk and pasture-sheep we are

Into his gates and courts with praise, thank him and bless his Name,
Lord, his mercy ay and truth endures the same.
PSALM. CI.
I Mercy will and judgment sing, Lord, I will sing to thee.

I will in midst of my house walk in my hearts uprightness.

I hate their work that turn aside, it shall not cleave me to.


I cannot bear the proud in heart, nor him that looks high.

May dwell with me, he shall me serve that walks in perfect way.

Before me settled shall not be the man that lies does tell.

To cut off from Gods city all that work iniquity.
PSALM. CII A Prayer of the afflicted when he it overwhelmed, and pours out
his complaint before the Lord.
JEhovah hear when I do pray,
And let my cry come unto thee.
2 From me hide not thy f^oe away,
In The day when trouble is on me.
Thine ear to me O do thou bend,
In The day I cry, haste, answer (...),

And like an hearth my bones burn be.

That I to eat my bread forget,

My bones into my skin are set.

Like Owl in wilderness am I.

On housetop solitarily.

Against me they rage against me they swear

And mix my drink with weeping tear.

Also th y vehement disdain:
For thou have set me up aloft,
And thou have cast me down again.
(2)

And like the withered grass I fall

Thy memory eke to ages all.

Thy mercy Sion her upon;
Because her time of favor now,
Yea, time appointed is come on.

Delight, her dust they pity do.

All kings of the earth they glory too.

He in his glory shall appear.

And he will not despite their prayer.

For the succeeding after race;
The folk which shall created be,
They hereupon the Lord shall praise.

From heavens the Lord the earth does set.

To loose them that deaths children he.

His Name in Sion to record.

And kingdoms for to serve the Lord.
(3)

And of my life cut short the day.

My God, O take me not away:
Thy years throughout all ages stay.

For elder time, and heavens they.
Are works that thine own hands have made

Yea, like a garment they shall all
Wax old, and as a vesture waste:
Thou shall them change, be changed they shall

And of thine years no end shall be,

Their seed shall stablish'd be with thee.
PSALM. CIII. A Psalm of David.
THe Lord bless, O my soul, and all in me his holy Name.

For he it is that does forgive all thine iniquities.


With his most dear compassion and kind benignity.

So that like as the eagles be, renewed is thy youth.

7 His ways to Moses he did show, his acts to Isr'els sons.
(2)

And unto anger he is slow, in mercy plenteous.

And he his wrath will not retain unto eternity.

Nor has he our iniquities, rewarded us upon.

So toward them that do him fear, confirmed is his love.

He has removed away so fall from us our trespasses.

Like pity does Jehovah show to them that do him fear.

15 Man's days are like the grass, like flowe^ in field so flourishes lie.

Also the place wherein it was no longer it shall know.
(3)

So likewise does his righteousness on childrens children stay.

The charge of his commandment, that it obey they may.

And over all his Royalty does bear dominion.
ye his Angels that excel in strength, bless ye the Lord.
That do his word, that hearken well unto the voice of's word.
ye the Armies of the Lord O bless Jehovah still;
His Ministers that do accord his pleasure to fulfill.

Bless ye Jehovah, O my soul, Jehovah bless alone.
PSALM. CIV.
O Thou my soul Jehovah bless thou Lord my God most great:
With majesty and comeliness thou clothed art in state.

Who like a curtain do display the heavens every where.

The clouds his chariot, and his way on wings of wind he takes.



Aloft above the mountains steep the waters they did stand.

And at th y thunders voice they sped their course away in haste.
They up aloft by mountains past, down by the vales did go.
The place for them which sixth thou have until they come unto.

That they to cover the dry ground may turn again no more.
(2)

Thence drink to all field beasts he brings wild asses drink their fills.





And for the heart of man gives bread it to support with might.

The cedar-trees of Lebanon, the which, himself does plant.

As for the Stork, the fir-trees are the places of her rest.



y do lions young, from God for food they call.
y go aside.

(3)

The earth does of th y riches hold abundantl y her fill.

Beyond all count small beasts beside those of great quantity.



With such things as are good, they so are fully satisfied.

Then do they die, likewise repair unto their dust do they.

And of the earth the face also thou do renew again.
(4)

The Lord shall in his doings all take pleasure joyfully.

The mountains he does touch, and then they thereupon do smoke.

While I a being have, will I, unto m y God sing praise.

I in the EVER-BEING one, exceeding glad will be.

O thou my soul Jehovah bless, Praise ye the Lord therefore.
PSALM. CV.
O Praise the Lord, call on his name, among People show his facts.




His wonders and his judgments which did from his mouth proceed.



A thousand generations too he does in mind record.

And unto Isaac afterward, likewise an oath did take.

To Israel for a Covenant that evermore should last.
(2)



When as they from one kingdom did to other people go.









And that unto his Senators he wisdom might impart.

And Jacob was a sojourner within the land of Ham.


(3)









The number of them was so great, that none could count how much.


(4)

And there was not among their tribes a feeble person told.







The labor of the people they inherited also.

And that they might his laws observe: therefore Jehovah praise.
PSALM. CVI.
THe Lord praise to the Lord give thanks because that good is he:
Because his mercy does endure to perpetuity.



Me visit with the saving health that comes alone from thee.

That I with thine inheritance may lift a glorious voice.

We practiced have iniquity we have done wickedly.
(2)

Thy many mercies: but at Sea, Red Sea rebelled unkind.

That by the same his mighty power he manifest might make.

So them, as through the wilderness, he through the Sea did guide.

He from the enemies hand likewise to them redemption gave.


(3)







20 They changed their glory to be like an ox that eats hay.
y God forgot their Savior, which in Egyt did great acts.


Stood in the breach before him to turn his wrath from wasting them.
(4)




Baal-Peor they joined themselves ate offerings of the dead.
his wrath did thus provoke the plague amongst them spread


(5)

So that with Moses for their sake, it very ill did go.





blood, blood of their son and of their daughters shed.
Whom unto Canaans Idols they gave up in sacrifice:
The land with blood abundantly polluted was likewise.

And they did go a whoring with inventions of their own.
(6)

So that he the inheritance, which was his own abhorred.

42 Their foes them thrall'd under their hand made them the yoke to bear.

With their own counsels, and waxt low through their iniquity.


And in his many mercies did

^y'd of all that led them forth into captivity.

To give thanks to thy holy Name, to triumph in thy praise.
Lord the God of Israel, from ay to ay blessed be;
And let all people say Amen, O praise Jehovah ye.
The fifth Book of Psalms.
PSALM CVII. Gods goodness to (1) Travelers.
With thanks unto the Lord confess, because that good is he;
^ec^ use his loving kindnesses last to eternity.
2 So say the Lords redeemed whom bought he has from the enemies hands;




Who did them set at liberty, out of their anguishes.

That to a city which they might inhabit, they might go.

And for his wonders manifold unto the sons of men.

The hungry soul he fills likewise with good abundantly.
(2) To prisoners

They who are sore afflictions in, and fast in Irons ti'd.
11 Because they in rebellion, against Gods word did rise
They also of the Highest One, the counsel did despise.

Down did they fall, and there was none could help to them impart.

Who did them set at liberty out of their anguishes.

As for bands, that they were in, he did them break asunder.

And for his wonders manifold unto the sons of men!

And he the bar asunder brake that made of Iron was.
(3) To the sick.


19 Then they unto Jehovah cry, when they are in distress;
Who sets them at liberty, out of their anguishes.

From out of their destruction free he likewise did them save.

And for his wonders manifold unto the sons of men;

While they his works declare likewise let them for gladness sing.
(4) To the Seafaring.



Which lifts the waves thereof on high, they mount up to the skies.


28 Then do they to Jehovah cry when they are in distress;
And he them brings speedily out of their anguishes.



And for his wonders manifold unto the sons of men.

Assembled where the elders been him also let them praise.
(5) To planters





Which unto them their fruitfulness with much revenue yields.
38 And in such wise he does them bless that they are much encreast;
And to become by wasting less he suffers not their beast.

By tyranny impoverished, and by affliction.

Where solitary deserts be, wherein there is no way.

And like a flock of sheep unto does make him families.

And bridle up their mouth shall all that work iniquity.

Jehovahs mercies what they are, they clearly shall discern.
PSALM. CVIII. A Song or Psalm of David.
O God my heart is fixed, I Will sing: yea with my glory praise.

O thou Jehovah thee will I the people praise among;
Also among the nations thee will I praise with song.

Thy verity does also reach unto the cloudy sky.

Also thy glorious Majesty, over all the earth abroad.

O (...) thou save with thy right hand, and answer give to me.

Of Shechem I Will division make, and me^e out Succoths vale.

Is of mine head the strength, the Law, shall Judah give for me.

And over the Land of Philistim I will in triumph sing.

Who is he that to Edom will conduct me as a guide?

And likewise wilt not thou, O God, forth with our armies go?


PSALM CIX. To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.
GOd of my praise, hold not thy peace

Their mouth, and mouth of guilefulness are opened wide against me.
Against me they speak with lying tongue

With words of hate; and me against without a cause they fought.



And likewise at his right hand let the adversary stand.

And let the prayer that he does make be turned into (...)



And (...) their places desolate, let them seek bread also.
(2)

And let the stranger spoil what he did by his labor gain.

Nor any one that favor may his children fatherless.

In the after generation out razed be his name

And of his meaner let the sin out-blotted never be.

That from out of the earth he may the memory of them cut.

But did pursue the needy poor so slay the broke in heart.
(3)

As he did not in blessing joy, so be it far him from.

Into his bowels water like, like oil his bones into.

And to a girdle wherewith he may gird himself always.

Thus them reward, against my soul that speak an evil word.
(4)

Because that good thy mercy is, O do thou set me free.
I, my heart in me is wounded too.
23 Like falling shade I pass, I Am tossed as Locust to and fro.





When they arise: but let him joy that servant is to thee.

And be they clothed as with a cloak with their confusion.

Yea, him among the multitude with praise I Will glorify.

From those that do condemn his soul to give salvation.
PSALM CX. A Psalm of David. First Meeter.
THe Lord did say unto my Lord,
To sit at my right hand accord,
Till I thy foes thy footstool make.

Thy rod of strength thee to attend,
The rule amid the enemies take.

In beauties of true sanctity.
Upon the day of thy great power
So of thy youth shall be the dew
As from the morning womb we view
The dewy drops of early shower.

Repent that thou a Priest shall be
By the order of Melchisedeck

And strike through kings upon the day
When as his fury forth shall break

The places with dead bodies throng.
The heads of countries great strike dead

Shall satisfy his thirst that day:
And so on high lift up the head.
PSALM CX. Second Meeter.
THe Lord did say unto my Lord,
Sit thou at my right hand
Till I thine enemies make a stool whereon thy feet may stand

In midst of thine enemies, thy conquering power extend.

As dew from early mornings womb thou have thy youth to thee.

By the order of Melchisedeck thou art a Priest for ay.

Upon the day wherein that he his indignation brings:

Great places: and over many lands he shall strike through the head!

Because of this therefore he shall list up the head on high.
PSALM CXI.
PRaise ye the Lord, Jehovah I with all my heart will praise:
l'th' private meeting of the upright, and public meeting place.

Sought out they are by all of those that have in them delight.

And to perpetual ay does stand that righteousness of his;

Full of compassion is the Lord, and likewise gracious.

He in remembrance will retain his covenant for ay.

In that the heathens heritage he did on them bestow.
(2)

Yea, very faithful also are each one of his commands.

Yea, perfected in verity, and uprightness are they.

(...) he has ordained: his Name holy and reverend is.

That do his will have prudence good, his praise endures for aye.
PSALM. CXII. First Meeter. Hallelujah,
WHo fears the Lord, blessed man is he
That much does in his laws delight
His seed on earth shall mighty be,
(...) shall the race be of the upright.

His justice lasts for ay likewise.

There does in darkness light arise.

And full is of compassion
A good man lends and favor shows
His works guides with discretion

Aye shall the just be in record.

His heart's fixed, trusting on the Lord.

Till on his foes his will he see.

His righteousness for aye shall be.
He horn with honor high shall rise,
(...) The lewd shall grieve, and melt away,
And gnash his teeth when this he spies,
The wickeds wish shall quite decay.
PSALM. CXII. Second Meeter.
PRaise ye the Lord, blessed is the man that does Jehovah fear:
That does in his commandments, his spirit greatly cheer.

The race shall blessed be that does from the upright one proceed.

His righteousness moreover does endure for evermore.

He gracious is and pitiful, and righteous is likewise.
(2)

And with discretion his affairs he carries on an end.

In everlasting memory the righteous man shall be.

His trust he putting in the Lord, his heart is firmly staid.

Until he sees what he desires upon his enemies.

With honor also shall his horn on high exalted stay.

And melt away, and their desire shall fail that wicked be.
PSALM. CXIII.
PRaise O ye servants of the Lord, Jehovahs Name, O praise.






8 That he with Princes may him set, his peoples peers among.

A joyful mother children to: therefore the Lord praise ye.
PSALM. CXIV.
WHen Israel did depart the Egyptians from among:
The house of Jacob from a folk that strangers were in tongue.



The little hills they also leaped, as if they had been lambs.



When as the presence of the God of Jacob does appear.

A water-running fountain he did of the flint stone make.
PSALM. CXV. First Meeter.
NOt to us, not to us, O Lord,
But glory to thy Name afford:
Both for thy truth and mercies sake.

Where is their God now gone away

He has done whatsoever he would.

The handiwork of men they were.

Eyes have they but they do not see.

They noses have, but smell no jot,

Feet have they, but they do not go:
And through their throat they never spoke.

And all that trust in them are so.

He is their help, their shield as well.

He is their help, their shield also.

Their help, their shield also is he.
(2)

He Will bless us, he will bless Isreal's house,
He'll' blessing Aarons house afford.




The Lords, but the earth men's sons gave he.

Nor any that to silence bow.
But we will bless the Lord both now,
And ever henceforth. Praise the Lord.
PSALM. CXV. Second Meeter.
NOt unto us, Lord, not to us but thou the glory take
Unto thy Name, both for thy truth and for thy mercies sake.






And nothing speak they through their throat

That do them make and all that do their trust upon them stay.




The house of Israel bless he will he Aarons house will bless




But he the earth distributed the sons of men among.

But as for us, we'll bless the Lord from henceforth without end. HALLELUJAH.
PSALM CXVI.
Love; because Jehovah does my voice and prayer hear.
2 And in my days will call, because he bowed to me his ear.

The pains of hell gat hold on me, distress and grief I found.

Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray.



Because the Lord has bounteously to thee himself expressed.

Thou have mine eyes from tears likewise, and feet from fall set free.







The death of every one of those his gracious saints that are.

(...) of thy handmaid am the son my bands thou did unty.

Jehovahs Name I earnestly will call upon it still.

Now in the presence of them all that his own people be.

In midst of thee Jerusalem, Oh praise the Lord with songs.
PSALM. CXVII. First Meeter.
YE nations all jehovah praise,
And give him praise ye people all.
For great to us his mercy is, is truth lasts ay, the Lord extol.
PSALM. CXVII. The Second Meeter.
O Praise Jehovah all
Ye nations every where:
Ye people great and small,

Great to us be
For ay the Lord makes true his word,
The Lord praise ye
PSALM. CXVII. The usual Meeter.
ALL nations praise the Lord him praise

Prevails on us: his truth ay lasts: therefore Jehovah praise.
PSALM. CXVIII.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord because that good is he:
Because his loving kindness lasts to perpetuity.

Now let the House of Aaron say, that is mercy lasts for ay.

That Is loving kindness does endure unto perpetual ay.

The Lord an answer gave to me, with an enlarged seat.


Therefore upon them that me hate see my desire shall I.

(2)



But in Jehovahs name I will them utterly root out.

But I will utterly destroy them in Jehovahs name.



And of salvation strongly works the right hand of the Lord:
16 The right hand of Jehovah is exalted up on high;
The right hand of Jehovah is a working valiantly
(3)



I will go into them, and-will the praise of Jah confess.




(4)

We will exceedingly rejoice, and in it will be glad.

I humbly thee entreat, now send prosperity, O Lord.

Out of Jehovahs house to you a blessing wish do we.

The sacrifices bind unto the Altars horns with cords.

The Lord praise, for he is good, for aye lasts his benignity.
PSALM. CXIX. The First Meeter.
A
ALL blessed are men upright of way,
Walk in Jehovahs law who do.

With all their heart who seek him too.

But in his ways do walk indeed.

Unto thy precepts to give heed.

To keep thy Statutes heedfullie!

Then be ashamed shall not I,

With hearts uprightness I Will thee praise,
Me utterlie forsake not thou,
I will observe thy Statute-ways.
(2) B
By what may youth red ress his way?
Thy word by heeding thereunto

Therefore let not thy Precepts fro.
I have hid in my heart,
That I might not offend against thee.

Thy Statutes therefore teach thou me.

The Judgments of thy mouth even all.

Rejoice more than in riches all.

And have respect unto thy ways.

And not forget what thy word says.
(3) C

That I may live thy word to keep.

See from thy law thy wonders deep.

Hide not thy laws therefore me fro.

In seasons all thy judgments to.

Are cursed which from thy statutes swerve.

For I thy records do observe.
23 (...) Princes sat and against me spoke
But on thy laws thy servant mused.

And them men of my counsel used.
(4) D

O quicken me after thy word.

Thy statutes learning me afford.

So I Will muse on thy wondrous ways,

According to thy word me raise.

And the law grant me graciously.

Thy judgments before me laid have I,

Oh Lord, on me shame do not cast.

When thou my heart enlarged have.
(5) E

And I will keep it to the end.

Yea, it with all my heart attend.

Because that I delight therein.

And bow it not to coveting.

And in thy way revive thou me.

Thy word who stands in aw of thee.

Because thy judgments good they be.

O in thy justice quicken me.
(6) F

After thy words salvation Lord.

Because I trust upon thy Word.

Because I on thy judgments stay.

For everlasting and for aye.

Because I do thy precepts seek.

Shall of thy Testimonies speak.

Which I have loved, delight I will.

Beloved; and mind thy precepts still.
(7) G

On which to hope thou did me give

Because thy word does make me live.
51 The proud have much derided me,
Yet have I not thy Law declined.

I did recall and comfort find.

For wicked men thy law forsake.

MY songs did of thy statutes make.

And kept with care thy Law have I.
I, for I kept aright,
Thy precepts very heedfullie.
(8) H

I said that I will keep thy Word.

Thy promised mercies me afford.

I turned my feet thy Records to.

To keep with heed thy Statutes so.

Yet did I not forget thy Laws

Thy righteous judgments are the cause.

That fear thee, and thy Laws keep too.

O Lord, thy statutes let me know.
(9) J

After thy word right-well have done,

For I believe thy precepts on.

But I thy word observed have now.

Thy Statutes cause thou me to know.

Thy laws I Will keep with m y hearts might.

But in thy law I do delight.
I was chastis'd,
That so thy statutes learn I should.

Than thousands of silver and gold.
(10) K

Thy hands me formed have and made

For hope I in thy word have had.

And faithfully thou chastnedst me.

Now let thy grace my comfort be.

For as my joy thy law I choose.

Do harm who on thy precepts muse.
79 Let them that fear thee, turn to me
And such as have thy Records known

That so I shame may suffer none.
11 L

My soul does faint for help from thee

I said when will thou comfort me?

Yet do I not thy laws forego.

Will thou doom on my troublers do?

Which do not unto thy law suit,

Help me, whom they mispersecute

But I thy laws did not forsake

Me in thy mercy livelie make.
(12) M

O Lord for ever to endure

Thou form'dst the earth and it stands sure

For all are servants thee unto.

Then had I perished in my woe.

Because by them thou quicknedst me,

I sought thy Precepts studiously.

But I thy Testimonies mind.

But very large thy law I find.
(13) N
I
It is m y study all the day.
then my foes made me more wise
By th y law, for it is with me a y.

Because thy laws my study are.
I know more than the ancients do,
Because I kept thy Laws with care.
y feet I stay,
That so I ma y th y word observe.

I did not from th y judgments swerve.
words are to m y taste how sweet!
More to m y mouth than honey they
y precepts wisdom get,
I therefore hate each l^ing way.
(14) O
y feet is the Lamp th y word,
And to my path the shining light.

That I will keep thy judgments right.
107 I am afflicted very sore,
Lord, quicken me after th y word,
free offerings own therefore
And me thy judgments teach O Lord.
y soul is in mine hand alwa y,
But I have not thy law forgot.

Yet from th y Precepts staid I not

For aye, for my hearts joy they be.

To the end even to eternity.
(15) P
thoughts with hate I do
But dearly love th y law do I.

I on thy word wait hopefullie:

May keep m y Gods Commandments.
y word stay me, live shall I:
Shame me not for my confidence.
y,
And still with jo y thy Laws I Will eye.
down from th y Laws who straie
For their deceit is vanity,

Like dross, th y laws I love therefore
thee my flesh does quake
And I do dread thy judgments sore.
(16) Q

I judgment do and righteousness

Let not the proud ones me oppress.

As also for thy righteous word.

And thy Laws learning me afford.

Thy Testimonies for to know,

For men thy Law do overthrow,
y precepts love,
Above gold, yea the finest gold.

All things thy laws most right I hold.
(17) R
wondrous are thy testimonies
Therefore m y soul keeps them with care.
thy words entrance gives, like wise
Them prudent makes that simple are

Because I longed for the same.
Look on me and such grace me grand
As thou do them that love thy Name.

No wickedness bear rule in me
134 From men's oppression free me set,
And keeper of th y laws I Will be.
y face let on th y servant shine,
And me to learn th y statutes cause.

Because men do not keep th y laws
(18) S
y just art thou, O Lord
Th y judgments upright are also,

Are right: yea very faithful too.
y?
Mine enemies th y word forget.

Therefore thy servant loves it.

Yet thy Commands forget not I.

Is just: thy Law is verity.

Yet thy Commands delight me give.
y lasts th y Records righteousness:
Make thou me wise and I shall live.
(19) T

Lord, hear me, keep th y laws I will

May keep thy Testimonies still.
y
I for th y word do hopeful wait.
148 Mine eyes prevent the watch, that (...)
Upon th y word ma y meditate.
y voice Lord, of thy mercy hear,
After th y judgments quicken me.

And from th y law far off the y be.

And all th y Precepts verity.
y Records knew:
Thou set'st them for eternity.
(20) V

For I thy Law do not forget.
y cause and ransom me:
For th y words sake alive me set.

Since the y to find th y Laws never strive:
y bowel-me rcies Lord, great are
After th y judgments me revive.
Great my pursuing enemies:
Yet nothing from th y laws I swerve.

For they thy word do not observe.
y precepts love do I
Grant of th y grace that live I may.
y words beginnings verity;
And all thy judgments right for aye.
(21) W

But of th y word m y hearts in aw^^
162 As one that has found out much spoil
So I rejoice do in th y law.

But dearly love th y Law do I.
y I praise thee, for
The judgments of th y equity.
y law, great peace have they
And such shall find no stumbling stone
y salvation sta y;
And thy Commandments I have done.

And them abundantly love
y Records keep,
For all m y ways before thee lie.
(22) Y
y cry to approach thy face
As thou have spoke me prudent make
o thee let my request for grace
Approach, free me for th y words sake.

Thy statutes have made known to me.
y word m y tongue shall show
For all th y precepts righteous be.
y hand be near:
For th y Commandments chose have is
y salvation dear,
Lord, and m y joies in th y Law lie.
Let m y soul live to show th y praise
And let th y judgments give me aid.
176 Because I have not left thy laws:
Th y servant seek like lost sheep straid.
The second Meeter for common Tunes.
1 Part. Aleph.
A LL blessed are the upright in the wa y who in the Lords law go.
y whose whole heart seeks him too.
y do none iniquity, in's ways who walking are.
y precepts with much care.
y statutes then m y ways were so direct!
y laws respect.


(2) Beth.
y word b y heeding to.







(3) Gimel.








(4) Daleth.


27 Learn me thy Precepts way, and so thy wonders I Will record,



I to thy Records cleaving stay; to shame Lord, put not me:

(5) He.








(6)
UNto me let thy mercies come, thy Word's salvation, Lord.
(...) And I my scorners answer shall, for I trust in thy Word.
(...) Truths word quite take not from my mouth who on thy judgments stay.
(...) And I shall always keep thy law for ever and for aye.
(...) And I will walk at liberty; for I thy precepts seek.
(...) And I Will not blush when Kings before I of th y Records speak.
(...) And in th y precepts which I love my self delight I will.
(...) And lift my hands to th y dear Laws, and mind th y Statutes still.
(7) Zain.


I have not from th y Laws declined.
I refreshed my self when I th y judgments old did mind.
Horror takes hold on me, because vile men th y Law forsake.
I in m y house of pilgrimage my song th y Statutes make.
55 O Lord, th y Name I mind by night, and kept thy Law have I
I obtained for I kept right th y precepts carefully.
(8) Cheth.
I said I Will keep th y Word.
I begged th y favor with whole heart, grace promised me afford.
I turned my feet th y Records to, in thinking on m y ways.
I hastened, and th y Laws to do I did make no delays.
I not thy Laws.
y judgments just because.
y laws, companion theirs am I
y laws, for Lord the earth's full of th y benignity.
(9) Teth.
y servant Lord thou have after th y word well done.
I th y Laws trust on
I e're I was chastis'd, th y word yet keep I now.
y Statutes make me know.
proud against me forged lies I Will keep. th y Laws with all m y might:


I of gold and silver prized.
(10) Jod.

y word trust to.


y grace that I may live; th y law my jo y I choose.



(11) Caph.
I stay.
y word, when will thou comfort me I say?
83 Thy laws forget not I: though I a bottle smoked am like.



I did not thy Laws forsake.

(12) Lamed.
y truth for aye does last.




y precepts sought.
y Records mind.

(13) Mem
y
ye

I keep with care.
y word I might.
y judgments have I not for thou me taught'st aright.
I taste th y words more to my mouth than honey they.
y precepts get thence hate I each false way.
(14) Nun




y soul's still in my hand: yet I have not thy Laws forgot.

111 Thy Records ever I possess, for glad my heart they do.

(15) Samech.




I shall be safe, and a ye with joy thy Law I Will eye.
y laws who stray for their deceit's a lie.
y laws I love therefore.
y flesh does quake for fear of thee I dread thy judgments sore.
(16) Ajin








(17) Phe


I gape, and for thy precepts pant, for longings mine they be.

y word, over me O let nor sin bear sway.


y laws.
(18) (...)
y judgments are also

139 My zeal consumed me, because thy words m y foes forget.
y servants love is set.
I, and slighted am: thy laws forget yet do not I.
y justice righteous is for aye, and thy Laws verity.
y laws my jo is yet be.
y righteous records last for aye: that I may live teach me.
(19) Quoph
y'd with whole heart I have hear me Lord keep th y laws I will.




y draw near far from thy law they be.

ye.
(20) Resh

y thy word.
y laws seek not they.

y troublers many, and my foes, naught from th y Laws I stepped.

y thy grace.

(21) Sehin
y word yet aws m y heart.
y word I joy as one that does great booties part.


y Law and stumbling block have none.

167 M y soul th y Testimonies keeps, my love to them is dear.

(22) Thau
y word make me.
y humble suit approach me by th y word set free.


y precepss since I chosen have O help me by thy might.
Lord, thy law is my delight.

y servant seek like lost sheep straid thy laws I Will not forget.
PSALM. CXX. A song of Degrees.
Lord cried in my straits, and he did answer me.
y soul set free.


I reside!
That I also within the tents of Kedar do abide.


PSALM. CXXI. A song of Degrees.


y foot be moved, nor slumber that thee keeps.




ye.
PSALM. CXXII. A (...) of degrees of David.
Lords house meet.

Jerusalem is builded up into a City frame:
In It self together uniform, compacted is the same.

That they unto Jehovahs Name their thankfulness may show.

The thrones that do unto the house of David appertain.
y for Jerusalem her peace they prosper that love thee.



PSALM. CXXIII. A Song of Degrees.
O Thou that in the heavens sitt'st, I Will lift mine eyes to thee.

As maids eyes to their mistress hand, so are our eyes unto
The Lord our God, until that he shall mercy on us show.

Because that filled with contempt exceedingly are we.

From them also that haughty be our souls contempt endure.
PSALM. CXXIV. A song of degrees of David
HAd not the Lord been on our side, may Israel now proclaim:
Lord been on our side when men against us came:





The snare asunder broken is, and we escaped are.

Who is the Maker of the earth, and of the heavens frame,
PSALM. CXXV. A Song of Degrees.
THey that do in Jehovah trust, shall as mount Sion be,
Which cannot be removed, but stands to perpetuity.
Like as the mountains round about Jerusalem do stay:
His people so the Lord surrounds, from henceforth and for aye.

Lest just men should put forth their hands unto iniquity.

And unto every one of them that are of upright heart.
But who turn to their crooked ways, the Lord shall make them go
With workers of iniquity: but peace be Israel to.
PSALM. CXXVI. A song of degrees,
WHen as Jehovah did return Sions captivity:
At that time unto them that dream, compared might we be

The Lord (...) me great things for them they said the heathen mong.




Bearing choice seed, shall sure with joy bringing their sheaves return.
PSALM. CXXVII. A Song of Degrees for Solomon.
Except the Lord the house do build, the builders work in vain.
Except the Lord the City keep, the watchman wakes in vain.
you to rise betimes, watch late, to feed upon
The bread of griefs: sure he givs sleep to his beloved one.
L^ sons are the heritage of the Lord, the fruitful womb his wage.
youthful age.

They shall not be ashamed in the gate in speaking with (...) foes.
PSALM. CXXVIII. A Song of Degrees First Meeter.
O Blessed is every one that does Jehovah fear,
That walks his ways along

Th y hands labor
Blessed shall thou be, it well with thee
shall be therefore.
y wife like fruitful vine
Shall be by thine house side.
The children that be thine,
Like Olive plants abide
About thy board.

That fears the Lord,

From Sion, and thou shall ^ee
Jerusalems goodness
All th y life's days that be.

Thy children then with their children.
Peace on Israel
PSALM. CXXVIII. Second Meeter.
THey blessed are the Lord that fear, that walk on in his wa y.

Yea it shall be full well with thee,

A fruitful vine, that up by thine house sides does flourishing grow.
Thy children round thy table found, as Olive branches are.
4 Behold thus he shall blessed be that does Jehovah fear.

And thou shall see prosperity upon Jerusalem.
Even all the days that th y life stays

Thy children then with their children, and peace on Israel.
PSALM CXXIX. A Song of Degrees
NOw from m y youth may Israel say often have they me assailed.
youth, yet against me naught prevailed.





Nor therewith he his bosom fills, that up the sheaves does bind.
you be.
Unto you in Jehovahs Name a blessing wish do we.
PSALM. CXXX. A Song of Degrees.
LOrd from the deeps (...) to thee.

Unto my supplications voice let be attent thine ear.


I for the Lord wait, m y soul waits; and I hope in his word.
y soul more for the Lord.

Because that with Jehovah there is kind benignity.

And he will Israel redeem from all is iniquities.
PSALM. CXXXI A Song of degrees of David.
MY heart's not haughty Lord, nor lofty are mine eyes:
In things too great or high for me, is not mine exercise.

Like as a child that weaned is (...) off his mothers breast.
^'m like a weaned child,
y
With expectation on the Lard from henceforth and for a ye.
PSALM. CXXXII. A Song of degrees.
REmember David Lord, and all is affliction:
y one.
y will not go m y houses tent into;
Upon the pallet of m y bed, I thither will not go.

Nor slumber to mine eyelids give will I in any wise.

A fixed habitation for Jacobs God so great.

But we within the fields of the wood, did find it to be there.

8 Into thy rest arise, Lord thou the Ark of thy strength also,
y Priests themselves array.
And grant unto thy holy ones, that shout for joy they may.

The face of thine anointed one, awa y quite turned be.

I of th y bodies fruit will make, upon th y throne to sit.

Upon th y throne for evermore sit then their children should.

He has desired it to be the place where dwell he will.
y resting place to perpetuity:
Here will I dwell, and that because desired it have I.

The poor that be in her with bread by me shall have their fill.
16 Her Priests with saving health, them also cloth will I
Her holy ones likewise they shall shout forth most joyfully.

A candle I prepared have for mine anointed dear,

But flourishing upon himself shall be his Diadem.
PSALM CXXXIII. A Song of degrees of David
HOw good and sweet on see
For brethren it is to dwell
Together in unity!

The head upon
That down did flow, the beard unto
Beard of Aaron:
That further downward went
His garments skirts upon.

Sions mountains upon:
For thereto sta y
The Lord his bliss commanded it is.
Even life for aye
PSALM. CXXXIII. Second Meeter.
HOw good it is oh see, and how it pleases well.
Together even in unity for brethren so to dwell.

Down Aarons beard, that downward went his garments skirts unto.

For there the Lord does blessing bid even life without an end.
PSALM. CXXXIV A Song of degrees.
O All ye servants of the Lord, behold the Lord bless ye
Ye who within Jehovahs house in night time standing be.


PSALM. CXXXV.
THe Lord praise praise Jehovahs Name,
Jehovahs servants praise him ye.
Lords house stand, the same
Who in courts of our Gods house be.
Lord is good
For it is sweet to his Name to sing.

And Israel for his precious thing.
Lord is great I know,
And over all gods our Lord keeps.
6 What he does will, the Lord does do
In heaven, earth, seas, and in all deeps.

That they from the ends of the earth should rise
He for the rain does lightning make
And wind-brings from his treasuries.

Of mankind and of beast also.

On Pharaoh, on all is servants too.


Og^ also one of Bashans kings,
All kingdoms of the Canaanites.

His people Isreal's lot to fall.

O Lord is thy memorial.

And of his servants he will take care.

And gold, men's hands did them prepare.

Eyes have they, but they do not see;

And in their mouths no breathings be.

That trust in them so each one is.

Thou Aarons house Jehovah bless.

Who fear the Lord him bless let them;
From Sion blessed be the Lord,
Who dwells at Jerusalem.
PSALM. CXXXVI.
O Thank the Lord, for he is good, for's mercies lasts for aye.

























PSALM. CXXXVII.
THe rivers on of Babylon there when we did sit down,
Yea sadly then we mourned when we Sion thought upon.

Because there they that us away led in captivity.

Sing us among a Sions song, then unto us they said.

To sing a song that does belong unto our God the Lord.

Let my right hand of her command be quite forgetful then

If choice joys over I mind not more Jerusalem my joy.

It raze, it raze, when as it was Jerusalem her day.

Which must be waste that which thou have rewarded us upon.

Thy little ones, and against the stones does them in pieces break.
PSALM. CXXXVII. Second Meeter.
BY water-floods of Babylon, there have we sitten down;
Yea, there we mourned, when as we did Sion think upon.


Who laid us waste, asked mirth, sing us a Sions song do ye.


Then let my right hand quite forget her own dexterity.

If I set not Jerusalem my chiefest joy above

Raze it to her foundation raze it again said they.

That like as thou us served have, so recompe^^^ thee.

Thy little ones, and against hard stones, does them in pieces break.
PSALM. CXXXVIII. A Psalm of David.
WIth all my heart I Will thee confess, praise thee the gods before,

I Will for thy mercy praise thy Name, and for thy verity.
Because thou over all thy Name, thy word do magnify.

With strength, within my soul, thou then did also strengthen me.
thee Lord shall praise when thy mouths words they hear.


But as for them that lofty be, he them far off does know.

Thine hands shall my foes wrath suppress and thy right hand me save.
Lord, aye stands.
Oh do not those forsake that be the works of thine own hands.
PSALM. CXXXIX. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
O Lord thou do me search and know, thou know my sitting down.




Such high and wondrous skill is more than reach thereto I may.
I from thy Spirit go? or from thy face where fly?

I take, and dwell where utmost sea-costs be.
10 Even there thy hand conduct me shall, and thy right hand hold me.

Then shall the night about me be like to the lightsome day.

Alike unto thee both these be, the darkness and the light.
(2)

Within my mothers womb thou have:

Because that I am fashioned thus in fearful wondrous wi^e;
And that thy works are mavelous, my soul right-well descries.
y substance was not hid when closely made was I;
And when that I was fashioned in earths deeps curiously

And all my members in thy Book were written down by name.
Which day by day should fashioned be, when none of them were come.
17 How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God! how great's their sum?

And still when that I do awake, I present am with thee.
(3)

Depart therefore from hence away ye men of blood from me.

Thy Name in vain they take also who are thine enemies.

Am I not sore agriev'd with them that up against thee rise?



And in the way conduct thou me that does endure for aye.
PSALM. CXL. A Psalm of David.
LOrd, free me from the evil man, from violent men save me,
2 Whose hearts think mischief every day, for war they gathered be.

And underneath their lips does lie the Adders poison too. Selah.

My goings which to overthrow in thought projected have.

They spread abroad besides the way: for me they grins have set.

Lord, hear the voice of my requests which are for grace to thee.
Lord, who art the strength of my salvation;
My head by thee has covered been the day of battle on.

His wicked purpose further not, lest they themselves do vaunt.
y side that do encompass me.
O let the mischief of their lips, to them a covering be.

Into the fire, into deep pits, to rise no more at all.

Evil shall hunt to overthrow the man of violent wrong.
I know God will maintain:
y name the up* right shall before th y face remain.
PSALM. CXLI. A Psalm of David.
JEhovah I upon thee call, O make thou haste to me:
And hearken thou unto my voice, when I do cry to thee.

And of my soul the lifting up, as evening sacrifice.

And also of my lips be thou the keeper of the door.
y ill, to do a wicked deed,
With men that mischief work: nor let me of their dainties feed.

It shall be such a precious oil, m y head it shall not break.
Fo r yet m y prayers even in their woe

On Rocks, then the y shall hear my words for they are sweet to taste.

So all about the mouth of graves our bones be scattered round.

M y soul O leave not destitute on thee my hope relies.

And also from the grins of those that work iniquity.

Until that altogether I escape in safety shall
PSALM. CXLII. Maschil of David, a prayer when he was in the Cave.
UNto Jehovah with my voice, I out aloud did cry:
Unto Jehovah with my voice my suit for grace made I.
2 Before his face I did pour out my meditation.
Before his face I did declare the trouble me upon.

In The way I walked a snare for me they privily did lay.

All refuge failed me, for my soul none any care did show.

And in the land of living ones thou art my portion.

From my pursuers save thou me, which stronger be than I.

The just shall compass me, for thou shall show me bounteous grace.
PSALM. CXLIII. A Psalm of David.
LOrd hear m y pra y'r, give ear when I do humbly call on thee:
Both in thy truth and righteousness make answer unto me.
2 And into judgment enter not with him that serves thee:
For in thy sight no man that lives shall justified be.
y soul, m y life to the ground has thrown;
And made me dwell in the dark like them that dead are long agone.

My heart also within me is made desolate to be.
is of old, I meditation use.
On all thy works, thy hand y work I thereupon do muse.

So after thee my soul does thirst, as do the thirst y lands.
(2)

Lest I become like unto them that down to pit did go.
y mercy earl y hear, for I upon thee stay:
Wherein that I should walk, cause me to understand the way.
For I to thee lift up my soul.

From them that be my foes; I fly to hide m y self with thee.
y Spirit is good, teach me thy will to do:
Into the land of uprightness conduct thou me also.

And for thy righteousness my soul from out of trouble take.

Destro y all that afflict my soul for servant thine am I.
PSALM CXLIV. A Psalm of David.
O Let Jehovah blessed be, who is m y Rock of might;
Who does instruct m y hands to war, my fingers eke to fight.
y high tower and who does set me free:
My shield, my trust: which does subdue my people under me.

Or son of wretched man, that thou account of him do make.
4 Man's like to vanity; his da is pass like a shade away.
^ow the heavens come down and touch the mounts, and smoke shall they.


From waters great, and from the hand of strangers sons me free.

(2)
y
And on ten stringed instrument to thee sing praise will I.

Who does his servant David keep free from the hurtful sword.

And their right hand a right hand is of lying falsit y.

Our daughters palace like may be as polisht corner-stones.

Our cattle bringing thousands forth, ten thousands in our streets.

Nor going out: that so our streets may from complaints be free.

O blessed shall the people be whose God Jehovah is.
PSALM. CXLV. David's Hymn or Song of Praise.
MY God O King, I Will thee extol, and bless thy Name for a ye.
y.
y praise his greatness search can none.
y works, and thy great acts make known.

And of the admirable works by thee done wondrously.

And I thy great Magnificence, will openly declare.
y of thy goodness great they largel y shall express;
And they shall with a thankful voice sing of th y righteousness.

Slow unto anger; and he is great in benignity.




y kingdom is a kingdom a ye, and thy reign lasts alwa is.

yes wait on thee, and their meat thou do in season bring.
y open hand fills the desire of every living thing.
is, and hol y in's works all.


And he will hearken to their cry, them likewise save he will.

But whosoever wicked are, destroy them quite will he.
Lord. discoursing shall express:
And let all flesh his holy Name for ay and ever bless.
PSALM. CXLVI.
THe Lord praise, praise m y soul the Lord

I Will praise the Lord, while that I am, praise to my God I Will give.

y do end.

Whose hopeful confidence upon the Lord his God is staid.



The Lord does raise the bowed down, the Lord to the just is kind.

But he of them that wicked be, does overthrow the ways.

To generations all shall reign: O praise Jehovah ye.
PSALM. CXLVII.
PRaise ye the Lord, for it
Is good praises to sing
To our God, fo r it is sweet:
Praise is a comely thing.

Jerusalem: And gathers them
That outcasts were.

And up their wounds does bind.

He calls them all by kind:

And of great might: Yea infinite
His knowledge it is

To ground the vile does fling

On ha^p our Gods praise sing.
8 Who clouds the skies:
Rains the ^arth upon, And mountains on
Makes grass to rise.

When as the y cry feeds them:
is not in horses strong,
Nor in the legs of men

His pleasure where, Men do him fear,
And hope on's grace.

Sion thy God confess.

In thee thy sons does bless.

In borders thine: With wheat so fine
He fills thee.

His word does swiftly pass.

Hoar-frost spreads ashes as

Like morsels too; Before his cold who
Can steady stand?

Makes wind blow, water flows

And Judgments Israel shows.

No Nation too: And judgments so
They have not known.
PSALM CXLVII. Second Meeter. Hallelujah
PRraise ye the Lord, for good it is praise to our God to sing:
Because a pleasant thing is this, praise is a comely thing.

He does together gather them that Isreal's outcasts are.




you sing out with thanksgiving
Upon the harp our God unto see that you praises sing.

Prepares rain* on mountains high who causes grass to grow.

10 His pleasure not in horses strong nor in man's legs does lie.


y children in thee blessed.






^e Jacob did his word, his laws, and judgments Israel show.

And judgments his they have not known O praise Jehovah ye.
PSALM CXLVIII. Hallelujah.
Rom heaven O praise the Lord,
Him praise the heights within
2 All Is Angels praise afford,
All Is Armies praise ye him.

Sun and Moon bright, All Stars of light,
O give him praise.


'Bove heavens ye waters clear.
For he spoke made they were.

For ever an aye: Nor pass away
Shall his decree.

Ye Dragons and each deep.

Whirlwinds, his Word which keep

And hills all ye: Each fruitful tree,
All Cedars too.

Things creeping, fowls that fly.

Peers all, the earths judges high.
Do ye always,
Young men and maids, Old men and babes
Lords Name praise
For his Name's only high,
His glory 'bove earth and heaven

The praise of all is Saints, even
The sons who be
^f Israel dear, His people near,
The Lord Praise ye.
PSALM. CXLVIII. Second Meeter. Hallelujah.
PRaise ye the Lord, from heav,n him praise him in the heights O praise.












Exalted is, his glory is above the earth and sky.

Of Isr'els sons, a folk him near; therefore Jehovah praise.
PSALM. CXLIX.
PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord a new melodious song;
And in the congregation his praise the Saints among.

The Sons of Sion in their King O let them be right glad.

Let them sing praises unto him with Timbrel, Harp also.

The meek he with salvation most beautiful will make.

Let them upon their beds also li^t up their singing voice.

And let be ready in their hands a double-edged sword.
On heathen vengeance, on the folk their censures t'execute,
Their kings in Chains, in iron hands their Noble men to shut.
The judgment upon them to do that is written in the Word:
This honor is to all his saints, give praise unto the Lord.
PSALM. CL.
PRaise Jah, praise God in's Sanctuary,
Praise him in his strong firmament.

Praise him for's greatness excellent.

Praise him with Harp and Psalteries.

Praise him with Organs, Lutes likewise.

Praise him on Cymbals sounding high.

Praise ye the Lord eternally.
Here ends the Book of Psalms.
The SONG of SONGS which is SOLOMON'S.
CHAP. I.
LEt him with kisses of his mouth, be pleased me to kiss
Because much better than the wine thy loving kindness is.



Into his secret chambers has the King conducted me,
We will be glad, and we likewise is thee will much delight.
We will remember more than wine thy love; thee love the upright.

Though black as Kedars tents, and as curtains of Solomon.

Because that with his beams the Sun has looked down on me.
My mothers sons were wroth with me, they vineyards me assign
To keep; whereas I have not kept the vineyard that was mine

And also where at noon-time thou thy flock to rest do make.
Because O wherefore should I be like to such veiled ones
That turn aside unto the flocks (...) thy companions (...)

Forth on my way by shepherds tents feed thou thy kids also.





Through all the night betwixt my breast, his lodging, place shall be.


Lo thou art fair my love, and sweet, our (...) is green likewise
Our houses beams of Cedars are, of Firr our Galleries.
CHAP. II.
I Sharons Rose and Lilly am, that grows the vales along.


My well-beloved one amongst the sons is even so.
I with great joy sat in his shade, his fruit I sweet did taste,




By Roes and Hinds of field, I you do charge, until he please.

He comes leaping, on the hills he skipping is also.

Behind our wall, the windows through: himself through lattess shows.
10 My well-beloved he did speak, and unto me did say
Arise my love, my comely one, come thou also away.


And of the Turtle-dove the voice is heard our land within.

The vines also with tender grape do give good smell, I say
Arise, my love, my comely one, and do thou come away.

And see thy face: for sweet's thy voice, thy face is also fair.

That spoil the vines; because our vines most tender grapes do bear.

Amongst the Lilly-flowers also his pleasant feeding is.

And like (...) Roe or young Heart be the Bother mountains on.
CHAP. III.
MY souls love I by night did seek, as I on bed* did lie
Although that I for him did seek yet find him could not I.

I will him seek whom my soul loves, I sought but not him found.

To whom I said, him whom my soul does love, O did you see?

But whom my soul did love I found, and then I held him fast.
I would not suffer him to go, till I had brought him in
My mothers house, the chamber where conceived I had been:

By Roes and Hinds of field, (...) you do charge, until he please,

Perfumed with (...) and Frankincense 'bove merchants powders (...)

About it Threescore valiant men, of Isreal's valiant ones.

Each man his sword has on his (...) for terror in the night


Of purple was the covering the which was spread above.
For daughters of Jerusalem the midst was paved wi^h love.

King Solomon adorned with his Diadem of gold:
Wherewith on his espousals day his mother has him crowned,
And in the day wherein his heart with gladness did abound.
CHAP. IV.
LO fair thou art, my love, lo fair doves eyes in thy locks are.
Thy hair as flocks of goats that from mount Gilead do appear.
y teeth are as a smooth shorn flock, which from the washing come.
Where every one of them bears twins, of them there is barren none.

Within thy locks thy temples are like a pomegranate piece.

Where bang a thousand shields, all shields of men of potency.
young:
The which are twins and have their feed the Lilly-flowers among

I Will g^t me to the mounts of my^rh: and hill of frankincense.

y spouse with me from Leb'non come from Lebanon with me:
Look from the top of Amana; from Shenirs top also.
From Hermon from the Lions dens, the Leopards mountains fro.
y sister spouse thou ravishest my heart, thou do affect
My heart with that one eye of thine, with one chain of (...) neck.

Than wine! and thine anointments smell all spices* fa^ above.
My spouse thy lips drop honeycomb, both honey and milk are on
Thy tongue, and thy clothes smell is like the smell of Lebanon,

A wellspring closed up she is, a fountain sealed up.

With pleasant fruits replenished, Camphire, Spikenard likewise.

All incense trues, My^^h, Aloes, with all chief kinds of spice.


Its spices that they may flow out; (...) garden come into
Let my beloved one, and eat his pleasant fruit also.
CHAP. V.
I Am into my Garden come, my sister spouse likewise.
And I my myrrh have gathered up together with my spice.
My honeycomb with honey are, my wine and milk drunk I,
Eat, O ye friends, drink, O beloved, yea, drink abundantly.

That knocks, Open unto me, O sister mine, my dove,
My love, my undefiled one, because my head is filled
With dew, my locks eke with the drops that have by night distilled.
y coat, ^ow shall I put it on again?
And I have washed clean my feet, how shall I them (...)?

My bowels made a troubled noise in me for him therefore.

My fingers eke sweet Myrrh upon the handles of the Lock:

Then had my love withdrawn himself, and he away was gone.
When as he spoke, my soul did fail* although I sought him have,
I ^ound him not; I called him, yet he me no answer gave.

Thee keepers of the wa^ls from me did take my veil away.

If my beloved ye find, that I for love do saint away.

What Is thy love more than others love, that us thou do so bind.




His Lilly Lips drop flowing myrrh

With beryl: said with Saphires is his belly Ivory, bright.

His look as Lebanon, as choice as Cedars to behold.

O daughters of Jerusalem, my love and friend is this.
CHAP. IV.
FAirest of women, whither is thy loved gone away.
Where is thy love by-turn'd that so seek him with thee we may?

To feed in gardens, and to get the Lilly flowers likewise.

And feed among the Lilly-flowers continually does he.

Yea, (...) as is an bost that does with banners stream.

Thine hair is as a flock of Goats which look from Gilead down.

Whereof each one bears twins, of them there is not a barren one.

That to a piece of pomegranate the same I may compare.

There are so many virgins as all number do surmount.
My Dove, my undefiled, She Is One; her mothers O^e is She,
Even of her that did her bear the very choice is She:
The daughters when they her beheld, they did her blessed call:
Yea, both the Queens and Concubines the y praised her withal.

Clear as the Sun, and terrible as hosts with banners dight.
I went down, valley* fruits to see.
To see if vines did bud, if bloom did the Pomegranate tree.
I ever was aware:
Upon the chariots of them that m y willing people are (...)

What will you see in the Shulamite? as two camps company.
CHAP. VII.
HOw beautiful thy feet with shoes O Princes daughter* stand.
Thy Thighs, their joints like jewels are work of a skilful hand.
y navel which no liquor wants, is like a goblet round.
Thy belly like an heap of wheat about with (...) crowned*
y two breasts, are like as two Roes, that young and twinlins be.
y.
Thine eyes like He^^bons fish pools are, (...) entrance by:
Th y nose as tower of Lebanon that does Damasous eye.
y head likewise
Like purple is; the King is held within the Galleries.



Like to Vine-clusters are thy breasts, thy nose as apples smelled,
y palate is, that to my love runs sweet,
Causing the (...) to utter speech of those that are asleep.

y beloved, let us forth unto the field be gone:
Let Us lodge within the villages, let us get up betime

If that the tender grape appear, the Pomegranates also,
If (...) they (...), and there m y loves I will on thee bestow

Both new and old, O my beloved, which I have stored for thee.
CHAP. VIII.
O That thou as my brother (...), that sucked m y mothers breast,
I would thee find without, and kiss, yet none should me infest.

Spic'd wine of my pomegranate juice to drink I would cause thee.
y head, and right should me embrace.
you till he please:
Not to stir up, nor to awake my well beloved one.

There where thy mother thee conceived under the apple tree*
Where she thee bare that brought thee forth I there up raised thee

For love is strong as death, and fierce as hell, is jealous zeal.
The coals thereof are coals of fire most ardent is its flame.

If all the substance of his house a man would-give for love
It ne'retheless would utterly a price contemned prove.

What shall we for our sister do, when she bespoke shall be?

And if a door, then her enclose with Cedar boards will we.
y are likewise:
Like unto one that favor found then was I in his eyes.

The vineyard hired out to them that should its keepers be.
Each one a thousand silverlings was for its fruit to pay.

Thy part O Solomon, unto a thousand does arise,
Those that do keep the fruit thereof, two hundred have likewise.

Unto thy voice attending be, cause thou me it to hear.

Or be thou like a fawn of Hearts the mounts of spices on.
The SONGS in the Prophet Isaiah
CHAP. V.
NOw I to my beloved will
A song of my loves vineyard, sing,
He has a vineyard on a hill,
Which in the horn of store does spring,

And planted it with choicest Vine,
Amidst it built a Tower also
And therein made a press for wine.
He looked Grapes it should yield then,
But sour wild grapes it forth did bring.

And men of Judah, judge this thing
Between my vineyard now and me

Yet when I looked its grapes to see,
Why brought it forth (...) grapes therefore
tell you what I Will do,
My vineyards hedge remove will I,
To be devoured, and I Will down throw
Its wall: and it trod down (...) lie.
6 And it for desolate I Will say,
Unprun'd, (...) with brambles spread
And (...), and to the clouds I Will say
That they on it no rain shall shed.

The Lord of Hosts his vineyard is,
The men in Judahs tribe, that dwell
They are that pleasant plant of his
And he for judgment did expect,
But lo' there an oppressing wound;
And that they justice should effect,
But lo an outcry there he found.
ISAIAH, XII. First Meeter.
O Lord I will thee praise, though thou wase wroth with me:
Thine anger turned is away, and thou do comfort me.

Because the Lord Jehovah is my strength and melody.
Yea he my safety is, (...)

Out (...) the wells of saving (...) draw waters forth in store.

(...) no the foll^ his deeds, declare that lofty is his Name.

The things that are most excellent, in all the earth its known.
ry out, and shout thou loud, that dwell'st mount Sion on;
For mighty in the midst of thee is Isreal's holy One.
ISAIAH. XII Second Metter.
JEhovah I will give thee praise, though thou wall wroth with me
Thine anger turned is away, and thou do comfort me.

Because the Lord Jehovah is, my strength and melody.
And he is my salvation,

Out of the wells of saving health, draw waters forth in store.
(2)

His doing, that his Name's extolled declare abroad also.

Yea, throughout all the earth abroad the same is fully known.
6 Cry on^, and shout aloud, thou that mount Sion dwell'st upon,
For mighty in the midst of thee is (...) only One.
ISAIAH XXV.
LOrd, you are my God, I Will thee exalt
I will thy Name confess:
Who wonders do, thy counsels old are truth and faithfulness,.

The stranger never of the town. rebuild a palace shall.

The City of dread Nations shall reverence thee withal.

In his distress thou art the strength unto the needy one.
Thou art a refuge from the storm a shadow from the heat:
When blasts of dreadful ones as storms against the wall do beat.

As heat by clouds shade ceast, the branch of dead ones low shall lie.
(2)

A sumptuous feast of fat things for all people to par^^ke:
A feast of wines upon the lees for them he shall prepare.
Of fat, and marrow things of wines on lees refined that are.

Cast over all people, and the vail, spread over nations all.

The Lord God from all faces shall wipe tears off utterly.
From all the earth his folks rebuke he shall take clean away.

This is the Lord on whom we had our expectation;
We will rejoice, and will be glad, in his salvation.
CHAP. XXVI.
WE have a City very strong,
God will appoint salvation,
Her walls and bu^ works for to be,
2 Set open ye the gates, that so
The righteous nation in may go,
that does observe the verity.

Whose thoughtful mind on thee is built,
Because he does on thee rely.

For in the Lord Jehovah store
of strength is to eternity.

The lofty City low makes lie:
He lays it low even to the floor
Even to the dust he has it thrown.

The feet and steps of the needy poor,

Thou most upright his path do weigh

We waited have for thee, the same
Our souls desire is to thy Name,
And thee in mind still to record.

Yea, I within me with my spright;
in early seeking thee do yern:
For when on earth thy judgments be,
The dwellers in the world shall shall see,
That so they righteousness may learn,

Yet righteousness learn will he none.
But in the land of uprightness
He will both deal unrighteously
And he Jehovahs Majesty
Will not behold him to redress
(2)

Is lifted up they will not see:
But see and be ashamed shall they
For envy at thy folk likewise,
The fire of thy strait enemies
Shall them devour, even, quite away.

For in us then have wrought also
Even all our works, our God, O Lord,

O (...) besides thee, but alone
By thee we will thy Name record.

They are deceased, they therefore
Shall not arise, because thou have
Them visited, and have them all
Destroyed, and their memorial
Thou quite have made away to waste

Increased have; the Nation
Thou have increased abundantly
Therefore thou glorified art,
Thou have removed it far apart,
Where all the ends of the earth do lie

Of trouble, out their prayer do pour
on them when thy chastisements light

Is pained, and our in pangs does cry:
So have we been Lord in thy sight,

As 'twere the wind, no health we wrought
In the earth, nor have the worldlings slew.

Who dwell (...) dust, wake, sing likewise,
For as the dew of herbs thy dew.
The earth shall her dead cast out also

and shut thy doors about thee fast:
Hide thou thy self now as it were,
But for a little moment there,
Until the wrath be over past.

To execute on them the doom
that do upon the earth remain
Because of their iniquity.
The earth also shall her blood descry,
and cover shall no more her flam.
ISAIAH XXXVIII. The Song of Hezekiah, after his recovery from sickness.

Go to the gates of grave shall I
And of the remnant of my years
I am deprived utterly

I th^^ Land of living ones the Lord
And man no more behold shall I,
With them that dwell within the world.

And moved as a shepherds tent:
I weaver-like my life off-cut,
With pining sickness he me spent,
Yea, from the day the night until
Thou quite an end of me wilt make,

My bones all as a Lion break.
From day to night thou will me waste,

(...) I mourn, mine eyes up cast
Do fail: Lord, help, oppressed am I.

(...) spoken and himself done this:
I all my life with softly path
Shall walk in my souls bitterness.

By these my spirits life do give:
Then wilt recover me also,
And thou will make me for to live.

But freed my soul in love thou have
From pits corruption, for behind
Thy back thou all my sins did cast.
For graves thy praise cannot make known
Nor yet can death thee celebrate
Such as into the pit go down,
They for thy truth no more can wait,

Thee praise, as I this day have done:
The father to the children still,
He shall thy faithfulness make known.

Therefore we in the Lords house praise
Will sing on stringed instrument
Throughout our life even all the days.
The Lamentations of Jeremiah.
CHAP. III.
I Am the man by's wrathful rod who have of grief the sight.





I cannot get out, his heavy chain I bear.




As into pieces: he has made me desolate to be.











Because that his compassions the y never do decay.




(2)




Lord will not cast off, but though grief cause he should,




36 The Lord approves not to subvert a man in his just case.






(3)







50 Until the Lord from heaven look down on our affliction.



I off am cut.

ry my breathing fro.
I called on thee







65 Give to them senselessness of heart, thy curse to them afford

CHAP. V.
REmember Lord, what is come on us, mark our reproach, and see





















The Prayer of Jonah to the Lord his God out of the Fishes be^ly.
Lord from my distress did cry, and he gave ear:
Out of hells belly I did cry, and he my voice did hear;
Into the deep and midst of Seas because thou did me cast:
The floods me compassed all thy waves and billows over me past.

Thy holy temple yet will I toward it look again.

The depths me round enclosed, the weeds about my head were bound.

Yet Lord my God thou brought my life up from corruptions pit.

And in my prayer came unto thee, into thy sanctuary.


The thing the which I vowed have to pay I will accord;
Because alone salvation proceeds from the Lord.
A Prayer of Habbakkuk the Prophet upon Sigionoth.
CHAP. III.
THy speech, O Lord I heard with fear,
Revive in midst of years, O Lord,
Thy word, make known in midst of years,
In wrath thy tender grace record.

The holy one from Paran hill Selah
The skies his glory overspread
And all the earth his praise did fill.

Horns from his hand procceded thence,
The hiding of his strength was there,

And from his feet coals burning went,

He looked and the Nations rent,
Ay-lasting hills were scattered.
The hills of perpetutity
Did how; his ways for ever stand.

The curtains shook of Midians land

What was thine ire against rivers wide?
What was thy wrath against the seas?
That thou did on thy horses side.
Thy Chariots of salvation were,

At thou to' (...) swear,
The (...) with (...)

The (...)
His voice (...) deep.
And listed up his hands (...)

Stood still within their dwelling sphere,
They moved at thine arrows light,
At the shining of thy glittering spear.

The heathen thou did thresh in rage,

For safety of thy heritage.
For safety with thine ointed one:
Thou from, the wickeds house the head
Did wound: so the foundation
Was to the neck discovered.

Did with his staves strike through the same,
That me they might have scattered,
Like as a whirlwind out they came
'Twas their rejoicing to devour
The poor afflicted secretly.

Through Seas and heaps of waters high.

And at thy voice my lips did quake:
A rottenness my bones came in,
And I within my self did shake.
That in the day of trouble so
I might in quietness sit still
When he ascends the people to,
Them with his troops invade he will.

Nor any fruit in Vines appear,
The labor of the Olive fail,
And though the fields no meat should bear
Though flocks shall be cut off from fold
In stall no herd should have abode.

I Will joy in my salvations God:
The Lord God is my strength, and he
Does make my feet like hinds also,
And He it is that causes me
Upon my places high to go.
The Song of the blessed Virgin MARY, LUKE I. 46.
MY soul does magnify the Lord,

In God my Savior, who beheld

For lo, henceforth all ages shall me ever blessed name.


And that from generation, to generation.

In the devices of their heart which they Imagined.

And has exalted them on high that were of low degree.



To Abraham, and to his seed henceforth for evermore.
The Song of Zacharias verse 68.
THe Lord the God of Israel be blessed, because that he
Has now his people visited, and them redeemed free.


Which has been since the world began,

We should be saved, and from the hand of all our foes likewise.



75 In holiness and righteousness before him while we live.

For to prepare his way thou shall before the Lords face go.



And in the shade of death, our feet in the way of peace to guide.
The Song of Simeon, Chap. 2. 29.
LOrd me thou lett'st depart in peace, who have th y servant been.



Rev. Chap. 4. Verse 8. The Song of the four Animals.
O Holy, holy, holy Lord, the Almighty God alone;
Which was, and is, and is to come, who fittest on the throne.
The song of the twenty four Elders. verse. II
THou glory; honor, and great power, Lord, worthy art to take:
For thou made all, they are, and were made for thy pleasures sake.
To the Lord Jesus the Lamb of God, The Song of the Church. Chap 5. verse 9.
THou worthy art to take the book, its seals to open too;
For slain thou wast, to God us have bought with thy blood also

Kings, Priests also, our God unto, and reign on earth shall we.
The song of the Angels and of the Church Verse 12.
THe Lamb is worthy that was slain to take power riches too.
And strength, and wisdom, honor too and glory, praise also.
The song of all the Creatures, verse 17.
TO him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb therefore,
Be blessing honor, glory and power, for aye and evermore.
The song of the innumerable multitude of the Saints. Chap. 7, 10.
UNto our God
Which sits on the Throne,
And to the Lamb
Belongs salvation.
The song of all the Angels, verse 12
EVen so be it
Praise, Glory, Wisdom too,
And Thanksgiving.
Honor and Power also,
And might for ever,
Be our God unto,
And evermore,
Amen, even be it so.
Another Meeter. verse 10
UNto our God alone, that sits on the Throne,
Unto the Lamb also belongs salvation.
Verse 12
A Men let blessing be,
And Glory Wisdom too,
Thanksgiving, Potency,
And honor might also,
Ascribed for aye
And evermore to our God therefore
Amen we say.
The Song of Moses and of the Lamb, chap. 15. verse 3
O Lord almighty God th y works both great and wondrous be.
Just King of Saints, and true thy way's

O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for holy thou alone:
For Nations all shall worship thee, for judgments thine are known.
Chap. 19 verse 1.
O Hallelujah, saving health,
OR,

Give ye unto the Lord our God,

And righteous are, for judgment he has on the great where done,
Who has the earth corrupted with her fornication:
Of them also that served him the blood avenged has he.
Out of her hand, for she it shed: Amen, the Lord praise ye.
FINIS.
A Table for the whole Book of Psalms.
A
ALL Nations praise Psalm. 117 All blessed are men Psalm. cxix
B
Bow doyn, O Lord Psalm. 86 By what may Youth Psalm. cxix By water-floods of
Babylon Psalm. 137
C
Clap hands all people Psalm. 47 Confer this grace Psalm. cxix
D
Declare abroad Psalm. 19 Do ye, O Congregation Psalm. 58 Down to the dust Psalm.
cxix
E
Enform me Lord Psalm. cxix Except the Lord the house Psalm. 127
F
Fret not thy self Psalm. 37 Find me out let Psalm. cxix From heaven O praise
Psalm. 148
G
God of my justice, when I call Psalm. 4 God is our Refuge Psalm. 46 Great is
Jehovah, greatly he Psalm. 48 Give ea^ O God Psalm. 61 God gracious be to us
Psalm. 67 Give listening ear Psalm. 78 God of my praise Psalm. 109 Good to thy
servant Psalm. cxix
H
Hear this all people Psalm. 49 Have mercy upon me, O God, Psalm. 51 How amiable,
Lord of hosts Psalm. 84 His ground-works in the Psalm. 87 He that within the
secrecy, Psalm. 91 He even the Lord is my Psalm. cxix Had not the Lord been Psalm.
124 How good, and sweet, O see Psalm. 133
J I
Jehovoh to my words Psalm. 5 Jehovah, O rebuke me not Psalm. 6 Jehovah, O how
long Psalm. 13 Jehovah, hearken to the right Psalm. 17 Jehovah in thy strength
Psalm. 21 Judge me, O Lord: for walk Psalm. 26 Jehovah, unto thee I cry Psalm. 28
Judge me, O God, and plead Psalm. 43 Jehovah, I for safety do Psalm. 71 Jehovah
reigns, he clothed is Psalm. 93 Jehovah reigns; therefore Psalm. 97 Jehovah he
as King Psalm. 99 Jehovah hear when I do pray Psalm. 102 Jehovah with thy servant
Psalm. cxix Jehovah I upon thee call Psalm. 141 I in the Lord do put my trust
Psalm. 11 I Will dearly love the Lord Psalm. 18 In The day of sore affliction Psalm.
20 I lift my soul to thee Psalm. 25 In Thee O Lord I put my trust Psalm. 31 I
will the Lord in seasons all Psalm. 34 In wrath Lord do not Psalm. 38 I said I
will look to my ways Psalm. 39 In Judah God is known Psalm. 76 I mercy will and
judgment sing Psalm. 101 I love because Psalm. 116 I to the Lord cried Psalm. 120
I to the hills lift up my eyes Psalm. 121 I joy'd in them Psalm. 122
K
Know make me Psalm. cxix
L
Lord, in thy wrath rebuke me not Psalm. 6 Lord, I Will Thee praise Psalm. 9 Lord I
will Thee extol Psalm. 30 [ a Book] Like as the Panting Psalm. 42 Let God arise
Psalm. 68 Lord bow thy ear, hear me Psalm. 86 Lord God of my salvation Psalm. 88
Lord God to whom Psalm. 94 Look for thy word I do Psalm. cxix Lord from the deeps
Psalm. 130 Lord free me from the evil Psalm. 140 Lord hear my prayer Psalm. 143
M
My God, my God Psalm. 22 My heart good matter Psalm. 45 My God from them deliver
me Psalm. 59 My voice was to Psalm. 77 Make ye a joyful noise unto Psalm. 100 Made
fast thy word Psalm. cxix My heart's not haughty Psalm. 131 My God O King Psalm.
145
N
Not unto us, Lord, not to us Psalm. 115 Now O how much Psalm. cxix Now from my
youth may Israel Psalm. 129
O
O blessed man that walks not in Psalm. 1 O Lord, my foes how gleat Psalm. 3 O
Lord, give ear to what I say Psalm. 5 O Lord my God, I do repose Psalm. 7 O Lord
our Lord Psalm. 8 O Lord who in thy (...) Psalm. 15 O mighty God preserve Psalm.
16 O ye the sons of mighty Jones Psalm. 29 O blessed is the man to whom Psalm. 32
O blessed is he that wisely does Psalm. 41 O God have mercy upon me Psalm. 51 O man
of might, wherefore Psalm. 52 O God to Thou give ear unto Psalm. 55 O God upon me
mercy have Psalm. 56 O God to me be merciful Psalm. 57 O God Thou have rejected
us Psalm. 60 O God Thou are my God Psalm. 63 O God when I my prayer make Psalm. 64
O all ye nations unto God Psalm. 66 O God, to rescue me Psalm. 70 O God, Thy
judgments Psalm. 72 O God, why have Thou Psalm. 74 O God, to Thee give thanks.
Psalm. 75 O God the heathen entered Psalm. 79 O God do not thou silence keep Psalm.
83 O LORD thou favored have Psalm. 85 O come let us unto the Lord Psalm. 95 O
thou my soul Jehovah bless Psalm. 104 O Praise the LORD. Psalm. 105 O God my
heart is fixed Psalm. 108 O praise Jehovah all Psalm. 117 O give ye thanks unto
Psalm. 118 Of my feet is the lamp Psalm. cxix O thou that in the heavens Psalm.
123 O blessed is every one Psalm. 128 O all ye servants of the Lord Psalm. 134 O
thank the Lord for he Psalm. 136 O Lord thou do me search Psalm. 139 O let
Jehovah blessed be Psalm. 144
P
Plead Lord with them Psalm. 25 Praise ye the Lord Psalm. 111, 112, 147, 148, 149
Praise O ye servants Psalm. 113 Pursue vain thoughts Psalm. cxix Praise Jah;
praise God Psalm. 150
Q
Quit to oppressors Psalm. cxix
R
Right wondrous are Psalm. R cxix Remember David Lord Psalm. 132
S
Save O Jehovah now because Psalm. 12 Save thou me by thy Name Psalm. 54 Silence
to thee, the praise Psalm. 65 [3 book] Sure God is good Psalm. 73 Sing to the
Lord a new song Psalm. 96 Shout to Jehovah all Psalm. 100 Sincerely just art thou
Psalm. cxix
T
The fool in's heart says Psalm. 14, 53 The Lord to me a Shepherd Psalm. 23 The
earth Jehovah's is Psalm. 24 The Lord my light is Psalm. 27 The trespass of the
wicked Psalm. 36 The mighty God Jehovah Psalm. 50 Truly my waiting soul relies
Psalm. 62 The waters in unto my soul Psalm. 69 Thou that lead'st Joseph Psalm. 80
The mighty God does stand Psalm. 82 The mercies of Jehovah sing Psalm. 89 [4
book] Thou Lord our stay Psalm. 90 The Lord does reign Psalm. 97 The Lord bless O
my soul Psalm. 103 The Lord praise Psalm. 106, 135, 146 The Lord did say unto my
Lord Psalm. 110 To thee with all my heart Psalm. cxix They that do in Jehovah
trust Psalm. 125 They blessed Psalm. 128 The rivers on (...) Babylon Psalm. 137
V U
Unto the might God Psalm. 81 Unto Jehovah thanks to give Psalm. 92 Unto the Lord
new song sing Psalm. 98 View mine affliction Psalm. cxix Unto Jehovah with my
voice Psalm. 142
W
Why rage the heathen Psalm. 2 Why stand'st thou Lord far off Psalm. 10 With
expectation for the Lord Psalm. 40 We with our ears have heard Psalm. 44 [5 book]
With thanks unto Psalm. 107 Who fears the Lord Psalm. 112 When Israel did depart
Psalm. 114 Without cause Princes Psalm. cxix When as Jehovah did return Psalm. 126
With all my heart I Will Thee Psalm. 138
Y
Ye just in God rejoice Psalm. 33 Ye nations all Jehovah praise Psalm. 117 Yield,
Lord, my cry Psalm. cxix


These go before the Psalms.
The songs of Moses The song of Deborah and Barak The song of Hannah, David's
Elegy.
These follow after the Psalms.
Solomon's Song. Th songs in the Prophet Isaiah. Lamentations of Jeremiah The
prayer of Jonah A prayer of Habbakkuk. The blessed Virgin Mary's Song The song
of Zacharias The song of Simeon. The songs in the Revelation
FINIS.

