ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.
Begun at Boston, the Thirtieth Day of MAY, 1694. And Continued by several
Adjourments unto Wednesday the Twenty-Seventh Day of February following: Being
the Fourth Sessions.

Anno Regni GUILIELMI, et MARIAE, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Septimo.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council. 1695.

Anno Regni Regis et Reginae, Guilielmi et Mariae, Septimo. AN ACT, For
Reviving of Actions and Process lately depending in the Superior Court of
Judicature Court of Assize and General Goal delivery, within the County of
Essex, and discontinued by the not holding of the said Court at Salem upon the
Second Tuesday in November, 1694.
WHEREAS by reason of Sickness and other more weighty Occasions of the Province
intervening; the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Goal delivery, could not be held and kept, at the time prefixed by Law for the
Sitting of the same at Salem within the County of Essex upon the Second Tuesday
in November, in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four:
For which if due Provision be not made, great delay of Justice, and
Consequently great Expenses to the Suitors in the said Court will ensue.
Therefore for the Continuing and Reviving all manner of Actions or Pleas lately
depending, and all manner of Process that were Returnable or depending in the
said Court, and which were discontinued and put without day by the not holding
the said Court.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That all Plea's, Writts, Actions, Suit's, Plaints, Process, Precepts or other
things whatsoever, that were Returnable or had day or days in the said
Superior Court of Judicature, or Assize and General Goal delivery, to have
been holden and kept as aforesaid, shall stand continued and be revived, and
are hereby continued and adjourned unto, and shall and may be pleaded, heard
and proceeded upon at the next Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize
and General Goal delivery within the said County of Essex to sit at Ipswich on
the Third Tuesday in MAY next ensuing.

And that all parties that had day by any Pleas, Writts, Bills, Actions, Suits,
Plaints, Process, Precepts or other thing or things whatsoever at or Sin the
said Court to have been kept at Salem as aforesaid, shall respectively appear
at the said next Court to be holden at Ipswich, under the Penalty of Forfeiting
any Obli^ations or Recognizances conditio^ed for the appearance of the said
parties at the aforesaid Court in Salem, o^ un^er any other penalty that might
have incurred upon (...) said par^^es, ^or not appearing at the said Court in
Salem, if the same had been there holden and kept.

Provided nevertheless and it is not to be understood by any thing herein
con^^^ned, That the Jurors chosen and Summoned to serve at the said Court at
Salem are obliged to appear and serve at the said Court to sit at Ipswich; but
that new Jurors shall be chosen to serve at said Court (...) of course.

Provided also that where it happens any Person or Persons being Principals
that were under Bond Obligation or Recogni^^ance for appearance at the said
Court to have been holden at Salem, are since that removed and gone beyond Sea
or out of this Province, and shall not be returned before the Sitting of the
next Court to be held at Ipswich: It shall be in the Power of the Court Sitting
at Ipswich, upon motion made on that behalf, and they are accordingly to allow
a Continuance of any such Bond, Obligation, or Recogniscance to such further
time as shall be thought necessary, that no Person concerned may be Surprised
or have advantage unreasonably taken against them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as it shall happen the Superior Court of Judicature,
Power for Adiourning of Courts.
Court of Assize and General Goal delivery, or the Inferior Court of Pleas, in
any of the respective Counties within this Province cannot be held and kept on
the day by Law prefixed for holding of the same, by reason of Death or Sickness
befalling any of the Justices of such Court or any Providential necessary and
unavoidable let or hinderance of their attendance: It shall and may be Lawful
to and for any two of the Justices of such Court respectively by Writ under
their hands and Seals directed unto the Sheriff of the County, therein
inserting the Occasion thereof, to adjourn the said Court unto a further day,
as in the said Writ shall be Expressed, at as little distance of time as
possibly may be from the day whereon by Law the Court should have sat, that so
Justice be not deferred or delayed: And the Sheriff upon receipt of said Writ,
shall cause Publication to be made of the same at the usual Place of the said
Courts Sitting and some other of the most Public Places within the same
County, and also to cause a Signification of such Adjournment, and the time
unto which it is made to be Posted up at or near the house or place where the
said Court uses to sit and other Public Places as aforesaid; to the intent
that unnessary Travail, Charge and attendance of all Persons concerned may be
prevented; and the Sheriff is to return such Writ with his doings thereon into
the Clerks Office of such Court: And all Pleas, Writs, Actions, Suits, Plaints,
Process, Pre^^^ts, Recognisances and other thing and things whatsoever
returnable or having day or days in said Court, shall stand abide and continue
unto the said Adjournment, and be held deemed and adjudged to be as good,
effectual, and available in Law to all intents constructions and purposes, as
if such Court had been held and kept on the day by Law for holding of the same,
and no Adjournment thereof had been made.

AN ACT, For the more Effectual Suppressing of Drunkenness, and putting in
Execution the Laws against such as shall presume to Sell Strong Drink without
License.
WHEREAS diverse Persons that obtain License for the Retailing of Wine and
Strong Liquors cut of Doors only, and not to be spent or drank in their
Houses, do notwithstanding take upon them to give Entertainment to Persons to
Sit Drinking and T^pling there; and others who have no License at all, are yet
so hardy as to run upon the Law, in adventuring to Sell without; Tending to the
great increase of Drunkenness and other Debaucheries: Such Houses not falling
under the inspection of Officers; as those that are Licensed.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That from and after the Publication hereof, every Person and Persons now
Licensed, or that shall hereafter obtain License to Retail Wine and Strong
Liquors to be spent out of Doors, Retailers to Sell no other Sorts of Drink
than what they are Licensed to nor to suffer persons to drink in their Houses
etc.
and not otherwise, who shall be Convicted of Entertaining or Suffering any
Person or Persons to Sit Drinking or Tippling in their Houses, Cellars,
Backsides, or within any of the dependences of such Houses; or of Selling any
other sort of Drink than what they have License for, shall incur and suffer the
like Penalties and Forfeitures as may by Law be inflicted upon Persons Selling
without License: to be recovered and employed in manner as by said Law is
directed.

And all Officers as well Grand-Jurors, Constables, Tything men, as the
Officers employed in and about the Collecting of the Excise, are hereby
Authorized and Required diligently to see that this Act be duly observed;
Officers to inspect Public Houses and to present such as Sell without.
and to present and inform of all breaches of the same, either at the Court of
General Sessions of the Peace, or to some Justice of the Peace; who are hereby
respectively empowered to hear and determine the said Offense according to Law:
As also alike to present or inform of any that shall presume to Sell any sort
of Strong Drink without License. And it shall and may be Lawful to and for any
of the aforesaid Officers respectively ex Officio to enter into and inspect the
House of any Person having once been Convicted of Selling without License, as
they may by Law into Licensed Houses. And if any of the before mentioned
Officers shall be Convicted of taking or receiving any Bribe, Penalty for
Receiving any Bribe, etc
Fee or Reward directly or indirectly to connive at, conceal, or not to present
or inform against any Person or Persons being Licensed to Retail for spending
out of Doors only, that shall suffer Persons to Drink or Tipple in their Houses
or any of the dependences thereof; or for any others who shall presume to Sell
without License; every Officer so offending, shall forfeit and pay three times
the Value of all and every such Sum and Sums by him received as a Bribe, Fee or
reward; one Moiety thereof unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of
the Government, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue
for the same in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record. And if such Officer be
one that be employed about the Excise, over and above the forfeiture aforesaid,
he shall ipso facto be discharged of and from his said Office, and be rendered
incapable to be employed in any Public Service as an Officer, by the space of
three years next following.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person Licensed as a Taverner, Innholder or Retailer of Wine and
Strong Liquors out of Doors, License to be Forfeited upon a third Conviction.
shall transgress this Act or any other Law of the Province made for the
Regulation of such Houses, in any of the particulars therein mentioned, and
shall be more than twice convicted of such breach of Law within the compass of
one year: Every Person so Offending, over and above the penalty in the Law for
such transgression, shall forfeit his or her License, not to be renewed again
by the space of three years next following.

And if any Person or Persons duly convicted of the breach of Law in any of
the particulars herein before mentioned, Persons unable or neglecting to pay
their Fine how to be Punished.
or for Selling without License, shall be unable, or neglect to pay and satisfy
the Fine imposed by Law for such transgression: It shall and may be Lawful to
and for the Court or Justice before whom the Conviction is to Order such Person
or Persons either to stand Committed to the Goal of the County by the space of
Twenty days without Bail or Mainorize, or to be set in the Cage, or Stocks, to
remain there, not exceeding the space of three hours.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select men in each Town shall cause to be Posted up in all Public
Houses within such Town, Select men to cause reputed Drunkards etc. to be
Posted up.
a List of the Names of all Persons reputed Drunkards or Common Tiplers,
mispending their Time and Estate in such Houses: And every keeper of such House
after notice given him as aforesaid, that shall be Convicted before one or more
Justices of the Peace of Entertaining or Suffering any of the Persons named in
such List, to Drink or Tipple in his or her House or any of the dependences
thereof, Penalty on the keepers of Public Houses giving them Entertain^t.
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings; one Moiety thereof to him
or them who shall inform of the same, and the other Moiety to and for the use
of the Poor of the Town where such Offense shall be Committed.

AN ACT, For preventing of men's Sons, or Servants absenting themselves from
their Parents or Matters Service without leave.
WHEREAS Complaint has been made by sundry Inhabitants of this Province that
they have Sustained great damage by their Sons and Servants deserting their
Service without Consent of their Parents or Masters, being Encouraged to enter
themselves on board of Private men of War, or Merchants Ships, and there
Entertained.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That no Commander of any Private man of War, or Master of any Merchant Ship or
Vessel coming into, Penalty on Commanders or Masters of Ships etc for
Entertaining men's Sons or Servants without leave
tarrying or abiding in, or going forth of any Port, Harbor or Place within
this Province, shall Receive, Harbor, Entertain, Conceal or Secure on board
such Ship or other Vessel, or suffer to be there harbored or detained any man's
Son being under Age, or Apprentice, or Covenant Servant, (knowing him to be
such, or after notice thereof given) without License and consent of his Parent
or Master in Writing under his hand first had and obtained; on pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Five Pounds Per. Week, and so proportionably for a longer
or shorter time that any Son, Apprentice or Servant, shall be held, harbored,
concealed or detained on board any such Ship or other Vessel as aforesaid,
without License and consent as aforesaid; the one Moiety thereof unto Their
Majesty's to be employed toward the support of the Government of the Province,
and the other Moiety unto the Parent or Master of such Son, Apprentice or
Servant that shall inform and Sue for the same in any of Their Majesty's Courts
of Record within this Province, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no
Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Apprentice or Covenant Servant who shall unlawfully absent himself
from his Master, and enter himself on board any Ship or Vessel as aforesaid,
Penalty on Servants deserting their Masters Service.
with intent to leave his Masters Service; or continue there more than the
space of Twenty-four hours, and be thereof convicted before Their Majesty's
Justices in General Sessions of the Peace within the same County, shall forfeit
unto his Master such further Service from and after the Expiration of the Term
which his said Master had in him at the time of his departure, as the said
Court shall Order, not exceeding one year.

AN ACT, For Grand Jurors Serving at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and
Punishing defaults of Jurors attendance.
TO the Intent that due Inquiry and Presentment may be made unto the Court of
Quarter Sessions of the Peace within the respective Counties, of all
Misdemeanors, Offenses, and breaches of Law proper to the Cogniscance of said
Court, happening within such County. For the Suppressing and Punishing of the
same; And that Jurors may duly attend the Service for which they are chosen.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Clerk of the Peace of each several County shall annually, Fifteen
days at lest before the day for holding of the Court of Quarter Sessions of
the Peace for such County, i^sue out Writts directed unto the Constables of the
respective Towns within the same; Requiring them or one of them forthwith to
warn a Meeting of the Inhabitants duly Qualified by Law, for the choosing of
one or more Grand Jurors, Grand Jurors to Serve a full year.
according to the number such Town has been accustomed to send, or otherwise
shall be appointed for them by the Justices of the said Court, and the Person
or Persons so chosen, to warn to appear at the next Court, and the following
Courts of Quarter Sessions successively to be holden for the same County within
the space of one year, and there to attend the Service belonging to them; and
to make return of the said Writ with his doings thereon accordingly unto the
said Clerks Office, before the opening of said Court: And if any Constable
shall fail of performing his duty by said Writ required, or seasonably to
return the same, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings; and the
Persons chosen and returned as aforesaid appearing shall be Impaneled and Sworn
a Grand Inquest for the body of such County, and shall continue in said Office
for the space of one full year, Their duty.
and until others be chosen and Sworn in their stead, whose duty it shall be
to Inquire and duly present the breach of all such good and whole-some Laws as
are or shall be Established within this Province, and all such misdemeanors as
are proper to their Inquiry and the Jurisdiction of said Court.

And if any Person chosen to said Office and Summoned by the Constable and so
returned by him, shall make default in appearance without reasonable Excuse
made and allowed of by the Court, Forty Shillings Fine for (...) appearance.
the said Court shall and may set a Fine upon him, not exceeding the Sum of
Forty Shillings. And a new Writ shall issue forth unto the Town to choose
another in his room, and so likewise in case of the removal of any by Death or
otherwise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person or Persons legally chosen and Summoned to Serve upon the
Petit Jury for Trials in the Superior Court of Judicature, Petit Jurors making
default to be fined not exceeding 20 s.
Court of Assize and General Goal delivery, or in any of the Inferior Courts
of Common Pleas, or of General Sessions of the Peace; being so returned by the
Constable under his hand, shall make default of appearance, and not attend the
said Service, without reasonable Excuse made and allowed of by such Court;
every Person and Persons so offending shall be Fined by said Court (who are
hereby empowered thereto) not exceeding the Sum of Twenty Shillings.

All Fines and Forfeitures accruing by Virtue of this Act shall be paid into
the Treasurer of the County, Fines and Forfeitures to come to the County.
where the same do arise, and be employed toward defraying of the Public
charge of such County.

And in case any Person or Persons Sentenced to pay any of the said Fines or
Forfeitures shall neglect or refuse so to do, the same shall be levied by
distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods or Chattels by Warrant from the Court
that awarded the same, how to be levied.
to be Signed by the Clerk of said Court; together with the incident charges
arising for taking such distress according to the Fees by Law allowed for
levying of Executions, and two Shillings for the Warrant to be paid unto the
Clerk that granted the same.

And all Grand Jurors shall be allowed by the County Treasurer the Sum of Two
Shillings Per diem, each man, during their attendance on any Court; the time to
be Certified unto the County Treasurer by the Clerks of the respective Courts.
Grand Jurors allowance.
And no Grand Juror shall be compelled to Serve more than one year in three:
Nor any Petit Juror more than at one Court within the compass of a year.

AN ACT, To Prevent the deserting of the Frontiers.
FORASMUCH as since the beginning of this present War very Considerable Sums of
Money have been Expended in the defense and for Preservation of the out Towns
and Frontiers of this Province, and in Regard it would greatly Prejudice Their
Majesty's Interests, and give Encouragement to the Enemy, if any of those Posts
should be quitted, or be Exposed by lessening the Strength thereof.

For Prevention whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That no Town or Plantation lying Frontier to the Enemy by Land, of which these
hereafter named are to be accounted such, That is to say, Wells, York,
Kittery, A^msbury, Havarhill, Dunstable, Chelmsford, Groton, Lancaster,
Marlborough, and Deerfield, shall be broken up, or Voluntarily deserted,
without Application first made by the Inhabitants, and allowance had, and
obtained from the Governor and Council for their drawing off, if it appear to
them that it may be of Public advantage, or that the Place is not Tenable: Nor
shall any Inhabitant of any such Frontier Town or Plantation having an Estate
of Freehold in Lands, or Tenements within the same, Penalty (...) Free holders
being Inhabitants in (...) Frontier that ^all desert.
at the time of Publishing this Act, remove from thence, with intent to Sojourn
or Inhabit else where, without special License first had and obtained as
aforesaid; on Pain of Fofeiting all his Estate in Lands and Tenements lying
within the Bounds or Precincts of such Town or Plantation, unto Their
Majesty's, to be disposed by Grant of the General Assembly, and the produce
thereof to be Employed toward the defense of such Town or Plantation, and
support of the Garrisons within the same, and not otherwise.

And the Select men or Chief Military Officer or Officers of such Town or
Place, are hereby Enjoined and Ordered to give notice by Certificate in writing
under their hands into the Clerks Office of the Superior Court of Judicature,
of the Removal of any such Person or Persons as aforesaid* Select men (...)
Military Officers to Certify the same*
And the Clerk on Receipt thereof, shall issue out a Scire Facias, Requiring
the Person or Persons so removing to appear at the next Superior Court of
Judicature, to sit within the same County, or otherwise at Boston, which shall
first happen; to show cause if any there be, why Judgment should not be Entered
for the Forfeiture, as by this Act is before directed: And in case any Person
being Lawfully Summoned, and Oath thereof made by the Officer, shall make
default of appearance by himself or Attourny, or not produce a License from the
Governor and Council for his removal, Judgment shall be entered against him
accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Person able and fit for Service who at the beginning of this War or
at any time since, that was an Inhabitant in any Frontier Town or Plantation,
not yet deserted, and has an Estate of Free hold in Lands or Tenements within
the same, Penalty on Persons fit for Service that have removed if they return
not. etc.
and is removed into any other Town or Place in the parts of New England, shall
at or before the first day of July next ensuing, return to such Town or Place
from whence he removed, and continue his abode there during the present War, on
Pain of Loosing and Forfeiting all his Estate and rights in such Town or Place,
to be recovered, disposed and Employed in manner as aforesaid; Unless such
Person shall at or before the said first day of July next ensuing, at his own
cost and charge procure and maintain an able sufficient Person, to the
acceptance of the Commission Military Officers, to sojourn and abide in such
Town or Plantation in his room, and to perform all duty there with other the
Inhabitants, for the defense of the same; Or make reasonable Excuse to the
acceptance of the Governor and Council, why he has not so done.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no Male Person of Sixteen years of Age or upwards, being an Inhabitant of
or belonging to any of the said Frontier Towns or Plantations, and not having
any Lands or Tenements in such Town or Plantation, Penalty on Persons other
than Freeholders that shall remove.
shall presume to remove from the same, to sojourn or remain else where, during
the present War, without special License first had and obtained from the
Governor and Council, on Pain of Forfeiting unto Their Majesty's the Sum of
Ten Pounds, upon Conviction of such removal, before the Justices at the General
Sessions of the Peace in the County where such Town or Plantation lies, to be
employed toward the charge of Prosecuting the War. And the Select men or Chief
Military Officers of any Town or Plantation from which any such Person shall
remove without License as aforesaid, are hereby Ordered and Enjoined to send a
Certificate in Writing under their hands of the removal of such Person and time
when, unto some of the next Justices of the Peace, or to any other of Their
Majesty's Justices, where they shall be Informed such Person may be found: And
every Justice of the Peace respectively unto whom such Certificate or Complaint
shall be brought, is hereby Empowered and Required to grant a Warrent for the
apprehending of such Person, if he may be found within his Precincts, and
conventing of him before himself, or some other of Their Majesty's Justices,
who shall require sufficient Security for such Persons appearance, to answer
for the same, at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the
same County, from whence he did so remove, and transmit the Recogniscance so
taken, unto the said Court; and in case the party can find no such Security,
Justice his power to commit to Prison where Security is not given.
then to cause him to be conveyed at his own charge from Constable to
Constable, and carried before one of Their Majesty's Justices within the County
from whence he came; who is Empowered to commit such Offender unto the Common
Goal of the County, unless he can put in Security as aforesaid. And if such
Person be Convicted of the said Offense, and Ordered by the Court to pay the
Fine or Forfeiture aforesaid, and shall neglect or be unable to pay the same,
he shall be Employed in Their Majesty's Service, The offender to answer the
Fine by Service, if otherwise unable
as the Commander in Chief shall direct, until by his Service as aforesaid, he
shall have fully answered and satisfied the said Forfeiture.

Provided this Act and every Clause and Article thereof, shall continue in
force unto the end of the Session of the General Assembly to Convene in MAY,
One thousand Six hundred Ninety Six (if the present War so long last) and no
longer, nor afterward.

AN ACT, For Supplying the defects in the Act Entitled, An Act Encouraging the
Killing of Wolves.
WHEREAS by the Act Entitled, An Act Encouraging the Killing of Wolves, made
and passed at the Session of the General Assembly, begun and held at Boston the
Thirty first day of MAY, in the Fifth Year of Their present Majesty's Reign;
there is Provision for payment to be made unto the Person or Persons who shall
Kill any grown Wolf or Wolves whelp, out of the Town Stock, in which such
Wolf is Killed, or of the Town lying next Adjacent thereto, and that the said
disburst, the same being made to appear, shall be allowed unto such Town, by
the General Treasurer of the Province out of the Public Treasury.

But Forasmuch as there is no particular direction in the said Act how or in
what manner such payment out of any Town Stock shall be made appear, so as to
justify the Treasurer in allowing of the same; and the better to prevent any
fraud therein.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every Person or Persons Killing any grown Wolf or Wolves whelp (other
than such as shall be taken out of the Belly of any Bitch Wolf) within any
Town of this Province, Constable and one or more Select men to give Receipt for
Wolves Heads.
and bringing the head thereof unto the Constable of such Town or of the Town
next Adjacent, the Constable in the presence of one or more of the Select men,
shall cut both the Ears off the same, and such Select man or men and Constable,
shall give the party a Receipt for the said head, expressing whither it be a
grown Wolf or a Whelp; and upon producing such Receipt, the party shall be
paid and allowed by the Select men or Treasurer of such Town out of the Town
Stock, for the same, as in and by the said Act is directed. And all such
Payments so made shall be Certified unto the Treasurer and Receiver General,
under the hands of the major part of the Select men in such Town, and Town
Treasurer (where any such be) or Town Clerk, in manner following, That is to
say, Mr. Treasurer,
THIS may Certify, That there has been paid unto Sundry Persons out of the Town
Stock of A for (...) grown Wolves, and (...) Wolves Whelps killed in and near
unto our Town, since the (...) day of (...) last past, and the heads thereof
brought unto our Constables, Certificate to the Treasurer.
and the Ears cut off in presence of some of our Selves, as the Law directs,
and so Certified unto us, in the whole the Sum of (...) Pounds (...) which Sum
we desire you to allow unto our Town, by discounting the same with B. C.
Constable out of the Public Assessment, committed to him to Collect in our
Town. Dated in A. aforesaid, the (...) day of (...)

Select men. Town Treasurer. Or Town Clerk.





And be it further Enacted,

That the Treasurer do cause a Competent number of blank Certificates in the
Form abovesaid, to be Printed at the Public charge, and Affix his own Seal
thereto, and is hereby Ordered to deliver so many unto the Select men of each
Town and Place respectively, or some one of them, as shall be necessary for the
use of such Town or Place.

AN ACT, For granting unto Their Majesty's A Tax on Polls and Estates; And
Additional Duties of Impost and Tunage of Shiping.
WE the Representatives of Their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, taking into Consideration the present distressing Circumstances of
the said Province, and the daily growing Charge for the Security and defense of
Their Majesty's Interests and Subjects within the same, besides the other
Contingent Charges for the Support of the Government, and other Public
Occasions, and the absolute necessity of granting a Supply for the ends
aforesaid, and for Prosecuting of the War against Their Majesty's Enemies. Do
Grant unto Their most Excellent Majesty's, A Rate or Tax of Three Thousand One
Hundred Eighty nine Pounds Four Shillings in Money. And Pray that it may be
Enacted.

And be it accordingly Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the said Sum of Three Thousand One hundred Eighty nine Pounds Four
Shillings, be proportioned unto the several Towns and Precincts within this
Province, to be Assessed and Levied in manner as by this Present Act is
hereafter directed. That is to say,

In the County of SUFFOLK.
l. s. d. Boston, Six hundred twelve Pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 612
13 04 Roxbury, Fifty eight Pounds. 58 00 00 Dorchester, Eighty two Pounds
thirteen Shillings, four pence. 82 13 04 Milton, Twenty eight Pounds. 28 00 00
Brantrey, Forty six Pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 46 13 04 Weymouth,
Thirty seven Pounds. 37 00 00 Hougham, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00 Dedham, Forty two
Pounds. 42 00 00 Medfield, Twenty four Pounds. 24 00 00 Wrentham, Ten Pounds.
10 00 00 Mendon, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Hull, Thirteen Pounds. 13 00 00 Salem,
One hundred twenty six Pounds thirteen Shill* four pence. 126 13 04 Ipswich,
One hundred fifty five Pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 155 06 08 Newb^ry,
One hundred and seven pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 107 06 08 Salisbury,
Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Amsbury, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Haverhill, Twenty six
Pounds. 26 00 00 Andover, Thirty two pounds. 32 00 00 Bradford, Twelve pounds.
12 00 00 Topsfield, Twenty six pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 26 13 04
Marblehead, Sixty one pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 61 06 08 Lynn, Fifty
nine Pounds. 59 00 00 Wenham, Twenty four Pounds. 24 00 00 Beverly, Forty four
Pounds. 44 00 00 Gloucester, Twenty six Pounds, four pence. 26 00 04 Manchester,
Six pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 6 13 04 Rowley, Thirty six Pounds
thirteen Shillings four pence. 36 13 04 Boxford, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 In
the County of MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown, One hundred and six pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 106 13
04 Cambridge, Sixty three pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 63 06 08
Watertown, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Newtown, Thirty one Pounds six Shillings,
eight pence. 31 06 08 Sudbury, Thirty eight Pounds. 38 00 00 Marlborough,
Twenty seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Medford, Eleven pounds six Shillings, eight
pence. 11 06 08 Malden, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Woburn, Fifty nine Pounds. 59
00 00 Reading, Thirty five Pounds. 35 00 00 Billerica, Twenty two pound
thirteen Shillings, four pence. 22 13 04 Chelmsford, Twenty six Pounds. 26 00
00 Concord, Forty five Pounds. 45 00 00 Stow, Six pounds thirteen Shillings,
four pence. 6 13 04 Groton, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Lancaster, Nine Pounds. 9 00
00 Sherbourn, Seventeen Pounds ten Shillings. 17 10 00 In the County of
HAMPSHIRE.
Springfield, Forty one pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 41 06 08
Northampton, Thirty eight pounds thirteen shillings, four pence. 38 13 04
Hadley, Twenty four pounds. 24 00 00 Hatfield, Twenty one Pounds six Shillings,
eight pence. 21 06 08 Southfield, Eight pounds. 8 00 00 Westfield, Thirteen
pounds six Shillings, eight pence 13 06 08 Enfield, Two pounds. 2 00 00 In the
County of PLYMOUTH.
Plymouth, Thirty six pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 36 13 04 Situate,
Fifty four pounds thirteen Shillings, eight pence* 54 13 08 Marshfield, Thirty
pounds. 30 00 00 Duxbury, Twenty two Pounds. 22 00 00 Bridgwater, Twenty three
pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 23 06 08 Middleborough, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00
In the County of BARNSTABLE.
Barnstable, Forty two Pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 42 13 04
Yarmouth, Twenty eight Pounds. 28 00 00 ^^^^ham, Twenty nine Pounds. 29 00 00
San^^^ch, Twenty eight Pounds. 28 00 00 Fa^^^uth, Seven pounds six Shillings,
eight pence. 7 06 08 Manam^^t, Six Pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 6 13
04 Rochester, Seven Pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 7 06 08 Harwich, Ten
Pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 10 13 04 In the County of BRISTOL.
Bristol, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 ^aunton, Forty four pounds thirteen
Shillings, four pence. 44 13 04 Dartmouth, Thirty seven Pounds thirteen
Shillings, four pence. 37 13 04 (...), Seven Pounds. 7 00 00 (...), Twenty nine
pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 29 06 08 (...), Twenty nine Pounds six
Shillings, eight pence. 29 06 08 Little Compton, Sixteen Pounds. 16 00 00
Tiverton, Nine Pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 9 06 08 Attleborough, Eight
Pounds. 8 00 00 In the County of YORK.
York, Four Pounds. 4 00 00 Wells, Four Pounds. 4 00 00 Kittery, Eight Pounds.
8 00 00 Isles of Sholes, Two Pounds. 2 00 00 On MARTHAS VINEYARD.
Edgar Town, Fifteen pounds six Shillings, eight pence. 15 06 08 Tisbury, Ten
Pounds thirteen Shillings, four pence. 10 13 04 Chilmark, Ten pounds thirteen
Shillings, four pence. 10 13 04 Nantucket, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer do send forth his Warrants directed unto the Select men or
Assessors of each Town and Precinct aforesaid, at or before the first day of
August next coming, Warrants to be issued by the first of August.
requiring them to Assess the aforementioned Sum set, and proportioned to such
Town or Precinct respectively, upon the Polls and Estate within the same, in
manner following, That is to say, All Male Persons Inhabiting or residing
within such Town or Precinct, from Sixteen years old and upwards (Except the
Praesident, Fellows and Students of Harvard College, Elders of Churches, and
such others as are improved in the Work of the Ministry, (...) of Assessing.
Grammar Schoolmasters, and those who through Age, Bodily infirmity, or extreme
Poverty, shall be thought unable to Contribute toward Public Charges) one
Shilling on the Poll, all Negros, Molatto's and Indian Servants, as well Male
as Female, after the Rate of one Shilling Per Poll; and all Housing and Lands
and other Real Estate whatsoever, all Goods, Wares and Merchandises, without
Exception, Trading Stock, Neat Cattle, Horses, Sheep, Swine, and all other
Personal Estate, particularly Enumerated in an Act made and passed at the first
Session of this Court, begun and held the Thirtieth day of MAY, in the Sixth
year of Their present Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act For Granting unto
Their Majesty's a Tax of Twelve Pence a Poll, and one Penny on the Pound for
Estates; and according to the several Rules and Valuations in the said Act
expressed and set down, in whose possession or improvement soever any such
Estate is or shall be at the time of making this present Assessment, after the
Rate of one Penny on the Pound, and after the like Rate for the Income of all
Handicrafts men in the discretion of the Assessors; and such Sum of a Penny on
the Pound as aforesaid, to be so often multiplied as together with the Polls,
shall complete the whole Sum herein before proportioned to such Town or
Precinct: And thereof to make distinct and perfect Lists, Lists to be made and
transmitted to the Treasurer by the first of September.
therein setting down every particular Persons name and Sum, with a
Notification thereon of the name of the several Constables or Collectors of
such Town or Precinct, and the Sum which each of them are severally to Collect,
and the List so made and perfected to transmit unto the Treasurer, at or before
the first day of September next.

And the Treasurer upon Receipt of such Returns and Lists of Assessment is
hereby empowered to make and send forth his Warrants, directed unto the
Constables or Collectors of the said several Towns and Precincts (together with
the said Lists) requiring them respectively, Warrants to be sent forth for
Collecting and ^a^ing in the Assessment by the Last of November.
to Collect and gather the said Assessments, and to pay in the same unto the
Treasurer or his Order at or before the last day of November next ensuing, by
which time they are to make up and issue their Accounts of the whole with the
Treasurer. Which aforesaid Warrants being sent to the Sheriffs or Marshals of
the respective Counties and Places, they are required immediately to disperse
and safely to deliver them unto the Constables or Collectors of the several
Towns and Precincts, according to the direction thereon.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all the Powers and Authorities given unto the Treasurer. Select men or
Assessors, Constables or Collectors, respectively for the enforcing the
Collecting and paying in of any former Assessment or Assessments, Powers and
Authorities granted to the Treasurer, Select men, Constables etc.
as well in and by the before recited Act Entitled, An Act for granting unto
Their Majesty's a Tax of Twelve Pence a Poll, and One Penny on the Pound for
Estates, or any Clause or Article therein contained, as in and by any former
and other Act of the General Assembly, relating to Public Assessments; shall
be, remain, abide and continue in full force, to be exercised and put forth by
the Treasurer, Select men, or Assessors, Constables or Collectors respectively,
for the making and Collecting of this present Assessment, as if the same were
in and by this Act particularly expressed, set forth, and Reenacted.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That in all Places lying without the body of any County and so not under the
power of a Sheriff, the Tresurer is hereby Authorized and empowered to direct
his Warrants unto the Marshal of such place or places to distrain upon any
defective Constable or Constables, the Arrears of any Public Assessments
committed or that shall hereafter be committed unto them to Collect, for which
they have not Accounted, or that hereafter shall not Account for, within the
time as by Warrant they were or shall be enjoined. And where any Sheriff or
Marshal shall make default in accounting for or returning into the Treasury,
the Sum and Sums mentioned in any Warrant or Warrants of Distress by him
received or to be received from the Treasurer; Where no Sheriff is, the Marshal
to distrain (...) defective Constables:
the Treasurer is further Authorized and Empowered to make out Warrants directed
unto the Coroner of such County where any Sheriff is defective, and to the
Constable of the Town in which a defective Marshal lives, The Coroner, on
defective Sheriffs etc*
requiring them respectively to distrain the same, upon the Estate Real or
Personal of such defective Sheriff or Marshal, as the Law directs, referring
unto defective Constables.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That to the ends in this present Act before mentioned, there be further
granted unto Their Majesty's, the following Additional Rates and Duties of
Impost, upon the several sorts of Wines* and Strong Liquors, Goods, Wares and
Merchandises, Additional duties of Impost and Tunage.
that shall be imported into this Province, and Tonage of Shiping, to be and
continue in force from and after the Publication of this Act, unto the
Twenty-ninth day of JUNE next ensuing, and no longer. That is to say, For every
Pipe of common Fyal, Passada, Madera, Canary, Malaga or Port Wine, over and
above the Duties already payable for the same, Ten Shillings Per Pipe, and so
proportionably for a greater and lesser quantity. For all Rhum and other Strong
Liquors, over and above the Duties already payable for the same, four Pence Per
Gallon. For all Goods, Wares and Merchandises from England, over and above the
Duties already payable for the same, Ten Shillings for every Hundred Pound
Sterling, Prime cost. For every Hogshead of Sugar, one Shilling: For every
Hogshead of Molosses, six pence: For every Hogshead of Tobacco, two Shillings:
For every Tunn of Loggwood, or other dying wood, two Shillings: and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, of each of the said particular
Commodities, over and above the Duties already payable for the same.

And for all other Goods, Wares and Merchandises ( Cotton Wool, Salt, and every
Commodity of the growth and production of New England excepted) over and above
the Duties already payable for the same, Ten Shillings for each Hundred Pound
in value.

And that for the Additional Duties above mentioned, no Draw-back, be allowed
upon Exportation. No Draw back*
For all Ships and other Vessels that shall Sail from any Port, Haven, River or
Creek within this Province, over and above the Duties already payable for the
same, Six pence Per Tun, according to the Computation of Tunage by Law allowed.

And all Officers employed about the Impost, are to take, use and exercise all
the powers and directions, Officers Power.
for the Collecting and Receiving of the Additional Duties before mentioned, as
by Law they may and ought to do for the other.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That for a present supply of the Treasury; the Treasurer be and hereby is
empowered to issue forth a certain number of the Bills of Public Credit, 4000.
Pounds in Bills to be Emitted.
of the late Colony of the Massachusetts, Endorst by him in manner as is
directed by an Act Entitled, An Act for a present Supply of the Treasury, to
the value of Four Thousand Pounds, and no more, at the just Sum in each of said
Bills set down, to be received back again for all Public Payments to the
Treasury, and in any Office dependant thereon, with the advance of Twelve Pence
on the Pound; the Treasurer upon paying out of said Bills to have Credit in his
Account for the Sum in said Bills, A Fund for the Bills.
with the allowance of Five Pounds Per Cent. more, after which Rate they were
drawn into the Treasury. And the Moneys to be Raised by virtue of this Act is
hereby granted as a Fund for the Repayment of the said Credit in Bills.

FINIS.

