THE ANSWER Of Several MINISTERS in and near BOSTON, To that Case of
Conscience, Whether it is Lawful for a Man to Marry his Wives own Sister?

Boston in N. E. Printed and Sold by Bartholomew Green. 1695.

To the READER.
T HERE is no practice so evil as not to find Ad^^^^^es. It is astonishing that
such a Scandal as that which is here impleaded, should have any fautors among
professors of Religion in a Land of Light, when Heathen Nations have (...) it,
although they had no other principle but the honesty of nature to guide them.
Some pretend that Death puts an end to all Relations, and that therefore a Man's
Wives Sister is no more his Sister after his Wives death, and consequently that
he may Lawfully Marry her. But according to this allegation a man's Wives Mother
is no more his Mother after his Wives death, and consequently he may Marry his
Wives Mother: Nor then is his Fathers Wife or Stepmother any more his Mother
after his Fathers death, and consequently he may have his Fathers Wife; which
is an impiety not so much as named amongst the (...) sort of Heathen. 1 Cor. 5.
1. Others (...), that indeed such Marriage is Sinful, but the (...) non debuit
factum valet, when once they are Married they are not to be separated they
think, which is a strange and contradictory Opinion. It is as (...) it should
be affirmed, that because men have transgressed against the light of nature,
they may do so (...), and l^ve in that sin though it be to the Eternal
Damnation of their Souls. Such Marriages are wickedly Incestuous; and therefore
to Question whether the Civil Authority may permit Persons so concerned to
continue in Conjugal Communion, is, to make it a Question whether Magistrates
may not indulge the most Scandalous transgressions of the Moral Law and so
bring the guilt of those Crimes upon the Government, and upon the whole Land
where they are perpetrated. Most certainly, when John the Baptist said to
Herod, It is not Lawful for thee to have thy Brothers Wife, Mark 6. 18. his
intendment was that they ought no longer to live together as Man and Wife. If
Magistrates or any other shall be reproached for their Holy Zeal in this
matter, they will Suffer Persecution in the very same cause for which John did.
Moreover, we find in the Scripture that when some had contracted Marriages
contrary (...) Law of God (and so have they all done that ^ave Married their
Wives Sister) it was not thought it would be sufficient for them to confess
their fault, or to inhibit the like practice in others for the future, but the
guilty Persons were made to put away all such Wives. Ezra 10. 3, 11. Neh. 13.
25.

But for further Information in this point, the Reader is referred to the
Answer herewith Emitted, which in few words contains enough to satisfy the
Consciences of them that Enquire without an Idol in their Hearts, or that are
sincerely willing to be satisfied.

Concerning the Case of Conscience proposed to our Consideration, Viz. W Hither
it be Lawful for a Man to Marry his Wives own Sister?
We Answer in the Negative; That it is utterly Unlawful, Incestuous, and an
Heinous Sin in the Sight of God. For,

1. The Scripture says, None shall approach to any that is near akin to him.
Lev. 18 6. Now the particulars instanced in that Chapter show, that by kindred
is meant not only Consanguinity, but Affinity, or such as are allied by
Marriage as well as by Blood. It is then clear, that a Man's Wives Sister is
near akin to him: for She relates to him in the very first degree of Affinity,
which is near kindred. It is a ruled Case amongst all Orthodox Divines and
Judicious Casuists, That a Man may not Marry any of his Wives kindred nearer in
Blood than he may of his own; nor may the Woman of her Husbands. A Man may as
lawfully Marry his own Mother as his Wives Mother, his own Aunt as his Uncles
Wife; so his own Sister as his Wives Sister. Lev. 18 14.

2. There is in the Scripture an express Prohibition of Marriage with such as
are no nearer akin than a Man's Wives Sister is. To instance. A Man may not
Marry his Brothers Wife Lev. 18. 16. and 20. 21 Math. 14. 4. Which Implies that
a man may not Marry his Wives Sister, who is as near akin to him as his
Brothers Wife. Persons not named in the Law, if they have the same nearness
with those expressly and in terms forbidden to join in Marriage Relation
together, are comprehended in that Law. When the Law expressly forbids the
Nephew to Marry the Aunt, it implies that the Uncle may not Marry the Niece,
because an Uncles Wife and an Aunts Husband are equally akin. It is (as Dr.
Hall in his Cases of Conscience has well noted) easy to observe, that all the
several^ies of the degrees prohibited run still upon the Male, under which the
exorbitances of the other Sex are comprehended. Thus though a Man's Marrying his
Wives Sister is not in so many express Words and Syllables prohibited, by clear
implication and necessary Consequence it is so. It is a very weak Argument, to
say, inasmuch as Marrying with the Wives Sister is not in terms forbidden in
the 18 Chapter of Leviticus, that therefore it is lawful. A Man's Marrying with
his own Daughter is not expressly forbidden in that Law: But since it is said,
he may not Marry his Daughter in Law or his Sons Wife, Verse (...) by necessary
deduction it follows, that he may not Marry his own Daughter. It is not in
express terms said, that a Woman shall not Marry two Brothers: and it is
certainly as lawful for a Woman to Marry two Brothers as for a Man two Sisters.
Yet this is so highly against the light of Nature as well as Scripture, as that
it was of old decreed in the Neocaesarian Council, that whosoever should do so,
should be rejected unto death.

3. The Light of Nature and Laws of Nations have Condemned this Practice as
Abominable. The Grecians, Romans and the Arabians, who had no light of
Scripture, only the Law, written in their hearts by nature, did prohibit such
Marriages. The Karcan Jews (who in Opposition to the Talmudists adhere to the
Books of Meses) Condemn them. So have Christian Nations done: And in our own
Nation in special. The Table of the Church of England set forth by Authority,
does expressly declare, that a Man may not Marry with his Wives Sister. Mr.
Reyner (that worthy Minister of the Gospel at Lincoln) in his Judicious Answer
to the Case before us, shows, that the Laws of the Land prohibit this Marriage;
and he refers his Reader for Information to Sir Ed. Cooks Institute, Part. 2.
p. 683. And to the Statutes of 25 H.8. Chap 22. and his 28 year. Chapt. 7. and
his 30 year Chap.38.

4. Learned Divines have with a great concurrence testified against such
Marriage as unlawful. Zanchy observes, that all the Ancient Fathers Witnessed
against it. So have our Protestant Divines: Particularly Beza, Junius, Gerhard,
Polanus, Bucanus, and the Geneva-Divines: Also, Zepperus, and Voetius: And of
our own Nation, Mr. Perkins, Dr. Ames, Dr. Hall, Dr. Willet, Dr. Hamond.
Likewise the English Annotators on Lev. 18.16. And Mr. Poole, and Mr. Clark in
their Notes on that place. Yea, the Assembly at Westminster (in which were many
Eminent Persons) in their Confession of Faith, Chap.24. Sect.4. have these
words. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity
forbidden in the word: Nor can such Incestuous Marriages be made lawful by any
Law of Man, so as those Persons may live together as Man and Wife. The man may
not Marry any of his Wives kindred nearer in Blood then he may of his own; nor
the Woman of her Husbands kindred nearer in Blood than of her own. These are
the words of that Renowned Assembly. Moreover it is well known that such
Marriage was Condemned as unlawful, by the Universities of Europe in the days
of K. Henry 8

As for the Objection that it is said, Lev.18.18. Thou shall not take a Wife to
her Sister to vex her besides the other in her life time. By Sister in that
place not a natural Sister in a strict sense, but any other Woman is intended:
The same expression in the Original is else where translated, One to another
Ezekiel.1.9. The Hebrews are wont to give the name of Brother and Sister to all
Neighbors, and more especially to all that are of the same Nation. Gen.19.7.
Isa.19. 2. Ezekiel.16.45, 48. The Jews (as some Learned men have well observed)
did sometimes take Second Wives, whilst the first was living, on purpose to vex
the first Wife; which was a very great Wickedness. The design then of that Text
is to prohibit Polygamy, but gives no allowance to any man to Marry his Sister
after his Wives Death.

Finally. That Practice is one of those Abominations, for which the Holy God
punished the Heathen Nations: And it is a burning Shame, that ever it should be
heard of in such a Land of Uprightness as New England once was and ever ought
to be. It is very sad, that a Practice which the Scripture calls Wickedness and
Abomination, and which the light of Nature condemns, should find any Patrons
amongst us. A great Divine has truly noted, that this is one of those
iniquities which provokes the God of Heaven to send enemies upon a People, and
to make their Land desolate. If after the Lord has stirred up his Servants in
the Ministry to bear their Testimony against it, (and we hope their is no
Minister in the Land either so ignorant, or under such a Penal and Judicial
desertion of God as to justify it) men shall still go on openly to Practice a
thing so vile, and that by the connivance of those who ought by Severe and
Righteous Laws to inhibit it, We may fear what God will do.

INCREASE MATHER. CHARLES MORTON. JAMES ALLEN. SAMUEL WILLARD. JAMES SHERMAN.
JOHN DANFORTH. COTTON MATHER. NEHEMTAH WALTER.


Mrs. JUDITH HULL, Of Boston, in N. E. Daughter of Mr. Edmund Quincey; late
Wife of JOHN HULL Esquire. deceased.
A Diligent, Constant, Fruitful Reader and Hearer of the Word of GOD, (...)
from her Labors, June, 22. 1695. being. the seventh day of the Week, a little
before Sunset; just about the time She used to begin the Sabbath. Anno AEtatis
suae 69.

Epitaph
GReat Sarah's Faith; joind with Good Hannah's Prayer;
For Hearing of the Word, glad Mary's Care;
Aged Elizabeth's Just Walk; To dwell
Nigh Prophets, a true Shunamitish Zeal;
An Humble Soul, Trimmed with an High Neglect
Of Gay Things, but with Ancient Glories decked;
All these Expired at once! Arrayed with Them,
Our HULDAH's gone to Gods Jerusalem:
Without a Figure so, with her Last Breath
She Triumphed over that Holophernes, DEATH.
Perfect in Thoughts, Words, Deeds, She soars on high,
Performing what her Name did signify.

