ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND. Convened and Held
at Boston, the Eight Day of November. 1693.

Anno Regni Guilielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Quinto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and Sold by Samuel Phillips. 1693.

Anno Regni Regis et Reginae, GULIELMI et MARIAE Quinto. ACTS and LAWS, Passed
by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England etc.
AN ACT, Relating to Sureties upon Mean Process in Civil Actions.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

It is Ordered and Enacted, That where Bail is given upon Mean Process in any
Civil Action, not only for the appearance of the party to answer the Suit, but
also to abide the Order or Judgment of the Court that shall be given thereon,
every such Surety or Sureties shall be obliged to satisfy the Judgment in case
of the Principals avoidance and the return of Non est inventus upon the
Execution; unless the Surety at the time of Entering up Judgment do bring the
Principal into Court and move to be discharged, upon which the Court shall
Order the keeper of the Prison to receive him into Custody, that so his Body
may be taken in Execution. And the party for whom the Judgment was given may
have a Writ of Scire Facias out of the same Court against such Surety or
Sureties, and in case no just cause be shown to the contrary, the Judgment
shall be affirmed against the Surety or Sureties with the additional Costs of
Suit and Execution be accordingly granted.

Always Provided, that such Writ of Scire Facias be taken out and served upon
the Surety within Twelve Months after the first Trial and not afterward, and
every Surety of whom such recovery is made may bring his Action for damages
against the principal debtor.

AN ACT For Passing of Sheriff's Accounts.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every Clerk of the Peace in each County within this Province, and Clerk
of Assize shall deliver unto the Sheriff of the County a perfect (...),
Amerciaments, Recogniscances, Moneys and Forfeitures, imposed, set, lost or
Forfeited in any Sessions of the Peace, Court of Assize and general Goal
delivery, or special Court of Oyer and Terminer by any Person due to Their
Majesty's, within the space of Thirty days next after the Ending of the said
Courts respectively; and within said time shall deliver unto the Treasurer and
Receiver general of said Province a Perfect Schedule of all such E^ by him
delivered to the Sheriff, on Pain of Forfeiting to Their Majesty's for the
support of the Government, the Sum of Five Pounds for each neglect, upon
Conviction thereof before the Justices of the same Court.

And the Justices of each of said Courts respectively are hereby Empowered to
Audit Examine and Adjust the said Accounts of the Sheriff, and upon Payment of
what shall be found remaining due thereupon to grant the Sheriff a Quietus est.

And whenever any Sheriff upon passing his Accounts, shall have his Quietus
est, he shall be thereby absolutely discharged of all Sums of Money by him
Levied and Received and pretended not to be accounted for within the said
Account whereupon he had his Quietus; unless such Sheriff shall be called in
Question for such Sum or Sums of Money so pretended to be Levied, within. Two
year's after the time of such Account and Quietus.

AN ACT, For Regulating of the Militia.
WHEREAS for the Honor and Service of Their Majesty's, and for the Security of
this Their Province against any Violence or Invasion whatever; It is necessary
that due care be taken that the Inhabitants thereof be Armed, Trained, and in a
suitable posture and readiness for the ends aforesaid; and that every Person
may know his duty and be Obliged to perform the same.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council, and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Ordained and Enacted by
the Authority of the same.

1. That all Male Persons from Sixteen Years of Age to Sixty, (other than such
as are herein after Excepted) shall bear Arms and duly attend, Persons liable
to Train.
all Musters and Military Exercises of the Respective Troops and Companies
where they are listed or belong, allowing Three Months time to every Son next
after his coming to Sixteen years of Age; and every Servant, so long, after his
time is out; to provide themselves with Arms and Ammunition etc.

2. And the Clerk of each Troop and Company once a Quarter yearly shall take an
Exact List of all Persons living within the Precincts of such Troop or Company,
Clerk to take a list four times a year.
and present the same to the Captain or Chief Officer, on pain of Forfeiting
Forty Shillings for each default, to be paid to the Captain or Chief Officer
to the use of the Company. And in case of non payment, to be levied by distress
and sale of the Offenders goods, by virtue of a Warrant from the Captain or
Chief Officer, who is hereby Empowered to grant the same.

3. That every Person listed in any Troop or Company shall so continue and
attend all duty in such Troop or Company, Persons to attend duty where listed
till orderly dismissed.
or otherwise suffer the Penalty by Law provided, until orderly dismissed or
removed out of the Town or Precinct, and in case of Removal into the Precinct
of another Company in the same Town, to produce a Certificate under the hand of
the Captain or Chief Officer of the Precinct whereto he is removed, that he is
listed there.

4. If any Person liable to be listed as aforesaid, do exempt himself by
Shifting from house to house or place to place, to avoid being so listed;
Penalty on such as shall Shift to avoid listing.
he shall pay as a fine for every such Offense, to the use of the Company to
which he belongs Ten Shillings being Convicted before any Justice of Peace of
the County.

5. That every listed Soldier and other Householder (except Troopers) shall be
always provided with a well fixed Firelock Musket, of Musket or Bastard Musket
bore; The Barrel not less then three foot and a half long, Foot Soldiers how
to be Armed.
or other good Fire Arms to the Satisfaction of the Commission Officers of the
Company, a Snapsack, a Collar with Twelve Bandeleers or Cartouch-box, one Pound
of good Powder, Twenty Bullets fit for his Gun, and Twelve Flints, a good Sword
or Cutlace, a Worm and Priming-wire fit for his Gun; on penalty of Six
Shillings for want of such Arms as is hereby required, and Two Shillings for
each other defect, and the like Sum for every four weeks he shall remain
unprovided; the Fine to be paid by Parents for their Sons under Age and under
their Command; and by Masters or heads of Families, for their Servants, other
than Servants upon Wages.

6. That every Trooper shall be always provided with a good servicable Horse
of Five Pounds Value, and not less then Fourteen hands high, (the same to be
determined by the two Chief Commission Officers) Covered with a good Sadle,
Troopers how to be furnished.
Bit, Bridle, Holsters, Pectoral and Crooper; and furnished with a Carbine, the
Barrel not less then two Foot and half long, with a Belt and Swivel, a case of
good Pistols; with a Sword or Cutlace, a Flask or Cartouch-box; one Pound of
good Powder, three Pounds of Sizeable Bullets, Twenty Flints, and a good Pair
of Boots and Spurs; on penalty of Twelve Shillings for want of such Horse as is
hereby ordered, and three Shillings a Piece for every other defect, and the
like Sum for every Six-weeks he shall remain unprovided: and that each Trooper
list his Horse, and shall not dispose thereof without the consent of his Chief
Officer on the penalty of Five Pounds: And for non Appearance at the time and
place appointed for Exercise, every listed Trooper for each days neglect shall
pay Ten Shillings Fine.

7. That there may be two Troops in a Regiment, each of which Troops shall not
Exceed Sixty men with Officers.

8. That Regimental Musters shall be but once in three years, (Except in
Boston) And every Captain or Chief Officer of any Company or Troop in any
Regiment, Regimental Musters, and Training of particular Companies.
shall be obliged on penalty of Five Pounds, to draw forth his Company or Troop
or cause them to be drawn forth Four days Annually, and no more, to Exercise
them in Motions, the use of Arms, and Shooting at Marks, or other Military
Exercises, which every person liable to Train having been duly Warned, and not
appearing, and attending the same, shall for each days neglect pay a Fine of
Five Shillings

9. That the Commission Officers of any Company or Troop or the Major part of
them, may order the Correcting and Punishing disorders and contempt on a
Training day, or on a Watch, Commission Officers power.
the Punishment not being greater then laying Neck and Heels, Riding the Wooden
Horse, or Ten Shillings fine.

10. That there be Military Watches appointed and kept in every Town at such
times, in such places and in such Numbers, Military Watches.
and under such Regulations as the Chief Military Officers of each Town shall
appoint, or as they may receive orders from the Chief Officer of the Regiment:
And that all persons able of Body or that are of Estate (and not Exemped by
Law) shall by themselves or some meet person in their stead, to the acceptance
of the Commander of the Watch, attend the same, on penalty of Five Shillings
for each defect; there having been due Warning giving.

11. Every Soldier or other Person liable by Law, refusing or neglecting to
attend Military Exercises, on Training days; or Military Watches that shall
not pay, Penalty for not attending Military Exercises.
or have no Estate to be found whereon to levy the fine, it shall be in the
power of the Captain, or Chief Officers of such Company on the next Training
day after such neglect (he not having satisfied the Clerk) to punish him for
such offense, by laying Neck and Heels, or Riding the Wooden Horse, not
exceeding one Hours time: And if such delinquent shall absent himself the
second Training day, without giving sufficient reason to the Captain, or Chief
Officer for the same; it shall be in the power of the Chief Officer of the
Company to direct a Warrant to the Constable of the Town, requiring him to
apprehend such delinquent, and bring him into the Field, that he may be punished
according as by this Law is provided, and all Constables are hereby Required to
Execute such Warrants accordingly.

12. That the Persons hereafter Named be Exempted from all Trainings. Viz. The
Members of the Council, the Representatives for the time being, the Secretary,
Justices of the Peace, Praesident, Fellows, Students, Persons Exempted from
Training.
and Servants of Harvard College Exempted by College Charter, Masters of Art,
Ministers, Elders and Deacons of Churches, Sheriffs, allowed Physicians, or
Chyrurgions, and Professed Schoolmasters, all such as have had Commissions, and
Served as Field Officers, or Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns, Coroners,
Treasurers, Attorney General, Deputy-Sheriffs, Clerks of Courts, Constables,
Constant Ferrymen, and one Miller to each Grist-Mill: Officers employed in and
about Their Majesty's Revenues, all Masters of Vessels of Thirty Tuns and
upwards, usually employed beyond Sea, and constant Herdsmen, Lame Persons or
otherwise disabled in Body (producing Certificate thereof from two able
Chyrurgions) Indians and Negros.

13. That the Persons hereafter Named be and hereby are Exempted from Military
Watches and Wardings. Viz. Persons Exempted from Military Watches etc.
The Members of the Council, Secretary, Representatives for the time being,
President, Fellows, Students of Harvard College, and the Gentlemen belonging
to the Governors Guard, Ministers and Elders of Churches, allowed Physicians
and Chyrurgions, Constables, constant Ferrymen, and one Miller to each
Grist-Mill.

14. That the Captain and Commission Officers of each Company or Troop shall
and hereby are fully empowered to Nominate and appoint meet persons to Serve as
Sergeants and Corporals in the Respective Companies or Troops, Commission
Officers to appoint Sergeants and Corporals.
and displace them, and appoint others in their Room, as they shall see meet.

15. That twice every year or oftener if required every Captain or Chief Officer
of each Company or Troop shall give order for a diligent enquiry into the state
of his Company, and for taking an Exact List of the Names of his Soldiers and
Inhabitants within the Limits of his Company, View of Arm's.
and of the defects of Arms or otherwise, and Names of the defective Persons,
that they may be prosecuted as the Law has provided, and such care may be
taken as is proper to remedy the same.

16. That if any Person, who is by Law obliged to provide Arms and Ammunition,
cannot purchase the same by such means as he has, if he bring to the Clerk of
the Company Corn or other Merchantable Provision, How persons unable to
purchase Arm's may be provided.
or vendible goods, so much as by Apprizement of the Clerk and two other
Persons mutually chosen, shall be judged of greater value by one fifth part,
than such Arms or Ammunition is of: he thereupon shall be Excused from the
penalties for want of Arms and Ammunition, until he can be provided, which said
Clerk shall provide as soon as may be by Sale of such goods, and render the
overplus to the party if any be: But the party shall notwithstanding give his
personal attendance upon all occasions as other Soldiers, until he be
supplied, and at such times shall perform any proper Service he may be put upon
by the Captain or Chief Officer of the Company he belongs to; but if the person
be judged unable to buy Arms, or to lay down the value proposed, if he be a
single man, he shall be put out to Service, by the two next Justices of Peace,
to earn wherewith to buy Arms and Ammunition; if such person have a Family and
be judged unable, by the Captain and Major part of the Select men to lay down
such value for the end aforesaid, then he shall be provided for out of the Town
Stock, or by Arms procured at the Towns charge, until such time as he be judged
able to provide for himself, and such Arms to be under the care of the Chief
Military Officer and the Select men of the Town.

17. That Drums, Drummers, Trumpets, Trumpeters, Colors and Banners be by the
Commission Officers of each Troop or Company provided at the charge of the
respective Companies and Troops, How Drums, Trumpets etc are to be provided.
where they are not already provided, and the Fines will not reach to procure
the same, and that such as have been employed as Drummers or Trumpeters or are
fit and capable thereof, being appointed unto such Service by the Chief Officer
of any Company or Troop, shall attend the Service, on penalty of Forty
Shillings Fine, and every Drummer for a years Service shall have Twenty
Shillings if he find his own Drum, and Ten Shillings if the Captain finds the
Drum; and a Trumpeter Forty Shillings a year, if he find his own Trumpet; and
Twenty Shillings, if the Captain finds it.

18. That such meet Person as by the Commission Officers of any Company or
Troop shall be appointed Clerk, and shall refuse to serve, shall pay Forty
Shillings fine, and another be chosen in his room, Penalty for refusing to
Serve as Clerk.
and so until one do accept; which Person shall be under Oath for the faithful
discharge of his Office, to be Administered unto him by a Justice of Peace, in
the same County, in the words following: You do Swear truly to Perform the
Office of Clerk of the Military Company under the Command of A. B. Captain, to
the utmost of your skill and power, Oath.
in all things appertaining to your Office, according to Law: So help you God.
And for every distraint made for any fine not exceeding Forty Shillings, he
shall have one quarter part for his pains and trouble. Allowance
And for such fines he may distrain Ex Officio; and in distraining shall
observe such Rules as the Law has provided in other cases; and upon Ten days
notice shall account with and pay to the Captain or Chief Officer what fines he
has received, his own part being deducted.

19. The Chief Military Officer of each Regiment as often as he shall see
cause, Meeting of the Chief Officers of the Regiment.
shall require the Captain or Chief Officer of each Company in his Regiment to
meet at such time and place as he shall appoint, and then with them to confer
and give in charge such Orders as shall by them or major part of them be judged
meet, for the better ordering and settling their several Companies, and for the
better promoting of Military Discipline amongst them. And the Chief Officer is
hereby empowered by his Warrant directed to any Clerk or Officer of his Regiment
to summon or cause to be brought before them any Offender against the Laws
Military, Their Power
and according to Law to hear and determine all matters proper for their
Cognizance, and to give sentence, and to grant Mittimus or Warrants for
Distraint to the Clerk of the Company where the Offense is Committed, for
executing which Warrant, if above Forty Shillings, he shall have Ten Shillings
out of the same for his pains and trouble therein; and no more.

20. That there be a Stock of Powder and Ammunition in each Town Provided, and
from time to time as there is need, Town Stock of Ammunition etc.
be renewed by the Select men; which shall be a Barrel of good Powder, two
Hundred weight of Bullets, and three hundred Flints for every Sixty listed
Soulders, and after that Proportion for the listed Soldiers of each Town,
whether more or less; Also that the Select men procure such a number of Arms
and so much Ammunition as shall be made appear by the Chief Commission Officers
of each Company in the several Towns to be needful for the supply of such Poor
as by Law they are to provide for: And such Town as cannot make it appear to
the Chief Commander of the Regiment that they are thus provided at or before
the first of May next, shall pay Five Pounds fine, Penalty for being unprovided.
which shall be distrained by Warrant from said Officer directed unto the
Constable upon the Select men of the Town or any of them, and disposed of for
the use of said Town toward the supply of such Stock; and the like Sum for
every three Months they shall remain so unprovided.

21. And the Select men where there is not a sufficient Stock of Powder, Arms
and Ammunition, and in such Towns where there is need of Watch houses, Select
men to make a Rate for buying of Ammunition etc in case.
Firing and Candles for their Watches; in such case the Select men for so much
as is wanting are to procure or satisfy what is required or needed as before,
shall make provision for the same by a Rate equally and justly laid upon the
Inhabitants and Estate in such Towns, and such Rate signed and Committed by
them to the Constables to collect, who shall and hereby are required and
Authorized to collect the same; and for non payment to distrain as for other
Rates, and the Money or pay collected to be brought into the Chief Military
Officers and Select men of the Town, to be by them improved for the ends
aforesaid. And the Select men or so many of them as shall neglect their duty
herein, shall pay Twenty Shillings fine, to be paid to the Captain for the use
of the Company, Penalty for neglect.
being convict before two Justices of the Peace, who are hereby empowered to
convent the party, and to hear and determine the same, and if need be, to
appoint other meet Persons in such Towns under the like penalties to perform
said Service.

22. That no Clerk Ex Officio make distraint for any fine until four days
after the Offense committed; Clerk ex Officio not to distrain with in four days.
that so the party may have opportunity to make Excuse, if any he have, why he
should not pay the fine; and every Clerk that neglects or refuses to account or
make payment, as by this Law is provided, he by a Warrant from the Chief
Officer of the Company directed to the Constable, Penalty for his neglect to
account etc.
may be distrained on for so much as he has or should have collected or
distrained for.

23. That all Officers yield Obedience to the Warrants or Commands of their
Superior Officers on Penalty of Five Pounds; to be heard and determined at the
next meeting of the Chief Officers and Captains of the Regiment; Penalty for
Officers disobeying their Superior Officers
and the fine to be taken by distress and Sale of the Offenders goods returning
the overplus (if any be) by Warrant from the Chief Officer of the Regiment
drected to the Clerk of the Company to which such Offender belongs, and to be
improved to the use and benefit of such Company as the Officers so met shall
agree, their Expenses being first defrayed out of the same.

24. That an Alarm at the Castle upon Castle Island near Boston being made upon
such causes as are agreeable to Instructions to be given by the Governor to
the Captain of the Castle, shall be by putting out two Flaggs, and firing of
two Guns toward the Town; Alarm.
at which time there shall with all possible speed such numbers be sent down
for their releif as the Governor and Captain General, or such Person as shall
be Commander in Chief in his absence, shall think necessary. At any other place
an Alarm may be made by firing three Guns one after another, or by firing a
Beacon, their Drums beating an Alarm, all Persons being called upon to Arm:
Upon which all the Trained Soldiers, and others capable to bear Arms that are
then Resident in any Town, shall forthwith appear complete with their Arms and
Ammunition according to Law, at the usual place of Rendevouz, or where the
Chief Officers shall appoint; there to attend such Commands as shall be given
for their Majesty's Service, Penalty for not appearing upon an Alarm.
and that on the Penalty of Five Pounds fine, or three Months Imprisonment:
The members of the Council, Justices and Sheriffs to attend the Governor, if
at or near Boston, and in other places to appear and advise with the Chief
Military Officers of the Town, and to be Assisting in Their Majesty's Service
according to their Quality; and such Alarms shall at all times be carried on
from Neighborhood to Neighborhood, and from Town to Town throughout the
Province, Releif be sent to Frontiers.
and from such Town where the Alarm is made, there shall be forthwith
dispatched one or more Horsemen, to signify the Occasion thereof to the
Justice of Peace, Chief Military Officer or Constable of the next Town or
Towns, which all Persons are to take notice of and attend as is before
directed: And if the Alarm be made either from a Seaport Town, or other Town
that lies a Frontier to or in great danger of the Enemy; the Captain or
Captains of the Adjacent Towns shall forthwith go with or send such releif, as
they shall judge meet for the Offense of the Enemy, or defense of themselves
and Neighbors, but so as to be observant to any Commands or Orders they may
receive from their Superior Officers: Penalty for a false Alarm
And if any Person shall wilfully make a false Alarm, he shall be fined to
Their Majesty's Twenty Pounds for support of the Government, or suffer Six
Months Imprisonment.

25. No. Officer Military or Civil or other Person shall Quarter or Billet any
Soldier or Seaman upon any Inhabitant within this Province, Penalty for
Quartering Soldiers etc upon Inhabitants.
without his consent (other than the Public Licensed Houses) under the
penalty of one Hundred Pounds; to be recovered by Action Bill Plaint or
Information, in any Court of Record; one half to Their Majesty's, for the
support of the Government; the other half part to the party grieved that shall
inform and sue for the same. And every such Inhabitant may refuse to Quarter
any Soldier or Seaman notwithstanding any order whatsoever.

26. That all Persons Exempted by this Law from Trainings, shall
notwithstanding be provided with Arms and Ammunition Complete upon the same
penalty, as those that are obliged to Train.

27. All Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures arising by Virtue of this Act or any
breach thereof (not otherwise disposed of therein) shall be for the use of the
Regiment, Company, or Troop respectively: That is to say, Fines and Forfitures
how to be disposed and recovered
for procuring and repairing Drums, Trumpets, Colors, Banners, Halberts,
paying of Drummers and Trumpeters, or other charge of said Company; and the
overplus (if any be) to be laid out in Arms and Ammunition for a Town Stock,
and be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of Their
Majesty's Courts of Record.

AN ACT, For Levying Soldiers.
FOR the more speedy Levying of Soldiers for Their Majesty's Service, and the
better to prevent disappointments through default in any improved therein, or
by nonappearance of such as shall be appointed to said Service.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every Person liable and fit for Service, being orderly detached or
Impressed for Their Majesty's Service, by virtue of a Warrant from the Captain
or Chief Officer of the Company or Troop whereto he belongs, Penalty for not
attending upon an Impress.
and being touched or Commanded in Their Majesty's Name to attend said Service,
shall by himself or other meet Person in his room (to the acceptance of his
Captain or Chief Officer) attend the same at time and place appointed; on pain
of suffering three Month's Imprisonment, to be committed by Mittimus from any
Justice of the Peace; or Chief Officer of the Company, where no Justice of the
Peace is in the Town; upon conviction of such neglect; unless such Person
within the space of two Hours next after his being Impressed, shall pay down to
his Captain or Chief Officer that granted the Warrant, the Sum of Five Pounds;
to be improved for the procuring and fitting out of suitable Persons on that
present Service, if timely to be had; or otherwise to be remitted by said
Officer unto the Treasurer* or Select men of the Town where such Person dwells,
to the use of said Town, for and toward a Stock of Arms and Ammunition: Fine
how to be employed.
And all Persons so paying the said fine of Five Pounds shall be esteemed to
have Served, and be no further or otherwise liable to any after impress, than
those that actually go forth in Service at that time.

Every Chief Officer of a Regiment who shall neglect or not do his utmost to
send forth his Warrants seasonably, for the detaching or impressing so many men
as shall be required, Penalty for (...) neglect of sending out Warrants.
shall pay Twenty Pounds fine: And every Captain or other Chief Officer of any
Company or Troop that shall not use his utmost endeavor according to Warrant
to him directed, to detach or impress, or cause to be detached or impressed,
and have so many men at the place of Randevouz, in time as by Warrant is
required, shall pay Ten Pounds fine: And every Officer or Soldier that shall
receive a Warrant from his Captain or Chief Officer, Penalty for not attending
warrants of Impress etc.
for the detaching or Impressing of men; shall forthwith attend and perform the
same on pain of Five Pounds fine; and all Persons are required to be aiding and
assisting to him in the Execution of such Warrant on the Penalty of Forty
Shillings; the said fines or Sums of Money respectively to be unto Their
Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government, Penalty on Persons
refusing to assist in Execution thereof.
and to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court of Record*

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Soldiers shall be in pay from the time of their being detached or
impressed, till they be orderly discharged, and have reasonable time allowed
them to repair to their usual places of abode. And if any Person directly or
indirectly by Counsel or otherwise, prevent the impressing, conceal any Person
impressed; or knowingly further his escape, Penalty on Persons avoiding the
Impress, and any furthering their Escape.
such Person shall pay as a fine, Forty Shillings. And all Persons lawfully
empowered to press, may pursue any Person that hides from the Press, or makes
his escape, and may by himself or deputy impress such Person in any place
within the Province. And if any Impressed for Their Majesty's Service, shall
remove or go out of the Province, and not attend the Service as required, such
Person at his return shall be apprehended by Warrant from any Justice of the
Peace; and by him committed to the common Goal of the County where he shall be
taken, to suffer three Months imprisonment, and before he be released shall
also pay a fine of Five Pounds, to the use of the Town whereto he belonged at
the time of his impressing.

If any Person Authorized to detach or Levy Soldiers for Their Majesty's
Service, Persons Authorized to Impress, not to discharge or spare any for
Reward.
shall Exact or take any reward to discharge or spare any from said Service, he
shall forfeit ten times so much as he shall so Exact or take; one Moiety
thereof unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government, and
the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same, by
Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of Record

No Soldier retained in Their Majesty's Service and borne in their pay, in
Garrison or otherwhere, Felony for any Soldier to desert his Post.
shall depart without License of his Commands, on pain of being proceeded
against as a Felon, and shall suffer the pains of Death: And every Justice of
Peace within his Precinct is hereby Authorized and required to cause all such
(...)serters or runaway Soldiers, which he shall know or be inform (...) of,
to be apprehended and secured, in order to Trial at the next (...), Justice of
the Peace to apprehend deserters etc.
to be holden for the same County where they shall be taken.

And further it is Enacted,

That all such Soldiers and Seamen that have been wounded in Their Majesty's
Service within this Province, and are thereby Maimed or other-wise disabled,
and had yearly Pentions allowed them by the former Government for their releif,
Pentioners.
shall have the continuance of the same (during their abode in this Province)
to be paid them out of the Public Treasury. And all such Soldiers and Seamen
as at any time hereafter shall be Maimed or other-wise disabled by any wound
received in Their Majesty's Service within this Province, shall be relieved out
of the Public Treasury, as this great and General Court shall order.

If any Soldier shall lose his Arms in Their Majesty's Service not through his
own neglect or default, Loss of Arms
such loss shall be borne by the Public: And in case any Soldier be furnished
with Arms for any Expedition in said Service; (...) of Arms.
he shall allow out of his wages Four Pence Per. Week for the same; and return
such Arms, or other wise pay the value thereof.

Every Captain or other Chief Officer that dismisseth any Person retained, and
assumeth another for gain; such Captain or other Chief Officer shall forfeit
Twenty Pounds, Penalty for (...) any Person (...)
to Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government, to be
recovered as aforesaid.

Provided that this Act nor any clause or Article thereof shall continue in
force any longer than the present War with the French, any thing therein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

AN ACT For putting and keeping in Repair the Townhouse in Boston.
WHEREAS the Town house in Boston within the County of Suffolk has formerly
been and is still continued to be made use of for the holding of Councils,
Courts of Judicature, and other Public Assemblies for the whole Province, and
has been accustomed to be upheld and repaired in part at the charge of the late
Colony of the Massachusetts, part at the charge of the said County, and part at
the charge of the said Town.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Charges of Repairing the said House be from time to time continued,
to be answered and paid in proportion following; That is to say, one half part
thereof out of the Public Revenue of the Province, one quarter part out of the
Treasury of the said County, Charge of Repairing the Townhouse in Boston
proportioned.
and the other quarter part out of the Treasury of the said Town. And the
Select men of Boston, from time to time as there shall be need, are to take
care that the said House be sufficiently Repaired, and to lay the Account of
the Charge before the Governor and Council; as also before the Justices in
Quarter Sessions, that so ^^^ers may be respectively given as well for payment
of the part thereof belonging to the Province, as that belonging to the County,
according to this Act.

AN ACT, For Highways.
FOR the better amending and keeping in repair and clear the Highways, and
common Roads, leading from Town to Town and place to place; and for laying out
new Highways, and turning old Highways where it shall be needful.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That there be Annually chosen two or more Freeholders in each Town
respectively within this Province, Surveyers of Highways to be annually
chosen and Sworn.
to be Surveyers of the Highways, who shall be Sworn before some Justice of
the Peace in the County, diligently and faithfully to perform the said Office
for the year Ensuing; which Surveyers shall take care that all Highways,
Private-wayes, Causess, and Bridges, lying within the Precincts of such Town,
be kept in repair, and amended from time to time, when and so often as shall be
needful, at the charge of such Town (where it is not otherwise settled) that so
they may be safe and convenient for Travelers, Teems and Drovers: And the
Surveyers are hereby Empowered to cut down dig up or remove, as well all sorts
of Trees, Bushes, Stones, Fences, Rayles, Gates, enclosures or other thing or
things, as may any ways streighten, Their Power
hurt, hinder or incommode the Highways: As also to dig for Stone or Gravel,
Clay, Ma^l, Sand or Earth in any Land not Planted or enclosed, and to Press any
Carriage, Workmen or other things fit to be Employed in the Highways, for
such reasonable satisfaction to the parties concerned as such Surveyers can
agree for; and in case of disagreement, such as the two next Justices shall
appoint.

And the Surveyers shall appoint certain days for providing Materials, and
working in the Highways; Surveyers to give public notice for working on the
Highways.
having respect to the Season of the year, and the Weather, and giving
convenient Public notice; at which days all persons liable to work ( that is
to say, from Sixteen years old and upward) by themselves or other sufficient
Persons in their stead, shall attend: And if any Person make default of
attending the said, work, by himself or other sufficient Person in his stead,
or with his Cart and Teem, as he shall be appointed, upon comlaint and proof
thereof before the next Justice of Peace (without reasonable Excuse made and
allowed by such Justice) he shall cause to be levied of every such offenders
goods, Penalty non attendance.
the Sum or Penalty of Two Shillings Six Pence for each days neglect of
Labor, besides the charge of making distress; and for default of their Cart,
and Teem Six Shillings Per. diem, with charge of distress as aforesaid.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That where a new Highway or common Road from Town to Town, or place to place
shall be wanting, Quarter Sessions to give order for laying out new High ways
or altering old ones.
and where old ways with more convenience may be turned or altered, upon
Application made to the Justices in Quarter Sessions, within the same County,
the said Court may appoint a Committee of two or three sufficient Freeholders
of the next Towns, who shall have most Occasion of said way, to inquire into
the necessity and convenience thereof, and to make their Report thereon; and
being judged to be of common necessity or convenience; the Justices of safe
Court shall order a Warrant to the Sheriff or his Deputy to Summon a Jury out
of the next Towns, to meet at some convenient day and place therein mentioned,
to view and lay out such Highways, or Roads, who shall have an Oath
Administered unto them by a Justice of Peace, to lay out such way according to
the best of their skill and judgment, with most convenience to the Public, and
least prejudice or damage to any particular Person; which having done, the
Sheriff or his Deputy is to make return thereof, at the next Court of Quarter
Sessions of the County where the same way is, as well under his own as the
hands of the Jurors, by whose Oath the same is laid out, to the end the same
may be allowed and Recorded, and after known for a Public Highway.

Provided that if any Person be thereby damaged in his propriety or improved
grounds, the Town shall make him reasonable satisfaction by the Estimation of
those that laid out the same: Damage in properties to be made good
And if such Person so damaged find himself agreived by any act or thing done
by the Jury, either in laying of the said way, or Estimate of his damages, he
may apply unto the Court of Quarter Sessions for Relief, before any allowance
or determination be made by them; who are hereby Empowered to hear and determine
the same; but if no sufficient cause appear for complaint, he shall pay all
charges arising thereby.

And be it further Enacted,

That the Select men of each Town respectively be and are hereby Empowered,
Select men's power they (...).
by themselves or others whom they shall appoint, to lay out or cause to be
laid out, particular and private ways for such Town only, as shall be thought
necessary; so as no damage be done to any particular Person in his Land or
Propriety without due recompense to be made by the Town, Recompense for damage.
as the Select men and the party interested may agree; or as shall be ordered
by the Justices in Qurter Sessions upon inquiry into the same by a Jury to be
Summoned for that purpose.

And it is further Enacted.

That if any Person or Persons shall Erect, or set up any Gates, Rayles, or
Fence upon or a cross any Highway* or Country Road, ^
or continue any such to the Annoyance and Encumbrance of the same (other than
such as shall be allowed by the Court of Quarter Sessions within the County) it
shall be deemed a common Nuisance, and it shall be lawful for any Person or
Persons to pull down and remove the same: And if any such Encumbrance be in any
particular or private way, allowed and settled by any Town, upon complaint
thereof made to the next Justice of the Peace, he shall appoint a Committee of
two or more discreet and indifferent Persons to view such Encumbrance and cause
the same to be removed: And if any Person be agrieved at the removal of any
such Gate, Bars or Fence, he shall be heard at the Quarter Sessions within the
same County, and upon just cause shown, shall be by them relieved.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if through neglect or not keeping in sufficienf repair any Highway,
Causey way, or Bridge, any Person happen to lose his life in passing any such
High way, Causey-way or Bridge, or lose a Limb, damage happening through defects
in ways or Bridges.
break a Bone, or receive any bruise or breach in any part of his Body, through
any defect in or want of neccessary repair of such Highway, Causey-way or
Bridge; the County or Town respectively to which of right it belongs to
maintain, and keep the same in repair; having been warned or notified of such
defect and need of repairs and amendment thereof, either in writing under the
hand of two witnesses, or by presentment thereof made at the Sessions of the
Peace; shall pay unto the Parents, Husband, Wife, Children or next of Kin to
any Person so losing his or her life the Sum of One Hundred Pounds; and for any
other harm as aforesaid double the damage sustained thereby; to be ordered and
set upon them by the Justices of the same County in Quarter Sessions; who are
hereby Empowered thereto; and to render like recompense for any carriage, Cart,
Horse or other beast harmed or lost proportionable to the damage suffered.

And if any Person chosen a Surveyer shall refuse to accept and take his Oath,
he shall forfeit Twenty Shillings, Penalty on Surveyers refusing to accept or
neglecting their duty.
and having accepted do neglect his duty shall forfeit for every neglect Five
Pounds; the said forfeitures respectively to be to the use of the Town, and to
be recovered by complaint before the next Justice of Peace, or at the Sessions
of the Peace in the same County.

No Person to be charged above a due proportion to the Highways either in
labor or Teems.

AN ACT, For Regulating of Fences, Cattle etc.
FOR the better preventing of damage in Corn fields, and other improved, and
common Lands, by Horses, Neat Cattle, Sheep or Swine, going at large.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

Fence viewers to be chosen and sworn
That in every Town and peculiar within this Province, there be Annually chosen
by the Inhabitants thereof (at the time of their Meeting to choose Select men
and other Town Officers) two or more meet Persons to be viewers of Fences; who
shall be Sworn before a Justice of Peace, to the faithful discharge of their
Office, in the particulars committed to their care by this Act: As also two or
more Persons for Hawards, or Field-drivers. Hawards or field-drivers.
And that all Fences of four foot high, being of Five Rayles, or four that are
Equivolent, Boards, Stone-wall, Brooks, Rivers, Ponds or Cricks equivalent
thereto, in the judgment of the Fence viewers shall be accounted sufficient
Fences: Fences of 4 foot high to be accounted sufficient.
And all Fences in common fields and other grounds under improvement that shall
be judged insufficient by the Fence viewers, and notice thereof given to the
party that of right ought to maintain the same, he shall sufficiently repair
and amend all defects therein within the space of Six days next after such
notice given him; Penalty for not repairing insufficient Fence.
and in case of his neglect, the Fence viewers are hereby empowered and ordered
forthwith to cause such defective Fence or Fences to be sufficiently made up
and repaired; and the Person or Persons to whom it belongs to make good such
Fence, shall pay double the cost and charge expended for doing of the same. And
in case of refusal or neglect to make payment as aforesaid, how to be recovered.
by the space of one Month next after an account presented and demand thereof
made, such Fence viewers may recover the same by Action, Plaint or Information,
to be brought before any Justice of the Peace within the same County, if the
Sum exceed not Forty Shillings; but if it be above that Sum than in the
Interior Court of common Pleas. None but proprietors and freeholders to have
any Horse run to feed on the common.


And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no Persons other than Proprietors and Freeholders in any Town or
peculiar, shall let any Horse or Horse-kind run to feed upon any common Land
belonging to such Town or peculiar, and every such Proprietor and Freeholder
may keep one Horse-beast upon the Common and no more, except such Proprietors
and Freeholders every of whom have a ratable Estate within such Town or
peculiar, of the value of Fifty Pounds, they to have the privilege of two and
no more.

And the owners of all Horse-kind going upon the Common are required to cause
the same to be entered with the Town Clerk, Horses going on the common to be
Entered with the Town Clerk.
who is to keep a Book for that purpose, and therein set down as well the
natural as Artificial marks, and for every such Horse or Horse-kind, shall pay
a Fee of three pence to the Clerk for his entry: Such entry to be made at or
before the Tenth day of April next, and so Annually, on pain that every Person
neglecting so to do shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings for each
default. And if any Freeholder or proprietor shall desire to put more Horses
upon the Common than is herein before allowed, he shall first repair to the
Town Clerk, and make entry of the Number and Marks thereof as aforesaid, and
pay the Fee as aforesaid for every such entry, as also the Sum of Five
Shillings Per head Per. Annum, to the use of the Propietors of such Commons on
pain of forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings Per. head for such neglect.

And every Town and peculiar within this Province are required to choose
Annually two meet Persons to see to the due observance of this Act relating to
Horses, and to prosecute the breakers thereof: Persons to be annually chosen to
see to the observance of this Act.
And if any Person so chosen shall refuse to serve, or neglect his duty in any
of the particulars herein committed to his care he shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Twenty Shillings to the use of such Town.

And the Town Clerk of each Town respectively shall once in the year give an
Account and pay into the Select man of the Town, so much as he shall receive by
virtue of this Act for any Horse-kind going upon the Common. Town Clerk to
account annually.


All penalties and forfeitures arising for breach of this Act relating to
Horses going upon the Common, shall be one Moiety thereof unto the use of the
Persons to be appointed to see to the observance of this Act, Penalties and
forfeitures how to be disposed.
and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same,
before any Justice of the Peace within the County.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Swine going at large on the Commons, shall be sufficiently Yoked from
the first of April to the fifteenth of October yearly; and Ringed in the Nose
all the year. Swine to be yoked and ringed.
And if any Swine be found unyoked or unringed, their owners shall be liable to
pay Six Pence Per. head; and in found damage feasant being unyoked or unringed
to pay Twelve pence Per. over and above double damages to the party injured.
And the Haward or Field driver or any other Person may take up and impound such
Swine.

And that there be paid unto the Haward or Field driver One Shilling Per. head
for all Neat Cattle or Horses, Fee for impounding.
and Three pence Per. head for all Sheep and Swine by him impounded.

And to the Pound keeper Two pence Per. head for all Neat Cattle or Horses, and
one penny per. head for all Sheep or Swine, for taking in and letting out, to
be paid by the owners of such Creatures.

And that for every Sheep in every Town going on the commons without being
under the hands of a Shepard, Penalty for Sheep going on the common without a
keeper.
from the first of May to the last of October in every year; the owners or
keeper of the said Sheep shall pay the Sum of three pence for every Sheep at
any time so found running on the Common, not under the hand of a Shepard or
keeper, betwixt the first of May and last of October yearly.

AN ACT For Enabling the Treasurer to call in the Arrears of Public Rates, and
discharging of Public Debts.
WHEREAS by an Act made by this Court in the year One thousand six hundred
ninety two; in the first Sessions Entitled, An Act for the Enforcing,
Collecting and paying in the Arrears of Public Assessments etc. The Constables
and Collectors were thereby Enabled to collect said Assessements, and ordered
to Account with and make payments unto the respective Treasurers; and for
defect to be distrained as by said Act does more fully appear^ Notwithstanding
which many Constables and Collectors have neglected to Account with and pay to
the respective Treasurers, as by said Act they were enjoyed; yet for such their
neglect have not been proceeded with as said Law has directed: By reason
whereof great Sums remain uncollected and many Persons unpaid their just dues.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That all Constables or Collectors that have had any Tax or Public Assessment
committed to them to Collect in any Town, Village, or Precinct, within the late
Colonies of the Massachusetts or Plymouth, since the first of October,
Constables or Collectors to account for or pay in the Arrears.
One thousand six hundred eighty nine, until the Arrival of His Excellency the
Governor; do forthwith Account with and pay to the Treasurer of the Province
so much of such Taxes or Assessments as is in their hands or that they have not
already paid or orderly discharged themselves of; which if they shall neglect
or refuse to do; the Treasurer is hereby empowered and required to have out
Warrants for so much as they have not paid or discharged themselves of as
aforesaid, directed unto the Sheriff of the County where any such defective
Constable or Collector dwells, Upon neglect (...).
requiring him to levv all such Arrears by distress and sale of such Constable
or Collectors Estate, real or personal, returning the over plus (if any be) and
if no Estate can be found, or not sufficient to discharge the same; then to
commit him or them unto the Goal of the County, there to remain until he or
they have paid and satisfied such Arrears with charges; except any Constable or
Collector, as the Treasurer, by order of the Governor and Council, shall be
directed to forbear; either for the whole, or part, in order to his procuring
an abatement: as this Act has hereafter provided.

And the Treasurer is hereby Ordered out of the Arrears of the whole
Assessments, whether on the late Colonies of the Massachusetts or Plymouth;
Treasurer ordered to make payment of Debts
or that have been laid on the Province, to pay all such Debts due from the
said Colonies respectively or from the Province as have been allowed by the
former Governments, or by the Governor and Council, or that have been or shall
be allowed by such Committees as have or shall be appointed for such end.

And where any Constables or Collectors in any Town are dead, and have not
adjusted the Accounts of the Assessments committed unto them respectively; The
Executer or Administrator of any deceased Constable etc liable in case
the Treasurer is hereby empowered to bring his suit against the Executor or
Administrator of such deceased Constable or Collector for the same, or what
shall appear to be due.

And forasmuch as diverse Constables have informed that thy have been disabled
from Collecting the Rates committed to them to Collect before His Excellency
the Governors Arrival, or the greatest part of them, by reason of the breaking
up of some Towns in whole or in part, or by the Death or removal of diverse
Persons, or by the Select men's Rating some Persons that are brought into
Extreme Poverty by reason of the War, and others that never were able to pay.

Be it therefore Ordered and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all such Towns, Constables or Collectors that desire or expect any ease
or abatement for or by reason of any of the abovenamed particulars, or have
any other just cause to allege for the same, Committee to receive Allegations
or pleas for Abatement.
do by themselves or by some meet Person in their behalf appear at Boston at or
before the Twenty fifth day of March next before. John Phillips and Peter
Sergeant Esqs. Captain Nathaniel Byfield, Major Penn Townsend and Mr. Edward
Homfield of any four them* who are hereby appointed and empowered to be a
Committee for the receiving and hearing of the Allegations, ^l^as or proofs as
may be offered for any such allowance or abatement to be made as aforesaid, and
to report the same unto this Court at their next Session; that so they may give
order therein as to them shall appear just and reasonable: And for so much as
shall not be by said Court allowed and abated, the Treasurer shall forthwith
Issue out his Warrants as aforesaid, to levy the same by distress and sale of
the Estate of such Constables or Collectors as were before indulged and forborne.

Also it having been made to appear that several Warrants Issued out by the
late Treasurer of the Province for making or Collecting of the Tax since His
Excellency the Governors Arrival, have miscarried. Treasurer to issue out new
warrants where the former have miscarried.


Be it therefore Enacted,

That the Treasurer forthwith Issue out new Warrants to such Towns and Places
for such Sum or Sums the other were sent out for; which all Select men are
forthwith to Assess, and Constables or Collectors to Collect by such Rules and
under such penalties as by the Law relating to said Tax were made and enjoined.

And whereas the Treasurer has been Ordered to make payment of what remains
due to several Persons that lent their Bills of Credit to this Province in or
about June or July, One thousand six hundred ninety two; many whereof have been
or may be longer unpaid then the time they were promised payment in.

Be it therefore Enacted,

Allowance to such as lent their Bills.
That such as are not already paid (discounting what they owe to the Province)
shall be allowed for what is due to them by the Treasurer, after the rate of
Six Per. Cent. Per. Annum, for the value lent; from the Expiration of the time
they lent the same for, until they be paid, or accept of the Treasurers order
for payment of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Constables or Collector shall duly pay and answer all Orders coming
from the Treasurer out of the Public Moneys in their hands, Penalty on
Constables or Collectors that exact or receive any Fee to hasten payment.
which they shall have Collected for any Public Tax or Assessment committed or
hereafter to be committed unto them to collect and that without delay. And if
any Constable or Collector shall require, exact, receive, or take any Fee,
Reward, Allowance or Abatement directly or indirectly from any Person or
Persons to hasten or forward his or their payment; and be thereof convicted,
upon complaint or Information brought before the Sessions of the Peace within
the same County; such Constable or Collector shall forfeit and pay the Sum of
Five Pounds over and above the Sum so taken; one half thereof unto Their
Majesty's toward the support of the Government, and the other half to him or
them that shall inform and prosecute for the same.

AN ACT For Bristol Fair.
WHEREAS the General Court of the late Colony of New Plymouth did in the year
of Our Lord, One thousand six hundred and eighty; Grant unto the Inbabitants of
the Town of Bristol within said Colony, that they should have Liberty of
keeping two Fairs in said Town of Bristol Annually for ever, one upon the third
Wednesday and Thursday in May, and the other upon the third Wednesday and
Thursday in November; And it being found by Experience that two days is not
sufficient for the Transacting the business of said Fair; and that so late in
November is inconvenient both with respect to Persons coming, it being many
times very bad Weather, and the chief time for Selling fat Cattle being sooner.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives
Convened in Great and General Court, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
of the same,

That from hence forth the said Fair shall be kept and held in Bristol
aforesaid within this Province, upon the third Wednesday, Times for holding
Bristol Fair.
Thursday and Friday in May, and on the third Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in
October Annually for ever, and at no other time; any Law custom or usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT, For Regulation of Seamen.
WHEREAS great loss and damage is frequently Occasioned Trade and Navigation by
Seamen deserting their Employ or Voyage they are entered upon, or being taken
off from the same by Arrest and restreint for Debt, or pretense thereof.

For Remedy whereof.

It is Declared and Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That if any Innkeeper, Victualler, Seller of Wine or strong Liquors,
Shopkeeper or any other Person whatsoever, shall trust or give Credit to any
Mariner or Seaman belonging to any Ship or other Vessel, No Mariner or Seaman
to be arrested for any Debt made whilst he belongs to a Ship etc.
without the knowledge and allowance of the Master or Commander thereof; no
Process or Attachment for any Debt so contracted without knowledge and
allowance as aforesaid, shall be granted against or served upon such Mariner or
Seaman, until he shall have performed the Voyage he is then entered upon, and be
discharged of the same: And every Process granted contrary hereunto, and
serving thereof, shall be deemed and adjudged utterly void in Law: And any
Justice of the Peace within the same County before whom it shall be made
appear, that any Mariner or Seaman belonging to any Ship or Vessel is committed
or restrained upon Process granted for any Debt or pretention of Debt made
whilst such Mariner or Seaman* was engaged and actually entered and in pay on
any Voyage, shall forthwith order his release.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if the Master or Commander of any Ship or other Vessel shall Ship any
Seaman, Penalty on Masters shiping Seamen first entertained on board another
Ship etc
knowing him to be first entertained and Shipped on board another Ship or Vessel;
Or after notice thereof given him shall not forthwith dismiss him; every such
Master or Commander so offending, being thereof convicted, shall forfeit and
pay the Sum of Five Pounds, one Moiety thereof to the use of the Poor of the
Town where the offense was committed, and the other Moiety to him or them that
shall inform and sue for the same by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any
Court of Record; and such Seaman so Shiping himself shall forfeit and pay the
value of one Months wages that he shall so agree for: to be recovered employed
and disposed of in manner as aforesaid. Seamens Penalty.


And further it (...) Enacted,

Seamen deserting their service to be imprisoned.
That if any Mariner or Seaman having Shipped himself on board any Ship or other
Vessel to proceed in any Voyage, and under pay (the same being made appear by
his hand set to the Masters Book or other writing of such Agreement) shall
neglect his attendance and duty on board, and absent himself from his said
Service, upon complaint thereof made to any Justice of the Peace within the
same County, such Justice is hereby empowered to convent such Mariner or Seaman
before him, and upon conviction of his so absenting himself as aforesaid, to
commit him to Prison, that so he may be secured and forthcoming to proceed on
the Voyage he has so agreed to, and to be delivered by order of the Justice
that committed him, or some other Justice in the same County.

An Addition To the ACT for Establishing of Judicatories and Courts of Justice
within this Province.
WHEREAS by said Act amongst other things therein contained, It is Enacted,
That it shall be in the Liberty of the party cast in any of the Inferior
Courts to appeal from the Verdict and Judgment given therein, unto the next
Superior Court within or for the same County, the case there to be tried to a
final Issue, or by a new Process once and no more to review the said case in
the same Court where it was first tried, and within the space of ten days
after Judgment given upon such Trial by review; the party agrieved may bring
his Writ of Error for a Trial of the said case at the next Superior Court to
be held within or for the same Country, to receive a final Issue and
determination; which said Clause referring to Reviews and Writs of Error, does
only Extend to the Courts Established by said Act; and no Provision is thereby
made for any Trials heretofore had in the County Courts in the late distinct
Colonies now united within this Province, which are now dissolved.

And whereas for want of due Provision and Remedy therein, great damage and
Injury may Occur to some of Their Majesty's good Subjects within this
Province^: For Redress whereof; and that no defect or want of Justice may in
any manner happen or be.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives Convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That where any Trial, Judgment, Sentence or Decree has been had given or made
in any of the County Courts within the late Colonies of the Massachusetts or
Plymouth, or Province of Main, Review of cases tried in the County Courts
within the late Colonies.
of what nature kind or Quality soever, the same have been there Tried had
given or made, since the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred eighty and
Six; and no Review or Appeal thereupon heretofore had and prosecuted: It shall
and may be in the Liberty of either party (Plantiff or Defendant) agrieved,
within the space of Twelve Months next after the date of this present Act, and
not afterward, to bring his or their Action of Review to the Inferior Court
of Common Pleas to be held for the same County where the Action was first
Tried; and after Judgment or Sentence given upon such Trial by review, the
party agrieved may Appeal therefrom unto the next Superior Court to be held
within or for the same County, Appeal
and the case there to receive a final Issue and determination, any Law usage
or custom to the contrary notwithstanding; Regard being had in the Trial of the
merit of any such case, to the Laws then in force within the said Colonies
respectively.

And forasmuch as the days and times appointed by the afore-recited Act for
the holding of the Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace and Inferior Court
o^ Pleas, within the County of Suffolk, do fall inconveniently to be attended,
in respect of other Public Occasions and Concernments of the Government.

Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Court of Quarter Sessions and Inferior Court for Suffolk to be held in the
Month's of July October January and April.
That from and after the end of the Month of March next, the same be altered;
And that the said Court of Quarter Sessions and Inferior Court of Common Pleas
for the said County of Suffolk, be thence-forward held and kept at Boston on
the first Tuesday in the Month of July, October, January and April yearly for
ever, any Law usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there be a Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Goal delivery, held and kept at Kettery within the County of York (late the
Province of Main) upon Wednesday, the Week before the sitting of said Court at
Ipswich, within the County of Essex; which is stated by Law to be held upon the
Second Tuesday of May yearly. Superior Court of Judicature etc. to sit at
Ketters.

and at Springfield.




And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there be a Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Goal delivery, held and kept at Springfield within the County of Hampshire,
upon the last Tuesday of June yearly.

AN ACT For a new Establishment and Regulation of the Chancery.
WHEREAS by an Act made and passed by this Court in the Year, One thousand six
hundred ninety two, Entitled, An Act for the Establishing of Judicatories and
Courts of Justice within this Province, amongst other things therein contained,
It is Enacted, That there be a high Court of Chancery within this Province to
be held and kept by the Governor or such other as he shall appoint to be
Chancellor Assisted with Eight or more of the Council, at such times and places
as the Governor or Chancellor for the time being shall from time to time
appoint, with Power and Authority to hear and determine all matters of Equity
etc. as in and by the said Act does appear. Which Court so constituted is by
Experience found not agreeable with the Circumstances of this Province in
diverse respects, not then so well considered or foreseen.

Be it therefore Declared and Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council
and Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same,

That the afore-recited Section or Paragraph in said Act and every Clause
thereof so far as concerns or any wise relates unto the Constitution of said
Court of Chancery be and hereby is repealed and made null and void to all
intents and purposes as if the same had never been. Repeal


And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there be a high Court of Chancery within this Province which shall have
Power and Authority to hear and determine all matters of Equity of what nature,
kind, or Quality soever, Court of Chancery.
and all controversies, disputes and differences arising betwixt Co-Executors,
and other matters proper and cogniseable for said Court, not relievable at
common Law, and not otherwise; and to order Subpaenas, Attachments, and other
Process's; and to make Orders and Decrees Interlocutory and Definitive, and to
Award Execution thereon.

Which said Court of Chancery shall be holden and kept in Boston, by three
Commissioners (being Freeholders within the Province) whom the Governor with
the advice and consent of the Council shall nominate and appoint for that
Service, to be held by 3 Commissioners assisted with 5 masters in Chancery.
assisted with Five Masters in Chancery to be nominated and appointed as
aforesaid; unto whom References may be made, and Affidavits and Recogniscances
taken before them, and to make Reports, and to do what else is proper for
Masters in the Chancery.

And the said Commissioners and Masters in Chancery before they enter upon the
Execution of their Commission, Commissioners and masters in Chancery to be
Sworn.
shall be Sworn before the Governor and Council, to the faithful discharge of
their respective Offices and trust, and to do right to Poor and Rich according
to the Rules of Equity and good Conscience, in all matters that shall be
brought before them, and therein to proceed without delay.

And the said Court are hereby Empowered to nominate and appoint, a Register and
other Officers proper and necessary; to appoint their Officers.
and to Administer an Oath unto them, for the faithful discharge of their
respective Offices and Trust.

And all Writts and Processes issuing out of the said Court, shall be under the
Seal of the Province, Writts and Processes to be under the Province Seal etc.
Time for sitting of said Court.
and bear the Test of the said three Commissioners and returnable in said
Court, which shall be always open; and shall sit for the hearing and
determining of Cases four times in the year. Viz. On the Second Tuesday of the
Months of April, July, October, and January.

Provided nevertheless, That either party not resting satisfied in the
definitive Sentence, Judgment or Decree given in said Court, in any Personal
Action, and none other, where the matter in difference does exceed the value of
Three hundred Pounds Sterling, may appeal from such Sentence, Appeal.
Judgment or Decree, unto Their Majesty's in Council, such Appeal being made in
time and Security given according to the directions in Their Majesty's Royal
Charter in that behalf: As is Provided and Enacted for Judgments to be given as
aforesaid, in other of Their Majesty's Courts of Judicature within said
Province.

Provided also any thing herein to the contrary contained notwithstanding,
Justices in Courts of Judicature to Chancer forfeitures of bonds.

Saving for cases depending.


That the Justices in any other of Their Majesty's Courts of Judicature, where
the forfeiture of any Penal Bond is found, shall and hereby are Empowered to
Chancer the same unto the just Debt and Damages.

And all Process's already made shall be valid, and cases depending in
Chancery, shall be proceeded in and carried on to a final Issue.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Fees to be demanded and paid in said Court, shall be these following
and none other. Viz.

For d. s. d. Every Subpaena, Two Shillings six pence 00 02 06 Every
Injunction, Six Shillings 00 06 00 Every Commission, Ten Shillings 00 10 00
Every Attachment, There Shillings 00 03 00 Attachment with Proclamation, Six
Shillings 00 06 00 Commission of Rebellion, Ten Shillings 00 10 00 Fees.
Sequestration or Writ of Error, Ten Shillings 00 10 00 Supersedeas, Six
Shillings 00 06 00 Every Decree, Six Shillings 00 06 00 Copies of Bills,
Answers, or other pleadings according to the Fees already stated, Twelve Pence
Per. Page, of the number of lines and words therein set down. Filing Bills,
Answers, Replications, Rejoinders, and Surrejoinders, each, Three Shillings 00
03 00 Every Order or Rule of Court in any case, One Shilling 00 01 00 Every
Oath Administered, One Shilling. 00 01 00

AN ACT, For a present supply of the Treasury.
WHEREAS by report of the Treasurer of the Province, It has been made appear to
this Court, that there is wanting a present supply of Money for payment for
Provisions already taken up, and procuring further Stores thereof, and
Clothing (...) of the Soldiers employed in Their Majesty's Service, and
supp^^^ of the (...) for defense of Their Subjects and Interests within this
Province, and for answering of the Public Debts, and other payments allowed by
this Court, and by His Excellency the Governor and Council. And whereas there
is need of building and fitting of a small Vessel mounted with Ten Guns, and a
suitable number of Oars, to Cruise on this Coast, for the better securing of
Trade and Navigation.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives. Convened in
General Court, and by the Authority of the same,

That for the end aforesaid and no other, a certain number of the Bills of
Public Credit of the late Colony of the Massachusetts, to the Sum of Fifteen
Hundred Pounds and no more, be by the present Treasurer issued and paid out of
the Treasury, according to the Orders of the Governor and Council; Five
hundred Pounds thereof forthwith to be improved for the building and fitting of
such a Vessel as is aforesaid, as the Governor and Council shall give
Directions: which number of Bills to the Sum of Fifteen hundred Pounds as
aforesaid, shall be signed by the Treasurer of the Province, at their going
out, in this manner: James Tailor, Treasurer of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay: And shall pass out of and be returned into the Treasury
again at the Sum or Value therein expressed and set down, and no more: The
Treasurer to keep an exact Account of the number and Sum of each Bill which he
shall so sign and deliver out: And the Province shall be and hereby is engaged
to anwer and make good the Value or Sum of all such Bills so signed and given
out as shall be in the hands of particular Persons, in current Silver Money of
this Province.

AN ACT, To prevent default of appearance of Representatives to Serve in the
General Assembly.
WHEREAS there has been a Neglect in some Sheriffs, in Observance of Their
Majesty's Writ to them directed, for the Convening and holding of a great and
General Court or Assembly, timely to issue forth their Precepts unto the
several Towns within their Bailiwick or Precinct, for the choosing of
Representatives to serve in the great and General Court or Assembly, and have
also not taken due care to have Returns of their said Precepts. And forasmuch
as many Persons Elected for Representatives, and having Summons, are not
careful to give their attendance accordingly, in due time, whereby the Public
Affairs for Their Majesty's Service are prejudiced.

For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, It is Ordered and Enacted,

That every Sheriff upon Receipt of Their Majesty's Writ for the Convening and
holding of a great and General Court or Assembly, shall forthwith make out his
Precepts under his Seal in form as by Law is directed, Sheriffs to make out
their Precepts in 7 days after Receipt (...) Majesty's Writ.
unto the Select men of the several Towns within his County, and cause the same
to be safely conveyed and delivered unto one or more of such Select men within
the space of Seven days at furthest next after his Receipt of such Writ as
aforesaid; And shall likewise take effectual care for having his Precepts
returned to him again from the said Towns respectively, with what shall be done
pursuant thereto, by the day therein prefixed, and cause the same to be brought
in to the Secretaries Office as by Writ he is Commanded. Select men to (...)
the (...) Assembly for (...) of Representatives.


And the Select men of each Town upon Receipt of the Sheriffs Precept, shall
cause the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of said Town duly qualified as in
the said Precept is mentioned, to be Assembled and meet at such time and place
as the Select men or the major part of them shall appoint, to Elect and depute
one or more Representatives for such Town as by Law they may, and shall cause
the Person or Persons so Elected and deputed by the major part of the Electors
present at such meeting, to be timely notified and Summoned by one or more of
the Constables of said Town, to attend Their Majesty's Service in the great and
General Court or Assembly, upon the day and at the time and place appointed for
holding of the same: And the Select men or the major part of them shall make
Return of such Election under their hands upon the said Precept, or annexed
thereto, in manner and form as by Law is Prescribed; and cause the same to be
delivered unto the Sheriff of the County at or before the day therein perfixed
for Return of the same; Penalty on Sheriff's for neglect of duty.
on pain that every Sheriff neglecting his duty in any of the particulars
before mentioned, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Fifty Pounds.

And every Select man or Constable in any Town neglecting his duty in any of
the Particulars before mentioned, Penalty on Select men and Constables
shall incur the pain and forfeiture of Five Pounds.

And every Sheriff shall be allowed for his trouble and charge in sending out
his Precepts, Forty Shillings, Sheriffs allowance.
to be paid out of the County Treasury.

And the Select men to be paid by the Town for the charge of returning their
Precept, for which shall be paid three pence a Mile. Select men's allowance.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

(...) Person Elected to Serve a Representative for any Town in (...) and
General Court or Assembly, Penalty for Representatives non attendance the first
day of the Court.
and being Summoned thereto, shall give his attendance at the said Court on the
first day appointed for the Courts sitting (without reasonable and just Excuse
for his absence, being made and allowed of by the house of Representatives) on
pain of forfeiting the Sum of Forty Shillings: Unless such Person being
present at the Election, shall declare unto the Assembly his non acceptance of
the Service, or upon notice thereof given him, shall forthwith signify his non
acceptance unto the Select men by writing under his hand: In which case the
Select men shall call the Town together again to Elect a new, that so they may
Enjoy their privilege.

That not any Town in this Province shall choose any Representative,
Representatives to be Freeholders and Resident.
unless such be a Freeholder and Resident in that Town or Towns, such are
chosen to Represent.

And if any Person not duly qualified according to Law, shall presume to Vote
in the choice of Representatives one or more for any Town; or shall put in more
than one Vote for any one Person in such choice, being thereof convicted,
Penalty on persons Voting, being not qualified.
he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds; one Moiety thereof unto Their
Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government, and the other Moiety
to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same.

All Persons shall put in their Votes unfolded to the Select men or Constables
appointed to receive the same.

And that where any Person offering to give in his Votes for Representatives in
any Town, shall be questioned by the Select men of the said Town as to his
being capable by Charter to Vote; Voters questioned to make Oath.
the said Person or Persons giving his or their Oath that they are Bona fide,
worth Forty Pounds Sterling, or an Estate of Freehold to the value of Forty
Shillings Per. Annum, before a Justice of the Peace, or in the absence of a
Justice of the Peace, before the Town Clerk, who is hereby empowered to
Administer the same, he or they shall be accounted capable of Voting and put in
his or their Votes accordingly.

All Fines and Forfeitures arising for breach of this Act or any branch
thereof, and not otherwise therein before disposed of, shall be unto Their
Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government; Fines and forfeitures
how to be disposed.
and be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of Their
Majesty's Courts of Record.

FINIS.

