ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston the Twenty-ninth Day of May, 1695. and continued by several
Adjournments until Wednesday the Twentieth of November following.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Septimo.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green and John Allen, Printers to the Governor
and Council. 1695.

Anno Regni GUILIELMI Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Septimo. An Act, That all Persons not being Freeholders or Settled
Inhabitants, Commencing Suit, shall give Security before Process be granted.
WHEREAS for the more due and equal Administering of Justice in Civil Causes,
the Judgment given upon the first Trial is not final, the Law allowing the
Party agrieved an Appeal therefrom, or a Review of the same cause. But
forasmuch as Strangers and others not Resident within the Province, do many
times by themselves or Attorneys Commence Suits against Freeholders or Settled
Inhabitants within the same, and Recover Judgment and Satisfaction thereon, and
Remove themselves, or Conceal and Convey away the Moneys so received; whereby
the adverse Party is prevented of Serving Process to bring the cause to another
Trial by Review, and by means thereof way suffer great wrong. To the intent
therefore that all His Majesty's Subjects may receive and enjoy the benefit of
the Remedy provided by Law as abovesaid.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every person, not being a Freeholder or Settled Inhabitant, having dwelt
within the Province by the space of three years before, intending by himself or
Attorney to Commence Suit against any person or persons within this Province,
before P^ocess be granted, shall by himself or Attorney enter into Bond,
Security to be given before Process granted.
with two sufficient Sureties (being Freeholders, or Settled Inhabitants as
aforesaid) unto the Party against whom Process is demanded, in the Clerks
Office of the Court, where the Suit is to be brought, in double the Sum to be
Sued for; with condition to answer and satisfy the Defendant his Costs arising
by such Suit, in case the Plantiff do not Recover against him: And that if
Judgment be rendered for the Plantiff, and the Defendant shall Review the same
within the space of eighteen months next following, and not afterward, that he
shall well and truly pay and satisfy unto the Party bringing such Action of
Review, all such Sum and Sums of Money as he shall recover thereupon, with the
Costs arising thereby.

And all Clerks of Courts are hereby Ordered and Required to take such Bond,
Clerks of Courts to take Security
before they make out Process in the name of, or to any Stranger, or other
person not being a Freeholder or Settled Inhabitant as aforesaid, or to the
Attorney of any such, and safely to keep the same, for the use and benefit of
the Party to whom it shall be made; For which, such Clerk shall demand the Fee
of Two Shillings and no more, to be paid by him at whose Suit the Process is
granted, and to be again allowed him in his Costs if he recover. And if it
happen Process to be made out to any Stranger or other Person not being a
Freeholder or Settled Inhabitant as aforesaid, or his Attorney, without taking
such Bond and Security, and the same be pleaded at the time of Trial before
Issue joined (and the Bond or a Certificate thereof from the Clerk cannot be
produced or shown forth) it shall be a good Plea for abatement of the Writ,
Bond not given the Process to abate.
and be accordingly allowed of by the Judges, any Law, Usage, or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Attorney Commencing and Prosecuting any Suit in the name of any
Stranger or other Person not Residing within the Province, shall be held and
reputed in Law as the Principal in such Suit, and be liable to be Served with
Process against his Estate or Person to a Review of any such Suit as the
Principal himself might be, Attourneys to Strangers, liable in their own
persons.
if present in his own person: Provided such Action of Review be brought and
commenced within Eighteen Months next following the time of the first Trial, or
Trial upon an Appeal as aforesaid, and not afterward.

And in all cases of like nature now depending, before Execution be granted,
Security as aforesaid shall be given to respond and satisfy such Sum and Sums
of Money that shall be Recovered upon a Review of any such Action, Cases
depending alike directed.
with the Costs arising thereon; and the Attorney that Commenced and
Prosecuted any such Case, shall be liable as aforesaid to be Served with
Process in his own Estate or Person to such Action of Review.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Stranger or his Attorney, after Suit Commenced, or Judgment given
as aforesaid, shall withdraw himself or keep out of the way, so as he cannot be
Served with a Writ within the time before limited to Review the Cause: It shall
be sufficient in Law to bring a Review of such Judgment at any time within
Eighteen Months next after rendering of the same, upon Summons left at the House
where such Stranger or Attorney Commenceing Suit in his name, had his usual
abode within the Province, fourteen days before the Sitting of the Court: Proof
of such Summons so left, being made upon Oath before the Court.

An Act, For the better discovery and more Effectual Suppressing of Unlicensed
Houses.
FORASMUCH as diverse Ill disposed and Indigent Persons, the Pains and Penalties
in the Laws already made not regarding, are so hardy as to presume to Sell and
Retail Strong Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Wine, Rhum, or other Strong Liquors or
mixed Drinks, and to keep common Tippling Houses, therein Harboring and
Entertaining Apprentices, Indians, Negroes, and other idle and dissolute
Persons, tending to the ruin and impoverishment of Families, and to all Impiety
and Debaucheries; And if Detected and Convicted of any such Offense, are unable
to satisfy the Fine imposed by Law for the same: And cannot be punished by
Imprisonment without wrong to their Families.

For Remedy whereof, and the more effectual Deterring and Suppressing of such
Evil Practices.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That when and so often as any person being duly Convicted of keeping a common
Tippling House, or Selling Strong Beer, Ale, Persons unable to pay the Fine to
be Whip't
Cider, Perry, Wine, Rhum, or other Strong Liquors or mixed Drink by Retail,
without License first orderly had and obtained for the same, shall be unable to
answer and satisfy the Fine imposed by Law for such Transgression, together
with the Charge of Prosecution; or that shall not pay such Fine and Charges
(and likewise give Bond for the good Behavior, if it be a second Conviction)
within the space of twenty four hours next after Sentence declared in that
respect: It shall and may be lawful to and for two Justices of the Peace, or
the Court before whom the Conviction shall be, to Order such Offender to be
openly Whipped with so many Stripes as in their Discretion shall be thought fit,
not less than Ten, nor exceeding Fifteen for one Offense; And to Restrain the
Offender in Prison, until the Fine and Charges as aforesaid are paid, or the
Order for Corporal Punishment be Executed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Grand-jurors, Constable,
Tithing men, and the Officers employed in and about the Excise, Officers power
to seiz drink found in unlicensed houses.
Ex Officio to enter into the House and Dependencies thereof, of any such
person as aforesaid, suspected of Selling Strong Drink without License, having
once been Convicted thereof, and taking with them such assistance as they shall
think needful, to make search for Strong Drink, and finding any quantity of any
kind of the Drinks herein before mentioned, to seiz and secure the same, so as
it be within the space of one year next after such Conviction, and to Inform
thereof at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden within the same
County, or unto two Justices of the Peace ( Quorum Unus) within the same; And
if the quantity of Drink so seized shall be judged by such Court or Justices to
be more than for the necessary use of the Family, and what their condition may
reasonably allow them to Expend, or otherwise to have in their Custody: It
shall and may be lawful to and for such Court or Justices to declare all such
Drink to be Forfeited; one Moiety thereof unto the Party that Seized and
Informed of the same, and the other Moiety to the Select-men or Overseers of
the Poor of the Town where it was Seized, to the use of the Poor there, and to
Order the Disposal thereof accordingly.

Provided nevertheless, That any person agrieved at the sentence of any two
Justices for either of the Offenses beforementioned may Appeal therefrom unto
the next General Sessions of the Peace within the same County; Appeal from the
Sentence of two Justices.
Provided such Appeal be claimed in due time, and Security given in manner as
the Law in such cases directs.

An Act, For the further Continuance of several Acts, relating to the
Prosecution of the War.
Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled and by the Authority of the same.

That the Act Entitled, An Act, For the Continuation of several Acts therein
mentioned that are near Expiring; Prosecution of the Indian Enemy etc.
made and passed at the Session of this present General Assembly, begun and
held at Boston the Twenty ninth Day of May, last past: namely, An Act, For the
Prosecution of the Indian Enemy and Rebels, and Preserving such as are Friends,
with the several Proviso's and Additions thereto in the said Act of
Continuation Expressed, shall be, and hereby are revived and further continued
to be, remain and abide in full force unto the end of the first Session of the
next General Assembly, Repeal of the Saving in Hampshire.
to be begun and held on the last Wednesday of May, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Six, and no longer. Provided nevertheless, That the Saving in the said
Act for Prosecution of the Indian Enemy, etc. referring to the County of
Hampshire shall be, Indians found within 5 miles on the East side, or 20 miles
on the West side (...)
and hereby is Repealed.

And it is further Enacted.

That all Indians who shall be found within five mil^^ of Connecticut River on
the Easterly side thereof (...) twenty miles on the Westerly side of the same,
shall be deemed and accounted to be Enemies, and treated as such, and the same
Reward and Allowance shall be made and given to any of His Majesty's Subjects
that shall kill, or take and bring in Prisoners any Indian or Indians found
within the said Limits as by the said Act, and the Act for Continuation thereof
is ordered and directed for any that shall be killed or taken within other
parts of this Province, during the continuance of said Acts.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the other Act mentioned in the said Act of Continuation, Assistance to be
given to the Province of Hampshire.
namely, The Act Entitled, An Act, For the giving Succors and Assistance to
the Neighboring Provinces and Colonies against His Majesty's Enemies; to
extend only unto Succors and Assistance for the Province of New Hampshire as
need may require; and the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Council
shall direct and order: Be and hereby is Revived and further Continued to be,
remain and abide in full force unto the end of the first Session of the next
General Assembly to be begun and held on the last Wednesday in May, One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety six, and no longer.

An Act, For taking of Affidavits out of Court.
FORASMUCH as it is often necessary, That Witnesses in Civil Causes be Sworn
out of Court, when by reason of their going to Sea, living more than Thirty
Miles distant from the place where the Cause is to be Tried, Age, Sickness, or
other Bodily Infirmity, they are rendered incapable of Travail, and appearing in
Person at the Court. To the intent therefore that all Witnesses may
indifferently testify their certain knowledge, and the whole truth in the Cause
they are to speak unto.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That for either of the Reasons before mentioned, and not otherwise, every
Justice of the Peace, Adverse party to have notification.
or others lawfully Commissionated and Empowered thereto, by two or more of the
Justices of the Superior or Inferior Court respectively may take Affidavits
out of Court, so as a Notification with reasonable time be first made out and
delivered to the adverse Party (if within twenty miles of the place) or left at
the place of his Dwelling or usual Abode, to be present at the time of taking
such Affidavit, if he think fit: and every such Witness shall be carefully
Examined and Cautioned to testify the whole truth; and being Sworn, No person
interested or the Attorney to write Affidavits.
the Justice shall attest the same, with the day, month and year of the Caption
thereof, and that the adverse party was present (if so) or that a Notification
was sent him, and shall Seal up the Testimony, and deliver it to the Party (if
desired) at whose Request it was taken: And no Person Interested shall write or
draw up the Testimony of any Witness in such Cause, nor any Attorney in his
Clients Cause; And if it manifestly appear any Testimony to be Written or Drawn
up by any Interested, or the Attorney in the Cause, Affidavits to be returned
to the Court Sealed up
or be returned from any Justice of the Peace by other hand than his own, into
the Court where the same is to be used, unsealed, or the Seal having been
broken up, all such Testimonies shall be rejected by the Court, and be utterly
void, and of no Effect in Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Justices to grant Summons for Witnesses.
That every Justice of the Peace shall be, and hereby is Empowered, upon Request
to him made, to Grant Summons for the Appearance of any Witness before him in
any Civil or Criminal Cause, where such Witness is Bound to Sea before the time
of Trial, and to take his Deposition in such Cause, the adverse Party being
present, or Notification sent him as aforesaid.

Witnesses to Bonds and other writings may be Sworn without notification.
Provided nevertheless, That Witnesses to Bonds, Specialties, Letters of
Attorney, and other Instruments, in Writing under the Hand of the Party
Executing the same, or to Accounts or Testimonies relating to Persons out of
this Government, or to be sent beyond Sea, may be Sworn without such
Notification as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Affidavits in perpetuam rei memoriam to be Sworn in Court or before 2 Justices
That all Affidavits relating to the Possession of any Houses or Lands, or any
other matter, in perpetuam rei memoriam, shall be made and taken before some
Court of Record, or two or more Justices of the Peace, Quroum Unus.

And it is further Enacted,

Penalty for perjury.
That all Persons For-swearing themselves in any such Affidavit taken as
aforesaid, shall incur the same Penalties, as if they had been taken in open
Court.

An Act, To prohibit the Exportation of Grain, etc.
WHEREAS the Harvest in the Summer past* fell greatly short; so as it is feared
there will not be a sufficiency of Grain, to serve the 0ccasions of the
Province, until the next Crop

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That from and after the Publication of this Act, during the Continuance of the
same; no Grain of any sort, Grain, Biscuit or Flower laden with intent to be
exported to be Forfeited.
Biscuit or Flower shall be Exported or Carried out of this Province by Land or
Water (except what is brought from ^he Western Towns to Hartford, in order to
be Transported (...) thence to Boston) Nor shall any Grain, Biscuit or Flower be
laden or put on Board any Ship or other Vessel, or into any Carriage with
intent to be Exported and Carried out of the Province by Land or Water, other
than what shall be for the necessary Victualing of Ships and other Vessels
Sailing out of this Province; on pain of Forfeiting all such Grain of every
sort, Biscuit and Flower: One Moiety thereof unto the Select-men or Overseers of
the Poor in the Town or Place where the same shall be Seized, to the use of the
Poor there, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall Inform and Sue for
the same in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record.

And all Officers employed for the Entering and Clearing of Vessels, for the
Duties of Impost and Tunnage, Officers to see that this Act be duly observed.
for Observance of the Acts relating to Trade and Navigation, are hereby
strictly Commanded and Required to see, that this Act be duly kept and
observed, and to make Seizure of all Grain, Biscuit and Flower about to be
Exported or carried out of this Province contrary thereto.

Provided nevertheless, That it shall be in the power of the Governor and
Council, Power in the Governor and Council to grant Licenses.
from and after the Tenth Day of March next, as they may find cause, to grant
Licenses to particular persons for Exportation of any kind of Grain, Biscuit or
Flower: this Act or any thing therein contained notwithstanding.

And for the better Encouragement to the bringing of Provisions into this
Province.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Vessels that shall Import Provisions (the major part of their Lading
being such) shall be Exempted and freed from the Dutys of Tunnage for that
Voyage. Vessels bringing in Provision freed from Tunnage.
Any Law or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And upon the Arrival of any Grain, Biscuit or Flower, for Sale, in any Port or
Harbor within this Province. The Owner, or Vender thereof shall not Sell or
Dispose of the same in any greater quantity, Provision imported not to be Sold
by whole Sale, until the end of 3 days
than six Bushels of Grain, or a Barrel, or half Barrel of Flower, or more than
one Hundred Weight of Biscuit to one person, until he shall first have given
public notice by a Crier three days beforehand, of the kinds and place where
such Provision is to be Sold; during which said three days, all persons shall
have free liberty to Buy of the said Provisions in the like or lesser quantity,
than what is before expressed, for the Supply of their Families, after the rate
of the Wholesale price at that time, without any Exaction, that the Poor be
not Oppressed.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in Force unto the end of the first
Session of the next General Assembly, to be held upon the last Wednesday in
May, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, and no longer.

FINIS.

