Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Province of
New York, Province of Pennsilvania, Country of New Castle, and the Territories
and Tracts of Land depending thereon, in America.
To all Officers and Ministers, Ecclesiastical and Civil, throughout the
Provinces and Territories under my Government.
WHereas I am credibly informed that Cornelius Christians, Peter Wessels,
Bartholomew Rouston, John Crage and William Green, Inhabitants and Sailers of
the City of New York, following their lawful Occupation, were taken into
Salley, where they are now in miserable Slavery, under the Power of the
Infidel, and that their Relations are not able to advance a sufficient Ransom
for their Redemption, I have therefore upon their application unto me, by and
with the advice of the Council, out of Christian Charity, and in Commiseration
of the grievous Bondage and Slavery of the said Persons, granted, and do by
these presents grant Lisence or Liberty to Warner Wessells, Antie Christians,
and others, the Friends of the said Prisoners, to ask and receive the free and
charitable Benevolence of all Christian People under my Government, as well at
public Meetings as private dwelling Houses. And to avoid Irregularity in
collecting the same, all Ministers or Preachers, where there are Parish
Churches or public or private Meeting Houses, are required to publish a true
Copy of this Grant, by reading there of openly, and affixing thereof afterward
upon the Door or other public place, and admonish the people to Christian
Charity, and at the next Meeting shall receive the free Offering and
Benevolence of the people, for the use abovesaid. And where no Churches nor
Meeting Houses are, the Constables are hereby required in their respective
Precincts, having a true Copy of this Grant, to go about and collect the
Charity of good Christian People for the use abovesaid. Of all which
Benevolence and Charity, the said Ministers or Preachers and Constables, are to
keep a distinct Account, which they are to transmit, with what Money they shall
collect by virtue of this Grant, without delay to Stephen Courtland Esquire Peter
Jacobs Marius, John Kerbyll and John Kipp of New York, who are hereby empowered
to receive the same, and transmit the said Money, or so much as shall be
requisite for the Redemption of the said Captives from Slavery, by the best and
most convenient means and way. Provided always, That in case there shall be a
surplusage above the value of their Redemption, or in case any of the said
persons shall be dead, or otherwise redeemed, they the said Stephen Courtland
Esquire Peter Jacobs Marius, John Kirbyll and John Kip shall be accountable to Me,
or to the Governor and Commander in chief for the time being, for the sum
collected, or so much thereof as is left upon their or some of their
Redemption, that it may be set apart (...) or other pious Uses, and for no
other use or into (...) whatsoever (...).

Given under my Hand and Seal at Fort William Henry the 8 th Day of June, 1693.
Ben. Fletcher.

Printed by William Bradford, Printer to King William and Queen Mary at the
City of New York, Anno 1693.

Ben Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in (...) of the Province of
New York, Province of Pennsilvania, and Country of New Castle, and the
Territories and Tracts of Land depending thereon in America.
To all Officers and Ministers Ecclesiastical and Civil throughout the
Provinces and Territories under my Government.
WHereas I am credibly informed that the Son of Warner Wessels, and Husband of
Antie-Christians, Inhabitants and Sailers of the City of New York, following
their lawful Occupation, were taken into Salley, where they are now in
miserable Slavery, under the Power of the Infidel, and that their Relations
are notable to advance a sufficient Ransom for their Redemption, I have
therefore upon their application unto me, by and with the advice of the
Council, out of Christian Charity, and in Commiseration of the grievous Bondage
and Slavery of the said Persons, granted, and do by those presents grant
Lisence or Liberty to the (...) Warner Wessells and Antie Christians, to ask
and receive the free and charitable Benevolence of all Christian People under
my Government, as well at public Meetings as private dwelling Houses. And to
avoid Irregularity (...) the same, all Ministers or Preachers, where there are
Parish Churches or public or private Meeting Houses, are required to publish a
true Copy of this Grant, by reading there of openly, and a fixing thereof
afterward upon the Door or other public place, and admonish the people to
Christian Charity, and at the next Meeting shall receive the free Offering and
Benevolence of the people for the use abovesaid. And where no Churches nor
Meeting Houses are, the Constables are hereby required in their respective
Precincts, having a true Copy of this Grant, to go about and collect the
Charity of good Christian People for the use abovesaid. Of all which
Benevolence and Charity the said Ministers or Preachers and Constables, are to
keep a distinct Account, which they are to transmit, with what Money they shall
collect by virtue of this Grant, without delay to Stephen Courtland Esquire Peter
Jacobs Marius, John Kerbyll and John Kipp, who are hereby empowered to receive
the same, and transmit the said Money, or so much as shall be requisite for the
Redemption of the said Captives from Slavery, by the best and most convenient
means and way. Provided always, That in case there shall be a surplusage (...)
the value of their Redemption, or in case any of the said persons shall be dead
(...) otherwise redeemed, they the said Stephen Courtland Esquire Peter Jacobs
(...) John Kirbyll and John Kip shall be accountable to Me, or to the (...)
Commander in chief for the time being, for the sum collected, or so much (...)
of as is left upon their or some of their Redemption, that it may be (...) for
the like, or other pious Uses, and for no other use or intent (...).

Given under my Hand and Seal at Fort William Henry the 8 th (...) June, 1693.
Ben. (...)

P rinted by William Bradford, P rinter to King William (...) Mary at the City
of New York, Anno (...)


