VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York
in America.
Die Jovis A. M. March 25. 1697.
THis Morning, according to Adjournment, Mr. Speaker attended at the House,
where were also present Cap. Schuyler, Cap. Read, Cap. D^key, Coll. Beckman,
Major Demire, and Mr. Abeel, and ordered the Clerk of the House to wait upon
his Excellency and Council, and acquaint them therewith. The Clerk returned,
informs Mr. Speaker and the Gentlemen present, that his Excellency was pleased
to say, That he thought, if the House did adjourn till Monday next, his
Excellency was in hopes all the rest of the Memb^^^ might be in Town by that
time. Then Mr. Speaker, and the Gentlemen present, did adjourn themselves until
Monday morning next ten a Clock accordingly.

Die Lunae 10 ho. A. M. March 29. 1697.
The Roll of the House being called over, were found absent only Cap. D'K^y,
Mr. Vnder^i^, Mr. Purdy, Cap. Whitehead, Cap. Jackson, and Major Howe^^, who
not appearing at the House this Morning, Mr. Speaker did adjourn until two a
Clock afternoon.

Die Lunae 2 ho. P. M. March 2^ 1697.
The Roll of the House being called over, were found absert only the two
Representatives of Westchester County, and Cap. Jackson. Ordered, That Major
Demir^, Mr. Daxb^ry, Mr. Sebran and Mr. Ranslaer do wait upon his Excellency
and Council, and acquaint them, That pursuant to the adjournment, the whole
House are met, except Westchester County, and wait to know what his Excellency
has to communicate to them for his Majesty and Country's service.

M^. Jamison brought a Message from his Excellency and Council, and acquainted
this House, That his Excellency and Council were met, and expected the
attendance of this House at the Fort immediately.

Whereupon the Speaker left the Chair, and attended his Excellency with the
whole House accordingly.

Mr. Speaker returned, resumed the Chair, and reports to the House the heads of
his Excellenc^'s Speech, which was received by the House with great
Satisfaction. And Ordered, That Major Howell, Cap. Read, Cap. Schuyler, Coll.
Beckman, Mr. Duxbury, Mr. van Ecklan, Cap. Whithead, and Mr. Abeel, do wait
upon his Excellency, and return him the hearty Thanks of this House for his
Care, in exposing his Person to so many Dangers and Hardships for the Security
of the Fronteers this Winter, and also for his favorable Speech now
communicated to them, and that his Excellency would be pleased to order a Copy
thereof to be sent down for the more speedy dispatch of business.

Major Howell returned, reports, that they had delivered the said Message to
his Excellency, and that his Excelleny was pleased to say, he would send down
an answer thereof to the House to morrow Morning.

Adjourned till 8 a Clock to morrow Morning.

Die Martis 8 ho. A. M. March 30. 1697.
His Excellency's Speech brought down by Mr. Jamison, read to the House, as
follows, viz. Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen Representatives;
I Am very glad to meet you here, according to your Adjournment the last
Session. I just now heard the Members of Westchester County have absented, and
hope Mr. Speaker, the House will do that Right to their own Honor to inquire
into the Reason of their Absence.

I was called to Albany this Winter by a double Obligation, my Duty to His most
sacred Majesty, in discharge of that Trust he has been graciously pleased to
put into my hands, and my Affection to his Subjects of that City, who by
Address desired my Presence with them.

And indeed, the Intelligence of a Design on that place, by the ^^ench and
their Indians (being flusht with their Success on Pemaquid (...) New England
the last Summer) was a sufficient spur to me.

I therefore resolved to make Albany my Winter Quarter, looking upon it not
only as a Barrier to this Province, but to other Colonies of his Majesty's
Empire in America.

My Passage met with some Difficulties by an early Winter, being twice drove
ashore by the Ice, and at last locked up by it; yet I made the Journey in twelve
days, though with some extraordinary Expense, being necessitated to travel part
of the way by Land, with a Detachment of my own Company.

Coll. Schuyler, who commands the Militia in those parts, and speaks the
Language, was very active in procuring Wagons and other Assistance, (as Sleas
for bringing up Field Pieces, small Arms, Ammunition, etc. which could not be
done gratis.

The Journey had the effect I expected, some Families who designed to remove,
upon the report of my coming, staid, by which the Garrison was much
strengthened.

I observed in all the Inhabitants, great zeal for his Majesty's service: they
were cheerful in the performance of their Duty, watchful and vigilant upon
those Guards committed to their care.

The Inhabitants are somewhat straightened by quartering his Majesty's Companys;
the Houses are small, fitted only for the convenience of their own Families; if
Barrachs were built (which will be no great Charge) the Inhabitants would be
eased, Soldiers better accommodated, Desertion easier prevented, and the City
better fortified.

And as you have hitherto showed great regard for his Majesty's Service, in
taking care as well for recruiting, as better subsisting, those Companys, so I
hope you will continue in the good mind of easing the Inhabitants, by
accommodating the Soldiers.

Your last gratuity to them had such influence, that not one man has deserted
since.

I desire you will appoint some of your House to look into those Payments, by
which you will see, that so much Money as could be got upon the Credit of that
Act, has been applied as it directs. Those Recruits from Connecticut came very
seasonably, they had their levy Money, and those two Officers that conducted
them were paid One Pound for each man, as a Reward for their Pains and Care,
which I hope gave them all Satisfaction.

The W^nter seem^ the most proper Season for the French to make an attach upon
Albany, all Rivers, Lakes and Marshes being so hard by the Frost that Cannon
may be drawn, etc.

Yet in Summer those parts suffer most by skulking Parties of French and
Indians; so that I must recommend to you the care of Recruiting his Majesty's
Companys at May next (when the time of those inlisted by your Act determines)
otherwise it will be impossible to cover the out Plantations; those Farmers
will remove, and leave the Country waste, the consequence of that will be the
Desolation of the City, which must then become a Garrison.

The five Nations of Indians can have no Relief there, their Friends being
gone, which they may justly conclude to be for fear of the French, and those
Indians will then purchase their Safety and Convenience by joining to our
Enemies of Canada.

The care you have taken for payment of a Party to advance upon the Enemies
borders, and lodge there for some time, to discover their motion, is of great
use; I hope you will continue that Allowance, and also consider the advantage
we found last Summer by the payment of Six Pounds to any Christian or Indian
for every Head they bring in of those skulking Murderers, who spare neither
Women nor Children.

By that encouragement we had some of them cut off in September last. Those
Gentlemen you have entrusted in the payment of the ad^^nce Parties, are without
doubt (...) for this, being (...) in Albany; they should have a Fund or Credi^
to pay for every Head brought in.

The punctual Payment for la^^ ^ummers Serv^^^ will spur many Young Men to be
Adventurers, both Christians and Indians; they will hunt hard upon this
encouragement. I desire you will continue Life in so honest a design for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Subjects in those parts.

I cannot be unconcerned at the Hardships this Province lies under, above
others (by reason of this War.) You have Agents now attending his Majesty, he
is our gracious King, Father of his People, he will hear.

A true and plain Account of our Circumstances will be represented, and Relief
obtained from his Majesty's pious Care of all his Subjects.

You have seen the Memorial given in to their Excellencys, the Lords Justices.
I have since received Letters, and another Paper given in by those Gentlemen to
the Right Honorable, the Commissioners for Trade and Plantations. I shall
communicate them to your House.

I know those Gentlemen employed from the Province are faithful and diligent. I
will not question their Success, if we are not wanting to our selves; they are
at an extraordinary Change; one of them is out (...) of that business which is
his Support; his Fortune and (...) both suffer by his absence. He was appointed
by your selves. You Will consider what is proper to be done for the carrying on
so good a Work, which is so well begun, and when finished will lighten our
present burden, and secure us from the Attempts of our Enemies.

Gentlemen, I pray God direct you.


(...) brought into the House by Capt. William Hyde, Read.

(...) of his Excellency's Sp^ech, do order, That Capt. Stillwell and Mr.
Sebran do wait upon his Excellency, and desire his Excellency would be pleased
to appoint a Serjant at Arms to attend the Service of this House, on occasion.

Mr. Jamison brought a Letter directed to the Speaker, which he opened, and
ordered the same to be read immediately; wherein were diverse Letters from Mr.
Nicolls and Mr. Brook, and also two Memorials delivered by them unto their
Excellency's, the Lords Justices of England, relating to the state of this
Province, which were likewise read. Whereupon it was ordered, That Major Demire
and Mr. Abeel do wait upon his Excellency, and give his Excellency the hearty
Thanks of this House for his favorable Communication thereof.

Mr. Speaker did likewise read to the House two Lettees which he received also
from Mr. Nicolls.

The House finding Humphery Underhill and Joseph Purdy, the Representatives for
the County of Westchester, have neglected their Duty to their Country, by
absenting themselves from the Service of this House convened in General
Assembly, It is therefore Ordered, That Mr. Richard Stokes, Serjant at Arms, do
forthwith go to the said Persons, or to the places of their respective abodes,
and there take them into safe Custody, if they can be found, and bring them to
this House to answer the Contempt, in the neglect of their Duty aforesaid, and
for his so doing the Order of this House, signed by the Speaker, shall be his
sufficient Warrant. Adjourned till 2 a Clock afternoon.

Die Martis 2 ho. P. M. March 30. 1697.
The House ordered the Reading of his Excellency's Speech, and did resolve that
the Security of the Fronteers at Albany should be the first point that should
be the taken into their Consideration.

Mr. Purdy, lately ordered to be taken into the Custody of the Serjant at Arms,
having appeared at the Bar, and requested the favor of this House, that he
might be admitted to his place, having no design in Contempt of this House.
Which Submission being accepted, it is ordered that he be dismissed from the
Custody of the Serjant at Arms, paying his Fees, and that he take his place in
the House accordingly.

The further Consideration of that part of his Excellency's Speech relating to
the securing the Fronteers of the Province at Albany, referred till to morrow
Morning. Adjourned till 8 a Clock to morrow Morning.

Die Mercurij 8 ho. A. M. March 31. 1697.
The Petition of Mr. Giles Silvester referred to the Consideration of this
House by his Excellency and Council, Read.

The further Consideration of that part of his Excellencys Speech relating to
the securing the Fronteers at Albany, etc. referred till afternoon.

Die Mercurij 2 ho. P. M. March ult. 1697.
The further Consideration of that said part of his Excellencys Speech, refered
till 8 a Clock to morrow Morning. And the House adjourned till that time.


