Phenomenon quaedam APOCALYPTICA Ad Aspectum NOVI ORBIS configurata.

Or, some few Lines toward a description of the New HEAVEN As It makes to
those who stand upon the NEW EARTH

By Samuel Sewall sometime Fellow of Harvard College at Cambridge in
New England.

Psalm, 45.10, Forget also thy own people, and thy fathers house.

Isai 11.14. But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the
west.

Act. 1.6 -- 8 Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to
Israel? -- ye shall be witnesses unto me unto the uttermost parts of the earth;
hasta lo ultimo de la tierra. Spanish Bible.

Luke, 15.24. For this My Son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found. V 32. For this thy Brother etc.

Ille non decrit Promissi^; restituet Regnum Israeli; sed suo modo, loco, ac
tempore. Bu^inger. N^quis ista a me dicta, aut adducta accipiat, quasi
contendendi, aut adversandi studio; ac non discendi potius, ac conferendi
gratia.

Fox Med. Apoc. p. 371. ad Phialam Sextam. MASSACHVSET; BOSTON, Printed by
Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, And are to be sold by Richard Wilkins, 1697.

TO THE HONORABLE, WILLIAM STOUGHTON Esquire. Lieut. Governor AND COMMANDER in
Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England.
WHEN I look upon the Longing Desire, and Parental Pity that was raised in
Divines, and Christians of all ranks; Non nos dele^tent siliquae por cerum,
doctrinae daemoniorum. Augustine Psalm. 138. col. 1589, 1592. Psalm. 47.436
both in England, and here, upon the very first Appearance of the American
Prodigal his coming to himself, and being disposed to return unto his Father: I
cannot choose but judge it to be very like to, if not the very same that is
spoken of Luke, 15.20. But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him,
and had Compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. For as all
physical Actions are of a Divine Original: Venienti occurrit, and nondu^^ verbo
uno ^ud^ t^, squalidum and d^forme^s amplectitur. Calvin p 240
so the Actions of good and holy Men, are in a peculiar manner ascribed to God.
A ^^^ction entitled, The DAY-BREAKING, if not the SUN RISING of the GOSPEL
with the INDIANS in New England; which was printed at London, 1647. together
with the following printed Relations, do give a ^^ry pleasant Prospect of this
notable Transaction, from October, 28. 1646. unto July, 5. 1659. inclusively.
The sorrowfu^l Decay and Languishing of the Work in many places since that
time; Bullinger, Apoc. p. 258. Ipse solus ver^ diceretur Aphricanus, Europaeus,
Asiati^us, Columbinus etc. Christus Quartum hoc Diadema hodi^ sibi vendicat.

Antichristus Triplex g^rit. A^e^. p. 244


and the little Faith that is to be found in exercise concerning it: are so far
from being a ground of Discouragement; that it gives us cause to expect that
the set Time draws very near for our blessed Lord Jesus Christ to be
Recognized and Crowned KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords. And I humbly crave
leave to enter a Claim, that the New World may be no longer made an Outcast:
but may be admitted to assist at the CORONATION. Perhaps some may think it
superfluous, at this time of day to pu^lish any thing against those Conjectures
which being ground less, fall of themselves But on the other hand, when the
Great KING was by his Ambas^adors keeping up a Treaty of Marriage with America:
it was then very Unseasonable and absurd to raise, or receive a Vain Report to
her Disparagement. And it seems convenient, that that which has been said
and written, and printed over and over again, to the Injury and Prejudice of
Columbina: should one time or other be Unsaid; that so the Scandal may be
removed. And seeing the mere Conjectures of Learned and Great Men, do bear a
great sway with multitudes, who never enquire what the grounds are they go
upon: it may seem a just Occasion for this small disquisition. In which I have
endeavored to prove that America's Name is to be seen fairly Recorded in the
Scriptures; particularly, in the Book of Psalms, in Daniel, and the Revelation.
That Euphrates may be distinguished from the Sea, and from other Rivers, it
ought to be limited to some proper Place; for which place, I propound the New
World: as being so far from deserving the Nick names of Gog and Magog; that it
stands fair for being made the S^at of the Divine Metropolis. In this manner
Jesus Christ will turn his back upon the pretended Vicar; until He turn again,
utterly to destroy him by the United Anger of the Seventh Vial. Rev 16.19.
Another thing that seems probable to me, is, that the New-English Planters
were the Forerunners of the Kings of the East; and as the Morning Star, giving
certain Intelligence that the Sun of Righteousness will quickly rise and Shine
with Illustrious Grace and Favor, upon this despised Hemisphere. If some
Accommodations seem novel and harsh at the first view; yet I suppose, I have
Mr. Mede's Indulgence for the producing them: Illud pro ce^to habens, nisi in
hisce talibus liberius paulo sentiendi, imo et errandi Venia concedatur: ad
profunda illa et latentia Veritatis adyta, viam nunquam patefactum iri. Epist.
p. 539. As for Daniel, 11.45. It is Planting, and not Replanting, that is there
spoken of. And the Plantations that I have ordinarily found assigned for the
Accomplishment of this Prophesis, do not correspond with that which is implied
in the word [Tabernables, Tentoria] sc. mobilia, et brevi removenda. Mr. Thomas
Parker, MSS p. 44.
That which (...) seem most of all out of Time, is the Fourth Seal, and so
consequently, the Fifth. And yet Mr. George Giffard brings down his Examples of
the Fu^filment of it as low as the Year, In France, under Charles the Ninth,
above Twenty Thousand Martyrs were slain in one month. Fox, Rev p 55
1428 p. 133. And Aretius places the Pa^i^ian Massacre under the Fourth Seal.
Mr. John Fox his Transition from the Fourth, to the Fifth Seal, is very
remarkable; Meditat. in Apoc. p. 54, 55. Postquam de politicis Imperijs, et
turbulentis eorum fatis, a^cana e Coelo Consilia patefacta audistis, in
superioribus Sigillis quatuor: ventum est tandem ad Quintum Sigillum, Sextum,
et Septimum. In quibus proprie de Regno Christi, de Ecclesia, Rebusque ad
Ecclesiam pertinentibus, usque ad consummationem Seculi, mira nobis Mysteria
aperiuntur. etc. Duo praecipue dis^incta Tempora proponuntur a Spiritu Sancto,
etc. The sum is, This great Field Officer represents the Martyrs under the
form of Two Armies; the First is composed of the Martyrs engaged in the Ten
First Persecutions, under the Roman Emperors: The Second was raised by JESUS
CHRIST to maintain and defend his Dominion against the Invasions of Antichrist,
in a (...) Long, and Bloody War. This Army is likewise drawn up in Ten
Brigades; the Ninth being the English Martyrs of the Marian Persecution; and
the innumerable Martyrs which were slain under Philip, in Spain and Flanders,
make the Tenth. I hope the Reader wont stand with me for making the White Robes
to be the frequent and Honorable Mention that is made of the Martyrs, and of
their Doctrine, in Sermons, Martyrologies, and Acts of Parliament. 35 Edw 1
Anno 1392. 16 Ri^h 2 5 24 H 8.12.25 H 8.19, 20, 21. 1 Edw 6 1 2 and 3 c 1, 21 3
and 4 cap 10 1 Elisa cap 2 and 13 cap 2 and 27 cap 2
There are very fair and full Maryrologies in Latin, English, French, and
Dutch. The Dutch Edition printed at Amsterdam, 1671. continues the general
History to the Year 1655. and gives an Account of the Unheard of Cruelty of
Ireland, and the dreadful Massacres and Murders of the Waldenses in Piemont,
under the Duke of Savoy. 1641.
Of this there is a large Account given by Samuel Morland Esquire and of the
Collection of 38000l. in England and Ireland, to be distributed among the
Remnant of that distressed People. In Ireland, October 23 Abov 200000. Innocent
persons were murdered in one Month; and many, with exquisite, and Unheard of
Tortures. Baker's Chronicle page 512.
He give but one particular Instance. Who is it has not been affected by
hearing mention made of the faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, and Martyr of
blessed Memory, Valiant and Loyal Lambert? Who, to the eternal glory of CHRIST;
and in defiance of Antichrist's Halbert, and Chain, and Flame, Cried out, None
but CHRIST! None but CHRIST! Vol. 2. page 358.

I knew not that the Conjecture was translated into English, until I saw the
second Edition, printed Anno 1650. the same Year that Mr. Thorowgood published
his JEWS in America. Which forced me to follow my Latin Edition set forth
1664. The sheets being wrought off before I saw the other. And when all is
done, if there be any hope that may bring on an Agreement, I willingly grant
the Infernum mentioned Psalm. 139.15. 1655
To be America; where, in these latter Ages, GOD has begun in a Terrible, and
Wonderful Way, to form a People for Himself, that they may show forth his
Praise. Isai. 43. Romans 9 21. Deuteronomy. 30.3, 4.

May it please your Honor, Mr. Secretary Addington did rather encourage than
discourage this Vindication of America; for whose Opinion your Honor has
justly a great Value. It was your Permission that opened my way into this
Field: Permit me therefore, humbly to offer these First fruits to your
Protection. Your standing Related to the Honorable Corporation mentioned in the
former Epistle, seems to render this Dedication homogeneous. And as I know
not a more severe and accurate Censor of what is amiss: so, no more quick and
powerful Defender* of that which is Right. Neither could I contrive better, to
design that in Two Epistles, which Mr. Richard Bernard has performed in Five.
For it is well known that you are a Friend of the BRIDEGROOM, To whose HONOR I
earnestly desire that all that I am and have, may be entirely and eternally
dedicated.

Psalm, 139.7 -- 10.
From sight of thy all-seeing Spirit,
Lord, whither shall I go?
Or whither shall I fly away,
thy Presence to escape fro?
To Heaven if I mount aloft,
lo Thou art present there:
In Hell if I lie down below,
even there Thou do appear.
Yea, let me take the morning wings,
and let me go and hide:
Even there where are the farthest parts,
where flowing Sea does slide.
Yea even thither also shall
thy reaching Hand me guide:
And thy Right hand shall hold me fast,
and make me to abide.
In Enarratione hujus Psalmi, col. 1593. Nemo trepidet: s^d ^^omo de Pennis
sais p^aes^mat. Opus est ut ha^eamus penn^s; and Opus est ut Ipse dedcaat.
Adjutor enim noster e^t: Affirmat

AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS. TO THE HONORABLE, Sir WILLIAM ASHVRST Knight, GOVERNOR,
and the COMPANY For the Propagation of the GOSPEL to the Indians in
New England, and places adjacent, in AMERICA.
THE Commendation of Erasmus, in his Book entitled Ecclesiastes, does very
justly belong to the English Nation, upon account of their effectual Desires
that the Americans might be gospelliz'd; Pulcherrimum, Deoque gratissimum erat
dare potius quam accipere ijs quos stude mus Christo lucrifacere: It was a most
beautiful Thing, Richard Eden in his Epistle to P Martyr's Decads of the Ocean.
and most acceptable unto God, rather to give to them, than to receive from
them whom we endeavor to gain for Christ. And yet their Praises are to be sung
in a higher Note: For I cannot but think that either England, or New England, or
both (Together is best) is the only Bride Maid mentioned by Name in David's
prophetical Epithalamium, to assist at the Great Wedding now shortly to be
made. And for ought I know, this Noble Gift, Administered by your Hands, may be
partly intended. Angels Incognito have sometimes made themselves guests to Men,
designing thereby to surprise them with a Requital of their Love to Strangers.
In like manner the English Nation, in showing Kindness to the Aboriginal
Natives of America, may possibly, show Kindness to Israelites unawares. In the
Year 1649 Mr. Downam gave his Conjecture to that purpose, in his Appendix to
New-English Letters then printed. And Mr. Thorowgood was so far satisfied in
his Opinion about it, that he published a Treatise in the Year 1650. entitled
Jews in America. And it should seem, many judicious Divines have been much of
the same mind. Mr. Eliot in his first Attempts to make them Christian, was much
concernd to find out some Promise in the Scriptures relating to them, upon
which he might ground his Faith and Hope in his incessant Labors for them: But
afterward he concluded that the Thirty seventh chapter of Ezekiel was written
principally for their sake; as also many other Scriptures. In this Perswa^ion
that worthy Person, both lived, and died. On the other hand, if America be laid
out as a Rendezvous for Gog and Magog, this must needs tend to supersede all
Desire and Endeavor for their Recovery. But better Things are hoped concerning
them, even such as will issue in their Salvation, when the fullness of Time is
come. In stead of being branded for Slaves with hot Irons in the Face, Benzo p.
11, 14.
and arms; and driven by scores in mortal Chains: they shall wear the Name of
God in their foreheads, and they shall be delivered into the glorious Liberty
of the Children of God. The Indians, upon various Occasions, do much affect to
be called by a new Name: which is given them by the Approbation of their
Elders. Persons of note among them, that they may wash off their Mourning, and
be clean; and that they may have a convenient Opportunity for publishing their
New Name; sometimes call for a solemn Dance. Now tho their Miseries be very
inveterate, yet GOD can speedily, and easily give them a New Name, and in a
mom^^^* change the Scene. Asia, Africa, and Europe have, each of them, had a
glorious Gospel Day: None therefore will be grieved at any ones pleading that
America may be made a Coparcener with her Sisters in the Free, and Sovereign
Grace of God. God many times sets one thing against another: and we may hope
that Unparalleled Severity will be succeeded by Superabundant BENIGNITY. And
when the Messiah shall have gathered his Sheep belonging to this his American
Fold: His Churches Music being then complete in the Harmony of Four Parts: The
whole Universe shall ring again with seraphick Acclamations, ONE FLOCK! ONE
SHEPHERD!

That your Honor, and the Honorable Company, and all concerned with you, may
be prospered by God in bringing forward this happy Match, is the constant
Desire, and Prayer of

YOUR HONORS most humble Servant, S. SEWALL.
Boston, N E. April 16 th. 1697.
SOME FEW LINES Toward a description of the NEW HEAVEN
NOT to begin to be; and so not to be limited by the concernments of Time, and
Place; is the Prerogative of GOD alone. But as it is the Privilege of
Creatures, that GOD has given them a beginning: so to deny their actions, or
them, the respect they bear to Place, and successive duration, is, under a
pretense of Promo^ion, to take away their very ^eing. Yet notwithstanding, some
Things have had this to glory of; that they have been time out of mind; and
their Continuance refuses to be measured by the memory of Man. Whereas
New England, and Boston of the Massachusetts have this to make mention of; that
they can tell their Age; and account it their Honor to have their Birth, and
Parentage kept in everlasting Remembrance. And in very deed, the Families, and
Churches which first ventured to follow Christ through the Atlantic Ocean, into
a strange Land, full of wild men, were so Religious; their End so Holy; their
Selfdenyal in pursuing of it, so Extraordinary; that I cannot but hope that the
Plantation has thereby gaind a very strong Crasis; and that it will not be of
one or two, or three Centuries only; but very long lasting. Some who
peremptorily conclude that Asia must afford situation for New-Jerusalem, are of
the mind, when that divine City comes to be built, the Commodities of It will
be so inviting as will drain disconsolate America of all Its Christian
Inhabitants, as not able to brook so remote a distance from the beloved City.
But if Asia should be again thus highly favored, and the eldest daughter be
still made the da^ling; yet it is known there will be a River, the Streams
whereof shall make gl^d the City of God. The Correspondence, and Commerce of
the little cities, and villages in the thr^e Kingdoms, and Plantations, do make
LONDON glad. And so it will be with New Jerusalem: the Nations of them which
are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the Kings of the Earth do bring
their glory and honor into it. New-Jerusalem will not straiten, and enfeeble;
but wonderfully dilate, and invigorate Christianity in the several Quarters of
the World; in Asia, in Africa, in Europe, and in America. And one that has been
born, or but lived in America, between thirty, and forty years; it may be
pardonable for him to ask, Why may not that be the place of New Jerusalem?
Problematical Questions do circulate; Mede, Epist. 42 p. 979.
and this was set up by Dr. Twisse above threescore years ago; the newness of
it in its return after so cosiderable a space of time, will, I hope, render it
grateful; or at least, will procure leave for one, with a little alteration,
to enquire, Why may not New-Spain be the place of New Jerusalem? Its being part
of the New World, one would think, carries with it no contradiction thereunto.
Places are usually called new from the newness of their situation; and not from
their being built anew; as New-Spain, New England, New London. For certain, If
Mr. Eliot's Opinion prove true; viz. that the aboriginal Natives of America are
of Jacob's Posterity, part of the long since captivated Ten Tribes; and that
their Brethren the Jews shall come unto them* the dispute will quickly be at an
end Manasseh-Ben-Israel is said to have published a book entitled, The hope of
Israel, endeavoring to prove this Position. For my own part, what Mr. Downam,
and Mr. Thorowgood have written on this head, seems to be of far more weight
with me than what Hornius, or any other that I have seen, have guessed to the
contrary. Mr. Eliot was wont to say The New-English Churches are a preface to
the New Heavens: and if so, I hope the preface and Book will be bound up
together, and this Mexican Continent shall comprehend them both. Who can tell,
but that David may thus fetch a compass behind his Antichristian enemies and
come upon them over against the Mulberry trees, and utterly destroy them by the
brightness of his coming? Who can tell but that Christ may in this manner
expose the lewd fondness of the Unholy War, and happily umpire the Difference
about the holiness of Places by causing New Jerusalem to come down from God out
of Heaven, upon that Earth wherein Satan, for many Ages, has peaceably
possessed an entire, and far more large empire than any where else in the whole
world besides? No body doubts but that our Savior can enter into this strong
man's house, bind him, and spoil his goods: Let us wai^ till He revive us by
saying, I am willing. If I mistake not we have a warrant sufficient enough to
encourage us unto a perseverance in hoping, and waiting upon God for this
Salvation.

Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
Uttermo^t ^arts of the earth for thy possession.

Of all the parts of the world, which do from this Charter, entitle themselves
to the Government of Christ, America's plea, in my opinion, is the strongest.
For when once Christopher Columbus had added this fourth to the other three
parts of the foreknown World; they who sailed farther Westward, arrived but
where they had been before. The Globe now failed of offering any thing New to
the adventurous Travailer: Or however, it could not afford another new World.
And probably, the cosideration of America's being the Beginning of the East,
and the End of the West; was that which moved Columbus to call some part of it
by the Name of Alpha and Omega. Now if the Last ADAM did give Order for the
engraving of his own Name upon this last Earth: 'twill draw with it great
Consequences; Peter Martyr Decad. 1. lib. 3 p. 13*
even such as will, in time, bring the poor (...) of their Graves, and make
them live.

Thou shall break them with a rod of (...), thou shall d^sh them in pieces like
a potters vessel.

'Twas most awful to see, or but to hear of Christ's Spanish-Iron Rod walking
amongst the earthen pots; whereby great Kingdoms, and Empires were quickly
broken to shivers* with many millions of their subjects; unto whom both
defensive, and offensive Iron was unknown, which made the deadly impressions of
their Enemies weapons, and the inefficacy of their own, surprising to
amazement. It is to be noted, that the Pots wherein they boiled their fish, and
flesh, etc. were made of earth; as also innumerable other vessels: most were
enjoind to use no other. By this means the Potters trade was in principal
demand among them: which renders this Metaphor very agreeable. In the
computation of Time made by the Mexican Nation, their greatest Period consisted
of Fifty two Years; which they called a Wheel. Upon the last night of every
Wheel they used to break all their Vessels, and stuff; and put out their fire,
saying that the World should end at the finishing of one of these Wheels, and
it might be at that time. Upon this conceit they passed the night in great
fear, and watched very carefully for the day. But when they saw the day begin
to break, they presently beat many Drumms, sounded Cornets, Flutes, and other
Instruments of Joy, saying, that God did yet, prolong the time with another
Age. And then began another Wheel, on the first day whereof they went to the
high priest and took new fire, and bought new Vessels. Joseph Acosta, lib. 6.
cap. 2. When the Spaniards came, they took these miserable Potters themselves,
and dashed them in pieces one against another. Holy Hilary, in his Exposition
of the second Psalm, is exceedingly concernd, lest there should be any
imputation of Ingratitude to our LORD, upon the account of his seizing upon his
Inheritance in such a manner, as presently to break it in pieces with an iron
Rod. But he quiets himself in this; that it is in order to Restoration, and
Reformation.

Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, etc.

They who will not take warning by Belsnazzar, and Motezuma; and will not
learn, in all their Administrations, to glorify the God in whose hand their
breath is, and whose are all their ways; they must expect to come to worse ends
than they did. Great Motezuma, who labored to be worshipped as a god. No
plebeian might look him in the face; if he did, he was punished with death. He
did never set his foot (...) ^he ground; but was always carried on the
shoulders of N^^^^men; and if he lighted, they laid rich Tapestry whereon he
might go. When he made any Voyage, he and the Noblemen went as it were in a
Park compassed in for the nonce; and the rest of the people went without the
Park. He never put on a Garment twice; nor did eat, or drink in one Vessel, or
Dish above once; all must be new. He used to be attended by Noblemen barefoot.
This Motezuma, of whose bloody (...), and Luxury he knew no bounds; was at last
imprisoned in his own Palace by his unwelcom Guests; was hated by his subjects;
covertly and basely slain; so that it is yet controverted, whether Spaniards, or
Indians were the authors of his death. But howsoever, Motezuma died miserably,
and paid his deserts to the just judgment of our Lord of heaven, for his Pride,
and Tyranny: His body falling into the Indians power, they would make him no
Obsequies of a King; no not of an ordinary person: but cast it away in great
disdain, and rage. A servant of his having pity of this king's misery, made a
fire thereof, and put the ashes in a contemptible place. Acosta, lib. 7. cap.
22, 26.

Some judicious and learned Divines have conjectured that America is prophesied
of in the thirty seventh of Ezekiel, under the denomination of a Valley.
Certainly, no part of the habitable World, can show more Bones; or bones more
dry, than these vast Regions do. Mr. Downam thinks that Mr. Eliot's taking his
Text from thence when he first preached ^o the Indians, has its weight. His
Appendix to the Letters from New England, is well worth the reading. The
Prophet is said to be carried out in the spirit: and for ought I know, he might
be carried beyond the limits of the then known World.

Dan. 11.45. And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas
in the glorious holy Mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall
help him.

The complexion of this portion of Scripture is such, as constrains me to
imagine, that the place designed by the Holy Spirit, is no other than America.
Every word almost, has an emphasis carrying in it, to me, the persuasion of
this sense. They who remove from one Land to another, there to dwell; that
settlement of theirs is called a Plantation. Especially, when a Land, before
rude and unfurnished, is by the New-comers replenished with useful Arts,
Vegetables, Animals. Thus when in the year 1492. Christopher Columbus had
opened the way, 1492.
the Spaniards planted themselves in the spacious Regions of America; and, too
much, planted Antichristianisme in the room of Heathenisme. Tabernacles] So
called from the movableness of their condition, and shortness of their
continuance. As Tents, they were lately set up; and, notwithstanding all their
Praemunitions, so far as they are Antichristian, they shall be taken down
before it be long, by the immovable Counsel and Providence of God.

Palace] The Extent, Riches, and Pomp of the Mexican, and Peruvian Empires, are
very great: Insomuch that when the Church of Rome met with Losses in Europe,
Bellarmin. d^ n^tis Ecclesiae, ad Notam Quartam, and Nonam.
they pleased themselves with their Gains in the New-World. They glory in the
many Churches they have planted there; which are, they say, without all mixture
of Heretics. If with Mr. Nicholas Fuller, Miscel. sacr. lib. 5. cap. 18. we
take this word to signify Equile Regium, Horse-Guards; It will still look upon
America. The Reputation the Spaniards Horses gave them, did much contribute
toward their prodigious Conquests. And after above threescore dangerous
battles, Mexico was at last taken upon Hippolytus day; August, 13. 1521. Since
which time, Horses, that were never seen there before, are one of the four Fair
Things of that City. 1521.


Between the Seas] The middle Provinces of the New World, governed by the Vice
Roys of Mexico, and Peru, are known to lie between two of the most wide, and
famous Seas of the whole World. The American Isthmus; respecting its own
narrowness, and the bold approaches of the huge Ocean on either side, does
command the title of Nonsuch. America it self, and they who pass thither, are
so much concernd with the Sea, that Peter Martyr styled his History, Deca^^ of
the Ocean. And in the general History of Spain, part of the King's Title is,
The Islands, and firm Land of the Ocean Sea. Grimeston, p. 1234. in the
glorious holy Mountain] Ingenious Joseph Acosta lib. 3. cap. 19. speaking of
New Spain, has these words, Which without doubt, is the best Province the Sun
does circle. And Mr. Gage, in his faithful Relations, cap. 12. p. 134. speaks
of its Excellency in this manner, There is nothing in Mexico, and about it,
wanting which may make a City happy. And certainly, had those that have so much
extolled with their pens the parts of Granada in Spain; Lombardy, and Florence,
in Italy, making them the earthly Paradise; had they been acquainted with the
New World, and with Mexico, they would have recanted their untruths. O that the
Lord were truly worshipped where He has poured forth the Treasures of his
Goodness for the children of men! O that in that Eden, the tempting and
enticing Serpent were not so much obeyed in the use of the fair seeming apple
of Pleasures; and the LORD that has enriched it with such Varieties, so much
neglected. The difficulty attending this construction, lies in the word [ holy]
which may be intended by way of Anticipation. What place more infamous for
Unholiness than Canaan? and yet it is said Exodus 15.13, 17. Thou in thy mercy
have led forth the people which thou have redeemed: thou have guided them in
thy strength unto thy Holy habitation. Thou shall bring them in, and plant them
in the mountain of thy inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou have made
for thee to dwell in: in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have
established.

Neither is this altogether dissonant from excellent Calvin's Commentary. For
that which remains of the Roman grandeur, is shared between the Emperor of
Germany, and the Pope: and they both contributed toward the planting these
Tabernacles. Pope Alexander the sixth (that horrible Monster) by his Bull or
Donation dated 1493. quarto Nonas Maij; and Charles the fifth, by his Expense,
and Royal Authority. They also that do govern in America, are not Kings, but
Vice Roys, answerable to Calvin's Proconsuls. And it is not Mexico, and Lima;
but Madrid, and Rome, that are the original, and principal Seats of the
Government. Take a Specimen of Antichrists inevitable coming to his End, in the
death of Roderick Borgia, afterward Pope Alexander the sixth; taken almost word
for word, out of Onuphrius in the Life of that Pope, and out of Guicciardin,
lib. 5. p. 235, 236. It is most certain, says he, that in his father and in
him; Caesar Borgia Duke Valentynois, were natural customs to use Poison; not
only to be revengd of their Enemies, or to be assured of Suspicions: but also
upon a wicked Covetousness, to dispoil Rich Men of their Goods; whether they
were Cardinals, or Courtiers; although they had never don them wrong; as happened
to the Cardinal St. Ange, who was very Rich. This manner of Rage they would use
also against their greatest Friends and Familiars, and such as had been their
most faithful servants; such as were the Cardinals of Capua, and Modeno: a
Recompense unworthy the merits of good men; and not disagreeable to the
disposition of such a Father, and son; whereof the one made all things lawful
by vile Dispensation: and with the other, nothing was dishonest wherein was
Opportunity to his purposes. Upon the 17 th of August, anno 1503. a Banquet of
Wine was made in the Arbor of the Vatican [ad umbrosum Vaticani ruris fontem]
for the poisoning of Adrian Cardinal of Cornette, or of some of the Richest
Senators, as Onuphrius has it. Valentynois sent before, certain ^^agons with
Wine Infected with Poison; which he gave to a servant that knew nothing of the
matter, commanding that no person should touch them. The Pope coming by
adventure, somewhat before the Supper, and overcome with the Drought, and
immoderate heat of the time, called for drink: and because his own provision was
not yet brought from the Palace, he that had the infected Wine in charge,
thinking it to be commended to his keeping for a wine most excellent, gave the
Pope to drink of the same wine which V^le^^ynois had sent: who arriving whilst
his father was drinking, drank also of the same wine; being but just, that they
both should taste of the same Cup which they had brewed for the destruction of
others. Valenti^^is, by the vigor and strength of his Youth, and ready Help of
strong Medicines, and Counterpoisons, had his Life saved; remaining
notwithstandig oppressed with a long and grievous Sickness. But his father the
Pope being aged, and unable long to endure the strength of the poison, died the
next day, Aug. 18 th in the Vatican at Rome, in the 71 th year of his Age, and
the eighth day of the twelfth Year of his Popedom. The Corpse was borne into the
Church of St Peter, black, swollen, and most deformed. All the Town of Rome ran
with great gladness to St Peter's, about the dead body of the Pope, their eyes
not being satisfied to see dead and destroyed a Serpent, who with his immoderat
Ambition, and poisoned Infidelity, together with all the horrible Examples of
Cruelty, Luxury, and monstrous Covetousness; selling without distinction, both
holy things and profane things, had infected the whole World. Thus far
Guicciardin in that place. In the Death of this Planter God has given Earnest,
assuring us that He will in the fittest Season, utterly root up the whole papal
Plantation, so as none shall be able to Help them.

The cognation that there is between this Prophecy, and that of the
Revelation, is so great, as occasioned Mede to answer, I conceive Daniel to be
Apocalypsis contracta: p 964. It will not therefore be incongruous to pass
immediately thither, without any other Transition.

Rev. 6.8. And I looked, and behold, a pale horse; and his name that sat on him
was Death, and hell followed with him: and power was given to the^ over the
Fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with the beasts of the earth.

The Four Quarters of the World seem to be represented by Four Animals; Asia,
by the Lion; Africa, by the Calf; Europe, by the Man, and America, by the
Eagle. Accordingly, the four first Seals seem to be Local; each of them
chiefly, or firstly regarding what was to be done in some One Quarter of the
World. So that Asia was to be the principal stage of the First Seal; Africa, of
the Second; Europe, of the Third, and America, of the Fourth. America is fitly
represented by an Eagle, which Royal Bird is very frequent there, and was once
the Standard of the Mexican Empire; the unparalleld Miseries whereof, and of
the New World are here described. And there is no Verse in the whole Bible does
so pathetically, and with so much Amplitude, and Variety foretell the
Destruction of Men: So wide, and deep the Measure needed to be, that was to
contain the Blood, and Slaughter of America! If there may be any accommodation
in that, the Color Stephanus, Aretius, Pareus.
of this Horse is much like the Color of the Indians. And although it seem an
oddity in Beza's Translation set forth Anno 1556. to make the Rider feminine;
yet it may serve to put one in mind that this tragical Scene was first opened
by the Magnanimous, and Modest Isabella Queen of Castile. From the death of
this gracious Queen, which fell out Anno 1504. the American Destructions are
observed to bear Date.

Hell followed etc.] This is added by way of horrid Aggravation, being a most
dism^l Exemplification of that Proverb, Where there is no Vision, the people
perish. Dr. Fulk in his Praelections published 1573. speaks thus, Sequitur
autem mortem Infernus, ne Corporum tantum haec lues esse censeatur: sed quam
aeterna Animae mors, and tormenta Inferni consequantur. Et corporis quidem
mortem Infernus semper sequitu^, nisi in ijs solum quibus morte Christi retusus
est aculeus mortis. Mr. Arthur Dent, Anno. 1603. For assuredly, Hell does
always follow the death of the body, excepting those only whom Christ has
delivered from Hell and Damnation, by the power of his Death. All these
perished without Faith, and without Sacraments, is the doleful Epiphonema
which Bartholomew de las Casas often makes, where he gives an account of Twenty
Millions Slain, Destroyed, and sent to Hell by Spanish Cruelties. The Grave has
nothing to do here. Multitudes of the slaughtered Indians had no other Grave
than the Bellies of Men, Spanish Dogs, and wild Beasts. In several places of
this very Province, Scarce One in twenty, left alive. N. Engl Memorial p 23
about the Year 1618. there was such a Plague among the Natives, that the
living were not able to bury the dead; by which means the ground became strawed
with their Bones.

Fourth part] It is the Field, and not the Proportion of the slain, that is
here designd: the Jurisdiction of the Destroyers is delineated in those words,
Upon the Fourth part of the Earth, i. e. Upon, or over America. What ever
Variation there may be in reckoning the other parts of the World; yet America
always obtains the Fourth place, as not only last, but very lately discovered
to the rest. The Quaternion of Evils here specified, are notoriously known to
have Ranged over this Earth. Dr. Whitaker affirms that no Histories make
mention of so great Tyranny, Besides their own bloody Massacres, Wars,
Sacrifices.
as the Spaniards exercised over the Indians De notis Eccles^ae, p. 505. And
Amandus Polanus in his Commentary upon Daniel, does very largely, and
pathetically describe this Desolating Abomination. Vide cap. 11.31. p. 1067,
68, 69, 70. Neither need one salve the last Instance by a Metaphor: the
Indians, to shun the Spaniards, fled from their delightful habitations by the
Seaside, and betook themselves to the mountainous Deserts, where the Tigers met
with them, and devourd them. And the Spanish Dogs killd, and eat Multitudes of
them: which might help to sharpen Mr. Mede's Pen, and cause him to say, Christ
our Lord sends his Mastives, the Spaniards, to hunt them out, and worry them:
which they did in so hideous a manner, as the like thereunto scarce ever was
done, since the Sons of Noah came out of the Ark. Epist. 43.

The following Seal did for many Years, seem to make against the forementioned
Applications, as altogether out of Time: But within these few Months, It seemd
rather to offer Arguments for them. For the Prophecy does not say when the
Martyrs were slain, but when they were seen. Now if the Fifth Seal be concluded
with the Year 311, or 325. the Antichristian Persecution, the longest, and most
grievous of all, will be wholly excluded. Whereas John was so posted, as that
he might look backward all along to the beginning; and forward all along, to
the end of Martyrdom. The eleventh Verse also seems to intimate that, measuring
from this Moment, much more of the time of Persecution was past, than was now
to come: Yet for a little season, may be understood in Comparison with what was
already past. Upon the whole, I humbly crave leave to offer, whether the Year
1572, or 1573. may not be the Article of Time intended for this Prospect? 1572*
Upon the supposition that Four of the Seals are Local, it was most orderly and
methodical to place them all together; tho some passages of the Fifth might
have an earlier commencement, than some of them. The Four Parts of the World
are as so many Colleges founded, and endowed for the setting forth of the
Glory of God. Christ had bespoke Witnesses in every one of them; and therefore
New-Colledge also is first mentioned, before the Fifth Seal bring in the whole
University of Martyrs. under the altar It is to be noted, that in the Year
1554. the Sacrament of the Altar began to kindle Fires upon the English Altars:
and there Christ in his Members, was by Authority, Tried, Condemned, and
publicly crucified, to a degree scarce equalled in any other Nation. The
Excellency and Preciousness of so many Voluntary Whole burnt-Offerings, made
the Pillars of Smoke, and Fire to ascend on high, and to be taken notice of all
the World over. And Mr. Fox prepared such a golden Oil to seed those Flames;
that they still do, and always will mount up, in perpetuam Rei memoriam. The
London Fashion was not approved of at Paris; neither, indeed, could it be
followed: besides that so long and tedious a Process was a thing of too slow
and dull a temper for that Climat- Bartholomaeus de las Casas writ in the Year
1542. fearing lest he should incur guilt in concealing the Loss of an infinite
number, both of Souls and Bodies. Polanus says, his Book was printed in
Spanish, at Sevil, apud Sebastianum Trugillium, Anno 1552. He did with such
irresistible Importunity represent the Outrages committed in the New World, as
prevaild with the Emperor to send over Commissioners on purpose to See whether
it was so, or no; and upon their Report, took a better Order, both for their
temporal, and spiritual Estate: notwithstanding a strong Interest made against
said Casas in the Court of Spain. It Is possible, these extraordinary Efforts;
both in Speaking, Writing, and Printing may be signified by a more express
attribution of a Voice to the Fourth Animal. In the Year 1572. Paris it self,
and the Prisons in Lions, and over the King^om, were made the King's
Slaughter-Houses. They of the Reform^ Religion were commanded thither, under a
pretense of keeping them out of Harms way: And there within the Courts of the
Prisons, the Butchers Ax and Knife, and Streams of Blood too, as much as might
be, were kept out of sight of the common people; for fear lest Humanity should
have got the upper hand, and Roman Catholics should have rescud their
Neighbors of the Reformation, from that monstrous Excess of Barbarity. At
Lions, the public Executioner, and the Garrison Soldiers innobled themselves
by refusing to kill these Sheep thus brought into the Butchers Pen; tho
commanded by the Governor. As Readiness Guard of old, so their Unfacing Honor
shall never be in danger of being out of Mind, by being out of Sight, so long
as any Compositors and Press men shall be left alive. In this Massacre, the
Place and Means of the Trepan, were so Eminent; the Nobility, Number, Worth of
the Martyrs slain, so very Extraordinary, that the ^ry thereof went up to
Heaven, and the Noise of it made the whole Earth to Ring again. Polanus, to the
Date of his Epistle before his Exposition on Daniel, subjoins this Chronogram,
composd in Remembrance of the Admiral, and of his Honorable Company of
Martyrs; the numeral Letters whereof make 1572. in which Year, August, 24.
being the Lord's Day, this Bloody Massacre was begun: BARTHOLOMAEVS FLET, QVIA
GALLICVS OCCVBAT ATLAS.

The next Year, a Fair Account of this Foul Tragoedy, came forth in Print,
bearing this Title,

DE FURORIBUS Gallicis, horrenda and indigna Amirallij Castillionei, Nobilium
atque illustrium virorum caede, scelerata ac inaudita piorum strage passim
edita per complures Galliae civitates, sine ullo discrimine generis, sexus,
aetatis and conditionis hominum: Vera and simplex Narratio. ERNESTO VARAMUNDO
FRISIO AUCTORE. Vis consili expers mole ruit sua. LONDINI, Ex officina Henrici
Bynneman. 1573.

This History brings to mind Three American Martyrs, whose Love to our Lord
Jesus Christ appeard to be of Proof, whenas many Waters could not quench It,
neither could the Floods drown It. In the Year 1555. Nicholas Durandus
Villagagnon, Thuanu^ lib. 16. p. 500, 501.
a Knight of Jerusalem, one who had been imployd in great Business, a Learned,
and able Man. He out of an eager desire to get Riches, and Honor; did by the
mediation of Gaspar Colligny the Admiral forementioned, obtain a License of the
King to set forth a Fleet, and carry the French Ensigns into the New World.
Upon the 13 th of November, he arrived at the capacious Harbor, which by the
Portugals is called Januarius, being in about 23. degrees of Southern Latitude.
The Fortress erected there, he called Colligni; and that he might the more
curry favor with the Admiral, he confirmd the hopes he had given that it was a
convenient place for propagating the pure Religigion; and petitioned that with
his good leave he might send for some Divines from Geneva. And to that purpose,
the next Year he writ to Calvin, who communicated it to the Elders; and after
Consultation upon the matter, two were chosen out of them; viz. Petrus
Richerius, of fifty; and Gulielmus Quadrigarius, of thirty years of Age; who at
the Request of Vi^lagagn^n, and Col^igny, undertook the Voyage. To these many
adjoined themselves; and among them was Joannes Lerius. Phi^ippus Co^q^ille^^us
had the Conduct of the whole Company committed to him: He betook himself to
Geneva for the sake of Religion, and was known to Colligny, by whose Letters he
was solicited to engage in this Affair, tending so much to the glory of God. At
their Arrival in America, they were received with expressions of great Joy; and
quickly after, their Church was formed according to the Costitution, and Usage
of Geneva; Villagagnon going before them therein, and promising to submit
thereunto. About the 20 th of March, the Lord's Supper was admini^tred,
Villagagnon himself being present. Afterward Controversies prevailed among them
by means of John Cointac a student of Sorbonne, who cut of a fond conceit of
his own Learning, was ambitious of a Superintendency over the other Ministers.
He was of ill manners, and such a friend to Antichristian. Non-Residency, as
not to be ashamed to hold a Benefice in France at the same time that he was
such a stickler at Brasil. He moved that Sacerdotal Garments might be provided,
the Vessels consecrated, Bread unleavened, and the Wine mingled with Water, and
the like. Richers in his Sermon, inveighed against these humane Inventions and
those that sought to introduce them; at which Villagagnon was very angry, and
silencd him: and, as is believed, being advised by a Letter from the Cardinal
of Lorain, evil entreated the Geneva Ministers, and wearied them out, and their
Company; who with much ado, through innumerable dangers, and almost starvd, at
last got to France. They were about 18, or 20. Leagues at Sea, when they sprung
a Leak; and the most part of their Bread was damnified with the salt water: and
they could hardly free the Ship by pumping. Whereupon, lest they should want
provisions for so long a Voyage, the Captain gave way to the desire of five of
the Passengers, to return ashore in the Boat: which their Company regretted,
for fear Villagagnon should do them a displeasure. But they reckoned themselves
safe, having not given him cause of Offense; but Obligation. And so with much
grief on both sides they took Leave; commending each other to the Keeping of
God. Now being unprovided of Mast, Sail, and all manner of Tackling for the
Boat; and of Skill to manage it: it was with infinite difficulty and hazard, that
they recovered the Land, and afterward, the Island and Fortress of Colligny.
They speedily presented themselves to Villagagnon, and acquainted him with the
Danger occasioning their Return: and prayed his Favor; forasmuch as they chose
to dwell with their Countrymen; and not with Portugals, or Indians: and had
left their Wives and Children, to serve him in this remote Land; which they
were ready to do to the uttermost of their power, until they might have
opportunity of returning to France. The Governor spoke them fair; praised God
for their Deliverance: and said, that tho they left him upon discontent, and
were now fallen into his power; yet he would leave Vengeance to God, and by no
means deny them Entertainment. However, he refused to let them make the best of
their boat, to buy Necessaries for recovery of their impaired health. And
within a while, was filld with Jealousies, lest all they had said was feigned;
and that Corquillerius called du Pont, Richer and Company, with the help of
those gone to the River of Plate, upon notice given, would in one night surprise
the Fort, and destroy him and his. Whether these Fears were real or pretended;
he came to a resolution to take them off as Traitors: But not finding how to
make that Charge probable, he pitchd upon Religion, and drew up Articles for
them to answer, as thinking such Sacrifices would be very pleasing to the
Court. The French of the Continent persuaded them not to give an account of
their Faith to this Apostat Tyrant: but that they should rather hide themselves
among the Portugals, or Indians. But they were of Opinion that God called them
to bear witness for Him, and accordingly, John Bordel, who exceeded the rest in
Learning and Grace, as well as in Age, drew up in writing a Confession of
Faith, containing an Answer to the Articles. This they all read often, and
distinctly weighed each Article; and then all signd it. It begins thus:
According to the Doctrine of St Peter the Apostle, in his first Epistle; all
Christians ought always to be ready to give an account of the Hope that is in
them, etc.

The Conclusion of their Confession is in these words, This is the Answer which
we have made to the Articles sent by you, according to the measure and portion
of Faith which God has given us. Let Him be pleased to cause that it may not
dye in us; but may produce fruits worthy of his Children. He giving us
Perseverance in the same, we will ascribe Praise and Thanks unto Him to all
Eternity. Amen.

JEAN du BORDEL. MATTHIEU VERMEIL. PIERRE BOURDON. ANDRE la FON.
When their Orthodox Confession was sent to Villagagnon, he declared them
Heretics upon the Articles relating to the Sacrament of the Altar, and Vows;
and s^id it was unlawful for them to live any longer, le^t the Company should be
infected with their Poison. Yet his resolution to put them to death, he kep^ as
private as he could, till Friday, the 9 th of Febru^ry, 1558. on which day he
orderd them to be brought from the Continent. Their friends with tears
dissuaded them from going to their slaughter. But they considering that God
might have brought them into those parts, and preserved them in millions of
dangers for this end; could not find in their hearts to desert the Cause of
their dear Lord Jesus: So John Bordel, Matthew Vermeil, and Andrew la Fon went
into the boat: But Peter Bourdon was left behind very sick. Being come to the
Island, Villagagnon commanded that they should be brought before him, who
holding their Confession of Faith in his hand, asked if they made and signed
it. They answered that they made it and signd it, every one owning his Hand;
and seeing it was according to the Confession of the holy Apostles and Martyrs
of the primitive Church, they were resolved, by the Grace of God, to maintain
it. Their words were scarce out, before Villagagnon discoverd a furious
countenance, threatening to put them to death, if they continued in their
damnable Opinion. And presently commanded his Executioner to put Irons on their
Legs; and to every Chain to hang fifty, or sixty pound weight: and orderd them
to be shut up in a nasty dark Prison, and set a Guard of armed men upon them.
They comforted one another in Prayer and singing of Psalms. All the Company of
the Island was very much troubled at this action, and secretly comforted the
Prisoners, and gave them provisions which they stood in need of. The next day
in the morning, he went well armd, with a page, into a little Hall, whither he
sent for John Bordel in his Irons; of whom he demanded an explanation of the
article of the Sacrament, He confessed that the Bread and Wine were Signs of
the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, confirming it by the saying of St
Augustine. Villag. in a great passion, gave him a blow on the face with his
fist; whereupon much blood flowed from his nose and mouth. To the blow he added
words agreeable; You have lied, Villain, St Austin never said so: Before I eat,
I will reward the fruits of your Obstinacy. As some tears fell with the blood,
Vil. upbraided him, calling hi^ a puny fresh water soldier, that would cry for
a fillip! Then he a^ked him if he would maintain what he had writ and signd.
Bordel answered, Yes, until by Authority of the holy Scriptures I am otherwise
taught. V. seeing the stedfastness of the man, commanded his Executioner to
bind him, and carry him to a Rock which the water coverd twice a day, three
foot. He and his page being armd, attended the poor Sufferer to the place
appointed. Bordel passing by the prison where his companions were, cried out to
them, with a loud Voice, Be of good Courage, you will quickly be delivered from
this miserable life. As he went along, he sung Psalms, to the astonishment of
bloody V. and his Executioner. Being upon the Rock, it was with much ado that he
got leave to commend himself to God in prayer, before he went out of the world.
The Executioner being too slow for furious V. he threatend him with a cat of
nine tails, if he did not make haste: therefore he immediately threw him into
the Sea, where he rendered to God his Spirit, calling upon the Name of our Lord
Jesus till he was drowned.

Matthew Vermeil was brought next, being greatly astonished at the death of his
companion, he pleaded with V. for his life with such Expostulations, Have we
robbed you, or evilly entreated the least of your servants? Have we plotted
your death, or done any thing to your dishonor? No Villain! said he; you and
your companions dye for no such things as these; but because you are a most
dangerous Pest to be separated from the Church, lest you spoil the rest of my
company. The Martyr answered, Eight months are not passed since you made an
ample confession of the Points for which you make us dye this day. Afterward he
petitioned him again for his life, offering to become his servant. V. said he
had nothing for him to do: but he would think of it, if he would recant his
Error. Vermeil seeing no hope given him, but what was destructive to his
Salvation, became thereby resolved in his mind, and Cried out with a loud
Voice, I had rather dye, to live eternally with the LORD: than to live a little
while, and dye for ever with Satan. After he had made his Prayer upon the Rock,
and commended his Soul to the Care of God, he freely delivered himself into the
hands of the Executioner; and Crying out with a loud Voice, Lord Jesus! have
mercy on me! He gave up the ghost. Andrew la Fon had not strength enough to
climb up into this Rock of Martyrdom: but by Promises and Threatenings, was
drawn to some degree of Recantation: Or else was favored by Villagagnon for
the sake of his Trade of a Tailor, which was very necessary. And so his life
was spared.

But the bloody Sacrifice of Vil. is not yet ended: One Victim remains; viz.
Peter Bourdon, who was left very sick on the Continent. Villagagnon went
himself thither, took one ashore with him. His first salutation to the poor
sick man was that he must get up, and go into the boat. Bourdon would have
excused himself, from his inability to do him any service by reason of
sickness. Villagagnon told him, this was to cure him. The poor man not being
able to stand, much less go; he caused him to be carried aboard. Villagagnon
asked whether he would stand to the Confession he had signd. He answered, he
would consider of it. As soon as they came ashore, the Executioner bound him
without any more ado, advertising him to have a care of his Conscience.
Bourden supposing that to be the place where his companions obtained the
Victory over death; he recommended his soul to God, and Cried with a loud
Voice, Lord God! I am of the same Paste with my Companions, who maintained the
Combat for thy Name, with glory and honor: I pray Thee, show me Favor, that I
may not succumb amidst the Allurements of ^^ian, the World, and the Flesh. I
pray Thee, pardon all my Transgressions and Offenses that I have committed
against thy Majesty: and this in the Name of thy wel-beloved Son, our Lord.
Having prayed thus, he turned himself toward Villagagnon, and asked him for
what he was to dye. For signing an he^^tical and scandalous Confession, said
Villagagnon. When he asked upon what point, he was declared an heretic;
Villagagnon told him it was no time to dispute, but to look to his Conscience:
and bid the Executioner make haste. Bourdon seeing that Divine and humane Laws
were as it were buried, being very resolute, he submitted himself to the
Executioner; and calling for the Help and Favor of God, he dyed in the Lord.
This Tragoedy was ended about ten in the morning. After which, Villagagnon
exhorted the people to avoid the Sect of the Lutherans; with which he himself
was once infected, to his great grief. He threatened death to the obstinat;
saying, that every one ought to observe what their fathers religiously taught
them. This day he commanded plenty of Provisions to be given to the Artificers
and Laborers, in token of Rejoicing. He had written to some Courtiers, that if
they would not blame him for carrying Preaching into Brasil, what great matte^s
he would do against the Ministers; promising to silence them. After this great
Cruelty, his Affairs went every day to wreck: Returning to France, French put
to the sword by the Portugals. H^ylyn Cosmog. page 1080.
he fell into Disgrace there; at last a secret-fire consumed him by degrees,
and he dyed miserably, without repenting of his Apostasy. French Martyrol.
lib. 7. fol. 400, to 404. and 414, to 418. Also Fox, his Table of French
Martyrs, Vol. 2. p. 129. In this history, we are rather to admire the Grace of
God helping three of this Company to go so far; than that the fourth went no
further: Especially considering how destitute they were of Books, and of
Friends that durst speak a word on their behalf; and above all, of their godly,
learned Ministers, who might counsel them, and comfo^t them in their Agonies:
whenas they had to do with a hasty furious Tyrant, more like a Leopard, than a
Lord.

But to return to Revel. 6.9. There seems to be a Distribution of Martyrs into
two Classes. The first were slain because they were Christians; the latter were
slain because they were Not Papists. For the WORD of God] i. e. For the sake of
Christ: They were for JESUS, and not for Jupiter. Testimony is, as it were, a
Term of Art pointing to the Sack cloth Witnesses mentioned Chap. 11.

dwell upon the Earth] This Phrase seems to be a stated Periphrasis for
Antichristians; who impudently pretend to the Monopoly of all that is
Ecclesiastical: whereas it is here said, that they themselves are Extra
Ecclesiam. And white Robes were given unto every one of them] The very material
garments in which they commonly suffered, were of that Color. And these words
seem to be meant of the Justice done to the Memory of these slain Martyrs, by
the True and Universal Histories that were written of Them about this time,
whereby they were vindicated from the Reproaches of their beastly Pursuers; and
had their Proper Character given them. Their filthy garments and Crowns painted
with Devils, were taken off from them; and Fair Mitres were set upon their
Heads, and they were clothed with change of Raiment. So much as might be, a
particular Account was given of each ones Birth, Education, Employment, and
Causes of Suffering. Illyricus, his Catalogus Testium Veritatis was printed at
Basil 1556. About the same time John Crispin, Beza's intimat friend, writ the
French Martyrology at Geneva; which has been very much enlarged, a complete and
excellent Composure: And it is remarkable, that the words of Rev. 6.9, 10. are
set before us in the Title Page. John Fox began his universal History of
Martyrs, at Basil, during his exile there; and perfected it at London, after
his return. At first, he writ in Latin, and sent the Copy to Basil to be
printed, where the Work is in great Estimation; as also in dive^s other foreign
Nations. Legatur Martyrologium Job. Foxi, says judicious Pareus in his learned
Commentary upon Rev. 16.6. Col. 821. His more complete English Edition was
finished about the Year 1570. Thus Christ commanded the Keepers of his Great
Ward Robe, to clothe his Martyrs with rich and costly white Robes of Latin,
English, and French Contexture. Mr. Fox affirms, that by the Iniquity of Time,
this Work could not be contrived in any Kings Reign since the Conquest, before
the Halcyon days of Queen Elisabeth. One Reason why this important Work could
best be performed then, may be gathered from the Triumph which this Learned
Unwearied Author gives the Art of Printing, invented about the Year 1450. Of
which, take this specimen: By this Printing, as by the Gift of Tongues, 1450.
and as by the singular Organ of the Holy Ghost, the Doctrine of the Gospel
sounds to all Nations and Countries under Heaven; and what God reveals to
one man, is dispersed to many; and what is known in one Nation, is opened to
all. Vol. 1. P. 803. The Usefulness of Martyrologies, He expresses thus, Et
tamen voluit hoc modo tua declarare Majestas, nobisque innotescere hominibus,
quam honorificum sit, pro tui nominis gloria fortiter dimicantes, occumbere,
quorum Tu vitam a cinere ac rogo sic vindicas, sic causam tueris, sic
dignitatem illustras; ut eandem, cum gloriae f^nore, abs Te recipiant
clariorem, quam si nunquam alioqui perdidissent. The best word the Lord
Cardinal, and Bishops could afford Mr. George Wisehart, was, False Heretic,
Runnagate, Traitor, and Thief. But when this Cause is brought before Mr. Fox by
an Appeal, He by a very just and impartial Sentence assures us, that he was a
most charitable Gentleman, a very good Scholar, a virtuous Traveller, an
orthodox, holy man of God, and blessed Martyr of Jesus. Vol. 2. p. 521. Very
notable is the Restoration of the Memory of Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius,
by Matthew Parker, Edmund Grindal, Gualter Haddon and others, the Commissioners
of Queen Elisabeth. Cardinal Poole's commissioners had been such Unrighteous
and Cruel Exactors, as to make the Bones of those Worthies to pay for their
Orthodoxy, and fruitful Diligence in the Famous University of Cambridge. It
was expressly mentioned in their commission, ad eorum qui in haeresi
decesserint, memoriam damnandum. And part of their sentence was, Eorum Memoriam
condemnandum esse, and condemnamus. See the History at large, Vol. 3. P. 639.
of the Ninth Edition. In this manner, by these printed Martyrologies, adorned
with lively Cutts; the blessed Martyrs are, all under one, both gloriously
Apparelled; and also placed in the open View of the whole World of Christians
whom John personates.

And it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season] Now
what the Lord will do with this wicked World, See Rogers's Naaman p. 601, 602.
or what Rest He will give to his Church after these long Sorrows; He is our
Father in Heaven, His Will be done in Earth as seems best to his divine
Majesty. In the mean time, let us for our parts, WAIT upon his Graces Leisure;
and glorify his holy Name; and edify one another with all Humility. John Fox
his Protestation, Vol. 1.

I was now about to have passed on to the Sixth Vial; but am interrupted by
some of my Friends, who suppose that not one of the Vials is yet poured out. To
which Objection, I have nothing more satisfactory to my self, to say, than what
I writ in answer to Mr. Benjamin Eliot, April, 7. 1685. Some object, that
Revel. 11.19. and Rev. 15.5. intend the same Thing: and the Witnesses are not
yet risen, and therefore there is no Vial as yet poured out. Vide Med. lib ^*
cap. 6. P. 735. Answ. See Med. Synchron. 5. Sect 3. P. 534. (...) Temple, in
both places, signifies the Reformed Church (...) according to the Com^andment
of Christ, and his Apostles; and separated from that sorry earthy heaven
conformable to the inventive fancys of men. But these two Scriptures have
respect to very different Times, and Conditions of this Church. The Opening
mentioned Rev. 15.5. precedes that mentioned Rev. 11.19. some hundreds of
Years. The Temple Rev. 15.5. is the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony.
Tabernacle] intimating its ambulatory, and movable condition; taken down in one
place, and set up in another, according to the holy, wise, and sovereign
Pleasure and Providence of God: And this may be spoken in contradistinction to
the Temple Rev. 11.19. wherein God will settle his Abode, Psalm. 46.4.

Testimony] The Sackcloth Witnesses are the constituent parts of this Temple;
which for the first Ages of it, was more closely shut, and less visible: and
began now to be more open, when the Commissioners of the Sackcloth Testimony
stood forth, in order to the execution of their Charge. On the other hand, the
Church Revel. 11.19. is called the Temple of GOD, intimating that God had a
more visible, avowed, and immediate Hand in building this Temple. As the
New-Jerusalem is said to come down from God out of Heaven. It may also imply
the Excellency and Glory of this Church above the former. Ostendit apertum
SPONSI Patrocinium.

Brightman Cantic. 6.2. fol. 105.


And therefore God will avowedly and plainly Own this Church to be His, by his
Wonder-working Providence in the face of the whole World. Whereas God did but
privately, and partially favor the other. And that, many times, Not to save
them from death (The Witnesses must be slain) but to strengthen them, and
enable them to dye Triumphing. As it fared with Christ their Head. In this
Divine Temple, the Ark of the Covenant is Seen: There Is another difference. Mr.
Mede conjectures it may be meant of Christ's Personal Appearance. See lib. 5.
cap. 11. P. 1114. However, then it will satisfactorily and plainly appear to
the Saints, that God in Christ, is a God Keeping Covenant; a God of Truth,
Fullfilling every good Word He has spoken concerning his Chosen, and
concerning his Enemies. Then, and not till then, will it fully appear, that God
is a faithful Keeper of that Covenant recorded Jerem. 31.31. and Heb. 8.8. The
Israelites had indeed served Baal, and not Jehovah: Therefore it was fit that
God should carry it toward them as Baal did to his prophets, 1 Kings, 18.26.
-- 29. But now, God will of his bounteous Grace provide, that there shall be no
more National, permanent Apostasy.

For the Confirmation of what has been said, take a few words of my ever
honored Master, the late Reverend, Learned and Holy Mr. Thomas Parker, in a
Manuscript of his upon Isai. 60. Nova Hierosolyma quae hic describitur, est
ipsa Philadelphiensis Ecclesia, quoad antitypum, inchoata a temporibus Wiclefi;
ante cujus pedes adorabunt omnes ipsius inimici, in compensationem Patientiae,
qua sustinuerat Opprobrium antegressum tempora Wiclefi; et qua sustinuerat
Opprobrium and Persecutiones passim erumpentes in primordijs Regni Christi,
post Wiclephum, restituti. Haec etjam est ipsa Nova Hierosolyma quae
describitur Apoc. 21. Comprehendit autem statum imperfectiorem, 1371.
inchoatum a temporibus Wiclesi; et statum perfectiorem post finem annorum
Antichristi; et etjam Perfectum tandem, introducendum in Gloria Coelesti. Et
paulo post, Violentia in ea jam ex part cessavit; saltem imperfectius, et
Vicibus alternis: sed tandem perfect cessabit etc. Sol igitur illius nunquam
occumbet, quoniam bostes Lucem ejus nunquam extinguent: licet ad tres dies and
dimidium, Voti sui compotes futuri videantur.

Upon these grounds, the forementioned Objection cease to be cogent with me.
And I am so far from thinking that no Vial is yet poured forth; that I am apt
to conclude, that no less than Five ANGELS have already poured out their Vials.
So many guesses have been made about the Subject of the Fourth Vial; that if I
do enter a claim for the Sun of Persecution, I shall no more incur the danger
of being extravagant, than some that have gone before me. Certainly, that is
the Sun that consolidates and cherishes the Antichristian State. As for the
Fifth Vial; Bullinger, Brightman, Forbes, Pareus, Mede, and Company
Interpreters of the Revelaton, have poured that to purpose. As also Dr.
Whitaker, The Author of the History of the Council of Trent, Chamier, Robert
Parker, Dr. Ames, Dr. Owen, cum multis Alijs. And seeing the Tower of Babel
has no other foundation than the Uncertain Vanity of the Apostle Peter's
having been at Rome: Uldaricus Velenus did the Babylonians a singular
displeasure in writing a Treatise to prove that He was never there. Bellarmin.
de Pontif. lib* 2. cap. 1. The truth is, except their Index expurgatorius be
enlarged with many Clauses of Scripture, the Probability lies on Velenus his
side; Ten to One. And Bellarmin's arguing from Peter's Tomb, is unsound. For it
was customary at Rome, to make Funeral Solemnitys, and erect Monuments for
persons dying abroad. Alcyone resolved to pay that Respect to her husband Ceyx,
who was lost at Sea. Ovid Metamor. lib. 11. and lib. 12. princip. Si non Urna,
tamen junget nos Littera; si non
Ossibus Ossa meis, at Nomen Nomine tangam.
How easy was it for the modern Romans to make use of this Custom when it might
serve their turn. Moreover if this Vial partly intends Impressions to be made
upon the City of Rome it self; yet we need not wait longer for them. There was
a jostling between Charles the Emperor, 1527.
and Clement the Bishop. The Emperors Army in their march toward Naples,
wanting both Pay, and Provisions; Charles Duke of Bourbon, was fain to calm
them, by promising the Liberty of furnishing themselves at Rome. Upon the fifth
of May, 1527 They encamped in a meadow near the (...) From thence He sent a
Trumpet to the Pope, to demand passage for his Army through the City, in his
way to Naples. The next morning, May, 6. at break of day* He drew near the
Suburbs, by way of the Mountain, and Santo Spirito; wherein he was favored by
a very thick Mist; which rising before day, and increasing with degrees of Fogg
and thickness, became such a Covert to the whole Camp, that his Soldiers were
not discerned till they were near the place where they began a furious Assault.
The Noble Duke marched in the head of his Troops, carrying a scaling Ladder in
his hand; and was unhappyly slain with an Harquebuse shot. Philibert of Chalon
Prince of Orange causing his body to be covered with a cloak, maintained the
Charge very vigorously, and by dint of Sword forced his Entrance. The
defendents fled before him; their Fear being far above any other sense or
passion in them; and the Suburbs were entirely abandoned, and left a prey to
the Conquerours. Clement was in the Palace of the Vatican, expecting the issue;
Fondly trusting to his Excommunication of Bourbon and the Army.
who hearing that the Enemies were entered, discovered his Passions of Fear and
frailty; and with certain Cardinals presently betook himself to the Castle of
St Angelo. He was in doubt whether it were best to abide there; or to retire to
some place of greater surety. In the mean time, Berard de Padoa, who was fled
from the Imperial Army, certified the Pope, that the Duke of Bourbon the
General was dead, and that their Courage was thereby so much abated, that they
desired an Accord with him: in which matter they sent out men to parley with the
Principals. On the day following, while the Pope was in this perplexity, not
knowing what course to take; the Spaniards seeing neither Order, nor Counsel to
defend the Quarter beyond Tiber, entered without any Resistance; and the same
evening, they entered by the bridge Xisto, into the City of Rome, where all was
turned into Flight, and Confusion. For want of great Artillery, the first
Dispute was sharp; in which there fell of the Imperialists One Thousand. Being
exasperated by this Loss, and the death of their General; they slew and put to
the Sword Four Thousand. In their pillaging, small regard was had to Friends or
Favorites; much less was respected the Authority of Cardinals and Prelates,
tho of their own Nation; Or the Dignity of Rich Temples, Relics, Dedications.
It is hard to particularise the greatness of the Prey. But that which made the
Spoil infinite in Value, was the Quality and great number of Prisoners,
Redeemed with most rich and huge Ransoms. The Launceknights, being Germans and
favorers of Luther; bore no good will to the Church of Rome. These took
prisoners certain Prelates, whom they apparelled with the Habits and marks of
their Dignities, and then set them upon Asses and lean Mules, with their faces
reversed to the crowpe of the beasts; and so led them through the City of Rome,
upbraiding and terrifying of them with the Name of Luther. Symonds on the Fifth
Vial p. 251.
Many of them they ^a^iously tormented; so that some first yielded a Ransom,
and then their Lives. The Cardinal of Sienna compounded with the Spaniards; and
was afterward made prisoner by the Launceknights, who made booty of his Palace,
and then led him all naked with buffets and bastinados, into the borough. He
was driven to redeem his life out of their hands with a promise of five
thousand Ducats. The Cardinals Minerva and Ponsaro paid the Ransom they were
rated at, after they had been in a vile Spectacle carried in Procession through
the Town of Rome. One called the Cardinal Sanctorum quatuor, or Cardinal of
Pouch, Fox, Vol. 2. p. 199, 202.
was slain. To these Strokes was superadded that of the Plague, which invaded
the City and Soldiers at the same time; and made its Entrance also into the
impregnable Castle of St Angelo, to the great danger of the Popes life: about
whom died certain special Men who did service to his person. The Pope was at
last so far meekened by the complication of many pressing Calamities attending
a strait Siege, as to be brought to a Composition with the Imperialists. He was
to make present payment of threescore thousand Ducats to the Launceknights; and
to the Spaniards, thirty and five thousand: This being done, they were to set
him at liberty with all the Cardinals. Within three months after, other like
great Sums were to be paid to the Spaniards and Launceknights, according to
their portions; which together with the Sums that had been paid, amounted to
more than three hundred and fifty thousand Ducats. That he might make these
Payments, and deliver himself from the heavy yoke of his Imprisonment, he
created certain Cardinals for Money, of whom the most part, for their Learning
or Virtue, were Unworthy so great Honor. The Cardinals Cesis and Ursin were
delivered to the Soldiers as Hostages, who were led by the Cardinal Colonno to
Grottaferara. And so all things having their orderly Expedition, the Spaniards
were to guard him to a place of Surety the tenth of December. But he fearing
some variation or ill Accident, stole away out of the Castle the night before,
in the habit of a Merchant, and was guarded to Orvietto. The Soldiers
satisfied of all their Payments from the time of the Pope's delivery, with
forty thousand Ducats over and above, as impressed money for two days, they
marched out of Rome the 17 th day of February, a day which had been most
joyful, and of special Respira^ion to the wretched people of Rome; if their
Calamities, which they supposed to be ended by the departure of the
Launceknights, had not eftsoons recontinued in a new course by the Abbot of
Farfa, and others of the family of the Urs^ns; who entering the Town with the
paysants of their dominions, did for many days many great Insolences. By
reason of these Calamities, grievous for their continuance, and lamentable for
their wretched Succession; descending from one Enemy that was ill, to another
that was worse, the City of Rome was not only made naked of a great part of her
Inhabitants, with the desolation of many houses and Palaces: but also it stood
rent and defaced in Images of ancient and worthy presence. etc. Guicciardin,
lib. 18. page 851 -- 878. Thuanus speaks (...) manner, Caesar, ut injuriam sibi
a Clemente illatam ulcisceretur, nominis pontificij auctoritatem per omnem
Hispaniam abolet; exemplo ab Hispanis posteritati relicto, posse ecclesiasticam
disciplinam citra nominis pontifi^ij auctoritatem, ad tempus conservari. Eodem
tempore Columnij a Caesare instigati, Romam occupant, and Clementem in Mausoleo
Had^iani obsident. Nec multo post totis viribus Romam itum, Duce Borbonio, et
urbe in petu capta and direpta DCCCC. postquam a Totila postremo vastata fuit,
anno, abunde de Clementis ambigua fide Caesari satisfactum est. Histor. lib. 1.
p. 17. Cesars abolishing the Popes Authority for a while, might lead the way to
Henry the Magnificent his Uncle, to do it for good and all. Guicciardin
reports the Imperial Army to consist of Four and Twenty Thousand; viz. eight
thousand Spaniards, twelve thousand Launceknights, XL Thousand Onuph. p. 382.
and four thousand Italians: an Army sufficient to do in Italy what they
pleased. The Cardinals that were in Italy made a motion, that as well they as
the other Cardinals beyond the Mounts, might assemble together at Avignion, to
take Counsel in so troublesome a time, what course to hold for the stability of
the Church. But because they would not all at one time, range themselves under
the power of so mighty Princes, they declined it. The Pope's chief hope was in
Francis the French King, who had been Caesar's Prisoner but a little before; and
now the Dauphin, and Duke of Orleance were in his hand as Hostages. Which
rendered his motions slow and irregular, as of a person in Fetters. So that
Monsieur Lawtrech commander of the Leaguers Army advanced not so far as Rome.
And Tiber by its Overflowing, incommoded a Party of their Men. The Emperor
also had a considerable Interest in Italy. Pompeijus Columna the Cardinal, who
much Influenced the People, was at his devotion; and the Duke of Ferrara
strongly solicited Charles Duke of Bourbon to surprise Rome, as the only
Expedient for securing his Maste^s Interests. By such means it came to pass
that the Imperial Army had no less than Nine Months time to pillage Rome.
Where the Pope contrary to his custom, his nature, and all expectation, did not
only constantly remain; but being confident of defending the City, he did not
only forbid Men to go away; but also made an Ordinance that no Goods should be
carried out; which Merchants and Artificers would have secured by sending them
down the River. Ea Nocte nihil unquam lugubrius aut funestius Roma vidit, says
Onuphrius in the life of Clement, p. 382. col 2. Now if one or two Kings did so
far waste Rome by the by, and as it were in Jest: When the Seventh Vial's Turn
comes, the Ten Kings will do it perfectly, and with a Vengeance. For Rome will
be reserved till then, Ut sentiat se mori. If the Papists object the death of
the Duke of Bourbon: That Loss was well repaired by the Choice of the Prince of
Orange in his stead; by which means Rome's Night was made more dark, and came
on the faster. And Johannes Medices, one of the chief Commanders on Clement's
side, fell also by a shot. Even Monsieur Lawtrech, the Pope's deliverer, died
in the Camp not very long after; and most of his Army was swept away by the
Plague. Not above three Years after, the River Tiber received a Commission to
make some considerable addition to the Ruin of Rome. Tiberis alveum egressus
magis quam ad eam diem hominum memoria, vel vetustis monumentis relatum esset,
Urbem inundavit, incredibili cum Romanorum damno, et aedium detrimento. Onuphr.
p. 384. col. 1.

Upon all, or some of these Considerations, it seems to me probable that Five
of the Vials are already poured out. Not but that they hold on their course
still; and will do so, until the Confluence of them all do with irresistible
Force ingulf Antichristianisme in utter Ruin. The truth is, all the Vials may
in some sense be said to have been poured out together at the beginning of this
Period of Rome's gradual Decay. Yet there are critical Times, and
characteristical passages of divine Providence, wherein each Vial obtains the
successive Regency app^inted them of Christ. And the Sixth Angel seems now to
stand ready with his Vial, waiting only for the Word to be given for the
pouring of it out The pouring out of this Vial will dry up the Antichristian
Interests in the New World: and thereby prepare the way for the Kings of the
East. This is agreeable to the analogy of Interpretation generally given by the
Ancients; and more lately by Bullinger, Pare^s, Cowper, and many others. Only
as Euphrates is one individual River, so it is suitable to limit it to this
Continent; thereby to keep it as it were within its banks. There is an harmony
between the Third and Sixth Vials. In the pouring out of that, the
Antichristian Rivers were made bloody, by the Civil, and Military Sword: By the
pouring out of this, the Great River is wholly dried up; so that Nothing of it
is left remaining to make Babylon glad. Consequently, the Armagedduntine
Expedition will some way resemble that of 1588. Only it will be much greater,
and more fatal to the principal Undertakers. Mr. Brightman couples Revelation,
16.16. with Daniel, 11.45. So that if the genuine sense of that place has been
given, we know where to look for the drying up of Euphrates. And to make the
Turkish Empire the subject of the Sixth Vial, seems heterogeneous: For
Euphrates must needs be parcel of the Waters upon which the Whore sits at the
time when this great River comes to be dried up: Which the Sun of Righteousness
will do, by causing so much of her dominion to cease for ever. The Pope and his
followers, by warring against the Turk, do not dry up Euphrates: but do enlarge
the Papal, by the diminution of the Ottoman Empire. And although the passing
away of the second Woe be matter of universal Joy; yet to make it to be the
drying up of Euphrates, seems hard: For the Sixth Vial does not carry off an
Old Plague; but brings on a New one. Neither did I ever hear that the Reformed
Churches fared so much the better for the taking of Buda, as to make me think
that Euphrates was then partly dried up. Moreover this is a new accommodation.
The first that I find of it, is in Mr. Fox, p. 373. Probably, if he had met
with it before, he would have mentiond it; that being his professed design,
Praefat. p. 6. But he acknowledges Interpreters went another way, and
endeavors to refute them. Pareus speaks thus, Neque nova vel recens a nobis
excogitata est haec interpretatio. Eandem enim ANONYMUS meus ante 260. annos
expressit his verbis, etc. col. 839. The inconsistency of this Opinion with
Mede's Hypotheses, makes not a little against it. He himself seems to be put
upon bending the fourth, to make it conform; aut saltem quod bestiae saluti
innexum, ejusque interest. p. 656. Although so great a Pilot's taking this
path, was an extraordinary prejudice; yet many learned Expositours have still
chosen to go in that which was the beaten Road in Mr. Fox's time; and, as I
suppose, was, and is the KING's high Way. Mend but the Chronology of Alcasar,s
dream, and what he has written upon the Sixth Vial, becomes a very good
Protestant Exposition; Etenim repent, et praeter opinionem, alius uxorem
propriam esse Christianam deprehendit, alius filiam, fratres alius, alius
cognatos and affines; ac demum omnes pariter animadverterunt Christianam Fidem
sese in mediam Romam, et in ipsas eorum domos insinuasse, atque adeo vix
aliquam esse super, quo non coelestis ille penetrasset Ignis, quem Christus in
terra accensurus advenit. p. 730. To his own that golden Promise belongs, The
Lord will dry up Euphrates to make a way for his scattered ones. Some think it
concerns the Return of the Jews miraculously; as once through the Red Sea.
Rogers's Naam. p. 228.

Sed, Quersum haec? What Concernment has America in these Things! America is
not any part of the Apocalyptical Stage. The Promise of preaching the Gospel to
the whole World, is to be understood of the Roman Empire only, according to the
extent of it in John's time: As it is said Augustus made a decree that all the
world should be taxed The Roman Empire contained about a third part of the Old
World: and this Triental only was to be concernd with the Apocalypse. The
Prophesies of the Revelation extend but to such Kingdoms or Monarchies of the
World, where the Church in all Ages still was: therefore not to the
West-Indians, nor Tartarians, nor Chinese, nor East-Indians.

But what shall we say, if the Stone which these Builders have refused, should
be made the Head of the Corner? Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in
the fields of the wood. Or if it be not made a Cornerstone: that it should be
quite thrown by, and not be at all laid in the Building: is more than can be
proved from the Scriptures. I suppose there is nec vola, nec vestigium of any
such thing to be found there. Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant?
to his own Master he stands or falls: Yea, he shall be holden up: for GOD
is able to make him stand; may be applicable here. There is a vast odds between
historical and prophetical Scriptures, as to the manner of their declaration.
Augustus taxed as much of the World as he could; taxed all his world Why may
not Jesus, in like manner; give Law to all His World, without asking Caesar's
leave? To tedder the Scriptures, and tie them to the Herculean Pillars; takes
off all the Luster of the Spanish Motto, PLUS ULTRA; and makes the Glory of it
to dwindle away to very nothing. But the Word of God is not bound. To go about
to do it, is, I fear, to limit the Holy One of Israel; and injuriously to spoil
the Church of that Doxology, In God will I praise the Word: in the Lord will I
praise the Word. I have seen an end of all perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad. It was so in David's time: but now, tho the Scripture Canon be
complete, it is so far shrunk, as to extend but to about a Quarter of the Old
World! For they who have no share in the Revelation, it is hard to think how they
will be able to make out a good Title to any portion of Scripture: this being
the last, and most comprehensive of all. And what a Rack of Romanizing,
endless, incurable Torture, must this needs fasten serious Christians upon.
Whenas after diligence to acquaint themselves with the Scriptures, and to
obtain the Favor of God in the ways there marked out: still all is bootless,
except they can prove themselves to dwell within the bounds of the Roman
Empire. Which, as to multitudes, is a doubt that all the Learning in Europe, is
not sufficient to resolve. And what shall become of Scotland Ireland, Denmark,
Sweden, Poland, Bohemia, Moscovia, much of Germany, and a great deal more of
Europe beside? Bucha^an, Br^rewood.
According to this Reckoning, these Nations must be Extra Ecclesiam, because
they are Extra Imperium: As also, by far the greatest part of Asia, and Africa,
and all America. The first and most, so far as I know, that has given
countenan^^ to this Bill of Ex^^^sion; is the Conjecture of the Learned and
Pious Mr. Mede. And herefore it may not be amiss to take a View of that Chapter
entitled, DE GOGO and MAGOGO in Apocalypsi Conjectura, lib. 3. p. 713. Although
the Author be incomparably more than my Match; yet the Honor of being a
Retainer to my Noble Lord Say; Love to my Country; and the Advantage, as I
apprehend, on my side, do prompt me to the Undertaking. Dr. Twisse in a Letter
to Mr. Joseph Mede, dated Ap. 6. 1635. mentions his having written to my Lord
Say touching his Counsels for advancing the Plantations of the West, and
telling him, that his Lordship little thought that they tended to promote the
Kingdom of Gog and Magog. My Lord in his Answer to the Doctor, gave a touch
only thereupon; which was this, That surely, the Americans were not Gog and
Magog. The Dr. writ more largely of this Subject in his next Letter. Upon this
his Lordship wrote a large Letter Opposing the Conceit of Gog, and Magog; tho
the Millennium of Christ's Kingdom were granted; yet not a little against that
also. Epist. 50. p. 993. Had this Letter of the L. Say been in print, probably,
there had been nothing left unanswered; or at least there had been a trodden
Path: whereas now I must beat out my way as well as I can.

Conjectura] Thus I have told you out my fancy of the Inhabitants of that
World: which tho it be built upon mere Conjectures; and Not upon firm grounds;
etc. Epist. 43. p. 981. Let but those who quote Mr. Mede, imitate his Modesty;
and as yet no great trouble occurs.

APocalypsis codex est fatorum ecclesiae Gentium, non Judaeorum. Habent enim
Judaei de suo etc. neque nostra ullatenus opus habent.

These Pronouns, Meum and Tuum, in a business of this nature, I cannot away
with. This being one of the first Writts of Partition brought for dividing the
Scriptures, that I have taken notice of. The Scriptures are an Estate holden in
Joint Tenancy; and none have any preferible Right in them. From the Epistle
Dedicatory; Unto his Servants; we must with Mr. Dent conclude, that the whole
Doctrine of the Revelation appertains to the Universal Church of Christ
throughout all the World, in all Times and Ages. p. 8. The Bodleian Library is
not the Propriety of this or the other particular College, or Hall; much less,
of the happy Keeper of it: but of the Renowned University of Oxford. By which
means the whole World is benefited by their Illuminations. The Apocalypse is a
most illustrious Epithalamium suited to the stately Magnificence of the
Bridegroom, Bernard Batc. Revel. p. 108.
and of the Bride. Now the Jews upon their Return, will eminently sustain that
Character. The New Jerusalem is that which the Old and New Testament do ring
of. This City of God is especially made up of Jews, and from thence it has its
Name. Goodwin, Rev. p. 28. Therefore, seeing the Parchments belong to those who
have the Estate; this Book must needs belong to the Jews: because the glorious
Things that are spoken of therein, are eminently spoken of them. Our LORD,
whose this Book is, and his Servant John, the writer of it, were Jews; and
there have been of that Nation converted in all Ages, who have kept Possession
for the rest: so that I cannot discern any incongruity in affi^ming that this
Book belongs to them also; and gives an Account of God's Providence toward
them; especially upon their Return. [ Return Return, O Shulamite! Return
Return!] But, let us see what is laid in against their Claim.

Ambitu suo Gentes] The Church consists not of Gentiles only. The four Quarters
of the World with all their Furniture, make the Apocalyptical Stage: and in
every one of these are the dispersed Jews to be found. Eodem (ni fallor)
faciunt etc.] If there be not Room enough in Rev. 10.11. to entertain the Jews,
I cannot imagine any thing large enough to comprehend them.

Sed omnium maxim illud confirmat Parabolarum Symbolorumque propheticorum in
hoc Libro indoles atque ingenium; in quibus nempe passim observare licet,
Judaeos, sive synagogam Israeliticam, Personam Verae Christi Ecclesiae ex
Gentibus surrogatae, sustinere: Gentes contra, typum Idolatrarum, ejusdemque
Ecclesiae hostium; etc. Atqui in ea Prophetia ubi Gens Israelitica alienam
personam sustinet; ibi suam ipsius gestare nullo modo verisimile est:
quandoquidem illud fieri nequit, quin totius Parabolae ratio conturbaretur. etc.

It is indeed a singular Honor to that Nation, that sincere Christians; such
as with inviolable Chastity keep themselves to the Institutions of their LORD,
should be called Jews, Rev. 2.9. But to take an occasion from thence, to
exclude all Jacob's Posterity from this Privilege, is to argue perversely. Our
Savior does not deny Nathanael to be a Jew, by pronouncing him an Israelite
indeed. The Revelation does not so much regard what Nation a man is of: but
whether he be a follower of the LAMB, or no. For he is not a Jew [in this
spiritual sence] which is one outwardly [only] But he is a Jew which is one
inwardly. Romans 2.9. In this glorious State of the Church which John
introduces, the Jew^ must needs be very much concerned; because Christ's
Receiving them again, is a notable means reserved of God, to revive, and bring
on the Spring of the Gentiles, and to cause them to flourish, as is herein
described. Romans 11.15. And yet there is no difference between the Jew, and the
Greek: for the same LORD over all, is Rich unto all that call upon him.

Hinc adeo fit ut tantillum etc.] The Jews are not mentioned by the by only;
but directly, and on purpose; as in the beginning of the nineteenth chapter.
And that which is last accomplished; is firstly and chiefly designed by the
Efficient. I will be their GOD, and they shall be my People: Is the most Great,
and Glorious, and All that can be said. Whatsoever else is spoken, must be only
in explanation of this; or it will be perfectly blasphemous Nonsense. Upon
which consideration, me thinks tantillum, and Sponsa AGNI, do not stand well
together in the same chapter. However, we are beholden to this great and worthy
Author, for his concurrent Testimony, that the Jews are the People intended in
the sixteenth, and nineteenth Chapters. Pari ratione] May it not with more, or
equal strength be argued, New-Jerusalem is not the same with Jerusalem: but as
Jerusalem was to the westward of Babylon; so New-Jerusalem must be to the
westward of Rome; to avoid disturbance in the Order of these Mysteries. If we
might be allowed to take Mr. Mede's words as they seem to sound at the first
hea^ing; they would signify no less; New-Jerusalem is not the whole Church;
but the Metropolis thereof, and of the New World. Epist. 20. p. 944. The thirty
seventh of Ezekiel treats of the Marriage of the LAMB. Therefore it seems
probable that the thirty eighth Chapter treats of the same Gog and Magog that
John does; the same Order being kept in both places. If Ezekiel have some
respect to former Enemies; that does not hinder, but that this might be the
ultimat and principal Aim of the Prophecy. The Reverend, Learned and Holy Mr.
John Cotton, had much of the meaning of this mysterious Book showed him by
Christ, as a Blessing upon his much Prayer and Study, in order to his
Exposition of the same in his weekly Lecture at Boston in New England. He has
written thus, This Gog cannot be Gyges, nor Antiochus Epiphones. This Gog in
Ezekiel, is the same with this Gog in the Text. For 1. Gog in Ezekiel is
foretold (when he shall come) to be the same whom the Prophets of old spoke of,
Ezekiel. 38.17. 2. Gog in Ezekiel, comes after the Resurrection and Reunion of
Judah and Israel, Ezekiel. 37. throughout. And upon his Destruction, Ezekiel sees
a Vision of a glorious Church of the Jews, Chapt. 40. to the end of the Book.
So does this Gog arise up to fight against the Holy, after the first
Resurrection o^ the Churches of Jews and Gentiles. And after his Destruction;
John sees the New Jerusalem come down out of Heaven, Chapt. 21. to the end of
the Book.

When the Saints and Witnesses of Jesus Christ have enjoyed the Liberty,
Purity, and Authority of Church Government, for the space of a Thousand Years,
after the Destruction of Antichrist; Satan will again find Liberty and Power to
deceive the Nations, Princes and People, in great multitudes, to war against
the Church; especially against Jerusalem. V. 7, 8, 9. Taken out of a Manuscript
of Mr Cotton's own Handwriting, p. 34, 36. Mr. Greenhil upon Ezekiel. 38.5, 6. p.
496. Observes, From all quarters of the World there be Enemies ready to combine
and act with Gog etc. Those of the East, comprehended under Persia; those of
the South, intended under Ethiopia; those of the West, included in Lybia; and
those of the North, contained under Gomer, and the house of Togarmah, were all
at the beck of Gog, to go against Jerusalem; the Servants, and Worship of God
therein.

Ex quo autem hominum genere Hostis hic novissimus -- Ex gentibus in opposito
nobis Hemisphaerio, quas Deus Opt. Max. occulto suo judicio, maximam partem,
nunquam sit Evangelij sui lumine perfusurus.

Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29. speaking, for ought I know, of the Unparalleld Providence
awaiting the aboriginal Natives of America, shuts up all with that solemn and
silencing Axiom, The Secret things belong unto the LORD our GOD. A man may know
more by himself, than all others can; and yet he cannot lawfully account
himself a Castaway; much less may he denounce another man Reprobate; and least
of all, a whole World of men: except he shall suppose himself licenced to cast
firebrands, arrows and death; and say, Am not I in sport? One of the chief
Spices wherewith Historians have embalmed the Memory of Isabella Queen of
Castile, is, that she did greatly love Learned men, who were of good
Conversation; especially Prelates of an holy and religious Life, preferring
such. Accordingly, Twelve learned Clerks of good and holy life, according to
those times, were sent over with Christopher Columbus in his second Voyage.
Grimeston Hist. of Spain, p. 845, 949. And we would fain hope there might be
some Gold among the counterfeit metal; the time of Refining not being then far
come on. According to Mr. Mede's Simile in his excellent Discourse upon Isai.
2.2, 3, 4. Disc. 29. p. 185. Dr. Whitaker de n^tis Eccles p. 505. speaks not
without hope of the Americans, as if it might fare better with them, than with
their Teachers. Quod siqui for^e illorum, Scripturas intelligunt, si Dominus
illis suum Spiritum dederit: possunt in meliori statu esse, quam sunt ipsi
Monachi, and Jesuitae, a quibus instructi sunt. Haec qualiscunque Evangelij
praedicatio, censeri debet prodromus praedicationis incorruptae, quae suo
tempore subsequetur. Alsted his continuation of Chamier, de notis Ecclesiae, p.
102. Mr. Mede mentions a Sentence taken out of a Treatise published Anno 1120.
Sicut fumus praecedit ignem, victoriam pugna; sic et gloriam Christi, tentatio
Antichristi. Book, 3. p. 888. In Mr. Broughton's Explication of the Holy
Apocalypse, chap. 11. p. 141. are these words, The West-Indians seem to come of
the East: as both speak some Hebrew. Now God drives us to both Indians, not
for Pepper, and Tobacco: but in time, to show his Name. And the Jesuits, in
teaching the Holy Trinity, Person, and Justice of Christ, may save many. Mr.
Daniel Roger^, Mr. Mede's Tutor, a Man of vast Parts, writes favorably of the
New English Plantations in America; and arises a Note higher, in expressing
his hopes of the Conversion of the Natives, Who can, or dare deny, but that the
calling of those Americans to the knowledge of the Truth, may seem a weighty
Occasion to expect from God the gift of Miracles? Naaman etc. p. 6, 169. Mr.
Henry Scudder, a solid and fruitful Divine; in opening those words in the Lords
Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven, p. 117, 118. has this Use, Whereas we
read and hear of much People both in Asia, and America, that worship and pray
unto the very Devil, not with inward worship only (for if these only, did so,
it were happy with many that are called christians) but with outward worship
also: Tho we cannot speak to them, to reclaim them of this devilish Idolatry;
yet in compassion we should speak to God for them, that He would please to send
the Light of his glorious Truth and Gospel, to discover their Sin unto them,
and to recover them out of the snare of the Devil, who holds them captive at
his will. I do urge this the rather, because I am persuaded, that when all
Israel shall be called namely, when the two Sticks prophesied of by Ezekiel,
shall be joined into One Stick: when, as the Apostle says, All Israel shall be
saved, Ezekiel. 37.16. Romans 11.26.
which State of theirs, v. 15. he calls a receiving of Life from the dead:
When this shall come to pass, I doubt not but Many of those deceived souls,
which yet never heard of the Gospel (except by Papists, who make them whom they
convert, thrice more the children of the Devil, than before) shall have part in
the same Resurrection: Let us therefore pray for them.

Having seen these three Worthies thus pleading and wrestling for the New
World; as also Dr. Ames, and Mr. Nicholas Estwick, as far as I can gather, a
well wisher thereunto: Remembering too that they were all, of Christ-College in
Cambridge; it gives me occasion to say, Una eademque Domus, Vulnus Opemque
tulit.

If the ancient name Vates, may still be allowed to Poets; it will be the more
considerable, that Mr. Abraham Cowley has said, At tu praeteritas tandem
obliviscere clades,
Nam tanti non parva Deus tibi, America, vindex,
Et dedit and majora dabit solatia damni.
Gande sort tua; pars omnis amara vorata est
Jam dudum: dulcis superest: etc. etc.
Ingenium, pietas, arts, ac bellica virtus
Huc profugae venient, and regna illustria condent*
Et domina his virtus erit, and fortuna ministra.
Plantar. lib. 5. p. 252, 253. Likewise, Herbert's Poems entertain us very
nobly with a good Presage for the New World; p. 191.

Then shall Religion to America flee:
They have their Times of Gospel, ev^n as we.
Not doubting but that these Authorities, being brought to the King^s Scales,
will be over Weight; I pass on. Nostri vero Hemisphaerij orbem, quem Oceanus
ambitu suo circumscribit] God has founded the American Tebel, upon the Seas,
and established it upon the Floods. For Rivers, Lakes, and Seas, America
refuses to give place. Quique solus Antiquis creditus est humani generis
domicilium.]

The Ancients believed there was no Earth here. The doctrine of Antipodes, was
with them, Heresy. Virgilius was condemned for it. So that by this argument,
the Inhabitants of the New World tread water. But to argue from an antiquated
Opinion, after it is, by Experience, convicted of essential and total Error; is
truly to personat Water, as to its instability. One may equally fasten the same
Imputations upon Asia, Africa, and Europe, because Montezuma and his Subjects,
did not believe there was any such Place, or People. In quo primus homo
conditus, etc.]. I shall always think the worse of Holiness of Places, for Mr.
Mede^s sake; seeing it has put one of his Learning and Charity, upon throwing
away the New World at a cast: For that seems to be the only basis of this
argumentation. And yet one would think, That the Fall of Mankind, Judas^s
Treason, and Mahomet^s Alc^ran, do but ill favourdly contribute toward the
sanctification of Asia. Eorum discipuli praedicarunt] Thuanus was of Opinion,
that God raised the Spaniards to that Height of Power, that they might be fit
Instruments for carrying the Gospel into these remote Parts: and speaks thus of
it, Non mediocre, meo quidem judicio, operae pretium fuit, ubi null^s omnino
terras esse credidit antiquitas, ibi inter tot gentes antea incognitum CHRISTI
Nomen vel perperam audiri and celebrari. Histor. lib. 1. p. 10. F. But to leave
other American Plantations, it is certainly known, That the Disciples of CHRIST
have, for these Seventy seven Years, constantly and publicly preached the
everlasting Gospel in New England in America; and have kept his Sabbath. It
should seem Mr. Estwick had alleged the Conversion of some Americans; by Mr.
Mede's Reply, March, 22. 163 6/7 Epist. 69. p. 1034. But the New Englanders
have not yet converted one; the Spaniards have, but unto Antichrist, not to
Christ: and the Story of their Conversion is such as may make a man justly
suspect there has scarce yet been over a true Christian of that Race] It is a
received Maxim, that into whatsoever place Jesus Christ sends the Gospel of
his Grace; in that Place He has People to be saved. And who can certainly fix
the Moment when Christ shall begin this mysterious Work? At the date of this
Letter, sixteen Years were run out, after Christ began to settle his Abode
here. And I presume, May America prosper, as Winthrop, and Wilson, and Company
came into it upon good Grounds!
the Negative testimony of a Person three Thousand miles off the Place
concerned, will not obtain much credit with equal Judges. Especially,
remembering that the 43 th Epistle begins thus, Concerning our Plantation in the
American World, I wish them as well as any body: tho I differ from them far;
both in other things, and the grounds they go upon. Neither can I believe, that
the Captain of our Salvation has landed his Forces here, to disturb and vex
Satan only; 1 Kings, 20* 23, 28.
but to fight with him in good Earnest, and break his Head. It is remarkable
what Mr. Nathanael Morton relates of one Squanto an Indian, in his
New-England^s Memorial, p. 25, 35, 40. He proved a special Instrument sent of
God for the good of the English, and was their Interpreter; directed them in
planting of their Corn; where to Fish; and was also their Pilot to bring them
to unknown places; and never left them until his death. He was a Native of
this place where Plymouth is, and scarce any left besides him. The great Sachem
Massasciet sought his li^e; which caused him to stick close to the Eng^ish.
Being on a Voyage to buy Corn, by reason of cross Winds they put in at
Mannamoik, where Squanto fell sick, and in a few days dyed. A little before his
death, he desired Governor Bradford (who was then there) to pray for him, that
he might go to English man's God in Heaven: and bequeathed many of his Things to
his English Friends, for a Remembrance of his Love: of whom they had a great
Loss. This fell out in the Year 1622. As Rahab, he with the uttermost hazard of
his life changed sides; left his countrymen, and espoused the Interest of
Strangers: And therefore I dare not deny, but that Rahab and he do now fare
alike. This Year the Indians were exceedingly affected with the Providence of
God in sending a plenteous Rain upon the very same day that the English had set
apart, and sought it by humble and fervent Prayer. All the morning, and the
greatest part of the day, it was clear weather, no cloud, or sign of Rain to be
seen. Yet toward Evening it began to be overcast, and shortly after to rain.
It came without either Wind, or Thunder, or any Violence; but by degrees, and
in that Abundance, as that the Earth was thoroughly soaked therewith: which did
apparently revive the languishing Corn and other Fruits; to their own and the
Indians Admiration. One of them was heard to say, Now I see that English-mans
God is a good God: for He has heard you, and sent you Rain; and that without
thundering Storms and Tempests; which use to break down our Corn. Surely* your
God is a Good God! The Drought lasted from the third week in May, to the middle
of July; without any Rain; and with great Heat, for the most part. N. E.
Memorial, p. 37, 38. Since the death of our Author, many of them have been
converted; a satisfactory Account whereof was sent over to England, and is in
Print: by means whereof, many fervent Prayers were offered up to God on their
behalf. So that we may hope, the Children of so many Prayers shall not finally
miscarry. The New Testament was translated into their own Language, and came
forth in Print, in September, 1661.
1661. And since that time, the whole Bible has been given them by the
singular Industry of Mr. John Eliot, at the Cost of the Honorable Corporation;
2000. Copies of a more correct Edition were printed Anno 1685.
and a Catechize, and several books of practical Divinity, to boot. There are
also several Churches of them wherein the Ordinances of Christ are administered,
and his Sabbath sanctified. Which Congregations may be compared to a piece of a
Pomgranat within the Locks of the New English Church. To the many printed
Testimonies of Mr. John Eliot; Father, and Son, Mr. Thomas Mahew, Mr. Henry
Whitfield, and others; one manuscript Evidence may be added. Major Daniel
Gookin, a Person of known Integrity; who tho he were an Assistant, yet
disdained not to accept the Government of the Indians, and was very conversant
with them; both at Cambridge, and at their own homes, for many Years together.
Anno 1674. He writ a Treatise thereabout; which he entitled, INDIANS
CONVERTED. In the 64 th page, is this Passage, For my own part, I have no
doubt; but am fully satisfied, according to judgment of Charity, that diverse
of them do fear God, and are true Believers. Well then, as to the Massachusetts,
Triumphant Whitaker's Hypothesis is happily made a Thesis; Scripturas
intel^igunt, Dominus illis suum Spiritum dedit.

Cujus f^nibus Judaeorum illa per omnes Gentes dispersio concluditur]

It is well known what Swarms of Jews did dwell in Spain, especially from the
times of Adrian the Emperor. 1492.
But in the Year 1492. Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Castile, made an
Edict, whereby all Jews, which inhabited in Castile, or Leon, were enjoined to
turn to the Christian Religion, and to be baptized within three Months; on
pain of having their Goods cofiscat, and perpetual Banishment. By this means
the miserable People were brought into Great Perplexity. The most religious of
them took counsel in the three months space of delay before they were to leave
the Country; and found means to send away their Money and chief Goods out of
Spain; wherein they were aided by many honest-minded Christians; who did help
to hide them. Others, who valued their ease, Native-Country, and Goods, above
all other matters; were baptized, and made profession of the Christian
Religion. And in process of time, the noble Families of Spain allied themselves
by Marriage, to that Race. Grimeston, Hist. Spain, p. 946, 947. This was called
the great Dispersion. One hundred and two and twenty Thousand Families were
driven out of Spain: and were forbidden to return, upon pain of forfeiting both
Estate and Life. Meminit hujus exilij Dav. Gans P. 1. page 60. b vocat
Ejectionem magnam; qua innumeri Solum, plurimi etjam Religionem mutarint.
Scribit, Calamitatem illius temporis ne quidem exprimi posse. Plura habet
Schebh. Jehuda, p. 38, 39, 40. Hottinger. de Judaismo, p. 914. Eodem illo Anno,
Hebraeos universos, quorum ingens and infinitus prope numerus erat, Hispaniae
finibus excedere jussit. Et ut Haereticos, Mauros, et Hebraeorum reliquias e
suo regno penitus evelleret, sanctum Inquisitionis officium instituit. Hispan.
illustrat. p. 1188.

The very same Year, 1492. Christopher Columbus found out the New World for
Castile and Leon. And although the New World was not yet made ready for the
Entertainment of the ejected Jews; or else the Jews were not yet fit to dwell
in a place of their Own: Yet considering the Synchronisme of this Banishment,
and Discovery; with the mavelous Perplexity the distressed Outcasts were in,
not knowing whither to go: As also the great Gain that this Navigation
afforded; the hopes some might conceive of managing themselves more safely with
their feigned Religion, which they had not proved, in a remote Place, than at
home: Considering also the mixture of those Nations by Inter Marriages; and
that the greatest and best part of America is peopled by Spaniards, and
Portugals: It is not improbable, but many Jews may reside there, tho covered
with a Spanish Vail Manasseh Ben Israel, Downam, Thorowgood, Eliot, and others
were of Opinion that America was first peopled by the Ten Tribes. God's
removing Israel out of his sight* 2 Kings, 17. v. 18, 20, 23.
is no less than three times mentioned; which may insinuate the Remoteness of
that Land, into which God by his Providence intended to cast them. And none was
so remo^e, and so much out of sight, as America. Mr. Greenhil thinks it is no
Haeresie to say, Christ meant the Ten Tribes, John, 10.16. alluding to Ezekiel.
37.22, 24. cap. 37. p. 462. If it be no Haeresie to say, the Ten Tribes are the
Sheep: Why should it be accounted Haeresie to say, America is the distinct Fold
there implied? For Christ does not affirm that there shall be one Fold; but
that there shall be ONE FLOCK, ONE SHEPHERD! But however it might be when Mr.
Mede writ, Now it is manifest to all, that very considerable Numbers of Jews
are seated in the New World; where they merchandise, have their Synagogues, and
places of Burial. At Spikes's in Barbados, there is a Street called Jews
Street; tho most live at the Bridge; and there is the Burying-Place for both
Towns. At Jamaica there are a great many; and Port Royal also has its Jews
Street; by the same Token, that the Formidable Earthquake left that standing;
tho their Synagogue, which stood in another Street, was thrown down by it. This
Earthquake happened upon the Third day of the Week, about a Quarter of an hour
before Noon; being the Seventh of June, 1692. A very great Treasure of
Merchandise, and of Silver, and Gold, then perished. Many Houses were swallowed
up; others thrown down; at the Point, and over the Island; especially such as
were built of Stone and Brick. A very fair Church at P^rt-Royal* and another
newly built at Ligania, were turned into heaps of Rubbish. The Church at the
Spanish Town, was broken to pieces. The Rocks, and High Mountains could not
withstand its Force; but they also being touchd, did smoke: In a moment, they
lost all their Ve^dure, and many cubits of their Stature. Near Two Thousand
Persons died; whole Families being swallowd up together. This Loss was, in a
manner, peculiar to the Point; very few comparatively, being slain in other
parts of the Island. Some of New England were there left wi^h the destroying
Angel: Others were taken into Protection; who, with a grateful Remembrance of
God's distinguishing Favor toward them, have given me the substance of this
Account. Upon this occasion, the Prodigious Earthquakes of Lima, in Peru, of
Sicilia, and Naples, might be mentioned: but that the Digression would seem too
long. Only it may be noted, that they are all Spanish: and that there was but
the distance of seven Months between this of Jamaica, and the most Dreadful
EARTHQUAKE of Sicilia: For that was sent in January following, upon the Lord's
day, being New Years day, according to the Julian Account. To return to the
Jews; There are several Families of them at New York; and New England is seldom
wholly without them. Now there are two at Boston; viz. Mr. Joseph Frazon, and
Samuel Frazon, his brother, to whom I am beholden for a sight of the Spanish
Bible. Joseph Frazon was sometime Scholar to the learned Yeosuah Da Sylva, in
London. They acquaint me, that the Jews were formerly very numerous in the
Dutch Plantations in Brasil: their Father and Grandfather did dwell there.
Olinda was taken by the Dutch, Anno 1629. how soon the Jews followed them
thither, I am not certain. But upon the Surrender of those Places to the
Portugals, they were dispersed. Yet at Suranam, and Curasso, there are plenty
of them still. Probably, these Jews will be converted, before any great Numbers
of the Indians, shall I say, or Israelites be brought in. That that ancient
Prophecy may be fullfilled, Zech. 12.7. The LORD also shall save the tents of
Judah First, that the glory of the house of David, and the glory of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah. To be for
some time defrauded and deprived of her Husband, was Rachels disgrace and
grief; which was renewed and multiplied by Barrenness after her enjoyment of
him. Genesis 30.1. And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel
envied her sister. But when the Times of Refreshing by the New Jerusalem, shall
come, Joseph shall take away his Mothers Reproach, and her Children shall be
more and mightier than her Sisters. Insomuch that there will be need of the
forementioned Expedient, to keep the balance. Isa. 11.13. The Envy also of
Ephraim shall depart, and the Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim
shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. Isa. 54.1. Sing, O
barren, thou that did not bear: Break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou
that did not travail with child: for more are the children of the desol^^^,
than the children of the married wife, says the LORD. That America has been
desolate and unmarried for innumerable Ages, is a most sad and awful Truth:
That she may now receive Jesus Christ as her Husband; will be the desire and
Prayer of all that favor the dust of Zion.

Caeteraque Prophetarum Oracula adimpleta] To strive to exclude America from
having any concernment in Mat. 24.14. Luke, 24.47. and Act. 1.8. Or, to go
about to prove that these Scriptures had their Accomplishment in the New World,
before the Spanish Discovery: is to give learned Bellarmin the better end of
the Staff. De Romano Pon. lib. 3. cap. 4. In this Encounter, Whitaker himself
is nearer a Foil, than Triumph. An Papa sit Antichristus, p 663, 664. Yet the
Cardinal mistakes in placing this before the coming of Antichrist: There is no
color for that; no more than there is to imagine that the prevailing Rage of
Antichrist, in the Three Days and Half, can comprise his Beginning, and total
Duration. However, it is a ridiculous thing for learned men with their cockle
shells to pretend to ^ade the Ocean dry. Known unto the Lord are all his Works:
and no doubt but He has spoken of them in his Word; which Word abides for
ever. So that what comes to pass in the New World, must be referred to some
Prophecy. And to make America to be the whole* and only Object of the Curses
denounced against Gog and Magog; and to shut them out from all Promised
Blessings; is altogether Unscriptural and Unreasonable.

Universum and solum] A Quo Warranto may well be brought against this Charter
without any danger of the Imputation of Arbitrary or illegal Proceeding* Both
parts may safely be denied.

Universum] Many times the place most given to Salt, is very near to that which
is most Fruitful. All the Children of Israel had Light in their Dwellings;
when all the rest of Egypt were under the Confinement of thick Darkness. How
many barren Heaths are there in fruitful England; which from Age to Age, do
affront and baffle all the Wit and Industry of the Nation! How often has it
Rained this Summer, upon one Town; and not upon another: tho not twenty miles
off! In Hungary, and Greece; Mosques, and Christian Churches are to be found
in the same City. The 18 th of the Revelation gives us ground to expect, that
Babylon will not be favored with the Privileges of Christ's Kingdom: For it
shall become the habitation of Devils, and the ^old of every foul Spirit, and a
cage of every Unclean and hateful bird. Alcasar thinks the Scripture intends
mysticas feras, and mysticos bubones, and inferorum volucres. p. 765. They that
dwell at Rome after the pouring out of the Seventh Vial, shall have nothing in
them that is good and desirable; neither really, nor in the Opinion of other
men: but the various Qualities of them all, shall be cursed, and hateful.
Unless an absolute Desolation be intended in the last verses of that Chapter.

Solum] It is generally concluded from those words, Come out of her my People,
that a little before the pouring out of the Seventh Vial; a Remnant of the
Lamb's Followers shall be found in Rome. Why may we not as well hope that God
has reserved Saints in Mexico, and other places of America? Our being without
the certain knowledge of it, is no more than what befell Elijah, Romans 11.4. Mr.
Strong, in his Sermon upon Ezekiel. 47.11. speaks thus, The Times to which this
Prophecy relates, are the Times of the Calling of the Jews: p. 3. The Time
therefore is to come: do you long for it, and pray for it. etc. p. 5.

Doct. Some men that live under the purest, and the most powerful Ordinances;
are, in Judgment, given up unto a perpetual Barrenness. p. 12. According to
Mr. Strong (who well answers his Name) If the Waters flow only in Asia, Africa,
and Europe; yet still, Universum will come off maimed: If they reach America
also; the Barrier Solum will by them be removed. And it is most certain, that
they are running in the New World; and I believe, as certain, that they will
never cease to run there: but will rise higher and higher, until they become a
Very Long, and Broad, and Deep RIVER. Because the People that are planted by
them, begin to be placed under the Influences of that New National Covenant,
Jer. 31.31. and Heb. 8.8.

Quicquid vero extra hoc Gentium est (locis nimirum ubi Inferorum sedem
collocavit Antiquitas) etc. Detestatione si quidem Lector, hic opus est^ non
Responsione.
] These Profane and Old wives Fables look uglily every where; but especially in
a Concern of this Moment; and in so beautiful, and well born a Work, as Mr.
Mede's is: And therefore Aversation from them ought to be natural to us; as
from some amphibious, serpentine Deformity.

Consule R. Episcopum Armach. Respons. ad Jesuitam, p. 337, 338, 339, etc
margin.] With all my heart! I am glad of this Invitation into the Company of
so great a Doctor as USSHER: For extinguishing the imaginary flames of
Purgatory, we need not go far to fetch Water: p. 163. And we need not go
further than this venerable Author, to expose this Antic Fancy of America's
being Hell. The material Spheres in ancient time were not made movable in their
sockets, as they are now, that they might be set to any Elevation of the Pole:
but were fixed to the Elevation of XXXVI degrees; Page 336, 337.
which was the height of the Rhodian Climat. The Horizon which divided this
Sphere through the middle, and separated the visible part of the World, from
the invisible; was commonly esteemed the utmost bound of the Earth: so that
whatsoever was under that Horizon, was accounted to be under the Earth. For
neither the common people, nor yet some of the learned Doctors of the Church
could be induced to believe that which our daily Navigations find now to be
most certain; that there should be another Southern Hemisphere of the Earth,
inhabited by any Antipodes. And this proceeded from no other ground, but the
Vulgar opinion, that the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth was not inhabited by
Living men, as our Northern is. P^^. 34^.
Insomuch that some of the heathen Atheists, finding the contrary to be True by
the discourse of right Reason; endeavored to persuade themselves from thence,
that there was no such place as Hades at all. Esse autem hujus ins^^^ae
Regionis, vastaeque Abyssi Incolas plures, beati Johannis Apocalypsi docemur.
etc. Hilar. in Psalm. 2 fol. 139. A. It should seem that according to St.
Hilary, and Ussher, Revelation 5.13. takes in America: For every Creature
Under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, are brought in saying, Blessing,
Honor, Glory and Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever. This Employment seems to be a Demonstration that God
would Create a New Heaven in the New World. There is no manner of difference
betwixt the lower Hemisphere of the Earth, and that wherein we live. p. 342.
Mr. Hugh Sanford in a learned Treatise DE DESCENSU etc. printed at Amsterdam,
1611. (which work was carried on and perfected by Mr Robert Parker, Father of
the forementioned Mr. Thomas Parker.
a man of great Learning and Piety) has spoken much to the same purpose. Inde
locus factus ect fabulae, Solemn, cum oritur, ab Oceano surgere: and in Oceani
^quis ardentem rotam tingere, cum occidit. Imo non fabulis tantum jactatum
istud: sed in historias etjam conjectum, videre licet and ridere. p. 61. This
gave occasion to that Fable of the Suns coming up out of the Sea, when it
rises: and of plunging the flaming Chariot in the Ocean, at Sun setting. Yea,
we may look and laugh, to see that this should not only be tossed to and fro in
Romances; but that it should also be stuffed into histories. Qui altiora
scrutantur, referunt Inferos ad Sphaerae rationem, inquit Servius: sic ut
Antipodes nobis Inferi; nos illis. lib. 2. page 63, 64, 132. Wherefore, I hope
our honored Mother will not account it undutifull or indecent for me to say,
The Inhabitants of Boston in Lincolnshire are no less Inferi to us; than the
Inhabitants of Boston in New England are to them. Nevertheless, I freely
Acknowledge, that as Christopher Columbus called the first Land he discovered,
St. SAVIOR: So, many Things alleged by Cardinal Bellarmin and others, about
the Descent into Hell; are wonderfully suited to the going of Christ Jesus into
America. Christus fuit in Inferno Liber, and Lib^rator aliorum. Non autem
vocatur poena si Rex invisat Carcerem, ut aliquos liberet: sed vocatur Dignatio
and Humilitas. Bellarm. de Christi Anima, lib. 4. cap. 16. col. 462. For
Philippi. 2.10. and Zech. 9.11. see cap. 10. col. 446. and cap. 11. col. 447.
Isa. 45.22, 23, 24.25. Romans 1^.11. The truth is, there is so much Confusion in
the discourses upon this subject, that a man cannot tell when he is in Heaven,
Parker, lib. 3. page 43.
and when he is in Hell. Tunc enim Paradisum Triumphator ingressus est, cum ad
Inferos penetra^^^: Philo Carpathiorum Episc. in Cant. 6. apud USSER. p. 350.
Margin. Some learned Protestants do observe there is no determinat mention made
either of ascending, or descending: and that the words literally interpreted,
import no more but this; Psalm. 110.6, 7
HE WENT UNTO THE OTHER WORLD. p. 352. Now the New World, the Valley of Baca
was the doleful Receptacle of Ungodly and Christless Men, perfectly exposed to
the Craf^ and Cruelty of Evil Angels. So near an Approach to; so complete a
Resemblance of Hell, was not elsewhere to be found in rerum natura. JESUS
CHRIST came hither to Visit this Prison, to Preach to the miserable Prisoners;
and, in spite of their si^ly Jailer, to Say, Go forth: to them that are in
Darkness, Show your selves. Isaiah, 49* 9. Parker de Descensu. lib. 4. p. 133.
If we turn to Zech. 9.11. Bellarmin. de Purgatori^. Lib. 1. Cap. 3.
Mr. Bulkeley on the Gospel Covenant, shows that the Prophecy belongs to this
Time; and the words immediately foregoing, demonstrate that it pertains to
this Place; viz. the New World. Probably, Joseph was here in this Wilderness
Pit, wherein was no Water. However, these inhabitants were exactly in the
circumstances of Joseph; out of which they could by no means get; being
Prisoners there; or persons bound, as the word signifies: which is the Indian
way of Imprisoning. In this Valley of the shadow of death, under invincible
Ignorance, they did live and walk. They had no Gospel, no Publication of the
Saving Grace of God in Jesus Christ; not so much as any Fame or Rumor of it;
which might set the most ready and athletick Industry on work. The Natives are
also much addicted to Forts and Castles, as they call them; which are
ineffectual to preserve them from Slaughter. Our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ
offers them a Cure of this Vanity, and advises them to turn to Him, as to an
impregnable Strong Hold: and so renders them Prisoners of Hope; who till now
were sh^t up in the lowest Dungeon of Darkness and Despair. That which inclines
me to understand the Scripture in this Sense, is, The Pit is One individual
Pit; whereas the Jews of the Old World are in several Pits; viz. Asia, Africa,
and Europe. And if they should be called One Pit; yet in this Pit there was
Water; which some of them have all along drunk of: and the obstinat Refusal of
the most, is a dreadful Aggravation of their Sin and Misery. Let us look into
one place in the New Testament; that Celebrated place, Matthew. 12.29. Mark,
3.27. Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he first Bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his House? Luke*
1.21, 22. When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in peace:
But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils. Parker, de
Descensu etc. lib. 4. p. 105, 6, 7. After Austin, de Civitate Dei, R^ber^.
Forbes. Par^u^.
lib. 20. cap. 7. col. 1205. C. and cap. 8. col. 1211. I take this Conquest and
B^nding, to be the same with that mentioned Revel. 20.1, 2. The words are
metaphorical, borrowed from the manner of Taking, and sacking or plundering of
a garrisond House, or City. The word House, may be here used; because of all
Proprieties, a man's House is the most Proper. Every man is a Monarch, and ought
to bear Rule in his own House: there he expects to be at Rest and Peace.
Matthew and Mark mention the Taking, and Luke adds the Dividing of the Spoil.
So far as we know, Satan the grand and Proud Usurper had all to himself in
America. Although the House and Furniture belonged to GOD; yet he was wrongfully
got into Possession, and gave out that all was his Own; that he was the god of
all this World: and he could by no means be ousted, but by a greater Force.
Negat forti et valido tyranno abrogari posse imperium, donec suis armis
spoliatus fuerit: quia nisi alia vis superior opposita fuerit; nunquam sponte
cessurus est: says Master Calvin, Harmon. p. 157. Whereas there was none so
much as to move any Question about it; much less to contest it in Law, or
contend for it by force of Arms. This Triumph was reserved for the Lord Jesus
Christ, who comes to conquer this Tyrant, and spoil his Goods. Si quidem ipse
alligavit for^em, di^ipuitque Vasa illius, videlicet nos, quibus ad omnia mala
opera fuerat ^busus: fecitque vasa Utilia Domino. Basilius and alij apud
Parkerum, p. 106. Christless Men and Women are Satan's Goods. And Christ binds
Satan, by Unbinding them. And divides this Spoil to this and the other valiant
and faithful Captain, and private Soldier; according to his Sovereign good
Pleasure. This Captain General will make through Work of it; He will not take
this house, and enter into it and take a little Plunder, and then leave it: but
He will spoil Satan's House, so as for ever to preclude him from returning
thither again to play Rex, as he had done before. Let it be remembered, (...) go
not about to exclude other parts of the World: but to show that the Americans
are, at this Time, very Emphatically Concerned: Their Redeemer is Strong, the
LORD of Hosts i^ his Name, He shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he may
give Rest to the Land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. Jeremiah, 50.34.

Igne coelitus perdendas, justo, licet ign^to nobis, judicio reservatum iri]
What a P^ity it is, Nimirum has arbores Regiones illas significar^, quae harum
feraces imprimis sunt. Brightm. Cant 4. fol. 73.
that because the American Mulbery trees are not so early in putting forth as
some other: therefore they must all presently be condemned to the Fire! Seeing
the First Resurrection is near at hand; it were better to wait a little, and
see what God will do for them therein. For we are certain that if they have a
part given them in the first Resurrection; they will not be obnoxious to the
mentioned Judgment. In orbis nostri meditullio sitae] The situation of
Jerusalem is not so Central; but that a Voyage may be made from London, to
Mexico, in as little time, as from London, to Jerusalem. In that respect, If
the New World should be made the seat of New-Jerusalem; if the City of the
Great KING should be set on the Northern side of it: Englishmen would meet with
no Inconvenience thereby; and they would find this Convenience; that they might
visit the Citizens of New Jerusalem, and their Countrymen, all under one. As
they go thither, Barbados stands advanced three hundred Leag^es Eastward, ready
to meet them with a Welcome to the New World. And Jamaica is posted just in the
way, to invite them thither, or to salute them in their passing by, and to
pilot them to St Juan de Ulva, if there be occasion. When homeward bound,
Providence will firstly take care of them; and after that, they will have their
Coutrymen to friend all along shore. Solitary Bermudas will be overjoyed, if
they happen to touch there. And if in that Latitude, any Captain shall
commmand, Helm a-Starboard* on purpose to visit our New English Tirzah; they
will be met with answerable Respect; and mutual Kindness shall render the
Congress happy. Yea, if the spending of a Mast, or springing of a Leak, do
oblige them to such a Diversion, the Pleasantness of the Effect, in bringing
good Company together, shall help to qualify the bitterness of the Cause. Ad
cujus minimum fines, Regnum Christi portensum iri, testantur Prophetatum
oracula] This word minimum contains in it the most Light for America, of any
one in the whole Chapter. The worthy Author seems here to begin to relent. By
this means being fairly got without the Invisible walls of the Imperial Prison,
and expatiating as far as Japan, and the Cape of Good Hope; I know nothing
should hinder, but that we may from thence take Shipping for the New World. As
for Psalm, 72.8. and Isa. 49.6. they are summoned to speak on our side. And
there are no less than Six times Three very Credible Witnesses, who have given
their Affidavit, that the Conversion of American Indians is an Accomplishment
of those glorious Prophesies. Their Testimony is to be seen at large in their
Epistle set before a Book published at London, in the Year 1652. entitled,
Strength out of Weakness. Or a Glorious MANIFESTATION of the further Progress
of the GOSPEL AMONGST THE INDIANS IN NEW ENGLAND. etc.

The Epistle is as follows; Christian Reader, These ensuing Letters do
represent unto thee, and to the Churches, the Outgoings of Christ, as a Light
to the Gentiles, that the Grace which brings Salvation, has appeared unto them
also in the furthest parts of the Earth, for the accomplishment of that ancient
and glorious Promise; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation to the End of the earth. Isa. 49.6. etc. We have
therefore thought fit to commend this great work of Christ unto the view of all
the Saints, under the following Considerations. 1. Hereby the Kingdom of Christ
is enlarged, and the Promise made unto him, Arma diaboli Gentes erant; fide
autem G^nt^um v^lneratus, caput quod habebat, amisit. Amb. in Psalm. 118.
in the Covenant between him and his Father, accomplished, his Dominion shall
be from Sea to Sea, and from the Flood unto the Worlds End. Therefore his
design is upon all the Kingdoms of the Earth, that he may take possession of
them for Himself* They shall all become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, Rev. 11.15. And the Kingdom, and Dominion under the whole Heaven, being
so possessed by Christ, shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most
High, Dan. 7.18, 27 etc. 2. The glorious Gospel o^ C^^ist is hereby Propagated,
etc. 3 Hereby the Souls of men are (...) of the snare of the Devil, in which
they were before held (...) by him at his will. etc. 4. Hereby the fullness of
the Genti^es ^^^weth near to be accomplished, that the Calling of the Jews may
be hastened. etc. The first Conversion of the Gentiles in its fullness makes
way for the coming in of the Jews, the Kings of the East. etc.

5. That the LORD has blessed the labors of our Brethren, who were driven out
from among us. A gracious heart, as he prays for, so he cannot but rejoice in
the success of other men's labors, as well as his own. So the work which is
Gods, may prosper, whoever be the Instrument; it is enough to him. etc. 6. This
we hope may be but the First fruits of those great Nations unto Christ. The
Lord does not usually, cause to bring forth, and then shut the womb, Isaiah,
66.9. Let no man despi^e the day of small things: The Lord has opened a great
door, which we hope Satan shall never be able any more to shut. etc.

This we humbly offer unto all those that love the Lord JESUS in sincerity; and
remain

Thine in the furtherance of the Gospel, William Gouge. Tho: Goodwin. Lazarus
Seaman. John Owen. Edm: Calamy. Joseph Caryl. Jer: Whittaker. Will: Greenhil.
George Griffith. Henry Whitfield. Will: Spurstow. William Bridge. Simeon Ash.
Sidrach Simpson. William Strong. Philip N^ye. William Carter. Ralph Venning.





In qua^uor angulis terrae] In the four Quarters of the Earth, Rev^ 20.8. In
Asia, Africa, Europe, America: East, West, North, and South; says Mr. Cotton,
MSS. p. 33. Phrasi repetita ex cap. 7.1. hoc est, universo Christianismo per
omnes mundi parts dilatato: Ubique enim grassabitur apostasia; sed magis in
Orient and Occidente, ubi apices erunt imperij, etc. Pareus, col. 1111. To
suppose that America should not at all be containd in Rev. 7.1. and that all
America, and no other part of the World beside, should be expressed by the very
same words, Rev. 20 8. Is to me, a perfect Riddle; which I can by no means
expound. And it seems Pareus never dreamed of any such thing. Gog et Magog sunt
Nationes parents Turcico imperi^, Brightm. p. 658. Quorum utrumque in Orbi^
Americani, Arctici et Antarctici in^olas competere, nemini rei Geographicae
perito, ignotum est] The whole Empire of America being Europaean, is a firm and
plain Demonstration of its being accessible. Barthol. de las Casas would fain
make us believe that it has been invaded before now. Dr. Whitaker reports that
the Spaniards killd more than they left alive* de notis Eccl. p. 505.
Carthagena was Assaulted and Taken by Sir Francis Drake, 1585. and this very
Summer, 1697. Emptied of vast Treasures, by a French Fleet. Ab Esse ad Posse,
valet Consequentia. As for New Spain; by reason of the Isthmus, situm ita
comparatum habent; as that they may be more easily attacked on both sides, than
Jerusalem can. Europe excells in Shipping; and the Trade Wind carries their
Fleets thither. From China, Japan, and other parts of Asia; a Fleet may invade
them on the side of Acapulco. Whereas, if the Americans had Ships enough to
make up a Fleet, and should send it from Acapulco Westward; they have a long
Voyage to the Philippine Islands; and then they have all the length of Asia to
sail over still: besides the difficulty and danger of passing the straits and
sands of the Red Sea. Making no allowance for Opposition by the way, all along
the Coast of Asia, for Fifteen Hundred Leagues together. Tamque invidendae
felicitatis Orbem] If Acosta, and our Country man Gage, and Thousands more may
be credited; Nature has not been so sparing toward America, as to give her
cause to envy her Sisters. Mat. 18.19, 20. Quum autem inaestimabile ^onura sit,
Christum habere in omnibus negoti is Praesidem, qui consilia and eventus
benedicat, etc. Calvin, p. 244.
And as for the Saving Grace of God; it is Sovereign and Free: and the Promises
of it are made to Persons, and not to Places. Therefore let not the Four
Sisters fall out by the way: but let them honor themselves, by accounting it
their greatest Beauty and Pleasure, to converse together in Unity; and quietly
to wait, till the Mind of Jesus Christ concerning this matter, be more fully
discovered: All, and every one, firmly resolving to follow the LAMB
whithersoever He shall go, esteeming that Best, and most Pleasant, which He
shall please to Determine. For if the Condition of the New World be in this
respect, Parker, lib. 2. p. 64.
Inferior; yet I hope, it will be so Good, that the Better shall not be
envied; but Letters shall really and truly be superscribed, Inferi Superis
Salutem. If it be Superior; the Envy of Ephraim will then naturally depart:
Ephraim shall not envy Judah; and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.

Si verum sit quod Fullerus noster probare contendit, etc. Vid eum Miscell
sacr. lib. 2 cap. 4. in fine] Having met with such obliging Entertainment from
Archbishop USSHER, I was the more emboldened to go and speak with Learned Mr.
Nicholas Fuller: and i^ it be grateful to the Reader; it shall not be
burdensome to me, to tell the substance of the Discourse; which was this;

Cum ergo Sacae seu Scythae semper numerosissimi fuerint, solique omnium
nationum frequentibus migrationibus assueti; plusquam prohabile profecto est,
ab ipsis primum habitatam fuisse quoque Indiam Occidentalem, quam passim
Americam dicunt, vere ac merito Columbinam potius dicerent, a magnanimo Hero
Christophoro Columbo Genuensi primo terrarum illarum investigatore atque
inventore plane Divinitus constituto, Nov. Orb* c. 84, and 85. Certa nempe res
est, gentes universas ex hac continente quam nos accolimus, in quaslibet Orbis
terrarum plagas, tanquam colonias, initio fuisse deductas. Hinc ergo Columbina
primum incolas acceperit necesse est. Atqui ex omnibus hujus continentis
tractibus long aptissimus est Japheticus (quocunque nomine cenfeatur,
Scythicus, Sarmaticus, Cimbricus vel Cimmerius, Celticus denique
Septentrionalis iste, quem nos spectamus) ad rem illam perficiendam. Nam siae
ulla controversia multo is quidem propior est Columbinae. etc. Quare
proculdubio a Japheti posteris Septentrionalium partium continentis istius
incolis habitari primum coepta est America, seu verius Columbina. Atque istis
valde convenient quae commemorat Antonius Galvanus, generosae stirpis Lusitanus
(qui diu apud Indos Moluccenses cum potestate fuerat) in libello quodam suo de
novarum terrarum Inventoribus Anglice a Richardo Hackluito nostro recens edito;
nimirum Tabencos (quos vocat) seu Chinenses vehementer confirmare, sese omnium
primos in longinquas O^bis regiones navibus trajecisse; cumque sint totius
Tartariae gens illustrissima, se maximae parti Scythiae olim fuisse dominatos.
Insuper ait, prorsus credibile videri a Chinensibus hisce, Tartarisve aut
Scythis Orientalibus repertam fuisse Columbinam, et incolis repletam. Nam
nationes ejus et moribus vivendique ratione and corporis totius filo, videlicet
parvis oculis, naribus simis, aliisque proprietatibus, persimiles sunt
Chinensibus. Utut hoc erat, satis tamen apertum est illud, Americanos, seu
Columbinos primos e terra Japhetica, i. e. tractu hoc Septentrionali, in
regionem illam long amplissimam vereque Novum Orbem concessisse, ac
sequentibus seculis ulterius etiam vel sua sponte vel pulsos a finitimis
fortioribus, superato freto Magellanico, in climata Australi Polo vicina
processisse. Nihil enim impediebat; cum fretum illud mire angustum sit, utpote
unius alicubi and perpaucarum alibi Leucarum, test omni Exceptione majore
nobilissimo Navarcho nostro Francisco Draco, primario ordinis Equestris viro,
qui idipsum totum perlustravit. Quamobrem QUANDOQUIDEM ad Europam,
Septentrionalemque and Boreum Asiae tractum Novus Orbis veluti immensae
magnitudinis auctarium accessit, et Japheto posterisque ejus jure haereditario
in perpetuam possessionem obtigit, negari non potest perfect atque absolute
imple^am esse propheticam Patriarchae benedictionem, et Japhetum verissime sic
nominatum ut cui dilataverit, h. e. vastissimum planeque stupendae amplitudinis
spatium, duplicis portionis instar, non parce and restricte, sed largissime
effusissimeque admensae, concesserit Deus.

These are the Sentiments of Mr. Nicolas Fuller concerning the New World, and
them that dwell therein; both as to what is past, and to come. If they do but
outlive the springing of this Mine, they are like to be out of danger of any
further design this Chapter has upon them. This learned Man, agreeable to his
great Ingenuity, endeavors to do Columbus the Justice, as to eternize his
Honor, by engraving his Name upon the World of his Discovery. It is every
where called America: but according to Truth, and Desert; men should rather
call it Columbina, from the magnanimous Hero Christopher Columbus a Genuese,
who was manifestly Appointed of GOD to be the Finder out of these Lands. But
why should a learned Man make all this Dirige for Columbus's Name! What matter
is it how America be called? For Flavio of Malphi in Naples has, in great
measure, 1300.
applied the Virtues of the Loadstone to the Mariners Compass, in Vain; the
Portugals have found the length of Africa's foot, in Vain; the Spaniards sent
out the Italian Dove, in Vain; Sir Francis Drake has sailed round the World,
and made through Lights to it, in Vain; and Hakluyt and Purchase have, with
endless Labor, acquainted Englishmen with these Things, in Vain: If after all,
we go about to turn the American Euphrates into a Stygian Lake! The breaking of
this One Instrument, spoils us of the long expected, and much desired Consort
of Music.

Another thing that Mr. Fuller drives at, is, he would fain have it believed,
that America was first peopled by the Posterity of our Great Grandfather
JAPHETH; tho he will not be very strict with us, as to the particular branch of
that Wide Family; as the Breadth of his Parenthesis shows. Well then! the
Americans are not Cham's children; nor heirs of his Curse: as some have
guessed. That Obstacle is removed out of the way of their Conversion. And by
this Argument it may be more firmly proved that Englishmen shall be Gog and
Magog: for without controversy, they are originally Cimbrians, as Pontanus
affirms. 428.
Rerum Danic. Hist. lib. 1. p. 12. and lib. 2. p. 58, 80. Some learned Authors
conjecture that they are derived from the very Sacae mentioned by our Author.
Cambden, Brit p. 132. Vid. USSER. De Brit. Eccl. primordi^s. p. 390 -- 395.
Sequitur d^inde Angl^a Vetus etc.
Verstegan, p. 14, 20. And this Opinion finds Favor with Cambden, in his
excellent Britannia, p. 129. Howbeit, that conceit of the best learned Germans
may seem worthy acceptance, who suppose that the Saxons descended from the
Sacae, a most noble Nation, and of much worth in Asia, and so called Sacosones,
that is, the Sons of the Sacae. Well may New England brook its Name; seeing, as
to its Inhabitants, it is every way of Kin to England. And Mr. Roger Williams's
Key into the Language of America, has one ward more than ever I was aware of;
p. 53.

Boast not proud English, of thy birth and blood:
Thy brother Indian is by birth as good.
Act. 17.26. Ephesians. 2.3.
Make sure thy second Birth; else thou shall see
Heaven open to Indians wild: but shut to thee.
As for the confounding of the Gog and Magog in the Revelation, with Ezekiel's;
the confusion which our Author would have others avoid; he himself seems partly
to fall into, in making the Americans Magogiticae gentis colonias: seeing John
his Gog and Magog are not brought upon the Stage till a Thousand Years hence.
Moreover, if there be any thing in being descended of the Scythian^, to entail
the Curse of Gog and Magog: twill make the Argument more strong, to bring them
from Asia, and Europe: for no body doubts, but that there are of their
Offspring in those parts. Not to insist on the Opinion received, in China, and
credited by Antonius Galvanus; that the Americans are Colonies sent from that
Nation: The principal Design of Mr. Fuller's whole Discourse appears in the
last clause of it, the sense of which is this, WHEREFORE, forasmuch as unto
Europe, and the Northern parts of Asia, there is the Accession of the New
World, a surplussage of boundless Bigness; and is fallen by right of
Inheritance, to Japheth, To Have and to Hold to him and his Heirs for Ever: It
cannot be denied, but that the prophetical Blessing of the Patriarch is
perfectly and absolutely fulfilled; and that Japheth was most truly so called,
as unto whom God would give Enlargement, h. e. grant for a Double Portion a
most huge Tract of Land of mavelous Extent; and that not upon a scanty and
strict; but upon a most Large and Liberal admeasurement.

But now the calculation of this Chapter turns all this Blessing into a Curse;
all this Bread and Fish, into Stones and Serpents. Who had not rather be
without a Portion, than have one so ill Conditioned? So then, from Mr. Fuller's
Design this Conjecture does tot^ Coelo errare; and as, with submission, I
conceive, from the Truth it self. If it appear so to do; Mr. Mede would have it
known, that his Desire is, Not to have it any longer reck^ned to have been
spoken, or written by Him. Epist. Lectori, p. 540. With this Sentence full of
so much Candor, I take leave of the worthy Author, as to this Controversy. But
I would not separate Mr. Nicholas Fuller from Dr. Thomas Fuller, for Names
sake, Amongst many of his pleasant and profitable Writings, there is his Holy
State, the 16th Chapter treating of Plantations, has this passage in the close
of it; I am confident that America (tho the youngest Sister of the four) is now
grown marriageable, and daily hopes to get Christ to her Husband, by the
preaching of the Gospel. This makes me attentively to listen after some
Protestant First Fruits, in hope the Harvest will ripen afterward.

Lift up your heads, O ye Gates [of Columbina] and be ye lift up, ye
Everlasting Doors, and the KING of Glory shall come in. This SCRIPTURE would
have made a most desirable and pleasant Conclusion of this small disquisition:
but that the Reader may expect to see what Renowned Dr. Twisse has written in
compliance with the forementioned Conjecture: because every one is not so happy
as to be Owner of Mr. Mede's Works.

It seems Dr Twisse did at first, keck and strain at our Authors Millennium, as
to the proper and personal Resurrection of the Saints. To f^cilitate the
swallowing of it, Mr. Mede sent him his Conjecture enclosed in a Letter dated
January, 31. 1634/5. Epist. 41. p. 975.
I perceive what i^ is that most pincheth you in the Millena^ian Prophecy; to
wit, that of Gog and Magog. Wherefore I send you enclosed herewith, my
Conjecture thereof etc. This is the first appearance of it, that I remember:
and was in manuscript probably, by the care to return it again speedily. But it
may make an Inhabitant of Columbina rather question the Truth of such a
Millennium, than confirm him in the belief of it; if it require such Aid. Dr.
Twis^e his Answer to this Letter, bears date the 2d of March next following;
out of which I have transcribed the Paragraph that chiefly concerns the
Conjecture; which is as follows; NOW, I beseech you, let me know what your
Opinion is of our English Plantations in the New World. Heretofore I have
wondedered in my thoughts at the Providence of God concerning that World, not
discovered till this Old World of ours is almost at an end: and then no
footsteps found of the knowledge of the True God; much less of Christ. And then
considering our English Plantations of late, and the Opinion of many grave
Divines, concerning the Gospel^s fleeting Westward: sometimes I have had such
thoughts; Why may not that be the Place of NEW-JERUSALEM?
But you have handsomely and fully cleared me from such odd conceits. But what?
I pray, shall our English there, degenerate and join themselves with Gog and
Magog? We have heard lately diverse ways, that our people there, have no hope of
the Conversion of the Natives. And the very Week after I received your last
Letter, I saw a Letter written from New England, discoursing of an
impossibility of subsisting there; and seems to prefer the Confession of God's
Truth in any condition here in Old England, rather than run over to enjoy their
liberty there; yea and that the Gospel is like to be more dear in New England,
than in Old: and lastly, unless they be exceeding careful, and God wonderfully
merciful; they are like to lose that life and zeal for God and his Truth, in
New England, which they enjoyed in Old; as whereof they have already woeful
experience, and many there feel it to their smart. Epist. 42. p. 979.

The Work of God in carrying the New English Colonies over the Great and wide
Sea, Let Bozius brag on! Nihil inde profecerunt, nihil ^romoverunt.
and Transplanting them in America; was a very direct and positive Answer to
that Boast of the Papists; Haereses autem Lutheranorum nunquam transierunt
Mare: The Lutheran Heresies did never cross the Seas. Bellarmin. de Amplitudine
Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 7. The Opposition hereby made to the Unexpected Accessions
to Antichrist, in the New World; brings to mind a Verse of the late Learned and
Laborious President of Harvard College, Mr. Charles Chauncy, If Fourty-two
stand steadfast in the West,
Then Forty two is Babel'd in the East.
The Author was so mighty in the Scriptures, so Pious, and such a great Master
of Languages; that his Conjecture concerning Babel deserves Credit: and with
the good leave of his Learned Sons, I take the Verse to be reciprocally True;
and will venture to say, If Forty two be Babeld in the East,
Then Fourty-two stands steadfast in the West.


It may be hoped that Christ will be so far from quitting what He has already
get in New England; that He will sooner enlarge his Dominion, by bringing on a
glorious Reformation in New Spain; and so making the New World deserve the
significant Name of Columbina: Of which Mr. Thomas Gage has given us a good
Omen, in his successful Zeal exercised in Mixco near Guatemal^ about the Year
1635. Our Countryman having by long and diligent Search, found out a Pagan Idol
(a Statue of Wood) in a dark Wilderness Cave; caused it to be privately conveyed
to the Church on the Lord's Day, and hid in the Pulpit. Out of Exodus 20.3. he
preached against Idolatry and Idols, which have eyes, and see not, etc. Sermon
being ended, he set up the black staring Idol upon the Pulpit, in open view;
and upbraided him sufficiently with his Nothingness, and inability to speak
for, or defend himse^^* and then orderd him to be hewn in very small pieces,
and to be cast into a fire of coals and burned in the midst of the Church,
before a great Assembly. The Indians, called Fuen^es, who had worshipped him,
were surprised and confounded. The Spaniards cried out joyfully, Victor!
Victor! Others repeated Gloria a nostro Dios, Glory to our God. New Survey etc.
cap. 20. page 397. Their lady mary not having any better eyes, to see; or ears,
to hear; or tongue, to speak, than the course clownish Indian Idol had; let
Ovid be admitted, on her behalf, to say, Nomine mutato, Causa relata mea est.

First Thoughts are sometimes the best. The Doctor had once very high Thoughts
of the Gospels Entrance into America; which put him upon saying, Why may not
that be the place of New-Jerusalem? And it is not altogether inconsi^^^^ble,
that Mr. Medes Clavis was first printed in the Year, 1627. which was a notable
means to revive the Thinking and Speaking of New Jerusalem. And this was the
Year wherein the Design for planting of the Gospel in New England, began to be
ripened. For in the Year 1628. the first Town in the Massachusetts Bay, was
begun by Mr. John Endecott, This was a singular Honor prepared by God for him.
And when He was chosen Deputy-Gov* five times and fifteen times Governor: He
very honorably discharged the Trust reposed in him; and put off those Robes,
and his Life together; March 15. 1664, 65.
and was called SALEM; which may give occasion to hope, that GOD intends to
write upon these Churches the Name of New Jerusalem: They shall be near of Kin
to, and shall much resemble that City of GOD. But what should oblige Dr. Twisse
to change his mind? It is most certain, that unless Christians be exceeding
careful, and GOD Wonderfully Merciful; Religion in Europe must instantly
Expire. As to America, He cannot, without great Reluctance, give up his English
Friends there: who differed from Mr. Mede; Epist. 55, 57, 70, 74.
and agreed well with them in the Grounds upon which they went thither. But, as
Epist. 50. p. 991. The Doctor was so entirely taken up in Vindicating the
Grace, Power, and Providence of God, as to their Intensive Nature: that,
according to his singular Modesty, he fully submitted the Consideration of
their Extensiveness, unto Mr. Mede; as more studied in Apocalyptical Mysteries.
That these good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, prepared to endure hardship, should
yet be surprised with Temptations; is no wonder. For Satan was here as in his
House strongly Fortified, and well Moted in; was abundantly stored with Arms
and Ammunition: Here he had his Headquarters, his Palaces; his Throne, kept
his Court; exercised an Universal, Unlimited, Unquestioned Jurisdiction Here
were none shut up or left; not so much as one little town or single famil^ that
held it out. Nay, being in love with Bondage, they take up Arms against their
Deliverer; and strive with all their might to continue the Tyrant in quiet
Possession. Innumeri enim sunt laquei ad illaqueandes homines: imo jam sibi
mancipatos, compedibus varijs ^ta constringit; ut Servitutem cui addicti sunt,
potius foveant, quam ad Libertatem ullo modo adspirent. etc. Calvin. Harmon. in
Mat. 12.29. p. 157. He will not fail therefore to use all his Policy and Power,
all his Methods and Stratagems of War against these Recruits, coming over to
reinforce the Invasion of his Dominions. Old and experienced Soldiers may be
wounded and worsted in particular Encounters; especially in great Expeditions
that are New and Unusual. But if they are sensible of their wounds, and
complain of the smart of them, by that we know for certain, that they are not
slain. As it was once said of Jerusalem; so it may be now said of Babylon, in
the sight and hearing of all their Antichristian and Pagan Armies; Tho ye had
smitten the whole Army of them that fight against you, and there remained but
wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn
this city with fire. Jer. 37.10. For their Captain is not only Invincible, but
Invulnerable; not liable to the least imaginable hurt or bruise. He will rally
his Forces again, Neither will He draw them off: but keep the Field; and gain a
complete and decisive Victory: Lest otherwise some should surmise that the
strong man was stronger than JESUS. As for their Hopes of Converting the
Natives; Mr. COTTON's Sentiments may be seen by a few clauses taken out of his
Manuscript on the Revelation; Chapter, 6.12. Doct. 1. A corrupt and false
Religion, tho never so firmly established, universally received, and anciently
continued: will come at length to be shaken, and abolished; and all the
Professors and maintainers thereof, utterly ashamed and confounded. R. 2. From
the Right of Christ to Inherit the whole Earth, and all the Nations in it.
Psalm. 2.8, 9. Zech. 14.9. U. 1. To expect the certain Ruin of all false
Religions; Indian, Turkish, yea, and Popish too. Rev. 18.21.

Rev. 12 7, 8 9. U. 1. To teach us to take up the like War against the ^^ds of
these Indians. -- We shall find the War difficult.

Rev. 15.8. U. To teach us, Not to wonder at the backwardness of these Indians
to be converted unto our Religion. It is here prophesied, they are not able,
nor shall be able to enter till these Plagues are fulfilled.

2. Especially, Pray we for the Calling of the Jews. If the casting away of the
Jews brought in Asia, and Europe ( a great part of both) with some part of
Africa: How much more shall their Conversion, which is their Fullness, bring in
a greater Harvest of these three Parts of the World, and America besides?

Mr. Joseph Caryl, one of David^s Worthies beforementioned, speaks thus, We
have heard of the First Fruits, and Second-fruits of India in New England, unto
Christ: and these are a fair Assurance of a plentiful Harvest there, in due
time. A blessed Foundation is laid; yea, the Building beg^^s to appear above
ground, in the visible Profession, or professed Subjection of many poor Souls
unto the Gospel of Christ. May (...) not therefore hopefully expect, that the
Top Stone shall be set up with a Shout of GRACE! GRACE! to it? Epist. to a
further Account of the Progress of the Gospel amongst the Indian* in New
England, printed Anno 1660.

Mr. Richard Mathe^, part of whose Character is, strenuus Veritatis Assertor,
being present when many Indians made their Confessions; has given his
Testimony concerning them, in such words as these; The admitting them into any
Churches of the English (for ought I know) might speedily be done, and with
much satisfaction, etc. Tho they be not combined into Church Estate, there is
so much of God's Work amongst them; as that I cannot but account it a great
Evil; yea, a great Injury to God and his Goodness; for any to make light, or
nothing of it. etc. Their whole Carriage, with plenty of Tears trickling down
the cheeks of some of them, did argue to us, that they spoke with much good
Affection, and holy Feat of God: and it much affected our hearts. etc.

The Epistle begins thus; THE Amplitude, and large Extent of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ upon Earth, when the Heathen shall be his Inheritance, and the
Uttermost parts of the Earth his Possession, etc: is a thing plainly and
plentifully foretold, and promised in the Holy Scriptures; Psalm 2.8. and 22.27.
and 72.11. and 86.9. Dan. 2.35, 44, 45. and 7.26, 27. Zech. 14.9. etc. And to
say no more, the Lord's mavelous Sovereignty and Liberty is to be observed,
who till now of late, has seen meet never to look after this People: but has
suffered them all this while to walk in their own ways; ways of Sin, and ways
of Death. Yea, and tho there have been Plantations of the English in the
Country now 20. Years, and more; yea, some a matter of 30. Years, or
thereabout: Yet of all this time (except some little workings in a few) no
considerable work of Grace has appeared amongst the Indians, till now of late.
So true is that Saying; The Times and Seasons, the Father has put them in his
Own Power. Act. 1.7. and c. This noble Epistle was dated at Dorchester, in New
England; December, 13 th 1652. Thus we see, these grave and great Divines did
not despair of; but believe the Conversion of the Natives. And they lived to
see the Dawning of that Joyful Day. A Letter written by the honorable John
End^cot^ Esquire then Governor, has these passages in it; I esteem it not the
least of God's Mercies that has stirred up the hearts of any of the people of
God to be instrumental in the enlarging of the Kingdom of his dear Son, here
amongst the heathen Indians: which was one (...) of our coming hither; and it
is not frustrated. It was prophesied (...), and now begins to be accomplished,
Psalm. 2.8. The Foun^^^^ion is laid; and such a one, that I verily believe, the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against. etc. Boston; 8 r 27. 1651. Take also
the Testimony of holy Mr. William Leverich of Sandwich, who took much pains to
espouse the Indians to Christ; not without good success.

Mr. John Oxenbridge, the late worthy Pastor of the first Church of Christ in
Boston; while he dwelld at Suranam, was by the Father of Spirits strongly
pressed in his own Spirit, to open his mouth for the Dumb, which cannot speak
for themselves, tho they greatly need it. Whereupon, with very pious Affection,
and much diligent Reading He compiled a notable Treatise of a 54* Pages in
Quarto, entitled,

A Plea for the Dumb Indian.

The Text is Romans 15.20, 21. Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not
where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation: but
as it is written, Isa. 52.15.
To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they that have not heard,
shall understand. Many other Places are alleged to prove the Americans Interest
in the Promises. I shall mention a few, which are by others improved to the
same purpose; as hoping that a cord of so many wreaths will not easily be
broken. The Books of Moses, and the historical part of the Old Testamen^ do
speak of, and promise this Gospelling of the Heathen; Indians as we^^ as
others. Genesis 9.27. GOD shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents
of Shem. If the aboriginal Natives in America are descended of SHEM; the
European Plantations are a Fullfillment of this Prophecy.
p. 16. Psalm. 2.8. and 48.2, 10. and 72.8, 9, 10, 11, 17, 19. and 82.8. and
113.3, 4. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4. All nations shall flow unto it. If GOD so widens his
Promise: who may dare so to narrow it, as to exclude the Indians? The Lord
forbid that any who have already tasted how good he is to themselves, that were
Unworthy before, and Unthankful after: the Lord I say, forbid that any such
should lodge, or admit so Uncharitable a thought in their hearts! What? to cut
off, and that for ever, so great a part of Mankind from the Blessing of the
Gospel! Where there is neither Greek, nor Jew, Barbarian, Scythian. Colos.
3.11. Mr. Oxenbridge thinks that the Ten Tribes may be in America; and that the
opinion of its being peopled by Carthaginians* is a clear Mistake. The 2 d
Chapter of the 2 d Part contains Motives to Gospellize the Heathen, such as the
Indians are. The First Motive is the Command of GOD, whose we are, and whom we
profess to serve. This Command is either plainly expressed; or closely employed
in the Promises. An express Command is to be seen in Mark, 16.15. Go ye into
all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature. Mat. 28.19, 20. It is
necessary the Fullness of the Gentiles should come in: and does Faith come upon
any by Chance? Why should bounds be set to the word of Faith, so long as
Infidelity remains? With what Confidence, what Conscience do we not offer
Christ to them that have him not? Do we detain the Word of God in
Unrighteousness? Bernard. lib. 3. cap. 1. de Consid.

Another Motive offers it self from the Coming of our dear LORD; which, if real
Christians, we do desire: but if intelligent ones, will not expect (because we
cannot obtain) till the Indians be Gospellized. Mat. 24.14. And this Gospel of
the Kingdom shall be preached in All the World, for a witness unto All Nations,
and then shall the End come. I need not again rescue this Text to the sense
that favors the Indians Gospelling: but rather employ it in this Service.
Christians, Would you not gladly have Christ come? Do you not long for such a
Day of his Presence, as will never be obscured by a Night of Absence or
Withdrawing? Do you not look out sharp for Him, to end the Violences and Abuses
of the sons of Wickedness? To dispatch this Vain and Vexatious world? What say
you? Do you so love Christ, as to say with the Bride, by the same Spirit, Come
Lord Jesus! Come quickly! Are you in good earnest that hear this? Desire then,
Pray and Labor that the Gospel may be preached in all the World; in this
Indian End of it. For till then, Christ himself tells you, He will not, He
cannot come. The Door is, as it were, shut against Him. How do you desire Him
to come in, and yet ly drowsing and turning on your Bed, as a Door upon the
hinge? You are trying near hand, how you can shift for your Selves; and so in
effect, shift off CHRIST, who is all this while kept without door. For Love, or
Shame, Get Up! and Open the Door! 2 Peter, 3.12. Looking for, and hasting unto
the coming of the day of God. Sit not then still: but as we use to do with
desirable and welcome Guests, go out to meet Him, and bring Him in. What is done
or prepared by Papists among Indians, is not to be despised; but improved by
Protestants. There may be some sincere Laborers and Converts among them. (...)
Urbanus Calveto tells me of a Spanish Bishop of Mexico converted to the Truth.
I cannot but think well of Betanzus of Guatemala. Benzo, p. 174, 256, 257.
Nor may I deem otherwise of Did. Lopez. His Letter has a Christian savou^ in
it. Yea, page 8.
Gage confesses that he had known some of sober Conversation, that had listed
themselves for the Indian Missions. And Acosta says there are Man of God; they
are scarce indeed. (...) may not pass by Joseph Acosta himself, whom I am
inclined to judge a serious Man for the Conversion of the Indians. 417.
In this Work he spent 17. Years: and when he departed from them, he was
followed with Tears and Cries. 429.
I cannot but esteem him for his pressing and maintaining so heartily the
Preaching of Christ to be the principal Thing. And he accounts it Ridiculous,
for the Indians to say them Prayers they understand not a word of. 35^.
He makes Explicit Faith necessary; and says it is not enough for vulgar
people to profess that they hold what the Church believes. He says that Prayer
is most needful in this Business: because it is all of God and his Grace; and
not of Merits. Moreover, it was said by Hilary and Jerome, that the hearts of
the Hearers may be more holy than the lips of the Priests* ^^6.


Pareus, Mat. 23.3.
By means of the Spaniard, the Indians have a School in every Town for Reading
and Writing: and Officers of their own to do Justice; except in matters of
Life. ^age, 146.
I conceive Hope and Joy, when I read what catachetical Doctrine was by a Synod
at Lima appointed to be taught an Indian that would become a Christian; He must
believe in One God; Acosta, ^67.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and that this God is Maker of All; and gives
eternal Glory to the good, and Torment to the Wicked. None is freed from Evil,
but by Jesus Christ made Man, and suffering for Man: and that He is our LORD
and Redeemer, and Only Hope; and Reigns in Heaven. In Baptism a man is made
[professedly] his Servant. If an Indian believe these Things, and Repent of his
past life, and now will live according to the Command of God: he may be
accepted for a Christian.

Let Protestants now, for shame, arise, and show that they have some breathings
of a true Apostolical Spirit in them. I conclude with that of the Prophet; Drop
down, ye Heavens, from above, and let the Skies pour down Righteousness. Isa.
45.8.

The 189 th Page shows the Nobility of Virginia's Original. Most of the
Adventurers were of such Quality, 1607.
as not to be likely to design their own Profit. 1610.
In their 53 d Order it is Appointed, that they shall (according to the first
Institution and Profession of this Company) Advise and devise to the utmost of
their Power, the best Means for reclaiming the barbarous Natives, and bringing
them to the true Worship of God, Civility of Life, and Virtue. I knew one who
under the name of dust and ashes, gave 500 l. in Gold, for the breeding of
Indian Children in true Religion; G^br. Barber.
and then in Trades, that they might live honestly. And a zealous Minister made
a considerable Collection in the East India Fleet, Patr. Copland.
for the same End. Mr. Nicolas Farrar gave 300 l. toward a College; to be paid
when Ten Indian Children should be placed in it: and in the mean time, 24 l.
per annum, to three discreet godly Men in the Colony; which should honestly
b^ing up three Indian Children, in Christian Religion, and some good Course to
live by. And the Company of Virginia did yearly appoint a Committee to take
into their care the matter of the College to be erected in Virginia, for the
Conversion of Infidels. To these Offere^^, we may well add those that offered
themselves. Mr. Glover that wanted no Employ; yet would go with Sir Thomas
Dale: When also went Mr. Alexander Whitaker (Son to that famous Professor in
Cambridge) being well settled in England, on a Living and Means of his own; yet
had his heart stirred up to preach the Gospel in Virginia: so that no
disswasion nor discouragement could withdraw him from the Voyage.

The 10 th Chapter p. 220. argues for the planting of Colonies truly
Christian, in America; for the Vindication of the Honor of God and Christian
Religion horribly and unmatchably scandalized by the barbarous Cruelties of the
Spaniards. The Land was as the Garden of Eden, or Paradise, before them; and
behind them a desolate Wilderness. Joel, 2.3.
They have fullfilled, and surpassed the Mischievousness of old Babylon, Isa.
14* 17. (...) Regionem Viventium. Parker, l. 2. p 15 Psalm. 24.1. and 50.12.
in making the World [the Habitable or Fertile World; as Gataker there] as a
Wilderness, and destroying the Cities thereof. Now the Good Lord by his Good
Spirit lift up a Standard against the Cruel Enemy of Christ and Mankind; that
such Enemies may be scattered. And let the Lord lift up his Hand; declare his
Power to the Gentiles, that they may be gathered to, and by the Standard of the
Gospel. And I would bless them in the Name of the Lord, that with true hearts
shall go forth to either part of this Work. Isa. 59 19. and 49.22.

The fervent Zeal of this learned and holy Man, would provoke a very Stone to
speak: and therefore I hope the Christian Reader will lend a favorable Ear to
my short Antiphony; What has Old-anti-Christ to do in the New World! By their
own Confession, their Chapter is an Old woman, past Child bearing. Nam Ecclesia
omnium consensu, etjam haereticorum, jam senuit: Sed nos nullam Ecclesiae
senectu (...) agnos^imus quemadmodum nec Dei. Whitaker, p 504. L^^ them seek
their heretics where they can find them.
si ergo in sua adolescentia ac juventute non crevisset, quomodo nunc in
senectute cresceret? Bellarmin. de not. Ecclesiae, lib. 4 cap 7. col. 175. and
176. D. One of this Mark may indeed be the Pope's Whore: but the Spouse of
CHRIST, she cannot be. For it is altogether impossible that the LAMB's Wife
should ever wax Old, and become Unfruitful. Her Youth is renewed as the
Eagles. It is most certain that the True Church will be Ten times more Vigorous
and Fruitful than ever before. In this Instance, Bellarmin's Fiddle is
miserably out of Tune, if compared with David's Harp; Ps. 4^ 16. In stead of
thy Fathers shall be thy Children. and 113, 9. He makes the barr^n woman to
keep horse; to be a joyful Mother of Children: praise ye the LORD. Compare
this with the Wedding mentioned Rev. 19.1* 7. where likewise the burden of the
Song is Allelujah: and Rev. 21 5. Behold, I make all things NEW; and we shall
perceive a perfect ravishing Diapason.

As for the Dearnes^ of the Gospel in New England; being Fore warnd we ought to
be Fore arm^d, that we may not be outbid. Truth is a Kind of Gold that cannot
be bought too dear. Truth (...) such a Commodity as never broke the Buyer
whatever it cost him. Caryl on Job, 12.16. My honored Pastor, the Reverend Mr
Samuel Wi^^ard, a person eminent for Soundness of Judgment, and Clearness of
Expression; lately preached and printed some excellent Sermons, the Text and
Title whereof is Buy the Truth, and Sell it not. In the 48, 49.68, 69. pages,
there are Lines very proper for the New-English Planters: as also in the 117,
118, and 125. pages of Covenant Keeping the way to Blessedness. May they
accordingly, Obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of Need! If we
consult the memorable Epistle of Mr. Shepard of Cambridge, and Mr. Allin of
Dedham, before their Answer to the Nine Positions; Or, if we inquire of the
Learned and Judicious Mr. Jonathan Mitchel, and Mr. Urian Oaks;
Election-Sermon, p. 17-21
we shall find, they reckoned that the Planters had a good Bargain. And this
Amiable Quaternion were all born in England; but chose to have their Graves
here at our Cambridge, and Dedham.

An impossibility of subsisting there] As this seems to be all; so this is
Argument enough, Attend we our Errand upon which Christ sent us into the
Wilderness, and He will provide Bread for us. Mr. Danforth Elect. Sermon, page
22.
if it can be made out. Miraculous Samson could not withstand Thirst; nor
Prodigious Jonathan, Hunger. Upon the Resettlement of Virginia by the Lord la
Ware, June, 9. 1610. there is this remark; This was the Arm of the Lord of
Hosts, who would have his People pass the Red Sea and Wilderness; and then to
possess the Land of Can^^n. Although there were not Ten to One, yet there were
Ten to Two of those who went to search the Land of Canaan; who reported A Land
that eats up the Inhabitants thereof! Number* 13.32. And some pious honest man,
being surrounded with Difficulties at his first coming hither; might
Unadvisedly write a discouraging Letter: Unto which, his never Returning to
England, and the flourishing circumstances of his Grandson at this day in New
England, are a very desirable and pleasant Contradiction. P. 107.
Capt. John Smith in his History published Anno 1624. affirms that he found New
England well inhabited with a goodly, P. 209, 215.
strong, and well proportioned People. And the Proverb is, Show me the Man, and
not the Meat. And if men can be contented with the Food and Raiment intended in
1 Timothy 6.8. they need not fear subsisting where Ash, Chestnut, Hazel, Oak and
Walnut do naturally and pl^nti^ully grow. But for this, let Mr. Morden be
consul^^d, p. 607 -- 61^.
to whom N. E is beholden for the fair Character given them in his Geographie.
It is remarkable, that Mr. Parker, who was a successful Schoolmaster at
Newbury in Barkshire, in the happy days of Dr Twis^e; was much ab^ut this time
preaching and Proving at Ip^wich in Essex, That the Passengers came over upon
good Grounds, and that GOD would multiply them as He did the Children of
Israel. His Text was Exodus 1.7. As Mr. Nicolas Noves, who was an Auditor, and
is yet living, la^ely informed me. Mr. Parker was at this time; 1634.
principally concerned in beginning Newbury, where the Learned and Ingenious Mr.
Benjamin Woodbridge, Dr. Twisse's Successor, had part of his Education under
his Uncle Parker. Mary Brown [now Godfry] the Firstborn of Newbury, is yet
alive; and is become the Mother and Grandmother of many children. And so many
have been born after her in the Town, that they make two Assemblies, Besides
all that have issued out to begin other Plantations.
wherein GOD is solemnly worshipped every Sabbath Day. And

As long (...) Plum Island shall faithfully keep the commanded Post;
Notwithstanding all the hectoring Words, and hard Blows of the proud and
boisterous Ocean; As long as any Salmon, or Sturgeon shall swim in the streams
of Merrimack; or any Perch, or Pickeril, in Crane-Pond; As long as the Sea-Fowl
shall know the Time of their coming, and not neglect seasonably to visit the
Places of their Acquaintance; As long as any Cattle shall be fed with the Grass
growing in the Medows, which do humbly bow down themselves before Turkie-Hill;
As long as any Sheep shall walk upon Old Town Hills, and shall from thence
pleasantly look down upon the River Parker, and the fruitful Marshes lying
beneath; As long as any free and harmless Doves shall find a White Oak, or
other Tree within the Township, to perch, or feed, or build a careless Nest
upon; and shall voluntarily present themselves to perform the office of
Gleaners after Barley Harvest; As long as Nature shall not grow Old and dote;
but shall constantly remember to give the ^ows of Indian Corn their education,
by Pairs: So long shall Ch^istians be born there; and being first made meet,
shall from thence be Translated, to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light. Now, seeing the Inhabitants of Newbury, and of New England,
upon the due Observance of their Tenure, may expect that their Rich and
Gracious LORD will continue and confirm them in the Possession of these
invaluable Privileges: Let us have Grace whereby we may serve GOD acceptably
with Reverence and godly Fear. For our GOD is a consuming Fire. Heb. 12.28, 29.

The mention of Mary Brown brings to mind an idle Whimsey, as if Persons born
in N. E. would be sh^rt (...). Whereas the Natives live long. And a Judgment
concerning Eng^ish men cannot well be made till Twenty or Thirty years hence.
Capt. Peregrine White born November. 1620. is yet alive, and like to live. Major
William Bradford (whose honorable Father Governor Bradford married here) is
more than 73. years old; and has worn a Bullet in his Flesh above 20 of them.
Elizabeth Alden Whose Grand daughter is a Mother.
(now Paybody) Capt. John Alden her brother, Alexander Standish, and John
Howland have lived more than Seventy years.

H^^ Uncle the Reverend Mr. James Noyes was a painful Labourer in God^s
Vineyard at Newbury.
This Summer* Ensign James Noyes has happily discovered a Body of Marble at
Newbury, within half a mile of the Navigable part of Little River; by which
means much better Lime may be made, than of Oyster shells or West India
Lime-stones; and afforded at a much cheaper rate. This Summer a Contribution
has been made at Rode Island and Narraganset; but firstly and principally at
Connecticut, by a Brief from the honorable the Governor and Council there: By
the continuance of which brotherly Love, many Hundreds in this Province, almost
quite slain with Hunger, have been rescued and revived. It is observable that
by far the greatest part of our Divines have received their Birth and Education
here: Who by solidity of Learning, soundness of Doctrine, and Integrity of
Life, do give much honor to their Lord and Master. And as Dr. Twisse's
VINDICIAE came ou^ Anno 1632* quickly after the Settlement of New England,
which was in the Years 1620, 1628, 1630. So that Faith which the Doctor did
Earnestly and Victoriously contend for; is no where more Unanimously,
Skillfully, and Resolutely defended than here. As a Memorial for the
Plantations of JESUS CHRIST in New England, Holy Shepard has his Wish. Elect.
Sermon, page 16.
a worthy Divine, whose honorable Parents were born here, is erecting a
Testimonial Pillar more ornamental and durable than polished Marble. And this
very Year, notwithstanding the Blast, the Worm, the Frost, the Drought, the
War: The Inhabitants of Fairfield, Newton, Rowley, and Excester, have been at
the Charge to build themselves very fair and large Meeting Houses for the
public Worship of GOD. I would fain hope, that the End of the Lord with New
England, Chap. 13.15.
will be such as was with Job: Because the Language of this Thing seems to
be, The He Slay us, yet will we Trust in HIM. October, 7. 1697.


