NEW ENGLAND Pesecutors Mauld With their own Weapons.

Giving some Account of the bloody Laws made at Boston against the Kings
Subjects that dissented from their way of Worship.

Together with a brief Account of the Imprisonment and Trial of Thomas Maule of
Salem, for publishing a Book, entitled, Truth held forth and maintained, etc.

By Theo. Philathes.

Truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a pray,

Isa. 59.14, 15. As Troops of Robbers wait for a Man, so do the company Priests
^^^der in the way by consent,

Hosea 6.9. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frames Mischief by a Law; they gather themselves together against the Soul of
the Righteous, and condemn the Innocent Blood,

Psalm ^4.20, 21. The Preface.
Christian Reader;
IT has not been without due Consideration, that we have seen cause to set
forth and publish a true Account of some of the New England Church Members
cruel and bloody Laws, which through the Priests instigating the Magistrates,
were by them made against both Quakers and all other Religious Persons within
New-Englands Jurisdiction, that were found to dissent from their Worship, as
also a short Relation of some few of the many Persons that suffered Persecution
under the Antichristian Power of the aforesaid Church, with some brief
Observations on each Law, and the Preamble thereof. Unto which is added, an
Account of the Priests, Rulers and Church Members great. Hurly-burley or
Confusion made about a late Book, entitled, Truth held forth and maintained,
etc. by Thomas Ma^l^ of Salem, in which Book is contained thirty eight Chapters
relating to the Principles of Truth, agreeing with the Testimony of the holy
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles recorded in the holy Scriptures of Truth,
together with an Account of Gods Judgments upon diverse of the chief persecuting
Priests and Rulers, and a Declaration of the late great Judgment of God upon
the Priests, Rulers and their Followers, of whom Twenty were (through the
Accusation by Specter Evidence, which Judgment continued

Persecutors Mauled with their own Weapons.
Antichristian Freedom established by the Law of the Old Charter Priests and
Rulers in New England.
THis Court having considering the Proposals presented to this Court by several
of the Inhabitants of the County of Middlesex, do declare and order, That no
man whatsoever shall be admitted to the freedom of this Body Politic, but such
as are Members of some Church of Christ, and in full Communion, which they
declare to be the true intent of the ancient Law, Anno 1031* 1660.

(...) Hence you may understand, that the County of middle^^x, (...) Money and
wealth, did encourage for sale, the high Priests Ware, as well as in (...) to
(...) to seat themselves (...) to the Magistrates (...) Court of Injustice,
against Dissenters from their (...) which said Courts were kept in (...), where
the Priests (...) brought of the (...) Estates, for (...), to the Value of many
hundreds of Pounds, with which the Priests and Rulers, with others of their
Church (...) themselves from day to day, while they made Laws against them that
dissented from the worship of their Priests, who when the^^ (...) were stuffed
with the best Provision, and their heads with the richest sort of Wine, had not
(...) home to their Common Prayers against all dissenters as well as Quakers;
and while they feasted themselves with the best of other men's Labor, they kept
the (...) thereof with the (...) entertainment their Goal and Bridewell house
did afford as by their cruel-suffering therein will hereafter appear, and as is
rel^ted in the Book of Sufferings, under these persecuting Magistrates, that
some went and demanded their fat Oxen of (...) again, to which their answer
(...) that we should sit and starve, while (...) are (...) which was to make
Laws to devour them and (...) great encouragement to the (...) Pol^tick, whose
(...) they ca^l it, is (...) pro^ed to be, b^ their persecut^^, (...) other
(...) in their Jurisdiction.

The Free-mans Law, by which a Body (...),
No man that is true can (...) Church per^ake
He that will honor gain, and (...) at their hand,
He must forsake all good, then by their cause may stand.

Preamble to the Persecutor^ Laws made against the People of God and the Kings
good Subject
WHereas there is a cursed Sect of Heretics lately risen up in the world,
which are commonly called Quakers, who take upon them to be immediately sent of
God, and Infallibly assisted by the Spirit, to speak and w^^e blasphemous
Opinions, despising Government and the Order of God in Church and common
Wealth, (...) king evil of Di^^^ties, repro^ching and reviling Magistrates and
Ministers, seeking to turn People from the Faith, and gain Proselites to their
pernicious way.

Observe; Here Is the Persecutors preamble to their Antichristian Law, the
unrighteousness of which is of their Father the wicked One, who from the
beginning has been an Accuser of the Brethren, wherefore the things of the
Kingdom of God are hid from them, Mat. 11.25. (...).21. In which state they
remain as the rebelious Jews, ^^ling good evil, and the truth, blasphemous
Opinions, ha^ing no more (...) to accuse the Quakers of evil* then had the
wicked Jews against the People of God in the Apostles (...) and will in this
following work appear so to be, to every true Christian Readers view of the
same.

Here (...) begins these free-mens sin,
I (...) for which Gods Judgments bring.

Prea^ble to these Persecutors Law.
(...) Court Considering the Premises, and to prevent the (...) Mischief, as by
their means is wrought in our nativ^ Land.

(...), That of their many Lies and Unjust charge^ against (...) Quakers,
Baptists, and other Dissenters, as well as (...) them of the Church of England,
is a Record to the end of (...), is also of their many other unrighteous Works
against (...) of God and the Kings Subjects, which had they and the^^ Brethren
been as clear from all means of mischief as the (...) there had neither
Rebellion, Treason, or Murder against the King ^een alleged to the charge of
their New England Brother Hugh Peter's, V^mur, and others of their Brethren in
England, which they call our native Land.

New England Persecutors Law.
1. Do hereby order, and by the Authority of this Court Be it ordered and
Enacted, That no Master or Commander of any Ship, Bark, Pinnace, Ketch, or
other Vessel, henceforth bring into any Harbor, Creek or Cove within this
Jurisdiction, any known ^uaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Heretics, upon
the Penalty (...) of One hundred Pounds, to be forth with paid to the Treasurer
of the Cuntry, except it appears that such Master wanted due notice or
information that they were such, and in that case he may clear himself by his
Oath, when sufficient proof to the contrary is wanting; and for default of
payment of the said Fine of one hundred Pounds, or good Security for the same,
such Master shall be committed to Prison by Warrant from any Magistrate, there
to continue till the said Fine be satisfied to the Treasurer, as aforesaid.

2. And the Master or Commander of any such Ship or Vessel, that shall being
them, being legally convicted, shall give in sufficient Security to the
Governor or one more of the Magistrates, to carry them to the place whence he
brought them; and on his refusal so to do, the Governor or said Magistrate or
Magistrates, shall commit such Master or Commander to Prison, there to remain
till he shall give in sufficient Security to the content of the Governor or
said Magistrate.

3. And if any Person or Persons within this Jurisdiction shall henceforth
entertain and conceal any Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Heretics,
Knowing them to be such, every such Person shall forfeit to the Country Forty
Shillings for every hours entertainment and concealment of any such Quaker or
Quakers as aforesaid, and shall be committed to Prison, as aforesaid, till the
Fines be fullly satisfied and paid.

Observe, That several of the Kings Subjects, Masters or Commanders of Vessels
suffered to the utmost extremity of this unrighteous Law, which is so
repugnant to the Law of God, and the Kings Laws, that in making and prosecuting
the same, they out do all their fore-^athers all (...) Iniquity, which Law was
so well pl^^sing to the Prie^^, (...) the more that people might believe their
wo^^ to be sanctified, set one day apart for Preaching and Praying,, as a day
of Thanksgiving for the same, hoping that by the means of a through pro^ecution
of this Law, to keep their Jurisdiction clear of every Person called a Quaker,
and that then their freemen would take the more courage against the Baptists
and them of the Church of England; for with the Quakers they were hard beset,
and in fear they would deprive them of their God; and as Demetrius, their Trade
would come to nothing, and in fear of being slain, as was their elder Brother,
Vagabond Cain, who as these had no certain dwelling in the Truth, which if
their Worship had been the true Worship of God, as we read, John 4.24. but on
the contrary, as we read, Mark 7 6, 7, 8, 9. Mat. 15.8. they worshiped they
knew not what, John. 4 22. in which state of Disobedience they were far from
the Rule of doing as themselves would have been done unto, Mat. ^ 12 Luke 6 31.
but in fleeing the Land to save their Purses with which their minds did abide,
regarded not the Rule to ente^tain Strangers, Heb. 13.2. but on the contrary,
gave them the (...) entertainment as the wicked Jews did to Christ and (...)
Apostles, from whose Rule of proving all things (...) that which is good, from
the same do these Persecuto^^ (...) restrain, as will more at large hereafter
(...)*

Of the like Laws we ne^e^ find
By men, that God and King do mind

New England: Antichristian (...)
4. And every Person or Persons that shall (...) or defend any of their
pernicious ways* (...) writing or meeting on the Lords Day, or at (...) time,
shall after due means of conviction (...) Penalty ensu^ng. viz. Every one so
meeting (...) to the use of the Country, for every time, Ten Shilling^ And
every one speaking in such a Meeting (...) Five Pounds*

Observe, That by this Law, and the other aforementioned Law of forty
Shillings for every hours entertainment to any Person or Persons, or others
whom they account blasphemous Heretick^, as they did account all that dissented
from their Priests Worship, by which two Laws they gained abundance of Money
for Fines of the Inhabitants, who were found either at the Quakers Meeting, or
to entertain their Relations and Kindred, though Father or Mother, Brother or
Sister, or any other Friend or Friends, or Relations and Kindred, whom in their
Law They call by the name of Strangers and Vagabonds, as by the following Laws
will further appear, and that every man by Membership admitted to the freedom
of their Body Politic, was according to their Priests way of teaching, become
a Ruler, to lord over the Faith of every Dissente^; by which the Christian
Reader may fully comprehend the nature of these Free-mens Body Politic.

Unto Religion these Freemen do pretend,
We may all see that Money is their and.

New England Antichristian Law.
5. If any Person shall knowingly import into any Harb^ur of this Jurisdiction,
any Quakers Books or Writings concerning their damnable Opinions, he shall
forfeit for every such Book or writing five Pound^; and whosoever shall
disperse or conceal such Book o^ Writing, and it be found with him or her, o^
in his or her House, and shall not Immediately deliver the same to the next
Magistrate, shall pay five-Pounds for di^persing or concealing every such Book
or Writing

6 And every Person or Persons whatsoever that shall ^ev^le the (...) or Person
of Magistrates or Ministers, as is usual (...) the Quakers, such Person or
Persons, shall be severe^y whipped, or pay the Sum of five Pounds in money.

The Reader may here note, That the substance of matter contained in these two
^a^t Law^ is very agreeable with what is before, as also with what will follow,
all which is to promote the works o^ Unrighteousn^ss against God and his
People, thereby to (...) from receiving the Truth, who (...) proving all things
to hold fast that which is good, (...) m^^t as by (...) Law, p^y five Pounds,
either for bringing any Quakers Books o^ writings into their Jurisdiction, or
keeping the same in their House when they are, without immediate delivering
(...) same to the next Magistrate, which does evidently manifest (...) design
is to (...) the Peoples Money, as well as to ^idde^ the^ of rec^^ving the
Truth, which fulfill what is written, (...) neither ent^^ the Kingdom of Heaven
themselves, nor s^ffer or (...) that are (...) to go in, Mat. 22.13. but as
those w^ck^d Jews die, so ^o these Hypocrites most unrighteously charge the
People of God with reviling the Office and Persons of Magistrates and
Ministers, when as on contrary, th^^ sedi^o^^s were true for Gods cause against
Pride, C^^^^tousness and Opp^^ssion, which greatly abounded in the Magistrates,
Priests and ^er^ecuting freemen, who for the most Part by their ^^^eling
Priests, were taught beyond all grace and common good, and that the whole
Government of their Church and Commonwealth, as they call it, had as they
concluded that dependency upon their old Charter, that as by their Law^ it is
manifest they neither feared God nor minded the Laws of (...) English Nation;
for they had assumed to themselves the (...) of both God, King and Bishops,
wholly confiding in the (...) of their old Idol Char^er.

Where Persecutors once gain Power,
Like Lions, Bears, and Wolves devour.

New-England's Antichristian Law.
7. And every Person that shall publi^h and main^^in any, Heterodox Erro^ious
Doctrine, shall be (...) to be questioned, and sen^ured by the County Court
where ^he^ lives, according to the merit of his Offense.

The Reader may hence understand, That the County Courts were plenty of these
Persecutors and Plenty of Jackalls to hunt for their prey, which was to find
out every Person in their Jurisdiction, that departed from the way of their
Priests Worship, such person and ^e^son^ came a prey, Isa. 59.15. who were
c^^sed to publish or maint^^^ the Heterodox or Erroneous Doctrine; at the
opening of whi^^ Courts, were always some of their (...) to pray, pretending
that what they did against Dissente^s, would be the more sanctified through the
means of their Prayers, which they pretended was for the honor of God, and
good of the Souls of them, on whom the said Court did inflict punishment, both
to their Body and Purses, so that what with these H^re^ings unsanctified
Prayers, and the like Advice to the Magistrates, they would be sure to lay load
enough on the ^^cks of the aforesaid Diss^nters, especially upon the Innocent
(...) Quakers, whom so often in their Law, they call (...)* for unto the^ was
the Priests greatest Rage manifested, through their wicked advice to the
Magistrates, to have them all hanged, of whom four were put to Death, and more
had been, had not their Bloody Hands been stopped through the means of the
Kings Order to the Contra^^, a Copy of which Letter will hereafter appear in
this Book, which before it came, many were they that were put to cruel
Sufferings, both by long Imprisonment, cruel Whipping, Cutting off Ears,
Branding with Red^^ct ^^ons, ordering Men and Women to be sold for bond Slaves,
lear^i^g the Bodie^ of Innocent Women for Witches, besides Banishi^g upon pain
of Death, and ab^ndance of their Estates taken for (...), on which these men,
so free to do the Devils Work, did live, eating and drinking at a high rate,
whilst others suffered as aforesaid.

This was the most of (...) Prie^ts and (...),
Whose (...)

New England Antichristian Law.
8. whereas there is a pernicious Sect, commonly call^^ Quakers, lately written,
who by word and writing (...) published and maintained many dangerous and
horrid Tenets, and take upon them to change and alter the laudable Customs of
our Nation, in giving civil Respect to Equals^ Reverence to Superiors, whose
Actions tend to undermine the Authority of civil Government, as also to destroy
the Order of the Churches, by denying all established Forms of Worship, and by
with drawing from the orderly Church Assemblies allowed and approved by all
Orthrodox Proffessors of the Truth, and instead thereof, and opposition
thereunto, frequenting private Meetings of their own, insinuating into the
minds of the simple, or such as are less affected to the Order and Government
of our Church and Common Wealth, whereby diverse of our Inhabitants have been
Infected and seduced; and notwithstanding all former Laws made, upon Experience
of their arrogant bold Obtrusions to Disseminate their Principles amongst us,
prohibiting their coming into this Jurisdiction, they have not been d^tered
from their impetuous Attempts to undermine our Peace and hasten our Ruin.

The Reader may here note, the great Wickedness of these unrighteous Priests
and Rulers, who to accuse the innocent, run themselves into further mischief,
through their bold Attempts against God and the King, which has proved to be
their ruin, for whilst they were digging Pits, and making Rods, and laying
Snares the innocent, God was preparing his Judgments against them, and all
those whose silence gave consent thereto by which Judgments they do not only
suffer (...) fruit ^ad Grain throughout their Juris^ (...) delivered into the
hands of the Barbarous (...) suffers (...) m^ke them a double measure of (...),
which themselves (as by their Laws) have (...) others, besides the loss of
their old C^^^ter and (...).

(...) ever (...) for Innocent Blood Reward,
Though whi^^ the Wicked live, little it regard.

New England Antichristian Law.
For prevention thereof, this Court does Order and Enact, that every Person of
the cursed Sect of Quakers, who is not an Inhabitant, but found within this
Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where no Magistrate is at
hand, by any Constable, Commissioner or Select Man, and conveyed from Constable
to Constable, until they come before the next Magistrate, who shall commit the
said Person or Persons to close Prison, there to remain without Bail, until the
next Court of Assistants, where they shall have a legal Trial by a special
Jury, and being convict to be of the cursed Sect of Quakers, shall be sentenced
to Banishment upon pain of DEATH.

Obs. The Reader may hence understand, that the nearer the Magistrates Laws did
extend to destroy the Lives of the Innocent, the more pleasing it was to the
Hireling Priests, who in honor thereunto, would set Time apart lo^ the
Churches Thank^giving.

New England Antichristian Law
And that every the Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction, being convicted to be of
the cursed Sect of Quakers, either by ^aking up, publishing and defending the
horrid Opinions of the ^^rsed Quakers* (...) stirring up (...) of Rebellion
against the Government of our Church as a Common Wealth, or by taking up their
ab^^rd and destru^tive Practices, viz. denying civil Respect and Reverence^
Equals and Superiors, withdrawing from out Church Assemblies, and instead
thereof, frequenting private Meetings of their own, in Opposition to our Church
Order, or by adhearing to, or approving of known Quakers, that are opposite to
the Orthodox received Opinions of the Godly, and endeavoring to disaffect
others to civil Government and Church Order established amongst us, and
condemning the Practice and Proceedings of this Court against the Quakers,
manifesting thereby compliance with those whose design is to overthrow the
Order established in our Church and Commonwealth.

The reader may here Observe the wretched state of these Bloody minded
Persecutors, who for want of true faith were in the state of th^it elder
Brother Cain, that was a murderer, like unto these who destroy the righteous
for their Faith and Obedience to God, for which cause these Persecutors bear
Cain^ mark, being in fear that those which are not of their murdering Spirits,
will slay them; and knowing themselves to be like principled, as was Hugh
Peter's, Venner, and many others of their New England Brethren in Iniquity,
stirring up Mutiny, Sedition and Rebellion against the English Government, and
the Order of the English Church established by the Bishops, as by the
Chronicles of England does at large appear of their Rebellion and Treason
against the King and his Children, in that day of their inventing so much
mischief against other^ in our Native Land, to set up themselves above all
others; which Sp^^it (...) the (...) in those their persecuting Brethren, who
impute that to (...) innocent (...) People, which (...) so highly guilty of, as
is manifested by their setting up themselves, to lord it ^ver the People of God
and the Kings Subjects, as for fifty or sixty Years time they have done in
New England, where the hireling Priests kept a constant stroke of putting all
that dissented from their Worship, into bear skins, and setting their followers
to tear them in pieces, calling out in their preaching to their people, Curse
ye Mero^, Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants that will not come to the help of
the Lord against the mighty, Judge. 5* 23. and cursed be he that does the Work
of the Lord deceitfully, by withholding his Sword from Blood, (...) 48.10 with
more of the like, endeavoring to persuade, that Gods general Judgments would
not depart, until they had hanged all the Quakers, and sent going all other
Dissenters.

The Judgments may remove, but when old Charter men
Are d^ad, and then
Or when God sends ^ere better men,
W^ll to rule in Government, then,
Pro. 29 2 From Devil and such Wicked Priests,
pray God deliver me
Then from all Mischief in the World,
be sure I shall be free.
Hosea 6.9. New England Persecutors Laws against the Kings Subjects
Every such Person upon Examination and Conviction before the Court of
Assistants, in manner as aforesaid, shall be committed to close Prison for one
Month, and unless they chose to depart the jurisdiction, shall give Bond for
their appearance at the next Court of Assistants, where continuing obstinate,
and refusing to retract and reform the afores^id Opinions and Practices, shall
be sentenced to Banishment, upon pain of Death, and in case of the aforesaid
Voluntary departure not to remain, or to return again into this Jurisdiction,
without the allowance of the major part of the Council first had and published,
on penalty of being banished upon pain of Death; and any one Magistrate, upon
complaint, or information, given him of any such Person, shall cause them to be
apprehended, and it upon Examination of the cause, he shall find Just grounds
for such complaint he shall commit such Person to Prison, until he come to his
Trial, as above expressed.

Observe, Here you may still note the Work of the Wicked, in whom he that was a
Liar and Murderer from the beginning* gave them no rest from their bloody
pursuit after the Lives of the Righteous, whom the Lord did preserve in all
their deep sufferings and firey Trials, that not one of the faithful Sufferers
for his Cause conformed to their wicked Will, who would (...) endure any that
differed in Judgment from their Priests Worship to inhabit within their
Jurisdiction, who without ^ear to God, or regard to Man, contrary to the Laws
of the English Nation, without either fear or regard to God, King or Bishops,
made the defense of their Faith, Church and Common Wealth (as they call
themselves) as strong as poss^ble they could with Sto^^^ (...), Goal and
Gallows, on which the chiefest strength of their Faith did depend; for when all
their other Antichristian Weapons failed them against the Quakers, the Gallows
held, until the Kings Letter came, and removed the strength of their faith in
that also; yet they continued by their old wonted way of picki^g away men's
Estates, by ^ining them in great Sums for dessenting from their Priests
Worship, which from the Quakers, (...), them of the Church of England and
others am^unted to about Twenty Thousand Pounds, in the bounds of New England.

When Wolves once got a taste of Blood,
They are for killing all that is good.
This Court being desirous to try all means, wi^h as much le^^y as may consist
with our safety, ^o prevent the ^^rusions of the Quakers, who besides their
absurd and blasph^mous Doctrines, do like Rogues and Vagabonds come in upon us,
and have not been restrained by the Laws already prov^ded.

Observe ^ave (...) the ^^xes Preamble to their Well (...) Law, whose Ravinous
blood-thirsty Nature is (...) contented with the ^^eece, but strive all they
can ^as have done the Wicked (...) part) to have the innocent Blood ^lso (as
did their (...) Bon^er in Queen Mary's time) whenas to many Thousands of People
it is well known that those which suffered in N^w-England, under the Name of
Quakers, were neither in Doctrine, P^inciple nor Practice, any way guilty of
these Persecutor charge, b^t on the co^t any differing therefrom, as Light
from Darkness, Truth from Error, God from the Devil, Christ from (...), and
Heaven from Hell, from whence is the Power and Spirit of all these that put
people to Death for their Faith and Obedience to God, who permits these things
to be done by the instruments of the wicked one, for a trial of Faith to those
who are made w^^^ing to part with all for the sake of him that first ^^ved
them, and gives them that Power through which they re^ei^e strength to
withstand all the ^o^ers of Hell, from whence proceeds the Spirit of these
persecutors, as did them in days past, John 8.44. Mat. 23.32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
whose safety did (as these to remain by the strength of unrighteous Laws, and
as they sold, so say these, We have a Law, and by our Law, every Person
dissenting from our Church Order, and against the Government of our Common
Wealth, as is manifest the Quakers do, by condemning the Proceedings of this
Court against Dissenters, who by our Law ought to (...). Which proves these
Persecutors t^ ^he true Vagabonds, by having no dwelling in the Truth.

Vagabonds are, as was their Brother Cain,
Who murder them, that in the Truth remain

New England Persecutors Laws against the ^ings Subjects.
Have ordered, That every such Vagabond Quaker found within any part of this
Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended by any Person or Persons, or by the
Constable of the Town, where he or she is found, and by the Constable, or in
his absence, by any other Person or Persons, conveyed before the next
Magistrate of that shire, where they are taken, o^ Commissioner invested with
Magistratical Power, and bring by them adjudged to be a wandering Quaker, viz.
such that has no orderly al^owance in this Juri^diction, and not giving civil
Respect or by any other (...) mani^esting himse^^ to be a Quaker, shall by
warrant under the hand of the said Magistrate or Commissioner* directed to the
Constable of the Town, or to any other meet Person* be stripped from the
middle, upward, and tied to a Carts Fa^l, and whipped through the Town, and
from thence Immediately conveyed to the ^onstable of the next Town toward the
b^rder, of our J^^isdiction, (...) their Warrant shall direct* til the^ (...)
conveyed through the outward most Towns of our jurisdiction

Ob^erve That (...) the follow^ng (...) of their many W^^rants of the (...)
Blood^ (...) Whipping of the Innocent (...) who by the^ (...) allowance to
trade, buy or se^l with^^ (...) for which cause of being so prohibit^d, and
found with (...) of Jurisdiction, are by them called Vagabonds, (...) being
found, as Cain was, to have no dwelling in i^ (...) are the right time
Vagabonds, endeavoring (as much as (...)) to whip others from their certain
dwellings (...) to become Vagabonds like themselves.

A (...) one of their many Warr^nt*
TO the Constable of Dover, Hampton, Salsbury, Newbe^^ (...) Ipswich, Wenham,
Li^n, Boston, Rox^ury, (...) and until these Vagabond. Quakers are carried
(...) jurisdiction, You, and every of you are required of the Kings Name to
take Ann Coleman, Mary Tomkins, (...) Ambrose and make them fast to the Carts
Tail, and driving the Cart through your several Towns to whip them upon their
Naked Backs, and not exceeding Ten Stripes on each of them in each Town; and so
to convey them from Constable to Constable, till they come out of this
Jurisdiction, as you will answer it at your peril. And this shall be your
Warrant. Dated at ^over, December the 22th, 1662.

Per me Richard Walde^.



Observe, Here are Eleven Towns in the Warrant, and from the first Town Dover,
to the last Town Drah^m, is about eight^ Miles, and Ten Stripes on each of them
in each Town, is One hundred and Ten stpipes a piece with a Whip made with
three small single hair twisted Cords, each of which being knotted (...) for
the Priests Work to defend their Faith, and so laid on the naked Backs of the
innocent Quakers, as if it were possible, the Knots might kiss the Bones, which
cruel work was agreeable to the Priests exhorting their Drudges from those
Scriptures Judge 5.23 Jer. 48.10. which Work was as far from the Work of God, in
this day, as Heaven is from Hell, as may be read. Luke 9.54, 55 56. Mat. 5.44,
45, 46. Luke 6.31 32, 33. Mat. 13.28, 29, 30. 2 Cor. 10 3, 4, 5, 6. but
contrary to these Persecutors act, as we read, John 8.44. Mat. 6.24. For his
Servants they are to whom they obey, Ram. 6.16. But as their laws were bloody
and their execution Cruel and Barbaron^, so has God suffered both he that drew
the Warrant, with many more of his persecuting Brethren, to be destroyed, and
their Riches consumed by the great Judgments of God upon them, as is mo^^ at
large to be seen in the aforesaid late book, entitled (...) held forth and
maintained, by Thomas Maule. And when the Quaker^ were commonly so whipped, with
their torn Flesh and bloody (...), had about fifty miles to travel through the
Wilderness (...) before they came to their Friends at Rode-Island* and so hard
weather with frost and snow, that diverse People have been killed therewith in
traveling between Town and Town, though was two or three (...) from each other.

The Devil and the Priests, and all such Warrant Makers,
In full Commu^ion are, with all such (...).

The Persecutors Law against the Kings good Subject
And if such Vagabond Quakers shall return again, th^^ ^o be in the like manner
apprehended, and conveyed as (...) as they shall be found within the limits of
our Jurisdiction, provided every such Vagabond Quaker have been thrice
convicted, and sent away, as aforesaid, and returning again into this
Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended, and Committed by any Magistrate, as
aforesaid, (...) the house of Correction within the County, where he or she is
found, until the next Court within that County, where if the Court judge not
meet to release them, they shall be branded with the Letter R on their left
Should^^, and (...) and sent away in manner as before.

(...), here you may understand that (...) se Cain-like p^^ted Vagabonds, did
extend (...), as well as these (...) Quakers, (...) to dissen^ from their
Priests (...) and to (...) against their unrighteous Proceedings against the
People of God and the Kings Subjects, which was tyranical, cruel, bloody and
barbarous, that if any Person (though the Church of England,) was ^ound to
petition to the King and Bishops to maintain their (...) respecting their
worship agreeable to the way of the English (...) it was accounted high
Rebellion by these Persecutors so to do for which Offense, no less then
Imprisonment and three Hundred Pound^, would keep them from being hanged on the
New England gallows till dead, dead, and of this nature, by imprisonment and
paying three hundred pounds apiece, was Dr. Child, (...) Maverick, and other
Merchants in Boston, kept from being hanged, (...) being taken, with a Petition
to send to England, a^ aforesaid. Of which when I come to give an account of
the English (...) being persecuted by these New England Freemen, to do what
they saw mo^^ pleasing to their Priests, shall the more speak relating to the
aforesaid suffering of Dr. Child, Samue^ ^^verick and others of the Church of
England as aforesaid.

From all Bloody Free (...), pray God deliver me,
T^^y are for Ha^ging (...), that one (...) toem not be.

The (...) against the King^ (...) Subjects.
And if after this he or she shall return again, then to be proceeded again
(...) Incorrigible R^gu^s and Enemies to the common Peace* and shall
imm^diately be apprehended and committed to the common Goal of the County, and
the next Court of Assistants shall be brought to the Trial, and proceeded
against according to the former Law made 1658. for their punishment on Pain of
Death. Psalm 94.20, 21.

Obs. You may understand, that of this nature it has been in all Ages to the
People of God, for as it is written, He that is born after the flesh,
persecution him that is born after the Spirit, even so it is now* Gal. 4.29.
and that the People are great sufferers as by these Laws, when they fall into
the hands of Hypocrites, which pretend so much to Religion, as did the wicked
Jews to destroy the righteous in that day, which work (as we read in the holy
Scriptures, Books of Martyrs, and the like true Histories) ever did, as now it
does, begin at the house of the persecuting Priests, who would have none live
save those that are one with them in all things that tend to the upholding them
with Money for preaching, which is made up with other men's word, whose Life and
experience they witness nothing of, but at random make a (...) days Image with
stolen words, (...) which they fright the People that know no b^tter then to
buy of their Ware, which further then they write it (...), lose it before the
next market day; such like is the preaching and teaching o^ every Hypocritical
Hireling and Persecuting (...) does leaven every Persecutor of their Church
(...) in the like covetous practice, through whose (...) many have been
horribly cheated. Now if New (...) be not highly guilty of these things, as
(...) to Death for Religion, then the People (...) the more to blame, to cry
out at the (...) so much as they do against Persecutors, (...) Doctrine,
Surfeited Horses, and the like of (...) Cheats, with which it is common for
(...) to trade.

^
^
^
^

New England Persecutors Laws against the King (...).
And for such Quakers as shall arise from amongst our selves, they shall be
proceeded against (...) Anno 165^. does provide, until they have been (...) by
the Court of Assistants, and bring (...) shall th^n be banished the
Jurisdiction, and (...) they sh^^l return, and be found in any part of this
Ju^^^^diction, then (...) be proceeded against as those that are strangers and
Vagabond* (...) in manner as before expressed.

O^s. The Reader may hence understand, that as their Laws were blood^, the
cruel nature of their or believing hard hearts, was in the execution of their
Laws, agreeable thereunto, who being bewitched by a Company of hi^eling
Priests) not to obey the Truth, were through obedience to wicked Spirits, mad
after the blood of the ^nnocent, that the devout Members of their Antichristi^n
Church; did Act with that sury to the Quakers, as if they could never use t^o
much Cruelty upon them, which was the more by the Priest-^idden Executioners,
through the Priests pronouncing Woes and bitter Curses against all such as
should fail in the neglect of their work for the Devil, against both Quakers,
Baptists, and (...) of the Church of England as well as against all other
Dissenters, which Curses they still backed with Scripture words, as aforesaid,
Judge. ^.23. Jer. 48.10. which work (as the wicked did, so these pretended) was
done by them for the honor of God, and glory of his Name, and that their
Church was the purest Reformed Church of all other Christian Churches in the
World, But, if the pureity of a Church consist in such wicked works as they
have done by virtue of unrighteous Laws against the People of God, and the
Kings Sub^ects, then it is manifest (by the length of time in the like cruel
bloody Work) that their Mother Church of Rome is more purer then theirs. But if
Persecution be the work of the Devil, (as by Scripture it is manifest so to be)
then according to Christ's own words, they are Children of him whose work they
do, then it most consequently follow, that Romes Church, being the first under
the Name Christian, found to persecute, that all under that name (...) to
persecute, are her children, whom so often they call the great Whore.

The Devil, Work not only done to Quaker!*
(...) Dissenters were in part Pertakers.

New England Persecutors Law against the Kings Subjects.
And it is further Ordered That whatsoever charge shall arise about
apprehending, whipping, conveying, or otherwise about the Quakers, to be laid
out by the Constable of such Town where it is expended, and to be repaid by the
Treasurer, out of the next County Levy. And further ordered, That the
Constables of their several Towns are hereby empowered, from time to time, to
impress Ca^^, O^en, and other Assistance, for the Execution of this Order. 1661.

Obs. The Reader may hence understand, That for the cloaking of the Devils Work
they made all their unrighteous Warrants run in the Kings Name, as if he was
the Author of their cruel Work against Dissenters, when as it manifestly
appears, both by the holy Scriptures, and also by the Kings Letter (a Copy of
which will follow) That they had no Warrant, Precept or Command either from God
or the King, but did wholly act and do according to their own Wills, which
still remain the same, to work Mischief against both Quakers, Baptists, and the
Church of England also, (as will hereafter evidently appear) but their Horns at
present are shortened, and their Cloak begins to appear threed-bare, and now
their Hypocrisy and Deceit will no longer hide their Wickedness from the King
and People, whose Money out of the Treasury must serve to defray the Charge of
the Devil's Work against the Kings good Subjects, who had taken from them, by
the persecuting Churches in New England, to the value of Twenty Thousand
Pounds, for Fines imposed upon them, because Dissenters from their way of
Worship, whose Priests and Rulers had also of their People yearly Sallarys,
according to the same Proportion of the aforesaid Sum of twenty thousand
Pounds, through which mean, as these Persecutors lived at a high rate on that
which others (...) labored hard to get, went in thred-^are Coats, and their
Famili^^ in want of that which was their own, and devoured by this persecu^ing
(...), whereby their great Oppression reached the whole People of the ordinary
degree, even as a sweeping Rain, that (...) all before it.

(...), who for uprighteous Gain,
(...) as People do Oppress, themselves for to maintain.

New England Persecutors Laws against the Kings Subjects Suspended (during
their pleasure.)
This Court heretofore, for some Reasons inducing, did judge meet to suspend
the Execution of the Laws against Quakers as such, so far as they respect
corporal Punishment or Death, during the Courts pleasure.

Obs. That though these Persecutors saw there was cause to suspend their bloody
Laws against the Kings good Subjects, so far as they did respect corporal
Punishment or Death, ye it must be only during their own pleasure, not the
Kings, no, they could not stoop to that. But whether they did not herein
manifest a Spirit of Rebellion against God, the Kings Order (as by his Letter
will appear) and the Laws of the English Nation, I leave others to judge. Now
the occasion of procuring this Order from the King, was their great Cruelty in
banishing sober honest People out of their Jurisdiction upon Pain of Death, if
they returned; for as before is said of Dr. Child, Samuel Maverick, and other
Merchants, whose Imprisonment and three hundred Pounds a piece, saved them from
the New England Gallows, and none, without the like hazard, might make
complaint to England; but several banished Quakers adventured to lay their said
suffering case before the King, whose merciful Ear heard their Cry, and took
Compassion on his suffering Subjects, and forthwith stopped New England
Persecutors wicked hands from shedding more innocent Blood, being acquainted
with their great (...) the manner of their Sp^^i^s by what their Brother H.
Peter's, Vennor, and other of their N. England Brethren had done both against
his Father and himself, as by his Letter (...) with them, as afterward it
proved so to be, (...) with the Tope Tile or covering of a fair outside
Building, whose inside is full of all manner of Deceit, and the Foundation
thereof very dangerous, by degrees, in working down-wards, till he comes to the
Foundation, which after wards was wholly removed, through the loss of their
Charter, which to them had been as an Idol Godd, in which they trusted as much
as ever the People did in Baal; and if ever Silver and Gold procure such
another, it may be at a high Rate, and they are like to be as cruel as before.
But the English Laws are far before New England Idols.

God will not ever permit the Devils Power,
Nor wicked Men the Righteous to devour

A Copy of the King's Letter.
Charles R.

TRusty and well beloved, We greet you well Having been informed that several
of Our Subjects amongst you, called Quakers, have been and are Imprisoned by
you, whereof some have been Executed, and others in danger to undergo the like,
We have thought sit to signify Our Pleasure in that behalf, for the future,
and do hereby Require, That if there be any of those People called Quakers
amongst you, now already condemned to suffer Death, or are Imprisoned, and
obnoctious to the like Condemnation, You are to (...) any further therein, but
that you (...) with ^ead the said Persons, whether condemned or imprisoned,
over into this our Kingdom of England, together with their respective Crimes or
Offenses laid to their Charge, to the end such course may be taken with them
here, as shall be agreeable to our Laws, and their Demerits. And for so doing,
these Our Letter shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge.

Given at our Court at White Hall, the 9 th day of September. 1661. in the 13 th
Year of Our Reign. Subscribed to Our trusty and well-beloved John Endicot, Esquire
and to all and every other Governors of Our Plantation of New England, and to
all the Collonies thereunto belonging, that now are, or hereafter shall be; and
to all and every the Ministers and Officers of Our said Plantation and
Collonies whatsoever within the Continent of New England. By His Majesty's
Command, W. Morris.


Obs. Now these Persecutors had nothing to charge these Innocent People with,
but that they were Quakers, against whom they had provided a Law, but this Law
was repugnant to the Laws of the English Nation; and therefore upon the receipt
of the Kings Letter, they durst do no other than set at liberty both them
condemned to suffer Death, and those imprisoned also; but herein they did not
obey the Kings Command; for he commanded them to send these Quakers so
imprisoned or condemned, over to England, with the particular Crimes laid to
their charge; but this they would not do, and good reason why, they had no
Crimes to lay to their Charge, but that they were Quakers. And being brought to
this pinch, instead of sending a Ship load of Quakers, and a large Roll of
their Crimes of Treason, Rebellion, Subversion of Government, etc. home to the
King, they send a Ship load of Ma^ts for a Present to the King, with a parcel
of horrid Wicked Lies against the Quakers; to defray the charge of which
Present, the poor Inhabitants were severely Rated. After which their great
Deceit and abominable Hypocrisy, the King came to find out, not only in doing
as aforesaid, but upon many other accounts, too large here to relate; and
before I conclude, enough against them will appear, to manifest their great
Wickedness against God, the King and People. Yet not withstanding all this,
they could not long forbear their old work of Persecution, but soon put their
Law in execution again; for the Kings Letter was dated, 1661. and they revived
their old Law again in 1662. which was done more in obedience to the Devil, and
to please their hireling Priests, than in honor to God, or respect to the
King, against whom they did rebel in so doing, as appears by his Letter, and
their not sending any of the Quakers over into the Kingdom of England, but
instead thereof sent a Present with a parcel of Lies, too large here to
relate, and put their Law into Execution again, and as sharp, cruel and
harbarous was the Execution (respecting corporal punishment) as formerly,
though the Towns were not to be so many in which they were to be whipped, yet the
Whip with three single hair twisted small Cords (each being knotted, fit for
the Devil and Priests Work) was the same as before the Kings Letter came, and
did so continue till near or about the time they lost their Idol, viz. their
old Charter, on which was their dependence, above GOD or KING, as is manifested
by their Works.

Priests Rulers Masts for Ships, Deceit and Lies withal.
Poor People made to pay, for Presents to White Hall.

New England Persecutors Laws against the Kings good Subjects, (upon Complains
of the Priests) put into Execution again.
NOW forasmuch as new Complaints are made ^o this Court, of such Persons
abounding, especially in the Eastern parts, endeavoring to draw away others to
that wicked Opinion, it is Ordered, That the last Law, Tit. Vagabond, Quakers,
May 1661 be henceforth in force, in all respects, provided, their Whipping be
but through three Towns, and the Magistrate or Commissioner signing the
Warrant, shall appoint both the Towns, and number of Stripes in each Town to be
given, 1662.

Obs. Here by comparing this their Date to their Law, with the date of the
Kings Letter, how little regard they had to the Kings Mind and Will therein
contained, which was, whether condemned to suffer Death, or Imprisoned, or to
suffer corporal Punishment, to forbear to proceed any further therein, but
forthwith to send the said Person over into the Nation of England, with the
respective Crimes ^^ Offense (...) to their Charge, to the end such course
might be taken with them, according to the Nature of the Offense, as should be
agreeable to the English Laws. Which express command of the King was but a
small time minded by them; for upon their considering the cause some small
time, proposed to themselves, that by virtue of their Idol Charter, they had as
much Power in New England as the King had in Old-England, and had they the like
strength of Men and Shipping, would (no doubt) with-stand all Kings and Princes
that should adventure to oppose their way; now had not I my self heard some of
them say these things, durst not have charged it here upon them, to public
view; and for a further evidence of the same, witness their Proclaiming, (with
a Trumpet before them,) against the Kings Commissioners in Boston, persuading
the People, (as near ^ as they could) That their Commissions were made under a
Hedge, with much more of the like Nature, too long here to relate.

Priests Rulerr bloody Work, on People has brought Woe,
With their consent that silent were to have it so.
They Are Works of him that is of Hell,
Against God and King all such Rebel.

New England Persecutors Law against the Kings Subjects.
Whereas it may be found amongst us, that men's Thresholds are set up by Gods
Thresholds, and men's Posts by Gods Posts, especially in open Meetings of the
QVAKERS, whose damnable Heresies, and abominable Idolatries are hereby
promoted, embraced and practiced, to the Scandal of Religion, hazard of Souls
and provocation of divine Jealousy against this People. For Prevention and
Reformation whereof, it is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof,
That every Person found at a Quakers Meeting, shall be apprehended, ex Officio,
by the Constable, and by Warrant from a Magistrate or Commissioner, shall be
committed to the House of Correction, and there to have the Discipline of the
House applied unto them, and to be kept to work with Bread and Water for three
days together, and then to be released; or else shall pay a fine of five Pounds
in Money, to the Country, for every such Offense; and all Constables neglecting
the^r Duty, in not faithfully executing this Order* shall in^ur the Penalty of
5 l. upon conviction, one third part whereof to the Inform^^

Obs. The Reader may here take Notice of one of these Persecutors many horrid
and wicked Lies, so proved by their Contradiction, who in their Preambles to
their Laws, accuse the Quakers with keeping their Meetings private, yet at
unawares in their Bride-well Law they charge the contrary; and though they
pretend the sin is great, yet it may be bought off for five Pounds in Mercy, as
often as they please; but the said Sum not being paid them by any one, they
were much enraged thereat, finding their covetous design in making said Law,
disappointed, because it ^each no further than to punish them that were not
free to pay 5 l. for being at a Quakers Meeting, as aforesaid, the Penalty of
which Law several Merchants in Boston suffered, rather than to disobey God, by
satisfying the lust of such covetous Priests and Rulers, who prefer the love of
Money before punishing for that which themselves account so great sins, as by
the Preamble of their Laws they pretend these abovementioned to be.

Their bloody Laws are almost done,
Which Work the Priests at first begun.

New England Persecutors Preamble to their Laws against provoking Evils, as
they call them.
Whereas the most wise and holy God for these several years past, has not only
warned us by his word, but chastized us with his Rod, inflicting upon us many
general Judgments, but we have neither heard the word nor rod as we ought to be
effectually humbled for our sins, to repent of them, hence it is the righteous
God has hightened our Calamity, and given Commission to the barbarous Heathen
to rise up against us, and become a smart Rod and severe Scourge to us, in
burning and depopulating several hop^ful Plantations, murdering many of our
Inhabitants of all sorts, and seeming, as it were, to cast us off, and putting
us to shame, and not going forth with our Arms, hereby speaking aloud to us, to
search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord our God, from whom we
have departed with great backsliding

Obs. That to acknowledge the Truth is well, and well would it be indeed if
they were found acknowledging the whole Truth, and to repent of shedding
innocent Blood, which is the great sin of New England Priests and Rulers, as
also of the consenting Church Members thereof; but of this there is no mention
made in their Preamble confession of words, without Works of Truth and
Righteousness to God and People, according as is at large manifest by their
aforementioned Laws, the neglect of which Execution was by their Priests
imputed to be the main cause of general Judgment to come upon them. But they
use to say, If all the Quakers were hanged, and all other Dissenters cleared
out of their Jurisdiction, then would their Land enjoy Peace: Unto which Work
the Rulers were bewitched, so far as the Devil was permitted to drive them, who
were as willing to run, and to work they went against all Dissenters, and set
forth a Book against the Baptists, entitled, The Rise and Foundation of the
cursed Sect of Annabaptists, in which was as many Lies as they use to gather
for their Pulpit Work on the first Day against the Quakers, which Lies to hear
also cost^ the People Money.

None are more blind than those that will not see,
The cause for which Gods general Judgments be.

New England Pers^c^tors Law against Provoking Evils, as they call them.
1. This Court apprehending there is too great a neglect of Discipline in the
Churches, and especially respecting those that are their Children, through the
non^acknowledgment of them, according to the Order of the Gospel, in watching
(...) them, as well as Catechizing of them, inquiring into their spiritual
states, that being brought to take hold of the Covenant, they may acknowledge,
and be acknowledged, according to their relation to God and his Church, and
their Obligation to be the Lord, and approve themselves so to be by a suitable
Profession and Conversation; And do therefore solemnly recommend it unto the
respective Elders and Brethren of the Churches throughout this jurisdiction, to
take effectual course for the Reformation therein.

Obs. By the aforementioned cruel bloody Laws against the People of God, what
nature their Church Government was of, in which Covenant, the words, Beware of
the Leaven of the Pharisees, was put of, and instead thereof they put in,
Beware of the Leaven of the Quakers; for which see Salem Church Covenant, so
called, caused to be so done by their high Priest, John Higinson, who in his
preaching told the People, The Quakers Light was a stinking Vapor from Hell,
with much more of the like, as was usual with him in his daily Preaching and
Teaching against the Quakers, Baptists, and other Dissenters, this Old-Charter
Priest, with other of his devout Church-Brethren in Iniquity, use to wish their
Children might be Rogues and Whores, rather than Quakers; which was too nearly
(though justly fullfilled upon many of them, as well as upon this old Priests,
whose Daughter was highly accused of Witchcraft, and now maintained by the
Parish. It is dreadful to consider what Wickedness is in men's hearts, to wish
such horrid Wishes, as the Jews did, Mat. 27.25. which justly came upon them,
as upon these of the like Spirit.

No Members Child, a Member then could be,
From Quakers Blood in (...)

New England Persecutors Laws against provoking Evils, as they call them.
2. Whereas there is manifest Pride openly appearing amongst us, in that long
hair is worn by some men, either their own, or the hair of others made into
Perriwigs; and by some Women wearing Borders of Hair, and their cutting and
cursing, and laying out their Hair; which Practice does prevail and increase,
especially among the Younger sort. This Court does declare against this evil
Practice, as Offensive to them and diverse sober Christians amongst us, and
therefore do hereby Enact and Advise all Perso^^ to use moderation in this
respect. And further, to empower all Grand Juries to present to the County
Courts all such Persons, whether Male or Female, whom they shall judge to
exceed in the Premises; and the County Courts are authorized to proceed against
such Delinquents, either by Admonition, or Fine, or Correction, according to
their good Discretion.

Obs. That through the long continuance of Disobedience, which is as Rebellion,
and the sin of Witchcraft, being highly guilty of Innocent Blood, these
Persecutors had lost their (...) over their own Families, who began to run into
great Super^^^ity and Entravagancy of those things which were not comely,
dec^n^ and of good Report, in which they did greatly increase, and now abound
beyond all the Power of their Laws to restrain. Wh^refo^e they may now see,
their ungodly wicked Wishes are come both upon themselves and Children; for the
Curse of the Lord (...) the House of them that have either actually or by
consent (...) Lord guilty of shedding Innocent Blood, Prove. 3.^3 Mal. ^. (...)

From all evil Wishes, pray God deliver (...),
And from all Wickedness me and mine (...)

N. England Persecutors Laws against provoking Evils, as they call them.
3. Notwithstanding the wholesome Laws already made by this Court for the
restraining Excess in Apparel, yet through the corruption in many, and neglect
of due execution of those Laws, the evil of Pride in Apparel, both for
costliness in the poorer sort, and vain new strange Fashions, both in Poor and
Rich, with naked Breasts and Arms, or as it were pinnioned with the Addiction
of Superfluous Ribbands, both on Hair and Apparel, for redress whereof, it is
Ordered by this Court, That the County Courts, from time to time, shall give
strict Charge to present all such Persons, as they shall judge exceed in that
kind; and if the grand Jury shall neglect their duty herein, the County Courts
shall impose a Fine upon them at their own Discretion.

Obs. The outward Appearance of these Persecutors, by their smooth words and
fair speeches, as also their short hair even or above their Ears, with high
crowned Hats, peacked Boards, as likewise their two or three inch broad Bands,
and their Apparel agreeable thereunto, by which they appoured in the outward,
like men differing from all other people whatsoever, which with their Priests
daily preaching, and their often loud praying, and their works not agreeable
with their words, were by their fruits manifested to be men of the like Spirit
whom Christ bid beware of, Mat. 7.15. which the more to be accounted good
Christians, under which name they pretended all their proccedings against the
evil of pride, to be for the honor of God, and the good of the People Souls,
when on the contrary it appears otherwise, by their sailing that which
themselves account sin, for money, which does clearly manifest their work to be
done in honor to themselves, whose love is to the Peoples Money, for the
satisfying their own coveteous Desires; which work does manifest Coveteousness,
Pride and Oppresion and Oppression in such Priests and Rulers that eat up the
sin of the People, Hos. 4.8.9. Micah 3.11.

Gods Cause is that to which they do pretend,
But all men may see, Money is their end.

New England Persecutors Laws against provoking Evils, as they call them.
And it is further ordered, That the County Court, single Magistrate or
Commissioners Court in Boston, have hereby Power to summons all such persons so
offending, before them, and for the first Offense to admonish them, and for
each offense of that kind afterward to impose a fine of Ten Shillings upon
them, or if unable to pay, to inflict such punishment as shall be by them
thought most suitable to the nature of the Offense; and the same Judges
abovenamed are hereby empowered to judge of, and execute the Laws already
extant against such Excess.

Obs. Whipping, or the like punishment, was only to such person^ unable to pay
their Fine, though the offense was no breath of any English Law, but these
Sin-sellers Laws are distinct from all the Laws of other Nations that I have
read or heard of, and indeed, in most things their Doctrines, Principles and
Practices the same, which are not only condemned by all true Christians, but
also by the Indians, Turks and other moral Heathens, who abhor the practice of
living upon the Fines of people not found to t^ansgress the Law or Laws of
their Nation, as these New England Priests and Rulers do, whose income for such
like things, by them imputed to the Peoples transgressing such like laws as
above said is to les^ th^n Twelve Hundred Pounds a year, besides fif^een
hundred Pounds a year from Persons chiefly of their own Churches, for the sin
of ^^cleanness, as also some years, no less th^n f^rty Hundred Pounds a year
for (...), they compelled from the people of God and the Kings good Subjects
dissenting from their Priests Worship, with which, and ten Thousand Pounds
yearly paid the Priests for preaching, and as much yearly paid the Rulers for
making Laws and judging; all which came out of the poor Peoples labor within
the bounds of New-Englands Priests and Rulers.

Where men can mak^ what Laws they pl^ase,
Such Pri^sts and Rulers live at (...)*

New England Persecutors Laws against proving (...), as they call them*
It is ordered by this Court That no person within this Jurisdiction, nor any
of their Relations depending upon them, whose visible Estates, real and
personal shall not exceed the true value o^ two hundred Pounds, shall not wear
any Gold or Silver Buttons, or Gold or Silver Lace, or Bone Lace above two
Shillings p^r ^ard, or Silk Hoods, or Silk Scarfs, Points or Ribbands, or great
Boots, upon the penalty of ten Shillings for every such Offense.

And further ordered by the Authority aforesaid. That the Select men of every
Town, are hereby empowered, enabled and required to assess every such Person so
offending, in any of the Particulars abovementioned, in the Country Rates, at
two hundred Pounds Estates according as such men pay to whom such apparel is
allowed. Always provided, That this Law shall not extend to the Restraint of
any Magistrate, or public Officer of this Jurisdiction, their Wives and
Children, who are left to their own discretion in wearing Apparel, or any
settled Mili^ary Officer, or Sou^dier in the time of Military Service, or any
other Whose Education and employment have been above the ordinary Degree, or
whose Estates have been considerable, though now deacyed; 1651.

It is further ordered and Enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof,
that all Persons within this Jurisdiction that shall wear any Apparel exceeding
their quality and Condition of their Persons or Estates, and either of these be
so Judged by the Grand Jury and County Court of that shire where such complaint
is made, all such Persons being convicted, shall for the first Offense be
admonished, for the second Offense pay a Fine of twenty Shillings, for the
third Offense forty Shillings a time, and so following as the Offenses are
multiplied, to pay forty Shillings a time to the Treasurer of that County.

And further ordered, That if any Tailor shall make or fashion any Garment for
Children or Servants contrary to the mind and order of their Parents or
Governors, every such Tailor shall for the first Offense be admonished, and
for the second Offense, forfeit double the value of such Apparel or Garment as
^e shall make or fashion contrary to the mind and order of such Pa^ents or
Governors, as aforesaid, the one ha^^ thereof to the Owner, and the other half
to the Country. And all Grand-Jurys are hereby enjoined to present all those
whom they shall Judge breake^^ of this Order. 1662.

Obs. That in the year aforesaid, 1662. through the Priests advice they were
hot in persecuting both Quakers, Baptists, and all other Dissenters, thinking
thereby to fine and whip the Christian^ from their Religion, which according to
the advice of their hireling Priests, being in hopes to do, that when they had
to done, and overcome the aforesaid provoki^g ^vils of Pride in Apparel, that
God would the more hear (...) loud Prayers. and remove his great Judgments from
amongst (...) certainly true, my self is witness to the (...) them say, That
Gods Judgments would never remov^ (...) them, till all the Quakers and other
Dissenters were hang (...) of their Jurisdiction. And for another Instance,
(...), when Thomas Ma^^le of Salem came to one of the ^pan^ Rulers, for a
Warrant to search for one hundred Pound^ (...) other rich Goods stole out of
his shop the night (...) whom this Ruler answered, He would grant him no
Warrant, (...) the Court of any (...) that did grant him a (...) Moreover, in
my hearing said to him, If a man knoc^ you on the head, or hang you, the
recompense is in your own hands; for you are not to be protected by the Laws of
this Government. This was the Justice of this great Ruler and Church Member,
free of their Body (...), as they call themselves, whose Laws allow that
Apparel to themselves which to others they impute the we^ring of, to be one of
the p^ovoking Evils; for which Offense as they (...)) the Offender (by their
Law) must be equally rated with such to whom the Law allows the said Apparel,
as also to pay 40 s. a time, ^s the Offense multiply; and if not able to pay,
then to be punished.

Pride, Oppression and Covetousness abound,
All which by Priests and Rulers Law is found.

New England Persecutors Laws against provoking Evils, as they call them.
Whereas there is much Profaneness amongst us, in Persons turning their backs
upon the public Worship before it be finished, and the blessing pronounced, It
is Ordered by this Court, That the Officers of the Churches, or select men,
shall take care to prevent such Disorders, by appointing Persons to shut the
Meeting House Doors, or any other meet way to attain the end.

Obs. The time was now near at hand in wh^^h all their wicked Works against
Dissenters, as well as on other accounts, came to be thoroughly looked into by
the King and Powers in England, who found then Unrighteousness so great, that,
as before related, their building began a pace to be overthrown, which People
perceiving, many of the Priests Hearers began to give little heed o^ regard to
their Idol Worship, to which they had been so long kept for diverse years,
merely by the strength of unrighteous Laws; and now at this time finding the
Priests and Rulers strength to confide in little more besides the Meeting House
Doors, in a little time after they had been in Meeting, were willing to depart,
without hearing any more of the Priests long winded Railing against the
Baptists, Quakers, and all other Dissenters; for which cause, I say, many
Persons turning their backs upon the Worship before it was finished, and the
Money-blessing pronounced, the Priests Money Box, always when done, held out by
one of the Church Officers, would fall much short of the Priests pay for his
Sermon, to what it use to do, when their cruel Laws were in more force than at
this time; but the strength of their Meeting House Doars, did at length also
fail; yet at times, as the evil Spirit moved in them, they must r^^ whom the
Devil permits to drive into such Unrighteousness, would be afflicting one
Dissenter or another, especially by Fines, which (...), Cart loads of Corn I
have then seen the Priests drudges fetch from the People called Baptists, as
also Goods and Cattle from others.

It was Profaneness, as these Persecutors say,
I (...) the Cause, the Priests did (...) more pay.

Old Charter Magistrates Hypocrisy, with an Instance of the^^ Deceit and C^eat
amongst themselves, at their General High-Court of Injustice to others.
An eminent Merchant in Boston, who is said to have erected the Townhouse at
his own charge, besides several other considerable Gifts to public Uses, he
kept an honest sober young Man to sell his Merchandise, and its like somewhat
differing in Judgment from their Priests way of Worship; he through a mistake
sold a Bridle for something more than was allowed by these Rulers for men to
advance on the Shilling; and being complained of was fined a great Sum of
Money, and besides was ordered to stand one hour in a public Place with the
Bridle in his Chaps; and the Fine was divided amongst the Magistrates, as one
of them testified, who being out of Court at the time when the Division was
made, was by his Brethren in Iniquity defrauded of his share, who was so
offended at the same, that he openly complained of the Wrong he had received by
his Brethren in this matter.

Obs. You may perceive, that these Old Charter-men had strange kind of Laws,
whereby to enrich themselves and impoverish others, as is already proved by
their aforesaid unrighteous Laws, so also by this it appears to agree with the
same, That no Merchant must advance more than q d. profit in the Shilling, for
Goods from England, by means of which Law their Clothing and Necessaries were
to them, and all of their way, at a che^p rate; for themselves were only
Merchants of Law, and their Priests Merchants of that which they call their
Gospel; which Law is their Wills, and their Gospel other men's Lines made ready
to their hands; but the Laws of the English Nation are otherwise, and the true
Gospel, to (...) that believe, is the Power of God to Salvation.

By Religion, with Deceit,
Makes Hypocrites to be a Cheat.

A brief Account of some of the Three Hundred and Nine Persons that suffered
Persecution under the Antichristian Power of the New England Church, besides
those four Servants of the Lord cruelly Murdered by a Law made at the Rulers
and Priests high Court of Injustice against Dissenters found with ^n their
Jurisdiction belonging to Boston, which are is follows, viz.
NIcholas Vpshall, an old Man full of Years, seeing their Cru^^^y to the
harmless Quakers, and that they had condemned some of them to dye, both he and
elder Wisewell, or other wise Deacon Wisewell, Members of the Church in Boston,
bore their Testimonies in public against their Brethrens horrid Cruelty to the
said Quakers. And the said Vpshall declared, That (...) did look at it as a sad
forerunner of some heavy Judgment to follow upon the Country. Which they took
so ill at his hands, that they fined him Twenty Pounds, and three Pound more ^t
another of their Courts, for not coming to their Meeting, and would not abate
him one Grote, but imprisoned him, and then banished him on pain of Death;
which was done in a time of such extreme bitter Weather for Frost, Snow and
Cold, that had not the Heathen Indians in the Wilderness Woods taken compassion
on his Misery, for the winter Season, he in all likelihood had perished, though
he had then in Boston a good Estate in Houses and Land, Goods and Money, as
also Wi^e and Children, but not suffered to come unto him, nor he to them but
more of his Sufferings are at large related in the Books of the Quakers
Suffering Persecution under the Antichristian Power of the New England Church,
and so proved to be by their foregoing Laws. And more of their Cruelty will
here follow.

The next I shall mention is Anne Burden, whose Husband being dead, and having
left Money due to him from several in New England, his said Widow came into
their Jurisdiction to get in the said Debts, for the use of her self and
Children. Now these Persecutors had nothing to charge her with, but that she
was a plain Quaker, and for (...) and coming into their Jurisdiction, she must
abide the Penalty of their Law, and which they executed upon her, and then sent
her away without greeting in her just Debts, for which she came into their
Jurisdiction. Which was one of their inventions to pay Debts to Dissenters
with, especially the Quakers.

Christopher Holder and John Copeland, men of good Estates, and of good Life
amongst men, for being of those called Quakers, and coming into their
Jurisdiction, and declaring the Truth, were cruelly whipped with their old wonted
Whip of three fold Cords, each being well knotted, fit for their Church work,
wherewith their Member Whipper gave each of these men Thirty Stripes a piece,
which were so cruelly laid on, that at the sight of their torn flesh and bloody
backs a tenderhearted Person fell down dead; after they had been thus whipped,
they were put into Bridewell, and there kept for three days without Bread or
Water; and with their wounded backs were forced to lie on the Boards without
Bed or Straw; and for Nine VVeeks were kept close Prisoners, where none, except
the Jailer (that devout Member) could come unto them. After which, both they
and Coll. Rous's Son of Barbados had their Ears cut by the Member of their
Peace, viz. the common (...) man. Now the reason why John Rous escaped with the
(...), was the kindness they had for him, in respect to (...), and his being a
Gentleman, (...)

Sarah Gi^bins and Dorothy Waugh, two young Women, for (...) of those called
(...), and coming into their Jurisdiction* had for their entertainment in
Boston, the flesh of their backs ^eaten to (...) by their Priests (...)
VVo^^man, viz. the Execu^ioner of their Law at (...), and when to whipped (...)
other M^mber of their Churches Peace* viz. their Jailer, shut (...) close Room,
where none was (...) ^ome unto them, and th^re ^ept three days together without
all manner of ^ood. And at another time kept them eight days without all manner
of P^ovision; and had not the Lord preserved them at this time, bey^nd what men
of themselves use (...) to do they had perished ^^der the Cruelty of the
New England Church, their said Sufferings are more at large to be seen in the
said Book of Sufferings.

William Shattock, an Inhab^^^^^ in Boston, for being one first day found in
his House alone, was by one of the Priests (...) to their House of Oppression,
for entertaining of Strange^^, and in the time of his being kept (...) with the
lik^ whipping, some of the Priests crew endeavored to p^^swade his Wife wholly
to leave him, and that they would place o^t his Children to Masters of
Families, that tended their Meetings, whose sufferi^g is more at large to be
seen in the said Book of Sufferings.

Thomas Harris, for declaring against (...) (which the guilty proud Oppressors
itching (...) to hear) was committed to their House of Oppres^^^^ where the
Jailer (that devout Member of their Church (...) him up, and kept him eleven
days, five of which he kept him (...), and though he had before been cruelly
(...), Wretch gave his Weak bruised body Twenty blows (...) pitche^^ (...),
whose sufferings are more at large to be seen in the Quakers book of
sufferings, (...) aforesaid

Several Innocent Women c^lled (...), had (...) Bodies ^^rthed for Witches,
which work (...) M^mbe^ women, with such cruelty to their Bodie^, that one of
the Women said, she did not the like trouble undergo in b^aring and bringing
for (...) five Children, besides what more they, suffered under the power of
those who were as free to run as the Devil was to drive then to perform his
l^st in the doing the aforesaid Antichristian work, of which more is to be
seen in the aforesaid Books of the Quakers suffering under the Antichristian
power of New-Englands Churches.

William Brend, for coming into Bostons Jurisdiction, where all the aforesaid
work of Antichrist was acted and done, and for being one of them called a
Quaker, and declaring the Truth, was cruelly whipped, and shut up into close
Prison, where the Jailer and devout Member of their Church, locked his Neck and
Heels together, so close that there was only room for the Lock to go between,
in which manner he kept him sixteen hours, and then gave his weak b^n^sed Bod^
One Hundred and Seventeen Blows with a pitched Rope. having thus beaten him for
dead, an out cry was among the People, That the Jailer had (...) a man; which
to (...) the People bills were set upon the Prison doors, and else where, That
the Jailer should be dealt with; but said Brends coming to rise again (though
the Doctors said, it would be admit^ble if he did recover for his flesh was
^eaten into a mere G^lly of Blood, however, as God would have it, he came to
recover again, then to prevent the Goalers being punished for this his great
piece of Wickedness to said Brend, John Horton their chief high Priest said, if
William Brend will endeavors (...) our Gospel Ordinances (...), it was just
upon him (...) he was beaten black and blue; and withal in said Book, that his
counsel was to his Church Brethren in Iniquity, (...) off the Fear skin, and
put on the Fox Skin; which indeed is (...) Priest like, the more to deceive
poor ^^^orant People, of whom God has opened the Eye of many, by which they
see hirelings deceit.

William (...) a Merchant, (...) Stevins and William ^eddra, as Informed the
(...) a clother the other a (...) man and Mary (...) wife to Mr Dier of Rode
Island all which four were great sufferers in Bostons Jurisdiction under the
cruel bloody hands of the Church Members, before they drove them with great
number of their Priests (...) to their bloody alter, and many more by the
Priests and Rulers with their co^senting Members (...) Iniquity, were intended
to be sacrificed an offering to their Anger and R^^venge, had not the Kings
Letters as aforesaid, stopped their (...) hands, and when the Priests drudges,
with their many, (...) Staves, Gu^s and Drums to drown, the Testimony of the
(...) Servants from being heard among the People, had (...) them to their
Bloody Altar, where they chearfull^ delivered up them Lives for the Truth God
and Testimony of Jesus, which was to the beholders Admiration, and (...) rage
of their Persecutors; when they were executed they cut down their Bodies,
letting them fall, to the breaking the Skul^s of (...), and tipped off their
Shirts, dragging their naked ^odie either by the heels, or with a (...) as they
dragged them, ^nam^d their Teeth with mere (...), as they went on with their
w^rk of ^^agging their Bodi^s (...) stinking Pit, into which they threw some of
their (...), and never would grant their Friends liberty (...) from Ravenous
Creatures, (...) place any manner of fence whatsoever.

Seeing the Wickedness of these Pers^cutors to (...) great, and their Lies
against the People of God many, (...) of the many which might be produced to
(...) (...) that (...) The Quakers might (...) would not accept it, therefore
say such Liars, they were (...) to their own Death. But to prove the contrary
(...) Merchants letter in print, who was no (...) out witness to what follows,
viz

Boston, the 26th of Ma^ch, ^001.
ON the 14th of this Instant here was one William L^^dra put to Death* The
People of the Town told me, he might go away if he would; but when I made
further enquiry, I heard the Marshall say, th^^ he was chained in Prison from
the time he was condemned, to the day of Execution. I am not of his Opinion,
but yet truly me thought the Lord did mightily appear in the Man. I goes to one
of the Magistrates of Cambridge* who had been of the Court that condomned him,
as he told me himself and I asked him by what Rule he did it? he answered me,
That he was a Rogue, a very Rogue. But what is this to the Question, said I?
Where is your R^^e? He said, He had abused Authority. Then I goes to the m^^
and asked him, Whether he did not look on it as a breach of R^le, (...) and
underval^e Authority? and said, That Paul gave Fes^^^ the Title (...), though
(...) I do not say, those Mag^trates are (...). I saw then when the Man was on
the (...) me, and called me Fr^^nd and said (...) to off (...) leave (...) one
(...) the (...) to speak, I said* G^ntlem^n* (...) stranger ^oth to your Person
an (...) and yet a Friend to ^oth (and I cried aloud) for the Lord sake take
(...) man's Life I said, Remember (...) counsel to the Jews, If this be of God
it will stand, if not it will come to Nothing but be care (...) you be not
found (...) against God. And the Captain said, Why had not (...) come to the
Prison. And the reason was, because I heard the Man might go (...) he would,
and therefore (...) down from the Free, Come down William, (...) may go away if
you will. Then Capt. Oliver sa^d, it was no such (...) and asked me, what I had
to do with it, and ^esides, (...) to be (...)* I told him, I was willing for
(...) endure to see this. And when I was in their own (...) to simpathize my
Grief, but I told them, they (...) no Warrant from the Word of God, not
President from our Country, nor Power from his Majesty to hang the (...)

Your Friend, THOMAS WILKY*


Samuel Sha^pack, Joshua (...) Smith, Edward Wharton, Samuel (...) Southwick,
his Father and Mother, Sisters and Brothers, (...) Kitchen and his Wife, with
others in Salem, were great (...) by these Persecutors, both by long
imprisonment, (...) loss of abundance ^f Goo^^ (...) Ca^tle, (...) Land of
(...), and several (...) upon pain of Death, and others of them ordered to be
s^id for B^^d-sl^ves; all these were of Salem, and more of the same Tow^
suffered much.

Obs. By the fore going Lines the Reade^ may (...) how they have Persecuted all
(...) in Judgment from the way of their Priests Worship. In the (...) place I
shall here Instance a little relating to what (...) of the Church of England
suffer^^^ by which the Reader may (...) better understand their bold attempts,
who neither fear (...) nor regard King or Bishops. First, you note the (...) of
set (...) that (...), viz. the manner was and yet is, at the opening of their
(...) to have some one or more of their Priests (...) pray, and to make tedious
long ins^ped Graces, as they call them, before and after Meals, as also to
consult what Penalties and Sufferings were most fit to be inflicted on
Offenders against their Arbitrary and no just Laws, and especially against any
that were found to diss^^t from their way of Worship, in which case the Priests
Advice would commonly be, to lay on load enough* and the Advice was believed to
be sanctified, though at the same time, they could not but understand they
drank the Wine of the condemned, so expressly changed as a sin on the
Magistrates, Rulers and Priests of Jerusalem, of no small provoc^tion to the
holy One of Israel, though the matter in Controvers^ relating to such as
dissente^ from their Priests Worship, (...) ^o matter of Offense ag^^^ the Law
of God, nor the Laws of the English Nation, notwithstanding they minded not,
but would pro^^^d, according to their (...) respect to au^^ no, not so much as
^o the Church (...) England, o^ (...), suffered under the New England Church,
which pretended to make (...) separation in point o^ ^ith and Doctrine as
witness that Letter, of their fore fathers and ^eaders into (...) the A^^abella
to the Bishops and (...) Church of England, calling them Brethren, and (...),
and who would know more of it, let them (...) book printed at Bo^ton by Joshua
(...), about (...) 1693 remarkable in that it is s^t forth by a Member (...)
Communion, but how well they carried it to the Church of England, and (...),
these few of the many Instances which might be (...), may sufficently evidence
against them, that they spared not any sound to dissent from their Priests way
of Worship, as for Instance, Dr. Child's, Samuel Mave^ick and other (...), of
whom I have before hinted, were of the way of worship of the English (...), and
by these Persecutors cruel Laws, (...) not suffered to have the least benefit
of or by that Worship, and (...) wholly denied of their privilege, belonging
to the Worship of the Church of England, they were sound to Petition to England
for the maintaining their Right in Boston, but so soon as this was known to
the^e Persecutors, they impeacht the aforesaid Per^^^ of ^^gh Rebellion, for
attempti^g the same, and forthwith im^^^^oned them, and fined each of them
three hundred Pounds, (...) means of their (...) the New Engl^^^ (...) only for
Murder (...) from (...) (...) stood, continued his preaching and baptizing,
according to his Commission from the Bishop of London, till at length he was
threatened with Whipping, and understanding that the Constables h^^ Warrants
from the persecuting Magistrates to seize him, and for that end beset his
Lodging; whereupon he returned privately to Carolina.

4. Nor were the Affronts offered to Robert Ratcliffe, the first estblished
Minister of the Church of England in Boston, (...) in silence: He came over in
the Year 1686. with Authority from the Crown of Engand to establish a Church in
Boston; this man's meekness and Sobriety was sufficiently knwn, yet were his
Affronts many, by which they ^ought to weary him out, not only by personal
Abuses and public Inimies, is breaking the Church W^^d^ws, tearing the service
Book, making (...) of Man's Dung^on the Doors, and filling the Key-holes with
the same, ^^t also ^^^ed his Clark, and compelled, him to Prison in a Wheel
(...), of which nature they acted many abuses against the aforesaid and his
Che^^^, insomuch that no Minister longer being able to endure then (...)
Antichristian Abuses which did more daily increase against h^^ and his Church,
was necessitated (after about four years stay amongst them) to leave his
Charge, and go for England, where the late Queen preferred him to a living.

5. And as a father sign of their hatred to that Church, at the time of the
Revolution, they Imprisoned three Gentlemen, Members thereof, without any
charge against them (...), save that they had officiated as Justices of the
Peace under the Kings Commission, and although they Joined with eight o^ ten
more of their own Church Members, who sat and Jo^ntly acted with them in the
same County, yet could find no complaint against their own Church Members; so
apparently partial were they to their own party, and violent to others, by
which (as aforesaid though not the thousand part of what might be brough^
against them of their great Wickedness against the People of God and the Kings
Subject^* ^et with a little more of the like nature to be added here^^^o, will
by their work^ be (...) to the understanding of every true Christian, That the
(...) Church is not the true Church of Christ, that worship him in the Spirit
and in the Truth, viz. (...) 4.^^

Having thus mentioned some of the abuses offered to some Member^ of the Church
of England, I shall now draw Conclusion so soon I have given a short account of
the (...) Maule of Salem, about his Book, called Truth^held forth, etc. I shall
begin thus, viz.

Thomas Maule, a Young Man about twelve years of Age, came from England to the
Island of (...), and from thence (for his health ^ake) came to New England,
where (...) much preaching and loud praying; he began to think with (...) what
manner of People are the^e? whose Streets ring (...) o^ Preaching and P^aying;
and having lived amongst them about three year he did experience their words
to be good, but by their works to have no good hearts; at the end of which
(...) removed himself to another of their Towns, called Salem, where he found
the Church Members to be in all respects (^s to religion) on with them in the
other Towns of their Jurisdiction; but in Salem he found a People of few wo^ds
and good works, agreeable thereunto, with which people he Jo^ned, by kee^ing to
their Me^tings, which so enraged the Church Members* that with their P^^ests,
they ^^ired up the Rulers against (...) them (...) where he kept (...) Pounds
for entertaining him; after which for his keeping open shop upon one of their
^alt (...), and speaking the Truth, against their P^iests ^ai^ing against the
Quakers and the like, they (...) times imprisond (...), device cruel, whipped
him, (...) their many (...) also a^^^ing him of (...) day of the week, but he
affirming the (...), and (...) persons, w^es of one (...) known had (...) Good
in (...) keeping, has (...) notwithstanding (...) yet recorded they him a
Liar, when he had spoken no other (...) the Truth relating to the same, shall
now proceed to the sum and as aforesaid. From which I shall now proceed to the
Sum and substance of his late Trial, which was writ by a hand then present in
their Courts, as follows.

The Copy of their Warrant Province of the Massachusetts Bay.
TO the Sheriff of the County of Essex, his under Sheriff or Debuty,
greeting. Whereas there is lying before the honorable Lieutenant Governor and
Council a printed Pamphlet, entitled, Truth held forth and maintained, and put
forth in the name of Thomas Maule, said to be Thomas Maules, of Salem within
your County, and published without, License of Authority, in which is contained
many notorious and wicked Lies, and Slanders, not only upon private Persons,
but also upon Government, and likewise diverse corrupt and pernicious Doctrines
utterly subversive of the true Christian and professed Faith.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Will and require you forthwith to
make search in the House of the said Maule, and ^^ere else you shall be
informed any of the said Pamphl^^ are, or may be found, seize and secure all
that you shall find thereof, and to cause the said Thomas Maule to appear
before the Lieutenant Governor and Council, at the Council Chamber in Boston,
upon Thirsday the 19th Current, to answer what shall be objected against him,
to his Majesty's behalf. To the Premises hereof fail not, making return of this
Warrant with your doings therein.

Dated at the Council Chamber in Boston, December 12th 1695. By Command of the
Lieutenant Governor and Council.

Js^^^ Addition, Secretary A true Copy, attested by George C^^win, Sherriff.



A Copy, of the Return of their Warrant.
Salem December 14 th, 1695.
ACcording to the within Warrant, I have been at the House of Thomas Maule, and
there have found thirty one of said Pamphlets, and them served, as required,
and have seized the said Maule, and delivered him to the keeper of their
Majesty's Goal in Salem, there to be secured, in order to his apearance at the
time and Place within mentioned, and have sent the said Thomas Maule by the
bearer Jeremiah Neale, to answer as within expressed, which Jeremiah Neale I do
constitute and appoint to be my lawful Deputy, to make return of this Warrant,
with the Body of said Maule, and to act in all things which shall be further
ordered relating to the concerning the within Warrant.

George C^^win, Sheriff This is a true Copy of the Original Return, attested By
Jeremiah Neale, Sheriff-Deputy.



Thomas Maule being brought by the said Neale, and said Jailer out of Salem
County, into Boston County, where appearing at the Council Chamber, before the
said Governor and Council who put diverse Insuaring Question to said Maule.

He made this Reply, That no righteous ^aw did bind or enjoin him to answer
further then he saw good, and that they had not acted agreeable to Law, in
compelling him into their County, to stand trial before them, who in the case
were not his equal Judges, and if they did intend to proceed against him, he
did expect the benefit of the Kings Laws, which did allow his Judges to be
Twelve men of his Equals, belonging to the same County he was of. The which
being consented to, four hundred Pounds bond was given for his appearance to
answer them at their High Court of Injustice against him, at Ipwswich the 19th
of the 3rd Month May, 169^. But before said Maule came to his Trial they
Imprisoned him and sacrificed sixteen pounds worth of his Books, a burnt
Offering to their Anger and Revenge, though upon his Trial the Jury could not
find him in the least guilty of any evil fact, relating to their Charge about
his Book.

The time of the Courts setting being come, said Maule was called to his Tyral
before Thomas Danford, Elisha Cook and Samuel Sewal, three of the Council, and
Judges of this Court, who demanded of Thomas Maule, If he did own that Book
entitled, Truth held forth and maintained, etc. to be of his putting forth?

To which he said, The outside of the Book did not fully manifest to him what
the inside thereof did contain. The Book being given to him, when he had looked
it (...), returned it again, with this answer, That all Printed in the Book, he
did own to be Truths, which he did vindicate and maintain, excepting the
Printers Errors, and some mistakes occasioned through Authors, which were
common to good Books.

Then Judge Danford said, You are to answer for Printing this Book without
^^scence of Authority.

To which said Maule answered, That if he were accountable for so (...), it was
not to them, but to the Bishops of the English Church, and the King did allow
him the same liberty to have his Book printed, as they did to an^ of their
subjects, which separated or dissented from their way of Worship.

Then Judge Coo^ said, You are to answer for publishing your Book in this
Government with^^^ the Lisence of the present Authority.

To which said Maul r^^plyed, The Government (...) the Kings, or ought so to
be, and the Books are my own Goods, who ^s an Engli^h Merchant have good ^^ght
by the Kings Laws to dispose of my Goods in any of the King (...).

Th^n Anthony Ch^k^e^, the Kings (...) said, Your Books are not lawful good to
be dispos^d (...) people, because they ^^^tain notorious wicked (...) Province,
as (...) Christian and (...) Faith, (...) upon many (...) Persons.

To which said Maul made this Reply, That the Charge-as yet to prove, and which
they could never prove against him; and so long as there was no evil fact, he
was no Transgressor of any righteous Law; and if their Change were true, as it
is not, it is no more than what they and their Priests are guilty of against
all Persons, as well as the Church of England, that dissented from their
Priests way of Worship, for which cause, and persecuting the People of God and
the Kings Subjects to death, their Doctrine, Principles and Practices were
condemned by all true Christian People that did know or hear of their
unrighteous Works, which (...) these many years have caused Gods Judgments to
come upon this Land; and for not repenting me you now given up to murder one
another, through the Devi^ ^ccusation, by Specter Evidence, accusing both
Priests, Rulers and People of being Witches

Then Judge Cook to this purpose said, You are a horrible Liar, (...) it more
better you would for^ear in this nature running your self into further Trouble
by accusing the Churches and Government after such a horrible wicked rate, as
you have done, and still do persist in for which you are to suffer, according
to your Deserts.

To which said Maul made this Reply, That the Truth by him to them was spoken,
and so (...) he did not ^xceed the bounds thereof, he did no^ fear their Whip,
^oal or Gallows, and withal, that relating to this his Testimony, he had
suffered ten times is their Jurisdiction, five times by Imprisonment, three
times by the loss of Goods taken from him, and twice by cruel Whipping; and now
before this Trial they had both imprison (...), and burnt sixteen Pounds worth
of his Books, and as (...) given him any Copy of the particulars of the Charge
against him.

To which Judge Dansord said, It (...) reason that Thomas Maule should have a
Copy of what we have to (...) him with, and also time to (...) it, which by the
renewing o^ his Bo^d, is (...) have (...) next (...). Which was agreed to.

Then Judg^^ (...) said, (...) would have Thomas Maule (...) more careful of
(...) to the Scripture^, and (...), Bible.

To which Ma^l^ answered, That to compare that with the Bible which was
^gree^ble to in Holy Scriptures in the Bible, could be (...) way found to (...)
undervalue the Bible. And as to Er^ors now so much talk of, he did not know of
any Book that was fr^e; for as some of the ^earned (...), Beza committed eight
hundred (...) his first Tr^^sla^ion of (...) New Testament, which by ame^ding
through hi^ second Tra^sl^tion, left three hundred Errors therein and by
compari^g Mat. 27 v. 5. with Acts ^.18. proves as great a Must ^e as a^y he
knew to be in his Book.

Judge Cook commanded this Sentence to be writ down.

Then said Maul desired it might (...) it down, That at present ^e did ^o
(...). Which being do^^, he said, That it through his ^ow so (...) an (...), he
did hope through co^t (...) next Trial.

Then Judge Cook (...), T^en your (...) is (...), and so cont^^ry (...) the
Quakers (...) Perfection, that it overthrows their (...).

(...), That it was not so, (...) makes a charge from (...) come to for^^^^
Error to j^yn (...), which makes free from all that is evil; and had not the
like in measure, been (...) state, ^^ have departed from evil, I had not become
a prey to you, who have caused me to suffer for the Truth, as it is manifest
you have done.

Then Judge Danford said, Thomas Maul, forbear, we have something else to do
than to spend time to hear you (...) after this kind of rate.

To which Thomas Maul answered, That he was willing to forbear without further
Trouble to him, by or from them.

A Copy of the Grand Jurys Presentment, as also a Copy of the Judges Charge.
AT a Superior Court held at Salem, for our Sovereign Lord the King, in the
County of Essex, in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, the
10th day of the 9th Month, 1696. The Grand Jury do present Thomas Maul of
Salem, Shopkeeper, for publishing, or putting forth a Book, entitled, Truth
held forth and maintained, wherein is contained diverse Slanders against the
Churches and Government of this Province; and for saying what he did before the
honorable Court at Ipswich, in May last, as will appear on Record, reference
thereunto being had, may more at large appear, (...) this hereunto annexed.

James Stivens, Fare-man.



Thomas Maule being bound over by Recogni^ance to this Court, and being asked
concerning a Book put forth by him, entitled, Truth held forth and maintained,
etc. did in oppen Court declare and say, That there was as great mistakes in
the Scriptures as in his Book, and instanced, comparing Mat. 27. v. 5. with
Acts 1. v. 18. and this being read to him, desires to be understood, That at
present he believes so, at the Superior Court of Judicature held as Ipswich on
the third Tuesday May last, 1696.

A true Copy, by Adington Davenport, Clerk.



Dr. Benjamin ^u^^ivants Speech, in the first part of the Pleas (...) the
Presentment, is as follows, viz.

To the Presentment of the Grand Jury, exhibited against Tho Maule this present
Court, always saving to himself the liberty of such further Pleading and
Defense, as by Law are due unto him, viz. First, That the uncertainty of
matters alleged in the said Presentment is so notorious, that he that runs may
read them; and the Lord Cook says, The Law requires certainty in all cases,
especially such as are Penal to the Lives or Estates of the Subject, which
uncertainties are. Secondly, That neither County, Year or Day are laid in the
said Presentment. Thirdly, That the Presentment is not laid to be made for the
King, who if any one has Offense by whatever in this case alleged against the
Defendant; neither is his Majesty's Name or Style used in the Presentment, as
is necessary, and required particularly by the Laws of this Government.
Fourthly, That it is not laid upon Oath, as it ought to be, if it hold a man to
his Answer. Fifthly, That the Jury had no Plantiff to inquire for, they being
sworn, Well and truly to try, and true Deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King, and Thomas Maule (...) Prisoner at the Bar. And Yet the Kings
Name and Style entirely omitted in the Presentment aforesaid. Six^^ly, That if
it were true the Defendant should have said, as is laid to his charge in the
Indictment, That there was as great Mistakes in the Scriptures as in his Book,
yet this can charge no fact by Law punishable upon him, the Presentment wanting
an invendo or meaning, whether they were the holy Scriptures or words of God,
since there are profane as well as holy Scriptures, and the Defendant may be
supposed, in Construction of Law, to intend as well profane as sacred
Scriptures. Seventhly, That it was not laid to be against the Peace of the
King, or so much as a Misdemeanor.

To these Arguments Judge Danford answered, That the Presentment was according
to former Usage, and their Custom, and that want of form could not destroy the
Indictment, or hinder the coming to his Answer.

Judge Cook said, As to the Invendo, that it would have been necessary if the
particular Quotations had not been named, which he did believe Thomas Maules
Counsel would not deny to be the Books of the holy (...), which was conceded
unto.

Then was Anthony Chickley, the Kings Attorney, called upon, to know what he
had to say to it on the behalf of the King, who only said, He would answer to
the third Exception brought against the Indictment, viz. That it wanted the
style of the King, affi^ming it did not want it, ^ounding his assertion on the
Pream^le of the Indictment, it being said, At a superior Court held at Salem
for our Sovereign Lord the King.

Reply to this was made, on the behalf of the Defendant, That the Preample had
no relation to the Body of the Presentment, since the Presentment was presumed
to begin at these words, The Grand Jury do present.

The Court, after some further debate, overruling the Pleas, the Prisoner is
left to say for himself.

Thomas Ma^le to the Judges on the Bench, as follows, viz.

To you who have set your selves to be Judges in this case, against me, as you
are invested with Magistratical Power by Commission from the King, I do respect
you, out wherein you do assume to your selves the Power of the Bishops Court,
as in this case, I do no more value you than I do Jack-straw. And i^ you (...)
approve your selves wise me, you ought to mend the many Rents by you already
made, thro^gh the mis^mannagement of the (...) committed to your Charge, before
you proceed to make a further breach upon me, who has not given you any just
occasion so to do, which if you are resolved to make a Rod for me, that it may
be easy, for the more ease of your own that is to come, for it is said by him
that cannot lie, The same measure that men make, the same shall be made to them
again; and if your Power, by which you act against me, do long continue, he
that now enjoys a good Estate, under your Government, in seven years time,
after this rate, may not be left worth a Grote; for as you are set to watch
over the People, things are at that pass, through your means, that they have
the greater need to watch over you, otherwise they are like to be undone by the
heavy burdens you lay upon them.

Then the Cause, with the said Ma^les Book, and a Speech made to this purpose
by Judge Danford, was committed to the Jury, viz. You have now heard the Cause,
which with the Book is now committed to your hands, why have taken a solemn
Oath to do the thing that is right in the sight of Gods as near as you can;
therefore you ought well to consider the horrid Wickedness of Thomas Maules
setting forth the Book now before you, in which there is contained a great deal
o^ blasphemous matter against the Churches and Government of this Province. You
well know, that when the Husbandman has (...) great ca^e and labor to fence
in his fi^ld of Wheat, and there comes a ravenous Creature and makes a Gap
through the Fence for other like Creatures to go through and spoil the Corn,
and to trample down and lay waste the Husband-mans Field, will he not ^se his
ut^ost endeavor to destroy such a ravenous Creature that do so? how much the
more are w^ to preserve the Hedge of (...) good Husbandman with which he hat^,
by his Ordinances, and good Government, ^enced and (...) aged his Churches and
People in this Province, against which the wicked work of Thomas M^ule does
wholly t^^d, (...) all good in Church and Commonwealth, which God ha^^ planted
amongst his People in this Province; which Cause with the said Maules Book i^
now before you, to do that which is right relating thereunto, as ^ear as God
shall enable.

In answer to which Speech, Thomas Maule made this Reply to the Jury, and said,
Jury look well to the ^^rk which you are now going to do, the Cause is now
committed to you, who are to be Governed by the Kings Law; no Law of our Nation
have I broken, as to y^u will appear; the Book has no evidence in Law against
me, further then to you it does appear, I have writ or caused to be printed any
thing contrary to sound Doctrine, and Inconsi^tant to the holy Scriptures of
Truth, which if you take up with any part of these Judges unjust Change against
me, and say, there is such like matter in my Book as they change me with, you
may seek to the Printer for satisfaction, for of any such like matter in the
Book I know not, and my hand is only to my Copy, which now is in another
Government, in the hands of the Printer, and my Name to my Book made by the
Printer does not in Law evidence to prove the same to be Thomas Maule, no more
then the Spector Evidence, in Law, is of force or validity to prove the person
accused by said evidence to be the Witch, but rather conclude the Spector to be
the Witch; therefore Jury look well to your Work, for you have sworn, True
Trial to make (...) Verdict give, which if you miss of doing me Justice, the
fault will lie on (...) part; for these my Accusers on the be^ch, are but as
Clerks to conclude your Work with Amen.

In some small time the Jury brought in their Verdict for the Prisoner, whom
they found not Guilty, At which the Judges seemed much disatisfied therewith,
and ass^ the Jury, how that could be, having the Book before them? who
answered, That the Book was not (...) Evidence, for that Thomas Maules Name was
there unto for by the Printer, and the matter therein contained not cognizable
before them, they not being a Jury of divines, which this case ought (...).

Then Judge Danford made this Speech, That t^o, Thomas M^ule had escaped the
hands of Men, yet he had not escaped the (...) of God* who would find out all
his Evils and Blasphemies against his (...) and People, and for which
Wickedness God did reserve him or further Judgment to come upon him.

In answer to which, said Maule replied, That he was no way guilty of their
Charge, but had great cause to praise God or his deliverance by the Jury, who
were made Instruments of fre^ing (...) out of the hands of them, who had
mani^ested (...) Works against the People of God, and the (...) S^bject, (...)
be one had done

In which time of the said Reply, Judge, Danford called out, Take him away,
take him away.

The Reader may hence understand, that the distance of these Persecutors from
the King, and much further froms Gods Truth, is the cause that by them, many of
the People of God and the Kings Subjects suffer, more then they would do, were
they where their complaint could readily be heard by the King, who would not
suffer his Subjects to be persecuted under the Antichristian Power of the
New England Church, who yet continue the old stroke, according to their Power,
against the Quakers, at this very time of liberty of Conscience, respecting to
Religion now allowed by the King and Powers of England, as for instance, they
now do suffer in their Jurisdiction, especially in the Town of Linn, where for
the Priests maintenance, they compel the Quakers Oxen, their Pots and
Platters, with the of other Household goods more worse in the respect, then of
the first two wiked Priests we read, Sam. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. For which
sin God will reward the (...)

FINIS

