By His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS the Assembly of this Provin^^ have raised a Fund for the Encouragement
of the Companys appointed by His Maje^^^, for the Defense and Security of the
Province and to enable me to give Three Pound Levy Money to each Man that
should enlist themselves for one Year, to Recruit the said (...) which Money
was paid unto the Persons that did so Inlist themselves. (...) Force of
Jamaica, Simon I^gerson and Ephraim Kill^^^ of Huntington, James (...) Davis
and John Collins of Santhold, and (...) All enlisted in the said Companys, and
who have (...) allowed (...) by the Favor of the Assembly, and were in the
(...) Ungratefully Deserted, and carried away His Majesty's Arms, (...) are
said to be Concealed and Entertained at the former places of their Abode. These
are therefore to Require all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and
other Officers, Civil and (...) throughout this Province, to make Enquiry and
diligent Search in their respective (...), to discover and apprehend the said
Persons, or any of them, and to Convey them, with the Kings Arms, in safe
Custody, to His Majesty's Fort in New York, as they will answer the contrary at
their Peril.

And I do further Publish and Declare, That ^f any of the said Persons
abovenamed shall within the space of Three Weeks from and after ^he Date of
these Presents, voluntarily surrender themselves, and Return, with their Arms,
to their Respective Companies, to perform and fulfill the Time of their
Service, those that do so return, shall be freely pardoned.

Given at Fort William Henry the Twelfth Day of September, in the Eighth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque
Domini 1696.

Ben. Fletcher.

God Save the KING
Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty at
the Bible in the City of New York, 1696.


