By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas there is nothing more evident in holy Scriptures, than when a Nation
or People do withdraw their Affections from God and his holy Ordinances, and
suffer themselves to be mis-guided by their wild and natural Appetites, that
Religion and Government becomes Contemptible, and the People degenerate into
Looseness and Profaneness, blaspheming the holy Name of God, and speaking evil
of Dignities and Powers. And whereas it is observable, that of late years the
People of this Province not having a due regard to those holy Duties which are
required of them by Almighty God, in the holy Scriptures, have fallen into
great Divisions, Striffes, Dissentions and Uncharitableness, encourageing
amongst themselves Backbiting, false Rumors, Enmity, Variance want of Love,
and all sorts of immoralities and Profaneness, to the great Scandal of the
holy Christian Religion, and the endangering of the Peace of his Majesty's
Government, thereby provoking the Almighty God to Anger, and justly bringing
upon this Province those Judgments of his Wrath which have lately attended us
in the grievous and afflictive Changes of the Seasons, by which much of the
Fruit of the Earth are blasted, and rendered unserviceable to Man. And whereas
Almighty God has at all times signified his great and unexpressible Love unto
Mankind, by withdrawing the Rod of his Judgments upon a Nation and People,
from them, when such People have with contrite hearts and unfeigned Repentance,
humbled themselves before him, acknowledging his infinite Power and holy Name,
and have also with fasting and Prayer supplicated his gracious favor for the
removing of all those Judgments wherewith he has afflicte^ his People. To the
end therefore that the Wrath of God may be appeased, and that these Judgments
which are now upon this Land and Province, and daily threaten the same, may be
removed, and that the People thereof may be no longer divided, separated and
disunited ^ their Affections unto God, and to his Majesty, our most gracious
Sovereign, and to one another, I have therefore thought fit, by and wit^ the
advice of his Majesty's Council, to publish and proclaim a solemn Day of Fast
and Prayer. And by these Presents I do Publish an^ Declare, That a solemn Day
of Fast and Prayer shall be kept and observed by all and every Person and
Persons within this Province upon Wednesday the 26th of this Instant October,
for the imploring of Almighty God to pardon the sins of the People, and the
withdrawing of his Judgments from this Land; and that by his signal Providence
he would take our most gracious Sovereign Lord King William into h^^ special
Protection, and preserve his Royal Person from all Perils and Dangers, and
bless all the Kingdoms and Dominions under his Majesti^^ Government with his
long and prosperous Reign, to the extirpation of Popery, and suppression of
A^bitrary Power, and the preserving of h^^ Subjects (...) just Rights and
Liberties; and that the most benign God by his divine Grace and Spirit would be
graciously pleased to (...) the Minds of the People, that all strife,
heart-burning and discord may pass away, and in lieu thereof they may be
inspired with a Spirit (...) Love, Charity and Concord, so that with one heart
and one mind God may be glorified, the King honored, and all those in
Authority under him Reverenced, to the (...) of a perfect Peace throughout this
Province, to the general Satisfaction, and to the Tranquillity of Mind of all
his Majesty's good Subjects within the same. And I do, by and with the advice
of h^s Majesty's Council aforesaid, Charge and Command that the said Wednesday,
being the 26th Instant, shall be strictly kept and observed as a solemn Day of
public Fast and Prayer, and that all servile Labor shall cease upon the said
Day, hereby requiring all Mini^ters of the Gospel within their respecti^e
Parishes and Precincts to give timely Notice thereof, that the same may be
duly and religiously observed in the^r respective Churches (...) Meetings with
Preaching and Prayer. And by and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council
aforesaid, I do strictly Charge and Command all Mayors, Justices of the Peace,
Sherrifs, Constables, and all others concerned, that they do take effectual
care that the said Day of solem^ Fast and Prayer be strictly observed
accordingly, in their several and respective Cities, Counties, Jurisdictions
and Precincts, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril.

Given under my Hand at Fort William Henry this sixth Day of October, School. and
in the Tenth Year of his Majesty's Reign. By his Excellency's Command, B.
Cosens, Cl. Concilij.
Bellomont.

God Save the KING.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty in the City of New York.


