By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas the Proprietors of East-New-Jarsey have been very pressing with the
Right Honorable, the Lords Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, to have
the Privilege of a Port at Perth-Amboy within the said Collony of New-Jarsey,
assertaining that they have a Right thereunto by virtue of a Grant they
obtained from the late King James, dated the 14th of March, 1682. though in
reality he was then only Duke of York, and derived his Title thereunto from a
preceding Grant from his Royal Brother King Charles the second; and have
thereupon complained, that their Rights and Properties have been invaded by the
Government of New York, in compelling their Ships to go up to New York, and
d^^^ing of them the benefit of a Port at Perth-Amboy. Which Complaint having
been taken into the Consideration of the said Right Honorable, the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, who, with the Advice of his Majesty's
Attorney and Solicitor General, gave unto His Majesty their humble Opinion,
That by an Act of Parliament made in the 2^th Year of King Charles the second,
cap. 7. entitled, An Act for the better securing the Plantation Trade, That
all Ports are to be appointed in the Plantations by the Commissioners of the
Customs of England, by and under the Authority and Direction of the Lord
Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury in the respective Plantations, for
the collecting such Customs as are due to his Majesty in these Plantations. And
that the aforesaid Power of appointing Ports, granted to the Commissioners of
the Customs by the said Act, was not granted to the Duke of York by the said
Letters Patents; and also the said Duke of York's Grant to the Lord Berkley and
Sir George Carteret could not convey any such Power, because he had no such
power granted to him by the Crown. Whereupon it appears evident, That the
said Proprietors have no manner of Right or Power to constitute Ports either in
East or West New Jarsey, from the late King Charles the second, the then Duke
of York, or any other Person deriving Authority from either of them, but that a
Power of constituting such Ports in any of his Majesty's Plantations, is vested
by Act of Parliament in the Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs, under the
Directions of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury.

And the said Right Honorable, the Lords Commissioners of Trade and
Plantations were further humbly of Opinion, That all Privileges should, as
much as possible, be preserved unto the Province of New York. Which his Majesty
was most graciously pleased to Approve; and thereupon was pleased to dismiss
the said Petition of the Proprietors of East New-Jarsey* and to order, That
there be not any Innovation within the River of New York, nor any Goods to pass
up the same, but what shall have paid the Duties at New York, to the end the
benefit of that Trade may be preserved to the Inhabitants and Traders of New
York and Albany, the same being agreeable to the Laws of his Majesty's said
Province, and to former Practice as well as necessary for the collecting of
those Customs and other Duties which are to be raised for the support of His
Majesty's Government in his said Province.

And whereas I am Informed, That notwithstanding of the Declaration of His
Majesty's Royal Will and pleasure in the Premises, the Proprietors and other
the Inhabitants of the said East New-Jarsey, do contrary thereunto, endeavor
to settle and establish a Port at Perth-Amboy, to the great Obstruction and
Decay of the Trade and Revenue of this His Majesty's Province. I have therefore
thought fit, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Council,
strictly to charge and command his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General of
this His Majesty's Province of New York, and all Custom House-Officers under
him, and all other person and Persons whom these Presents may or can concern,
that all and every of them in their respective Places and Circumstances, do
take effectual care that no Ship or Vessel be suffered or permitted to go unto
Perth-Amboy, or unto any other Port or Place within the said East-New-Jarsey
with any Goods or Merchandise whereon any Duties or Customs do arise by virtue
of the Laws of England and this Province, without their first coming and
entering the same in his Majesty's Custom-House at New York, and paying there
the aforesaid Duties established by the Laws, as aforesaid. And if any Ship or
Vessel shall, contrary hereunto, go into any Port or Harbor in the said
New-Jarsey, then his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, or any Officer
appointed by him, shall seize and stop the same undischarged by due course of
Law. And all Persons are hereby strictly Charged and Commanded to take Notice
hereof accordingly, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril.

Given at Fort William Henry the Twenty Fourth Day of May, School. and in the
Tenth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace
of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Bellomont

God Save the KING.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty in the City of New York, Anno Domini, School.


