ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston the Twenty-seventh of May, 1696. and continued by several
Adjournments until Wednesday the Eighteenth of November following.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Octavo.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. 1696.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Octavo.
An Act, For the Equal distribution of Insolvent Estates.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the
same.

That when the Estate of any person Deceased shall be Insolvent or Insufficient
to pay all just Debts which the Deceased owed, the same shall be set forth and
distributed to and among all the Creditors in proportion to the Sums to them
respectively owing so far as the said Estate will extend, saving that the Debts
due to the Crown, Saving
the Sickness and necessary Funeral Charges of the Deceased are to be first
paid. And the Executor or Administrator appointed to any such Insolvent Estate
before payment to any be made (except as aforesaid) shall Represent the
Condition and Circumstances thereof unto the Judge for Probate of Wills, and
granting of Administrations; and the said Judge shall nominate and appoint two
or more fit and indifferent persons to make a true and equal Appraisement of
such Estate, and Administer an Oath unto them for that purpose; Apprisers to be
Sworn
and shall also nominate and appoint two or more fit persons to be
Commissioners, with full power to Receive and Examine all Claims of the several
Creditors, and how they are made out: Commissioners to receive the Claims.
And such Commissioners shall cause the times and places of their meeting to
attend the Creditors for the receiving and examining of their Claims to be made
known and published by Posting up the same in some public places in the Shire
Town of that County where such Deceased Person last dwelt, and of the two next
adjoining Counties. And six, twelve or eighteen months time (as the
circumstances of any Estate may require) shall be allowed by the Judge unto the
Creditors for bringing in their Claims, and proving their Debts: At the end of
which limited time such Commissioners shall make their Report, and present a
List of all the Claims unto the said Judge, who shall order them meet
Recompense out of the Estate, for their care and labor in that Affair: And the
Debts due to the Crown, Sickness, and necessary Funeral Charges as is herein
before provided, being half subducted, shall order the Residue and Remainder of
the Estate to be paid and distributed to any among the other Creditors that
shall have made out their Claims in due proportion to the Sums unto them
respectively Owing according as the Estate will bear; saving unto the Widow, if
any be, her right of Dower according to Law in the Houses and Lands of the
Deceased, the Widows Dower at the Expiration of her Term to be also distributed
among the Creditors in a like proportion.

Provided, That notwithstanding the Report of any such Commissioners, Debts may
be contested at Common Law.
or allowance thereof made, It shall and may be lawful to and for the Executor
or Administrator, to contest the proof of any Debt at the common Law.

And no Process in Law (except for Debts due to the Crown, Sickness and Funeral
Charges) shall be allowed against the Executors or Administrator of any
Insolvent Estate so long as the same shall be depending as aforesaid. Process
Suspended whilst the Commission is depending.


And whatsoever Creditor shall not make out his or her Claim with such
Commissioners before the full Expiration of the limited time, such Person shall
be for ever after debarred of his or her Debt, Creditors excluded that bring
not in their Claims.
unless he or she can find some further Estate of the Deceased's, not before
discovered and put into the Inventory.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid*

That every Judge for Probate of Wills and granting Administrations within the
respective Counties, be, and hereby is fully Authorized and Empowered to call
before him, and to require and Administer an Oath unto any Person or persons
probably suspected by any Executor or Administrator to have concealed, Persons
Suspected of concealment or Imbezelments to be Sworn.
imbezel'd or conveyed away any of the Money, Goods or Chattels left by the
Testator, or Intestate, for the discovery of the same. And in case any such
suspected person was betrusted by the person Deceased, attended upon, or was
otherwise conversant with or near unto him in the time of Sickness, or left in
possession of the Estate whereby to strengthen and make the Suspicion more
violent, and shall refuse to clear and acquit him or her self upon Oath. It
shall and may be lawful for and the Judge is hereby Empowered to commit such
Person so refusing to Swear, Penalty for refusing*
unto the Goal of the County, there to remain until he or she shall comply to
discharge him or her self upon Oath as aforesaid, or be released by consent of
the Executor or Admimistrator.

Appeal
Saving unto any Person agrieved at any Sentence, Order or Decree, made by the
Judge of Probate, Liberty of an Appeal unto the Governor and Council; Such
Appellant giving Bond in a reasonable Sum with Sufficient Security to prosecute
his Appeal with Effect and to abide and perform the determination that shall be
made thereupon.

An Act, For the due Assize of Bread.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That henceforth every Loaf-Bread Baker shall have a distinct mark for his
Bread, and keep the due Assizes hereafter expressed as well for what he Bakes
for Sale, as to be spent in his Family. That is to say, The Assize of Bread
shall be rated according to the middle Price of Wheat not to be altered but
upon the increasing or decreasing of Six Pence in the Sale of a Bushel: The
Penny Loaf to weigh by Averdupoize weight as is hereafter mentioned, according
to the different prices of Wheat by the Bushel. Viz. Price of Wheat Weight of
penny white loaf, Weight of penny wheaten, Weight of penny household. s. d. oz.
dr. oz. dr. oz. dr. At 3 11 4 17 2 23 0 3 6 10 2 15 3 20 4 4 09 2 13 7 18 4 4 6
08 3 12 5 16 6 5 07 5 11 4 15 3 5 6 07 1 10 5 14 2 6 06 4 09 7 13 1 6 6 06 0 09
0 12 0 7 05 6 08 5 11 4 7 6 05 2 08 1 10 4 8 05 0 07 4 10 0 8 6 04 6 07 1 09 4
9 04 4 06 6 09 0 And so proportionably under the penalty of forfeiting all such
Bread as shall not be of the several Assizes aforementioned, to the use of the
poor of the Town where the same shall be Seized, and otherwise as is hereafter
expressed.

And for the better discovery and more effectual preventing of fraud and deceit
in the Assize of Bread.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Clerks of the Market in each Town within this Province, or any one of
them, shall and are hereby empowered and required once every week or oftener as
they shall see cause, to enter into any Shop or Place where Bread is usually
Sold or Baked for Sale, Clerks of the Market power and duty.
and to weigh the same; and all such Bread which they shall find under the due
Assize according to the proportion before mentioned, or not being marked, to
make Seizure of, and deliver two third parts thereof unto the Select-men or
Overseers of the poor in such Town, for the use of the poor within the same;
and the Officer to have the other third for his pains. And the Constable or
Constables of such Town are hereby ordered to be aiding and assisting unto such
Clerk or Clerks of the Market for the due Execution of their Office, when he or
they shall be thereunto required.

And be it further Enacted,

That the Select-men in each Town where Bread is Baked for Sale, Select men to
state the price of Wheat.
shall once a month, or oftener, as they shall see cause, Inquire, State and
Record the middle price of Wheat, and cause the same to be made known by
posting it up in some public place or places within such Town, and the Bakers
shall accordingly regulate the Weight of their Bread after the Assizes herein
beforementioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Biscuit Sold by Tale shall be alike marked and made of the same Assize
with the penny-loaf, Biscuit Sold by Tale to be Marked and of due Assize
on pain of Forfeiture as aforesaid. And the Clerks of the Market are hereby
required and empowered to Weigh all such Biscuit, and to make Seizure of all that
shall be un-marked or under Weight, to be employed and disposed of as
aforesaid; and all Biscuit Sold by Weight shall be dried fit for the Sea.

An Act, For making of Lands and Tenements liable to the payment of Debts.
WHEREAS the Estates of Persons within this Province do chiefly consist of
Houses and Lands, which give them Credit, some being remiss in paying of their
just Debts, and others happening to dye before they have discharged the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That all Lands or Tenements belonging to any person in his own proper right in
Fee, shall stand Charged with the payment of all just Debts owing by such
person, as well as his personal Estate, Lands (...) Tenements liable to
Execution.
and shall be liable to be taken in Execution for Satisfaction of the same;
where the Debtor or his Attorney shall not expose to view and tender to the
Officer personal Estate sufficient to answer the Sum mentioned in the Execution
with the Charges.

And all Executions duly Served upon any such Houses and Lands, Execution
duly Served and Recorded to make a good Title.
being returned into the Clerks Office of the Court out of which the same
issued and there Recorded, shall make a good Title to the Party for whom they
shall be so taken, his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Also where the Goods and
Chattels belonging to the Estate of any person Deceased, shall not be
sufficient to answer the just Debts which the Deceased Owed, or Legacies given:
Upon Representation thereof, and making the same to appear unto the Superior
Court of Judicature holden for or within the County where such Deceased Person
last dwelt; the said Court are hereby Empowered to License and Authorize the
Executor or Administrator of such Estate to make Sale of all or any part of the
Houses and Lands of the Deceased so far as shall be necessary to satisfy the
just Debts which the Deceased owed at the time of his Death: Justices of the
Superior Court Empowered to License the Sale of Lands etc.
And Legacies bequeathed in and by the last Will and Testament of the Deceased.
And every Executor or Administrator being so Licenced and Authorized as
aforesaid, shall and may by virtue of such Authority, Make, Sign and Execute in
due form of Law Deeds and Conveyances for such Houses and Lands as they shall
so Sell; which Instruments shall make a good Title to the Purchaser, his Heirs
and Assigns for ever.

Provided Nevertheless, Debts to the Crown to be first paid.
That any Debt or Debts due to the Crown from any such Estate, shall be first
secured and paid out of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when any person or persons shall make Sale or other Alienation of any
Lands or Tenements to him of right belonging, Fraudulent Deeds to be void.
with intent to defeat and defraud his Creditors of their just Debts not bona
fide for good and valuable consideration truly paid. All such Sales and
Alienations are to be deemed (...) and fraudulent, and shall be of none Effect
to Bar any Creditor from such Debt as is to him Owing.

An Act, To prevent the destroying and Murdering of Bastard Children.
WHEREAS many Lewd Women that have been Delivered of Bastard Children, to avoid
their shame, and to escape punishment, do secretly Bury or Conceal the Death of
their Children, and after, if the Child be found Dead, the said Woman do
allege that the said Child was Born Dead, whereas it falls out sometimes
(although hardly it is to be proved) that the said Child or Children were
murdered by the said Women their lewd Mothers, or by their assent or
procurement.

BE it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same.

That if any Woman be Delivered of any Issue of her Body, Male or Female, which
if it were born alive, should by Law be a Bastard; and that she endeavor
privately, either by Drowning or secret Burying thereof, or any other way;
either by their self, or the procuring of others so to conceal the Death
thereof, that it may not come to light, whether it were Born alive or not, but
be concealed. In every such case the Mother so offending, shall suffer Death,
as in case of Murder: Except such Mother can make proof by one Witness at the
least, that the Child whose Death was by her so intended to be concealed, was
Born Dead.

An Act, Against High Treason.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That if any person or persons shall compass or imagine the Death of Our
Sovereign Lord the King, or of Our Lady His Queen, Compassing or imagining the
Death of the King etc.
or of ^he Heir apparent to the Crown. Or if any Person shall Levy War against
Our Lord the King, or be adherent to the Kings Enemies, giving them aid and
comfort in the Realm or elsewhere, and thereof be probably attainted of open
deed by his Peers upon the Testimony of two lawful and credible Witnesses upon
Oath brought before the Offender face to face, Levying War against the King.
at the time of his Arraignment, or voluntary Confession of the Party
Arraigned. Or if any Person or Persons shall counterfeit the Kings Great or
Privy Seal, or the Seal of this Province, and thereof be duly Convicted as
aforesaid. Then every such Person and Persons so as aforesaid offending,
Counterfeiting the Kings great Seal etc.
shall be deemed declared and adjudged to be Traitors, and shall suffer pains
of Death, and also loose and forfeit as in cases of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Trial of all and every person and persons whatsoever Accused, Trials
to be Regulated according to the Law of England, in cases of Treason, etc
Indicted and Prosecuted for High Treason and Misprision of such Treason, shall
be regulated according to the Act of Parliament made in the Seventh Year of His
Present Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of Trials in cases
of Treason and Misprision of Treason: And the Party so accused, indicted and
prosecuted, to be allowed the benefits and privileges in and by the said Act,
granted and declared.

An Act, In Addition to the Act for preventing of Common Nusances arising by
Slaughter Houses, Still-Houses, etc.
FOR the better preventing of Desolation by Fire that may happen, by Drawing of
Spirits, or melting down of Tallow.

BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That if any Distiller or Tallow Chandler shall presume to Set up any Still or
Stills for the drawing of Spirits, Copper or Furnace for the melting of Tallow
or make use of any Still, Copper or Furnace for either of the said Ends in any
House or Place other than such as are or from time to time shall be assigned
for that purpose by the Select-men of the Town, with two or more Justices of
the Peace contrary to the intent of the said Act; Court of Quarter Sessions
empowered to cause Stills for drawing of Spirits or Furnaces for melting of
Tallow set up without Order to be taken down.
Every person and persons so offending, and being thereof duly convicted
before His Majesty's Justices in the Court of General Sessions of the Peace
within the same County, shall not only incur the penalty or Fine in the said
Act mentioned; but shall also enter into Recognizance to take down such Stills,
Coppers or Furnace; and in default of entering into Recognizance as aforesaid,
to be committed to Prison until he do cause the same to be taken down; or else
such Stills, Coppers or Furnaces shall be taken down by order of the said
Court, and the Charge thereof to be levied by distress and Sale of such
Offenders Goods, returning the Overplus, if any be.

AN ACT, In Addition to the Act, for Regulating Ferries.
WHEREAS there is a constant Recourse of Travelers and others for Passage over
the Ferry's betwixt Boston and Charlstown, and betwixt Boston and Winisimet.
Therefore (...) prevention of the great Inconvenience and Damage that does or
may happen to persons by being hindered and delayed at the said Ferry's for want
of speedy Transportation over the same.

BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor* Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That the person or persons that are, or from time to time shall be employed
for keeping Winisimet Ferry, (...) at (...) Ferry.
shall constantly maintain a good Boat or Boats in good repair suitable for the
said Ferry on each side of the Water, and that such Boats whether there be any
Passengers in the same or not, shall put off from their respective Shoars to go
to the other side upon each day in the week (the Lords Day excepted) at the
Hours of five, seven, nine and eleven a Clock before noon; and at one, three,
five and seven of the Clock after noon, throughout the whole Year, so as it be
within day light: On pain, That every such Ferry-man or Ferry-men being
complained of and convicted before any one or more of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of Neglect of his Duty in not crossing the said Ferry at the several
times and hours beforementioned, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, Penalty for Ferry men's neglect.
one half to the Informer or Complainant, and the other half to the use of the
poor of the Town of Boston. And such Justice or Justices may restrain the
Offender or Offenders until he or they shall pay the said Sum.

And be it further Enacted,

That all Posts and Expresses for His Majesty's Service and other persons
having extraordinary Business as in cases concerning Life and Death, Posts etc
to be speedily transported.
shall be speedily Transported over the said Ferry at any time or season
without delay, on the penalty aforesaid, any thing herein before contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, That such Ferry-man or Ferry-men shall not be obliged
to put off from their respective Shoares, Saving for Stormy seasons.
and pass the said Ferry at any of the times or hours before stated, if it
manifestly appear to be hazardous for them so to do by reason of any Storm or
Tempest, or that in the Winter the Ice do hinder the passing of any Boat across
the said Ferry.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as it shall happen, At Charlestown Ferry, two Boats not
to lie on the same Shore.
That the Boats employed for the Ferry betwixt Boston and Charlstown, shall be
on the same Shore, upon the Landing of the second Boat, the first shall
forthwith put off, and pass over to the other side, Passengers or no
Passengers, on the like Penalty herein before expressed, and to be disposed of
as aforesaid, to the use of the Poor of Boston or Charlstown respectively.

An Act, To supply the defect in the Law referring to the choice and power of
Tythingmen, Enacted at the Session of the General Court in February, Anno. 1693.
WHHEREAS it is provided in and by the said Act, That if any Person Chosen to
the Office of Tythingman, shall refuse to take his Oath, or Serve therein, he
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings, the said Forfeiture to be
Levied by Distress and Sale of such Persons Goods: but no provision is made how
to come at the said Forfeiture, if no Goods of such Persons can be found to
Distrein for the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

Persons chosen to the Office of Tythingmen to be committed, where no Goods can
be found to Satisfy the Fine.
That in every such case where no Goods can be found whereon to make Distress,
it shall and may be lawful, to and for the Officer, to Seize the Body of the
Offender, and him Commit unto the Prison, to be there kept, until he shall
answer and pay the said Fine or Forfeiture, with the Charges of Levying the
same; And the Warrant directed to the Officer for Levying thereof shall contain
in it such a Command: Any Law or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty a Tax upon Polls and Estates.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Convened in General
Assembly; For and toward the Repair of His Majesty's Castle upon Castle Island
near Boston; For the making and Erecting such further Addition as may be
necessary in Batteries, and Vaults for defense and security of the same, and
Support of the Garrison there; For the Subsistence and paying of Wages to
Seamen and Soldiers, and payment for Vessels hire, that have been, are, or
shall be employed in His Majesty's Service, for the Defense of this His
Province, and the Vigorous Prosecution of the War against His Majesty's
Enemies; For the procuring of Ammunition and other Stores of War; For the
payment of such Salaries Grants and Allowances as have been, or shall be made
by the General Court or Assembly, and all such Allowances and payments as are,
or shall be directed by any Act of this Province, to be made out of the Public
Treasury; For the Support of the Government and answering of the incident and
contingent Charges thereof, and for no other ends or intents whatsoever: Do
Unanimously Grant unto His most Excellent Majesty, A Tax of Nine Thousand Six
Hundred and Nineteen Pounds, Ten Shillings in Money, to be Levied upon Polls
and Estates, both Real and Personal within the said Province, as in and by this
present Act for the manner and proportion thereof is directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That the Treasurer do seasonably Send out his Warrants directed unto the
Select men, Trustees or Assessors of each respective Town or Precinct within
this Province: Requiring them to Assess the Sums therein set and proportioned
unto such Town or Precinct, upon all Rateable Male Polls, above the Age of
Sixteen Years (except Elders of Churches, Settled Ministers, the Praesident,
Fellows, and Students of Harvard College, Grammar Schoolmasters, and such who
through Age, Infirmity, or extreme Poverty in the Judgment of the Assessors,
Select-men or Trustees are rendered incapable to Contribute toward public
Charges) and upon all Estates both Real and Personal, lying within the Limits
and Bounds of such Town or Precincts, and next unto the same (Not paying
elsewhere) in whose hands or possession soever the same shall be found in just
and equal proportion as near as may be according to their best judgment and
discretion, making no difference as to the Sum set upon Polls: All Indian
Melatto and Negro Servants to be Estimated as other Personal Estate, and to
make two distinct Lists of the Assessment of said Sum upon the Polls and
Estates within such Town or Precinct each List containing one just half of the
said Towns or Precincts proportion to this Tax, therein setting forth what each
particular person is to pay toward the same against his or her Name
respectively, and the Lists so perfected and signed by the said Assessors,
Select-men or Trustees, or the major part of them to Commit to the Collector,
Constable or Constables of such Town or Precinct, as also to return a
Certificate of the Name or Names of such Collector, Constable or Constables,
together with the Sum total of the List or Lists to each of them respectively
Committed unto the Treasurer some time before the Tenth Day of April next
Ensuing. And the Treasurer upon Receipt of such Certificate, is hereby Empowered
and Ordered to Issue forth his Warrant or Warrants to the said Collector,
Constable or Constables, requiring him or them respectively to Collect the Sum
total of one of the said Lists, and to pay the same into the Treasury, and
Issue the Accounts thereof with himself or his Successors in said Office, at or
before the last day of May next Ensuing. Also to Collect the Sum total of the
other of the said Lists, and pay the same in, and Issue the Accounts thereof as
aforesaid, at or before the first day of August next following. And the
Treasurer is hereby also directed to send his aforesaid Warrants enclosed to
the Sheriff or Marshal of each respective County, who is hereby required
immediately to disperse and transmit the same unto the Select men, Trustees,
Assessors, Constables or Collectors of the several Towns and Precincts,
according to the directions thereof; and for his said Service, Charge and
Expenses therein, shall have a reasonable allowance ordered him by the Court of
Quarter Sessions in such County, out of the County Treasury, upon his laying
the Account thereof before them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That each Town and Precinct within this Province shall be Assessed and pay as
its proportion to this present Tax the Sums hereafter following.

That is to say, in the County of SUFFOLK.
l. s d. Boston, One Thousand Eight Hundred and Sixty Pounds. 1860 00 00
Dorchester, One Hundred Ninety Five Pounds. 195 00 00 Roxbury, One Hundred
Fifty Nine Pounds. 159 00 00 Milton, Ninety Three Pounds. 93 00 00 Brantrey,
One Hundred Fifty Six Pounds. 156 00 00 Weymouth, One Hundred and Five Pounds.
105 00 00 Hingham, One Hundred Fifty Six Pounds. 156 00 00 Dedham, One Hundred
and Seventeen Pounds. 117 00 00 M^^field, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 00 Wrentham,
Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Mendon, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 Hull, Forty Eight
Pounds. 48 00 00 In the County of ESSEX.
Salem, Four Hundred and Twenty Pounds. 420 00 00 Ipswich, Four Hundred and
Thirty Five Pounds. 435 00 00 Newbury, Three Hundred and Eighteen Pounds. 318
00 00 Salisbury, Seventy Two Pounds. 72 00 00 Topsfield, Seventy Eight Pounds.
78 00 00 Amsbury, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Haverhill, Seventy Eight
Pounds. 78 00 00 Andover, One Hundred and Fourteen Pounds. 114 00 00 Bradford,
Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Boxford, Fifty Four Pounds. 54 00 00 Marble head,
One Hundred Seventy One Pounds. 171 00 00 Lynn, One Hundred Sixty Eight Pounds.
168 00 00 Wenham, One Hundred and Eight Pounds. 108 00 00 Beverly, One Hundred
and Twenty Pounds. 120 00 00 Gloucester, Seventy Eight Pounds. 78 00 00
Manchester, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 Rowley, One Hundred and Eight Pounds. 108
00 00 In the County of MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown, Three Hundred Pounds. 300 00 00 Cambridge, One Hundred Eighty Nine
Pounds. 189 00 00 Watertown, Two Hundred Eighty Two Pounds. 282 00 00 New-town,
One Hundred and Five Pounds. 105 00 00 Sudbury, One Hundred and Twenty Pounds.
120 00 00 Marlborough, Eighty Four Pounds. 84 00 00 Medford, Forty Two Pounds.
42 00 00 Malden, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 00 Wooburn, One Hundred Forty Four
Pounds. 144 00 00 Reading, One Hundred and Two Pounds. 102 00 00 Billerica,
Fifty One Pounds. 51 00 00 Chelmsford, Seventy Two Pounds. 72 00 00 Concord,
One Hundred and Fifty Pounds. 150 00 00 Stow, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Groton,
Thirty Three Pounds. 33 00 00 Lanchester, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 (...),
Fifty One Pounds. 51 00 00 In the County of Plymouth.
Plymouth, One Hundred and Eleven Pounds. 111 00 00 (...), One Hundred Sixty
Two Pounds. 162 00 00 Marshfield, Eighty Seven Pounds. 87 00 00 Duxbury,
Seventy Eight Pounds. 78 00 00 Middleborough, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00
Bridgwater, Seventy Five Pounds. 75 00 00 In the County of Barnstable.
Barnstable, One Hundred Twenty Six Pounds. 126 00 00 Yarmouth, Seventy Eight
Pounds. 78 00 00 Eastham, Eighty Four Pounds. 84 00 00 Sandwich, Ninety Six
Pounds. 96 00 00 Falmouth, Twenty One Pounds. 21 00 00 Manamoit, Twenty One
Pounds. 21 00 00 Harwich, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Rochester, Eighteen
Pounds. 18 00 00 In the County of Bristol.
Bristol, Sixty Six Pounds. 66 00 00 Taunton, One Hundred Twenty Six Pounds.
126 00 00 Dartmouth, One Hundred Thirty Two Pounds. 132 00 00 Freetown, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 Re^^both, One Hundred and Two Pounds. 102 00 00 Attleborough,
Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Swansey, One Hundred and Five Pounds. 105 00 00 Little
Compton, Sixty Six Pounds. 66 00 00 Tiverton, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 In
the County of Hampshire.
Springfield, One Hundred and Fourteen Pounds. 114 00 00 Northampton, One
Hundred and Two Pounds. 102 00 00 Hadley, Seventy Eight Pounds. 78 00 00
Hatfield, Sixty Three Pounds. 63 00 00 South field, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00
00 Westfield, Thirty Nine Pounds. 39 00 00 Enfield, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 In the
County of York.
York, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Wells, 00 00 00 Kittery, Thirty Six Pounds. 36
00 00 In Dukes County.
Edgar-Town, Forty Pounds, Ten Shillings. 40 10 00 Tisbury, Twenty Seven
Pounds. 27 00 00 Chi^mark, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Nantuckett, Ninety
Pounds. 90 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That each Town and Precinct at their next Annual Meeting directed by Law for
the Choice of Town Officers, shall Choose three, Assessors to be chosen at the
Annual Meeting for choice of Town Officers
five or seven able and discreet persons, being Freeholders within the same
(each person by common esteem to be worth at least One hundred and fifty pounds
in real and personal Estate) to be the Assessors of such Town or Precinct, for
the (...) proportioned and set upon them in and by this Act; And all and every
person and persons so Chosen for Assessors, and accepting thereof, shall take
the Oath following. That is to say,

YOU A. B. being Chosen an Assessor for the Town of C. for this present Tax, Do
Swear, That in the discharge of said Trust, Oath
you will deal impartially and equally therein, in proportioning the Sum to be
Assessed upon the said Town, after the best of your discretion and judgment. So
help you God, etc.

Which Oath the Town Clerk of each Town or Precinct, Selectmen or Trustees to
be Assessors in case.
where there is no Justice of the Peace, is hereby empowered to administer. And
if the Inhabitants of any Town or Precinct shall not Convene at the Time
appointed by Law for Annual Election of Town Officers, or being so Convened,
shall neglect or refuse to choose Assessors as aforesaid, or that the Assessors
so chosen shall refuse to accept of the said Trust; the Select-men or Trustees
for the time being of such Town or Precinct, shall be, and are hereby declared
the Assessors of the same, and shall severally take the Oath beforementioned.
And every Assessor attending the Service aforesaid, shall be paid by the Town
Treasurer or out of the Town-Stock, Two Shillings Per Diem for each day he
necessarily attends said Service.

And be it further Enacted,

That if the Assessors of any Town or Precinct shall neglect or refuse to
perform the Service required of them by this Act, they shall pay the Sum set
and proportioned upon such Town or Precinct, Penalty for neglect of duty in
Assessors, Constables etc.
in and by this Act, to be Levied by distress and sale of the Estates real or
personal of such defective Assessors by Warrant from the Treasurer directed to
the Sheriff or Marshal of the County in which such Town or Precinct lies, and
for want of Estate, their Bodies to be taken and imprisoned, until they pay the
same. And all Sheriffs, Constables or Collectors failing of performing the Duty
and Service of them hereby respectively required, shall be liable and subject
unto the like pains, Penalties and Forfeitures to be prosecuted and recovered
of them in the same way and manner as in and by any Act or Acts of the General
Assembly, or any clause, branch or article thereof are set, declared and
described.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That where any person or persons being Inhabitants or Dwellers in any Town or
Precinct within this Province, at the time of making this present Tax, and
being Assessed thereunto, shall be about to remove themselves or Estate from
thence before the time herein prefixed for paying in the same into the
Treasury. Persons about to remove, to pay such full proportion to the Lists.
It shall and may be lawful, to and for the Constable or Collector for the same
Town or Precinct, to demand and levy the whole Sum and Sums as such person or
persons shall be assessed at in the List and Lists to him committed,
notwithstansting the time for collecting and paying in the second part of the
said Tax may not then be come. And in default of payment, to distrein for the
same, or to take any other way or course by Law directed for the obtaining
thereof.

And Whereas there is Owing unto the Treasury in part of the Town of
Northamptons proportion to a Tax granted in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety One, the Sum of Seven Pounds seventeen shillings and Nine pence
committed to John Clark then Constable of said Town to Collect, and afterward
by the Select-men abated out of the List to him given.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the said Sum of Seven Pounds Seventeen Shillings and Nine pence, be, and
hereby is added unto the said Towns proportion herein mentioned to this present
Tax, which will make up their whole Sum One Hundred and Nine Pounds Seventeen
Shillings and Nine pence to be Assessed upon the said Town, Northamptons
Addition of 7 16 9
as by this Act is directed. And the Treasurer is Ordered and Authorized to
issue out his Warrants to said Town accordingly. And the said John Clark is
hereby fully discharged of and from the said Sum of Seven Pounds Seventeen
Shillings and Nine pence, John Clark discharged.
and all Process or Executions heretofore granted by the Treasurer, and Served
upon him or his Estate for the same are hereby declared to be void and of none
Effect.

And for the better inabling the Treasurer to enforce the bringing in the
Moneys herein Granted or due from any Town or Precinct, or in the hands of any
Sheriff, Constable or Collector.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer be and hereby is empowered to take, use and Exercise as well
all such Rules, Directions, Powers, and Authorities, Treasurers power.
as have heretofore been given him in and by any Act or Acts, of the General
Assembly, or in any Clause, Branch or Article thereof, as in and by this
present Act, for the obtaining and drawing into the Treasury the Money herein
Granted, as also the Arrears of all former Rates, (...) fully and Effectually,
as if the same Directions, Powers and Authorities, had herein been again
particularly recited and Re-enacted, and notwithstanding any limitation or
restraint thereof in or to the particular Act or Acts wherein the same are
enumerated, set down and expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer be and hereby is empowered to issue forth and pay a certain
number of the Bills of Credit, Three Thousand Pounds in Bills to be issued
forth.
of the late Colony of the Massachusetts, Endorsed in manner as is directed by
the Act, Entitled, An Act, For a present Supply of the Treasury, to the Sum of
Three Thousand Pounds, and no more, toward the Uses for which this present Tax
is granted; which Bills shall pass out of the Treasury at the Value therein
Expressed, the Treasurer to have Credit in his Accounts after the Rate of Five
Pounds Per Cent. more for such Sum in said Bills as he shall so issue forth as
aforesaid, having been received into the Treasury at that Value; and the said
Bills shall be taken and accepted in all Public payments, with the advance of
twelve Pence on the Pound over and above the Sum therein Expressed: And this
present Tax to be a Fund for the Repayment of all such Sums in said Bills as
shall be in the hands of particular persons, in current Money of this Province.

FINIS.

