By His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A PROCLAMATION
FOrasmuch as sundry of His Majesty's Subjects upon the Fronteers have been
most Barbariously and Inhumanely destroyed by a most Cruel and Cowardly Enemy
from Canada, who lurk privily in the Woods, as Wolves and Beasts of Prey, for
an Opportunity of Killing and Scalping of Persons about their Innocent Labor
in the Fields, without any regard to Age or Sex. And forasmuch as it is most
difficult to apprehend or find them out, or to pursue them with any Body of
Men. I have therefore, by and with the Advice and Consent of his Majesty's
Council for this Province, for the Encouragement of Christians or Indians to
destroy such cruel and bloody Murderers, thought fit to Publish and Declare,
That any Person whatsoever within this Province, whether Christian or Indian,
that from henceforth shall (...) and destroy any such Enemy within three
English Miles of any of his Majesty's Garrisons upon the Fronteer, or within
three Miles of any settled Farm, in the County of Albany, Vlster and Duchess
County, shall have Six Pounds Reward paid out of His Majesty's Revenue of this
Province. And all Masters of Sloops, or other Vessels, that Trade between this
and Albany, are strictly required, not to pass to and fro upon the River,
unless there be two, at least, in Company; and that the Men that Navigate or
have passage on board such Sloops, or other Vessels, be well provided with Arms
and Ammunition for their own Defense, and to keep strict Watch, that they may
not be surprised by any such Murderers.

Given under my Hand at His Majesty's Fort in New York, the Eleaventh Day of
May, in the Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Th^rd,
by the Grace of God, KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini 1696. Ben. Fletcher.

God Save the KING
Printed by William Bradford, Printer to His Majesty, at the Bible in the City
of New York 1696.


