By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas God (...) his Princely (...) been pleased in a very signal manner to
extend his Royal Care and Protection to th^^ his Province and People, during
the late War, by sending hither Supplies of Men, and all necessary Stores of
War for their common Def^^ce and Security, which ought to beget in all his
Majesty's Subjects here a just Veneration for his Majesty's sacred Person, and
an Inviolable Zeal for his Service and Government. And to the intent his
Majesty's dutiful Subjects in this Province may be put in mind of the
unspeakable Obligation they owe, and the firm adherence they are bound to
preserve to his Majesty's Royal Person and Government, his said Excellency the
Governor, by and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province,
does conceive it for his Majesty's Service, and it is hereby Ordered, That the
Oaths established by Act of Parliament in England, instead of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, be taken by all the Male Inhabitants of this
Province, of the Age of sixteen Years, and upwards, (Indians and Slaves only
excepted) and that the Test and Association, which are also enjoined by Act of
Parliament in England, be signed by the Persons so taking the Oaths as
aforesaid. And his Majest^^^ Justices of the Peace in the several Counties
^^^pe^tively, are hereby empowered and required, with all convenient speed to
(...) and administer the said Oaths, and see the ^^ad Test and Association
signed or acknowledged by the said Inhabitants accordingly. And the said
Justices of the Peace are hereby ordered to make a Return to the Secretaries
Office at New York, from within their respective Districts of the Counties
wherein they dwell, of the Test and Association signed as aforesaid, and (...)
or before the Tenth Day of February next ensuing the date hereof; whereof the
said Justices of the Peace are not to ^ail.

Given at Fort William Henry the Twenty Third Day of November, School. and in the
Tenth Year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order of Council, B. Cosens. Cl. Concilij.
Bellomont.

God ^ave the KING.
Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty in
the City of New York, School


