ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun and Held at Boston the Twenty-sixth of May, 1697. and continued by
several Prorogations until Wednesday the Thirteenth of October following: being
the Third Session.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Nono.



BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. 1697.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Nono.
An Act, For Encouragement of the Prosecution of the Indian Enemy and Rebels.
FOr Encouragement of such as shall voluntarily go forth in greater or lesser
Parties by Commission from the Governor and Commander in Chief for the time
being of this His Majesty's Province, in the discovery and pursuit of the
Indian Enemy and Rebels.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same.

That there shall be paid out of the public Treasury of this Province, Fifty
Pounds Reward for an Indian Scalp.
unto any Party or Parties that shall voluntarily go forth at their own Charge
(...) Commission as aforesaid, in the discovery and pursuit of the said Indian
Enemy and Rebels, for every man or woman of the said Enemy that shall be by
them slain the Sum of Fifty Pounds, and for every Child of the said Enemy, Ten
Pounds for a Child under 10. years besides Plunder and Prisoners.
under the Age of Ten Years, that shall be by them slain, the Sum of Ten
Pounds, and that such Party or Parties shall also have and keep unto their own
use all Plunder and Prisoners by them taken of the Enemy; and that there shall
be likewise paid out of the public Treasury for every man or woman of the said
Enemy that shall be Slain in the defense of any House or Garrison attacked or
otherwise, the Sum of Five Pounds. All which aforesaid payments shall be made
by order of the Governor and Council, upon producing before them the Scalp of
any Indian Slain as aforesaid, and upon Oath made of the time, place and other
circumstances relating thereto, and that it is the Scalp of the Indian that was
then so Slain. And in case any person or persons shall be wounded in the
aforesaid Service, Cure and Pension.
he or they shall be cured at the Charge of the Public, and if maimed or
otherwise disabled, shall have such Stipend or Pension allowed unto him or
them, as the General Court or Assembly shall think meet. And the Reward herein
before granted shall be equally shared and distributed to and among all the
persons of any party or parties, that shall be in Company at the Killing any
Indian as aforesaid, only the Captain to have two Shares, and the Lieutenant
one Share and half thereof. And the Plunder and Prisoners that shall be taken,
to be distributed in like shares and proportion, unless where any party or
parties shall otherwise agree among themselves.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person or persons shall produce any Scalp not being an Indian
Scalp, Penalty for producing a false Scalp.
or that shall not be the Scalp of any Indian bona fide Slain in Service as
aforesaid, with intent to deceive and obtain the reward herein before granted,
and be thereof legally convicted; every person and persons so offending, if
convicted before the payment of the reward granted by this Act for an Indian
bona fide slain as aforesaid be ordered, shall forfeit and pay the full value
of such reward; one moiety thereof unto His Majesty, for and toward the
support of the Government, and the other moiety to him or them that shall
inform and sue for the same in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record. And if
such person or persons so offending shall have payment made of the said Reward
unto him or them, and be afterward convicted as aforesaid, then such person or
persons shall forfeit and pay double the value of the Reward paid for such
Scalp, three fourth parts thereof unto His Majesty for and toward the Support
of the Government; and the other fourth part to him or them that shall inform
and sue for the same as beforementioned. And every person and persons
offending and convicted as aforesaid, shall likewise suffer three months
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted, That the Commissions to be granted
unto any person or persons to go forth upon the said Encouragement, Commissions
to be limited to time.
shall be limited to a certain time, and that no person or persons so
Commissionated shall have or claim any exemption or privilege allowed by Law
to persons that have born Commissions.

And all Indians that shall be taken or found on the North side of the Road
leading from Marlborough to Springfield, Limits to Indians.
or within half a mile on the South side thereof, or within twenty miles on the
Westerly side of Connecticut River, shall be deemed Enemies, and treated as
such.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue in force until the last day of
June next, (if the War so long continue) and not afterward.

An Act, For Reviving the Act to prevent the deserting of the Frontiers.
WHEREAS the Act Entitled An Act, To prevent the Deserting of the Frontiers,
Made and Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly, at the Session
thereof by Adjournment the Twenty Seventh Day of February, which was in the
Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, Expired the Twenty
Ninth Day of June last past. And it being judged necessary for His Majesty's
Service, that the said Act be revived and further continued.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same.

That the said aforementioned Act Entitled, An Act, To prevent the Deserting
of the Frontiers. And all and singular the Paragraphs, Sentences, Clauses and
Articles therein contained, be, and hereby are revived and further continued to
abide and remain in full force during this War, and not afterward. Any thing
in this or the said Act contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

An Act, For Easing the Charge and the Relief of Prisoners of War.
FORASMUCH as a considerable Charge has been drawn upon His Majesty's Subjects
within this Province for the Relief and Support of French Prisoners of War that
have been brought into the same by His Majesty's Ships, and by Private Men of
War, and diverse others that have been obtruded upon this Province from the
Neighboring Governments; Besides the inconvenience and danger attending by
many of the said French going at large.

For Prevention whereof, and to the intent that such Prisoners may be sutably
Relieved and Provided for.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That no Commander of any of His Majesty's Ships, or of any Private Man of War,
No French Prisoners of War to be landed but by License from the Governor.
or Master of any other Ship or Vessel bringing any French Prisoners of War
into this Province (...) or suffer any of them to come on Shore, or be Landed
within the same, until such Commander or Master has first waited upon the
Governor and Commander in Chief for the time being, and obtained his
permission and License so to do. And if any Commander of any Private man of War
or Merchant Ship or Vessel shall presume to act contrary hereunto, he shall
Forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds for every such Prisoner that shall be
Landed or put on Shore out of any such Ship or Vessel without Permission and
License as aforesaid. Penalty for landing any without such License.
One Moiety thereof unto His Majesty, for and toward the Support of the
Government of this Province; and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
inform and sue for the same in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record; and all
such Prisoners shall be remanded on Board again. And every Commander of any
Private Ship of War, or Merchant Ship or Vessel before License be granted him
for the Landing of his Prisoners, shall give sufficient security for their
Subsisting and Maintenance during their abode in the Province, Commanders of
private Ships of War etc to give Security for the Charge of their Prisoners
and to answer the necessary Charges for their Transportation according as the
Governor and Commander in Chief with the advice and consent of the Council
shall direct and appoint.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Masters of Merchant Ships or other Vessels Sailing out of this
Province from time to time for such Ports and places in Europe, or else where
as the Governor and Commander in Chief may think proper to send any French
Prisoners unto, Merchant Skips to transport Prisoners of War as the Governor
shall order.
in order to their geting to some of the French Dominions, before the granting
of their Clearings in order to Sail, shall be obliged to receive on Board such
Ship or Vessel so many and such Prisoners as the Governor and Commander in
Chief by order in Writing under his Hand shall direct and cause to be sent on
Board for Transportation, provided the number so ordered do not exceed one
sixth part of the Company improved for the Sailing such Ship or Vessel, and
that they have their passage for their labor, if capable of Service at Sea;
but if otherwise any such Prisoners be impotent, are Gentlemen, Merchants, or
were Commanders of Ships at the time of their Caption, the passages of such to
be paid for after the usual and accustomed rate, out of the Public Treasury of
the Province for so many as were brought in by His Majesty's Ships or other
Vessels under His Majesty's Pay, and for others by them that brought them in.
And if any Commander or Master of any Merchant Ship or Vessel after such
Prisoners being sent on Board, shall permit or suffer any of them to come on
Shore or to be Landed in any part of this Province, Penalty for permitting any
to come on shore after being sent on board.
such Commander or Master shall forfeit and pay for such his contempt and
neglect, the Sum of Five Pounds for every person put or suffered to come on
Shore, to be recovered, employed and disposed of in manner as is herein before
directed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it any French Prisoners that have been or shall be brought into any of
the Neighboring Governments, shall travel or come by Land or Water into this
Province or any part thereof without License first obtained in Writing from the
Governor and Commander in Chief, and bearing the same with them, Prisoners
coming from the other Governments without License to be Seized and returned back
it shall be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever to seiz and take up
such Frenchmen and every of them, and him or them to carry to the next
Constable; who is hereby required to convey them before the next Justice of the
Peace, and such Justice by Warrant under his Hand and Seal shall cause such
Prisoners to be sent from Town to Town, and from Constable to Constable, until
they be returned into the Government or place from whence they came.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in Force during the present War with
France, and no longer.

An Act, For the Revival and further continuing of the Act for Establishing of
Precedents and forms of Writts and Processes.
WHEREAS the Act Entitled, An Act, For the Establishing of Precedents and
Forms of Writs and Processes, and all and singular the Forms, Articles,
Clauses, Matters and things therein contained, with the alterations and
amendments heretofore made, and such (...) are contained in an Act of this
present General Assembly, passed at their first Session Begun and Held the
Twenty sixth day of May last past, Entitled, An Act, For the further
continuing of the Act for Writs and Processes, are by the said Act last
mentioned, further revived and continued to abide and remain in full force and
virtue, until the Tenth Day of December next, and no longer.

To the intent therefore that the Precedents and Forms of Writs and Processes
established by the before recited Act, with the amendments and alterations of
the same, made as aforesaid, may be further continued in force until other
Provision be made.

It is hereby Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Go^^^^our, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same,

That the said Act Entitled, An Act, For Establishing of Precedents and Forms
of Writs and Processes, and all and singular the Forms, Articles, clauses,
matters and things therein contained, with the alterations and amendments
heretofore made either by the said after Act, Entitled, An Act, for the
further continuing of the Act for Writs and Processes, or by any other Act or
Acts of the General Assembly, be, and hereby are further revived and continued
to abide and remain in full force and virtue, until the end of the Session of
the General Court or Assembly, to be begun and held on the last Wednesday in
May next, which will be in the year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Eight and no longer.

AN ACT, For ascerteining the value of Coins Current within this Province.
WHEREAS for many years past the Money Coined in the late Massachusetts Colony,
has passed current at the rate or value it was stamped for, and good Sevil
Pillar or Mexico pieces of Eight of full seventeen penny weight, have also
passed current at six Shillings per piece, and half pieces of proportionable
weight pro rato, quarter pieces of the same Coin at sixteen pence per piece,
and Reals of the same Coin at Eight pecce per piece.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same.

That all and every the Coins beforementioned, shall still be and continue
current Money within this Province, and shall be accepted taken and received at
the respective values aforesaid, according as has heretofore been accustomed.

Provided always, That such of the said Coins as pass by tale, be not
diminished by Washing, Clipping, Rounding, Fileing or Scaling.

AN ACT, Against Murder.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled and by the Authority of the same,

That whosoever shall commit wilful Murder upon premediated Malice or Hatred,
and be thereof convicted, the person or persons so offending shall be put to
Death.

AN ACT, Against Ravishment or Rape.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That if any man shall Ravish any Woman (...) Carnal Copulation with her by
Force against her Will. Or if any man shall unlawfully and carnally know and
abuse any Woman Child under the age of Ten Years, every person and persons
offending either of the cases before mentioned, being thereof convicted, shall
(...) counted Felons, and shall be adjudged to suffer the pains of Death (...)
in cases of Felony.

AN ACT, For the punishment of Buggery.
FOr avoiding of the detestable and abominable Sin of Buggery with Mankind or
Beast, which is contrary to the very Light of nature.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.
It is Enacted,

That the same Offense be adjudged Felony, and such Order and Form of Process
therein to be used against the Offenders as in cases of Felony. And that every
man being duly convicted of lying with mankind as he lies with a woman. And
every man or woman that shall have carnal copulation with any Beast or brute
Creature, the Offender and Offenders in either of the cases before mentioned,
shall suffer the pains of Death, and the Beast shall be Slain and Burned.

An Act, Against Atheism and Blasphemy.
BE it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor Council, and
Representatives, Convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is Enacted by
the Authority of the same,

That if any person shall presume wilfully to Blaspheme the Holy Name of God;
Father, Son, or Holy Ghost; either by Denying, Cursing, or Reproaching the True
God; his Creation, or Government of the World: Or by Denying, Cursing, or
Reproaching the Holy Word of God; that is the Canonical Scriptures contained in
the Books of the Old, and New Testament; Namely, GENESIS, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Samuel, Kings, Kings,
Chronicles, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, The Song of Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel,
Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah,
Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi: MATTHEW, Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Romans,
Corinthians, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
Thessalonians, Thessalonians, Timothy, Timothy, Titus, Philemon, Hebrews,
James, Peter, Peter, John, John, John, Jude, Revelation: Every one so offending
shall be punished by Imprisonment, not exceeding six months, and until they
find Sureties for the good Behavior, by setting in the Pillory, by Whipping,
boaring through the Tongue with a red hot Iron, or setting upon the Gallows with
a Rope about their neck; at the Discretion of the Court of Assize, and General
Goal Delivery, before which the Trial shall be; according to the Circumstances,
which may aggravate or alleviate the Offense. Provided that not more than two
of the forementioned Punishments shall be inflicted for one and the same Fact.

An Act, For Registring of Deeds and Conveyances.
FOR the Prevention of Clandestine and uncertain Sales of Houses and Lands. And
to the intent it may be the better known what right, title or interest persons
have in or to such Estates as they shall offer to Sale.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That henceforth all Deeds or Conveyances of any Houses or Lands within this
Province, Deeds executed by signing sealing acknowledgment and Record, to be
valid.
Signed and Sealed by the Party or Parties granting the same, having good and
lawful right or authority thereto, and acknowledged by such Granter or Granters
before a Justice of the Peace, and Recorded at length in the Registry of the
County where such Houses or Lands do lie, shall be valid to pass the same
without any other Act or Ceremony in the Law whatsoever.

And that from and after three months next after Publication of this Act, no
Bargain, Sale, No Bargain Sale etc. made 3 months next after this Act, to be
good against any but the granter, without being acknowledged and Recorded.
Proof of a Deed by witnesses, in case, to be equivalent to Acknowledgment.
Mortgage or other Conveyance of Houses or Lands made and executed within this
Province, shall be good and effectual in Law to hold such Houses or Lands
against any other person or persons, but the Granter or Granters, and their
Heirs only, unless the Deed or Deeds thereof be acknowledged and Recorded in
manner as is before expressed. Provided nevertheless that when and so often as
it shall happen any Granter to live in parts beyond Sea, or to be removed out
of this Province, or to be dead before any Deed or Conveyance by him or her
made, be acknowledged as aforesaid, in every such case, the proof of such Deed
or Conveyance made by the Oaths of two of the Witnesses thereto Subscribed,
before any Court of Record within this Province, shall be equivalent to the
Parties own acknowledgment thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Granter or Vender of any Houses or Lands shall refuse to
acknowledge as is aforesaid, any Grant, Bargain, Sale or Mortgage by him or her
Signed and Sealed, Penalty for persons refusing to acknowledge their Deeds.
being thereunto required by the Granter or Vender, his, her or their Heirs or
Assigns. It shall be lawful for any Justice of the Peace within the County
where such Granter or Vender lives, upon complaint made to send for the Party
so refusing, and if he or she persist in such Refusal, to commit him or her to
Prison without Bayl or Mainprize, until such Party shall acknowledge the same.
It being first made appear and proved to be the Act and Deed of the same Party
by the Oath of one or more of the Witnesses thereto Subscribed; and such
Grantee or Vendee filing a Copy of his Deed so proved in the Registers Office,
shall thereby secure his Title in the mean time, and the same shall be
accounted sufficient caution to every other person and persons against
purchasing the Estate in such Deed mentioned to be granted.

Provided, That nothing in this Act shall be construed, deemed or extended to
bar any Widow of any Vender or Mortgager of Lands or Tenements from her Dower
or Right in or to such Lands or Tenements; Saving for Dower.
who did not legally join with her Husband in such Sale or Mortgage, or
otherwise lawfully bar or exclude her self from such her Dower or Right.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That any Mortgagee of any Lands or Tenements, his or her Heirs, Executors or
Administrators having received full satisfaction and payment of all such Sum
and Sums of money as are really due to him by such Mortgage, How Mortgages
shall be discharged.
shall at the request of the Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators
acknowledge and cause such satisfaction and payment to be Entered in the Margent
of the Record of such Mortgage in the Registers Office, and shall sign the
same, which shall for ever thereafter discharge, defeat and release such
Mortgage, and perpetually bar all actions to be brought thereupon in any Court
of Record. And if such Mortgagee his or her Heirs, Executors or Administrators
shall not within ten days next after request in that behalf made, and tender of
his, her or their reasonable charges, repair to the Registers Office, and there
make and sign such acknowledgment as aforesaid, or otherwise sign and seal a
discharge of the said Mortgage, and release and quit claim to the Estate
therein mentioned to be granted, and acknowledge the same before a Justice of
Peace, he, she or they so refusing, shall be liable to make good all damages
for want of such discharge or release to be recovered by Action or Suit in any
Court of Record, and in case Judgment pass against the Party so Sued, he, she
or they so cast, shall pay unto the adverse Party treble costs arising upon
such Suit.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Clerk of the Inferior Court of Pleas in each respective County shall
also be the Register of Deeds and Conveyances, and shall fairly enter and
record at length all Deeds, Clerk of the Inferior Court to be Register of
Deeds.
Conveyances and Mortgages of any Lands, Tenements, Rents or other
Hereditaments, lying and being within the same County, made, executed,
acknowledged or proved in manner as is aforesaid, which shall be brought to him
to Record, and shall on Receipt thereof into the Office no^^ thereupon the day,
month and year when he received the same, and the Record shall bear the same
date. And every such Register before he (...) the said Office shall be sworn
before one or more of the Justices of such Court, well, truly and faithfully to
execute the same. And it shall and may be lawful to and for every Register
aforesaid to ask and receive for entering and recording any Deed, to be Sworn.
Conveyance or Mortgage, Twelve-pence for the first page, and Eight pence a
page for so many pages more as it shall contain and no more, accounting after
the rate of twenty eight lines, of eight words in a line to each page,
Registers Fees.
and proportionably for so much more as shall be under a page, and Six pence
for his attestation on the Original of the Time-book and Folio where it is
Recorded, and for discharge of a Mortgage as aforesaid, One Shilling and no
more.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, Deeds
Executed according to former Laws and usage Valid.
That all Deeds of Bargain, Sale or Mortgage heretofore made and executed,
according to former Laws and Usage shall be valid and effectual.

[Publisht. 30 th. October. 1697.]
An Act, Of Limitation for Quieting of Possessions.
WHEREAS a good and beneficial Act was made by the late Governor and Company
of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in the Year of (...) God, One Thousand
Six Hundred Fifty (...) following: That is to say,

That any person or persons that has either himself or by his Grantees or
Assigns before the Law made for direction about Inheritances, bearing date
October the Nineteenth, One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty and Two, possessed and
occupied as his or their own proper right in Fee simple, any Houses or Lands
within this Jurisdiction, and shall so continue, whether in their own persons,
their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or persons from, by or under
them, without disturbance let suit or denial legally made by having (...)
Claim of any person thereto (...) with the Recorder of the County where such
Houses or Lands do lie, with the names of the persons so claiming, and the
quantity, bounds of the Lands or Houses claimed, and such claim prosecuted to
effect within the term of Five Years next after the Twentieth of May, One
Thousand Six Hundred and Fifty Seven. Every such Proprietor, their Heirs and
Assigns shall for ever after enjoy the same without any lawful le^t, fuit,
disturbance or denial by any after claim of any person or persons whatsoever,
any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding Which before recited (...)
been found to be of great benefit and Service to His Majesty Subjects within
the said Colony, and prevented many contests and Law ^its which otherwise would
have arisen by reason of a neglect in many persons to observe a legal course
and method for the passing and confirmation of Sales and Alienations.

And Whereas sundry persons having a just and equitable right and Title unto
Estates in Housing or Lands, either acquired by purchase or otherwise accrueing
unto or settled upon them since the passing of the before recited Act, may want
formal Conveyances and assurances in the Law for the same, or the Deeds,
Instruments or other Writings concerning such Estates may be defective or
imperfectly made and executed, whereby such persons may be in danger of being
deprived and evicted out of their honest and just Rights and Possessions.

For prevention whereof, and for the further quieting of Possessions and
Settling of Titles.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every person and persons who were possessed in his and their own proper
right (...) Houses or Lands within this Province upon the first day of October,
Quiet Possession from the first of October 1692 until the first of October 1704
(...)
in the year of our Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred* Ninety Two, and all
others deriving from, by or under him or (...), continuing the possession of
such Houses or Lands until the first day of October, which will be in the Year
of our Lord (...)* One Thousand Seven Hundred and Four, without (...) or
disturbance by claim made thereto, and action brought and prosecuted for the
same with Effect, shall by virtue of such possession have, hold and enjoy such
Houses or Lands unto him or them, his and their Heirs and Assigns for ever in
Fee. And all Actions and Process to be thereafter brought for the same, are
hereby excluded and for ever debarred.

Saving for the Kings Rights
Provided always, That there shall be a Saving of His Majesty's Rights, and all
public Lands belonging to the Province, not orderly disposed of.

Provided also, That this Act shall not be understood to ba^ the Title of any
Infant, F^me Covert* or person New Compos (...), Imprisoned or in Captivity,
Other Savings.
who shall be allowed the (...) of seven years next after such Imperfection
removed to pursue their Claim or Challenge to any Houses or Lands wherein they
have interest or Title: And the like time of seven years shall be allowed to
persons having an Estate in reversion in any Houses or Lands, from the time
such reversion falls, to recover their Right, and persons beyond Sea shall be
allowed the term of ten years from the publication of this Act to pursue their
claim or challenge to any Houses or Lands as aforesaid.

And forasmuch as diverse Towns and Settlements in the Eastern Parts of this
Province have been deserted and broken up by reason of the Rebellion and War
made by the Indians, Five years time allowed from and after the Ending of the
War with the Indians, to lay claim to Lands lying to the Eastward of Piscataqua
River, and in other, the Frontiers.
and sundry persons in other the Frontier Towns, particularly Enumerated in an
Act of the General Assembly, have by means thereof been driven from their
Habitations and Improvements.

Be it therefore further Provided and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Limitation of time for the continuance of Possession by this Act
prefixed, shall not extend or be understood to extend unto any Houses or Lands
lying to the Eastward of Piscataque River, or in other the Frontiers, but the
same time shall be, and hereby is enlarged and lengthened out for the space of
five years next after the ending of the War with the Indians, during which
space all persons may pursue their right and claim to any Houses and Lands
lying in those parts and places and every of them. And that no person or
persons pretending right or title in or to any Lands lying within this Province
purchased of any Indian or Indians, Lands purchased of Indians without orderly
allowance etc. not confirmed by this Act
without orderly allowance and confirmation thereof had, according to former
Laws and Usage of the several late Colonies of Massachusetts and New Plymouth,
and Province of Main respectively shall have or receive any benefit by this act
with reference to such Lands.

[ Published 30 th. October, 1697.]
An Act, For granting unto His Majesty a Tax of Six Thousand and Forty Pounds
Ten Shillings, upon Polls and ^states.
UPON Consideration of the Great (...) and Expense which has necessarily
accrued and arisen in the year last past, and this present year, in providing
for the safety and defense of His Majesty's Subjects and Interests in this
Province; For Repairing and Setting in order the Castle and Fortifications
about the same, and further Strengthing and Enforcement thereof; The purchasing
of Provisions, Ammunition, and other Stores of War; The Fitting, Victualling
and Manning of the Province Gally, and Fire Ship; The Hire of Transports and
other Vessel that have been here taken up and employed in His Majesty's
Service; The Wages become due unto the Commanders, Officers, Soldiers and
Seamen, that have been employed in the said Service; The Subsisting of Seamen
and Soldiers, posted in Garrisons, and sent forth in pursuit of the Enemy; And
for the Support of the Government, and answering of the Incident and Contingent
Charges in and about the same. We His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the
Representatives of this His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, Convened in General Assembly: For and toward the Defreying of the
before (...) several Charges and Expenses, and of other the just Debts due from
this Province; For the Payment of such Salaries, Gratuities and Allowances, as
have been or shall be made, by the General Assembly; And all such Allowances
and Payments as are directed by any Act of this Province, to be paid out of the
public Treasury; And for the further Support of the Government, defense of the
Province, and Prosecution of the War against His Majesty's Enemies; and for no
other ends or uses whatever: Do Unanimously grant unto His most Excellent (...)
of Six Thousand and Forty Pounds Ten Shillings in Mon^^, (...) upon Polls and
Estates, both Real and Personal (...) P^^^vince, as is in and by this present
Act for the manner (...) thereof is directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer do forthwith send out his Warrants (...) unto the
Select-men, Trustees or Assessors of each respective (...) or Precinct within
this Province, Requiring them to Assess the (...) herein set and proportioned
unto such Town or Precinct upon all Rateable Male Polls above the age of
Sixteen Years, (except Elders of Churches, Settled Ministers, the President,
Fellows and Students of Harvard College, Grammar School Masters, and such
(...) through Age, infirmity or extreme poverty in the Judgment of the
Assessors, Select men, or Trustees are rendered incapable to contribute toward
public Charges) and upon all Estates both real and personal lying within the
limits and bounds of such Town or Precinct and next unto the same (not paying
elsewhere) in whose hands, possession or occupation soever the same shall be
found in just and equal proportion as near as may be according to their best
judgment and discretion, making no difference in the Sum to be by them set upon
Polls, and having due regard to persons faculties and personal abilities, and
to estimate all Indian, Molatto and Negro Slaves as other personal Estate: And
to make a fair List of the Assessment of the said Sum upon the Polls and Estate
within such Town or Precinct in three distinct Columns, and therein to s^t
forth what each particular person is to (...) same against his or (...) name
respectively, the first Column to contain the number of Polls for which such
person is assessed, and the Sum set upon each of them, the second Column to
contain the Housing Land or other real Estate, for which such person is
assessed, and the Sum set thereupon, and the third Column to contain the Sum by
them set upon such person for his or her personal Estate and Faculty. And also
requiring the said Select-men, Trustees or Assessors, to commit the said List,
so perfected, and signed by them or the major part of them, unto the Collector,
Constable or Constables of such Town or Precinct, and also to return a
Certificate of the name or names of such Collector, Constable or Constables,
together with the Sum total of the List to each of them respectively committed
unto the Treasurer some time before the last day of November next ensuing. And
the Treasurer upon Receipt of such Certificate, is hereby empowered and ordered
to issue forth his Warrant to the said Collector, Constable or Constables,
requiring him or them respectively to collect the total of the said List, and
to pay the same into the Treasury, and issue the Accounts thereof with himself
or his Successors in said Office, at or before the last day of January next
following.

And the Treasurer is hereby also directed to send his aforesaid Warrants
enclosed to the Sheriff or Marshal of each respective County, who is hereby
required immediately to disperse and transmit the same unto the Select-men,
Trustees, Assessors, Constables or Collectors of the several Towns and
Precincts according to the directions thereof* and for his said Service, Charge
and Expenses therein, shall have a reasonable allowance ordered him by the
Court of Quarter Sessions in such County, out of the County Treasury upon his
laying the Account thereof before them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That each Town and Precinct within this Province shall be assessed, and pay as
its proportion to this present Tax, the Sums hereafter following. That is to
say, In the County of Suffolk.
l. s. d. Boston* One Thousand One Hundred and Seventy Pounds. 1170 00 00
Roxbury, N^^ty Six Pounds. 96 00 00 Dorchester, One Hundred Thirty Two Pounds.
132 00 00 Milton, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Brantrey* Ninety Six Pounds. 96 00 00
Weymouth, Sixty One Pound Ten Shillings. 61 10 00 Hingham, One Hundred and Two
Pounds. 102 00 00 Dedham, Seventy Five Pounds. 75 00 00 Wrentham, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 Medfield, Fifty Four Pounds. 54 00 00 Mendon, Nine Pounds. 9
00 00 Hull, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 In the County of Essex.
Salem, Two Hundred Fifty Two Pounds. 252 00 00 Ipswioh, Two Hundred Seventy
Four Pound Ten Shillings. 274 10 00 Newbury, One Hundred Eighty Three Pounds.
183 00 00 Salisbury, Forty Three Pounds Ten Shillings. 43 10 00 Amsbury, Twelve
Pounds, 12 00 00 Haverhill, Forty Five Pounds. 45 00 00 Andover, Seventy Two
Pounds. 72 00 00 Bradford, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 Top field, Forty Eight
Pounds. 48 00 00 Marblehead, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 00 Lynn, One Hundred and Two
Pounds. 102 00 00 Wenham, Forty Two Pounds. 42 00 00 Beverly, Seventy Five
Pounds. 75 00 00 Gloucester, Fifty One Pounds. 51 00 00 Manchester, Twelve
Pounds. 12 00 00 Rowley, Sixty Six Pounds. 66 00 00 Boxford, Forty Pounds Ten
Shillings. 40 10 00 In the County of Middlesex.
Charlstown, One Hundred Seventy Four Pounds. 174 00 00 Cambridge, One Hundred
Twenty Three Pounds. 123 00 00 Wat^^town, One Hundred Fifty Four Pound Ten
Shillings. 154 10 00 New town, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Sudbury, Seventy Eight
Pounds. 78 00 00 Marlborough, Forty Nine Pounds Ten Shillings. 49 10 00
Medford, Twenty Two Pounds Ten Shillings. 22 10 00 Malden, Fifty Seven Pounds.
57 00 00 Wo^burn, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 00 Reading, Sixty Six Pounds. 66 00 00
Billerica, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Chelmsford, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00
00 Concord, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 00 Stow, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Groton, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 Lancaster, Ten Pounds Ten Shillings. 10 10 00 Sherbourn,
Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Framingham, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 In the County
of Hampshire.
Springfield, Seventy Two Pounds. 72 00 00 Northampton, Sixty Nine Pounds. 69
00 00 Hadley, Forty Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Hatfield, Forty Two Pounds. 42 00 00
^out^field, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 We^^field* Twenty Five Pounds Ten
Shillings. 25 10 00 Enfield* Four Pounds Ten Shillings. 4 10 00 In the County
of Plymouth.
Plymouth, Seventy Three Pounds Ten Shillings. 73 10 00 Situate, One Hundred
and Eight Pounds. 108 00 00 Marshfield, Fifty Seven Pounds. 57 00 00 Duxbury,
Forty Two Pounds. 42 00 00 Bridgwater, Fifty Four Pounds. 54 00 00
Middleborough, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 In the County of Barnstable.
Barnstable, Eighty One Pounds. 81 00 00 Ya^mouth, Fifty Four Pounds. 54 00 00
Eastham, Sixty Nine Pounds. 69 00 00 Sandwich, Sixty Four Pounds Ten Shillings.
64 10 00 Falmouth, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 Manamoit, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00
00 Rochester, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 Harwich, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00
In the County of Bristol.
Bristol, Fifty Two Pounds Ten Shillings. 52 10 00 Taunton, Eighty One Pounds.
81 00 00 Dartmouth, Eighty One Pounds. 81 00 00 Freetown, Twelve Pounds. 12 00
00 Rehoboth, Sixty Nine Pounds. 69 00 00 Swansey, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Little
Compton, Fifty Four Pounds. 54 00 00 Tiverton, Twenty One Pounds. 21 00 00
Attleborough, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 In the County of York.
York, Four Pounds Ten Shillings. 04 10 00 Wells, Four Pounds Ten Shillings. 04
10 00 Kittery, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 In Dukes County.
Edgar Town, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Tisbury, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00
Chilmark, alias the manner of Tisbury, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Nantuckett,
Sixty Nine Pounds. 69 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select men or Trustees of each of the said Towns and Precincts before
mentioned, shall forthwith grant their Warrants for the convening the
Inhabitants of such Town or Precinct, to choose three, five or seven able and
discreet persons being Freeholders within the same (each person by common
esteem to be worth at least One Hundred and Fifty Pounds in real and personal
Estate) to be the Assessors of such Town or Precinct for the Sum proportioned
and set upon them by this Act. And all and every person and persons so chosen
for Assessors, and accepting thereof, shall take the Oath following. That is to
say, YOU A. B. being Chosen an Assessor for the Town of C. for this present
Tax: Do Swear, That you will impartially and equally discharge the said Trust
in proportioning the Sum to be assessed upon the said Town after the best of
your discretion and judgment. So help you God, etc.

Which Oath the Clerk of each Town or Precinct where there is no Justice of the
Peace, is hereby empowered to administer. And if the Select-men or Trustees of
any Town or Precinct shall not convene the Inhabitants thereof for the choosing
Assessors as aforesaid, within the space of seven days next after receipt of
the Treasurers Warrant, or the Inhabitants being so convened, shall refuse to
choose* any, or that if the Assessors chosen by any Town or Precinct, shall
refuse to accept of the said Trust, the Select men or Trustees for the time
being of such Town or Precinct, shall be, and are hereby declared the Assessors
of the same, and shall severally take the Oath before mentioned. And every
Assessor attending the Service aforesaid, shall be paid by the Town Treasurer,
or out of the Townstock, Two Shillings Per Diem for each day he necessarily
attends said Service.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That as well the Sum herein before set and proportioned to the Farms or
Precinct called Framingham, as the Sum of Eight Pounds set and proportioned to
said Precinct, by the Act, For granting unto His Majesty a Tax upon Polls and
Estates: Passed by this Court at their Session in May last (which is yet
unassessed and not collected) shall be assessessed upon the Polls and Estates
in said Precinct, by the Assessors of the adjacent Town of Marleborough, and
that the Inhabitants of said Farms or Precinct, shall have liberty, and are
hereby empowered to choose one Assessor from amongst themselves to join with the
Assessors of said Town of Marlborough in assessing and proportioning the
aforesaid Sums set upon said Precinct, and also to appoint a Collector for the
gathering in and collecting of the same. And the Treasurer is hereby ordered
and directed in his Warrant to be sent to the Assessors of Marlborough
aforesaid, to require them to assess as well the Sum herein set upon said Town,
as the abovementioned Sums set upon Framingham aforesaid, and to make return
as above directed, with the name likewise of the Collector to be appointed by
said Precinct, whom the Treasurer shall empower, to collect and pay in the said
Sums in manner and time as is before expressed for this present Tax. And in
case the Inhabitants of said Precinct, shall not appoint a Collector as
aforesaid, for collecting the Sums set upon said Precinct, the same shall be
committed unto the Constable or Collector of the said Town of Marlborough, who
shall be empowered by the Treasurer for the collecting thereof. Any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Assessors in each Town or Precinct, shall Assess the Estates lying
within the same, by one general Rule as near as may be. And if any person be
agrieved at the Sum set upon him as his proportion toward this Tax, such
person making application unto the Assessors, and demonstating that he is rated
more than his proportion to the Sum set upon their Town, said Assessors shall
ease him; and if they refuse so to do, then the person agrieved, complaining
unto the next General Sessions of the Peace within that County, and making
appear that he is assessed more than his proportion as aforesaid, shall be
heard and relieved by the Justices in said Sessions, and such person shall be
reimbursed out of the Town Treasury, so much as the said Justices or Assessors
respectively shall see cause to abate him. And the Fe^mer or Occupier of any
Houses, Lands or other Real Estate, shall be allowed and paid by the Landlord
or Owner thereof, one half part of all such Sum and Sums of money as he shall
pay for the said Houses, Lands,, or other Real Estate, toward this present
Tax, upon Certificate from the Assessors, how much the same are assessed or
rated at thereto, unless where there is any agreement to the contrary between
any Landlord and Tenant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Select men, Trustees, Assessors, Sheriffs, Constables or Collectors
failing of performing the Duty and Service of them respectively required by
virtue of this Act, shall be liable and subject unto the pains, penalties and
forfeitures, as are in or by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or any
clause, branch or article thereof in like cases set and declared to be
prosecuted and recovered of them in the same way, and manner as in and by such
Act or Acts is directed and prescribed. And that the Treasurer be, and hereby
is also empowered, to take, use, and exercise all such rules, directions, powers
and authorities, for enforcing the collecting and paying in this present Tax as
is unto him given and granted by the Act of this present General Assembly, made
and passed at the first Session thereof begun and held the Twenty sixth day of
May last, Entitled, An Act, For granting unto His Majesty a Tax upon Polls and
Estates, to enforce the Collecting and paying in of the Tax therein granted.

FINIS.

