Copy of the Orders for Repealing of several Acts.
AT THE Court at Whitehall. The (...) Day of August, 1695. Present, Their
^^^^^^encies the Lords Justices (...) COUNCIL.
Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury Lord Keeper Lord Privy Seal Duke of Shrewsbury
Earl of Oxford Earl of Montague Earl of Monmouth Earl of Romney Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Lord Chief Justice Holt Sir Henry Goodrick Mr.
Smith.
WHEREAS by Powers granted under the Great Seal of England, the Governor,
Council and Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
are Authorized and Empowered to Constitute and Ordain Laws, which are to
^^^^inue and be in force unless His Majesty's pleasure shall be signified (...)
^he contrary. And whereas in pursuance of the said Powers, se^^^^ Laws have
been made by the Governor, Council and Assem^^^ of the said Province. That is
to say,

An Act, For continuing the Local Laws to stand in Force till November the 10
th. 1692.

An Act, For Erecting of a Naval Office

An Act, For Holding of Courts of Justice.

An Act, For Incorporating of Harvard College at Cambridge in (...)-England.

An Act, For Setting forth general Privileges.

An Act, For the quieting of Possessions, and settling Titles.

An Act, For the equal distribution of Insolvent Estates.

An Act, For the punishing of Capital Offenders.

An Act, For making of Lands and Tenements liable to the payment of (...).

An Act, Against the Counterfeiting, Clipping, rounding, Fileing and ^^^ring of
Coins.

An Act, For the (...) of Judicatories, and Courts of Justice within this
Province.

An Act, For the Establishing of Precedents and Forms of Writs and Processes.

An Act, Against Conjuration, Witchcraft, and dealing with Evil and Wicked
Spirits.

An Act, For the better securing the Liberty of the Subject, and for Prev^^^^^^
of Illegal Imprisonment.

An Act, For the Reviving of an Act, for continuing of the Local Laws.

And one other Act, For sending of Soldiers to the Relief of the Neighboring
Provinces and Colonies.

Which said Laws having upon perusal of the Right Honorable the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, appointed a Committee of Trade and
Plantations been presented to Their Excellencys the Lords Justices of England.
Their Excellencies by the Advice of His Majesty's Privy Council, have thought
fit to signify Their Disapprobation and Disallowance of the same. And
accordingly the said Laws are hereby repealed and declared void and of none
Effect,

William Bridg^man.

At the Court at Kinsington, the 26. day of December 1695.
Present, The KINGS Most Excellent Majesty in COUNCIL.
Lord Keeper Lord Privy Seal Duke of Norfolk Duke of Sconberge Duke of
Shrewsbury Marquess of Winchester. Lord Great Chamberlain. Earl of Bridgewater
Earl of Stamford Earl of Scarbarough Earl of Romney Lord Godolphin Mr. Vice
Chamberlain Mr Secretary Trumbull Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequor Lord Chief
Justice Holt Mr. Russell Mr. Boscawen Mr. Smith.
WHEREAS by Powers granted under the Great Seal of England, the Governor,
Council and Assembly of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, are Authorized
and Empowered to Constitute and Ordain Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, which are
to continue and be in force until His Majesty's Pleasure shall be signified to
the contrary. And whereas in pursuance of the said Powers, two Laws have been
made by the Governor, Council and Assembly of the said Province, Entitled,

An Act, For Coasting Vessels (...) And

An Act, To Restrain the Exports, (...) Hides and Skins out of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay: And for the better preservation and increase of Deer in
the said Province.

His Majesty is pleased to signify his Disapprobation and Disallowance of the
said Laws, and according to His Majesty's Pleasure the said Laws are hereby
Repealed and declared void and of none Effect.

William Bridgeman.

Memorandum,
That the several Acts Entitled as follows, being disallowed of and repealed
by Their Excellencies the Lords Justices of England in Council, have been
Re-Enacted by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His Majesties-Province
of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, with amendments, since the Receipt of
the signification of the said Repeal, which was on the 13 th of July 1696.

That is to say,

An Act, Impowring Justices of the Peace to decide differences not exceeding
Forty Shillings.

An Act, For Establishing of Courts.

An Act, For the Revival and further continuing of the Act for Establishing of
Precedents and Forms of Writts and Processes.

An Act, For the equal distribution of Insolvent Estates.

An Act, For the making of Lands and Tenements liable to the payment of Debts.

An Act, For Incorporating Harvard College at Cambridge in New England.

An Act, For ascertaining the value of (...) current within this Province.

An Act, Against High Treason.

An Act, To prevent the Murdering of Bastard Children.

An Act, Against Murder.

An Act, Against Ravishment or Rape.

An Act, For the punishment of Buggery.

BOSTON in New England.

Printed by Order of the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor and Council; by
Bartholomew Green, and John Allen. 1697.


