ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun and Held at Boston the Twenty-fifth Day of May, School. and continued by
Prorogation until Tuesday the Fifteenth of November following: being the Second
Session.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Decimo.



BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. School.

Anno Regni GUILIELMI Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Decimo.
An Act, For Discontinuing the Duties of Impost, Granted at the Session of the
General Assembly begun and held the Twenty Fifth day of May, One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety Eight, and for granting of other Duties of Impost instead
thereof.
For the better Encouragement of Trade and Commerce within this Province.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That all and singular the Rates and Duties of Impost upon all Wines, Liquors,
Goods, Wares and Merchandise that shall be Imported into this Province, granted
unto His Majesty in and by an Act made and passed by the Great and General
Court or Assembly, at their Session begun and held the Twenty Fifth Day of May
in this present Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight,
Entitled, An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty several Duties of Impost,
Excise and Tunnage of Shipping. Be, and hereby are discontinued; And that all
and singular the clauses, paragraphs and articles in the said Act contained any
^ayes relating to the said Duties of Impost. Be and hereby are repealed and
made void and of none effect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That in lieu and stead of the said Duties of Impost granted by the said
recited Act, and discontinued as aforesaid, (over and above the provision made
by the Tax granted by this Court to make good the abatement upon the said
Impost) There shall be, and hereby is given and granted unto His Most Excellent
Majesty to and for the ends, uses, and intents following: That is to say, For
and toward the subsisting and paying of Wages to Seamen and Soldiers that are
or shall be Employed in His Majesty's Service, for the defense of His Majesty's
Subjects and Interests within this Province, and the Suppressing of the Indian
Rebels; For the upholding and supplying of His Majesty's Castle upon
Castle-Island near Boston, and His Majesty's Fort Mary, at Saco; For
maintaining of the Province-Galley; For the payment of such Salaries,
Gratuities and Allowances as have been or shall be made by the General
Assembly, and for defraying of the incident and contingent Charges in and about
the Support of the Government within this His Majesty's Province, and for no
other uses or intents whatsoever; the several Duties and Impositions hereafter
mentioned upon all Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises that shall be
Imported into this Province from and after the Publication of this Act, for and
during the continuance thereof,

That is to say,

For every Pipe of common Wine of the Western Islands, the Sum of Ten Shillings.

For every Pipe of Canary, Malago or Sherry Wine, the Sum of Twenty Shillings.

For every Pipe of Madera or Passado Wine, the Sum of Fifteen Shillings.

For every Pipe of Port Wine, or Wine of any of the sorts not before mentioned,
the Sum of Ten Shillings.

And so proportionably for greater or lesser quantities, and for every Gallon
of Rhum or other Spirits, the Sum of Three half pence.

For every Hundred Pound Sterling in English Merchandises, at the prime Cost in
England, the Sum of Ten Shillings.

For every Hogshead of Sugar, Two Shillings.

For every Hogshead of Molosses, One Shilling.

For every Hogshead of Tobacco, Two Shillings Sixpence.

For every Tun of Logwood, Three Shillings.

And for all other Commodities, Goods, Wares and Merchandises (Salt, Cotton,
Wool, Provisions, and every other thing of the growth and product of
New England excepted) One penny for every Twenty Shillings value here.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all the aforesaid Imposts, Rates and Duties shall be paid in current
money of this Province by the Importer of any Wines, Impost to be paid before
Landing.
Liquors, Goods or Merchandises, unto the Commissioner or Receiver, to be
appointed as is herein after directed for entering and receiving of the same at
or before the Landing of any Wines, Liquors, Goods or Merchandises, and all
Entries where the Impost or Duty to be paid does not exceed Four Shillings,
shall be made without Charge to the Importer, Fee for Entry
and not more than Sixpence to be paid for any other single Entry to what
value soever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Masters of Ships or other Vessels coming into any Harbor or Port
within this Province from beyond Sea, or from any other Province or Colony,
before Bulk be broken, Master to make Report of the contents of his Loading.
and within Twenty four hours after his Arrival in such Harbor or Port, shall
make a Report to the Commissioner or Receiver of the Impost to be appointed as
hereafter mentioned, of the Contents of the Loading of such Ship or Vessel,
without any charge or Fee to be demanded or paid for the same: Which Report
such Master shall give in to the said Commissioner or Receiver under his hand,
and shall therein set down and express the quantities and species of the Wines,
Liquors, Goods and Merchandises Laden on such Ship or Vessel, with the marks
and numbers thereof, and to whom the same is consigned, and shall also make
Oath, That the said Report or Manifest of the Contents of his Loading so to be
by him given in under his hand as aforesaid, Upon Oath
contains a just and true account to the best of his knowledge, of the whole
Lading taken on board and Imported in said Vessel from the Port or Ports such
Vessel came from, and that he has not broken Bulk, nor delivered any of the
Wine, Rhum or other distilled Liquors Laden on said Ship or Vessel directly or
indirectly: And that if he shall know of any more Wines, Liquors, Goods or
Merchandises to be Imported therein, before the Landing thereof, he will cause
it to be added to his Manifest. Which Oath the Commissioner or Receiver is
hereby Empowered to administer, Penalty for neglect.
after which such Master may unload and not before, on pain of One Hundred
Pounds to be forfeited and paid by each Master that neglects his Duty in this
behalf.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

(...), Factors or other persons, Importers being Owners (...), or having any
of the Wines, Liquors, Goods, Importers to make Entry.
Wares or Merchandises consigned to them that by this Act are liable to pay
Impost (...) shall by themselves or order, make Entry thereof in Writing under
their hands with the said Commissioner or Receiver, and produce unto him the
Original Invoice thereof, and pay the Duty and Impost by this Act required,
before such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or Merchandises be Landed or taken out
of the Vessel in which the same shall be Imported, on pain of forfeiting all
such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or Merchandises so Landed or taken out of the
Vessel in which they are Imported. And no Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or
Merchandises that by this Act are liable to pay Impost or Duty, shall be Landed
on any Wharf or into any Warehouse or other place but in the day time only, and
that after Sun rise and before Sun set, unless in the presence of and with the
consent of the Commissioner or Receiver, on pain of forfeiting all such Wines,
Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises, and the Lighter, Boat or Vessel out of
which the same shall be Landed or put into any Warehouse or other place. And if
the Commissioner or Receiver shall suspect that any Merchant, Factor or other
person to whom any Wines, Liquors, Goods or Merchandises comes consigned does
not in the Entry or Writing thereof to be given under his hand as aforesaid,
make a full and perfect Entry of such Wines, Liquors Goods and Merchandises, or
that the Invoices thereof produced and shown by any person or persons as by
this Act is directed, are not really and bona fide the Original Invoices of the
Wines, Liquors, Goods or Merchandises such person or persons would then Enter.
In every such case, the Commissioner or Receiver is hereby ordered and directed
not to admit such person or persons to an Entry of the said Wines, Liquors,
Goods or Merchandises, until he or they shall have made Oath to the truth of
said Writing or Invoice by him or them presented as aforesaid. Which Oath the
Commissioner or Receiver is hereby empowered to administer, and if such person
or persons shall not have and produce any Invoice of the quantity of the Rhum
or Liquors to him or them consigned, then the Cask wherein the same is shall be
gaged, at the charge of the Importer, that the quantity thereof may be known.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Merchant or other person Importing any Wines into this Province,
shall be allowed Twelve Per Cent Leakage, provided such Wines have not been
filled up on Board, Allowance for Leakage
and that every Hogshead, Butt or Pipe of Wine that has two third parts
thereof leaked out, shall be accounted for outs, and the Merchant or Importer
to pay no Impost or Duty for the same. And no Master of any Ship or other
Vessel shall suffer any Wines to be filled up on Board, without giving a
Certificate of the quantity so filled under his hand before the Landing thereof
to the Commissioner or Receiver of the Impost in such Port, on pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Fifty Pounds.

And if it be made appear, That any Wines Imported in any Ship or Vessel be
decayed at the time of Landing thereof, or in seven days afterward, Oath being
made (if required) before the Commissioner or Receiver that the same has not
been Landed above that time, Allowance for decayed Wines.
the Duty and Impost paid for such Wine shall be repaid unto the Importer
thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Master of every Ship or Vessel Importing any Wines, Liquors, Goods,
Wares or Merchandises, shall be liable to and shall pay the Impost for such and
so much thereof contained in his Manifest, Master liable to pay Impost
as shall not be duly Entered, and the Duty paid for the same by the person or
persons to whom such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or Merchandises are or shall
be consigned. And it shall and may be lawful to and for the Master of every
Ship (...) other Vessel, to secure and detain in his hands, at the Owners
(...), all such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or Merchandises Imported in such
Ship or Vessel, until he shall receive a Certificate from the Commissioner or
Receiver of the Impost, that the Duty for the same is paid, and until he be
repaid his necessary charges in securing the same* Or such Master may deliver
such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or Merchandises as are not Entered, unto the
Commissioner or Receiver of the Impost in such Port, or his order, who is
hereby empowered and directed to receive and keep the same, at the Owners
risque, until the Impost thereof with charges be paid, and then to deliver such
Wines, Liquors, Goods, or Merchandises as such Master shall direct.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Commissioner or Receiver of the Impost in each Port, shall be,
Commissioner empowered to Sue for the Impost.
and hereby is empowered to Sue the Master of any Ship or Vessel for the Impost
or Duty for so much of the Lading of Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and
Merchandises Imported therein according to the Manifest by him to be given upon
Oath as aforesaid, as shall remain not Entered, and the Duty or Impost thereof
not paid, and where the Goods, Wares or Merchandises are such as that the value
thereof is not known, whereby the Impost to be recovered of the Master for the
same cannot be ascertained, the Owner or person to whom such Goods, Wares or
Merchandises are or shall be consigned, shall be Summoned to appear as an
Evidence at the Court where Suit for the Impost and Duty thereof shall be
brought, and be there required to make Oath to the value of such Goods, Wares
or Merchandises.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Ship or Vessel with her Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, the Master of
which shall make default in any thing by this Act required to be performed by
him, Vessel the Master of which shall make default to be liable to make good
the penalty etc.
shall be liable to answer and make good the Sum or Sums forfeited by such
Master, according to this Act for any such default, as also to make good the
Impost or Duty for any Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or Merchandises not Entered
as aforesaid, and upon Judgment recovered against such Master, the said Ship or
Vessel, or so much of the Tackle or Appurtenances thereof as shall be
sufficient to satisfy said Judgment may be taken in Execution for the same,
and the Commissioner and Receiver of the Impost, shall, and hereby is empowered
to make Seizure of such Ship or Vessel, and detain the same under Seizure,
until Judgment be given in any Suit to be commenced and prosecuted for any of
the said forfeitures or Impost, to the intent that if Judgment be rendered for
the Prosecutor or Informer; such Ship or Vessel and Appurtenances may be
exposed for satisfaction thereof, as is before provided: Unless the Owners or
some on their behalf for the releasing of such Ship or Vessel from under
Seizure and restraint, shall give sufficient security to the Commissioner or
Receiver of the Impost that Seized the same, to respond and satisfy the Sum or
value of the forfeiture and Duties with charges that shall be recovered against
the Master thereof upon Suit to be brought for the same as aforesaid, and the
Master occasioning such loss and damage unto his Owners through his default or
neglect shall be liable unto their action for the same.

And the Commissioner or Receiver of the Impost is hereby further empowered to
allow Bills of Store to the Masters of any Ships or Vessels importing any Wines
or Liquors for such private adventures as shall belong to the Master and Seamen
of such Ship or other Vessel at the discretion of the Commissioner or Receiver,
Commissioner to allow Bills of Store.
not exceeding Three Per Cent of the Lading, and the Duties payable by this Act
for such Wines or Liquors in such Bills of Store mentioned and expressed shall
be abated*

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all penalties and forfeitures accruing or arising by virtue of this Act,
shall be one half to His Majesty for the uses and intents for which the before
mentioned Duties of Impost are granted, and the other half to him or them that
shall seiz, Penalties how to be recovered and disposed.
inform and sue for the same by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law
shall be allowed, the whole charge of Prosecution to be taken out of the half
belonging to the Informer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

A Commissioner and Receiver to be appointed.
That there be one fit person and no more nominated and appointed by this Court,
as a Commissioner and Receiver of the aforesaid Duties of Impost, and for the
Inspection, care and management of the said Office, and whatsoever relates
thereunto; To receive Commission for the same from the Governor or Commander
in Chief for the time being, with Authority to Substitute and Appoint a Deputy
Receiver in each Port, besides that wherein he resides, and to grant Warrants
to such Deputy Receivers for their said place, and to collect and receive the
Imposts for all Wines, Liquors, Goods and Merchandises that shall be Imported
into such Port, and to render the Accounts thereof, and pay in the same to the
said Commissioner and Receiver; Which said Commissioner and Receiver shall keep
fair Books of all Entries and Duties arising by virtue of this Act, and the
same to lie open at all seasonable times to the view and perusal of the
Treasurer and Receiver General of this Province, with whom he shall account for
all Collections and Payments, and pay in all such Moneys as shall be in his
hands as the Treasurer shall demand it: and Sworn
And the said Commissioner and Receiver, and his Deputy and Deputies before
their entering upon the Execution of their said Office, shall be Sworn to deal
truly and faithfully therein, and shall attend in the Office from nine to
twelve of the Clock in the Forenoon, and from two to five of the Clock in the
Afternoon. And the said Commissioner and Receiver for his labor, care and
expenses in the said Office, shall have and receive out of the Province
Treasury, Sixty Pounds in Money Per Annum, his allowance
and his Deputy or Deputies to be paid for their Service such Sum and Sums as
the said Commissioner and Receiver with the Treasurer shall agree upon
reasonable Terms.

Provided nevertheless, That the present Commissioner and Receivers of the
Duties of Impost, be and hereby are continued for collecting and receiving of
the Duties granted by this Act, Present Commissioner and Receivers to continue
till the first of March.
and for the inspection, care and management of the said Office, and what
relates thereunto, until the first day of March next coming, and then the
person that shall be nominated and appointed by this Court to be the
Commissioner or Receiver of the aforesaid Duties to receive his Commission for
the same, and to enter upon the exercise thereof. And that the said
Commissioner and Receiver of the Impost, and his Deputy or Deputies shall also
be Receivers of the Duty of Tunnage of Shipping or Powder Duty, granted by the
before recited Act, Entitled, An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty several
Duties of Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping. Any thing therein contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted and Provided by the Authority aforesaid,

That in case any Wines or Liquors Imported and Landed within this Province at
any time before the publication of this Act, Draw back to be allowed for Wines
and Liquors imported before this Act.
(the Impost and Duty of which has been well and truly paid or secured to be
paid, according to the before recited Act) be afterward Exported out of the
Province within twelve months after Importation thereof, and be so made appear
unto the Commissioner or Receiver of the Impost in such manner and form as by
the Act or Acts for granting the said Duties of Impost is directed. Then, and
in every such case there shall be repaid or discounted by the said Commissioner
or Receiver unto the Importer or his Assigns the respective Sums and Drawbacks
mentioned and expressed in the said before recited Act, Entitled, An Act, For
Granting unto His Majesty several Duties of Impost, Excise and Tunnage of
Shipping.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue in force from the publication
thereof until the Twenty ninth day of June, which will be in the year of our
Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred, and no longer.

An Act, For Regulating and Inspecting the Building of Ships.
FORASMUCH as the Building of Ships is a business of great Importance for the
common good, and not only the safety of men's Estates, but Lives are nearly
concerned in the well and orderly performing of the same. And forasmuch as
Builders and Workmen (...) under them, are oft-times remiss and negligent of
their duty in that regard, as has been found by experience; and it being
therefore necessary and agreeable to the course and practice of His Majesty's
Kingdom of England; That suitable provision be made, and effectual care taken
therein.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That when and so often as any Ship or Vessel of Thirty Tuns or upwards,
Warrant to be obtained and Survey made before Planking.
is to be built and set up in any Town or Place within this Province, before
any Plank be brought on, the Carpenter or Undertaker shall repair unto one of
the Justices of the Peace within the same County, who, upon request made is
hereby empowered to appoint and authorize one or more able Shipwrights to be
Overseers and Surveyers of the said Building, and of all the materials and
workmanship to be improved, made use of, done and to be done to, on and about
the same from time to time, as often as the Carpenter or Undertaker shall see
cause to call them thereto, and especially at such times as in and by this Act
is hereafter directed and appointed; That is to say, Every Tear of Timbers
shall be Surveyed before they be enclosed or covered with Plank, Special times
for a Survey.
and the Floor Timbers before the Kealson be bolted down; The Beams and Timbers
for the Decks shall be Surveyed after laying, before any Plank be fastened on,
and the Bottom to be Surveyed before Calking: Which Overseers and Surveyers to
be appointed as aforesaid, shall take care that all the materials in said
Building be sound, sufficient and suitable for the occasion, and that the works
be done and performed strong, substantial and in workman-like manner, according
to the Rules of the Shipwrights art, and that all Trunnels be not only found
and well seasoned, No Timber or Plank of Oak, other than white Oak to be used.
but also without Sap. And shall have a particular care and regard that such
Ship or Vessel be well Calked, and not to allow any Timber or Plank of Oak to
be used therein other than white Oak, and shall direct that all insufficient
Materials be taken out, and that defective Workmanship be amended.

And the Surveyers and Overseers to be appointed as aforesaid, shall have an
Oath administered unto them to be faithful and indifferent between the Carpenter
or Builder, Surveyers to be Sworn.
and the Undertaker, and to observe the directions given them by this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Penalty on Builders neglecting to have a Survey
That if any Carpenter or Builder shall bring to, and fasten any Plank upon any
Ship or Vessel of the burden aforesaid, before a Warrant of Survey be obtained
as aforesaid, and the Surveyers and Overseers have been to view the Frame;
Every such Carpenter or Builder offending herein, shall forfeit and pay the Sum
of Ten Pounds: One Moiety, thereof unto His Majesty, for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Province, and the contingent Charges thereof,
and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same, by
Bill, Plaint or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record within
this Province.

And if any Carpenter or Builder upon the advice and direction of such
Surveyers or Overseers shall neglect to take out, Builders penalty for not
attending the advice of the Surveyers.
reform and amend what is judged by them to be defective or amiss in any
materials or workmanship, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings
Per Diem, to the use of the poor of that Town, where such Ship or Vessel shall
be in Building, until the defects be amended; being convicted of such neglect
before one or more Justices of the Peace, or before the Court of General
Sessions of the Peace, unless such Justice or Court upon hearing of the
Carpenter or Builder shall see cause to allow him some further reasonable time
for doing of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when any Surveyers and Overseers are called upon by the Carpenter or
Undertaker respectively to Survey the work or materials as is provided in this
Act; Every such Surveyer or Overseer shall have for his care and attendance
when called, Overseers allowance.
Three Shillings for every Survey; Which Charge of Surveying is to be born by
the Carpenter when he is in fault or defective; But when the Carpenter is not
in fault, then by the Undertaker. And when the Surveyers or Overseers shall
give their advice or judgment on or about any work unfinished, that the same is
faulty or defective, the Carpenter shall not thereby incur the Charge of
Surveying, but only when the Surveyers or Overseers see reason to direct the
taking out or shifting any Timber or Plank.

And in case the Surveyers and Overseers are occasioned to Travail out of Town
for the Surveying any Ship or Vessel in Building, they shall be further allowed
for their time and necessary Charge.

AN ACT, In Addition to, and Explanation of the Act against Adultery and
Polygamie, made in the Sixth Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary.
WHEREAS in the Act Entitled, An Act against Adultery and Polygamie, It is
Provided in these Words; Provided always that this Act or any thing therein
contained shall not extend to any person or persons whose Husband or Wife shall
be continually remaining beyond the Seas by the space of Seven Years together:
or whose Husband or Wife shall absent him or her self the one from the other by
the space of Seven Years together, in any part within Their Majesty's Dominions
or else where, the one of them not knowing the other to be Living within that
time. Which Limitation of Seven Years is in some Cases found to be Excessive
and Inconvenient.

Therefore for the better preventing the Violation of the Seventh Commandment,
and for obtaining the Blessings God is wont to bestow upon the Keepers of the
same.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly: And it is Enacted and Declared by
the Authority of the same.

That if any married person; Man or Woman has lately, or shall hereafter go to
Sea in any Ship or other Vessel bound from (...) to another where the Passage
is usually made in three months time; and such Ship or other Vessel has not
been, or shall not be heard of within the space of Three full Years next after
their putting to Sea from such Port; Limitation of Three Years in case.
or shall only be heard of under such circumstances, as may rather confirm the
opinion commonly received of the whole Companys being utterly lost: In every
such case, the matter being laid before the Governor and Council, and made to
appear; The man or woman whose Relation is in this manner parted from him or
her, may be esteemed single and unmarried; and upon such Declaration thereof,
and License obtained from that Board, may lawfully marry again. Any Law, Usage
or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act, Enabling Sheriffs, Constables, etc.(...) r^^quire aid and assistance
in the Execution of their Respective Offices referring to Criminals.
FORASMUCH as it is oftentimes necessary, That Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs and
Constables be aided and assisted in the Execution of their respective Offices.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

That when and so often as any Sheriff, Under Sheriff or Constable shall be in
the Execution of his Office for the preservation of the Peace, or for
apprehending or securing any person or persons for violating the same, or for
any other criminal matter or cause. It shall and may be lawful to and for such
Sheriff, Penalty for refusal or neglect to aid or Assist the Sheriff etc
Under Sheriff or Constable to require suitable aid and assistance therein. And
if any person or persons being required by any Sheriff, Undersheriff or
Constable in His Majesty's Name to aid or assist him in the Execution of his
Office as aforesaid, shall neglect or refuse so to do, and be thereof convicted
before one or more of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, such Offender or
Offenders shall be fined, to the use of the poor of the Town where the Offense
shall be committed, not exceeding Forty Shillings, at the discretion of such
Justice or Justices, according to the circumstances aggravating or lessening
such Offense. And if such Offender or Offenders be unable, or shall not
forthwith pay the said Fine, such justice or Justices may punish him or them by
Imprisonment, not exceeding forty eight hours, or by setting in the Stocks not
exceeding four hours.

And if any person or persons not being really and bona fide a Sheriff,
Undersheriff or Constable, Penalty for pretending to to be a Sheriff etc. and
not so bona fide.
shall presume to abuse His Majesty's Name and Authority in pretending him or
themselves to be any or either of the said Officers, and take upon him or
themselves to act as such, or to require any other person or persons to aid or
assist him or them in any matter or thing belonging to the duty of a Sheriff,
Undersheriff or Constable: Every person or persons so offending, and being
thereof convicted, shall forfeit and pay a Fine not exceeding One Hundred
Pounds, according to the nature and circumstances aggravating his offense, at
the discretion of the Court, before whom the Conviction shall be; one Moiety of
the said Fine or Forfeiture to be unto His Majesty, toward the Support of the
Government within this His Majesty's Province, and the other Moiety to him or
them that shall inform and prosecute for the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That any of His Majesty's Justices of Peace, for the preservation of the same,
or upon view of the breach thereof, Justices may Command any person to
apprehend an offender in case.
or of any other transgression of Law proper to his Cognizance done or
committed by any person or persons whatsoever, shall, and hereby is empowered
(in the absence of a Sheriff, Undersheriff or Constable) to require any person
or persons to apprehend and bring before him such Offender or Offenders. And
every person and persons that shall neglect or refuse to obey any Justice or
Justices in apprehending such Offender or Offenders, being thereunto required
as aforesaid, shall incur and suffer the like pains and penalties as is before
provided for refusing or neglecting to assist any Sheriff, Penalty for neglect
or refusal.
Undersheriff or Constable in the Execution of his Office as before mentioned.

And no person or persons so offending, unto whom such Justice is known or
shall declare himself so to be, shall be admitted to plead excuse on pretense
of ignorance of his Office.

AN ACT, For the better Preservation and Increase of Deer within this Province.
WHEREAS the Killing of Deer at unseasonable times of the year has been found
very much to the prejudice of this Province, great numbers thereof having been
hunted and destroyed in deep Snows when they are very poor, and bigg with
young, the flesh and skins of very little value, and the increase thereof
greatly hindered.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That no person or persons whatsoever within this Province, from and after the
last day of December, in this present year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
Eight, till the first day of August, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Nine, No
Deer to be killed betwixt December. and August yearly, on penalty.
and so from the last day of December to the first day of August following
annually for ever hereafter, shall any ways whatsoever, Kill any Buck, Do or
Fawn, on pain that such person or persons so Offending, shall forfeit the Sum
of Forty Shillings for the first Offense, Three Pounds for the second Offense,
and Five Pounds for the third Offense, and so for every Offense after: One
Moiety thereof unto His Majesty, to be employed toward Support of the
Government of this His Majesty's Province, and the other Moiety to him or them
that shall inform and sue for the same, in any Court of Record within the said
Province.

And if any person or persons Offending as aforesaid, shall not have
wherewithal to pay his or their Fine or Fines, Persons unable to pay the
Penalty, to satisfy by work.
he or they shall for the first Offense work twenty days, for the second
thirty, and for the third Offense fifty days, as shall be directed by the
Justices, before whom the cause shall be heard and determined; and the Wages or
Earnings for his or their work to be employed to and for the uses before
mentioned.

And if any Venison, Skin or Skins of any Buck, Do or Fawn newly killed, The
flesh or skin of any Deer found to be sufficient conviction unless etc.
shall, at any time in any of the aforesaid months wherein they are by this Act
prohibited to be killed, be found with, or in possession of any person or
persons whatsoever, such person or persons shall be held and accounted in the
Law to be guilty of killing Deer contrary to the incent of this Act, as fully
as if it were proved against such person or persons by sufficient witness viva
voce; except such person or persons do bring forth and make proof who was the
person, or who were the persons that Sold or Killed the same.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever, Tame
Deer may be killed at any time.
who shall keep or breed any Deer, tame, or in any Park or Island, at any time
to kill any Buck, Do or Fawn so kept and bred. And that any person or persons
whatsoever, shall have free liberty of Hunting as formerly to the Eastward of
Piscataqua River. Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act, For hearing and determining of Cases in Equity.
WHEREAS the Respective Courts of Justice within this Province are by Law
Empowered, where the Forfeiture of any Paenal Bond shall be found, in the
Entering up of Judgment in such case to chancer the same unto the just debt and
damages. The Practice whereof is found to give great ease and satisfaction unto
His Majesty's Subjects; whereby Oppression, Delay, and great Costs and Charges
are prevented; which otherwise would unavoidably arise. And Applications having
been unto this Court, That further provision may be made for releife in Equity,
in cases not releivable by the Rules of the common Law.

To the intent therefore that Justice and Equity may be jointly Administered.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That in all cases brought or to be brought for Trial in the Superior Court of
Judicature, Courts of Justice Empowered to chancer Penalties annexed to
specialties and forfeitures of Estates granted on condition.
or in the Inferior Court of Common Pleas within the several Counties; where
the Forfeiture or Penalty annexed unto any Articles, Agreement, Covenant,
Contract, Charter-party, or other Specialties or Forfeiture of Estates on
Condition Executed by Deed of Mortgage, or Bargain and Sale with Defeasance,
shall be found by Verdict of Jury, or Confession of the Obligor, Mortgager or
Vender; The Justices of the said Courts respectively where the Trial is had,
are hereby Empowered and Authorized, to moderate the rigor of the Law, and on
consideration of such cases according to Equity and good Conscience to Chancer
the Forfeiture, and Enter up Judgment for the just debt and damages, and to
award Execution accordingly; Only in real actions upon Mortgage or Bargain and
Sale, with Defeasance, the Judgment to be conditional; That the Mortgager or
Vender, or his Heirs, Executors or Administrators do pay unto the Plaintiff,
such Sum as the Court shall determine to be justly due thereupon, within two
months time after Judgment Entered up for discharging of such Mortgage or Sale;
Or that the Plaintiff recover possession of the Estate Sued for, and Execution
to be awarded for the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That in all cases of like nature heretofore heard and tried in any of the
Courts of Justice within this Province, since the month of April in the Year of
Our Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Six, where the whole Forfeiture
or Penalty of any Bond or Obligation, Conditioned for the payment of Money,
^^^formance of Articles, Covenants, Agreements, Charter-parties or other
Specialties has been Recovered and Exacted; Provision for cases of like nature
heard and tried since April. 1686.
Or where any Estate granted on condition by Mortgage, or Bargain and Sale,
with Defeasance has been recovered, and the Mortgager or Vender by himself or
assigns has entered into, or by any ways or means whatsoever obtained
possession thereof for default of the Mortgager or Venders paying the Money, or
otherwise performing what according to such Condition or Defeasance he ought to
have done, the party agrieved and oppressed by such Exaction, or to whom the
Right or Equity of redemption of any such Estate does belong, may bring his
Suit for remedy and relief therein, by filing a Bill, Plaint or Declaration,
either in the Superior Court of Judicature, or the Inferior Court of Common
Pleas, at his pleasure, and shall cause the adverse party to be served with a
Writ or Process out of such Court, fifteen days before the day of the sitting
of the same; briefly notifying the import of the said Bill, Plaint or
Declaration, and requiring him to appear at said Court, to make his Answer and
Defense. And in case of the Defendants Nonappearance, or on motion made to the
Court, and reasonable cause therefore shown, the Court may continue such Suit
unto the next Court and no longer. Provided no such Suit shall be brought,
after the Tenth Day of December, which will be in the Year of Our Lord, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and One.

And the Justices in the before mentioned Courts respectively are hereby
Empowered and Authorized to receive and hear every such case and cases that
shall be orderly brought before them as aforesaid, The Justices of the several
Courts empowered to receive and hear such cases and to grant releife in Equity.
and on consideration of the several pleas and allegations made by either party
to decree and enter up Judgment therein agreeable to Equity and good
Conscience, and to award Execution accordingly. And where any Mortgager or
Vender of any Houses or Lands granted on condition has recovered, or entered
into, and taken possession of the same for the condition broken, the Mortgager
or Vender, or his Heirs tendering payment of the Original Debt and Damages, or
such part thereof as was remaining unpaid, at the time of Entry; with
reasonable costs and allowance for any disbursements afterward laid out on
such Housing or Lands for the advancement and bettering of the same, over and
above what the Rents, profits or improvements thereof made shall amount unto,
upon a just computation thereof by the Court, as on hearing of the parties
shall be made to appear; The Mortgager or Vender, or his Heirs, or the present
Tenant in possession (being the purchaser and holding in his own right) shall
be obliged to accept such payment, and to restore and deliver possession of the
Estate unto the Mortgager or Vender, or his Heirs, and Seal Execute, and
Acknowledge a good and sufficient Deed in the Law of Release and Quitclaim to
the same. But in case of his not appearing in Court, or refusal to accept such
payment tendered, (...) whole of said Moneys which the Court shall enter
Judgment (...) ^^ing left in custody of the Court on behalf, and for the use of
the Mortgagee or Vendee, his Heirs or Assigns, Judgment shall be Entered up for
the Mortgager or Vender, or his Heirs, to recover p^^session of such Houses or
Lands and Execution be accordingly awarded. And further it is Enacted, That at
any time hereafter where the Mortgagee or Vendee shall be in actual possession
of any Estate granted on condition, It shall be in the liberty of the Mortgager
or Vender, or his Heirs, to bring his Suit in manner as aforesaid, for
redemption thereof, within the space of three years next after the term therein
expired, and not afterward.

Provided always, That the party agrieved at any Judgment to be given as
aforesaid, shall have the same liberty of Appeal and Review as in other cases
is provided at the common Law.

AN ACT, For Establishing the Form of an Oath to be administered unto the
Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature, and the Justices of the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas respectively.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor; Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That the Oath following shall be administered unto each of the Justice of the
Superior Court of Judicature, and also to each of the Justice of the
respective In^eriour Courts of Common Pleas within this Province, by the
Governor or Commander in Chief for the time being of the same, or such as
shall be by him thereto appointed.

That is to say, YOU Swear, That well and truly You shall Serve Our Sovereign
Lord the King and his People in the Office of a Justice of the (...) Court of
(...) and that you will do equal Law and Execution of right to all People, poor
and rich after the Laws and Usage of this Province, and in such cases as the
Law does especially provide to be relieved in Equity, there to proceed
according to Equity and good Conscience, without having regard to any person.
So help you God.

Which before-recited Oath shall also be administered as aforesaid unto the
Justices that shall be appointed and commissioned, for the res^^ctive Courts
aforesaid from time to time, before their entering upon the Execution of their
Office.

An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty, a Tax upon Polls and Estates.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England Convened in General
Assembly, having had before us the Accounts of the Treasury. Whereby we are
sensible of the necessity of granting a further supply of Money as well for the
paying and discharging of the Debts already due and owing from the Province, as
of the future growing Charge thereof; For Subsisting and Paying of wages to
Soldiers and Seamen, and Vessels hire, that are or shall be employed in His
Majesty's Service, and for the prosecuting and subduing of the Indian Rebels,
and other Charges and Expenses that shall arise thereupon, or for any
Negotiation concerning them. For the paying of such Salaries, Gratuities and
Allowances as have been or shall be made by the General Court or Assembly; and
all such Allowances and Payments as are directed by any Act of this Province,
to be made out of the Public Treasury, and for Support of the Government, and
answering of the incident and contingent Charges thereof. Do unanimously grant
unto His Most Excellent Majesty for the ends, uses and intents
beforementioned; As also, For making good so much of the Public Revenue as
shall fall short by the abatement of part of the Duties of Impost discontinued,
For the better Encouragement of Trade. And for no other uses or intents
whatsoever; A Tax of Five Thousand, One Hundred and Eighteen Pounds, Fifteen
Shillings in Money, to be Levied upon Polls and Estates, both real and personal
within the said Province, as in and by this present Act for the manner and
proportion thereof is directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That the Treasurer do forthwith send out his Warrants directed unto the Select
men, Trustees or Assessors of each Respective Town or Precinct within this
Province; Requiring them to assess the Sum herein set and proportioned unto
such Town or Precinct upon all Rateable Male Polls above the Age of Sixteen
Years (except Elders (...) Churches, Settled Ministers, the President, Fellows
and Students (...) Harvard College, Grammar School Masters, and such who
through Age, Infirmity, or extreme Poverty in the Judgment of the Select-men,
Trustees or Assessors are rendered incapable to contribute toward public
Charges) at Three Shillings on the Poll, and on all Estates both real and
personal lying within the limits and bounds of such Town or Precinct, and next
unto the same (not paying elsewhere) (...), possession Tenure or Occupation
soever the same (...) One Penny on the Pound, and to abate or (...) (if need
be) so as to make up, together with what (...) arise upon Polls, the full Sum
hereby set and proportioned (...) Town or Precinct, Houses and Lands to be
Estimated at the (...) Rent o^ Income whereat they usually are, or may
reasonably be (...) for in the places where they lie and not otherwise; and the
Tenant or Occupant thereof to be assessed for the same. All Indian Molatto and
Negro Servants to be Estimated as other personal Estate, according to the sound
judgment and discretion of the Assessors, not excluding Faculties: Also
requiring the said Select-men, Trustees or Assessors to make a fair List or
Lists of the said Assessment setting forth in distinct Columns against each
particular persons name how much he is Assessed at for Polls, how much for
Houses and Lands, and how much for personal Estate and Faculty, and the List or
Lists so perfected and signed by them, or the major part of them, to commit to
the Collector, Constable or Constables of such Town or Precinct, and to return
a Certificate of the name or names of such Collector, Constable or Constables,
together with the Sum total to each of them respectively committed, unto
himself some time before the last day of January next ensuing. And the
Treasurer upon Receipt of such Certificate, is hereby Empowered and Ordered to
issue forth his Warrants to the Collector, Constable or Constables of such Town
Requiring him or them respectively to Collect the Sum total of the List or
Lists to him o^ them committed, and to pay the same into the Treasury, and
issue the Accounts thereof with himself, or his Successor in said Office, at or
before the Thirtieth day of April next following.

And the Treasurer is hereby also directed to send his aforesaid Warrants
enclosed to the Sheriff or Marshal of each respective County, who i^ ^^quired
immediately to disperse and transmit the same unto the Select men, Trustees,
Assessors, Constables or Collectors of the several Towns and Precincts within
such County, according to the (...) thereof* And for his Service, Charge and
Expense the (...) reasonable allowance ordered him by the (...) of the Peace in
the same County, to be (...) Treasury, upon his laying the Account (...) them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That each Town and Precinct within this Province shall be Asses^ed and Pay as
its proportion to this present Tax the Sum here (...) following That is to say
In the County of SUFFOLK.
^^ ^^ ^^ (...), Nine Hundred Seventy Five Pounds. 975 00 00 (...), Eighty Two
Pounds Ten Shillings. 82 10 00 Dorchester, One Hundred and Seven Pounds, Ten
Shillings 107 10 00 M^^t^n, Forty Five Pounds. 45 00 00 Brantrey, Eighty Pounds
80 00 00 Weymouth, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00 Hingham, Eighty Seven Pounds Ten
Shillings. 87 10 00 Dedham, Fifty Eight Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 58 15 00
Wrentham, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Medfield, Forty Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings.
47 10 00 Mendon, Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings. 7 10 00 Hall, Forty Pounds. 40 00
00 In the County of ESSEX.
Salem, Two Hundred and Five Pounds. 205 00 00 Ipswich, Two Hundred Twenty
Eight Pounds Fifteen Shil. 228 15 00 Newbury, One Hundred Fifty Two Pounds Ten
Shillings. 152 10 00 Salisbury, Forty Pounds. 40 00 00 Amisbury, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 Haverhil, Forty Pounds. 40 00 00 Andover* Fifty Pounds. 50 00
00 Bradford, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Topsfield, Forty Three Pounds Fifteen
Shillings. 43 15 00 Marble head, Seventy Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings. 77 10 00
Lynn, Eighty Five Pounds. 85 00 00 Wenham, Thirty Five Pounds. 35 00 00
Beverly, Sixty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. 62 10 00 Gloucester, Forty Two Pounds,
Ten Shillings. 42 10 00 Manchester, Twelve Pounds, Ten Shillings. 12 10 00
Rowley, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Boxford, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 In the County
of MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown, One Hundred Forty Five Pounds. 145 00 00 Cambridge, One Hundred
and Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. 102 10 00 Watertown, One Hundred Twenty Five
Pounds. 125 00 00 Newtown, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00 Sudbury, Sixty Five Pounds.
65 00 00 Marlborough, Forty One Pounds, Five Shillings. 41 05 00 Medford,
Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Maulden, Forty Five Pounds. 45 00 00 Woob^urn, Seventy
Five Pounds. 75 00 00 Reading, Fifty Five Pounds. 55 00 00 Billerica, Twenty
Five Pounds. 25 00 00 Chelmsford, Thirty Five Pounds. 35 00 00 Concord, Seventy
Two Pounds. 72 00 00 Stow, Five Pounds. 5 00 00 Groton, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00
Lancaster, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Sherbourn, Thirty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. 32
10 00 Framingham, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 In the County of HAMPSHIRE.
Springfield, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Northampton, Fifty Five Pounds. 55 00 00
Hadley, Forty Pounds. 40 00 00 Hatfield, Thirty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. 32
10 00 Southfield, Twelve Pounds, Ten Shillings. 12 10 00 Westfield, Twenty One
Pounds, Five Shillings. 21 05 00 Enfield, Five Pounds. 5 00 00 Deerfield, Five
Pounds. 5 00 00 In the County of PLYMOUTH.
Plymouth, Sixty Five Pounds. 65 00 00 Situate, Ninety Five Pounds. 95 00 00
Marshfield, Sixty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. 62 10 00 Duxborough, Thirty Seven
Pounds, Ten Shillings. 37 10 00 Bridgewater, Forty Five Pounds. 45 00 00
Middleborough, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 In the County of BARNSTABLE.
Barnstable Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Yarmouth, Fifty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings.
52 10 00 Eastham Fifty Five Pounds. 55 00 00 Sandwich, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00
Falmouth, Seventeen Pounds, Ten Shillings. 17 10 00 Manamoy, Seventeen Pounds,
Ten Shillings. 17 10 00 Rochester, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Harwich, Twenty Two
Pounds, Ten Shillings. 22 10 00 In the County of BRISTOL.
Bristol, Forty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. 42 10 00 Taunton, Seventy Five
Pounds. 75 00 00 Dartmouth, Sixty Five Pounds. 65 00 00 Freetown, Eleven Pounds
Five Shillings. 11 05 00 Rehoboth, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Swansey, Fifty One
Pounds, Five Shillings. 51 05 00 Little Compton, Forty Seven Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 47 10 00 T^verton, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Attleborough, Ten Pounds.
10 00 00 In the County of YORK.
York, Five Pounds. 5 00 00 Wells, Five Pounds. 5 00 00 Kittery, Twenty Two
Pounds, Ten Shillings. 22 10 00 In Dukes COUNTY.
Edgar-town, Twenty Five Pounds. 25 00 00 Tisbury, Twelve Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 12 10 00 Chilmark, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Nantuckett, Fifty
Pounds. 50 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select men or Trustees in each and every of the several Towns and
Precincts beforementioned, shall be the Assessors of such Towns or Precincts
proportion herein before set unto this present Tax (where any others specially
Chosen or to be Chosen for that purpose, refuse to accept thereof) And all
Assessors before they enter upon the said work, shall take the Oath following.

That is to say, YOU A. B. being an Assessor of the Town of C. for this present
Tax, Do Swear, That in the Discharge of said Trust, you will deal impartially
and equally in proportioning the Sum to be Assessed upon the Inhabitants of
said Town after the best of your discretion and judgment, and in so doing
attend the rules and directions prescribed by this Act. So help you God.

Which Oath every Justice of the Peace, and Town Clerk respectively of each
Town where no Justice does reside, is hereby empowered to administer.

And every Assessor attending the Service aforesaid, shall be paid out of the
Town Treasury, Two Shillings Per Diem for each day he is necessarily employed
thereabout.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if the Selectmen or Trustees of any Town or Precinct (or other Assessors
accepting that Trust) shall neglect or refuse to perform the Service required
of them by this Act, or to take the Oath appointed as aforesaid for the due
performance thereof, they shall forfeit and pay the Sum herein before set and
proportioned upon such Town or Precinct, to be Levied by Distress and Sale of
the Estates real or personal of such defective Select men, Trustees or
Assessors, by Warrant from the Treasurer, directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of
the County in which such Town or Precinct lies, and for want of Estate, their
Bodies to be taken and imprisoned, until they pay the same. And all Sheriffs,
Constables or Collectors failing of performing the Duty and Service of them
respectively required by virtue of this Act* shall be liable and subject unto
the pains, penalties and forfeitures as are in or by any Act or Acts of the
General Assembly, or any clause, branch or article thereof in like cases set
and declared, to be prosecuted and recovered of them in the same way and manner
as in and by such Act or Acts is directed and prescribed.

And the Treasurer, and the Select-men or Assessors, shall be, and are hereby
also respectively empowered to take, use and exercise all such rules,
directions, powers and authorities, for enforcing the collecting and paying in
this present Tax as is unto him or them respectively given and granted by any
Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or any clauses, branches or articles
thereof to enforce the collecting and paying in of any former Tax or Taxes
whatsoever, as fully and effectually as if the same rules, directions, powers
and authorities had herein been again particularly recited and reenacted, and
notwithstanding any limitation or restraint thereof in or to the particular Act
or Acts wherein the same are enumerated, set down and expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person be agrieved at the Sum set upon him as his proportion
toward this Tax, such person making application to the Select men, or
Assessors, and demonstrating that he is rated more than his proportion to the
Sum set upon their Town, said Select-men, or Assessors shall ease him. And if
they refuse so to do, then the person agrieved complaining unto the next
General Sessions of the Peace within that County, and making appear that he is
assessed more than his proportion as aforesaid, shall be heard and relieved by
the Justices in said Sessions, and such person shall be reimbursed out of the
Town Treasury so much as the said Justices or Assessors respectively shall see
cause to abate him.

And the Fermer or Occupier of any Houses or Lands, shall be reimburst and
allowed by the Owner or Landlord thereof, one moiety or half part of such Sum
and Sums as he shall pay for such Houses or Lands unto this present Tax (where
no particular Contract is to the contrary between any Landlord and Tenant) upon
producing a Certificate from the Assessors or Town Clerk of the Sum or Sums
such Houses or Lands are set at and assessed unto the said Tax. Any Law or
Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.
Memorandum,
THE several Acts and Laws Entitled as follows, made and passed by the
General Assembly, in the Years 1693, and 1694. having been laid before His
Majesty, His Majesty has been pleased to Repeal the same. That is to say,

An Act, For Regulating the Building of Ships.

An Act, Encouraging a Post Office.

An Addition to the Act, For Establishing of Judicatories, and (...) of Justice
within this Province.

An Act, For Supplement and Addition to several Acts and Laws of this Province.

An Act, In further addition to the Act, For Establishing of Judicatories, and
Courts of Justice within this Province.

An Addition to the Act Entitled, an Act, For the setting forth of General
Privileges.

An Act, For a new Establishment and Regulation of the Chancery.


