By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS it is of absolute Necessity for the Good and Prosperity of this
Province, that our Principal and first Care be in Obedience to the Laws of God,
and the wholesome Laws of England, to shake off all sorts of Looseness and
Profaneness, and to unite and join in the fear and Love of God, and of one
another, by a Religious and Virtuous Deportment and Behavior, every one in his
respective Station and Calling, to the end that all Heats, Annimosities and
Dissentions may vanish, and the Blessing of Almighty God accompany our Our
Honest and Lawful Endeavors, and that we join Our Affections in the true
Support of His Majesty's Government over us, who has so often and so generously
exposed His Sacred Person to eminent Dangers, to Redeem us from the growing
Power of Popery and Arbitrary Government, and has by the Blessing of God
procured Our Deliverance, and an Honorable Peace, and is a great Example and
Encourager of Religion and Virtuous Living. I have therefore thought fit, by
and with the Advice of His Majesty's Council for this Province, and I do hereby
Strictly Prohibit all Inhabitants and Sojourners within this Province from
Cursing, Swearing, Immoderate Drinking, Sabbath Breaking and all sorts of
Lewdness and Profane Behavior in Word or Action. And for the true and
effectual Performance hereof, I do by and with the Advice aforesaid, Strictly
Charge and Command all Mayors, Aldermen, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs,
Constables, and other Officers within this Province, that they take care that
all the Laws made and provided for the Suppression of Vice and encouragement of
Religion and Virtue, particularly the Observation of the Lords Day be duly put
in Execution, as they will answer the Contrary at their Peril.

Given at New York the Second Day of April, School. and in the Tenth Year of the
Reign of Our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Bellomont.

God Save the KING.
Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty in
the City of New York. School.


