Province of the Massachusetts Bay. By the HONORABLE, the Lieutenant Governor,
etc. Council and Assembly: Convened at Boston, upon Wednesday the 27 th. of
May. 1696. In the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
For better Encouragement to Prosecute the French and Indian Enemy, etc.
Ordered,
THAT if any suitable person or persons shall offer themselves to take the
Command of a Company against His Majesty's Enemies, and obtain a Commission
from the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief, with
Orders to Raise a Company or Companies for His Majesty's Service: such Officers
and Companies (over and above the Encouragement given by an Act of this Court,
of Fifty Pounds Per Head for every Indian man, and Twenty five Pounds Per Head,
for any Indian Woman or Child, Male or Female, under the Age of Fourteen Years,
taken or brought in Prisoner; the Scalps of all Indians slain, to be produced
and delivered to the Commissioner or Commissioners for War, as the Law in that
case provides, and the benefit of Plunder) shall be allowed and paid out of the
Public Treasury their necessary Provision, Ammunition and accustomed Wages,
for so long time as they are seeking or pursuing said Enemy. But when they
shall return to any Town, Fort, Garrison or Vessels for so long time as they
stay in any such place, they shall be out of Pay: And the chief Officer and
Clerk of every such Company, shall each of them keep a Journal of all their
Proceedings from time to time, and return the same unto the Commissioner for
War, and that they be further supplied with Vessels for Transportation, and
Boats as needed. And in case of receiving any Wounds or Maihems in the said
Service, shall be encouraged as to Cure and Pensions as is by Law provided for
Soldiers that are Impressed, and likewise to be allowed a Chyrurgeon with them
if it be procured under Public Pay.

And for Encouragement of speedy Succors and Relief to be yielded unto the
Frontiers upon an Alarm or Attack (...) upon them by the Enemy; such of the
Neighb^^^^ng To^^^ as move to their Relief and toward the Surprizal or Pursuit
of the Enemy, by virtue of the Law of the Province, or by virtue of any Order
of the Lieutenant Governor or Commander in Chief, or Commander of the
Regiment, shall have the like Encouragement as aforesaid, if such persons shall
have pursued the Enemy farther than they may reasonably return in twenty four
Hours, otherwise to be allowed no Wages.

Provided, That this Order shall continue in force for the space of six Months
next coming, and for no longer.

Isaac Addington, Secr. William Stoughton.



