A JOURNAL OF THE House of Representatives For His MAJESTY'S Province of
New York IN AMERICA

Begun the 20th day of June, in the seventh year of His Majesty's Reign,
Annoque Dom. 1695.

Die Saturni Ante Merid. June 1695.

By Order of the House of Representatives, I do appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Sign of the Bible in New York, 1695.

A LIST of the several Representatives, returned (pursuant to his Majesty's
Writ) to serve in General Assembly, for the respective Cities and Counties of
the Province of New York, viz.

City and County of New York. James Graham, Brandt Schuyler, Lawrence Read,
Thennis de Key,
City and County of Albany and Ranslaers-wick. John Abeel, Derick Wessels,
Killian Ranslaer,
Ulster County. Henry Beekman, William ^ Meyer,
Westchester County. Humphery Underhill Joseph Purdy,
Kings County. John Van Eklin, Cornelius Sebran,
Queens County. Daniel Whitehead, John Jackson,
Suffolk County. Matthew Howell, John Tuthell,
Richmond County. Thomas Stillwell, Elias Duxberry,

A Journal of the House of Representatives, etc.
Die Jovis Ant. Merid. June 20. 1695.
THis Morning (pursuant to his Majesty's Writ (the several Representatives
returned to serve for the City and County of New York, City and County of
Albany, and Collony of Ranslaers-wick, Kings County, one from Queens County,
and one from Suffolk County, viz. James Graham, Brands Schuyler, Lawrence Read,
Thennnis de key, Derick Wessels, John Abeel, Killian Ranslaer, John van Ecklin,
Cornelius Sebrand, Daniel Whitehead and John Tuthel attended at the House, and
the rest not appearing, the Clark was ordered to wait upon his Excelleny the
Governor, and acquaint him there*with, who returned, and reported, That his
Excellency advised them to take such proper Methods as has been usual in the
like cases, he believing the other Representatives would be here this Night.
Whereupon the House adjourned till to morrow Morning at eight of the Clock.

Die Veneris Ante. Merid. hor. 8. June 21. 1695.
According to adjournment the Representatives hereafter named, (viz.) James
Graham, Brands Schuyler, Lawrence Read, Thenus de Key, John Abeel, Derick
Wessels, William Ranslaer, John van Eklin, Cornelius Sebrand, Daniel Whitehead,
John Tuthell, Thomas Stillwell and Elias Duxberry came to the House, and sent
the Clark of the same to acquaint his Excellency, the Governor, of their
attending there, and to know his Excellency's pleasure; who returned, and
reported, That his Excellency had sent two of his Majesty's Council to
administer the Oaths established, instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, etc. and when that was done, he should hear further from them. And
accordingly Coll. Stephanus van Courtlandt and Coll. Nicholas Bayard two of his
Majesty's Council aforesaid, came to the House, and produced his Majesty's
Writ of Dedimus Potestarem, and pursuant thereunto the abovenamed
Representatives, in their presence respectively, were sworn, and subscribed the
Test accordingly. Soon after Humphry Underhill and Joseph Purdy came to the
House. And then the whole House waited upon his Excellency and Council in the
Fort, to know his Excellency's further pleasure, who recommended them to return
to their House, and to choose a Speaker, who accordingly returned; and the said
Humphery Underhill and Joseph Purdy having taken the Oaths appointed, etc. and
subscribed the Test, as appeared by Certificate under the Hands of the said
Coll. Courtlandt and Coll. Bayard, the House unanimously chose James Graham,
Esquire their Speaker, and accordingly conducted him to the Chair. Upon the taking
of which the House requested of him, That upon his being approved by his
Excellency, he would please to address his Excellency, in behalf of this House,
and demand that their former Rights, Privileges and Customs may be confirmed
to them, viz.

Imprimis, That none of the Members, nor their Servants, be arrested or
molested during the Sessions. That they may have freedom of Access to his
Excellency and Council, when occasion presents. That they may have liberty of
Speech, and a favorable Construction made upon all Debates that may arise
among them. And for the Removal of all Mis-understandings between the Governor
and Council, and this House, that a Committee of the Council may be appointed
to join with a Committee of this House, to confer on such matters as shall
occur. And that this their Demands may be approved by his Excellency and
Council, and accordingly entered in the Council Books.

Whereupon the House went all to the Fort, and did present James Graham, Esquire to
be their Speaker, who was accordingly approved of by his Excellency. Upon which
approbation Mr. Speaker did, in behalf of the whole House, assure his
Excellency, that they were Persons Loyal, and well affected to his Majesty, and
the present Government; and also, did address his Excellency, as was desired by
the House, in their behalf, and did desire. That their Rights and Privileges,
etc. should be continued to them, as usual, etc. Which Address was approved of
by his Excellency and Council, and accordingly granted.

Then his Excellency was pleased to make a short Speech to the House, the Heads
of which were as follows, viz.

To take care of the Fronteers, that Provision be made from the first of May
last.

To consider of the Forces come over, and the Quota assigned to this Province
for an united Force from all the Kings Plantations on the Main

To consider the Circumstances of the Province, with regard to the News come
from the Lords of the Admiralty, and Intelligence from Albany.

All which are for the ease and safety of the Province: The one cannot be long
lived without the other.

The House returned, Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair, and recites to the House
his Excellency's Speech, ut supra.

In regard that his Excellency's Speech did consist of several Heads, whereof
some may have been omitted in the Recital thereof by the Speaker, it is
Ordered, That Major Wessells and Mr. Tuthel do wait upon his Excellency, and to
desire that the Heads of his Speech might be sent to this House in writing.

John Jackson, one of the Representatives of Queens County, came to the House,
Whereupon it was Ordered, That Mr. Purdy, one of the Members thereof, do go
with him to the Fort, and see the Oaths appointed, etc, administed to him, and
that he subscribe the Test. Mr. Purdy returned, and declared, That he was
present when the Oaths were administered to the said Jackson by Coll. Courtlandt
and Coll. Bayard, and likewise saw him subscribe the Test. Whereupon the said
Jackson desired to take his place accordingly.

Ordered, That the further Consideration of his Excellency's Speech be referred
till the Afternoon.

Major Wessells and Mr. Tuthel do resort from his Excellency, That his
Excellency will take care the Heads of his Speech be prepared and sent to the
House in writing, according to the Message committed to them.

Ordered, That the Roll of the House be called over. Upon calling over the
Roll, Major Howell, returned a Representative for Suffolk County, and Henry
Beekman and William d' Meyer, returned Representatives for the County of
Ulster, were absent.

Ordered, That the Speaker do issue out his Warrant, Requiring the said
Representatives forthwith to attend the service of this House.

Adjourned till Two a Clock Post. Merid.

Die Veneris 2 hor. P. M. June 21. 1695.
Ordered, That every Representative here present do give his attendance at the
ringing of the Bell.

Mr. Jamison, Clark of the Council, came to the House, and brought with him the
heads of his Excellency's Speech in writing, which were in these words
following, viz.

T O take care of the Fronteers, that Provision be made from the first of May
last.

To consider of the Forces come over, and the Quota assigned to this Province
for an united Force, from all the Kings Plantations on the Main.

To consider the Circumstances of the Province, with regard to the News come
from the Lords of the Admiralty, and Intelligence from Albany. All which are
for the ease and safety of the Province. The one cannot be long lived without
the other.

By Order, D. Jamison, Cl. Concilij.

Ordered, That according to the direction of this House in the Morning, the
Consideration of his Excellency's Speech be immediately proceeded upon.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be given to his Excellency for the care
he has taken of the Province, and also for his favorable Speech to this House.

Adjourned till to morrow Morning 8 a Clock.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Saturni hor. 8. A. M. June 22. 1695.
UPon the Consideration of the second Head of his Excellency's Speech, Ordered,
That Mr. Van Eklin and Mr. Tuthil do wait upon his Excellency and Council, and
humbly desire a List of the Quota's appointed by his Majesty, for the security
of this Province.

Mr. Tuthil and Mr. Van Ecklin returned, and brought a List of the several
Quota's appointed by his Majesty for the security of this Province, (viz.)

Quota's of men ordered by their Majesty's out of the several Colloniel
here-under mentioned, for the Assistance of the Province of New York, viz.

Pennsilvania, 80 Massachusetts Bay, 350 Maryland, 160 Virginia, 240 Rhode
Island and Province Plantation, 48 Connecticut, 120 New York, 200 In all 1198

Ordered,

That his Excellency be addressed to order the Printer to print the daily Votes
of this House at the Public Charge, and that Mr. Read and Mr. Sebran do wait
upon his Excellency with the said Address.

Mr. Read and Mr. Sebran returned from his Excellency, and reported, That his
Excellency is very willing the daily Votes of this House should be printed at
the public Charge, but hopes that the House, (before the Session ends) will
allow the Printer something of further encouragement than what already
established.

Ordered,

That the Votes this House be daily printed, and that the Speaker issue out his
Warrant to the King's Printer, to print the same at the public Charge
accordingly.

Upon the Consideration of the second Head of his Excellency's Speech, the
House being very sensible of the great care and pains that his Excellency has
taken for the security of this Province, and more especially by interceeding
with his Majesty to procure the Forces which are now arrived for the
Re-enforcement of the same. And in humble expectation that the said Forces
shall be employed for the security of the Fronteers, and for freeing of
Detachments (which of late have been very grievous to this Province) for that
service for the future (except in time of Invasion and Rebellion) in humble and
most grateful Acknowledgement of the great Service, Benefit and Ease to this
Province, by the Favors done by his Excellency, and the future benefit that
this Province shall have by the service of the said Forces, to be employed on
the Fronteers, do unanimously agree, That there be a Levy of One Thousand
Pounds, to be raised upon the respective Inhabitants, etc. of this Province, to
be presented to his Excellency, the one half whereof to himself, the other half
to be employed by his Excellency to the said Officers and Soldiers, as he
shall see meet.

Adjourned till Monday Morning next, two a Clock P. M.

Die Luna 2 hor. P. M. June 24. 1695.
Upon the Consideration of the second Head of his Excellency's Speech, pursuant
to what was concluded upon by this House last Saturday, it is ordered. That
Alderman Schuyler, Mr. Abeel, Mr. Purdy, Mr. Sebran, Mr. Tuthel, Mr. Duxberry
and Mr Jackson be a Committee to adjust the Quota's and Proportions of each
respective County, for the payment of the said Thousand Pounds, and make their
Report thereof to morrow Morning at eight of the Clock.

Adjourned till to morrow Morning eight of the Clock.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives* I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Martis Ant. Merid. June 25. 1695.
A Bill to enable the City of New York to relieve the (...), and defray their
necessary and public Charge, was Read, and ordered a second Reading.

Adjourned till two a Clock P. M.

Die Martis hor. 2. P. M. 1695.
Ordered,

That the Levy of the Thousand Pounds he raised in each respective City and
County, according to the Quota's and Proportions following, viz.

City and County of New York, L 2^0 County of Westchester, 5^^ County of
Richmond, ^^0 Kings County, 190 Queens County, 1^0 Suffolk County, 2^^0 Ulster
County. 110 Orange County, 10 L 1^^^

Adjourned till to morrow Morning eight a Clock.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford is
Print the Journal of this House.

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Jovis Ant. Merid. June 27. 1695.
THe Report of the Committee appointed to examine what Forces have been
employed for the security of the Fronteers, since the first of May last, and
what they should have for the said Service, was read, and contained as
follows, viz.

June 26. 1695.
Pursuant to the within Order, the Committee ordered Mr. D' Key and Mr. Wessels
to wait upon his Excellency the Governor, and desire the Muster Rolls of the
Forces now in the Service at Albany, etc. who brought answer, That they should
be immediately sent.

About an hour after the said Rolls were sent.

Ordered, That the Committee be adjourned till two a Clock in the afternoon.

The Committee, according to adjournment, met at two a Clock in the afternoon,
and think it requisite that the Persons mentioned in the said Muster Rolls,
according to Mr. Wessels report, being in actual Service, ought to have for
their said Service, from the day of their being listed, etc. the several Sums
following, viz. For every Field and Commission Officer, according to former
establishment, and for every private Centinal 8 d. per Diem.

By Order of the Committee, Ellis Duxbury, Chairman.

The said Report being too general, Ordered, That it be recommended to the said
Committee, and that they do enumerate in their Report the particular number of
Forces employed in that service, and how long they have served since the first
of May last, and make their Report forthwith.

The Report of the Committee, appointed to examine what Forces have been
employed for the Defense of the Fronteers, etc. was read, and is as follows,
viz.

We think it is requisite, that the Persons mentioned in the said Muster-Rolls,
according to Mr. Wessels Report; and here unto annexed, being in actual
service, ought to have for their said Service, from the day of their being
entered on the (...), the several Sums following, viz. For every Commission
Officer and Field Officer according to the former Establishment, and for every
private Centinal 8 d. per Diem.

By Order of the Committee, Ellis Duxbury, Chairman.

We do find, according to the Muster-Rolls produced to us by Major Wessells, as
follows, viz. Capt. Peter Schuyler, The First Lieutenant, the Second
Lieutenant, Four Serjants, Four Corporals, One Montr^^^. One Drum, One Clerk,
and Thirty one Centinals have been in the Service at Albany since the 1 st. of
May last.

We do also find more in the said Service, viz. since May the 7 th, One
Centinal, May 9 th, Two Centinals, May 16 th, Two Centinals, May 22 d, Two
Centinals, May 23 d, Three Centinals. In all forty one Centinals.

We do also find under the Command of Major Howell, in the said Service at
Albany, since the 18th of May last, One Major, one Captain, one Lieutenant, one
Ensign, four Serjants, two Drums, four Corporals, one Clerk, and thirty four
private Centinals.

And since the said 18th day of May, we find entered into the said Service,
viz. May the 23 d, Fifteen Centinals, May 25 th, Seven Centinals. May 26 th,
Two Centinals. In all 58 Centinals.

Ellis Duxbury, Chairman.

Whereupon it was objected, That the allowance of Major Schuylers Company was
not according to Promise. It is therefore Ordered, That the same be recommitted
to the said Committee, for their further Consideration of the allowance to the
said Company, according to said Promise, and make their Report thereof
forthwith.

The Committee, to whom the Examination of what Forces were employed for the
Defense of the Fronteers, etc. bring in their Report that was recommitted to
them, which was ordered to be Read, and contained as follows, viz.

June the 27th. 1695.
The Committee appointed to examine what Forces have been employed for the
Security of the Fronteers, since the first of May last, and what Reward they
shall have for the said Service, do Report, That the several Forces mentioned
in the Muster- Rolls, unto us produced by Major Wessels, and enumerated in the
annexed, are in actual Service, and ought to have for their said Service (from
the day of their entering into the same) the several Sums following, viz. To
every Field Officer and Commission Officers etc. according to former
Establishment. To every private Centinal of Major Schuylers Company, 12 d. per
Diem, with the advance Money already paid them. And to every private Centinal
of Major Howels Company, 8 d. per diem. And that they do think it requisite,
that a Fund be raised for the payment of the said Forces until the first of
August, next, according to the allowance abovesaid.

By Order of the Committee, Ellis Duxbury, Chairman.

Which Report is approved by the unanimous Consent of the House, and its
ordered, that Capt. Schuyler, Mr. Tuthel, Capt. Whitehead, Mr. Underhill and
Mr. Ecklin be a Committee to examine how much the Sum of the said Service shall
amount to, and the Quota's and Proportions of each respective City and County
accordingly, and make Report thereof to morrow Morning at eight of the Clock.

A Bill to enable the City and County of Albany to defray their necessary
Charge was Read, and ordered a second Reading.

Adjourned till to morrow Morning eight a Clock.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die veneris 8 hor. Ant. Merid. June 28. 1695.
THe Report of the Committee appointed to examine how much the Sum to pay the
Forces at Albany shall amount to, and the Quota's and Proportions of each
respective City and County, etc. was read, and was in these words following,
viz.

June 28. 1695.
Pusuant to the within Order, we have examined how much the Sum of the said
Service shall amount to, and do find that the Sum of eight hundred Pounds will
satisfy and pay the Forces employed on the Fronteers since the first of May
last, until the first of August next ensuing, with the incidental Charges. And
that the Levy of the said 800 l. be raised in each respective City and County,
according to the Quota's and Proportions following, viz.

City and County of New York, L. 224 County of Westchester, 40 County of
Richmond, 16 Kings County, 152 Queens County, 112 Suffolk County, 160 Ulster
County, 88 Orange County, 08 L. 800.

By Order of the Committee, Daniel Whitehead, Chairman.

Which is approved of by the whole House, and ordered that the said Sum be
raised accordingly.

This House having received Information that one of the Soldiers lately sent
over by his Majesty, at the Solicitation of his Excellency, for the security of
this Province, has been sentenced to Death, for a Mutuny by him acted in his
coming over to this Province. The House of Representatives considering the
Service those Forces came to do in this Province, and being willing to
encourage them in the faithful discharge of their Duty for the future, become
humble Suppliants unto your Excellency, That your Excellency would favorably
be pleased to grant unto the said Soldier his Majesty's Pardon for his said
Offense, which shall ever be gratefully acknowledged by Us, and all his
Majesty's good Subjects within this Province, whom we represent. And ordered,
That Mr. D' Key, Mr. Abeel, Mr. Tuthil, Mr. Sebran, Mr. Stillwell, Mr.
Underhill, and Mr. Jackson, do wait upon his Excellency with this Address.

Mr. D' Key returned, and reported, That he waited upon his Excellency with the
Address, and that his Excellency was very willing to comply with the Request of
the House, and that their Address should be accordingly granted.

Ordered,

That the Speaker do draw up a Bill for the raising of one Thousand Pounds upon
the respective Inhabitants, etc. of this Province, the one half whereof to be
presented to his Excellency, and the other half to the Officers and Soldiers
lately come over for the secruity of this Province.

Ordered,

That the Speaker draw up a Bill for the raising of eight hundred Pounds, for
the paying and satisfying the Forces employed by his Excellency for the
security of the Fronteers from the first of May last until the first of August
next ensuing; and bring the same into this House on Monday next.

Adjourned till Monday next at two a Clock in the after noon.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Luna 2 hor. P. M. July 1. 1695.
Colonel Henry Beekman and Major William D' Meyr returned Representatives for
Ulster County, and Major Matthew Howell returned a Representative for Suffolk
County, came to the House, and having taken the Oaths, etc. and subscribed the
Test (as appeared by Certificate under the hands of Coll. Stephanus van
Courtlandt and Coll. Nicholas Bayard, were desired to take their places
accordingly.

A Bill for the preventing the deserting of his Majesty's Service, among the
Forces arrived for the Security of this Province, and for giving a Reward to
such as discover the same, was Read, and ordered a second Reading.

A Bill for the encouraging of Seamen, was Read, and ordered a second Reading.

A Bill granting to his Majesty one Thousand Pounds, the one half to be allowed
unto his Excellency, and the other half unto the Officers and Soldiers lately
arrived, for their encouragement, was read* and ordered a second Reading.

A Bill for the raising eight hundred Pounds, for the paying and maintaining
the Officers and Soldiers employed for the securing the Fronteers of this
Province at Albany, from the first of May last to the first of August. was
read, and ordered a second Reading.

A Bill for the preventing the deserting of his Majesty's Service, among the
Forces arrived for the security of this Province, and for giving a Reward to
(...) shall discover the same, was a second time read, and ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill for the encouraging of Seamen was a second time read, and ordered to
be engrossed.

The Bill granting to his Majesty one Thousand Pounds, the one half to be
allowed unto his Excellency, and the other half unto the Officers and Soldiers
lately arrived, for their encouragement, was a second time read, and ordered to
be engrossed.

The Bill for the raising eight Hundred Pounds, for the paying and maintaining
the Officers and Soldiers employed for the securing the Fronteers of this
Province at Albany, from the first of May to the first of August was read a
second time, and ordered to be engrossed.

The Speaker, at the request of Coll. Hamilton, moved this House, That the Act
of General Assembly, entitled, An Act for the encouraging a Post Office, might
be continued for three years longer.

Ordered, That the Speaker do bring in a Bill accordingly.

Adjourned till to morrow Morning eight of the Clock.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Martis 8 hor. Ant. Merid. July 2. 1695.
MR. Speaker, according to the order of the House yesterday, brought in a Bill
for continuing the Act for encouraging the Post Office three years longer,
after the expiration of the said Act, which was read, and ordered a second
reading.

The said Bill was read a second time, and ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill to enable the City and County of Albany to defray their necessary
Charge, was a second time read, and ordered to be engrossed, with the amendment
of two years, instead of three.

The Bill granting to his Majesty one Thousand Pounds, the one half to be
allowed unto his Excellency, and the other half unto the Officers and Soldiers
lately arrived, for their encouragement, was read the third time, and passed,
and ordered that the same be sent up to the Governor and Council for their
assent.

The Bill for the raising eight Hundred Pounds, for the paying and maintaining
the Officers and Soldiers employed for the securing the Fronteers of this
Province at Albany, from the first of May to the first of August was read the
3d time, and passed, and ordered to be sent up to the Governor and Council for
their assent.

Ordered,

That Coll. Beekman, Mr. Tuthell, Capt. Jackson, and Mr. Sebran do wait upon
his Excellency and Council with the said Bills passed, for their Assent.

A Bill for the preventing the deserting of his Majesty's Service, among the
Forces arrived for the Security of this Province, and for giving a Reward to
such as shall discover the same, was Read the third time, and approved, and
ordered that it be sent up to the Governor and Council for their assent.

The Bill for the encouraging of Seamen, was Read the third time, and passed,
and ordered that it be sent up to the Governor and Council for their assent.

Ordered, That Mr. Abeel, Capt. Schuyler, and Mr. Read do wait upon his
Excellency and Council with the Bill for preventing the deserting of his
Majesty's Service, etc. and the Bill for encouraging of Seamen, for their
assent.

The Bill for continuing the Act for encouraging the Post Office three years
longer, was read the third time, and passed, and ordered that it be sent up to
the Governor and Council for their assent.

The Bill for enabling the City and County of Albany to defray their necessary
Charge, was read the third time, and passed, and ordered to be sent up to his
Excellency and Council for their assent accordingly.

Ordered, That Mr. Duxbury, Ma jor Wessels and Mr. Underhill do wait upon his
Excellency and Council with the said Bills passed, for their assent.

The Bill to enable the City of New York to relieve the poor and defray their
necessary and public Charge, was a second time read, and ordered to be
engrossed.

Adjourned till two a Clock in the afternoon.

Die Martis P. M. 2 hor. July 2. 1695.
The Bill to enable the City of New York, etc. was read the third time, and
passed, and ordered that it be sent up to the Governor and Council for their
assent.

Ordered, That Capt. Schuyler, Capt. D' Key, and Capt. Read do wait upon his
Excellency and Council with the said Bill for their assent.

The Petition of the Representatives of the County of Westchester was read, and
granted, and ordered that a Bill be brought in accordingly.

Adjourned till to morrow morning 8 a Clock.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Mercurij 8 hor. Ant. Merid. July 3. 1695.
A Bill to enable the Representatives of the County of Westchester to receive
their allowance, according to Act of General Assembly, etc. was, according to
the Order of the House yesterday, brought in and read, and ordered a second
reading.

The said Bill was read the second time, and ordered to be engrossed.

The aforesaid Bill to enable the Representatives of the County of Westchester,
was read the third time, and passed, and ordered to be sent up to the Governor
and Council for their assent.

Ordered, That Mr. Underhill and Mr. Purdy do wait upon his Excellency and
Council with the said Bill, for their assent.

Coll. Caleb Heathcore and William Pinhore, Esquire brought a Message to the House
from his Excellency and Council, with the Bills for preventing Deserters, etc.
and the Bill for encouraging of Seamen, with the Amendments annexed, and
desire this House to consent to the same.

The House took into Consideration the Amendments annexed to the Act for
encouraging of Seamen, and agree to the same.

Ordered, That Mr. Read and Mr Abeel do carry up the Bill for encouraging of
Seamen, with the amendments.

The House of Representatives taking into Consideration the Amendments sent
down by his Excellency and Council, with the Bill entitled, A Bill for
preventing the deserting of his Majesty's Service, etc. and cannot agree to the
first Amendment, for the changing the Title of the said Bill, because this
House did frame the Bill on purpose only for such of the Forces that arrived to
be employed for his Majesty's Service in this Province, and for none other,
except such as should lift themselves for the future in the said Companies.

They likewise cannot agree to the second Amendment, because the Preamble sets
forth the Reason why the Bill was framed, and the Bill was only made to
discourage those only Forces from deserting the said Service, and to correct
and punish such of the Inhabitants of this Province that should be in any
manner of way aiding or assisting to the encouraging of them therein.

This House does agree to the third Amendment, that the words ( without leave
from his proper Officer) be left out, and to the same words in the Paragraph
mentioned, and agree to mention the Kings Reign when the Act of Parliament,
mentioned in the said Bill, was made.

Ordered,

That Mr. Wessels and Mr. Van Ecklen carry up the said Bill, with the said
Amendments.

Adjourned till two a Clock in the afternoon.

Die Mercurij P. M. 2 hor. July 3. 1695.
The House of Representatives now convened in General Assembly do humbly
address his Excellency and Council, and pray, that they will allow unto William
Bradford, his Majesty's Printer for this Province, the yearly Sallary of Twenty
Pounds current Money of this Province, over and above the Sallary already
allowed him by his Excellency and Council. And ordered that Coll. Beekman,
Major Howell, Mr. Read, Capt. Whitehead, Major D' Meyr, and Mr. Ranslaer do
wait on his Excellency and Council with this Address.

Adjourned till to morrow Morning 8 a Clock.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker,

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695.

VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for his Majesty's Province of New York.
Die Jovis 8 hor. Ant. Merid. July 4. 1695.
Ordered,

THat the Clerk of this House do bring in an Account of what Charges has
accrew'd for Officers Salearys, House-Rent, and other Expenses during this
Sessions.

The Account of the House-Rent, Salaries, Expenses, etc. was accordingly
brought in by the Clerk, and read, and approved, etc.

Ordered, That an Address be made to his Excellecy, the Governor, and Council,
to order his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General to pay to John Clapp,
Clerk of this House, the sum of twenty Pounds nineteen Shillings, which is for
so much due for Salaries to the Clerk, Doorkeeper, House-Rent, and several
other Expenses during this Sessions of Assembly, as by the Account thereof this
day brought into the House does appear.

Mr. Jamison, Clerk of the Council, brought a Message from his Excellency and
Council, requiring the Speaker, with the whole House, to give their immediate
attendance at the Council Chamber.

The Speaker immediately left the Chair, and went with the whole House
accordingly to the Port.

The Speaker returned to the House, after he had waited upon his Excellency and
Council at the City Hall, for the Publication of the Laws hereafter mentioned,
and resumed the Chair, and acquainted the House that his Excellency was pleased
to acquaint the House that there was five Bills that he had passed; and that
there was two others, one whereof was a Bill for the preventing the deserting
his Majesty's Service, etc. which had been sent down to this House with
Amendments, to which this House had not agreed, he therefore thought fit, with
the Advice of his Majesty's Council, to lay it aside. There was another Bill
for granting to his Majesty one Thousand Pounds, etc. in which he perceived
there was a Complement paid to himself, for which he was thankful; but in
regard that he found it not consistent with his Honor to pass it, he did
likewise, by the advice of the Council, reject it; And gave this House
assurance, That as he had studied the ease and safety of the Province, so he
would continue to manifest the same at all times. And that he understood there
had been great dissatisfaction about the Accounts, and recommended that this
House would appoint a Committee for the viewing of the said Accounts, which
should accordingly be ready for their Examination, that they might make Report
thereof against the next Sessions. And thereupon was pleased to ad journ the
Assembly unto the first of October next, and required the attendance of the
House to the City Hall for the Publication of the Bills past. Whereupon the
Speaker with the whole House, attended him accordingly; and there was then
published the Bills following, viz.

A Bill to enable the City of New York to relieve the Poor, and defray their
necessary and public Charge.

A Bill to enable the City and County of Albany to defray their necessary
Charge.

A Bill for encouraging of Sea men.

A Bill for continuing the Act for encouraging the Post Office three years
longer after the expiration of the said Act.

A Bill for raising eight hundred Pounds for paying and maintaining the
Officers and Soldiers Employed for the Security of the Fronteers of this
Province at Albany from the first of May to the first of August.

The House taking into consideration the Report made to this House by the
Speaker, of his Excellency's Speech, do order, That the Thanks of this House be
returned to his Excellency for the care that he has taken for the case and
safety of this Province, and the assurance he had given them of the continuance
of the same.

Ordered, That Capt. Schuyler, Mr. Read, Capt. D' Meyr, Capt. Whitehead. Mr.
Duxbury, Major Howell, Mr. Abeel, Mr. Underhill, Mr. Ranslaer, and Mr. Van
Ecklin* do wait upon his Excellency with this Address, and be likewise a
Committee to examine the Accounts of the Government, of what Money has been
raised, and what disbursed from the arrival of Coll. Slaughter, until this day.
And for the more easy and effectual doing thereof, That they do meet at the
City of New York ten days before the meeting of the next Sessions of Assembly,
and they or any seven of them to be this Committee, and make Report thereof to
the next Sessions of Assembly. And the House accordingly, to the time directed
by his Excellency, did Adjourn this House until the first day of October next
at ten a Clock in the Morning. And this House is ad journ'd accordingly.

B Y Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print the Journal of this House,

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Bible in New York, 1695.


