Contemplations ON Mortality.

Wherein The Terrors of DEATH are laid open, for a Warning to Sinners: And the
Joys of Communion with Christ for Comfort to Believers.

By Samuel Lee. M. A. Sometime Fellow of Wadham College. Oxon.

Phil. 3.20, 21. We look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body.

Bernard, To the Knights of the Temple. The death of Christ is the death of my
death; because he died that I should live: for how is it possible that he
should not live, for whom life has dyed.

BOSTON in N. E. Reprinted by B Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips, at
the Brick Shop. School.

To His Highly Honored Father, Mr. Samuel Lee. Grace and Peace be multiplied
from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Honored and Dear Sir,
THis little Tract was hatched by the warmth of your desires: it has broke
shell too hastily: It looks but callow and speeds to your bosom for wing and
protection. The bonds of nature, grace and promise oblige it from me: I wish it
'twere worthy your view, might help your faith or raise your joy. I shall wrap
my Preface under the dignation of your paternal leave in a Testimony, a
Request, and a Prayer.

M^ Testimony respects a grateful acknowledgment of your singular goodness,
unwearied kindness and tender love from my birth upward. When reason budded,
Deuteronomy. 32.2.
your wholesome and godly counsels ever dropped as rain, your speech as dew, as
small rain upon the tender herb, and as showers upon the grass. The warmth of
your affection cherisht me under the divine influence into a flower: your
wisdom then transplanted me into the nurseries of grace and learning, and at
length to the Muses garden at Oxford. It was ever your pious care to place me
under the shadow of holy Tutors. I magnify God and thankfully acknowledge your
prudence and love. My body indeed was ever but tender and weak: your affections
strong and vigorous, your charges great, your solicitous thoughts were ever
wakeful, that no unkind storm might blow upon me. I prosper'd, for God was with
you, your prayers went up, his blessing came down, and lo, by the grace of God.
I hope your labor has not been altogether in vain in the Lord. You watched me,
and the Lord us both, and has kept us as the apple of his eye, and has blessed
up together many lustres of years. There Is none like the God of Jesurun, Deuteronomy.
33.26.
that rides on the heavens for our help, and in his excellency upon the sky.
The eternal God be your refuge, and underneath the everlasting arms*

Dear Sir, my Request follows. The God of Heaven has sprung a branch out of
your roots, and given you to see a grand son of your own bowels. Blessed be his
name, who begins to speak concerhis servants 2 Samuel 7.19.
house for a great while to come. Will you please to give him a principal share
in the lifting up of your hands to the holy Oracle; that the Covenant may never
depart out of his mouth Isay 59 21.
nor the mouth of his seed (which the Lord graciously grant him) nor the mouth
of his seeds seed for ever. Will you please to lay your hands on his head and
say of him as holy Jacob to Joseph? Genesis 48.15.
The God, who fed me all my life long to this day, the Angel, who redeemed me
from all evil, when I came over Jabbok from Laban my hard Uncle: Bless the Lad,
and let my name be named upon him: let the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush, over-shadow his heart. Will you please to bless him in the name of the
mighty God of Jacob, that his days may be long? If it seem good in the eyes of
the divine wisdom, that he may grow to a multitude in the midst of the earth,
and see peace upon Israel, that his smell may be of a field, which the Lord
has blessed: Deuteronomy. 33.12.
Let the Lord cover him all the day long, let him dwell between his shoulders.

He is designed for the Sanctuary: if the Lord please to accept and gift him,
and to bless his times with seasons and places of whole-some and pious
literature. Be pleased to bless him as a free will offering in the name of the
Lord, that your little Samuel may be girt with a linen Ephod to minister
before him in Shiloh, to burn incense and whole burnt offerings upon his Altar:
that grace being poured upon his heart and lips, he may have the tongue of the
learned to speak a word in season to weary souls.

Honored Sir, My humble Prayer remains that the great God of Heaven would
please graciously to support your Spirits under the weakness of age, that you
may never want the staff of Jacobs faith to lean upon, in the hour of worship;
that your sleep may be sweet in Bethel upon the Cornerstone, and afterward
may ascend the Seraphical Ladder after the great Angel of the Covenant into
Heaven, that over all your sacrifices of prayer and praise that Angel of the
Lord Judge. 13 19.
may do wonderfully; that at even^ing-tide, the covenant of free grace may
shine full in your face like the 2 Samuel 23.4.
light of the morning, when the Sun is arising, even a morning without clouds,
and that your assurance may spring like the tender grass by clear shining after
rain, that Luke 2.28.
Simeon like you may take Christ in the arms of your faith while living, and
that Christ may warm your heart in the arms of his love, when dying; That you
may sing aloud that lovly Song, Now let thy Servant depart in peace: For mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation: that having seen him here as a Prince of peace,
you may see him there as the King of glory.

If the following papers may contribute any thing: I rejoice, waiting that
blessed time, when all our joys shall be full and none Joh. 16.22, 24.
take them away, when Christ shall see us again, and Heb. 9.28.
appear the second time to our Salvation. When the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world [EXALEIPSI] shall also Rev. ^.7.
wipe away all tears, not only from standing in, but springing out of our eyes,
when the tear fountain shall be dried up, and the Punctum lachrymale Bartholin
Anat. p. 344.
conduit stopped.

Here Is little, out sinning and suffering, mourning and praying, there shall be
nothing but holy enjoying, rejoicing and praising. Here we 2 Cor. 5.2, 4.
groan being burdened with clay-tabernacles, which set heavy and weighty upon
us, since the animal spirits are much exhaust^^ ^y length of days and the
sorrows of this frail life. And yet we groan, but not simply to be unclothed,
not merely to put off our clay; but to be clothed upon, af^ter our clay; is
baked in the earth into a transparent Porcellane Tabernacle, fit for glory.
When Mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and our vile bodies Phil. 3.21.
shall be changed and fashioned* like his most glorious body; then shall we
ever follow the Lamb with agile spirits wherever he goes, leading us to the
living fountains of waters. The Lord graciously make us all fit vessels for the
Temple not made with hands, by the imputat^^^ of his Sons righteousness, that
after a holy life, we may sleep peaceably in Jesus and reign triumphantly with
him.

Most honored Sir, I humbly commend you into the bosom of this blessed La^b
and Prince of Life to be presented Ephesians. 5^27.
without spot or wrincle unto himself. (...) his Lamb-like Shepherd of Zion,
that his crook and his staff may comfort you. That goodness and mercy may
follow you all your days, and you may dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

So prays, humbly and earnestly begging your fervent petitions and blessings
from the fountain of Israel, upon

Your most obedient Son, in all humble duty and sincere affection, in our Lord
Jesus. S. L.
July 30. 1669.
Contemplations ON MORTALITY.
PSALM. 23.4. Yea, though I should walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I
will not fear evil: for thou will be with me; thy crook and thy staff^^ they
shall comfort me.


CHAP. I. Upon the words of the Psalmist.
KIng David from his Royal Palace in Mount Zion, might feast his eyes with many
dilicious Prospects.

1. The first and chiefest was the Tabernacle of the Lord of Hosts, who Psa.
87.2.
gates of that mountain, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. This holy Prince
delighted in communion with God and therefore is fryled a man after Gods own
heart: he Psalm. 13.1.2, 4, 5.
swore against the slumber of his eyelids, till he found a place for the Lord,
a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. And where did he fix the Tents of the
holy One of Israel? did he not bring up the Ark from the house of Obed-Edam
into the Sam 6 12.
City of David with gladness? For Psa. 132.13.
the Lord had chosen Zion, he desired it for his habitation. Thrice happy those
Princes, who entertain the pure Worship of God within their Courts. They shall
Ps. 89.15.
know the joyful sound of Temple-musick they shall walk, O Lord, in the shining
light of thy countenance.

David enamelled his eyes, was the pleasant City of Jerusalem, Ps. 122.3
a City Compact together, Psalm 48 2, 3.
beautiful for sci^uation, the joy of the whole earth, God is known in her
Palaces for a refuge

A third, Was the valley of Kidron, a Kedar, obscurities and thick shadows,
environed with mountains and a swift torrent trilling along its caverns This
gave a comely off set to the neighboring hills: here were the shady strokes of
natures pencil the more to illustrate the bright pieces of this holy Land-skip,
Hence were redoubled the pleasant and warbling eccho^s of the silver-Trumpets
at new Moons and Sacrifices.

The fourth and last, was the three-ridged Olivet fruitful, healthful, and
pleasant.

In the first of these Prospects, he saw the holy One of Israel walking in his
Sanctuary, and enjoyed sweet fellowship with the divine Oracles. From the
second, he took a view of the State of this vain life. In the third, he might
raise Contemplations upon the house of all living. In the fourth, he beheld as
in a glass, a glorious cast of the Resurrection, Zach. 14 4.
the day of Judgment, and Ascension to Heaven.

The sweet Singer of Israel had tuned in consort with his Harp, many choice
Meditations, near the murmuring waters of Kidron, and here in this Psalm he
plays upon the valley it self. Let Us descant on his Lesson in four parts.

1. Here Is a comparison of the state of death, to a walk in the shady valley of
Kidron. I know it is usual to interpret the shadow of death, by great and deep
afflictions, but I shall accept the phrase in this method: In its first notion,
that darkness which seizes upon persons ready to die, is represented. In a
second the grave and death it self. Its plain by the conferences of Job 3.5 and
10.21 and 34 22 and 38.17.
Job with his Arabian comforters, 'twas Eastern language. In a third by a
Me^alepsis, those horrors and terrors that attend the agonies of dying mortals:
yea, any grievous calamities that paint the face of death to the life in the
glass of imagination.

Here under an elegant Allegory holy David prosecutes the divine shepheardy:
Gods gracious care and conduct. The green pastures and the crystal streams
with which his soul was refresht; Not doubting but goodness and mercy should
follow him all the days of his life, and although he should be lead through
the valley of the grave; the Lions and the B^ars, the Tigers and the Wolves of
those fell bottomes should not scare him. I will fear no evil for thou art with
me. Assuring himself that the great Shepherd of Israel had wisdom and power
sufficient to guide him safely and at length to enclose this sheep of his
Pasture in the Folds of his house Ps. 23.6.
of glory for ever. Other shepherds tremble at the yelling of the Lions, and
the print of their foot stamps horror, much more to convey their Flocks under
such dismal shadows be the shades never so verdant, and the gliding brooks
never so sweet and pleasant; lest they and their sheep prove sorry comforters
to one another, when they slide together into the Maws of such ravening
Butchers. But here is a blessed and glorious shepherd Muscul ^^ Loc.
( qui sciens prudensq, ducet in mortem ipsam:) who purposes and resolves to
lead his Flock through the jaws of death; So that David sings this Psalm in the
warm feelings of the divine Presence, I Will fear no evil: thy crook and thy
staff they shall comfort me.

Secondly, Here Is the person, that walks ruddy, royal and holy David. Thy
sanguin complexion must now turn blanck and melancholy, when Abishag's arms
shall be cold and feeble comforters, and thy real body must shrink into this
grim 1 Samuel 19.16.
Michots bed. That conquering Sword at whose brandishing, Edam and Ammon
trembled, must be shaped into deaths Sith to mow thee from the Land of the
Living. Thy holy heart must take Sanctuary in the divine Covenant, Ps 49, 1^
89, 48.
that God will one day redeem thy life from corruption, and thy darling from
the hand of the grave.

Thirdly, We should muster up the evils that put on their armor, gird on their
Swords, and whet their glittering Spears for a fatal encounter in this valley.

Fourthly, We must prepare the Cordia^ls, the Balms and all the sustaining fear
no evil, since God is with us, his Crook and his Staff shall comfort us. Micah
7 14* Lev. 27.32.
Bochari de animal. l 2. c. 44. col 459. part 1.
His Shebet [pe^um pastorale,] his Shepherds Crook to guide and conduct to the
Pastures of Glory, his Mishgnan, his staff^, to beat off wild beasts and
enemies that might assault and annoy us.

CHAP. II. Of the Valley of Death.
DEath it is compared to a Valley, to a Valley of shadow, to a walk in a Valley,
to a night walk in this shady Valley of Kidron.

1. Death is compared to a Valley, While men are alive their feet are set upon
a Rock, on a high Mountain on the towering Pinnacle of a Temple, and Oh how hard
it is for any to persuade themselves, that they shall once step down the
precipice into this Valley. Every one thinks he may live to morrow, be he never
so old: and the morrow of his thoughts can see no evening. But down he must and
visit the dark land of his forefathe^s mansions.

In the Valley of Kidron were the Jer. 31.40.
Jewish Sepulchers on the East Side of the City, between the aspiring Mountains
of Moriah and O^ivet. Here the Ravens of the Valley pi^k^ out the Prove 30.17.
Eyes of disobedient Children. Did Jews or Romans (who had also their Tombs in
the Live. Dec. 3. l. 6.
Esquilian Mountains on the East of Rome) turn their faces to the rising Sun,
in hope of a resurrection to a future life? whatever glances might in spirit
their Customs: Into this Valley they must all desc^nd and run their appointed
race. Into this Valley of Kidron, through the watergate was conveyed the Soil
and Off^l and Filth of the City: probably most of their Sewers and Drains had
here their vent. Here all the Jer. 31.40^
Ashes and refuse of the Sacrifices, all the recrements and purgations of the
Temple found a Lay-stall. Death and the grave cover all.

Its a high pitch of Grace to be humbled unto the death, to mingle the dust of
our noble bodies with such off scourings and sullage, to converse with the
records of rottenness. But so it is with a Saint, he submits his will and yields
up his spirit to God: To putrify a while in the Valley of Himnon, that by
Heavens Chemistry, he may spring up into a Tree of Life, in the Garden of
Gethsemany. Wicked men fret and fume at death, and curse the Apple that
poisoned nature, and some would seem to cheat death by a violent seicide, O
fool, ne moriare mori: by a choosing a violent, to avoid a natural death* by
cu^ting off present terrors, to hasten eternal.

But a Saint like a man in a dark Cavern under a mineral Mountain, sees light
at the other end by the Eye of Faith. He goes down into this V^lley leaning
upon the Staff of hope, of Christ in him the hope Col. 1.27
of glory: he spies Mount O^ivet, and the footsteps of Christ's Ascension. Cor.
5.2
He groans to be uncloathed of his filthy garments, expecting change of
^aiment, and places to walk among Angels Zach 3.7
that stand by and wai^ upon the Prince of the Covenant. He knows that his vile
body, this Phil 3.21.
body of humiliation, must once be a body of exaltation, and fashioned like his
glorious body, who is able to subdue all things to himself, and to came our
bodies into his own image.

Secondly, Death is a valley of shadow, Akrabbims, ascents of Scorpions and
Fons Draconis prope Jerusalem
Fountains of Dragons, and yet 1 Cor 15 57
the holy Spouse will go hand in hand with Christ, from the fleeting pleasures
of this mortal Lebanon, to view and walk in the midst of these tremendous
Dungeons. Cant 4 8


The Valley of Kidron of old likely was a dark Valley, not only for Rocks and
Mountains, but pitchy shades and thence ^ight yield a lively symbol of death:
here might be Trees and Shrubs which not only shut out the healing beams of the
Sun: but also by their opiate vapors, and the exhaling of deadly atoms, might
lull the brains asleep in the Cradle of Death: here might grow the funestous
Y^w, the strong-scented Box, that makes the head to fume, the melancholy
Cypress, the soporus Juniper with the Fur: here the dark greens of deadly
nightshade, the gross Savin and Dulcamara might entwine together, and cover
many an Asp, many a Cockatrice and a Basilisk; and plump them with their
direful poisons.

Does a Saint fear to trace these Regions and to measure the Land of his
Captivity? No! Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ, who gives him victory 1
Cor. 15.57
His f^et are shod with Gospel-promises: the Iron and Braz^n Deuteronomy. 3 ^
shoes of happy Asher fence him from the stings of these Haserap^im Number. 21 6.
Seraphims, these fiery Serpents: he shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the
young Lion and the Dragon shall he trample under foot; Ps. 91.13.
nay, he shrinks not, though let down into this Den of Lions: seeing the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah is with his Daniels.

And yet Darkness, this Egyptian darkness carries a lo^d of fear and sadness
upon i^s back, it exhales and breaths out terror from every dim hole within the
Valley: behind every bush lurks a glaring Leopard; from the cleft of every Rock
the young Dragons hiss out fire, and belch venom upon a carnal man. He that is
alive to sin, may tremble to dye to nature, and screik out and scream to think
of the old Serpent sliding through the marrow of his backbone and upbraid him
with bitter scoffs about the forbidden fruit. O ^ye Sons of Men how long will
ye love Psalm. 2.2.
vanity and forget your latter end? The length of their love to vanity keeps
pace with the line of Life; they turn not from it, til they turn into it, and
become vanity it self; and their place know them no more.

In time of some rowzing Sickness the Bell of Eternity tolls dolefully in their
Ears: then they say, By and by Lord, weel come to worship, to repent and amend:
but if a good Crisis lengthen the hopes of life; their gyant-promises sink into
Dwarfs, and their By and by lengthens out its Tenor through many a morrow, till
the last hour approaches, and then the day of invitation from divine grace,
turns into a day of provocation to the divine anger: he that swears in his Heb
6.17.
love to the Heirs of promise for their strong consolation, will Heb. 3.11.
swear in his wrath to the Children of disobedience that delay repentance, and
harden their hearts at the voice of God, they shall never enter in to his rest.

Alas! what is the life of man? but a Jam. 4.14
vapor appearing for a little while and then vanishes away: Man walks ^^ a
vain Job 8.9*
vain shadow while he lives, even the shadow of a vapor; every wind puffs it
away and man is not: a short lived vapor, that lives to be, but lives no
longer, no sooner in being, but it flies away, and who can gather it: what is
all time from the Suns first motion, till he turns to sackcloth; but a
perishing cut out of the bosom of Eternity: scarce worth the name of a point
or a moment to it. And, what then are the few and evil days of man's life upon
earth, like a spark gives a s^ap and ^^rishes; but when he dies, the shadows of
a dark, of a long Jer. 6.4.
evening are stretched upon him.

How wholesome is it to meditate under these shadows: By these things Isa. 33.16*
men live, and in all these is the life of our spirit: let us catch these
vapors by the hand of contemplation, and distill some spiritual Cordials.

Is life so Job 7.7.
vain a meteor? O vainer soul to build castles upon it: here is Heb. 11 10
no City that has foundations: that's in heaven, men trade, and buy, and build,
and plant, as if the Noah's second flood of fire and brimstone would never
come. All former ages are wrapped up in the short breath of a history, and yet
most men live, as if they thought their forefathers were by the Art of Magic
stepped aside in a mist, and the story of death but a Poets fable. But as Dion.
Cass. l. 53. p. V. 34.
Tiberius said of Scaurus, that revived an old Tragedy against the Emperor, he
himself should be Ajax. Thou look upon Death only as the Tragical Theme of
some sickly over-studied Minister, till thou become the Tragedy it self, and be
invelop't in eternal darkness: to which the shadow of death is but the shadow
of misery.

What makes night but the shadow of the earth? and what is death but the shadow
of the grave? every night is the shadow of death, and every sleep in the bed is
next of kin to that in the dust: and should raise up the holy seed of
meditation to his brother. While man lives, he walks in a shadow, and when he
dies he lies down in it: A carnal man dies once, and rises to Judgment: but
after that to a second death, and never rises more. A Saint indeed steps down
into this first Valley, but walks through it to glory. The Vale of Kidron was
also called the Valley of Tophet, and the Valley of Gehenna.
Ge-hennon, the Valley of Hell. From the Valley of the grave wicked men sink
into the bottom of Hell: But a Saint ascends from Kidron to Olivet.

Thirdly, Death is a Saints walk in this shady Valley. King David, might, but
Saint David would fear no evil; though he trod this dismal path. Christ is gone
before Act. 2.29.
the patriarch, and has left behind him the luster of his footsteps to
inlighten David's feet in the Psalm. 16 11.
path to life, 'Twas not his royal Diadem could ^azle the eyes of Death, and
fright him ^^om attaching his Ermine Robes, or guard him from apalement at the
wan looks of Death: Scepters as well as Shee^^ooks lie snapt in that Valley:
Purple and Sackcloth are alike begrim'd with the soil of the grave: The Worms
Tablecloth is spread with the fine Linen of Egypt, no less then the coursest
Woollen, not greatness, but goodness, not highness, but holiness, gains Letters
of safe conduct through this Valley. All pass through it, but a Saint walks
through it to the Mountains of Spices.

Fourthly, Death is a night-walk pass, not to stay there: it is a night-walk,
and there he must walk till the bright morning sorings* So many Suns must roll
over his body till the Resurrection. Then he that Dan. 12.2*
slept in the dust of the earth, shall awake to everlasting life. When his
mouldring Clay being well digested in the Sepulchral Vrn, shall attain
maturity: it shall then shine forth a diaphanous, splendid and glorious body.
The sleep of the ancient Heroe-Saints for some thousands of years, shall seem
but as the sleep of one night: Wicked men's souls may be terrified with dreams
and visions of horror in that dismal night; but a Saint sleeps quiet and sound,
and with Christ's dead body shall he arise: he tosses, Isa. 26.19.
he tumbles not in this bed of Roses: it is but one fast sleep to a laboring
and resting Saint; the worm shall suck the nerves of the wicked, and feed Job
25.20
sweetly on him; but a Saint feeds sweetly on death. It Is but his refreshment
from all the sorrows and ^oil of his heart and hands, that he found under the
Sun, and his works follow him to glory.

Saints indeed are noctambulones, night walkers in this Valley; but it is not
the fruit of undigested Suppers on the worlds D^inties, but as a happy pleasure
in the bosom of Christ. The separate Soul watches his lovely bedfellow, and
sings (a requiem, an Epithalamium) a Song of Love toward its Marriage-morning.
Nay Angels in shining garments ^it at the head and feet of a Saints grave. When
holy David Ps. 8.3.
considered Gods Heavens the work of his fingers, the Moon and the Stars which
he had ordained: he considers Man too, that God should remember him* and the
Son of Man that he should visit him, what is Man to a Star, to the Sun, to the
Heavens? yet a Saint's of more value to God then numerous Stars or the manifold
Orbs of Heaven. Was not David now on the Roof of his House by night gazing on
that ^pangled Canopy, and pondering on the greatness of the Stars, their
motion, luster and influence? May not a Saint thus meditate upon the
night-watches of the grave and look up to the Genesis 15.5
Stars as so many promises. Ps. 89 37.
and faithful witnesses in Heaven? When he views the Zodiac, he traces the
course of the Sun of righteousness: he looks upon the Milky Way, as the future
path of his glorified feet. He counts what if each Saint shall have a Star for
his Kingdom; and yet, that all the Stars are but the paintings of the
outhouses of that eternal Palace, wherein he shall dwell with God: When his
Fathers face shall visit him with the dayspring from on high, and the bright
morning Star shall glitter upon the Eastern Mountains of the Resurrection, and
proclaim the Suns arising to an eternal Jubilee.

CHAP. III. Of the persons walking in the Valley of Death.
IN this Valley of Kidron, David and Jonathans little Lad must gather up the
mortal arrows together. Princes and Skullions must do their homage alike in
Deaths Kitchen: There Is the homely House, the Straw-Hovell appointed Job 30
for all living: There be the AIDIOI OIKOI, Diodor. Sic. l. 1. e 5 1
the Camden in Glamorganshire.
eternales domus, those smoaky and fulsome Huts, about which (the leves animae)
the separate Ghosts do keep their residence: here the sprightly Satyrs tread
their measures, and paint green circles in the Elysian Fields, till the
blushing dawn of eternity. Ps. 22 29
None can keep alive his soul from death, nor ransom his Job 13.6.
lamp from darkness. The martial Commander creeps under his Bed Sueton in
Coleg. c. 51
with Caligula, at the rattling of this Thunderbolt: no Marble Palaces can
dazzle the eyes or daunt the approaches of Death: no iron bars can repel his
force: his aqua fortis burns all asunder: he stands not aghast at the pale and
wan looks of quivering Princes; but like a giant fluster'd with the wine of
blood looks terrible on the proud Nimrods of the World. Kings Edicts, that
Death be not whispered in their Courts are sullied on waste Paper, they but
daub their Royal Parchments with fond flourishes. Their strongest Towers are
but the spinstry of Spider-webs. Death's too great a Flesh-fly to be caught in
such Tiffany Walls, he will hum in their ears with hateful buzzing, will they,
nill they: There Is no Canon or Decree against him can stand inviolable. Should
Medes and Persians twist Laws as strong as Cables, this Sampson snaps them
asunder like raw Flax or twined threads If all Justinians pandects were cramb'd
with severe penalties, that death presume not to touch an Emperor or be rude
with his Lady or Children, he will send a Phocas to find them out, and bale them
to his Slaughterhouse. The Captains of their Guard with their Halberdiers,
fling down their Arms and cry craven. This old Leviathan Job 41 29.
counts their Darts as Stubble, and laughs to scorn the shaking of their
Spears. When this storm rises, this furious blast, he takes down the
top-gallant, and the Flags of Admirals, he cuts their Masts by the Board, the
wisest Pilot he flings overboard, no Anchor holds, they run adrift and are
shattered upon the Rocks.

The cunning Lawyer with all his shirks and querks, and Writs of Error cannot
hook out a Habeas Corpus from this unbribed B^r. Death has too subtle a Pate to
be overmarcht; he has Presidents and ruled Cas^s and Records as high as Adam:
There Is no Chancery refuge or Appeal from the Club-Law of this King's Bench;
he is Lord Chief Justice, and Jay^or, he is Sheriff and Executioner.

But what says Hipocrates with his Coan Aphorisms, and Galen with his long
winded Method? Cannot he open a Vein in the Arm of this raging Adversary, that
his Sword may fall, and the Calenture of his fury abate against Man kind? Is
there no enchanted Portion, nor amorous Cup can lull him asleep? O Physicians!
Are there no Recipe's in all your Dispensatories against the crack of
Heart Strings? Must his deadly Ague shake both you and your Patients into the
Grave? Must his dropsy drown you, his Fever burn you to Ashes, his
Consumption emaciate and waste you to Skelitons, and set up your Bones in his
Anatomy School? What is there no Antidote, no Treacle against the needle-teeth
of this black Adder? No! he turns a deaf ear to all your Siren-Lectures. This
Serpent* Eccles. 10 11.
will bite for all your enchantments: Such bablers are no better.

But alas! for this day of darkness Joel 2.2
this gloomy morning, that is spread upon the Mountains, Can we track no comfort
in this thick Fog of Ignorance? Are there no Trees of Life to be found in
Lebanon? Alas! is Eden lost? Is that Tree free among the dead? did the venomous
breath of the old Serpent wither it? did he hack it down? did he pluck it up by
the roots? Are there no sprouts from its chips, nor no healing atoms that flew
from its wounds into other shrubs or plants? Is there no drug in Arabia, no
balm in Gilead, no Spice in India can revive a languishing mortal? What no
Etheriall Spirits, nor irradiating Sulfurs, nor Mineral tinctures, nor Elixers
of Life to cure this stroke? Will Not potable Gold snatch back the flying Spirit,
and entreat that noble guest to stay a while within its old Cloister n^w
plaistred and gilt with this restorative? Will Not the limpid Alcahest make the
blood volatile, and circulate it nimbly against the cold congealing blast of
death? Will Not the great red-powder cure it? Then farewell all their empty
notions, and unpracticable maxims, their clogging (...) and ill digesting
Powders: their life-exhausting blood-le^s, and their cold mortal Juleps? O vain
man!

-- Nullis mors est medicabilis herbis.
No Plant in natures garden springs
To heal or swage these deadly stings.
Use the Physician, that is a duty: trust not in him, for that's a sin. Good Asa
had this mournful title upon his 2 Chronicles. 16.12, 13.
Tomb that he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, and slept with his
Fathers. Though the skilfulst Physician, and the holiest Saint do meet
together; yet both should count upon a last day, a last hour, and a last
moment, that they cannot pass. Isa 3.2*
The mighty man, and man of war, the Captain of Fifty, the honorable, the
Counselor, the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator, Death takes them
all by the hand and leads them into this gloomy Valley. He reverences not the
gray hairs, he rises not up to the milk-white brow of the grave and ancient,
nor lays down his crooked Since at the foot of aged and hoary heads: he strains
no courtesies with the weaker sex, nor gives it the upper hand; the pitiful
cries of tender Infants pierce not his Adamantine breast: This ^earless Moloch
hugs them mor^ally in his brazen arms, he has Urns proportioned to all their
Ashes, and Graves of every s^z^.

But what though riches and honor though sweet natures and vertu^us minds
prevail for no reprival: Must holy bones also see corrup^ion? Cannot Faith and
Prayer wrestle a fall with this mighty King of terrors No, no, though the
wicked twice fall under the din^ of this Goliahs Sword: yet it is appointed for
all Heb 9.17.
once to dye, and after that to Ju^gment: For as by one man sin entered Romans 5 12
into the world, and Death by sir; So death passes upon all men, for that all
have sinned: Faithful Abraham must lie down in the Cave of Machphe^oh Pa^ient
Job after all his Arabian Tragedies must act one Scene more, and say to
Corruption Job 17 14
thou art my Father, to the Worm, thou art my Mother and Sister: Strong Sampson
must fall by this Jawbone in the Vineyards of Zorah, and meek Moses though he
dye in a Deuteronomy. 32 50
Mountain, must walk down this deep 34.6
Valley of Abarim: Wise Solomon by all his prudent and politic maxims of
Government, cannot tame and rule this ferocious Behemoth, nor (...) this wild
Bull at his Figtree: But his (...) breath must out at the door of his lips, he
returns to his earth, Ps. 146.4
and that very day his thoughts and his reasons of State must perish: All his
skill in Botanicks could not extract such (an ens primum, or) a quintessence
from his Cedars in Lebanon, to prolong his life a moment beyond the appointed
Job 14.5.
months, and the bounds which he could not pass. No, nor holy Paul could not
strengthen the stakes of his Tabernacle or keep its curtains from trembling,
but an East wind from the Roman wilderness smites it down to the ground, and
all his Acts 18.3.
skill in Tent-work could not raise it: He therefore counts upon his house with
God, not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5.
eternal in the Heavens, and groans earnestly to be clothed upon, that
mortality might be swallowed up of Life. Q


But why must Saints dye? has not Christ paid a ransom to purchase them from
death? Must Daniel the man of desires be led into this second Captivity? Must
John the beloved Disciple, though he escape the boiling Oil, and rocky Patmos,
come down to his Tomb at Ephesus, and walk in this six-foot Valley? yes, even
he that lay in the bosom of Christ, must also sleep in the bosom of the grave.

To this may be replied, A 1
That Justification is a continued act of divine grace ( terminative and quoad
D^wnam of Justify. p. 6. Edit. fol. Land. 1639.
nos) in respect to us, and it lasts from our first conversion to the
declarative sentence of absolution at the day of Judgment, Indeed in respect to
God (who is actus purissimus) a most pure and absolute act and sits down
without any succession of times, in the glorious noon of Eternity, our
justification admits no degrees. It is not instilled into us drop by drop in
respect to him: but so soon as a man does truly believe, he stands truly and
perfectly righteous in the sight of God* The Covenant of Grace is ratified (
simul and semel) together and at once, at the Throne of God in the name and
virtue of Christ's righteousness, so soon as ever we truly believe; but it is
applied, manifested and completed to us, in the successive methods of
effectual vocation, sanctification and final redemption at the great day. For
while we continue sinners, we have continual need of justifying grace. David as
to fresh Commissions stood in need of Psa. 51.7.
purging with Hysop from his leprous sins to receive an atonement, Lev. 14 6,
19. and to have the Seal of the Psa. 32.5.
forgiveness of the iniquity of his sin, upon his acknowledgment and
confession: For as to us, God is not said to remit those sins, that are not yet
committed, but such Romans 3.25.
as are past. We are taught therefore by our Lord to pray Mat. 6 11, 12. Act.
5.31.
every day, forgive us our trespasses We sin daily, and must confess daily, and
pray daily for repentance and pardon. Yea God himself, in that Evangelical
promise by Esaias, assures us. Isa. 43.25.
I even I ( DELENS) am blotting out your trasgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember your sins, to comfort us against tentations about daily
infirmities: Do we sin every day? and is the truth not in him? nay, does he
make him a liar, that says 1 John 1.10.8.21.
he has no sin? then we have need of a daily Advocate to plead for us at the
right hand of the Father, a high Priest that Heb 7.24*
continues ever, and V 25.
lives ever to Heb. 9.24.
appear in the presence of God, and to make intercession for us. By virtue
whereof he Joh. 14.2, 3.
prepares the heavenly Mansions in the Temple of Glory for us, and for them.
Then, he will come again and receive us unto himself, that where he is, we may
be with him, and behold his glory. And when this Prince of life, the Judge of
quick and dead, shall appear, he will pronounce that final justifying and
glorifying sentence Mat. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my Father, Psa. 32.1, 2.
(for blessed are they indeed to whom the Lord then imputes not iniquity) come
and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Then shall our justification be
complete in all its points at that joyful declaration of Christ upon his
Tribunal in Judgment: No marvel then, Romans 8.10, 11.
If the bodies even of Saints shall dye: It Is because of sin; though the spirit
be life, because (...) ^^ghteousness. But then shall all our sins be (...)
^^otted out, and cast behind his back in the Mic. 7.19.
depths of the Sea, when those times of Act 3.19, 20, 21.
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: when he shall send Jesus
Christ at the great Restitution, whereof he has spoken by all his holy
Prophets since the world began: Then shall Onesiphorus according to the prayer
of Paul 2 Timothy 1.18
find mercy in that day at the hand of Christ, That day of full Ephesians. 1.14* and
4 30
Redemption has not yet appeared, when the Mat. 13.43
righteous shall shine forth in the Kingdom of their Father with everlasting
joy upon their heads.

Again, Death was decreed and determined of God to seize upon fallen sinners in
all its kinds, A. 2.
and yet we never find that doleful sentence repealed as to temporal
dissolution, in any promise Joh. 11 25
I am the Resurrection and the Life says Christ: he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. Yea, our blessed Lord in his Sermon at
Capernaum, no less Joh. 6
then four times, comforts his Disciples with the Doctrine of the Resurrection:
not, that they should not dye, but that he would raise them up at the last day.
Nay, even to John himself Jesus Joh. 21.23
said not, that he should not dye, But if I will, that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee Peter. No! both holy Peter and holy John, Death is ordained
as a means to purge and cleanse their bodi^^ from the soil and filth of sin,
and to fit those sanctified Vessels for the life of glory.

Saints therefore must look upon death wi^h no other aspect, A. 3.
then as the greatest bodily affliction, which shall or can befall them, and
that it has the same i^grediency, though in a deeper me^sure with all the
bitter Cups of trial, which the Father is pleased to put into their hands*
They have one common reason, and one common end to make them partaker^ of his
holiness. Sickness of the holiness of Grace; and Death of the holiness of Glory.

But are not Saints the Members of Christ's body? Is the head glorified and must
the Members pass this State of examination? Must believers dye? Yes! and good
reason too! Should not the Members be conformable to their Head? Ought Christ
to have Luk* 24.20
suffered these things, and so to enter into his glory? Has the Father made
Heb. 2.10.
the Captain of our Salvation perfect through sufferings, and will he not the
same way bring many Sons to glory? Shall this High Priest after the order of
Melchizedek drink Ps. 110.7.
of the brook of Kidron in the way to O^ivet before he lift up the head in a
glorious Ascension? And shall Saints, the inferior Levites think much to taste
it? Zebedees Children do but taste a few drops at the bottom of Mat. 20* 22, 23.
the Cup of Kidrons water, Christ has drunk it often Saints do but sip of Numb.
5.27. etc.
these bitter waters, not for satisfaction but submission to the Law: they
shall not cause their thighs to rot, but conceive to glory. What Is fabled of
the Unicorn that he takes away the poison by dipping his horn in the waters
before the Beasts of the Forests do drink after him: Is true of our Lord, he
has sweetened these waters of Marah with this Tree of Life, for true Israelites
to pledge him. His holy body washed the waters of Jordan by his Baptism, and
healed the waters of K^dron by his Passion. Christ that pure prolifick Joh.
12.24.
Corn of Wheat fell into the ground, and died and brings forth much fruit:
The grave is made fer^ile by his death: that Saints lying by his dead body may
be impregnated and spring up in a green Resurrection, and grow ripe to the
harvest of glory, They are implanted into the Romans 6.5.
similitude of his death, and shall be raised in the likeness of his
Resurrection. As that heavenly grain did rise; so shall Saints sprout upon his
stalk without Chaff for the Garner of Paradise.

A. 4. Again, Saints dye, not only in conformity to their head, A. 4.
but to magnify the glory of divine Grace in Salvation by the New Covenant.
Christ takes away the radical and fundamenttall guilt of sin, but not the
total in being thereof during this Life. None shall go to heaven by the law of
perfection, according to the tenor of the first Covenant. None shall boast of
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Tit. 3.5.
work or merit: for by grace are we saved. None shall climb to heaven but by
Genesis 28.11, 12 Joh 1.51
Jacobs Ladder, whose foot is fixed upon the son of man. We are saved by grace
to Rom 3.27
exclude boasting we are saved Act 15 11.
by faith, that Christ may be Phil. 1 20
magnified whether in life or death: we are saved Tit. 3.4.7.
by mercy, that the kindness and love of God our Savior may appear: we are not
born, but made heirs according to the hope of eternal life: Nay, we are saved
by Romans 8.24.
hope, and with patience we wait for it: Were we perfect here; our faith would
be clambering into vision, and our hope into fruition, our resting, waiting,
panting frame would be swallowed up in preliminary enjoyments of heaven: our
love would cast out all fea^ and torment, and ride triumphant before
resurrection, to the capitol of glory: But God has an eye to that new and
living way of salvation paved with the precious blood of the second Covenant:
wherefore though Christ be Romans 10.4.
the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes: yet he
restores us not in this life to the beauty and perfection of holiness; So that,
if sin remain in a Saint, death must needs be its issue: For sin when it is
finished Jam. 1.16
brings forth death: Though death in all its circumstances be not the proper
Romans 6.23.
wages of sin unto a Saint, because Christ has satisfied and made us free from
the Law Romans 8* 2.
of sin and of death: Though death be not the Ib. c. 6.22
OPSONION, the stipendiary supper of a believer, yet it is the OPSONARION, the
sour sauce, wherewith the remnants and leavings of original, and the too great
improvement thereof in actual sins and infirmities are disht up: Warm Bernard
starts this question, If Christ have delivered us, Bern. ad milit. Templ. f.
98. a. Ed. Pari. 517.
[ Vtquid adhuc morimur and non statim immortalitate vestimur? Sane, ut Dei
veritas impleatur, etc.] Why do we yet dye and are not presently clothed with
immortality? Verily, that the truth of God might be fulfilled: For, because God
loves mercy and truth, its necessary that man should dye, because God had
foredoom'd it: but yet that he should also rise from the dead, lest God should
seem to forget his mercy: So then though Death Lords it not over a Saint
perpetually, yet it remains a while upon us, because of the truth of God. Even
as Sin, though it reign not in our mortal bodies, yet is it not totally taken
from us. Thus Bernard lays the burden of a Saints death, upon the primitive
fall, the curse of God, the veracity of his threatenings and fulfilling of that
word to Adam, in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye: and a little
before, [ Adae delictum merito contrahimus: quouiam cum peccavit, in ipso
eramus and ex ejus carne per carnis concupisentiam genite sumus. We are
deservedly involved in Adams guilt, because we all sinned in him: for when he
sinned, we were in him, and were begotten of his flesh by carnal
concupiscence.] And is not this the very Doctrine of Paul? Romans 5.11.
As by one man sin entered into the world and death by sin; So death passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned: This is the guilt that carries those that
have not sinned after V. 14.
the similitude of Adams transgression into the grave. Yea Infants, and
Embryo's, such as never saw the light, from one dark grave to another.

Insomuch, That though the second and glorious Covenant of free grace, be Ps.
89.37.
established as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven: yet it receives
not its full accomplishment in all its promises, till the Saints set down in
the bosom of Christ after the great Tribunal: and it is not any the least
impairment or reflection upon the divine Justice on this side the resurrection,
to visit the Saints transgressions with this Rod, and their iniquity with these
stripes: 1 Cors 11 30.
For this cause, says Paul (treating of some violations respecting our Lords
Supper) many are weak and sickly among you and many sleep.

Wherefore, though the guilt of sin be removed by Justification, through the
merit of Christ, and the dominion of sin by sanctification through the Spirit:
yet the total remainders of original or actual sin are not stub'd out of the
heart: but some fibers and strings will stick b^^ind in the best, during this
present li^e: In like manner, though 1 Cor. 15 55, etc.
the sting of death, its venom and poison be pulled out by the death of
Christ: yet our mortality is not abolished. Although our Lord has brought 2 Timothy 1 10
life and immortality to light through the Gospel, in its revelation and
consignation to every believer; yet not as to its complete fruition till the
day of Christ. Then shall this mortal put on immortality, and death shall be
swallowed up in victory, and then shall we render eternal thanks to the Father,
for giving us this victory 1 Cor. 15.^7
through our Lord Jesus Christ. For reign he must, till this last enemy also be
put under his feet: To conquer over death b^ rising, brings more honor to God,
then to keep our foot from the grave: or else Divine Wisdom (...) not r^n that
course. One's the effect of powerful manutenency. But the (...) of creating
omnipotency. Hence, as Christ the Natural, so shall Saints be declared the
Adopted sons of God, Romans 1.4.
with power by the resurrection from the dead, by reason of which union God
will also raise them up like their glorious and mystical head Act. 2.24
by loosing the pains of death, it being impossible for them likewise to be
held by it, For Christ being risen from the dead is become 1 Cor. 15.20
the first fruits of them that sleep: Our blessed Lord rose at the Passover,
and they shall rise at the day of Pentecost: He rose as the Head, they as
Members, all in their own order shall rise to glory.

But some may say, Obj.
Did not Enoch and Elias leap over this Valley of death into heaven?

True! Answ.
but their translation moved upon the wheels of transmutation equivalent to
death: as they also, who are found alive at the coming of Christ. Though they
pass not through the strainer of the grave, yet they undergo the percolation of
a change. As the heavens shall Psalm. 102 26
perish when they be changed and pass 2 Pet. 3.10
away with a great noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat: nevertheless
we look for new heavens, and a new earth, not in substance, but in quality.
Even so Elijah, though riding to heaven in a chariot of fire, and the living 1
Cor. 15 51 1 These. 4 17.
Saints at our Lords coming in a chariot of air, yet are all by a mavelous
change [ METATITHEMENO^] Heb. 11.5.
translated to the vision of God.

CHAP. IV. Of the Formidable Evils in the Valley of Death.
AS in a Land-skip let us take a quick prospect of those fatal and tremendous
evils, which cock their Helmets, and make bare their Gorgon faces at the
entrance, in the passage, and the utmost end of this direful Valley.

1. At the Entrance, when these brazen gates fly open: The soul bewitching
comforts, to which we must bid [ a longum vale] an eternal farewell, and those
wracking pains, which must be felt, not on a Pala^e of Ivory, but a Bed of
Iron, in which this Giant Procrustes tortures all he catches: must needs shoot
barbed arrows into the Livers of all impenitent sinners.

The Philosopher teaches Aristot. Rhet l. 7 (...)
[ METABOLE PANTOON GLVKVTATON,] that change is the sweetest of all things: It
must be in things to the better, or equal at least in goodness to precedent
enjoyments; else it is PANTON PIKROTATON: the bitterest of all. To have been
fair, strong, healthful, rich, and happy, sharpens the edge of present misery,
and cuts the deeper. Is not this a dead fly in the box of ointment, a gourd in
the pot, a snake in the grass, that poisons the joy of all thy comforts? Must
the amorous smiles of all thy sinful pleasures corrupt into doleful howlings?
Here Is the parting style, when the sweet embraces of the dearest conjugal
relations must surrender up to mortal gripings: Here livid, and fainty kisses
must take leave of pretty children his own bowels, [ and pignora chara
nepotes,] those choice pledges of a man's survival unto himself: The friend
that is nearer than a brother, must now shake hands and look back to little
purpose at this dolesome and dark goodnight. His fine houses and fair
possessions, his fruitful orchards of his own planting, and his pleasant
gardens, with all its rills and fish ponds, his flowery meadows, and beautiful
prospects, his gameful parks and woody forests, his dutiful and toiling
tenants must all come to his bedside and shake their heads, and wi^h dry eyes,
bid good-even to their old foolish rent-wracking covetous Landlord: Then all
these flashy, thorny joys that made so great a crack^ing under his pot, having
shot some splinters in his eyes, and more in's heart will leave him in thick
darkness: Then all his false parasites and trencher-guests, for a sorry ring
(else hardly) will march with him to the pits side, and forsake his (...) when
closed in a cold stone.

Besides 'twill gaul him to the heart in that hour, to think what a feather cap
Fool Eccles. 2.19
he leaves for his Heir: that will turn upon his left heel, and twit the miser,
when he sees his chests all lined with gold, and sorrow for nothing but that he
shall never more have so true a drudge: Then out goes the young Russian with
the fork upon his shoulder, to France and Venice to learn carriage among
Whores, Banditos and Riotous Persons, till penury forces his belly to fellow
common with Luk 15 30, 36
Swine and quarrel with hogs for their husks, and at length can hardly crawl
home to the Surgeons Shop: Are not these sweet Flowers for his memory to smell
to? And a sovereign Cordial against the assaults of Death?

But were this all, 'Twere no match for a Roman Spirit? No, no! proud
worldlings before departure often conflict with fearful torments, Agags ^ Sam.
15.32
bitterness of death arrests their souls and make their Spirits stagger: The
Psalm. 18.4. and 116.3.
pains of Death and of Hell get hold upon them: These deadly sorrows switch
them with such smart lashes [ Vt se sentiant mori] as to leave lingering pains
with strong and biding Convulsions. Like Tiberius that cruel Tyrant: when
tormenting of Asinius Gallus, told him, he was not yet reconciled, and
therefore would no^ permit him to dye, ^
BION TIMORIAN THANATON ENERGESIAN EPOISI] That he might count life a
punishment, and death a great benefaction Like the stroke of these Rev. 9 6.
Scorpions when men shall seek death but not find it, and shall desire to dye,
but Death shall flee from them: So sharp and pungent are these invenomed shalls
Job 7.1^.
that the soul chooses Strangling and death rather than life: They are called
Act. 2.24.12
the ODINES THANATOV, the pains of death, the acute pains of a woman in
travel: when God shall Job 33 19
chasten men with pains upon their B^ds, and the multitude of their bones with
strong pain: when every bone shall have its pang; and every pang from the
strong arm of God: oh! how dreadful to fall into the hands Heb. 10 31
of the living God: They are pains indeed which God calls pains, when the soul
shall be torn and rent from its beloved twin; Oh! the tendons crack and the
nerves with startling dolor snap in sunder. We read of one but sick of the
Palsy, and yet Mat 8 6.
grievously tormented. When the Lord smites persons Deuteronomy. 28.22
with Consumptions, Fevers, Inflammations and extreme burnings: Oh, what
tos^^ngs and tumblings and pinings with wearisome hours: when torn and grinded
by the Stone or wrack^ by the gou^* what tongue can express their miseries? For
a Herod to be eaten up of Act. 12 2^
Worms and such little wretches to pull a Prince piecemeal, and to run away
unquestioned: For Jehorams 2 Chronicles. 21.19.
bowels to fall out by reason of his sickness, and poison his Courtiers: For
Asa to lie howling of the Gout, and make all Jerusalem ring with his ^o^ing:
Should not these tidings of (...) miserable Monarchs, cool the fury and tame
the madness of the Bedlam Hectors of our Age. To ruminate upon these terrors of
death, these painful throws, when men pour out their souls in dreadful agonies
methinks should take them a peg lower and put their carier in sin to a pause:
They who taste of the Cup of Death, find it more bitter than Wormwood, more
venomous than the poison of Asps all squeezed into it: Such as are under the
ghastly view of Death, behold a griefly and fearful monster, that scares the
bloody Heroes and vainglorious Gallants into exquisite horrors.

-- Obriguere comae and vox faucibus haesit. Their hair stands an end, and
their tongue faulters with amazing fears. It has a direful sting, more horrid
than a Scorpion or a Dragon. This Cup unless sweetened with a lively sense of a
gracious promise there is no laying of your lips to it: This fiery flying
Serpent, unless eased of his sting: there is no dallying with it in their
bosoms for fool hardy sinners: Well might Sueton in Cas. c 87.
Caesar wish a sudden, and Augustus (...) in Aug. c. 99.
an easy Death, who had beheld many astonishing spectacles in their long and
bloody wars: which might pierce hearts of Adamant, and melt the most brawny and
flinty breast, and run down the most stoical Apathies into Rivers of mournful
S^mpathies and compassions: Methinks, it should awaken snorting formalists to
admit into the Hall of Conscience the Echoes of the roaring Elegies of such
who dye (as the historian phrases) Id. in Cas. c. 88.
non morte sua, not a natural but a violent death; when this Lion rampant rends
the Soul from the body, as he would the Hos 13.8.
Caul of a Kids heart: When death shall meet them as a Bear bereaved of her
Whelps, or an evening Wolf that has lurkt close in Psalm. 104.20
her D^n all the day long of a sinners life, and comes forth barking at night
and sharp set for her prey: Then they are forced to drink deep of the wine of
violence, and to sup up the Cup of the avenger. Then they Job* 15.33
shake off their unripe Grapes as the Vine and cast off their Flower as the
O^ive.

But alas! the pains of natural or the pangs of violent death, are but the
stinging of Gnats or Flea bites to a scorched conscience and inflamed by the
wrath of God: When men come to dye, and have trifled away precious hours with
Rattles and childish Ba^b^s, and the silly jingling Hobby-horses of Court or
Country: and at that turning point of Eternity have forgotten to make their
peace with God: then Conscience rowzes up like a Giant refresht with the wine
of Sodom, and the Grapes of Gomorrah. When the grinning Furies lasht the
goatish Soul of Tiberius for all his Villainies within the dark and dismal
Dungeon of his unclean breast: Oh! who would not tremble to think of those
goring wounds, those secret and invisible tortures, which wrackt his Soul and
stretched his tormenting imaginations upon the Devils Tenter-Hooks. See, how
Tacit. Annal l 5. p. 107. Edit. Basil. 1544.
Tacitus breaks forth upon the Theme, Si recludantur Tyrannorum mentes, posse
aspici laniatus and ictus,] had we Casements into the hearts of Tyrants: the
dreadful marks of the Steel whips of Conscience would appear with bloody
gashes: And as Dio. in Nerone l. 63.
Dion the Historian speaking of the horrors of Nero, near the time of his
death, for the ass^ssination of his Mother and other brutish crimes: says,
that if a Whelp did but howl, or ^ Hen cackle, or the (...) of a Tree creak by
a strong wind, [ ^EINOS ETARATSETO] he was in a wo^ul anguish: Oh, how the
wires of Megaera fetched blood and gobbets at every stroke, from the Soul: When
God shall pour the scalding Lead of his wrath into these fre^h wounds, when the
Law thunders from Mount Sinai, and the lightnings of Paran glitter about him,
Then Hab. 3.16.
their bellies tremble, their lips quiver at the voice, and rottenness enters
into their bones: When sin comes home to the Soul on a deathbed, and accosts
him as the Soldier did Pollio in Mario p. 538. Ed. Lug B.
Marius the Blacksmith, and Triduan Emperor, ( Hic est gladius, quem ipse
fecisti.) Here Is the Sword of thine own hammering and shaking it in the face of
a sinner, cries, look how it shines, it is thine own furbishing.

Then woe to him, who has enlarged his desire as Hell, and increased that,
which is not his: and laden himself with thick clay: Then fain would he vomit
up his sweet morsells: but no Emetick of the shop can help him, no Squills, no
Roots in Nicander can fetch them up: Then they abhor to remember, what they
cannot forget, and the eyes of their fancy are as quick and venomous as a
Basilisk. Then with their robberies of Peter they would pay off Paul: and for
their defrauding of Ministers would give ten-fold Tithes, and with the ruins of
old Abbeys, and Manors by oppression and depopulations of Villages, that they
may Isa. 5.8.
be alone in the midst of the earth, in all haste they patch up Chapels,
Schools and Workhouses.

But God hates the Sacrifices of dying and putrilaginous bodies: the Incense
that oppressors offer, proves the savor of death unto death; he counts the
sighs of their fleeting Spirits, like the steams of rancid dunghils, which the
fire of Hell sends up: not the beams of his countenance, who is now departed.
No warning pieces before could alarm them. No blazing Comets could awaken or
startle them: though Mantil. Astrinom. l. 1. p. 27
that of Mantilius be true in all ages.

Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether.
Never did blazing Comets shine in vain,
But famine pale, plague or fierce wars did reign.
But now they scud about like Eels in Thunder, and anon Death hales them with
the weeds about their heads in his sweeping drag-net. Now they cry out with
Spartian in Hadrian p. 34. Ed. Lug. B.
Hadrian the Emperor: Animula vagula blandula,
Quae nunc abibis in loca.
Pallidula rigida (...).
Nec ut soles dabis jocos.
O pretty, petty, wandering Soul,
In what holes wrigglest thee?
Stark naked, cold and crackst no more
Thy frothy Jests with me.


And is this all the cold comfort for these roaring Blades with a sneaking
Epigram, with so deadly a neck-verse, to swing into the arms of eternal
vengeance: How horrible is it, and to be trembled at, to think that Randol the
Poet (as I have heard) should cry out at death, Now Horace have at thee where
ever thou art. Could we think, that vile worms when dying should spew such
poison? like the Toads in Helmon^* t. mu^. pest. p. 884 410.
Helmont hung up by the Heels before the fire of Hell cast out green flies and
other venom, Oh! that it might make a Zenexton an antidote against the plague
of the heart in astonished mortals And have you not drencht your Souls in a sweet
pickle by flinging off repentance to so late an hour. Alas! God's now gone up
to his place and retired, ye have Prove. 1.25, etc.
set at naught all his Counsel and would none of his reproof: Now he laughs at
your calamity and mocks when your fear comes as a desolation and your
destruction as a whirlwind: when distress and anguish seizes upon you;
Therefore shall ye eat the fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own
devices: It Is not the cold absolution of every formal Priest can daube up these
Thunder struck Walls with his untempered Mortar. The foolish and cockheaded
Athiest, that Psalm. 14 1.
said in his heart there was no God and was bold and saucy to fancy what he
would have, that he might revel and rant and tear it, in his blasphemous pride,
and do corrupt and abominable works; begins now to be awakened out of his
Frenzy-Lethargy, and runs into the clefts of the rocks and skulks in the tops
of the ragged rocks, and cries to the deaf hills to fall on him, and the
hard-hearted mountains to cover him for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his
terrible Majesty.

The old Owl-eyed. Heathens by the glimmering glances of Synideses A^^in be.
doct. Plat. cap. 10. Max. Tyr. c 1. etc.
and Syntereses, the faint reflections of primitive light did grope after a
Deity by the Glowworm candle of soft contemplation. They caught at a little
vanishing notion of the first Being by the working of their Souls in
night-Visions and argued the immortality of their own Spirits and began to
discern that ( Divinae particula aurae) this particle of Divine light, was
inspired by the Father of Lights and Spirits: Romans 1.20.
By the things that were made they stammer'd and spelt out lamely his Eternal
Power and Godhead: But alas! the Meridian Fools of our age, that sit in the
Devils Chair of Pestilence, though taught by the glorious light of holy
Scripture, will hardly come off to cry at death, with that musing Philosopher
of Greece, O ens entium miserere mei. O Being of Beings have mercy on me. But
when the grave Judge of Conscience commissioned and charged by God, sits down
with his white considering Coife in his Judgment Seat upon a pale Pillow: Then
their stupid Atheism (a sin greater then Jam. 2.^9.
Devils are guilty of) brings the Scoffer to the Prove 7.22.
correction of the Stocks; and Phineas his righteous dart strikes through his
belly, and there he lies sentenced t^ self-tormen^ing horrors: Thoughts as
fiery flashes of lightning, and as (...) as double edged Swords No Turkey
Cymiter pierces so deadly to the inner-most p^^ts of the belly.

But Oh Sirs! this is not all: The Devil by his Heb. 2.14.
ministeria power of death, slips forth from behind ^he hangings, all armed
with fire-bran^s. He who before like a roaring Lion yield after his prey: Now
whe^^ his Claws upon the rock of their impenitent hearts grins like a tearing
Lion, and ^^rangles for his Lionesses: Now he (...) secretly stirred them up to
war and rapine, to slaughter and bloodshed, even the precious blood of the
Saints, he who egged, and spurred them up to their mad ambition and rage; to
alarm neighbor Provinces into confusions, to satiate their lust, revenge and
avarice; now he springs forth with his Rev. 9.17.
breastplate of fire, jacinct, and brimstone: and out of his mouth flow
torrents of fire and smoke and sulphur: His head is twisted about with a Crown
of Snakes, and girt with a Vest and Tunick of Scarlet deep dyed in the blood of
Souls. This Prince of the Power of the Air, the raiser of tempests, now hurries
up a storm within, which no created power can calm: At his puddling he finds
turbulent matter in the foul sinck of their hearts, and rowzes all the winds of
the Compass into a dreadful Hurricane: Then the wicked Gallio's that of old
waved and tush't at any thing, but Spring-Gardens and painted Faces, and
pampered Paunces, Romans 13.14
and provisions for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: That snuff^ at your
Counsels like the doltish block-head, the Jer. 2.24.
wild Ass in the Wilderness; Till their bellies swell big with the Tempter, in
this month you shall find them crying out with the German Captain in those
civil Wars: Six hundred Dollars for a Minister to comfort a ga^led Conscience.
Then how the Waves break white one in the neck of another? Oh! how the wicked
wretch tumbles like Isa. 57.20.
troubled Seas that cannot rest, and casts up mire and dirt? It Is dreadful to
stand on the shore and see, how Leviathan makes the deep Job 41.31
(...) to boil like a pot, the Sea (...) like a Pot of Ointment; he m^kes a
path of flaming Brimstone to (...) him, and at the breaking of these waves of
fire, strong sulphurous exhal^tions even stiffle and suffocate the Sp^rits. One
of the Roman Emperors sent to buy the Pillow of a man, that was greatly in
debt, and yet could sleep sweetly: But who would not fly from the Pillow of an
awakened Athiest, though stufft and ^cramb'd with double angels: When such
dismal Sprites chatter at the four corners: when he who had seduced them to
all their flagitious ^ins, and hardened them to perseverance now appears in his
colors, triumphing in the harvest of his envy, and tumbling his impenitent
Proselytes, with himself into the bottomless gulf of despair.

And now it is evident, Who ever formed Weapons against Heaven and prosper'd? Do
not their Darts recoil upon their Psalm. 68.21
own hairy Scalps? When against every raking Oppressor, Hab 2.1^
the Stone cries out of the Wall, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer
it. When Isa* 34.13, 14.
the O^ls of the Desert shall hoop among their shattered Palaces in hideous
Consort, and Satyrs shall cry to their Fellows.

Now, Woe to the ruiners of Cities by Fire, and Hab. 2.12
builders of Towns with blood, that stablish their foundations by iniquity, and
cement the stones with the gore of the Innocent: That put the Verse. 15.
Bottle to the nose of their Neighbors and make them drunk, to behold their
nakedness. That boast in their might Isa. 5.11.22.
to drink Wine, that they are men of strength to mingle strong drink, and how
many they knock under Table: V. 23, 24.
Therefore as the fire devoureth stubble, and the flame consumes the ch^ff; So
their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust. Now,
Woe Hab. 2.19.
to him that says to the wood of a Table, awake; and to the dumb stone of a
Cross, arise; for it shall teach: These all compass themselves Isa. 50.11.
with sparks of their own kindling: This they shall have at the hand of the
Lord; they shall lie down in sorrows.

CHAP. V. Of the State of the Dead.
NOt only in reference to the State of Sinners before and at the point of
Death: but as to their passage through the Valley of the grave, many grand
horrors do occupy the thoughts of mortals: Oh! that it were to prevent, as well
as foresee: what a damp it is to carnal Spirits, to think of their heads being
no sooner laid in the cold Cavern; but Death as a Tiger or Psa. 49.14.
Lion greedily feeds upon them: With what a cold clamy sweat they faint away,
to think of going down to the Gates of Death, and there to be locked up in a
loathsome Dungeon? But here is the sweet comfort of a Saint that Christ has the
Rev. 1.18.
Keys at his Girdle and will give them the Ib. c. 2.28.
the morning Star: They rest meekly pacified, that their blessed Lord went the
same way to glory: that Abraham, Samuel and David; that Daniel, Paul and John
have beaten the path before them: There is but one Ephesians. 4.5.
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one new and living way to enter within the Vail,
that former Saints Heb. 11 40
without us should not be made perfect.

But how mortally do the Pulses of unsanctified persons beat, at the
remembrance of the pit: How they swound away with many a sinking qualm. The
fiery thoughts of their cold entertainment among the clods, well may they
scorch and shrivel up the plumes of their pride and jollity: Oh how crest fallen
and blew in the lip; when this fatal guest knocks at door: The tenors of the
old drunkards songs, do they not quiver and rattle in their throats with woeful
howlings? What Vultures of grief would know their heart strings, did they dare
to retire and meditate in this Charnel-house? Were they so valiant and hardy
Knights as to converse with Conscience in secret? as heretofore they have met
their impudent Mistresses Prove. 7.9, 10.
with the attire of a Harlot in the twy-light, in the evening, in the black and
dark night: Would they not hang the head, droop the wing and feel the^r Loins
dissolved in trembling Palsies? Do not their countenances Dan. 5.6
change and their knees clatter together to read the writing upon the wall that
their days are numbered and finished? How do the inhabitants of the earth melt
at the musings on their forlorn estate in that hollow and deep Vault? What! to
be trodden upon by every footless worm, to be insulted upon by an ugly grub: to
be bearded by a yellow Maggot, and to be kept prisoner in stinking chains of
darkness by noisome rottenness? Oh! how it vexes the high spirit of a Lord, and
nauseates the fine stomach of a Lady? Then Is the time, when all Isa 14.9.10, 11.
the Kings of the Nations will rise up from their Thrones in the grave, and
pass this dolorous complement with the proud Emperor of Babe^: Art thou also
become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? Thy pomp is brought down to
the grave, and the noise of thy Viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the
worms cover thee, where the Nouns in the Hebrew B^ehart* de animal. part. 2. c.
254.
are feminine, and the Verbs masculine: the creatures contemptible: but their
feast magnificen^, upon the bowels of Princes: Oh! how the Woodlice,
flat-worms, maw-worms, the yellow-tails, mites, and wivils carve out their
morsels, and rejoice together: Annon, after the feast is ended, the yellow
hundred foot takes up his Palace-royal in the skull of a King, and the proud
mincing Jezabels shall have their faces once more painted and spotted with the
odious excrements of a black Beetle.

It Is but lean comfort for haughty and big looks which Prove 6.1* and 21 4
the Lord abhors, to be humbled into these dark holes: where their costly
Sepulchral Lamps shine with but a dim and blew light, to search what impudent
insects dare so boldly to crawl up and down their entrails, and scorn to give
account to their summons. For a living worm counts himself more honorable than
a putrefying Monarch.

Here, on this side the grave, after every meal they must have a fit of music
to digest their varieties, and a sad poor fool must come in with his patches to
make them merry: But he that mocketh the poor (whether in purse or parts) Prove.
17.5.
reproacheth his Maker, and he that is glad at calamities shall not be
unpunished.

Their gluttonous Feasts shall have sour sauce of deaths cooking; and no Doctor
can sweat away the surfeits of Conscience: When Death has once shook them by
the should^r into the grave, he'l^ call also for a lesson at his Table, and the
Satyrs shall play low Funeral-Songs upon the Lute-strings of their perishing
Nerves, and Dance in their courses while they are here, they rise from their
gormandizing Platters to play at Cards for whole Parks, and fling the Dice for
ancient M^nnors: But there flaming Devils will hurl their bones about, from
under the Altar, and the Chancel rails without Sacrilege and thrust their own
Rapiers red hot into th^^ bushy Pa^es, and make those hairy Comets to burn for
warning Beacons: O then, they would fain prevail with Father Abraham to send
Messengers to their Luke 16.28
five brethren upon earth to testify to them, lest they also come to this
place of torment: Here alter the game at Tables is ended, they hurry away with
Coach and six horses in haste to hear a Sermon at the Playhouse, and are very
well edified, fully inst^ucted and takes notes of the ready way how to reach.
Hell speedily: But there death and his Hos. 2 14.
master will handle them without Mittens, he will force no court complements upon
them: There Is a King of a fierce Dan. 8 23.
countenance, understanding dark sayings, will speak as big and as rough as
they taunted to the poor, he will make them bend the knee, and do suit and
service at his Court Baron: There they shall hear the Jaylors longwinded
Lecture upon a sharp and cutting Text, and cannot get out of his Chapel though
they sit at the lower end, he will keep them from sleeping, and gash their
memories with the keen knife of his tongue, about the many Sabbaths they
profaned, and the means of Grace they contemned; how they mocked at repentance,
and loll'd out the tongue at preciseness; he will gripe them with the holy
examples, meek admonitions of Saints and their patient sufferings for the truth
at their barbarous hands: They Will have cold stomachs to jeer and fleer in the
face of this conscience scalding Preacher; he will chain the blessed Bible to the
D^sk of their Pews; which they had laid aside like an old Almanac: Now it
comes in date at this year of reckoning. He Will prove to their faces, how they
have slighted the heavy Judgments of the late dreadful Pestilence, the
astonishing Fire, and the color of the British Seas, crimsoned and ^iapa^'d
with the blood of their brethren: he will gaul them with their base ingratitude in
slighting the mercies of the Great God, who gave them reprieval and survival
after all these dismal momento's. But now has delivered them from Jerome 21.7
the Pestilence, and from the Sword and from the Famine, into the hands of this
dismal King of Assyria: he will once more rub up their dull senses with sharp
rebukes, about the numerous ch^cks of conscience, and the loud calls of the
spirit, which then they enjoyed, but now they may howl after, without any
pity: and that which shall vex them to the heart, he will ever be harping and
grating odiously upon the same string, and jarring in their ears, and rubbing
the old sore about their lost opportunities and seasons of grace: This shall be
a plain and home Sermon, such as before they scoft at: here will be no flowers
of Rhetoric to set off Truth to the squeazy palate of a Sermon sick Lady; here
will be no fear to displease greatness, here is no Trencher Chap^ains to soften
expressions, lest the great Churl Stomach at sound reproofs, that might save
his soul: No, these days are past! here is no impatient lookings at the
hourglass when the last sand drops, to be gone to dinner; here is no being glad
at sleeveless errands to steal away through the crowd, and choke conscience
with this ^^am: that a little's enough if well practiced: No^ here is a Preacher
will hold them to it, and taunt and twit them with the day of repentance being
over, and chain them to their seats, and lock them in the Stocks as once they
did the Saints in Lollards-Tower; till the Trump of the Resurrection sounds an
Alarm to Judgment.

Is this the state of wicked men's souls; while their bodies ^ot in the grave:
when will they learn to be wise for Eternity? They must Bernard. de Conver. ad
Clericos.
suffocate and slay the worm of conscience; here says Bernard, that would not
be bitten hereafter: Is it not better to hearken diligently to a few Sermons
here, though ^en hours long, though Act. 20.7.
Paul preach till midnight: then to be ^inckt to that terrible Sermon that
shall last many hundred years long, from the day of death, till the day of
judgment, and after that a second Sermon in the afternoon, which shall know no
evening, but last to Eternity: when rivers of tears cannot wash away guilt, nor
ten thousand rivers of oil cannot make thy Sacrifice flame acceptably Mic. 6.7.
up to heaven: O be wise while the day lasts, and do the work which the Father
gives to work: Joh. 6.29.
This is the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he has sent.

But if ye reject this counsel, and like foolish builders refuse this stone of
the corner, till that fearful night shall overshadow you; then your mouldring
bodies must lie by it, and be kept in that smothering prison; while your
lamenting souls are agitated and hurried with these condemning and tormenting
Furies: There your bodies though of never so fine a Job. 21.26.
Clay, must mix with the course allay of your once oppr^ssed Slaves: The dust
of Princes must mingle with base and mean Peasants: they and their Porters must
lodge together: Lords and Beggars know no distance, and what Artist can form
his Epitaph, by any distinct color, or grain in their mould? Neither can heaps
of Gold bribe* a fancied Charon, to waft their bodies out of these gloomy
regions, these Egyptian shades to any Elysian meadows of pleasure: The
searching brains of the ablest Counselors can find no flaw in the Writ of
Death, nor get any bayl or mainprize from that tedious Gatehouse: Here the
Skull of the acu^est Thomist through length of time will all dwindle into
starvling Moss while he forgets to distinguish its fit season for the Weapon
Salve: Alas! it will not cure the fractures made by Deaths Pole-Ax: No
distinctions can satisfy this cunning sophister to turn the Key and release
the Prisoner: But here they must all continue and abide in the state of the
dead: The ingenious Artificer, can invent no clew to hand him out of this
snaring maze, this winding Labyrinth: There Is Eccl. 9.10
no invention or judgment, no device, knowledge or wisdom in the grave, whither
thou go: It Is by the Decree of the Dan. 4 17.
watchers, the time once doomed and fixed, there is no reversion. He that goes
Job 7.9, 10
down into this far Country shall return no more to his house, nor shall his
place know him again: There all sit down in deep silence till the moment
appointed by the high and holy One, who inhabits Eternity: Then shall the
enemies of his Sons Kingdom, creep out of the dust to shame and everlasting
contempt.

But the ashes of his people, their gracious Father lays them up in the
treasuries of his wakefull providence, and they shall be his in that day, that
Mal. 3.17*
he makes up his Jewels, when the joyful voice of Christ shall gently raise
them to that blissfull dawn: when (RODODAKTVLOS NOOS,) the rosy fingered morn
shall blush out of the East, and the Sun of Eternity shall gild their rising
Temples for glory.

CHAP. VI. Of the fell Dragons at the further end of the grave.
MEthinks the way through the dark Morisans Travels, p. 113.
Grott near Naples, opening toward the sulfurous mountains of Vesuvius, and
the stagnant air of Campania bears some resemblance with this close and
terrible passage, through the Valley of Death: were the terrors many at the
entrance, they increase and multiply at the coming ^orth: There Is no hiding,
stopping or retreating; when the Reapers are sent forth to gather the Tares
Mat. 13.30.
together, to bind them in bundles and to burn them to ashes: no stately
Mansolemns, no Marble Tombs can detain the new-enlivened bodies, when they
begin to hear the shrill Echoes of the Archangels Trumpet: That acute voice
which sounded so often in the ears of Jerome, Arise ye dead and come to Judgment.

The great doctrine of the Resurrection which vain Athenians derided, now
shines forth in its glory: when the bones that were scattered at the graves
mouth begin to crawl together. See how the sinews, Ezekiel. 37.8.
nerves, and muscles climb up to their proper places, and milk-white skin
covers them round about Here Is an admirable spectacle of the imperial power of
God: when so many millions of miracles, shall proclaim that glorious and
fearful name of the Lord of Hosts: when some dust shall creep up the Banks of
Rivers, and others from the depths of the Sea: when that which was mingled with
common Earth, o^ the Sands of the Shore, the Bowels of Fishes, wild Beasts and
Cannibals, shall each Atome return to the structure of their proper Bodies, and
all the round Globe over, new quickened and living persons start up in every
quarter: Methinks the Angels stand gazing at it, and trumpeting forth blessing,
Rev. 5.13. Clem. Alex. strom. l. 5 p. 405.
honor, glory and power to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb
for ever and ever.

That the ancient Heathens had some glimpses of this great point Eusebius. de
prepar. Evang. l. 11. c. 33. and l. 13. c. 13.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius out of Plato and Plutarch, and our Bradward. de
Cause. Dei. l. 1 c. 1. sect. 39. p. 96.
Bradwardin out of Pliny, Varro, Plato and Democritus give some evidence: But
whence the old Sophies lighted their Torches, and how far they improved their
faint and glimmering twilight I must not enlarge: nor show, who rose no higher
then Pythagoras his doctrine of transanimation, out of Porphyry and the Stoic
Schools: since we have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which we do well 2 Pet.
1.19
to take heed as to a light, shining in a dark place till the Day Star arise in
our hearts.

We have here to consider, with what ^onsternation of Spirit, all wicked and
ungodly men, shall lift up their heads out of the dust of Death: How bitterly
shall their Souls and Bodies greet and rue the day of their sad reunion: These
Simeons and Levies, former brethren in evil, now turn mutual instruments of
cruelty in their habitations: Methinks the fore-dooming of that Tragical
Dialogue should fore amuse any reasonable creature, To think, how the lamenting
body shall wring its hands at the moment of the Souls re-entry: when the Soul
it self shall tremble and all the bells of the senses ring backward at this
fatal marriage: How do the eyes gush forth with tears in that cloudy morning,
and the whole day overflown Pro. 27.15
with continual droppings of a soaking rain, and that with tears of blood, and
flaming drops of brimstone. They who were in this life mutual Tempters, shall
in that life be mutual Tormenters. O that mortals would put on Prometheus
betimes and be wise before hand, and cry out with Jacob, O my Genesis 49.6.
Soul come not into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not thou
united: For both were guilty of self-murder, and that of the deepest grain, the
strangling of Souls.

But alas! were the body to rise only, that were its happiness and perfection.
Resurrection in its simple notion speaks out the redintegration of nature: The
form of the Soul has a strong and vehement appetite after the material Body:
It delights in union to perform the native and genuine functions of
information: Alas! sinners shall not merely rise, but must all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ, and can the^^ be any thing more horrible to the
imagination of a dying sinner, not reconciled to God, then the great and
fearful Tribunal? When God Eccl. 12.14*
shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing, whether it be
good or evil: When Death rides toward him on a meager and pale Horse; that
dismayes him most to spy Judgment gallopping after him. Heb. 9.27.
Its appointed for all to dye, and then to Judgment.

There will a Judge sit down upon a fiery Throne of Carbuncle: who shall not
Isa. 11.
judge after the sight of his eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of his ears,
external appearance and glittering greatness bribes the understanding: and safe
witness perverts the sentence of an earthly worm: he must go ( Secundum
allegata and probata) according to proofs and witnesses: But here is a Judge Ib.
V. 3.
of quick scent in the fear of the Lord: righteousness shall be the girdle of
his loins and faithfulness of his reins. (The O LOGOS) Heb. 4.12, 13.
the Word essential pierces to the dividing of soul and spirit, the joints and
marrow; he is a discerner of the thought and intents of the heart: There Is not
a creature but is manifest in his sight: All things without are naked and
stripped of their vestments, and all things within are cut open by his Razor, and
anatomized to the backbone and spinall marrow before the eyes of him with whom
we have to do.

The eyes of this Judge are Rev. ^1.14. etc.
as a flame of fire, his feet like fine brass burning in a Furnace, he treads
down and burns up his enemies at once: His voice is as the sound of many
waters, who can abide* the day of his coming? Out of his mouth flows a sharp
two-edged Sword, and his countenance is like the Sun shining in his strength.
Rev. 2.23
He searches the reins and hearts, and gives to every one according to their
works.

He that sits down on this Judgment Seat, Rev. 4.3. etc.
is to look on, like the various and many-vein'd Jasper in the rare diversity
of his excellent and glorious attributes and perfections: like the incarnate
Sardine in taking our flesh upon him, and round about the Throne the enamouring
Rainbow of the Covenant, shining like a pleasant green Emerald with all the
glittering promises of the Spirit. Upon twenty four Seats encompassing this
illustrious Chair of heavenly state, sit the reverend Assessors, twenty four
Elders, clothed in white Raiment and Crowns of Gold upon their Heads, according
to the twenty four Orders of Priests, attending this great Prince of might, and
High Priest upon Zach 6.13.
his Throne, and between his Princely and his Priestly Dignities, the Counsel
of Peace shall stand. Before him burn seven Lamps of Fire, and upon twelve
Brazen Oxen stands a Sea of Glass like Crystal: He is endued with the
multiformous gifts and graces of the holy Spirit: his hands are always purely
washed in Innocence, and round about the Throne in this Majestical
Temple-Session, angelical Cherubims full of eyes, cry night and day Rev. 4.8.
[ Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, V. 5.
and is to come] and from out of the Throne proceed lightnings, and
thunderings, and voices.

At so radiant and tremendous a Spectacle, in such a glorious and orient
Theater: how can the direful persecutors of the Church look up? O how they
creep to the Rocks for some hole, some cleft to pity them, O Nimrod, Pharaoh
and Nebuchadnezar! O Nero, T^ajan and Dioclesian, whither will ye run from the
face of the Lamb, that sits on the Throne, who with his fulgent Eyes, searches
and pierces to the Center of the Universe. O Pope of Rome and thy cursed
Shavelings, Its in vain now to stand poring on Bern de Conside* ad Eugen f. 2*
37 h.
Bernards good monitions to thy stubborn Predecessor, Eugenius. O Bonner and
Gardener, what will become of you and your Successors, for pushing, and goring,
and letting out the blood of Saints, all in the Book of Martyrs, Remember James
Abbes, and the Fox Marty^s Vol. 3. p 956, etc. Ed. 1641.
Sheriffs Servant at Bury, who railing at that faithful Martyr, was struck with
madness and cried out, James Abbes is the servant of God and is saved, but I am
damned, and inveighed at the Priest that brought him the Host, that he and such
were the cause of his damnation.

Is it so terrible before hand in the presentiments and preaccusations of
Conscience, before that great and fearful Day of the Lord come? What will be
the horror of execution, when the blood which is dried up in prisons as well as
drawn forth by whips and flames, shall be weighed to a drop and a grain in the
balance of this righteous Judge. So much Rev. 18.7.
torment and sorrow give them: Then the Beast shall be taken, and with him that
false Prophet the Pope, that wrought Miracles before him: Both these shall be
cast alive into the Lake of fire burning with Brimstone: Then, they that Rev
14* 10, etc.
worship the Beast and his Image, and received his Mark in Hand or Forehead,
shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb: the smoke of their torment shall ascend for
ever and ever. They shall have no rest day nor night, who adored the Beast or
his Image, or received the Mark of his Name: And this brings me to the last
Consideration, and that is Eternity.

The misery of Hell (could I speak it properly) were it to end but a moment on
this side Eternity, either in bliss or abatement of pain or complete
annihilation: 'twere a sovereign Cordial. The memory of it would be a cooling
drop day by day, upon the tongue of every Dives, to keep it from blistering
into blasphemy.

But to ponder upon this dreadful, Ever: and to champ upon it to Eternity, its
a thousand times more bitter than Wormwood, Aloes or Coloquintida. It Is to
swallow down the wine of astonishment, and to pledge one another Deuteronomy. 30 33
with the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes.

I dare any wicked man in the world to run on in their follies, with any
serious apprehensions of Eternity, or calm convictions of it upon their
Spirits. Clem Alexandr. Strom. l. 1. p. 222 Edit. Lug. B.
Poor Heathens have highly asserted the Souls Immortality, and common reason
evinces, that there can be no communion between God and Belial, sight and
darkness cannot associate. If the Soul be immortal, and its union to God be the
life of the Soul? must it not (when God's absent, and absent for ever from all
unholy persons) lie down in Eternal Death? 1 John 1.6, 7, etc.
He that walks in light, dwells and has fellowship with the Father, and
with the Son: But he that lives and dies in darkness can never come to, or
abide in Eternal Light: But must be cast out into utter darkness, where is
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

I know there be such in our days, or else I should not mention it, who would
fain tamper with the false doctrine of Orig^n, and (like his weak Disciples)
would persuade themselves, that AIOON and AIOONIOS in the Greek, often note but
a stated determination of time, and therefore may be so understood in this
case. Poor wretches! will they hazard their all upon a pitiful conjecture: a
jejune criticism in Grammar, and run foolhardy upon the pikes of divine
vengeance, and the thick bosses of his Bucklers, under the thin covert of a
words acceptance sometimes in that sense in Scripture: when the nature of the
matter, and the force of the context obliges: should you not rather deeply
weigh and ponder upon those places: where the damnation of the wicked is
opposed to the eternal salvation Dan 12.2 Mat. 25 46. Jude 7.21.22
of the Godly. Do you believe eternal life for the Saints? and shall the
wicked, who come not into a life of grace, shall they after a set race of years
be raised to glory? Such as never repent, never close with Christ, never fly to
the promise while here; and is there any repentance in the grave or remission
of sins? O fool, twice dyed in grain, that dare to venture thy Soul upon the
punctilio of a word. Nay, is not that very word, AIOONIOS, used and applied to
the divine Romans 16.26 Heb. 9.24.
Majesty, who inhabits eternity, and dwells in the inaccessible light: Nay,
are there not other cogent expressions setting out the perpetuity of that
estate in misery (where their word is absent: with which they play their lives
at stake). Is there not a doleful Mat. 5.26 Rev. 1.18
prison which no man can unlock or break through* or be let forth till he pay
the utmost farthing? Is there not a place where the Mark 9.44.46, 48.
worm of Conscience dies not, and the fire shall never be quenched? Are these
but dry metaphors? Take heed thy soul be not the dreadful fiery comment, that
thou sink not into Luke 16.26
that great gulf, Rev. 20.3.
that bottomless pit: If thou will be wise Prove 9.12.
be wise for thy self and believe on the Son Joh. 3.36,
to everlasting life, he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him.

O Souls, will you warm your thoughts, and unfreeze your security at that
fearful fire; will you open your eyes at the sight of that horrible darkness.
Fire that yields no light, and flames, that are thick with darkness. O
monstrous misery! A cohabitation with Devils: The Drum of the ears even
tingles, and is broken in pieces, with distracted roarings of men and devils,
and yet to see no body. O Souls! will you be warned by the noises of these
Canons at distance? shall that insatiable thirst and gnawing worm well viewed
in the glass of divine threatenings provoke you to mend? Or will you stay
rather, till you feel the loins of wrath in its unsupportable burden, and then
cry out too late? Alas thy Conscience then at every turn will dun thy Soul,
with that of Abraham to Luk 16 25
Dives, O Son remember, etc. Remember the many holy Sabbaths, the precious
Sermons, the earnest zeal of painful Ministers to pull thee as a firebrand out
of the fire: Remember the good examples, the pious presidents, the melting
admonitions, the fore afflictions and fatherly visitations of God. Remember me,
thy now sweltring Conscience, that shook thee often by the Collar, that scared
thee to some duties, and gave thee many a warm Item of this wrath to come:
Remember how thou scoffedst at puritans and mourners for sin. Remember that
good spirit that cried to thee, Return, return, harden not thy heart, hearken
while it is called to day. But now vain is the hope of mercy: vain to lift up
the bitterest cries, thou shall find no place for repentance in the breast of
God Heb. 12 17
no change in his mind, though thou seek it carefully with tears. The day of
thy blessing is past. Now the hope of the hypocrite is cut of^, and swept down
like a Spiders Web. Now thou have no rest from this angry teazed Vulture, that
knaws thy Liver night and day: And that which puts the bloody and circumflex
accent, the abiding tone upon all thy maladies: They are Eternal, who can dwell
with Isa. 33.14
everlasting burnings, who will set Isa. 27.4.
briars and thorns against him in Battle? who can enter the Lists and contend
with consuming fire, when it shall devour before him and be very Psa. 50.3.
tempestuous round about him* when he shall show Isa. 30 3, 31
the lighting down of his arm with the indignation of his anger, with the flame
of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones; When the
pile of Tophet shall be fire, and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like a
stream of Brimstone shall kindle it?

These are the fiery Serpents (the Haseraphim) the Devils, the fell Dragons
that gape with open mouth, that hiss with inflamed tongues, and pour out floods
of venom, at the further end of the grave upon every impenitent sinner.

O that the terror of the Lord would persuade men to take hold of his arm, to
make peace with hi^h, and to be Job 22 2^
at rest. O that I could rowz^ vain man from the lap of pleasure. Will ye sl^ep
on the Prove. 23.34
top of a Mast, in such a rolling and tumbling tempest, when every whiffe may
toss you into the deeps of Hell? Be wise at last, if possible, and shake off
your senseless slumbers; O hard heart that tremblest not at the rattling of his
Chariots, when he clotheth the necks of his Horses, with thunder against thee
as in the day of Battle. That Is a hard heart which is not frighted at it self,
and what will be the event? Ask not me, says Bernard Eugen. f. 237. a.
Bernard, but ask Pharaoh: Be instructed by the Egyptian Carcasses on the shore
of the Red Sea. Will you learn to Psalm. 2.12.
kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way? when his wrath is
kindled but a little: O when it flames all abroad, how terrible is it? The
flames of London were but painted fire to this. That sucked up houses, but this
Mat. 10 3.
immortal Souls.

But where is the Remedy? O kiss the Son lest he be angry: O blessed Son! O
gracious Savior, that is Psalm. 2.12
angry if he be not kissed; and grieved if he be not loved: He loves Prove. 8.17
36.
them that love him; and complains, that they wrong their own Souls, and love
death, that hate him.

Vile Sinners! we are angry with him because he calls for love, who needs not
care for it: let us be angry with our selves, because we give it not: He Is angry
with sinners, that Sinners kiss him not. Such as cast away the cords of his
Laws, V. 3.
he casts about them the cords of his love. And must such sinners kiss him?
yes! they kiss the creature, why not him? he made our hearts, he loves our
hearts and chides to have them. It Is a jealous love, no waters quench, but such
as freely run into it.

Here Is loving anger and wrath in grace, he fights with kind anger, that he may
embrace with love. It Is the heat of love that kindles his ange^, (...) if
neglected, 'twill blaze into a flame. His love hastens us with the voice of
anger: that the fire of his anger consume us not: His anger calls us from his
anger, but not to his anger, but to his love. His mouth checks us that we may
kiss it, and his heart is moved for us, that we may move into it: when anger
warns, it is loving anger: but love too long abused kindles the flame of wrath.
If so much love in this holy anger to bring us to him: what manner of love in
those blessed kisses, when we come. Let Us then love his anger, and kiss his
love: Psa. 2 12.
For happy are all they that put their trust in him.

You that are living, hearken to his anger that ye may never feel it, lay this
love to heart, and consider its latter end. This love will gather the Saints
together, and set apart the godly, the kind Psa. 4.5 Benignus.
in heart Psa. 50.4.
that love him, for himself: For such have made an everlasting covenant of Salt
with him by sacrifice.

CHAP. VII. Of a Saints Comforts, against all the Evils in Death.
I Will fear no evil, says David: For thou art with me, thy crook and thy
staff, they comfort me.

Here, are evils great and manifold in this Valley of Death: evils to be feared
and trembled at, but not by a David. Anacephal^osis.
A Saint will fear no evil: what David, no evil? not the evil of loss, nor the
evil of sense, not the parting from many sweet enjoyments, not the curse of the
Law, thundering from Sinai, and lightning from Ebal, not the conflicts of
conscience, nor the darts of Satan, not the pangs of sickness, nor the pains of
death, not the mouldring dust, nor unsavory stench; not the hideous darkness,
nor the tedious night of the grave, as you may perceive by the foregoing
Chapters. O valiant David! when God stands by thee: what, do thou not
stagger at the doctrine nor ^ear the event of thy resurrection to Judgment, not
the strictness of that awful Judge nor his doomful sentence: nor the long face
or silver hairs of Eternity? No, no! David will fear no evil, and here is his
Cordial. For thou art with me: thy crook and thy staff, they comfort me.

He fears no evil, because God is with him: He fears God, and therefore naught
but God. I Will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, Luk 12.5
says our Lord, fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into
Hell: yea, I say unto you, fear him. The filial fear of God expells the
tormenting fear of death and hell it self. Holy David with one God in his hand
encounters and vanquishes every evil, and scatters the fear of evil. Let the
King of Terrors muster his Forces and order his Troops in Battalia: The shadow
of death to David is but the shadow of evil. Though Psa. 3.6
ten thousand Curiassiers run upon him atilt with envenomed and poisoned
spears, Psa. 4.8.
he lays him down in the bosom of God, he sleeps in peace; For thou Lord
make him to rest in safety. The Job 26.11.
Pillars of Heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof, who keeps a Saint
in his arms. He Will scourge the black Tents of Hab. 3.7. Matt. 27.54.
Cushan with affliction, and the pale Curtains of this Land of Midian, like the
Soldiers a^ our Lords Sepulcher, shall tremble to detain a Saint in the grave;
For he that keeps Israel Psa. 121.3.
shall neither slumber nor sleep: he will awaken him in due time in the
resurrection morning to enter the Courts of Glory.

David says not: I shall not dye, and therefore I will not fear: But though I
dye, I will not fear, for thou art with me. Be the waters of Kidron never so
deep: the fire of Tophet's Valley never so quick and furious: Psalm. 40 2.
the pit of Moloch never so dark and obscure: God has secured my heart from
fear, because he is with me: Isa. 43.2.
The waters shall not drown* nor the fire burn, nor the pit swallow. The power
and wisdom, the mercy and truth of God encircle the faith of a Saint, he dies
Heb. 11.13
kissing and embracing the promises, and like good old Simeon taking Christ in
his arms: he tunes his Swan-like Luke 2.28, 29
Sonnet, and sings himself asleep at the mouth of the grave.

Thou art with me: For thou art mine. A God in Covenant guides to death, and
receives to glory. Other friends take leave at death: Here Is a friend like Ruth
Ruth 1.16.
goes through with thee to Canaan: Others shake hands at the grave, they weep
with Orpah and depart: This friend takes thy spirit into his Luk 23.46
hands immediately, and keeps thy body in his privy Isa. 26.20.
chamber of presence. God is the God of Abraham even in the grave, God Mat.
22.32
is not the God of the dead, but of the living: God is the God of whole
Abraham, therefore Abraham is alive to God, his immortal soul is alive with
God: his precious dust is alive to God: and therefore Abraham's body shall
arise to glory: It Is in his keeping, who keeps all the Psa 34 20
bones of his Saints, not one of them is broken: and to morrow (I mean at the
resurrection of the just) all their Psa. 35.10.
bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee? Joseph's bones are embalmed for
heaven, and lie in a more magnificent Tomb then Egypttian Pyramids, and Gen 50
25 Exodus 3.19. Josh. 24.32. Heb. 11.22
follow the Ark to Canaan. Does the Father take care of his childrens bone?
what chest do they sleep in? with Isa 26.19.
my dead body, says Christ, in the Cedar Chest of the Covenant. What? do they
sleep in the arms of his own beloved Son? yes, they 1 These. 4 14.
sleep in Jesus, and shall rise with Jesus: They are baptized into his death,
V. 14.
and buried in his grave, and brought in the clouds together with him. The same
new Tomb, the same Fine Linen, the same Spices, the same Angels for a Savior,
and for his Saints. Little did Joseph of Arimathea, think that he embalmed the
whole body mystical of Christ, and wrapped the Saints together with him in the
same Joh. 20.7
Napkin, but so he did, by reason of their communion with him.

But does the Father and the Son likewise take such heavenly care of dying
Simeons? and is the Spirit of Grace at a distance from the bodies of Saints,
which are his 1 Cor. 6 19.
Temples? No such matter! though there were not a stone of these Temples lying
upon another, yet the Spirit will rear them up. The Spirit of God is at work in
the grave (...) If the Romans 8.11.
spirit of him that raised up Jesus (...) the dead, dwell in you. He that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
spirit that dwells in you. So then, well may a Saint with holy Jacob Gen 49.33
gather up his feet into his bed and sweetly fall a sleep. For the Father keeps
him, the Son lies by him, and the Spirit quickens him: All heaven will come
down to the grave of a Saint, and not wake their beloved, till Song. 6.4.
the day break and the shadows flee away, then up he gets to the mountains of
Myrrh and to the Hills of Frankincense.

But to follow David: its worth tracing the footsteps of David: nay the
footsteps of God with David in this Valley: Therefore he fears not, for God is
with him: lets listen to his Harp and learn the Ditty. Methinks I hear five
principal Songs of spiritual consolation for a dying Saint.

For thou art with me: David has it and David feels it, and therefore speaks
it: It Is his safety to have it, his joy to feel it, and his love to speak it:
the having of God at death carries us to heaven safely; the feeling it, wings
us thither, and makes us sing of it to others, when we are flying.

A holy Appeal to God in Prayer, David must now be supposed upon his knees,
praying, harping, singing, for thou art with me: All the joyful Prayers of a
Saint end with Songs, and the Songs with this Epiphonema; this burden, shall I
call it? No! this Diapsalma, this Selah, this Diapason, this Close upon all the
Strings, For thou art with me.

A Saint in Covenant, and a Saint knowing it, may dye sweetly: It Is a For thou
art with me, and what is the reason; For thou a^ mine; He that can prove, that
God is (...), may sweetly infer that God is with him. God's with none but who
are his: But they that are so, and know it so, shall fear no evil: For God
makes them Act. 2 28.
full of joy with his countenance.

Divine Relation is a Saints Sanctuary. Psa. 23.1.
my shepherd, I shall not want a full Table, trickling Oil, a running Cup are
David's portion. Such a child that has a God to his Father, fears no want. Such
a Lamb, that has a God to his Shepherd, V. 5.
fears no evil. His crook and his st^ff shall comfort him: Here Is green
Pastures and pleasant Rivers in the very Valley of Death.

Faiths prospect of Heaven transports Gi^den Vale. It Is a narrow Valley, he
leaps it over with his Shepherds staff: Faiths eyes are strong and its legs
nimble: He takes his rise from the promise, and no sooner di^s, but is over
Kidron; At death carnal men's eyes are dim, no spectacle, no optic Glass can
help them to spy Jerusalem. A Saint like Moses has Deuteronomy* 34 7
strong eyes, nor is his natural moisture fled. He stands upon the Pisgah of
his own Tomb, and sees cross the whole Land of Canaan, to the utmost, V 2.
even the Mediterranean Sea. Others at death, how feeble are Eccl. 12 3
the knees of their Souls? their hands the keepers of their house tremble, and
their thigh-bones the strong men bow themselves. But the feeblest of the
inhabitants of Zion, (I speak of such as stand [ in specula visionis Zach. 12 8.
] in the watchtower of Faith, and look through the glass of assurance) they
shall be as David in that day, and the house of David shall be as God, as the
Angel of the Lord before them: As David! but why as David? Sure, strong was the
faith and piercing the eye of David, that saw glory so clearly through all the
thick Fogs and Mists of the Valley: 'Twas God was with him that cleared his
eyes, and pointed with his hands as he did to Moses, and Deuteronomy. 34.1, 4.
caused him to see it. But neither Moses nor Aaron must enter, to show that the
ceremonial no nor the moral Law cannot wait us over the Brook to Canaan. But
David, the Prince of the new Covenant, he shall tread down the Cananites, and
on his head shall his Crown flourish: David the Subject had David the Psa. 84 3.
King with him: David the Servant had David the Son: the Son of Jesse had the
Son of God for Psa. 110.1.
his Lord and Captain. And whose Faith shall not flower by Christ's watering?
and whose fear shall not wither at his presence: who fears death when this
Shepherd sustains? who fears his arriving to Heaven, if a God, if a God in
Covenant, if my God and my Father lead me. Thou art now with me, says David,
I Will not fear, for shortly I shall be with thee: God's with us here: but we are
with him in heaven: here drops of Heaven slide into us, there we shall swim in
heavens Ocean: Here a little of the oil of joy trickles into our hearts from
Psa. 133.2.
the head of Christ: there we shall Mat. 25.21
enter into the fullness of our Lord and Masters joy: here it enters into us,
and there we enter into it. But still by virtue of his presence, thou art with
me, and the vigor of his conduct, thou shall lead me: Thou art with me to bring
me to thee: Thy Crook and thy Staff they comfort me, and why? For they protect
and guide me to thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles. Thou will show me the
path of life: At Psa 16.11
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore: of all these five, I hope to treat
in their order; If God permit.

CHAP. VIII. Experimental feelings of the Divine presence, choice Comforts to a
Saint at Death.
THou have made known unto me the waves of life: and what follows? Thou Acts
2.28.
shall make me full of joy from thy countenance. God's face darts one beam of
light on the path of a Saint, to shine upon his way to glory: another beam (and
that is of joy) upon the heart of a Saint, to oil his motion. And all but beams:
yet warming beams and experienced beams to hasten him to the Sun it self. A
Saint has now but beams of joy, and blessed be God for beams, and such beams
as direct and attract to the Sun it self, to that Sun of joy, to the fullness of
joy in his countenance: Saints look unto him and their Psa. 34.5.
faces are enlightened, our looking to God makes us look like him and the nearer
to him, the more we are like him; Gods countenance is of a changing and
transforming nature: When God looked upon Moses but through a chinck: how did
his face shine, how lovely was it, as well as glorious? God smiles on a Saint
in love, and a Saint reflects upon God with joy.

But Saints have not only good looks from God, but free entertainment. He
makes me to lie down in green pastures, he leads me beside the still waters,
he restores my soul, he leads me in paths of righteousness for his Names
sake: Oh! how the cool Etesian gales from the rivers of the spirit in
ordinances revive and refresh a Saint: The experience of present mercies
dispells the fears of future evils: I will fear no evil for thou art with me:
God never forsakes a soul in covenant, never withdraws his real (though
sometimes his visible) communion. I foresaw the Lord always Act. 2.25, 27
before my face: therefore my heart rejoices, etc. because thou will not leave
my soul in the grave. By nature God's not with us: but when once the day spring
from on high does visit us, grace never sets in an evening, whether we sleep or
wake we are still with God.

Here Is the point, to know aright; that God is with us: and we with him.
Whether we have walked with God and he with us. If Enoch walk with God, then God
will take him: He that walks with God, pleases God: Genesis 5.24
The Septuagint render the Hebrew word for walking, by pleasing God, and the
Spirit of God delights in the word [ EVERESTEIN] and uses the same Heb. 11.5.
when treating of Enoch in the New Testament, to show what pleasure God takes
in them, that walk with him.

If we walk with God, we have fellowship and communion with him. God 1 John
1.6, 7.
is light, and if we walk in light we walk with him: Light is holiness: and a
holy person walks in light and dwells in God: let us not spot our garments, and
we shall walk with him in white Rev. 3.4.
The fine linen of holiness alas, what Saint does keep it clean: we must wash
it daily in the Laver of the Spirit, or else no company for a holy God: The
best of our linen is but cour^e and yellow: its well if it be sincere and
true: but then it shall shine with rays of glorious light, and be laced and
beautified with admirable gifts: The Queen Psalm 45.14
shall be brought unto him in raiment of needle work at the wedding day. Now
it is soiled with many a drop and many a foul spot: but then as pure as God
would have it. Now, the more's the pity, it is patcht and ragged: many a Saint
is out at heels in his holiness, he walks disorderly and uncomely. But then we
shall have new Coats, fine linen clean and white, Rev. 19.8. and change of
Raiment from our older brother. Benjamin Genesis 45.22
shall be fine indeed, when he sits at the Table of the Ruler of Canaan: It Is
holiness fits us for Table communion in heaven: it is porch communion in grace
that brings us near it: have thou never walked with God in the porch? thou shall
never sit down at the Luk 22.30
Table of Christ and drink the new wine of the Kingdom.

Again; As God walks in the light of holiness: he walks also in the holy Lam. 2
1.
footstool and there his goings: He Rev. 2.1.
walks among the golden Candlesticks: In the Temple all talk of his glory,
while he sits at the Table of grace, and the Song 1.11.
Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof; T^^re he has Ps. 133.3.
commanded the blessing and life for evermore.

Walking in Scripture when applied to God in communion with Saints, is expressed
three several ways: Before God, with God, and after God.

To walk before God (among others) one special sense is, (that we are now upon)
to walk in pure and holy worship. Coming up to the Temple is called a coming up
1 King 14 9
before God, our appearing, Psa. 56.13.
sitting, 1 Samuel 2.30, 35.
walking and abiding before him. Ps. 100 2. etc.
And Jeroboam is branded on the account of false worship, that he cast God
behind his back. As God commands his people, they shall have no other Gods
before him; So be forbids any other worship then he has instituted, to serve
himself with: For he is Exodus 20.5.
a jealous God: his eyes do see quickly Exodus 32.8
and his jealousy will Deuteronomy. 29.18, 20
smoke fiercely against such a man, and all the curses in the Book shall lie
upon him, and the Lord will blot his name from under heaven. Bold and saucy is
that silly worm that presumes to chalk out a worship for the living God.

To walk with God, is to walk in his ways, in his statutes and commandments to
do them: to eye his directions, to feel and turn about with every guide of his
hand. We must Psalm. 119.
choose his precepts for our way, and we shall have him for company: and is the
way so holy, and our God so holy? then blessed is the man that is holy and
undefiled Ps 119.1.
in such a way, and in such heavenly company: The Hos. 14.9.
ways of the Lord are right: the just shall walk in them; but transgressors
shall fall therein. Every holy duty is a rock of offense, and a stone of
stumbling to a carnal heart, he trips and stumbles and falls and rises no more:
But an upright heart, and an upright way, meet pleasantly with an Psa. 25 8
upright Lord, that teaches sinners in the way, and guides the meek in
judgment: Prove. 11 20
Such as are upright in the way, are his delight, he takes pleasure in the path
and person.

To walk Deuteronomy 13 4.
after God, is to choose God for our Captain and Leader: to make him our
example, president and conduct. The Israelites followed the cloud of Gods
presence by day, and the pillar of Fire by night, in the howling Wilderness of
Arabia, till they came to Canaan. When the Numb. 9.17
cloud was taken up, then Israel journied, and where the cloud abode, there
they pitched their Tents: Saints must be imitators Deuteronomy. 1.36. Josh. 14 8.9
of Caleb and Joshua, to follow the cloud of the divine presence fully: and
this is the Churches prayer Psa. 80.2.
before Ephraim Benjamin and Manasseh stir up the Ark of thy Strength, march
before us to lead and save us: A holy and perfect God goes before, and a holy
and perfect People follow after: Be Mat. 5.48.
ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; For it is written Pet. 1.15, 16
be ye holy as I am holy: Not to come up to it, but to come after it; not to
equal but to eye and imitate. O perfect copy! the more a Saint looks at it, the
more he mends his hand: O the rare strokes in this pattern of holiness! that
enamours the eye to behold, and quickens the hand to imitate: As he is, so are
we 1 John 4.17
in this world: as he walked 1 John 2.6.
so ought we: So should we Lord! and by thy heavenly conduct so would we: Let
Saints consider, how Christ walked: how obediently to the Father, how tenderly
to the brethren, how mortified to the worlds vanities. When thy thoughts are
tempering, or thy tongue upon the string: thy hand or thy foot hastening to
action: stop one moment, consider, would Christ do this, and be followers of
God, as Ephesians. 5.1.
dear children.

Thirdly, As God walks in holiness, and in the Sanctuary of Ordinances: So he
delights to walk among a holy People: he Zeph. 3.17.
rejoices over them with joy, he rests in his love, and joys over them with
singing: When Zion shines in holiness, she shall be a Crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of her God: She shall no more
be termed Forsaken, nor her land desolate: But her own name shall be Isa. 62.4.
Heph-zibah and her Lands name Beulah: For the Lord delights in her, and her
land shall be married. The joy and delight of God is in a people like himself,
with such he will dwell, rejoice over them 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
above the joy of harvest, and walk in them for ever. Prove 8.17.
I love them that love me, says Wisdom and who seeks me early shall find me:
Love sets the heart a seeking and the more we love him, we seek the earlier. I
sought yea Song 3.1.
by night, him whom my soul loved. Night-searchers are Christ finders, a holy
heart seeks a holy Savior, and a holy Lord delights to be found by it: Christ
absents, not for want of love to us, but to inflame our love to him: he loves
Song 2.9.14
to stand behind the wall, and to hear our moaning after him; to look out at
the 2.9.
window of heaven, and takes pleasure to see our wanderings about to find him,
and sends Isa 30.21.
his holy spirit to whisper to us, where he is

Art thou like Christ? Do thou delight in Song 2.14.
hearing the voice, and seeing the face and changing breaths in conversing with
Saints? Does the blood of David run in thy Veins? Does thy goodness, thy
kindness, extend to Saints on earth, to those Ps 16 2, 3.
excellent ones, more excellent Prove. 12.26
than their neighbor? Is thy delight in these Princes of the daughters of
Zion, these Psa 45.16.
Princes in all the Earth. God calls Zion his Heph-zibah my delight is in her:
Do thou call the Sons of Zion, thy Heph-zibam? My delights in them. So David
did, Psalm. 16, 3.
Col-Hephzibam, All my delights in them. All his delight: All his time, and all
his parts, all his estate, and all his affections are spent with God and
Saints: With his good will, he could spend all his days in the Courts of Gods
house and society of Israelites, that come up to worship. Art thou one of
these? then all these are thine: because thou art Christ's, thy heart's in them,
and one day in their company is a little heaven: For what makes heaven? Psalm.
84.7
but a purer and a longer communion with God and Saints. Why did David so long
and pant to dwell in Gods house? that he calls it, his Psa 27.4.
one thing, his one, his only his darling, his choice petition? chiefly! to
Psa. 27.4
behold the amenities, the pleasantnesses, the beauties of the Lord, and to
inquire in his Temple, to taste the 36.8.
fatness of his house, the fat sacrifices of the peace offerings with God. God
had his part and the Priest his, and the Saint his. In Lev. 7.14.15, etc.
the old Sacrifices all the fat C. 3.16.
was the Lords: but in the spiritual sacrifices, all the Isa. 25.6 Psalm. 63.5.
fat is a Saints at the Gospel mountain: when the cloth is spread for the feast
of fat things, of fat things full of marrow, when the wine's mingled, and Prove.
9.2.
the table's furnished, and Wisdom cries, Song 5.1.
Eat O friends and drink abundantly O beloved.

But this is not all, (yet more than all besides) though David love God above
all seeks him before all, and loves Zion for finding God there: yet the Saints
he loves too, and therefore delights to go to Zion to meet the multitude that
kept holy feasts in Psa 42.4.
the courts of God. [ Hamon Turba tripudians.
chogeg,] To rejoice with the multitude of dancers, and hear the joyful Psa.
89.15.
sound: where they are still Psalm. 84.4.
praising him and Psalm. 145 11, 12.
talking of his power: They sing of his righteousness, his mighty acts and the
glorious majesty of his Kingdom.

Where Is the man that pleads his name in Zions Court-roll: he that is Ps. 87.5,
7.
born there, delights to be there among the Singers and Players on Instruments:
he loves the Songs of Zion; For all his Springs are in Zion, and stream from
the God of Zion: Would you find a Saint or would you find your self to be so?
look in the Courts of Zion: in pure Ordinances with a pure God do all true
Saints converse. Do thou enquire for the Song 1.7, 8.
footsteps of the flocks of his companions. Perhaps the Fathers flock, the
little chosen flock of Christ, is with his son Moses, some faithful Shepherd
in the Exodus 3.1, 2.
backside of a Desert coming to the mountain of God, and there see Visions of
the flaming Bush and the Angel of the Covenant in it? Do thou delight where
Christ does feed, though in secret and retired corners, and hold communion
with Saints there? It Is not glittering pomp of outward services that takes the
heart of a Saint: that is the mark of a Roman strumpet. To worship in spirit and
truth: not in gaudy Gerizims or stately Samaritan Temples, Joh. 4.20. 2 King.
16.11.
not to burn incense on Altars like those of Damascus: but in naked and plain
simplicity of the Gospel lies the beauty and glory and ornament of the true
Church. Altar Damascenum.
Divine institutions: not a little beyond them of men's invention, please a holy
heart. A true Convert always inquires after purity of worship; like the woman
Joh. 4.20.
of Samaria, when Christ was working upon her heart, is very inquisitive and
busy about the truth of worship, and Christ as ready and clear in answers. Art
thou a walker with God? thou walk'st then and conversest with him, and with
holy Saints in holy worship.

But is thy delight in vain Companions: that is an ill token. Do thou fancy
and relish Mat. 15 9
vain worship, and set in the assemblies of superstitious Zealots. It Is a
bad Omen of a carnal heart, and an ignorant head. A man's company shows his
moralls: and a Saints, his graces. Where our treasure is, there our heart and
love, and communion lies. A vain habit and a vain gesture, and vain discourse
with vain and trifling spirits are the Sign-Posts, that hang out from an empty
and a vain heart. Do thou bowl away thy time, shoot away thy seasons, and
bett away thy precious hours among the wasters of the day of grace? I fear thy
profession is rotten at core. David argues his integrity before God, in not
having sat Psa. 26.4.
with vain persons. nor having gone in with dissemblers or 35.16.
with hypocritical mockers in Feasts. But that he was a Companion Psa. 119.6.
of all such as feared the Lord and kept his Precepts. Sheep do not use to
company with hogs, and lie down in the mire together, you never saw Doves
feeding upon Carrion' with Crows and Ravens. Such, whom thou perceivest by a
spiritual instinct and expectest to sing with thee in heaven; do thou company
with, pray, hear, conferr and converse with, here upon earth? I need not bid
thee: If gracious, the magnetisms, the Loadstone of holiness will draw and
allure thee. The perfume of that precious ointment, it is fragrant aromatical
smell, will attract thy society by a spiritual naturality. Those that are 1 John 4.7
born of God love the Brethren.

To issue this: If thou find inward solace and pleasure: 1. In a holy
conversation. upholds thee from dashing thy foot against any stone of
stumbling; For thou love his Law Psalm. 119.165.
and nothing which God does to thee, shall offend thee.

These tokens plainly manifest, that God is with thee; but do thou feel it?
Can thou say it from an inward warmth influenced into thy Soul, by sitting
under the Psalm. 91.4.
Feathers of the Almighty, under the wings of the Cherubims in his holy Oracle?
Art thou warmed by Ordinances, and inflamed in thy affections to God, and
through a holy cherishing vital heat? Can say with David, thou art with me?
then humbly infer I will fear no evil. He that walks in Psalm. 89 15.
the light of Gods face, and under the warmth of his wings: no evil frights
him, no Lion in the way turns him aside from the paths of holiness. A righteous
man under the sense of the flowings in upon him, of the righteousness of
Christ, is as bold as a Lion, and makes all the beasts of the forest tremble.
He plays with that huge Job 41.2, 5
Leviathan of Death, as with a Bird, and bores his jaw with a thorn: The head
of this Ps. 74.14.
Crocodile, is meat for his Soul in the wilderness: he spreads a banquet for
his companions, and parts him among his spiritual merchants: he makes a gain of
death, and feeds upon the Destroyer. For 1 Cor. 3.21
death is his, because he is Christ's, and Christ is Gods. He carries the Kev. 2
17
white stone of absolution in his bosom, and fears not the day of Judgment.
Christ is Gal 1.10
revealed in him, and so shall his glory. The Cor. 1.27 Ephesians. 3.17.
dwelling of Christ in his heart by faith, is not only the hope of glory, but
roots and grounds him in love, and inlarges his Soul to comprehend with all
Saints the interminable bounds, the unmeasurable dimensions, the unintelligible
knowledge of the love of Christ, till he be filled with all the fullness of God.
Though as yet he sees not Christ by the eye of sense: yet he is enamored with
him by the eye of love from the optic nerve of Faith, and 1 Pet. 1.8
rejoices with joy unspeakable and full of glory. A Saint cannot conceive the
greatness of Christ's love, nor utter the exuberancy of his own joy. As the
love of Christ flows in, so his joy swells, overflows and tides it into the
bosom of Christ. He is as full of heaven as he can hold, and is ready to take
his Phaenix-flight upon the wing of an ecstasy into Paradise.

But where is the Saint, that injoyes such heavenly feelings of the presence of
God? Did we search our experiments to feel our feelings, and taste our tastings
of God? More would find the Well, and drink the waters of assurance. Vt nemo in
sese tentet descendere nemo!
Will no man dive into his breast,
To seek the face of such a guest?
Have thou a Well of living waters within thee and never a Bucket? A Fountain,
and never a Basin of Meditation: Be a worthy Soldier of Gideon, Judge. 7.5, 6
lap with the hand of Faith, B^chart. de animal. parti col. 67 4.
hasten and conquer the Midian of tentation: O how it strengthens the nerves,
inspirits, and puts a new life in the sinews of these Champions of valor to
fight the Lords Battles: A sense, a taste of the waters of divine love makes a
conquering Saint: Like Sampson at death, flayes all his Philistines, destroys
their God and their Temple together: What the touch of God upon the heart is,
may be better felt then expressed, and what ye can express, none understands but
he that feels: None hear these Unison strokes, but Virgin-Souls that have
learnt Rev. 14.3
the Song of the Lamb: No stranger intermedles with a Prove. 14.10
Saints bitterness at first conversion, nor the sweet fruit of joy in
assurance: These spices grow in the Song. 4.12.
enclosed garden, bitter are they in the root and taste at first: but send forth
a fragrant scent when pounded in the Mortar of Meditation: These waters flow
from a Fountain sealed, like the head of Nilus, but at length by their nitrous
streams impregnate all the champion plains of the Soul with fertile and teeming
joys: A Saint distills them into Spirits of consolation and then like an
expert Chemist circulates all his duties and graces in the closed glass of
experience at the Sun of Gods countenance into an oil of joy. It Is etheriall
and volatile, and comforts all that mourn: It Is fragrant wine and highly
balsamical fit for a sick beloved: it Song. 7.9.
goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak.

The love of God is a glorious object, seen by the eyes of the Soul turned
inward: Experience is like the chrystalline humor, through which, and
Meditation is like the tunica Spigel. Anat. fol. p. 301. and Bartholin 80. p.
351 Ed. Lug. B. 1651
retina, the Network-Coat of the Eye, upon which the various kinds and species
of divine love are clearly discerned: Like as the curious varieties of all
manner of objects are brought into darkened rooms by unequal glasses: So it is
with a Saint in the private room of contemplation when his glass is placed in
the roof of his Soul, and all worldly objects are shut out, a heavenly heart
lets in only the admirable things that come from above. All that is in Heaven
flows in, and paints the Chambers of the Soul like Solomon's Temple within: and
adorns a holy heart in lively colors with Palm Trees and Cherubims: The Queen
is all glorious Psalm. 45.13
within: Her clothing of wrought Gold from fhe Isle of Ophir, her garments of
Phrygian Needlework: But all these ornaments beautify the heart within: The
Kings Song 7.5.
Galleries within the Soul are hung with the Arras of Grace, and Tapistry
Stories of Gods love from Election to Salvation, from Heaven to Heaven: Lift up
your heads ye everlasting Psa. 24 9
doors, that the King of glory may enter, and there Song 7.12
receive his loves.

Naked innocence and godly simplicity, holy integrity and unblameable purity of
life, are a Saints outward ornaments, the choicest luster, and radiancy shines
in the presence Chamber: The Soul that has it, beholds it with unsatiable
delight, enjoyes it, and is even inebriated and scarce it self, with the
pleasant draughts of this cordial Nectar: It drinks abundantly of this holy
anodyne to assuage its sorrows: The joys of Heaven poured in from the golden
cup of assurance is a choice opiative against death: It perverts not, but
exalts the intellectuals and translates a Saint in a trance to glory.

Have thou then any spiritual senses, and are they Heb. 5.14.
exercised to discern both good and evil: Can thou taste the bitter evil of
death in the forbidden fruit, and cure that mortal gust with the Rev. 2.7.
Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God: Has the Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
Head of Principalities and Powers, commanded away the Cherubims with their
flaming Swords from the gates of Eden: Has the Prince of Life called thee to
feed upon that Rev. 22.2.
medicinal fruit to live for ever? Has thy Soul relisht the sweetness of the
water of the chrystalline River of Life? Does it flow so fast upon thy Palate
with its unspeakable varieties and admirable changes of all manner of delicious
tastes, that thy spiritual fancy is incapable to keep pace with, much less to
unfold and express its pleasure: Here are sweet waters stolen from heaven, that
the world knows not, and hidden Manna that even many disciples Joh 4.32.
taste not: The waters come down from the Rev. 22.1.
throne of God and of the Lamb; They spring from the Fountain of the Fathers
divine election, and his eternal Covenant with the Lamb, and run between the
Banks of the Incarnation and Passion in crystal streams: Have thou tasted 1
Pet. 2.3.
that the Lord is gracious? Tell me, O Soul, is he not sweet? And so sweet,
that thy tongue cannot hold but passionately invite others to come Psalm 34.8.
taste, and see: Is not the Manna, the Joh. 6.35.
Bread of Life, which Christ gives, suited to every desire and longing
appetition of a Saints Palate? Is not his Song 2 3.
fruit sweet to thy taste? Do not the Apples comfort thee, when thou eat'st
them under his shadow with great delight? To them that believe he is 1 Pet. 2.7
precious, says Peter, If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious: A
gracious Lord is a precious Lord, and a tasted Lord is a sweet Lord. Speak
true, O Soul, did ever taste so choice a sweetness, or lay thy lips to such
Song 6.11.
Pomegranats as grew in this garden: The Song 7.12. and 2.13.
flower of the Vine by its smell allures, by its taste captivates the senses and
even overcomes the spirits of a Saint: Its said of the spicy mountains of
Arabia the happy, that the gatherers are often bereaved of their spirits by the
strong emanation of those fragrant shrubs: Truly Saints, (when walking in the
mountains of Canaan the heavenly, I mean of assurance) need the spice of
support against the powerful efflux of the spice of joy. The Soul before it
finds Christ, is sick of love, and when he is found, is sick of joy: I mean
while here below, till we are purified by vision, it can scarce well bear the
flowings in of assurance: We must have our visions of the Angel of the Covenant
like Jacob, Genesis 32.26
only by dawnlight, glittering noon enjoyments are for heaven: These old
Bottles are ready to burst with the new wine of the Kingdom; We could not bear
the strength of this wine: If the King should often bring us into these
Cellars, and therefore he keeps the Key, and opens and shuts it at his
pleasure: and possibly therefore God is pleased to nourish Saints but with
drops of these high Tinctures of glory, full draughts might swell us with
pride, and inflame us with fevers of censure against meek walkers: Jacobs
Peniels must halt upon shrunk sinews. Gen 32.32
And Paul's Revelations must be humbled by Satan's buffets: It Is not only the
surges of grief, but rivers of joy that may overwhelm the spirit. Vol. 3. p.
64. b.
As Gerson speaks of a devout woman that breathed out her Soul in the strength
of these enjoyments: Therefore it is, that here we must live by tastes and
tastes only: the full banquet's kept to last, the first fruits first, then the
harvest; first the bunch of Eschol, and then the Vintage of Canaan: first the
waterish wine of Cana, and then the miraculous wine of Christ's glorious
Kingdom: Admirable grace it is, that God drops down tastes and lets fall crumbs
from the Table of the Spirits of the Just made perfect: And is a taste so
pleasant, so delectable, then what is the fullness: Have thou a mouth that tastes
and a savours the things of God? Though it stay the stomach, yet it whets the
appetite for glory: The ear tries words and the mouth tastes meat, says Job
34.3.
Elihu: but it is the heart that ponders judgment: Heavens dainties call for a
pondering spirit to dwell upon the relish, and a circumspect frame, that we be
not wanton: I have heard of thee, says Job, Job 42.5.
by the hearing of the ^ar: but now mine eye sees thee (and may we say) my
soul tastes thee: Therefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes:
Abhorrency of self and complacency in God, are tokens of divine tastings,
feelings, seeings, enjoyings: The nearer we draw to those holy embraces, the
more lovely does God appear and more vile our selves: Nothing else pleases that
Soul which has had a ravishing relish of God, Now nothing less then God, now
nothing longer, nothing like him: Not our selves, our sins humble us, our
graces are imperfect: Not Angels: Mary weeps for all she Joh. 20.12, 13.
talks with shining Angels, it is not them she cries for: not can their white
garments dry up her tears, or their radiant shining faces raise the least
umbrage of a smil^, while her Lord is absent: The burden is, they have taken
away my Lord, and where is he? But a word from Christ clear her eyes, and
chears her spirit: She knows his voice (when Christ will have it so) before she
sees him: She saw a seeming Gardener and asks for Christ: but now she sees the
true Vine, and tastes his love, she hears his voice and sees his face, and
nothing now will serve but V. 17.
touching: The more we hear and see of Christ, the nearer, fuller, sweeter are
our approaches to him: The Soul's never satiated on this side heaven: This
feast presents heavenly Viands genuine and opposite to a gracious palate: They
are not of a cloying, clogging temper, and there over comes in flowing upon the
heart fresh, new, and sweet issuings from Christ: Such rare pi^ces of prospect
entertain the Soul in this transfiguring mountain: that it peeps and pryes, and
piers in at the Keyhole of the Chamber of Heaven, and can do nothing but lie
at the posts of wisdom, and cry with the ancient, plus de te Domine, More of
thee, Lord*

But on the other side, where are the hearts of besotted worldings: The eyes of
a Prove. 17.24
fool, says Solomon a^e in the ^nds of the Earth, rolling and rambling about
upon vain objects: But wisdom is at the very face of him that has
understanding, he sees such beauty in the face of wisdom: that he shuts his
eyes to the world, and opens them only to heaven.

A wandering eye is the sign of an unsatisfied fool, that will not learn wisdom
from a Solomon: Though God gave him more riches, (If Villalpandus count
aright,) than ever any of the Roman Emperors had; and all manner of enjoyments
and an exquisite heart to dive to the bottom of the visible Creation: Every one
that girds himself to run Solomon's race a new, counts that Prince a fool, but
proves himself to be so: God commanded Solomon to write a Book on purpose to
save our labor, to quench our drought, to excuse our toil, and to set up his
Herculean Pillars: On the one side he graves, all is vanity: on the other, ne
plus ultra, sail no further: For now there is no terra incognita, no more land,
nor continent, nor Isle to be discovered: hear the conclusion of the Eccl. 12.13
whole matter: Fear God and keep his commandments for this is the whole of man.

Solomon's Ships of speculation went round the world and brings tidings of more
gold for covetous wretches, and more Apes and Peacocks for curious and weak
fancies, but no new thing under the Sun: The old pleasures indeed shall wast
home new toils, and new vexations, but no satisfaction to a judicious Soul: A
wise man therefore fixes his eyes upon divine wisdom, and daily contemplates
the ribs of Solomon's Ship laid up in the dock at Eziongaber, shattered with its
sore travels, and learns the great prudence to stay at home, to study his own
heart, and to ponder the paths of understanding. Alas! then may we not pity,
deluded, bewitched entangled mortals, that still hunt their game, and follow
the hot scent through the wilderness and forest of this world: Oh! how they
puff and pant, and sweat and leap hedge and ditch after the deep throated
hounds of their boundless desires to catch a shadow: It Is a plain sign they
know little and have tasted nothing of God to hunt so fiercely after smoke and
vapor.

I will not say it is unlawful to hunt wild Beasts for the food of man, or to
make room and preserve his safety: But this I Will say, to take pleasure in
setting the creatures at variance, to make a sport of the fruit of sin, to make
that a recreation which God has made a curse, is the sign of one that walks
contrary to God: I read of no godly man but of four other hunters in Scripture,
Nimrod, and Esau, and Ishmael, and the cruel hunter of souls, and I am sure
they are wild and bad companions: But there are a world of hunts men that
pursue the pleasures of sin, and the gains of unrighteous Mammon, and Oh! how
these ignes fatui, these inflamed meteors lead thousands into the bogs of
eternal darkness. And as the ancient Heathens sang of hunts-men, -- Nec praeda
quam caede magis etc. Nunc hominum nunc bella gerunt violenta ferarum. That
cager hunters of Beasts in times of peace were usually bloody hunters of men,
in time of war.

That man has no communion with God, whose Soul is immerst and drowned in
sensual pleasures: Such as walk in the vanity of their minds, are alienated
from the life of God; Ephesians. 4.18.
such have little honor or love for God, that forsake the fountain of living
waters, and suck the mud of the broken Cisterns of the Creature: Their Souls
are as earthy as their objects, and their spirits as base as their pleasures:
But remember that to lay up thy Soul in thy Barns, to tie it in thy Bags, to
lodge it in thy Parks, to pack it in thy Warehouse, or stove it in thy Ship:
These are dangerous places to look for it: when the world is in a light flame.

Shall I commend unto thee, O man, a gainful Trade and a pleasant Chase: The
first is to lay out all thy Stock for the pearl of price: The second is to fall
in company with David, and Psa. 63.8.
follow hard after God, and never leave him till thou get a blessing, As Psa.
42.1.
the Heart pants after the waterbrooks; so pants my soul after thee, O God,
Here Is a hunted heart turns hunter himself: Sin hunts a Saint, and he pants for
God, and at length meets with lovely Venison, but it is in the Sanctuary,
savoury meat that his soul loves, he tastes it, and blesses his darling before
he dies: He feeds upon a Kid of the flock, takes the Cup of Salvation and
Praises, saying, thou have dealt bountifully with me, Psa. 116.7.
Return, O my Soul, unto thy rest: He has no rest upon earth, no rest but in
God, and therefore return O my soul, unto thy God: He looks upon the whole
earth, as Tohu vabohu, without form and void, Genesis 1.2
and all the fullness thereof to be but emptiness, the roaring of the seas to
sound forth their shallowness, and all the starry heavens to be like Stellae
nebulosae.
vanishing clouds: Unless he feels the warmth of the spirit of God moving upon
the waters of his soul.

If thou have indeed had spiritual feelings of God, thy Soul's warmed, thy
thirst to the world slaked, to God inflamed, thy hot inquisition and pursuit of
the creature cooled and checked: Fools gather Cockleshells and Peebles, when
there lies before them a Min of Gold or a Rock of Diamonds: And here is the vast
difference between the possessors of worldly, and the inheritors of heavenly
treasures. Those make the man covetous of an evil, Hab. 2.9
covetousness to his house, the other* ennobles the mind with a communicative
generosity: And there is reason for it, though no reason for sin, yet there is a
reason to be rendered why the sinner acts so: For the first loses by his
hoarding, and the other gains by his spreading: The graces of the spirit in the
soul as well as in the whole Church, are a fountain of gardens, Song 4.15.
a well of living waters and streams from Lebanon: They are not wells bent up,
but overflowing: Come, says David, and I Will tell you what Psa. 66.16.
God has done for my soul: Experience in these Visions is like sailing upon an
Ocean, that has an infinite round: no diving to the bottom, no kenning of a
shore: There Is always a terra incognita, an unknown land in heavenly mysteries,
and the more we discover, it yields more various and excellent pleasures. New
fruits, new tastes, new paradises, new gardens of delight, new songs and new
joys for ever* The Songs of the Lamb will be new Rev. 14.3.
to all eternity: Here, in this life the soul hoists up sails from the port of
conversion, on the waters of Merom, the bitter waves of repentance, mourning
under tentation for sin; then spreads them upon the Sea of Galilee in sweet
communion with Christ and his holy disciples in the ship, then passes the dead
sea without danger, and at length with a prosperous gale falls into the vast
Ocean of eternal glory.

But to re-entrench: he that feels what God is to his soul, is inwardly filled
with a sense, what he will be: Death is no more able to amuse a holy soul
inbosom'd with God, and seasoned with experiences of his love then the Carcass
of the Lion was to fright Sampsons Parents: nay, it fed them with life-honey
dropping from the honeycomb.

Keep up thy feeling fellowship with God in the closest, and choicest
reflections upon his love, and the fear of death will vanish: Make conscience
of secret sins and secret duties: this will make way for secret communion, and
sweetly increase it: The more frequent and humbly familiar, you are with God in
holy reverence: the more divine and soul-fainting emanations will flow from his
heart to replenish thy soul, and enlarge it for glory: our Psa. 90.8.
secret sins, says Moses are in the light, in the broad day light of thy
countenance. Let Us consider Psa. 90.8^
he sees the least aberration and wandering of our thoughts from his love,
let us be as tender to avoid his displeasure, as we would be joyful in the beams
of his face: let us Psa. 63.6.
remember him upon our beds, and meditate on him in the night watches: Let Us
Psalm. 4.4.
commune with our own hearts and be st^ll, that we may commune with his and be
joyful. Silete, vacate, be still from all passions and hurries: give a vacancy
to thy Soul to meditate on God and it will still thy fears. The more our Souls
are wrapped up in this communion, the more they dye to the world and live to God.
Our life is a vapor to dying mortals: but death is a vapor to a living, to a
lively Saint.

But now let me end with a caution that is mixed with a Cordial: A very holy
Saint may set in a cloud, and arrive at the haven in a storm. God's tied to
believers by promise to save them* but not to carry them in Song. 3 9
Solomon's Chariot of the wood of Lebanon, into Heaven* Yet it stands firm what
David sings in this present Psalm; Thou art with me, and therefore, He fear no
evil. When the Soul from feeling can cheer up its spirits, that God is with it:
It fears nor, who is against it. God for secret reasons Luke 24.16
may hold the eyes of some disciples, that they may not know him: to show that
(...), from grace to glory, is from free love, and that we can challenge
neither grace to close with his Covenant, nor assurance to discern our
adherence. The sprinkling of the Conscience from dead works, the peace of God
that passes all understanding, Col. 3.15
to rule in our hearts; and the joys of the holy spirit all flow from the same
Fountain. All our springs are in Zion, and bubble up from under the Throne of
the Mercy-Seat. Yea at the state of Death some ordinary Christians, If meek and
humble, may enjoy greater Visions, then many gracious, holy, and sweetly gifted
Ministers. It Is not always the strength of Grace: but the gift of influence
that breeds and nourishes strong and bright assurance. A Mary Magdalen shall
call Jesus by the name of Rabboni^: When two experienced Disciples shall walk
and talk with him many a mile, and not see him nor taste him till the evening,
till the Luke 24.29
Supper of Glory. But yet it is rare for holy hearts to want these heavenly
Visions. The pure in heart shall see him in the Glass of assurance, as well as
behold him hereafter face to face.

CHAP. IX. Holy Appeals to God in Prayer, great Comforts against Death.
DAvid was now at Prayer, applying and appealing to God, at owning and
appropriating work; telling God, that he was with him. Did not God know that he
was with David? Yes! but God loves to hear from a Saint that he feels it A
Saint must tell God that he feels it, not to satisfy him as unacquainted with
it. (For the Lord fills the Soul with himself, and known unto the Lord are all
his works from the beginning) But because God delights to hear, that we
thankfully own and acknowledge it. Thou art with me, David speaks it upon his
knees, and with his Harp in his hands he sings it. This Lesson, Lord I learnt
of thee, will thou please to hear it. Thou art with me, in me: and thou within
me come unto thy self. I am full of thee, and therefore my Soul over-flows to
thee. Thy love is a fire, which has inflamed my heart, and Excellens sensibile
laedit sensum.
being pent it preyes upon my spirits: let it have it is holy vent into thy
bosom. It multiplies upon it self, and out it must; will thou accept it? For a
while let it warm the strings of my Harp as well as of my affection, and touch
every tone with a flame of love: as if a Seraphim had quickened it with a coal
from the Altar. Then let my Soul like fire ascend before thy Throne, winged
with that love from whence it came.

Prayer, what is it, but a flight of the Soul from it self to God? A Soul
affected with divine love has Doves eyes, its prayers has Doves wings and
flies with Letters of credence at its feet from the spirit within our Temples,
unto the holy Oracle within the Vail.

It Is in Prayer, that David pours out his Soul and sings, Thou art with me: he
says not, thou will be with me: but infers, that God w^^ld be with him,
because he was so: and therefore I shall fear no evil. This God is our God Psa.
48.14.
for ever and ever: he will be our guide unto death, and through death: and
after Psa. 73.24.
death, receive us to glory. Faith carries the foot of prayer, [ EIS
MESOVRANEMA] Rev. 14.6
into the midst of Heaven, as with Angels wings. And as the Lord said to
Joshua, so may we say to praying Saints, Josh. 1.3.
every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that has he given
you, the good land is before you, go in and possess it.

When we pray, we enter the Court of Heaven, where the Lord Exodus 24.10. Ezekiel.
1.26.
sits on a Sapphire Throne, embellisht with the morning Stars and the Rainbow
of the Covenant round about him, and thousands of Legions of Cherubims to
minister to him.

We are taught by our blessed Savior to pray: Our Father which art in Heaven:
as if a Saint in prayer should account himself as it were assumed into Heaven.
The Father sees us at all times: but in prayer we do [ Sistere nos coram]
present our Souls to be seen by him. Should our hearts be in heaven, when our
Souls are in prayer: what heavenly hearts become so heavenly a presence as
God's, and so heavenly a quire as the Angels round about him. Let Us pray, that
his will be done, as it is in heaven: that we be like a kind of earthly Angels:
that in all our prayers, our wills may be hallowed into his, 1 John 5.14.
as when we shall come to heaven. Then, if we ask any thing (e) according to
his will, he hears us. To have our wills, the best way is to have his holy
will to be ours, and then we may pray with reverence, as Luther said, Let our
will be done, for our will is become thine. Gerson de Mendi^i^ate f. 760.
Ne tradas me voluntati meae, O give me not up to mine own will, but to thine.
The will of God is 1 These. 4.3.
our sanctification, and a Saints, renewed will delights in the holiness of God
Here Is a union of wills in the communion of holiness. For both Heb. 2.11.
he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one. Joh. 17.23.
I in them as our Lord in his heavenly prayer, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one.

Receive we such a Kingdom, Heb. 12.28
let us serve him with reverence. Nothing renders us more reverent in our
services then an inward sense of the divine holiness that fills his essence,
and is the luster of his Kingdom. This argument of the divine holiness to put
us in a reverent frame, is often pleaded in Scripture. Thou art Psalm. 22.3
holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel, Thou dwell in the
Temple, where they are still praising thee, and therefore they serve and praise
thee because thou art holy, What services are the Cherubims continually engaged
in, but crying Holy, Rev 4 8.
Holy, Holy, before the Throne. Ye shall Lev. 19 30
reverence my sanctuary (my holy place) I am the Lord. Holiness is the
attractive of Reverence from a holy heart: The nearer we approach to a holy
God, the more awful impressions are stamped upon a holy Soul. I will be Lev. 10 3
sanctified in them that ^^aw nigh me (says the Lord) and before all the
people I will be glorified. Drawing nigh to him commands sanctity in us, and
the more we sanctify his name by our holy addresses, the more we glorify him.
He is Exodus 15.11.
glorious in his holiness, and therefore fearful in his praises The rays of
glory round about his holiness, (that none can behold and live) should imprint
submissive though f^ial fear upon our spirits in his praises and services. It Is
true, that God is to be feared, as to the matter of his praises: his dreadful
acts upon his Egyptian Enemies: yet when his wrathful judgments have sunk the
Chariots as lead in the deep waters: still a holy fear should tune the V 20, 21
Timbrels and measure the Dances of his People in praise, Serve the Lord with
Psa. 2 11
fear and rejoice with trembling, we serve him acceptably, when we attend his
presence not with slavish but Heb 12 28
godly fear: and when we rejoice in his goodness, and tremble at his greatness;
our heavenly joy defends us from the base terrors of bondage and our holy fear
from luxuriant wantonness. Nay, when Phil. 2.3.
we work out our Salvation in the Vineyard of the promises: we must sweat at it
with a S^n-like fear, knowing that our work is not worth our penny: and with
due trembling being assured, that when the Lord Psa. 36.6*
preserves one, and lets another perish, yet his righteousness is like the
great mountains, and his Judgments are a great deep.

O but say some, where the spirit of the Lord is, there is 2 Cor 3.17
liberty Again, we have access with Ephesians. 3.12.
boldness by the faith of him. Again, we are invited to come boldly Heb. 4.16.
to the Throne of Grace: and Again, we have Heb. 10.19
bo^dness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus. Truly some
Translators seem a little too bold with the Greek word, and make other
Christians thereby too bold with the thing unless the word [boldness] be taken
in a very reverent sense: it might better be translated by liberty or freedom,
that is, from a spirit of bondage. For PARRESIA in the notation and acceptance
of the word in Greek Authors, and in it^ opposition to straitness and pen^ness
of spirit in our addresses to God, most properly signifies the speaking out the
mind of a man fully with enlargedness of heart, and fluency of expression. It Is
an encouraging word, to allure drooping, and to incite and raise desponding
weak believers; Gerson d^mystic Theolog. Tom 3 p 66.^.
not to spur on audacious, irreverent and presumptuous spirits. Improbe au^es
irrumpere in osculum oris, si nec pedi^^s cum lachrymis, etc. Says Gerson,
thou art wickedly audacious, to rush into the kisses of his mouth, that have
not first washed his feet with thy tears. I know, God calls us to a more sweet
and heavenly familiarity with himself under the Gospel, then when under the
ancient pedagogy of the Law. But let us not be saucy and put on our Hats in the
Court, Moses was commanded not to draw too nigh the flaming bush, and to put
off his shoes, and so was Joshua, Jos. 5. all to signify the danger of too
much prying curiosity and the necessity of a holy reverence in the presence of
God. Rev. 4.10.
Behold how the twenty four Elders fall down before him in worship, and cast
their golden Crowns before the Throne. Let Us remember that we are but Psa.
73.22.
Behemoth's great beasts before him; but dust and ashes still, worms and no
men, less then the least of his mercies: nay, when in heaven we are but
glorified dust and sparkling ashes, but spiritual flesh, but atoms and less
then nothing, to stand before God. The very heavens are impure in his sight,
and he charges his Angels with folly. When they cry, Holy, Holy before him,
they cover their faces and may justly cry out with Lepers, unclean, Lev 13.49
unclean. Their created holiness, considering its infinite deficiency from
Gods, is like folly and pollution, and their lips uncircumcised before his
unfadomable beauty, inaccessible light, and Angel-confounding holiness. And did
they not suck in streaming rays of holiness from beholding his face
continually, and drink in rivers of divine dignation, to make and accept them
as worthy? they could never be able or fit to fly before his Throne, or to be
employed in the messages of his services. Psa. 73 22
Eternity is insufficient for the highest of finite beings to praise an
infinite essence, and that unsearchable abyss of holiness, glory and Majesty. O
then what is man? That God should visit him, when we consider the impurity of
the heavens, and its caelestial inhabitants: Nay, what is man? That God should
suffer him to peep and mutter out of the dust before him

Well however; come near, but humbly, and we may come freely: come we
reverently, and what grace we feel within us, we may appeal with, before him
Examine me, O Lord, and prove me (says David) Psa. 26 2 V^e^^en^s.
try my reins and my heart, search me, O God, and Ps. 139.23
know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts Sit as a refiner upon me, melt
away the dross of my impure affections, that my Soul may appear like glittering
gold seven times purged by the fi^e of thy love. Nay, Lord (thus David appeals)
thou V. 1.
have searched and known me, and oh how precious are thy V. 17
thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the sum of them. Thy thoughts of me, and
my thoughts of thee, how precious to me, O God? how great is the sum of them?
Thy thoughts of electing love, of justifying and sanctifying grace. Nay, thou
have thoughts for 2 Samuel 7 19.
a great while to come. A great while indeed, for they are thoughts of eternal
Jer. 31.3
love. Thy thoughts in number transcend the sands on the Seashore, the hairs
of my head, and the stars of heaven. Archimedes may number the sands, Spigelius
the hairs, and Hipparchus the visible stars: But who can expend thoughts
commensurate to the love of God. The circle of his love cannot be squared, nor
its cubick root extracted. We may study and pray Ephesians. 3.18
to comprehend with all Saints the glorious love of God in Christ: But still it
passes knowledge, and surmounts our numbers. Well might David when waking, Ps.
139.18.
be still with God. In the morning watches, when his Soul was freshest, his
thoughts warmest, his parts quickest: while the yet remaining darkness
presented no diverting objects to his eyes, and the deep silence of the night
distracted not his audience with various clamours: Then David has his Songs in
the night, Isa. 30.29.
as in the holy Solemnities: Then does he meditate on the divine love, and
remember God Ps. 63.^
upon his Bed. His wonderful works and the thoughts of God concerning him, Psa.
40.5.
he professes they could not be reckoned up in order before him. Though he was
still with God, searching and following after him, yet Job 11.7.
could not find out the Almighty to perfection. But yet the holy man holds fast
his confidence, For thou art with me, and I with thee. God with us, keeps us
with him. Do our desires and affections haste after him, they will bring in the
food of assurance, that he is ours. (Talem illum invenies, says Gerson, qualis
and tu fueris in tuis desideriis. Gerson de Mendicitate spiritual, f 75.
) Our spiritual desires longing and panting after God, interpret and manifest
the gracious motions of the divine love to us. The more we seek him, the
sweeter we find him: and the more we trust him, the more he loves us. Let us
with David in all our straits make to him as our rock, our refuge, our strong
Castle, our Fortress, our City of Defense, and Munition of Rocks, Op. 3. part.
our Waters shall never fail, and our bread shall be sure.

Appeals to God.
To Appeal to the Majesty of Heaven is a matter of most important moment,
because of his omniscience, omnipresence, his exactness in justice and
judgment. If our hearts 1 John 3.10*
condemn us, God is greater and knows all things: but if our heart acquit us,
then have we confidence toward God: yea and 4 17.
in the day of Judgment. To be sc^ld^d with condemna^ion from conscience and
from God too, is double judgm^nt, and our hearts condemnation is but the
harbinger to Gods. Conscience is but the Prison till execution, and if the
earthly Prison be so noisome and dismal, what is the eternal? It behooves all
therefore, that dare appeal to God, to examine and try their hearts with
impartial strictness, before they turn about their faces to heaven. David
spends the largest part of an excellent Psalm in choice ruminations upon the
divine attributes and the works of God, on his former experiences and deep
meditations upon the all-searching eye of God, before he dares to make an essay
of a reverent Ps. 139 2
appeal unto him. Holy Paul makes small account of being judged by the Church,
or by moral men, or his own conscience in comparison with 1 Cor. 4 3, 4
divine judgment. Our heart is Jer. 17.9
deceitful above all things, who can know it. But the Lord is a God of
knowledge, and by him 1 Samuel 2, 3.
actions are weighed. The balances of the Sanctuary will turn at a grain of
the least action, yea, at the thousandth part of a thought. His EKDIKON OMMA,
his piercing and searching eye, enters the innermost parts of the belly, His
eyes do behold his eyelids Psalm. 11.4.
try the children of men. [ Explorabunt.] They search into the hearts and pry
into the reins of men* The Lord sits ( in specula aeternitatis) upon the
watchtower of glorious Majesty, and discerns all the secret recesses and
caverns of the hearts of Men and Angels The Metaphor seems to be taken from
Soldiers that stand upon the guard on a high Tower to observe and ken the
approaching enemy. When men do ( connivere occulis) even close their eyes, and
make as it were a small portion of a Tube with their eyelids to exclude the
light and discern obj^cts the clearer, or like refiners that look narrowly into
the Crucible or Cople to discern, when the melted Gold gathers into a clear and
pure circle and has cast out all its dross. All this, is to show with what
niceness and accurateness the Lord does pierce into the hearts of men. When we
consider the excellency of the searcher, the curiosity of his observation, that
nothing escapes the Eagle-eye of his Omnisciency: when we ponder upon the
purity of his Judgment, and the equity of his tremendous tribunal, who should
not fear before him and tremble at his imperial Majesty? For who can stand if
he does but Psalm. 143.
enter into Judgment? [ ne veniat] let him not come toward the work, says the
Psalmist, unless we can stand before him* To impose upon men, is base
hyprocrisie: but to impose upon the Maker and searcher of hearts is cursed
Atheism, abominable impudence, Psalm. 14*1* 2, 4.
and corrupt folly of the works of iniquity.

When we enter our appeals before God, we imply his all-searching providence,
his avenging hand, his acquitting justice, his pardoning grace, the
resurrection of the dead, and the dreadful Judgment Seat of Christ. EN TOVTO DE
upon this account Act. 24.16 2 Cor. 5.2
says Paul, we exercise our selves, in having a conscience void of offense in
the sight of God: that the Psalm. 19 14.
meditation of our heart may be acceptable in his sight, our Strength and our
Redeemer.

As to the matter of our appeals in prayer, there are but four cases, whereof I
would treat in respect to our comforts at death. Isa. 33.6.


Section 1.
Our first Appeal may be about the integrity and sincerity of our hearts. Not
that we have escaped all outward sins, or performed all inward duties, or can
absolve our selves from Psalm 19 12.
secret faults, or are purely cleansed from all the stains of hypocrisy: But
that the bent of the heart is to God, that the constant pointing of the needle
of our love is to heaven: that we approve no sin, not the least intumescence,
fermentation or rising of an evil thought without actual combat or at least a
serious, inward habitual displicency of heart against it, springing from that
radical hatred, which is in us through grace against the least concupiscence.
Though when we Romans 7.22.
would do good, evil be present with us: yet there is a crystal fountain of
delight in the Law of God, bubbling from the inward man, that cleanses and
carries away the very soil of our thoughts. This holiness of heart and
conformity of will to the Law of God flows from the grace that dwells in us.
Thou art with me, says David. A holy God makes the heart holy, and the heart of
a Saint by the light of holiness, sees God, and a holy God to be with it. In
Psa. 36.9.
thy light we do see light, the light of grace, and we shall see light, even
the light of glory.

Many infirmities are and will lurk in the choicest of Saints: The Ivy of sin
will shoot its roots and fibers into the joints and cracks of our Mud-walls:
but when these fall, that shall wither. A Saint is always hacking at the boughs
of actual and stubbing at the root of original sin. His sincerity makes him to
lay about him, and though he cannot appeal, Lord, I have no sin: yet thus he
can, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: Psa. 51.9.
Hide thy face from my sins: the face of thy justice, the face of thine anger,
and look upon the Psa 84 9
face of thine anointed within the vail: Psa. 55.1
hide not thy self from my supplications: Ps 119.19
hide not thy commandments from me: O Psa. 69.17
hide not thy face from thy Servant. I am Psa 119 94
thine, Lord save me, for I have sought thy Precepts. I have kept the ways of
the Lord, and have not Psa. 18.21.
wickedly departed from my God. I have not dealt so wickedly, as to go away
from God and his holy ways, through the tentation of any wickedness. Not as if
there were any departure from God, that were not wicked: but I have not
committed so great a wickedness, as to fall away from the ways of God. His
Judgments Psa. 18.22.
were before my face, and I did not put away his Statutes from me. Neither his
Statutes in respect to purity of worship nor his judgments, that is, his
judicial Law in respect to moral obedience. Therefore the Lord has recompensed
me according to the cleanness of my hands, in his V. 24.
eye sight. To wash our hands in the La^er of the Sanctuary before his eyes,
because he sees them: not because men see their impurity. David would not rake
in any foul dunghill of sin, or pollute his fingers with the pitch of bribery
or the sanies, the ulcerous matter of any corruption, because God saw him, Nay
I was upright V. 23.
before him and have kept my self from mine iniquity. I have guarded, watched
and strictly observed my self as to mine own iniquity whatever it were,
ambition, lying or any fruits of a sanguine complexion, Can thou thus appeal
to God in Prayer, that thou keep thine eye upon God, and that the eying of
his face guards thy heart from sin? Thou may then cheerfully infer, that God
is with thee, that he will enlighten the lamp of thy Soul with the light of his
love and thus lift up thy Soul with David. The Lord my God will enlighten my
darkness, and though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will
fear no evil, for thou will be my guide to glory.

Section 2.
A second Appeal may flow from a Mat. 12.34.
the mouth speaks, the hand works, and the ^oo^ runs. In whose hearts
are the Psa. 84.5.
ways of them that pass through the Valley of B^cah, up to the Temple of
Beracah. Such as have God's holy ways in their hearts, want not feet to walk
and run in them: when the heart is in the ^oot, it runs nimbly like a Roe or a
young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether. They go from strength to strength,
till they all appear before him in Zion. Thy law is in Ps. 40 7, 8
my heart, that is the root of obedience, and therefore lo I come to thee When
the heart believes, the Romans ^0.10.
mouth confesses unto Salvation: when the heart is fixed, settled and calmed
from carnal fears, then Psalm 57 7. and 108.1.
the tongue praises, the harp warbles, and the ten-string'd Instruments of the
Soul make the Temple-Marbles to ring aloud of his glory. When the heart bubbles
up with a good matter, Psalm. 45.1.
then the tongue becomes the pen of a ready writer. The body alas, is but the
Romans 6.5.
weapon the organ and altar of the soul. When some persons are impeacht of an
ungodly life, they retort: let every one answer for himself, their hearts are
good and that they are no hypocrites. But can hearts be good? when lives be
naught, or can lives be unholy, when hearts be gracious? Such as the vein is,
such will the metal prove, that is melted from it: as the fountain, such is the
stream; as the root, such the fruit: like star, like influence: The Pleiades
will soften with showers, and Orion will bind with frost: The cause and its
effects are of the same blood and kindred: Out Pro. 4.23
of the heart are the issues of life natural, carnal and spiritual.

Whoever can look back on a well ordered conversation, to him, shall be shown
Psa. 50.23
the Salvation of God. He that has his Quiver full of holy works may shoot at
this enemy (Death) in the gates. The ungodly cannot Psa. 1.5
stand in Judgment: but he that delights in the Law of the Lord, whatever he
does, shall prosper: when holiness has taken root in the heart, it blossoms
and flowers in peace of conscience, and joy of the Spirit, and brings forth
pleasant fruits in the conversation and goodly spices in the hour of death.
Like the Psalmist in his affliction, so a Saint at death, comforts himself with
the holy Songs he had warbled in his youth. The end of the wicked is to be cut
off, Psa 77 6.
and Prove. 14.32
he is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous, (he that has walked
uprightly) has hope in his death. Mark the perfect, and behold the upright:
for the Psa. 37.37.
end of that man is peace. He Will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold: If there be any choicer thing than grace and glory (and truly that is
God himself) he will keep back nothing. From whom? from such as walk Psa. 84 11.
uprightly. He Will show Psa 16.1. Psa. 23 3.
the path of Life, but it is to such, as first have been lead by him in the
paths of righteousness.

Happy man, that can unfeignedly and skilfully tune Hezekiah's Song: Remember
Isa. 38.
now, (now at the point of death) O Lord how I have walked before thee in truth
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy ^ight.
Integrity of heart and the goodness of his doings are his double appeal at the
appearance of death. Though the good, we have done, be very little, yet if that
little fruit grow from a sanctified root, God graciously accepts it, because
it is of his own planting. As David spoke of his royal preparations for the
Temple: So must we of all our graces, duties, services. 1 Chronicles. 29 14
All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Do any fragrant
spices perfume the air of a Saints discourse? Or any pleasant fruits garnish
the garden of a Saints life? We must invite, as the Spouse does, Let Song. 4 16.
my beloved come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruits. The trees of
righteousness are Isa. 61.3
of his planting, that he may be glorified, like the Trees of Lign-Aloes, like
the Cedars of Lebanon, whi^^ the Lord has planted and (...) for Numb. 24 6 and
Psalm. 104 10 (...) To Phil. 2.13
will and to do: to think and to act: the hearts integrity and the life's
sanctity, are all from his good pleasure. Whosoever can enter his appeal at the
throne of grace, with the testimony of his conscience, that 2 Cor. 1.12
in simplicity and godly sincerity, he has had his conversation in this world,
may rejoice at the remembrance of the day of the Lord Jesus, and long for its
approach.

Section 3.
Vitte^^on Optic l. 2. Theorem. 17 p. 67. edit Basil. fol. 1572.
Optics teach us, that lines and rays of light, come from all parts of a
luminous body, and traverse, and cut one another at innumerable angles, but
some are central from the midst. All the affections are but emanations and
beamings from the heart and will; but love is the cardinal and central ray.
What we love, that sets all the wheels of the Soul in motion. Love's the
commandress of all our forces. It Psa. 86.11.
unites all the powers under its banner, and leads all the squadrons of the
soul into the fortress of God's name. The Soul before acquaintance with God,
was like a bird wandering from (...), but now she has found where (...) Psa 84.3
young, even all its (...) upon thine altars, O Lord of (...) King and my God.

The Soul that is in love with God, loves him only; thirsts, pants, cries after
him, ( Whom Psa, 73 25
have I in heaven but thee, and none upon earth do I desire besides thee.) Are
there no Saints there, no Angels there? Yes* but they move in the stated
inferior Orbs both of their own essence and his affection, he mounts higher,
and the glory of the Sun of Gods countenance, eclipses all these Stars, that a
Saint sees none in heaven to love like God. All these he loves in the order of
his ascension to the bosom of God. A Saint passes by the Angels, ascending and
descending on Jacobs Ladder, till he comes to the embraces of the Genesis 28.12,
13.
Lord above, at the top of all. [ Non aliud tanquam illum. (as Bernard. f. 94.
h.
Bernard heavenly) non aliud praeter illum, non aliud post illum.] A Saint
loves none like him, none besides him; none, after he has tasted of his
loveliness. And again, [ Nec pro illo aliud, nec cum illo aliud, nec ab illo ab
aliud conver tamur.] The Soul embraces none in stead of him, none in
competition with him, neither turns about from him, to any besides him. Bern.
p. 77. h.
Bonum est magis in camino habere te mecum quam ^sse sine te in coelo. It Is
better to be (...) thee in a Furnace, then in Heaven (...) thee. A Saint loves
Heaven for God, not God for Heaven. Heaven i^ Heaven because God is there, and
wherever God is, that place is a Saints heaven. As a ^aithful Spouse is not
taken with the Jewels, Bracelets and Earrings, but the lovely person that
gives them. It Is not the place but the person, not the Palace, but the Princes:
not the glorious Throne, (...) Father of Mercies upon it. God love first (...)
kindled these holy flames and (...) do they tower, but upward (...) ^he e^ement
of love within his (...) O let my prayer, says David, (...) as ^^cense: the
love (...) heart like a Pi^^ar of incense. Psa. 141 2. Dirigatur in star
co^^^mne.
(...) was fragrant to God, but what (...) in the fi^^, that first came down
(...); no love but that which (...) from God. O let our love (...) upright into
heaven in (...) and (...) Pi^^ars, not waved by (...) blasts of the worlds
tentations. The Torch of our affections was first kindled from Ezekiel 10.6.
between the wheels of the chariot of Cherubims and it lights our winged feet
into the Chamber of Pres^nc^. We have none in heaven to love, and none in earth
to desire but God: Here upon earth there is nothing desirable but God: In
heaven there are things desirable, but nothing so lovly as God. He is the
only, prime, and ultimate object (...) the Souls ^atie^y. H^ark^n to this, Psa.
45 10
O daughter, consider his lovely and (...), ^nc^ine thine (...) ^orget thy
^a^hers house, The (...) relish of the song of divine love inchan^s the Soul
with a holy forgetfulne^s of old terrene relations. So shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty. O Queen of Zion, forget thy black Egyptian Father and all
his tawny-moor Princes, of the adust race of Cham. R^n to the arms of thy
Solomon, desire him upon earth, and love none besides him in heaven, and he
will greatly desire thy beauty: Thy beauty? Alas! it is his beauty that shines
upon thee: First thy beloved is thine, and then thou art his; he plants his
Lillies and then feeds among them.

But let us descend a little and try the pretended love of mortals by these
higher than Lydian touchstones: Do thou love any thing in the world, more
then God, above God, beyond God, without God, and not in order to him? How then
can 1 John 3.17*
the love of the Father dwell in you? Do thou love him more then these and
yet spendest so little time in communion? Communion manifests where a man's
heart is: and the measure of Communion is the Standard of our love. We would
fain have a sense of his love, and yet watch not for the presence of his
person: When Christ knocks, do our Souls melt within us? When he cries, Song
5.2
Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, do the everlasting
doors fly abroad at the voice of the King of Glory? Love and Kingdoms ^^horr
Rivals* Do I not hate them that hate thee, says David, Ps. 139.21
yea with perfection of hatred. Thine enemies are enemies to me. Can thou
love carnal friends and vain persons, their frothy jests and squandring of
precious hours with vain news, the sinful pleasures, the Soul-choaking and
strangling profits of the cheat, and grand Imposture of the Ezekiel 28.^8
Tyrian traffic of the world? And yet dare say, that (...) love God: Thou
art a (...), and the truth 1 John 2.15
is not in thee. Vain distinctions will taste like wormwo^d and gall, and wine
Ma^k 15 23
of myrrh when thou appea^est (...) D^^th* He that spends his time, his
strength and brains Joh 6 27
f^r meat that perishes: 1 Cor. 6.13
the belly that hides it, must perish with it; But living bread and living
water that comes down from heaven, nourishes our love to the Doner, and nurses
up fair countenances to stand bef^^^ the King of Glory.

There Is many an empty headed talker that wears in his Cap, the aerie plume of
profession, and yet locks up his pennys in chests of flint. The hammer of
judgments, the fire of divine wrath, will scarce melt down a few drops to
comfort a brothers bowels, and then it is tinctured with the bitter fears of the
ruin of his family: or at least, that he shall not raise it to the dignity of
his ancestors The Axe of the sorest affliction can hardly hew off a few
scattering chips to warm a poor brothers Cottage. They keep Deuteronomy. 26.13
hallowed things in their house without fear of Achans curse. They hide in
their Tents things that should be devoted to the Sanctuary. J^s 6.19, 24
This sinks many a fair estate, it is a worm at the root, because they
consecrate not of their gain to the Lord of the whole earth. O ye of no faith,
Mic. 4
is this your false love? If faith work by love, and love be a fruit of faith,
and love to a Brother be the token of love to God? Where Is your faith or love
to God or Brother.

But here is not all: I am ashamed of the converses of Christians. Do thou
love God and talk all day of the world? Holy Baines gives it as a notable
character of a carnal heart, Baineson the Ephesians. p. 201
whose conference is cold and careless, and for the most part about unnecessary
and curious Arguments: As, whether we shall know one another in heaven or not?
Whether Hell be in the Air, in the Earth or where it is? or like some of the
hollow-hearted and Sick^brained Schoolmen, 1 Timothy 6.4.
of what metal the Trumpet of the Archangel is made, whether Gold or Silver?
Such have hot heads, but cold hearts; they are branded by the Apostle Paul, as
proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strife of words, whereof
comes envy, strife, rai^ings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of
corrupt minds and dest^^^^e of the truth, you shall hear them lavish out many
impertinent words about idle controversies, tending to jangling and mere
vanity: Differences about some Historical matters, and doubts about reconciling
seeming varieties in the Scriptures: these things shall awaken their drowsy
minds, tip their tongues with some discourse, that they may seem pious and
cheat conscience smoothly: Alas! at the hour of death, conscience will show it
self to be no fool: but will call all these things to mind with deadly horror.

What we love, we love to talk of: You may fetch out the hearts of Lovers by
talking of what they love, though otherwise prudent persons. Love gilds the
tongue with eloquence: It makes the dumb to speak as Codrus his mute Son, when
the Fathers life lay at stake. Love is a native, an overflowing Orator: When it
gluts the tongue with its fullness, that it cannot utter; then it proclaims the
heart by blushes: and casts forth its self at the windows of the eyes by quick
and nimble glances: It Is Song 8.7.
as strong as death: many waters cannot quench it, nor stoods drown it; It
contemns Gold and all the Substance of thy house. Is thy love sincerely
inflamed to God? A Kingdom, a World, a Heaven cannot buy or bribe off thy heart
from God.

Methinks, when I stand and muse upon Soul-sick mortals, as they run up and
down the streets of London, and strike fire upon the stones, and kick up the
dirt, and justle, and quarrel for haste. To see them reel about the lanes and
alleys, like drunkards intoxica^ed with the venomous cup of profit, while their
Job 3.15.
foot hastes to deceit: oh what a dirty heaven have these bemired wretches?
what a pittyful molehil do these giddy pismires huddle about and scarce deserve
at last, to taste of the Parthian banquet with Crassus, to have molten Gold,
but Kennel filth poured down their Throats, with this Epitaph, Satiate stercore
quod fitisti: be filled with the mire, for which thou have thirsted. Oh, how
greatly should we pity and mourn over the fallen estate of man: when we behold
such woeful spectacles of decayed reason, so far from rational actors, that they
rather sustain the distracted person at Athens. For though they say not, yet by
their deportments, seem to wish that all the Ships in the Thames were theirs,
that all the Wharfs, Cranes, Warehouses, and their Stowage, were all theirs:
As if the Lord had set Job 34 13.
the world in their hearts, not to contemplate his wisdom in its beautiful
structure, but to adore it as a God. They spend their spirits in heaping of
clay, and compass themselves with thick clods of the earth: Most men's lives are
exhausted in playing for glistering Counters, and he is counted wisest that
lurcheth most: Though Solomon the wisest of all mortals determines by the
guide of Gods spirit, that bread is not to Eccles 9.11
the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of skill, but
time and chance happens to them all: But yet in all ages among the depraved,
and frothy spirits of the herd of this vain world: Riches and not wisdom
advances to honor, and the raw unsavory, undigested blatterings of rich
misers are lickt up by fools like themselves, as if they were De^phian Oracles.
But Oh lamentable state of the fallen children of Adam to grind out their days
with sorrow and to pour out the strength of their nerves and sinews in digging
and delving for colored Dust: That rational men, the Princes of the world,
ordained to dominion over all the visible creation, should embrace dunghils,
and cage up their Souls in a bag, and sport to see those immortal Beings to hop
up and down in their Pockets: Into so forlorn an estate are such noble
creatures degenerated, that their precious seasons are melted away between the
comb and the Looking glass. How many mean men's patrimonies do some wear at
their Ears, and about their necks in Jewels? How many pounds do they squander
in trifles? while the necessities of the precious* Members of Christ call aloud
for relief: Does God threaten by Zephany Zeph. 1.8.
to punish Princes, and Kings children, and all such as are clothed with
strange apparel? Does Paul command in the name of the Lord, that women adorn 1 Timothy 2.9
themselves in modest apparel with shamefastness and sobriety: not with
broidered hair, or Gold, or pearls, or costly array? Does the Apostle Peter
enjoin that wives be adorned, not 1 Pet. 3.3
with plaited hair, and wearing of gold, and putting on of apparel, i. e.
costly attire? Does the Lord so highly complain Isay 3.16
of the haughty daughters of Zion, that walked with stretched forth necks and
wanton eyes, mincing as they went, and making a tinkling with their feet; That
therefore he would smite them with scabs, and stinks, with rents, baldness,
sackcloth, and burning instead of beauty, and that the V. 26.
desolation of the Captivity should be their portion? And dare the sinful
Minions and proud Peacocks of our age, not only rob the creatures but their own
families, to brave and brazen it in the very face of heaven and defiance of his
holy word: why so much expense to paint frail clay and gild a potters vessel,
or which is worse to feed the lust of the eye, and to add fuel to the lust of
pride? We may say to them as the Prophet? 1 John 2.16.
why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? Did they dismiss their Bibles, divorce
their consciences and forsake all assemblies of worship: they would not put
religion to so great a shame, nor so highly inflame their account for the great
day.

But alas, the love of vanity and conformity, Je^. 2.33.
to the trifling and apish fashions of this world is not only the sin and
sickness of the weaker sex, while they seem even to puzzle Satan to (...) new
(...) to starch up their pride and ^oly: but even men are effemina^ed and lost,
and drunk with and drowned in sensuality, luxury and madness. But what, have
the fore-spoken-of worldlings no pretenses? And these followers of fashions no
cloaks of excuse to cover their shame? Yes, having fewed on the Fig Leaves of a
religious dress, and taken up a form of godliness, do secretly scorn your
pity, and justify their being worldly, to prevent being 1 Timothy 5.8.
infidels: and think they may be covetous by authority to provide for their
families. The other under the pretext of handsomness, decency and comportment
to their youth, rank and quality, hide the vanity and pride of their naughty
spirits: Both sorts have Christ often in their mouths for Salvation, but too
much hate his government; they will seem to keep Sabbaths with some devotion, but
wish the New Mood over to set out Corn: They Will haste to Church but it is to
learn fashions, and p^y into others garbs, and not their own hearts: They Will
turn to proofs in their Bib^es, perhaps write Sermons, and fling 'em at their
heels, chop up a few customary Prayers in their Families, to st^p the
convictions of conscience, and talk ( pro forma) for custom and company sake of
the state of the Church and matters at a distance. But sirs this will not do
the business of working out Salvation, and making your calling and election
sure. O vain men, where are your hearts, and where your affections? Let every
one that 2 Timothy 2.19
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. [ APO ADIKIAS] from injustice
and undue scraping up the unrighteous Mammon. It Is observed, that through the
whole Bible, no Saint is branded with the sin of covetousness. Indeed our Lord
has forewarned his disciples to Luke 12.15
take heed and beware of covetousness, and otherwhere, to Luke 21.34
beware lest at any time their hearts be overcharged with surfeting and
drunkenness, and cares of this world, and so that day come upon them at
unawares. If our Lord so strictly enjoin it upon his disciples, how much more
on us, upon whom the perilous ends of the world are come. It seems, there be
greedy gluttons, that gorge in the world till they surfeit and guzling
drunkards, that swallow it down to shameful spewing If disciples are so
severely admonisht of sitting too long at the worlds Table, what need have
others to be rowzed from their sumptuous fare, least with Dives, they fall sick
of their Venison, and be summoned and carried from their suppers into Luk 16 23
Torments? How earnestly should men be charged in our days not to make have to
be rich, lest they fall 1 Timothy 6 9
into the tentation and snare of the Devil: not to trust in V 17
uncertain riches but the diving God. Most men's riches are their Pro. 10 15 and
18.11
strong Castles, and they answer the poor 2 Ch 18 23.
roughly at their gates, They trust in the Mauzzims these munitions, these
Temples of Plutus. They pull at b^gs of iniquity Isay 5.18
with cords of vanity, and hale at twistedcheats, as it were with Cart roaps:
So they be subtle enough to avoid the censure of men and the penalties of
humane laws: the judgment of God breaks no squares in their conscience. they
are like earnest mariners that tug and sweat, and are even sick, at the Capitan
to weigh up Anchor and hoist Sail for new voyages. They put all the
bloodhounds of their sagacious thoughts upon the hot scent of a good bargain,
and if it mount away like Prove. 23.5
an Eagle toward heaven, they load it with many a secret curse, and tie bitter
banns to its talons, till the flying Zach. 5.4
roll return and enter into the house of these thieves, and swearers, to
consume the Timber and the stones thereof. We may ^omplain with Bernard [ Bern.
ad fratr. sec. 1. f 93. b.
Citius ad mortem properant, ^uam nos ad vitam] Their Prove. 5.5.
steps take hold of hell, and hasten faster to the chambers of death, than
others to the house of wisdom. Surely, deluded mortals conceit that the world
is of short continuance, and like Rev. 12.12
Satan come to it with such raging appetites as if they had but a short season.
Are not these men far from leaving their Ships and Nets to follow Christ? they
seem to pray him to stay a while, till they have caught the fish of profit and
honor. They put off repentance till gray hairs, and proffer sacrifices of
threescore year old, when they are rich enough to believe with a bag of gold by
their sides, and have fortified faith with the security of a great purchase
against all the issues of Providence: Then theyl' promise to build a fair
Almshouse, and cut their Coat of Arms upon the Frontispiece for a good Example.

I know there be many Gallios Act. 18.17
that care for none of these things: of Felix his temper: that appoint Chapter 24,
25.
Paul a more convenient season. They count them four and cynical that warned
them of death and the wrath to come, but oh, how sour do themselves look when
the fear of death assaults them, and conscience bites like an Adder for
scorning former advice about circumspect walking and redeeming of precious
time. But O fool is it not better to be pricked with the goad of wisdom, to hear
rather verba pungentia quam palpantia? smarting and searching words to
Salvation, then smooth and oily words to damnation, that Sermon that pricks not
but delights the hearer, is not the word of wisdom. Hierom. in Eccles. 12 11.
p. 83. T. 7. Is it not safer to hear this Bell now ring in thine ear, then in
Hell? Is it not more convenient to hear Paul preaching in his chain? then for
thee to tremble in thy chains; for the dreadful sentence at the Tribunal of
Christ. Then, hoarding up of ric^es will not profit in that day of wrath, nor
fine fashions ward off the stroke of Christ's iron rod, Ps 2. Will g^iping
gains or soft raiment, lay up a good foundation for the time to come? Can men
dye with any safe reflections of comfort upon the actings of sin? Can such
appeal to God at death, that they sincerely love him, when they love Jam 4.4.
his enemies so profusely? Let not these frothy things be entertained by such,
as would fain dye peaceably. Would ye sleep in the bosom of Christ happily,
then walk in his eye holily. Live in the love of God, and you may appeal safely
at death, and long for his Salvation. I have Genesis 49.18.
waited for thy salvation O Lord, says dying Jacob. But how comes in this
pious ejaculation of Jacob, (may some say) at his blessing of Dan? unless the
holy Patriarch in the midst of other matters at the benediction of his
children, should seem to have fallen suddenly into a trance of joy through a
quick glance upon his former waiting, and that now he saw this glorious
salvation (...) at hand. Others, when they (...) curvetting upon their winged
Cour^ers after worldly games and pleasures, Dan's Serpent of judgment and the
Adder of Death bites their heels in the path, and the Riders fall backward,
Then oh how earnest they are for dying the death of the righteous? Alas the
Time's now past, for such to long for that salvation on any good grounds, who
by faith and prayer never waited for it: But in Jacobs glass we may see the
frame of a Saints heart, and the heavenly strain of his song at death, who in
the midst of the compiling his Will and Testament concerning that, which his
soul loved and had long expected, he breaks forth in the ecstasy of a joyful
appeal, now when he sees it approaching. Lord, this is what I wait for, this my
soul longs and hankers after to enjoy Pub^iul. in Hodaep. Hierosol. l 1. vid.
praef. ad Radzivelii peregrin. Hierosol. 3. edit. An^werp. 1614.
As it is reported of a Jerusalem Pilgrim being at Mount Olivet, that in the
midst of his kisses of Christ's supposed foot prints, between devout sobs and
sighs and tears he expired his last breath. When the Soul cries out with David:
Now Lord Psa. 39.7.
what wait I for? my hope is in thee. Or as Simeon: Lord Now Luke 2.29.
let thy servant depart in peace for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. [
SOTERION SOV] thy ordained and my beloved Savior with his salvations. Now my
hope thus long deferred shall sprout up into a Tree of Life, and feed my soul
with the pleasant fruits of thy salvation: This Rock of the Covenant shall pour
out the crystal streams from the Throne of God and the Lamb. Jacob and
Simeon sing the same new song of the lamb, and fall asleep sweetly in the same
arms. Their love to Christ bubbled up into warm appeals: the sails of their
joy were swelled with fresh gales of the spirit, while they steer under the
top-gallant of assurance into the haven of enjoyment: They lie down on the
pitch of Nebo, on the very peak of Pisgah in a beautiful view of the delicious
Landscape of the fat valleys, and the rivers of milk and honey that run among
the mountains of Canaan. They begin to cast away the glass, and see more
immediately: to resolve the riddle, 1 Cor. 13*12.
the AINIGMA and expound it by vision.

When Saints, like (...) can passionately pour (...) Souls into the breast of
Chritt, Joh. 21.17.
Lord, thou, who know all things, know that I love thee: this
contestation, this blessed appeal will keep Peter from ever sinking in the
mortal sea of Tiberias: and hold up the chin of a Saint through the greatest
floods, and billows of tentation, yea, of death it self, and waft them safely
into the bosom of Christ triumphing.

Section 4.
The fourth and last appeal is about the presence of God with us. I have spoken
already to the sense of divine communion in a former chapter, and shall now
only treat in brief about our appeal concerning it: David had a sense of it,
that was his comfort and conquest, but now he declares it, that is his triumph.
Lord, thou have been with me, and thou know it, and my soul knows it, and I
sensibly feel, that thou art still with me. Tu mecum; Thou with me, says the
Hebrew, restraining the divine presence to no certain time. Thou stand with
me, by me, on my side; I will fear no evil. The Lord stood by Paul in a
tempest, and said, Act. 17.24.
fear not Paul, and Paul's all in a calm: The Syrtes or quicksands of Lybia,
the Euroclydons or most furious winds, the rolling mountains of water fright
not his faith: When Sun, Moon and Stars are mantled in Srygian darkness for
many days: while others wish for day, Paul enjoyes it. No dangers terrify a
Saint, when God is present: The King of Terrors is subject to the King of
Saints, and gives up the keys of his Castle to this Lord Paramount, and lays
down the Mace at his Feet. (...) ^^illabatur orbis, etc. Though mountains be
hurled into the heart Psalm 46 3.
of the Sea, the waters roar, and the great hills shake with the swelling
thereof: yet a Saint drinks of a river that makes glad the City of God, and
glides with its silver streams along the banks of his Soul A Saint Psa. 143 5.
remembers the days of old, meditates on all his works, and muses on the work
of his hands. He recounts his sweet songs in the night, his pleasant touches on
the harp* when the spirit of God was pleased to sing in consort. I Remember,
says the Psalmist, the Ps. 77.10.
years of the right hand of the most High, when his candle shined upon my head,
and by his light I walked through darkness The secret of God was upon my
Tabernacle, when Job 29.3. etc.
I washed my steps in butter, and the rocks poured me out rivers of (...) He
that has enlarged my Soul Psa. 4 1.
in distress, he that has 2 Cor. 1 10
delivered, does and will: deliver. Christ is the root of his faith, experience
like a heavenly dew makes it spread and flower in appeals to heaven, and grow
within the firmament: Nay all a Saints graces are like the Misselto^, have no
root of their own, but in the true vine, their sap and life is from Christ, and
experience sucks it out Thou have been with me, and continually with me, and
therefore* I will not fear I was cast upon thee Psa. 22.10
from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly. Thou art my hope, O Lord
God, thou art my trust from my youth By thee Ps. 71.6.
I have been held up from the womb, thou art he that tookest me out of my
mothers bowels, my praise shall be continually of thee. Cast me not off in my V
9.
old age, forsake me not when my strength fails. Thou V. 20.
shall quicken me again, and bring me up again from the depths of the earth.
See how David's feeling communions did wing his soul up into heaven and keep it
there. The Lark is a lively emblem of a Saint always singing while moun^ing to
heaven: and then silent in a gracious sadness when by any tentation drawn down
to the world.

Behold in David, how experience feeds upon God, and drinks out of God and then
like a Dove li^^s up its eyes to heaven in appeals of praise under the sense of
divine veracity, love and mercy. O my Soul, thou have Doves eyes, eyes like the
spirit, when thou raisest up thy wings in heavenly praise and thankfulness.
Appeals are the fruit of gratitude, and oh how comely is this for Saints. Bern.
f. 89. b.
Bernard says, it is clemency in God to deny ungrateful men their petitions,
that they may not fall under heavier condemnations for their frequent
ingratitudes. Let us then sing forth his glory and make every mercy to sound
upon the Harp and Viol. My lips says the Prophet V. 22.
shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee, and my Soul which thou have
redeemed. My tongue shall talk of thy rigteousness all the day long. He has
heard my voice, I Psalm. 116.1, 2.
will call upon him as long as I live. He has been with me, and he will be
with me, and David tells this, not to the sons of men, not to his own soul
only, but to God himself. When David and his Harp are alone, and the singer of
Zion is planting his heavenly thoughts into the melodious strings, O the
Shushannims, the Lilly tunes that David pla^es, 'twould ravish ones Soul to lay
an ear to the keyhole. To hear an other Saint flowing forth in appeals. I^
dissolves our Souls into rivers of pleasure but for our own Souls to be
swimming in these Sanctuary waters: O ex^asie of joy! the Soul by appeals div^s
into the Ocean of love, and appears not till the resurrection. The life of such
a Saint is hid with God in Christ, and at his appearing and kingdom shall break
forth in orient and radiant luster. It builds none of Peter's Tabernacles in the
mount of present vision, it longs for fullness, and looks upon Tabor as but a
small petty step to glory, and under the sweet manifestations of its future
communion, cries out when dying with that Mr. Newman of New England*
holy Saint of late: Angels do your office.

Was God with a Saint in electing love before a Saint was? Is God with a Saint
in the breathings and sealings of his spirit before a Saint clearly sees
himself with God, and shall such stand amused at death? What Is Death to a
Saint? It neither separates from God, nor (...) the Spirit, nor Angels, nor
Saints, nor Heaven, nor Glory. It Is a friend to a Saint, one of the
Guard-Chamber to the King of Heaven, turns the key and hands us into his
presence. A Saint like Androdus (in Gellius) has picked the thorn out of the
foot of this Lion, and behold how tamely he walks by his side, till the morning
of Triumph. Is God with a Saint and can he say so? because he feels so; The
grave, which is like the darkness of Egypt to others, it may be felt: gives the
light of Goshen to a Saint, since Christ has lest, a path light and a luminous
glittering print of his footsteps in it, when he passed through it. A Saint
draws its enlightened air into the lungs of meditation for his nourishment.
God's with him, and a Saint sees him, tastes him, feels him and therefore Act
2.26
his heart rejoices, his tongue is glad, and his flesh rests in hope. It was
said of Lazarus. Joh. 11.3
Behold he whom thou love, is sick, and it may be said of every departing
Saint: Behold he whom thou love is dead; No! says Christ, this damsell-soul
Mar. 5.39
is not dead, but sleeps and my bosom shall warm it, till it wake and
minister to me. The vigor of Christ shall cherish the body of a Saint (as
Elisha did the S^unamites child) and raise it to a glorious life, when the Sun
of assurance shines glitteringly at the evening of his life in the face of an
appealing Saint, his Soul may presage joyfully, that such a ruddy Mat. 16.2
evening is the certain token of a radiant and illustrious day, to follow the
bright morning of his resurrection. A day wherein the Captain of our Salvation,
our victorious and triumphant Joshua will lead the Armies of Israel into the
land of Canaan, and command the Sun o^ glory to stand still for ever in the
noon of Eternity, and that permanent happiness never to know an evening. O then
haste my beloved and come away, Song 8.14
be like a young Roe or a Heart upon the Mountain of Spices. Thou Rev. 22.16
(...) thou Offspring of David, thou bright and Morning Star, that shinest in
that ruddy dawning, haste thine appearance.

The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears say, come, come
quickly, Amen, Even so come, Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

