ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun and Held at Boston on Wednesday the Twenty sixth of May, 1697.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Nono.



BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council, 1697.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Nono.
An Act, For putting the Militia of this Province into a readiness for defense
of the same.
WHEREAS the Law has already provided in case of Alarm made either from a Sea
Port or other Town, lying Frontier to, or in danger of the Enemy; That the
Captain or Captains of the adjacent Towns shall forthwi^h go or send such
Relief as they shall judge meet for the Offense of the Enemy and Defense of
themselves, etc. But forasmuch as in this time of danger, there may be Occasion
to call together, Arm, Array and put into a Posture for War, the whole Militia
and Forces within the several Counties, for the necessary defense of the
Province in case of Invasion, or sudden approach of the Enemy, before the
notices thereof can reach the Commander in Chief, to have directions or Order:
from him for the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor and Commander
in Chief, by and with the advice and consent of the Council and
Representatives, Commission Military Officers empowered to encounter and pursue
the Enemy.
in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That all Persons Commissioned by the Commander in Chief to bear Office in any
Military Regiment, Company or Troop within this Province: Be and hereby are
Empowered and Authorized by virtue thereof (agreeable to Instructions by him
already given to the Chief Officer of the several Regiments) as Occasion shall
require, in the cases and to the intents and purposes abovesaid, to Arm, Array
and Weapon the Regiment, Company or Troop respectively under their Command, or
part of them; and by force of Arms to encounter, repel, pursue, kill and
destroy, Colonel or other Chief Officer of a Regiment Empowered to arm the
Regiment or part thereof for repelling and pursuing the Enemy etc
any of the French and Indian Enemy. So always as to be observant of such
Commands and Orders, as they shall receive from their Superior Officer, and to
dispatch away to him speedy notice of their Motion and the Occasion thereof.

And that the Colonel or Chief Officer of each Regiment Commissioned by the
Commander in Chief, be and hereby is Empowered and Authorized as Occasion shall
require in any of the cases and to the intents before mentioned, from time to
time, to call together the whole Militia of the Regiment under his Command, or
such part of them as he shall think needful, and to Arm, Array and put them
into posture for War upon any Alarm, Invasion or notice of the appearance of
the Enemy, French or Indians, by Sea or Land; and the said Regiment, Companies
or Troops so Armed, Arrayed and Weaponed, or part of them, to lead, conduct and
employ, or to appoint some other fit Person by Writing under his hand, to lead,
conduct and employ them as well within the Regiment and County whereto they
belong, as into any other County or (...) Province, for the Assisting,
Succouring and relieving any o^ (...) M^jesties Subjects, Assistance to be
given unto Neigh^^^^^ing Towns, etc. attackt by the Enemy.
Towns or Places, that shall be Assaul^^d by the (...) or in danger thereof;
And with such Party, (...) encounter, resist, repel, pursue, kill and destroy
(...) and Indian Enemy, or any of them by all fitting ways, Enterpriz^^ and
means whatsoever. The Colonel or Chief Officer of such Regiment so taking to
Arms* or sending forth any party of men, forthwith to Post away the
Intelligence and Occasion thereof, unto the Commander in Chi^^, and to attend
and observe such directions and Orders as he shall receive from him. And in
case it happen the Colonel or Chief Officer of any Regiment, be out of the
Limits or Precincts of the Regiment for which he is or shall be Commissioned
respectively, Intelligence to be Posted away to the Commander in Chief.
at the time of any Invasion, Attack or appearance of the Enemy, or Alarm given
from any of the Neighboring Towns or Regiments, the next Commission Officer
then within the Regiment, shall have, use and exercise the same Powers and
Authorities herein before granted, until the return of the Colonel, or other
Superior Officer; the Officer so acting to Post away the Intelligence thereof
with the Occasion for the same as aforesaid, In case of the Colonels absence
the next Commission Officer to act
unto the Commander in Chief, and to attend and observe such directions and
Orders as he shall receive from the Commander in Chief therein.

And for the better preventing of false Alarms by disorderly Shooting off Guns
in the Night.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no Person or Persons whatsoever in any Town or Garrison, shall presume to
discharge or shoot off any Gun or Guns after the shutting in of the day light,
in the Evening, or before day light in the Morning; Penalty for disorderly
Shooting.
unless in case of Alarm, approach of the Enemy, or other necessary defense: On
pain that every Person so offending, and being thereof convicted before one or
more of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of
Ten Shillings: One Moiety thereof to and for the use of the Poor of the Town,
where the Offense is committed, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
Inform or Prosecute for the same. And in case such offender shall not have
wherewith to answer the said Fine, or shall refuse or neglect to pay the same,
then to be set in the Stocks, not exceeding two hour's time.

Provided, That this Act shall remain and continue in force during the present
War, and no longer.

An Act, For giving Succors and Assistance to the Relief of His Majesty's
Subjects in the Neighboring Provinces or Colonies.
FORASMUCH as in this time of War there may be Occasion for the Raising of
Soldiers, and Transporting or Marching of them out of the Limits of this
Province into the Neighboring Provinces or Colonies, For the Defense of His
Majesty's Subjects and Interests, and the Prosecution of the French or Indian
Enemy.

BE it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Convened, and by the Authority of the same,

That in the Vacancy of the General Assembly, It shall be in the Liberty of the
Governor and Commander in Chief for the time being, by and with the advice and
consent of the Council to Raise and Transport such part of the Militia of this
Province as they shall find needful, or oblige them to March into any of the
Neighboring Provinces or Colonies for the ends beforementioned, at any time
or times until the end of the next Session of this present Court, and at no
time afterward, without their free and voluntary consent, or the consent of the
Great and General Court or Assembly. This Act or any thing therein contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty several Duties of Impost, Excise and
Tunnage of Shipping.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, being duly sensible of the
great Charges and Expenses which have already arisen, and will be daily growing
and increasing, for the Defense of His Majesty's Subjects and Interests within
this His Province, and for a vigorous Prosecution of the War against the French
and other His Majesty's Enemies, For and toward the defraying of the Charge of
the Province Gally, and Fire ship, and the fitting out and hire of such other
Vessels as have been, are or shall be taken up here, and employed in His
Majesty's Service, for the Defense of the Province, For answering of the
necessary and contingent Charges in and about the Support of the Government,
For payment of the Salaries and Allowances to the Officers employed in and
about the Execution of this Act, and such other Grants, Salaries and Allowances
as have been or shall be made by the General Court or Assembly: Have cheerfully
and unanimously given and granted, and do hereby give and grant unto His Most
Excellent Majesty, to the ends and intents aforesaid, the several Duties and
Impositions upon all Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises, that shall
be Imported into this Province, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping herein
after-mentioned and expressed; and Pray, that it may be Enacted.

And be it accordingly Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted and Ordained by
the Authority of the same,

That from and after the Twenty ninth day of June, in this present Year of our
Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, for and during the continuance of
this Act, there shall be paid by the Importer for all Wines, Liquors and Goods
that shall be Imported into this Province, the Rates in and by this Act here
after mentioned and expressed. That is to say,

For every Pipe of common Wine, of the Western Islands, the Sum of One Pound
Ten Shillings, Rates of Wines.
For every Pipe of Passado Wine, Two Pounds Five Shillings. For every Pipe of
Madera Wine, Two Pounds. For every Pipe of Canary, Malago or Sherry Wines, Two
Pounds Ten Shillings. For every Pipe of Port-wine, One Pound Fifteen Shillings.
For every Pipe of Wine not of any of the sorts beforementioned, One Pound.
And so proportionably for greater or lesser quantities, and for every Gallon
of Rhum or other Spirits Imported as aforesaid, Rates of Rhum and other Spirits.
Ten pence. For all Goods, Wares, and Merchandises that shall be Imported as
aforesaid (Salt, Cotton Wool, Provisions, and every other thing of the growth
and product of New England only excepted) the several Imposts and Duties
following. That is to say, For every Hundred Pound Sterling in English
Merchandises at the prime Cost in England (the Original Invoices whereof to be
produced and shown) the Sum of Twenty Shillings. Rates of Merchandises.


For every Hogshead of Sugar, Two Shillings. For every Hogshead of Molasses.
One Shilling. For every Hogshead of Tobacco, Two Shillings sixpence. For every
Ton of Logwood, Three Shillings.
And for all other Commodities, Goods, Wares and Merchandises (except as before
excepted) One Penny for every Twenty Shillings value here; The whole duty of
Goods to be paid down and one half for Wines and Liquors, the other half to be
s^cured by Bond.
all which aforesaid Imposts, Rates and Duties shall be paid in current Money
of this Province, unto the Commissioner for impost to be appointed as in and by
this Act is here after mentioned and expressed, or to his Sub-receiver, the one
half thereof for Wines and Liquors, and the whole for Goods and Merchandises,
to be paid at or before the Landing of any Wines, Liquors or Goods, and three
months time to be allowed to the Importer for payment of the other half for
Wines and Liquors, if he shall desire the same, and give Bond with sufficient
Security to the Commissioner, or such other person as he shall appoint to be
Receiver, for payment thereof accordingly; otherwise the whole to be paid at or
before the Landing of any such Wines or Liquors. And all Entries where the
Impost or Duty to be paid does not exceed Four Shillings, Entries where the
duty exceeds not four shillings to be free.
shall be made without Charge to the Importer, and not more than sixpence to
be paid for any other single Entry to what value soever. And for every Bond to
be given as aforesaid, there shall be paid Twelve pence and no more.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Masters to make Report before breaking Bulk.
That all Masters of Ships or other Vessels coming into any of the Harbors or
Ports within this Province, before Bulk be broken, shall make a Report to the
Commissioner for Impost to be appointed as is here after mentioned, or such as
he shall Substitute, to Receive the same, of the Contents of the Loading of
such Ship or Vessel, without any Charge or Fee to be demanded or paid for the
s^^e. And if there be on Board such Ship or Vessel any Goods, Win^ or Liquors
in and by this Act liable to pay Impost, such Master shall then also give an
Account under his Hand to the said Commissioner or Receiver of all such Goods,
Wines and Liquors liable to pay Impost, Masters to make Oath.
on Board such Ship or Vessel, with the quantities, species, and to whom the
same are Consigned, and the Marks thereof, and shall make Oath that the same is
a just and true Account to the best of his knowledge, of the whole Lading taken
on Board at the Port or Ports such Vessel came from. Which Oath the
Commissioner or Receiver respectively are hereby Empowered to administer.
Penalty for breaking Bulk before giving an account upon Oath.
After which, such Master may Unload, and not before, on pain of Fifty Pounds
to be forfeited and paid by each Master that shall neg^^^t his Duty in this
behalf And the said Commissioner is hereby Empowered to allow Bills of Store to
the Masters of any Ships or Vessels Importing any Wines or Liquors for such
private Adventures as shall belong to the Master and Seamen of such Ship or
other Vessel, Bills of Store allowed.
at the discretion of the Commissioner not exceeding three Per Cent. of the
Lading, and the Duties payable by this Act for such Wines or Liquors in such
Bills of Store mentioned and expressed shall be abated.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Merchants, Factors or other person or persons Importers, Importers to
make Entries and pay the duties or secure the same before landing.
being Owners of, or having any of the Wines, Liquors, Wares or Merchandises
Consigned to them, that by this Act are liable to pay Impost or Duty, shall by
themselves, or order, make Entry thereof in writing under their Hands with the
said Commissioner or Receiver, and pay the Duty, or secure the same to be paid
as by this Act is provided, before such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares or
Merchandises be Landed, or put into any Boat or Vessel, in order to be Landed,
on pain of forfeiting all such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises so
Landed or put into any Boat or Vessel, in order to be Landed. And that no
Wines, Liquors, Goods, Goods to be landed in the day time only.
Wares or Merchandises that by this Act are liable to pay Impost or Duty, shall
be Landed on any Wharf, or into any Ware house or other place, but in the day
time only, and that after Sunrise, and before Sun set, unless in the presence
of, and with the consent of the Officer appointed to inspect such Affairs, on
pain of forfeiting all such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises. And
all manner of persons are hereby required to be aiding and assisting unto the
Commissioner and his Agents, the Informer, All persons to be aiding of the
Commissioner, etc.
Discoverer or Seizure of such Wines, Liquors or Goods so Unloaden, contrary to
the true intent and meaning of this Act. And if the Commissioner or Receiver
shall have just reason to suspect, That any Merchant, Factor or other person to
whom any Goods or Merchandises comes Consigned, does not in the Entry or
Writing thereof to be given under his Hand as aforesaid make a full and perfect
Entry of such Goods or Merchandises; or that the Invoices of any English
Merchandises produced and shown by any person or persons as is by this Act
directed, are not really and bona fide the Original Invoices of the Goods and
Merchandises, such person or persons would then enter, in every such case the
Commissioner or Receiver respectively are hereby ordered and directed not to
admit such person or persons to an Entry of the said Goods and Merchandises, An
Oath to be Administered unto persons Suspected of making short Entries.
until he or they shall have made Oath to the Truth of said Writing or Invoice
by him or them presented as aforesaid; Which Oath the Commissioner or Receiver
are hereby respectively empowered to administer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Commissioner or for any of
the Officers employed under him in and about the Impost by Warrant from any two
Justices of the Peace within this Province, (to that purpose first obtained)
with one Constable or more, to search all manner of Houses, Cellars and
Warehouses for such Wines, Power to make Search in houses, etc.
Liquors, Goods or Merchandises which they or any of them shall be informed,
were there carried to be concealed in prejudice to the true meaning of this
Act, and with intent to defraud His Majesty of His said Dues, and all such
Wines, Liquors, Goods and Merchandises so found, shall be seized and forfeited,
to be disposed of as is herein after-mentioned: And any two Justices to whom
Complaint of any such matter shall be made, are hereby empowered and required to
make out their Warrant to the Constable accordingly, and to break open the door
or doors of such Houses, Cellars and Warehouses in which he shall be informed
any Wines, Liquors, Goods or Merchandises are concealed as aforesaid, if the
Owner or Possessor of such Houses, Cellars or Warehouses shall deny Entrance
thereinto. Always Provided, That such search be made in the day time, and
within the space of one month after the Offense supposed to be committed.
Provided also, That if the Information whereupon any House, Cellar or Warehouse
shall be searched prove to be false, that then, and in such case the party
injured shall recover his full damages and costs against the Informer, by
action of Trespass.

And be it further Enacted,

That such Officer or Officers as shall be empowered and appointed by the said
Commissioner, Power to Search Vessels and attend the unlading.
shall have power, and are hereby authorized to enter on Board any Ship or
Vessel, there to make search or to attend the Unloading of any such Ship or
Vessel the better to prevent fraud and to secure the true payment of the Duties
in and by this Act granted and expressed.

And it is furth^^ Enacted and Provided by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Merchant or other pers^^ Importing any Wines into this Province,
Allowance of 12 per. Cent. leakage for Wines.
shall be allowed Twelve Per Cent. for Leakage. Provided said Wines have not
been filled up aboard. And that every Hogshead, Butt, or Pipe of Wine that has
three fourth parts thereof Leaked out shall be accounted for Outs, and the
Merchant or Importer to pay no Impost or Duty for the same.

Provided also, That if it be made appear, that any Wines Imported in any Ship
or Vessel be decayed at the time of Landing thereof, Wines decayed to have
abatement.
or in seven days afterward, Oath being made (if required) before the said
Commissioner or Receiver that the same has not been Landed above that time,
the Duties of Impost for such decayed Wine shall be abated.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if all or any Wines or Liquors as aforesaid be Landed within this
Province, and afterward be Exported out of the same within twelve months after
Importation thereof, (being so made to appear, Draw backs allowed upon
Exportation
) there shall be repaid or discounted by the said Commissioner or his Order,
unto the Importers or their Assigns, two thirds of what they paid upon
Importation of the same for so much as they shall so Export.

Provided, That no Drawback shall be allowed for any Wine, Rhum or other
Liquors which shall be Laden or Shipped off to be Exported out of this Province,
Fee for Certificate for Drawback.
unless Certificate be first had for the same from the Receiver, and (...) be
Shipped in the presence of a Waiter, who shall Endorse the Shipping upon the
Certificate, and Return it into the Office before the Drawback be allowed: For
which Certificate, the Receiver shall be paid Six pence, and the Waiter for
seeing the same Shipped, and Endorsing it, shall be paid Six pence: And no such
Certificate shall be granted before the Importer shall have made Oath that the
whole duty inward for such Wine, Rhum, or other Liquors is paid, or secured to
be paid; and the Ship or Vessel on Board which such Wine, Rhum or other Liquors
shall be Shipped in order to Exportation, Importer and Master to make Oath.
shall not be cleared at the Impost Office, before the Master thereof has made
Oath, that he will Land such Wine, Rhum, or other Liquors, bona fide out of the
Province, the danger of the Seas only excepted. Which Oaths the Commissioner or
Receiver are hereby respectively empowered to administer.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,

That there shall be given, granted and paid onto His Majesty for the Uses
aforesaid, in current money of this Province, from and after the said Twenty
Ninth day of June in this present year, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven
during the continuance of this Act, an Excise upon all Wines, Brandy, Rates for
Excise.
Rhum and other distilled Liquors, Beer, Ale, Perry and Cider, that shall be
Sold by Retail in any Town or place within this Province by those that shall
Retail the same in manner and form herein after mentioned and expressed, That
is to say, For every Gallon of common Wines, of the Western Islands, the Sum of
Sixpence. Every Gallon of Passado, Malago, Canary and Sherry, the Sum of
Twelve-pence. Every Gallon of Madera, the Sum of Eight pence. Every Gallon of
Rhum and all other sorts of distilled Spirits, the Sum of One Shilling. Every
Barrel of Beer, Ale, Perry and Cider, the Sum of One Shilling and Sixpence,
and after the same rate for any greater or lesser quantities.

And for the due and orderly Collecting and Receiving of the Excise aforesaid.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Retailers of Wine, Brandy, Rhum, and other distilled Liquors, Beer,
Ale, Perry and Cider within this Province, having any of the said Liquors in
their respective Houses, or elsewhere belonging unto them at the time of this
Act taking place, shall make due Entry, and pay the Duties and Excise aforesaid
for the same, as is herein before mentioned, unto the Commissioners for Excise
to be appointed as in and by this Act is hereafter directed, or such other
person as they shall order to receive the same, Entry of Wines, Liquors etc. to
be made with the Commissioner or other person to be appointed by them.
and upon their further Receipt or purchase of all or any of the Liquors before
mentioned, shall before they receive it into their Houses, Cellars, Shops,
VVarehouses, or other Rooms or Places, make Entry with the said Commissioners,
or other Person to be appointed by them for that purpose, and pay the Duties
and Excise aforesaid, under the penalty of forfeiture of all such Liquors as
shall be found in any Retailers House, or other place or places thereto
belonging, not being duly Entered, and the Excise not paid as aforesaid. And
every Retailer who shall make his own Cider, Brew his own Beer or Ale, or
distill strong Liquors, shall from time to time, and at all times when he or
they shall make, brew or distill the same, Penalty for default.
make Entry with the said Commissioners, or other person to be by them
appointed as aforesaid, of all such Cider, Beer, Ale or distilled Liquors by
them made, brewed or distilled, and pay the Excise as aforesaid, under the
like* penalty and forfeiture of all such Liquors as shall be found in such
Retailers House, or other place or places thereto belonging, not Entered, and
the Excise thereof not paid in manner before expressed, and every Retailer not
making due Entry as is before required, upon Conviction thereof shall over and
above the penalty aforesaid also forfeit his or their License or Licenses, not
to be renewed within the space of three years. And it shall and may be lawful
to and for such Officer or Officers as by the said Commissioners shall be
appointed and empowered when and so often as he or they shall think fit, in the
day time to enter into any Retailers House, Cellar or Warehouse, to search for
such Wines or Liquors as are not duly Entered, nor the Excise paid for the
same, and such Wines or Liquors so found to seiz and secure in order to the
Trial and Conviction thereof, and to Gage any Cask or Casks for that end and
purpose. Onus probandi to be upon the Claimer.
And the proof whether the Duties for such Wines, Liquors, Beer or Cider be
paid or secured to be paid, shall lie upon the Claimer, and shall not be
incumbent on the Prosecutor or Informer, in behalf of His Majesty and himself.
Provided such Seizure be made, or Action brought within Twenty Days after the
ground for such forfeiture or action did arise.

Penalty on persons that shall take in or keep Wines or Liquors belonging to
Licensed persons.
And be it further Enacted,

That no person or persons on any pretense or color whatsoever, shall or may
take in, receive, harbor, entertain, keep or conceal in his or their Dwelling
Houses, Cellars or Warehouses, any quantity or parcel of Wines or other Liquors
belonging to any* Licensed person or persons, Retailer or Retailers, under the
penalty of forfeiture of Twenty Pounds for every such quantity or parcel of
Wines or other Liquors so taken or received, harbored, entertained, kept and
concealed as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as Complaint shall be made to any of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace within this Province, by the said Commissioners or other
person by them empowered to inspect the Excise, that they suspect Wines,
Liquors, Search to be for Wines or Liquors concealed with intent to defraud.
Beer or Cider to be concealed with intent to defraud His Majesty of the Duties
laid by this Act in the Houses, Cellars, Vaults, Rooms or other places
belong^ing to any Retailer, and that such Retailer refuses to open the doors of
such their Houses, Vaults, Rooms or other places; Or upon Information given to
such Justice of any other person or persons suspected to receive, harbor,
entertain, keep or conceal in his or their Dwelling-Houses, Cellars or
Warehouses, any quantity or parcel of Wines or other Liquors for any Licensed
person or Retailer: In every such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for
such Justice, and he is hereby required to issue out a Warrant to such Officer
complaining, thereby to enable him with the assistance of a Constable in the
day time to break open the doors of such Houses, Cellars, Vaults, Rooms or
other places of any such Retailer where they are denied Entrance, and finding
any Wines, Liquor^, Beer or Cider concealed that ought, but yet has not been
Entered, and the Duty of Excise not paid as this Act provides, to seiz and
secure the same in order to Trial and Condemnation, Or to break open the doors
of any Dwelling Houses, Cellars or Warehouses of any other person or persons
suspected to conceal and harbor therein any Liquors or Wines of any Licensed
person or Retailer, and finding there any such Liquors or Wines; the person
harboring or concealing the same shall be liable to the action or suit of the
Informer for the penalty of Twenty Pounds abovementioned.

Provided nevertheless, That if the Information whereupon the Dwelling House,
Cellars or Warehouses of any person or persons suspected to harbor or conceal
any Wines or Liquors for any Licensed person or Retailer, shall prove to be
false, the person injured shall recover his full Damages and Costs against the
Informer that obtained such Warrant as aforesaid, by Action of Trespass.

And be it further Enacted and Provided any thing herein before contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Commissioners to agree
with any Retailer for his Excise for the whole year in one entire Sum,
Commissioners Empowered to Farm out the Excise
to be paid quarterly as they in their discretion shall think fit to agree for,
without making any Entry thereof as is before directed, and that the said
Commissioners may let or farm the Excise or part thereof to any person or
persons in any County Town or Place within this Province, for the best profit
and advantage of the public that they can for the year ens^ing.

Commissioners Empowered to Sue.
And the said Commissioners by themselves, or their lawful Substitute, may Sue
for, and recover in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, or before any
Justice of the Peace where the matter is not above his Cognizance, any Sum or
Sums of Money that is or shall grow due for any of the aforesaid Duties of
Excise, where the party or parties from whom the same is or shall grow due,
shall refuse or neglect to pay the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That from and after the said Twenty ninth day of June in this present year One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, during the continuance of this Act, Duties
of Tunage.
there shall be paid by the Masters or Owners respectively of all Merchant
Ships or other Vessels whatsoever, (except Boats employed for the fetching of
Wood, Timber, Stones or Fish to be made use of and spent in the place only)
that shall Sail from any Port, Haven, River or Creek within this Province, the
Sum of Twelve pence Per Ton, for every Ton such Ship or other Vessel does
measure according to her Dimensions by the Rule hereafter mentioned, for every
time such Ship or Vessel shall go forth. And that the Master of every such Ship
or other Vessel above Twelve Tons coming into any Port or Ports of this
Province to Trade or Traffic, the major part of the Owners whereof are not
belonging to this Province, shall (over and above the beforementioned duty of
Twelve pence Per Ton) every Voyage they make, pay* Twelve pence Per Ton more,
or one pound of good and new Gunpowder for every Ton such Ship or Vessel is in
Burden according to the rule of measuring hereafter set down and expressed, to
be employed for the Supply of His Majesty's Castle and Forts within this
Province. Which payments respectively are to be made unto the said Commissioner
for Impost, his Deputy or Deputies, who on Receipt thereof shall give a
Certificate that the said Duty is paid, and such Certificate to be produced and
delivered unto the Naval Officer, before he grant any Clearing for such Ship or
other Vessel.

Provided nevertheless, That no Coasting Vessels within this Province, or
Vessels arriving from the Province of New Hampshire, the Colonies of
Connecticut or Rhode Island, the Provinces of New York, or East or West Jersey,
shall be obliged to pay the said Sum of Twelve pence Per Ton first mentioned
more than twice in the year.

And for the better ascertaining the Tunage of any Ship or other Vessel liable
to the Duty aforesaid.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Tunage of such Ship or other Vessel shall be computed by the breadth
at the main beam within board, Rule for computing Tunage.
the depth to be accounted half the said breadth, and the length three times so
much as the breadth after the usual manner of multiplying and dividing the
product by one hundred: And every Master or Owner of such Ship or Vessel before
any Lading be taken on Board her, shall give an Account under his Hand of her
dimensions as aforesaid unto the said Commissioner, his Deputy or Deputies; and
i^ such Officer does apprehend and suspect that the Account given is short of
the true dimensions, the said Officer repairing unto one of the next Justices
of the Peace, such Justice shall, and hereby is empowered to grant his Warrant
to some able Ship Carpenter, requiring him to repair on Board such Ship or
other Vessel, and to measure the same in manner as is before expressed, and to
make his report thereof unto the said Commissioner, his Deputy or Deputies, and
such Justice is further empowered to administer an Oath unto the measurer to
deal truly and faithfully therein, for which Warrant and Oath administered,
there shall be paid unto the Justice Two Shillings, and the Measurer for his
Service shall have and receive the Sum of Five Shillings; all which Charge
shall be paid by the Master or Owner before such Ship or Vessel be cleared,
where the Master or Owner is found to have given a short Account of the
dimensions, if otherwi^^ (...) the Officer for managing the Impost Office, who
is allowed to b^ing such Charge to Account of the Public.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there be one fit person and no more nominated and appointed by this Court
as a Commissioner and Collector, Commissioners to be appointed
to have the general inspection, care and management of the said Office of
Impost and Tunage of Shipping, and whatsoever relates thereunto, and that there
be three fit persons and no more nominated and appointed by this Court as
Commissioners and Collectors, to have the general inspection, care and
management of the said Excise Office, and whatsoever relates unto the same,
which Commissioner and Commissioners respectively shall receive Commission for
their said respective Offices from the Governor or Commander in Chief for the
time being, with authority to nominate, appoint, employ and empower such and so
many Officers under him and them respectively, as with the advice of the
Treasurer for the time being of this His Majesty's Province, he and they shall
think necessary for the well-ordering and managing of the Affairs relating to
each of the said Offices, and the better to prevent Frauds, and to grant them
Warrants for executing of the same, and the said Commissioner and Commissioners
respectively, and all other Officers under him and them, before their Entering
upon the Execution of their respective Offices, shall be sworn to deal truly
and faithfully therein, which said Commissioner and Commissioners respectively
shall keep fair Books of all Entries and Duties arising by virtue of this Act,
and the same to lie open at all seasonable times, to the view and perusal of
the Treasurer and Receiver General of this Province, with whom they shall also
Account for all Collections and payments, and pay in all such moneys as shall
be in his and their hands as the Treasurer shall demand it; and the
Commissioner for Impost and Tunage of Shipping, and Commissioners for Excise
shall have and receive such Sum and Sums as the General Assembly shall think
fit to allow him and them respectively, for their labor, care and expenses in
said Affair. All other Officers employed under the said Commissioner and
Commissioners respectively to be paid for their Service, as he and they with
the Treasurer shall agree, upon reasonable Terms: And all and every such person
and persons to whom the said Excise, Fermors of the Excise alike Empowered as
the Commissioners.
or any part thereof, shall be letr or farmed by the said Commissioners, and
the Officers which they shall employ under him or them, shall have, use and
exercise all such powers and authorities as in and by this Act is given,
granted or committed unto the said Commissioners and their Underofficers for
the better Collecting said Excise, and preventing Frauds.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Penalties and Forfeitures accruing or arising by virtue of this Act,
or any clause or article therein contained, shall be one half to His Majesty,
Penalties and Forfeitures how to be recovered and disposed.
for the uses and intents for which the before mentioned Duties of Impost,
Excise and Tunage of Shipping are granted, and the other half to him or them
that shall seiz, inform and sue for the same, by Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign,
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, the whole Charge of Prosecution to
be taken out of the half belonging to the Informer.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in force for the space of one whole
year from and after the said Twenty ninth day of June, in this present Year,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, and no longer.

An Act, Relating to Town-Rates or Assessments.
WHEREAS diverse Constables and Collectors of Town-Rates or Assessments are
defective and negligent of their Duty in not timely paying of the same as by
the Warrants or Estreats to them committed they are required.

For Redress whereof.

BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Constables or Collectors within the several Towns in this Province,
who have had, or hereafter shall have any Rates or Assessments for the
defreying of Town Charges, orderly (...) and committed unto them to collect,
Constables or Collectors of Town Rates not issuing their accounts thereof by
the time prefixed in their warrants to be liable to Suit.
the Accounts and payment whereof are not issued, or that at any time or times
hereafter shall not pay in and issue their Accounts thereof with the Treasurer
of such Town, or other person appointed by the Select-men to be a Receiver of
the same, by the time prefixed in the Warrants to them respectively given for
the collecting and paying in thereof, or within the space of one month next
after the expiration thereof; every such defective Constable or Collector shall
be liable to the Action or Suit of the Treasurer or Receiver of such Town; And
such Treasurer or Receiver is hereby Empowered and Authorized to Sue for and
recover all such Rates and Assessments or any Arrears thereof, of and from the
Constables or Collectors respectively to whom the same were committed, and that
have, or shall neglect their duty in that regard, by Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, any Law, Usage or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT, To Restrain the Exportation of Provisions.
TO the intent that His Majesty's Service be not disappointed for want of
necessary Provisions for the Victualling and Subsisting of Seamen and
Soldiers, that are or shall be employed therein, Provisions being very scarce
in these parts by reason of the two last Harvests failing.

BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That from and after the Publication of this Act during the continuance of the
same, no Beef, Pork, nor Grain of any sort, Biscuit or Flower shall be Exported
out of this Province by Land or Water nor be Laden or put on Board any Ship or
other Vessel, or into any Carriage with intent to be Exported or Carried out of
the Province by Land or Water (other than what shall be for the necessary
Victualling of Outward Bound Ships or Vessels, having first obtained License
from the Governor and Council for the same) On pain of Forfeiting all such
Beef, Pork, and Grain of every sort, Biscuit and Flower so Laden or found on
Board any Ship or other Vessel, or put into any Carriage; or the value thereof;
One Moiety to the Select^men or Overseers of the Poor in the Town or Place
where the same shall be seized to the use of the Poor there, and the other
Moiety to him or them that shall Inform or Sue for the same in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record*

And all Officers employed for the Entering and Clearing of Vessels, and for the
inspecting and looking after the Duties of Impost, and the observance of the
Acts relating to Trade and Navigation, are hereby strictly commanded and
required to see that this Act be duly observed, and to make seizure of any of
the Species of Provisions above Enumerated, Laden on Board, or found in any
Ship or other Vessel, or in any Carriage contrary to the true intent of this
Act, and all other persons Informing shall have the benefit of this Act. Saving
a Liberty to the Western Towns on Connecticut River to Transport their
Provisions from thence to Hartford to be brought into these Parts of this
Province.

Provided nevertheless, That it shall be in the power of the Governor and
Council to grant Licenses to all such as shall offer to Export any of the sorts
of Provisions herein beforementioned to Newfoundland for the Supply of His
Majesty's Forces there; such persons giving sufficient Bond to carry the said
Provisions to Newfoundland, for the occasion aforesaid, and to no other place
whatsoever. And also to grant License for Provisions to be Exported to the
Province of New Hampshire, for His Majesty's Service there.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue in force until the Twentieth Day
of September next Ensuing, and no longer.

An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty a Tax upon Polls and Estates.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England Convened in General
Assembly, for and toward the Support of His Majesty's Castle upon Castle
Island near Boston, for the Subsis^ing and paying of Wages to Seamen and
Soldiers, and payment for Vessels Hire that have been, are, or shall be here
taken up and employed in His Majesty's Service, for the defense of this His
Province, and for the vigorous prosecution of the War against His Majesty's
Eenmies, For the Equipping and maintaining of the Province-Gally and Fire-Ship,
for the procuring of Ammunition, and other Stores of War, for the payment of
such Salaries, Grants and Allowances as have been or shall be made by the
General Court or Assembly, and all such Allowances and Payments as are or shall
be directed by any Act of this Province, to be paid out of the Public Treasury
for the Support of the Government, and answering of the incident and contingent
Charges thereof, and for no other ends or intents whatsoever. Do unanimously
Grant unto His Most Excellent Majesty, a Tax of Four Thousand Seven Hundred and
Nineteen Pounds in Money, to be Levied upon Polls and Estates, both real and
personal within the said Province as in and by this present Act for the manner
and proportion thereof is directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer do seasonably Send out his Warrants directed unto the
Select men, Trustees or Assessors of each respective Town or Precinct within
this Province: Requiring them to Assess the Sums herein set and proportioned
unto such Town or Precinct, upon all Rateable Male Polls above the Age of
Sixteen Years (except Elders of Churches, Settled Ministers, the Praesident,
Fellows and Students of Harvard College, Grammar School Masters, and such who
through Age, Infirmity, or extreme Poverty in the Judgment of the Assessors,
Select men or Trustees, are rendered incapable to Contribute toward Public
Charges) and upon all Estates both Real and Personal, lying within the Limits
and Bounds of such Town or Precinct, and next unto the same (Not pa^ing
elsewhere) in whose hands or Occupation soever the same shall be found in just
and equal proportion as near as may be according to their best judgment and
discretion, making no difference as to the Sum set upon Polls: All Indian
Melatto and Negro Servants to be Estimated as other Personal Estate, and to
make a fair List of the Assessment of said Sum upon the Polls and Estate within
such Town or Precinct, therein setting forth what each particular person is to
pay toward the same, against his or her Name respectively, and the said List
so perfected and signed by them, the said Select-men Trustees or Assessors, or
the major part of them, to Commit to the Collector, Constable or Constables of
such Town or Precinct, as also to return a Certificate of the Name or Names of
such Collector, Constable or Constables, together with the Sum total of the
List to each of them respectively Committed unto the Treasurer some time before
the last Day of August next Ensuing. And the Treasurer upon Receipt of such
Certificate, is hereby Empowered and Ordered to Issue forth his Warrant to the
said Collector, Constable or Constables, requiring him or them respectively to
Collect the Sum total of the said List, and to pay the same into the Treasury,
and Issue the Accounts thereof with himself or his Successors in said Office,
at or before the Last Day of October next following. And the Treasurer is
hereby also directed to send his aforesaid Warrants enclosed to the Sheriff or
Marshal of each respective County, who is hereby required immediately to
disperse and transmit the same unto the Select men, Trustees, Assessors,
Constables or Collectors of the several Towns and Precincts, according to the
directions thereof; and for his said Service, Charge and Expenses therein,
shall have a reasonable allowance ordered him by the Court of Quarter Sessions
in such County, ou^ of the County Treasury, upon his laying the Account thereof
before them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That each Town and Precinct within ^his Province shall be Assessed, and pay as
its proportion to this present Tax the Sums hereafter following. That is to
say, In the County of SUFFOLK.
l. s. d. Boston, Nine Hundred and Ten Pounds. 910 00 00 Roxbury, Seventy Fight
Pounds. 78 00 00 Dorchester, One Hundred and Ten Pounds. 110 00 00 Milton,
Forty Six Pounds, Ten Shillings. 46 10 00 Bra^trey, Seventy Eight Pounds. 78 00
00 Weymouth, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00 Hingham, Seventy Eight Pounds. 78 00 00
Dedham, Fifty Eight Pounds, Ten Shillings. 58 10 00 Medfield, Forty Two Pounds.
42 00 00 Wrentham, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Mendon, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Hull,
Twenty Five Pounds. 25 00 00 In the County of ESSEX.
Salem, Two Hundred Pounds. 200 00 00 Ipswich, Two Hundred and Fifteen Pounds.
215 00 00 Newbury, One Hundred and Fifty Pounds. 150 00 00 Salisbury, Thirty
Four Pounds. 34 00 00 Amsbury, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Haverbill, Thirty Six
Pounds. 36 00 00 Andover, Fifty Three Pounds. 53 00 00 Bradford, Eighteen
Pounds. 18 00 00 Topsfield, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Marble head, Eighty
Pounds 80 00 00 Lynn, Eighty Four Pounds. 84 00 00 Wenham, Forty Pounds. 40 00
00 Beverly, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Gloucester, Thirty Nine Pounds. 39 00 00
Manchester, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Rowley, Fifty Four Pounds. 54 00 00 Boxford,
Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 In the County of MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown, One Hundred and Forty Pounds. 140 00 00 Cambridge, Ninety Five
Pounds. 95 00 00 Watertown, One Hundred Thirty One Pounds. 131 00 00 New town,
Fifty Two Pounds. 52 00 00 Sudbury, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Marlborough, Forty
Pounds. 40 00 00 Medford, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 Malden, Forty Five Pounds.
45 00 00 W^oburn, Seventy Two Pounds. 72 00 00 Reading, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00
Billerica, Twenty Five Pounds. 25 00 00 Chelmsford, Thirty Five Pounds. 35 00
00 Concord, Seventy Pounds. 70 00 00 Stow, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Groton, Sixteen
Pounds. 16 00 00 Lanchester, Thirteen Pounds. 13 00 00 Sherbourn, Twenty Five
Pounds. 25 00 00 Framingham, Eight Pounds. 8 00 00 In the County of Hampshire.
Springfield, Fifty Three Pounds. 53 00 00 Northampton, Fifty One Pounds. 51 00
00 Hadley, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Hatfield, Thirty One Pounds. 31 00 00
Southfield, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Westfield, Nineteen Pounds. 19 00 00 Enfield,
Three Pounds. 3 00 00 In the County of Plymouth.
Plymouth, Fifty Five Pounds. 55 00 00 Situat^, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00
Marshfield, Forty Three Pounds. 43 00 00 Duxbury, Thirty Nine Pounds. 39 00 00
Bridge water, Thirty Seven Pounds. 37 00 00 Middleborough, Thirteen Pounds. 13
00 00 In the County of Barnstable.
Barnstable, Sixty Five Pounds. 65 00 00 Yarmouth, Forty One Pounds. 41 00 00
Eastham, Forty Two Pounds. 42 00 00 Sandwich, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00 Falmouth,
Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Manamoit, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Rochester, Eight
Pounds. 8 00 00 Harwich, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 In the County of Bristol.
Bristol, Thirty Five Pounds. 35 00 00 Taunton; Sixty Five Pounds. 65 00 00
Dartmouth, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Freetown, Eight Pounds. 8 00 00 Reboboth,
Fifty One Pounds. 51 00 00 Swansey, Forty Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Little
Compton, Thirty Eight Pounds. 38 00 00 Tiverton, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00
Attleborough, Eight Pounds. 8 00 00 In the County of York
York, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 Wells, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 Kittery, Twenty
Pounds. 20 00 00 In Dukes County.
Edgar-Town, Twenty Two Pounds. 22 00 00 Tisbury, Fourteen Pounds. 14 00 00
Chilmark, Fourteen Pounds. 14 00 00 Nantuckett, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.

That the Select-men or Trustees in each and every of the Respective Towns and
Precincts before mentioned, shall be the Assessors of the same, for the Sum
proportioned and set upon them in and by this Act, and shall take the Oath
following. That is to say, YOU A. B. being an Assessor for the Town of C. for
this present Tax, Do Swear, That in the discharge of said Trust, you will deal
impartially and equally therein, in proportioning the Sum to be Assessed upon
the said Town, after the best of your discretion and judgment. So help you God,
etc.

Which Oath the Town Clerk of each Town or Precinct, where there is no Justice
of the Peace, is hereby empowered to administer. And if in any of the Towns,
Precincts or places above menti^^^d there are no Select-men or Trustees, the
Inhabitants thereof are hereby required forthwith to Choose Select men or
Assessors for the proportioning and assessing the Sum in and by this Act set
upon such Town, Precinct or place, who shall also take the Oath abovementioned.
And every Assessor attending the Service aforesaid, shall be paid by the Town
Treasurer, or out of the Town Stock, Two Shillings Per Diem, for each day he
necessarily attends said Service.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That i^ the Select men or Assessors of any Town or Precinct, shall neglect or
refuse to perform the Service required of them by this Act, they shall pay the
Sum herein before set and proportioned upon such Town or Precinct, to be Levied
by Distress and Sale of the Estates real or personal of such defective
Assessors, by Warrant from the Treasurer directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of
the County in which such Town or Precinct lies, and for want of Estate, their
Bodies to be taken and imprisoned, until they pay the same. And all Sheriffs,
Constables, or Collectors sailing of performing the Duty and Service of them
respectively hereby required, shall be liable and subject unto the like pains,
penalties and forfeitures, to be prosecuted and recovered of them in the same
way and manner as in and by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or any
clause, branch or article thereof are set, declared and prescribed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Assessors in each Town or Precinct, shall assess the Estates lying
within the same, by one general rule as near as may be; And if any person shall
be agrieved at the Sum set upon him as his proportion toward this Tax, such
person making application unto the Assessors, and demonstrating that he is
Rated more than his proportion to the Sum set upon their Town, said Assessors
ease him, and if they refuse so to do, then the person agrieved, complaining
unto the next General Sessions of the Peace within that County, and making
appear that he is Assessed more than his proportion as aforesaid, shall be
heard and relieved by the Justices in said Sessions, and be re^imbursed out of
the Town Treasury so much as they shall see cause to abate him.

And for the better Enabling the Treasurer to Enforce the bringing in the
Moneys herein granted.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer be and hereby is Empowered to take, use and Exercise as well
all such Rules, Directions, Powers and Authorities, as have heretofore been
given him in and by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or in any Clause,
Branch or Article thereof, as in and by this present Act, for the obtaining and
drawing into the Treasury the Money herein Granted, as fully and effectually,
as if the same Directions, Powers and Authorities, had herein been again
particularly recited and Re-enacted, and notwithstanding any limitation or
restraint thereof in or to the particular Act or Acts wherein the same are
enumerated, set down and expressed.

An Act, For the further Continuing of the Act for Writts and Processes.
BE it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Act Entitled, An Act, for the Establishing of Presidents and Forms
of Writts and Processes, The Act for Writs and Processes continued.
and all and singular the Forms, Articles, Clauses, matters and things therein
contained, with the Alterations and Amendments heretofore made, and such other
as are herein after mentioned: Be, and hereby are further revived and continued
to abide and remain in full force and virtue until the Tenth Day of December
next Ensuing, and no longer.

Provided nevertheless, That all Writts and Processes shall bear the style of
the King, Writs to bear the Style of the King, and to be issued in His Name
only.
and be Issued in His Name only.

Provided also, That the words Forty Pounds Sterling in the Precept to be
Issued by the Sheriffs or Marshals respectively for Electing of Representatives
to Serve in the General Assembly, be, and hereby are altered; and that the
words Fifty Pounds Sterling be inserted instead thereof in the said Precepts to
be hereafter Issued: Any former Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Pleas, Writts, Actions, Suits, Recognizances, Plaints, Process,
Continuance of Writs, etc
Precepts, and other things whatsoever that were or are returnable, had or have
day or days in any of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, or Courts of
General Sessions of the Peace within this Province; Or in the Superior Court
of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery not yet determined,
shall be, and are hereby revived and continued to abide and remain in full
force and virtue, the Act for Establishing of Courts since a new made
notwithstanding: And all Parties having day by any such Pleas, Writts, Bills,
Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts or Recognizances (at or in any of
the said Courts shall respectively appear at such Court, under the Penalty of
Forfeiting any Obligations or Recognizances) conditioned for the appearance of
the said Parties at such Court, or under any other penalty that might have
incurred upon the said Parties for not appearing at the said Court, the said
Act for Establishing of Courts since a new made notwithstanding.

Provided, That the Court of General Sessions of the Peace, Concord Court
Adjourned.
and Interior Court of Common Pleas to have been holden at Concord for the
County of Middlesex, on the Second Tuesday of this present month of June, and
was Adjourned unto Tuesday the Twenty Second Day of the same month; Be, and
hereby is further Adjourned unto the Second Tuesday in July next, then to be
held and kept for this time.

An Act, Impowring Justices of the Peace to decide Differences not exceeding
Forty Shillings.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same,

That all manner of Debts, Trespasses and other Matters not exceeding the value
of Forty Shillings (wherein the Title of Land is not concerned) shall and may
be heard, tried, Justices of the Peace to grant Summons Capias or Attachment
for matters tryable before them.
adjudged and determined by any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within
this Province in their respective Precincts, who are hereby empowered upon
Complaint made of any such Debts, Trespass or other matter as aforesaid, to
Grant Summons, Capias or Attachment against the party complained of, directed
to the Sheriff or Marshal of the County, or either of their Deputies, or
Constables of the Town wherein such party lives; for which Summons, Capias or
Attachment, the Justice shall be paid One Shilling, and the Officer for Serving
the same, One Shilling and no more: Fee for a Wri^t and Serving.
And in case of Non appearance upon Summons duly Served being so returned by
the Officer, such Justice may issue out a Warrant of Contempt directed to the
Sheriff, Marshal or other Officer as aforesaid, to bring the Contemner before
him, as well to answer the said Contempt, as the Plaintiffs Action, and may (if
he see cause) fine such Contemner, Fine for Contempt in not appearing upon
Summons.
not exceeding Ten Shillings, to be accounted for to the Treasurer of the
County toward defraying of County Charges: And after Judgment given in any
Case, may grant an Execution or Warrant of Distress directed to the Sheriff,
Marshal or other Officer as a^oresaid, to levy the said Fine, Debt or Damage,
with Charges upon the Defendants Goods or Chattels. And such Officer by virtue
thereof shall expose the same to Sale, returning the Overplus (if any be) to
the Defendant, and for want of such Distress, ^o take the Body of the
Defendant, and him to carry and convey to the Common Goal of the County or
Precinct, there to remain until he has satisfied the said Fine, Debt or Damage
with Charges. And in case such Complainant be Nonsuited, or Judgment pass
against him, then the said Justice is hereby Empowered to assess to the
Defendant reasonable Costs against such Complainant, to be levied and recovered
in manner and form above expressed.

Writts to be Served seven days before Trial.
Provided always, That all Summons, Capias or Attachment before such Justice of
the Peace, shall be served and executed at least seven days before the time of
Trial or hearing.

Provided also, That the party agrieved shall have liberty to appeal to the
next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be holden for the same County, Party
agrieved to appeal to the Inferior Court.
he entering into Recognizance with one sufficient Surety in the value of the
Debt or Damage Sued for, and sufficient to answer all Costs to prosecute the
said Appeal there with effect, and to abide the Order of said Court, where such
case shall be tried and receive a final Issue and Determination.

And the Party appealing shall bring the Copies of the whole Case to the Court
appealed to, Party appealing to bring the whole case.
where each party shall be allowed the benefit of any further Plea or Evidence;
and if upon such new Plea or Evidence the Judgment happen to be reversed, the
Appellant shall have no Costs granted for the first Trial, and such Appellant
shall also give in the reasons of his Appeal unto the Justice appealed, Reasons
of Appeal to be given in seven days before the Trial.
from in Writing seven days inclusively before the sitting of the Court
appealed to. And all Justices are hereby required to keep fair Records of all
their Proceedings from time to time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Clerk of any Town within this Province, may, and hereby is Empowered
to grant Replevins, Summons or Attachments for any matter or cause tryable
before any Justice of the Peace, and Summons for Witnesses, Clerks of Towns to
grant Replevins etc.
and to direct the same to the Constables of such Town, or to the Party to be
Summoned for Witness respectively; and the Constable or Constables are hereby
required to execute such Replevins, Summons or Attachments accordingly, and to
make due Return thereof.

An Act, For Establishing of Courts.
FOR the Establishment of Courts of Justi^e throughout this Province* as well
in respect of the times and places for holding of the same, as for the orderly
Regulating the Proceedings therein.

BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same,

(...) shall be held and kept in each respective County within th^^ ^rovince
yearly, at the times and places hereafter named and (...), a Court of General
Sessions of the Peace, by the Justices (...) the Peace of the same County,
Times, Places for holding of the General Sessions of the Peace.
or so many of them as shall be limited in the Commission for the Peace, who
are hereby empowered to hear and determine all matters relating to the
Conservation of the Peace, and Punishment of Offenders, and whatsoever is by
them cognizable according to Law, and the times and places for the holding and
keeping the said Courts within the respective Counties, shall be as follows:
That is to say, For the County of Suffolk, at Boston, on the first Tuesdays in
July, October, January and April: For the County of Essex, at Salem, on the
last Tuesdays in June, and December; at Newbury, on the last Tuesday in
September, and at I^swich, on the last Tuesday in March: For the County of
Middlesex, at Cambridge on the Second Tuesday in September, at Charlstown, on
the Second Tuesday in December and March, and at Concord, on the Second Tuesday
in June: For the County of Plymouth, at Plymouth, on the third Tuesdays in
September, December, March and June: For the County of Barnstable, at
Barnstable on the first Tuesdays in July, October, January and April; For the
County of Bristol, at Bristol, on the Second Tuesdays in July, October, January
and April: For the County of York, at Wells on the first Tuesday in July, and
at York, on the first Tuesday in January: For the County of Hampshire, at
Northampton, on the first Tuesday in September, and a^ Springfield, on the
first Tuesday in March: For Dukes County, at Edgartown, on the first Tuesday in
October, and on the last Tuesday in March; and for the Island of Nantucket, at
said Island, on the first Tuesday in October, and on the last Tuesday in March
yearly from time to time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That at the times and places before mentioned, there shall be held and kept in
each of the said respective Counties and Island of Nantucket, Times and Places
for holding Inferior Courts of Pleas.
an Inferior Court of Common Pleas, by four of the Justices o^ and residing
within the same County, and Island respectively, to ^e Appointed and
Commissionated thereto; any three of whom to be a Quorum for the hearing and
determining of all Civil Actions a^ising or happening within the same tryable
at the Common Law, of what nature, kind or quality soever; and upon Judgment
given therein to award Execution.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Appeal allowed to the Superior Court.
That it shall be in the liberty of the party agrieved at any Judgment given in
any of the said Inferior Courts to appeal therefrom unto the next Superior
Court to be held within or for the same County, and upon Judgment given at the
said Superior Court upon such Action of Appeal, it shall be (...) for either
party Appellant or Defendant within the space (...) eighteen months next after
such Judgment given, Liberty of review in 18 months next and not afterward.
and not afterwa^^ to Review such Action by Process out of the same Court once
and no more; the case upon such Action of Review to be finally issued and
determined, or otherwise the party agrieved at any Judgment given in any of the
said Inferior Courts may by ^ new Process, once and no more, Review in the
Inferior Court.
to review the said Case in the same Court where it was first tried, and within
the space of one year next after Judgment given, upon such Trial by review, the
party agrieved may bring his Writ of Error for a Trial of the said Case at the
Superior Court to be held within or for the same County, Writ of Error
afterward.

Party appealing or taking out a Writ of Error to give Security No Appeal
admitted after the Courts Sitting or Execution granted.

No Costs granted for the first Trial where the judgment is reversed on new or
plea or evidence.


there to receive a final Issue and Determination.

Provided, That the party appealing or bringing any Writ of Error as
aforesaid, shall first enter into Recognizance with sufficient Sureties; it
upon Appeal before one or more of the Justices of the Court appealed from in a
reasonable S^in that he will prosecute such Appeal with effect; and if upon a
Writ of Error before one or more of the Justices of the Superior Court in the
value of the Debt or Damage recovered that he will prosecute such Writ of Error
with Effect, and abide the Order of the Court thereupon.

Provided also, That no Appeal shall be admitted after the time of the Courts
sitting, nor after Execution granted. And that the party appealing shall bring
Copies of the whole Case unto the Superior Court appealed to; where each party
shall be allowed the benefit of any new and farther Plea and Evidence; and if
upon such new Plea and Evidence the Judgment happen to be reversed, the
Appellant shall have no Costs granted him for the first Trial. And further,
That every Appellant as aforesaid shall give in a Declaration briefly setting
forth the Reasons of his Appeal unto the Clerk of the Court appealed from,
fourteen days inclusively before the sitting of the Court where such Appeal is
to be Tried.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That there shall be a Superior Court of Judicature, Superior Court of
Judicature and Court of Assize.
Court of Assize and General Goal Dell^^e^y over this whole Province, to be
held and kept annually at the respective times* and places herein after
mentioned, by one Chief Justice, and four other Justices to be Appointed and
Commissiona^^d for the same; any three of whom to be a Qu^rum, who shall have
Cognizance of all Pleas, real, personal or mixed, as well in all Pleas of the
Crown, and in all matters relating to the Conservation of the Peace, and
punishment of Offenders, as in Civil Causes or Actions between party and party,
and between His Majesty and any of His Subjects whether the same do concern the
realty, and relate to any Right of Freehold and Inheritance ^r whether the same
do concern the personalty and relate to ma^^^r of Debt, Contract, Damage or
personal Injury, and also in all (...) Actions which concern both realty and
personalty, and after deliberate hearing, to give Judgment, and award Execution
thereon.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Justices in any of the Courts aforesaid, where the Forfeiture of any
Penal Bond shall be found, shall be, Power to chancer Forfeiture of any penal
Bond.
and are hereby ^^^powred in the Entering up of Judgment in such case to chancer
the same unto the just Debt and Damages.

Provided always, That when the Original Process in Civil Cau^ses is made out
of the Superior Court, Liberty of review in the Superior Court.
the party agrieved at the Judgment thereon given; shall have liberty to review
his Case in the said Superior Court once and no more, and that all persons
which shall bring any Action of Review to the Superior or Inferior Court
respectively, shall lay the whole Case before the Court where such Action of
Review is to be Tried.

Provided also, That either party not resting satisfied with the Judgment or
Sentence of any of the said Judicatories or Courts of Justice in personal
Actions where the matter in difference does ex^ceed the value of Three Hundred
Pounds Sterling, Appeal to His Majesty in Council.
may Appeal unto His Majesty in Council, such Appeal being made in time, and
Security given according to the directions in the Charter in that behalf.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the said Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal
Delivery, shall be held and kept at the times and places within the respective
Countys as follows. Times and Places of h^^ding the Superior Court, etc.
That is to say, Within and for the County of Suffolk, at Boston, on the last
Tuesdays in October and April; Within and for the County of Essex, at Salem, on
the Second Tuesday in November, and at Ipswich, on the third Tuesday in May:
Within and for the County of Middlesex, at Cambridge on the last Tuesday in
July, and at Charlstown, on the last Tuesday in January; For the Counties of
Plymouth, Barnstable, Brist^l, and Dukes County, at Bristol, on the second
Tuesday in September, and at Plymouth, on the second Tuesday in March.

And be it further Enacted,

Appeals from Hampshire, York and Nan^^^ket to be at Boston or Charlestown.
That the Trial of all Civil Causes by Appeal from any of the Inferior Courts
within the respective Counties of York and Hampshire, and the Island of
Nantucket, or by Writ of Error shall be in the Superior Court to be held at
Boston or Charlstown; and that there be held and kept a Court of Assize and
General Goal Delivery for the Respective Counties and Places of York, Hampshire
and the Island of Nantucket aforesaid within the same, Court of Assiz to be
h^ld in the said places as Occasion shall be.
from time to time, as the Governor and Council, advising with the Justices of
the said Court shall direct and appoint according as occasion may be.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Plaintiffs liberty to
begin his Suit either in the Inferior or Superior Court.


That it shall be in the liberty of any Plaintiff to begin his Suit either in
the Interior or Superior Court at his pleasure.

Provided nevertheless, That no Action under the value of Forty Shillings shall
be brought into any of the Inferior Courts, nor any Action under the value of
Ten Pounds into the Superior Court, unless where Freehold is concerned, or
upon Appeal.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Processes and Writ^ to issue out of the Clerks Office
That all Processes and Writts shall issue out of the Clerks Office of the said
respective Courts in His Majesty's Name, under the Seal of the said Office, to
be Signed by the Clerk, and directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of the County,
his Under Sheriff or Deputy, and i^ such Writ or Process be against the Sheriff
or Marshal to be directed to the Coroner of such County, who is hereby empowered
to execute the same; and where the Sum Sued for is under Ten Pounds, may be
also directed to the Constables of the Town. (...) Process to run through ^he
Province.
And Writts as well Original as Judicial issuing out of the Clerks Office of
the Superior or Inferior Courts respectively shall run into any County within
this Province, and be there executed by the Officer or Officers of such County
to whom they are directed.

Provided nevertheless, That the Clerk of each Town respectively within this
Province, as well as the Clerk of the said respective Courts, may and hereby is
empowered to grant Summons for Witnesses in Civil Cases directed to the party to
be Summoned for Witness, requiring him or them to appear at the Superior or
Inferior Court respectively. Town Clerks may grant Sum^^ns for Witnesses.
And all Processes for appearance as well in the Interi^our Court of Pleas as
the Superior Count of Judicature, shall be Served and Executed fourteen days
before the sitting of the Court, wherein such Writ or Process shall be
returnable. And all proper O^iginal Processes in the said Courts shall be
Summons, Copies or Attachment. And in case upon any such Process duly Served,
and Return thereof made into Court, Judgment to be entered up upon default.
the Defendant do not appear by himself or his Attorney, his default shall be
Recorded, and Judgment entered up against him thereupon, unless before the Jury
be dismissed he shall come into Court, and move to have a Trial; in which case he
shall be admitted thereunto, first paying down unto the adverse party double
the Costs he has then been a^ so far* and the Plaintiff shall make a new Entry.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Matters and Issues in Fact arising or happening in any County or
place within this Province shall be tried by twelve good and lawful m^n of the
Neighborhood, Matters and issues in Fact to be tried by a Jury.
to be chosen in manner following: That is to say, That the Clerk of each Court
respectively in convenient time before the Sitting of such Court shall issue
out Warrants directed to the Constables of the several Towns within the County
or Jurisdiction of said Court, or the most principal of them; Requi^ing them to
assemble the Freeholders and other Inha^bitants of such Town, Juror^ how to be
chosen
qualified as in and by His Majesty's Royal Charter is directed to Elect and
choose so many good and lawful men as the VVarrant shall direct, to Serve as
Jurors at such Court, Penalty on Constables for not making return of W^^rants
for Jurors.
and the Constable shall Summon the persons so chosen to at^tend accordingly at
the time and place appointed, and make timely Return of his VVarrant unto the
Cl^rk that granted the same, on pain that every Constable failing of his duty
herein, shall forf^it and pay as a Fine unto the County Treasurer for the use
of the Coun^ty, the Sum of Forty Shillings.

And no ^^^son Serving as a Justice, Juror, VVitness o^ otherwise, Ceremony to
b^ (...) in Swearing*
shall be obliged to use any other ceremony in taking of their respective
Oaths, than li^^ing up the hand as has been accu^^omed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Justices of the said several Courts, be, and are hereby empowered to
make necessary Rules and Orders for the more orderly practicing and proceeding
in said Court. Courts to make (...) Rules and Orders.
Provided they be not re^pugnant to the Laws of this Province, and that no
Summons, Process, Writ, Judgment or other proceeding in Courts or course o^
Justice shall be abated, No Process, Writ, etc. to be abated for
circumstantial Error
arrested or reversed upon any kind of ci^cumstantial Errors or Mistakes where
the person and case may be rightly understood and intended by the Court, nor
through defect or want of form only. And all VVritts, Proc^sses, Declarations,
Indictments, Pleas, Answers, Replications and Entries in all the said Courts
shall be in the English Tongue and no other: And it shall be in the liberty of
the Plaintiff or Defendant in any of the said Courts to plead or defend his own
Cause in his own proper person, All Writts etc. to be in the English Tongue.
or with the assistance of such other as he shall procure, being a person not
scandalous or otherwise offensive to the Court. And Attourneys Fees to be
allo^^d at the Superior Court of Judicature, shall be Twelve Shillings, and at
the Inferior Court Ten Shillings and no more, Attournys Fees.
and but one Attorney to be paid for in any case.

And be it further Enacted,

That Two Shillings Per Diem shall be accounted due satisfaction to any Witness
for his Travel and Expenses and no more, Witnesses allowances per Diem.
to be allowed in Civil Causes* And if such Witness live within three miles of
the place of the Courts sitting whereto he is Summoned, and be not to pass any
Ferry, then One Shilling and Six pence Per Diem shall be accounted sufficient.
And if any person or persons upon whom any lawful Process or Summons shall be
Served to testify, depose or give Evidence concerning any Cause or Matter
depending in any of the said Courts, Penalty for Witnesses not appearing
and having tendered unto him or them such reasonable Sums of money for (...) or
their Costs and Charges as having regard to the distance of the places is
necessary to be allowed in that behalf, do not appear according to the Tenor
of the Process or Summons, having no lawful or reasonable let or impediment to
the contrary; That then the party so making default, shall for every such
Offense lose and forfeit Forty Shillings, and shall yield such further
Recompense to the party agrieved according to the loss and hindrance that he
shall sustain by reason of the Non appearance of the said Witness or Witnesses:
The said several Sums to be recovered by the party so grieved against the
Offender or Offenders, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law
to be allowed.

FINIS.

