A JOURNAL Of what Passed in the Expedition of His Excellency Coll. Benjamin
Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Province of New York,
etc. To (...) ANY, to Renew the ^ovenant Chain with the five (...) ^ations of
Indians, the Mohaques, Oneydes, Onondages, (...) and Sinnekes.
(...) 17. ON Thursday after Sun set his Excellency imbarqued at Gre^^^^ch. On
Tuesday mor^ing arrived at Albany.

This day his Excellency viewed the Fortifications of the City, and (...) to
the Mayor and Aldermen for such Reparations (...) needful in the Block-houses,
Platforms and (...).

The 27th. Sunday afternoon, The Sachims of One^d and (...) at Albany, in the
Evening they supped with his E^^^llency giving great expressions of the Joy and
Satisfacti^^^ (...) had in meeting his Excellency.

(...) his Excellency sent Capt. James Wee^^s to view (...) Sche^ectady, and
bring report to his Excellency (...) Repairs are wanting. Which was (...).

This day the Sachims of the other three Nations arrived, an^ desired time to
rest themselves till to morrow.

The 29th, His Excellency called the Sachims together, an^ spoke.

At a Meeting of the Sachims of the five Nations at Albany, the 29th of Sept.
1696.
Present, His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll Nicholas Bayard, of
the Council. William Pinhorn, Esquire of the Council. Major Peter Schuyler, of the
Council. Matthew Clarkson, Esquire Secretary. The Major, Recorder and Aldermen of
Albany, etc.
His Excellency said, Brethren, It is an unexpressible Satis^faction to me that
I see you here. I do heartily Condole* the loss our Brethren of the Onondages
and Oneydes have sustained by the late Eruption of the French Army from Canada.

Upon the first certain Intelligence I had (...) in (...) with what Force I
could hastily gather for your assistance.

And I am now here, and present you the Onondages an^ Oneydes these two Belts
of Wampum, as a Confirmation of m^ Sincerity, and these Kettles to repair your
loss in that kind.

Brethren, Two Months ago I received at New York the fir^^ Intelligence that
the French had made an Insult upon you^ Country, I forthwith came up, as I
said before, to your R^^lief and Assistance. I had an account, before I did
reach Alban^ from some of your People, That the French Army were r^^treated,
and marched back toward Canada; I then sent E^^presses desiring you all to
meet me at this place. Some tim^ after I received your Answer, That you would
meet me a (...) this time in Albany. And I am now come up a second Time (...)
Summer, in order to renew the Covenant Chain, and to co^^sult with the Brethren
what is most proper, and may be most conducing to the common good and safety of
the whole House.

Brethren, I do acquaint you from my most Illustrous Master the King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, that he will always extend his gracious
Protection to you, and a^ a Seal of it his Majesty has commanded me to deliver
you these Presents to keep bright the Covenant Chain from all Rust, and to
strengthen it in behalf of all his Majesty's Subjects, not only of this
Province, but these also of New England, Connecticut, the Jarseys,
Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia.

The List of the Presents sent from the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and given
to the Indians, viz.
24 Blew Coats, laced with broad Lace, 24 laced Hats, 24 pair of Shoes with
Buckles, 24 Shirts, 22 doz. of Hose, 30 Gun Barrels and Locks, 50 Brass
Kettles, 1 Barrel of Powder, 4 C. weight of Lead, 1000 Flints, 1 groce of
Tobacco Pipes, of Wood and Tin, 2 groce of Knives, 6 Pound of Vermillion.
Prime cost in England of the above goods 200 l. st^rl.

A List of Presents added by the Government of New York.
1 Piece of D^ffils, 2 Cask of Swan Shot, 7 Barrels of Powder, 14 large
Kettles, 7 Pieces of white Hamils for shirts, 100 Hatchets, 54 pound and a half
of Tobacco in Roll, 2 groce of Pipes, Wampum 3 l. 9 s. 28 Gallons of Rum,
l. s. d. All which cost in New York Money, 169 05 04 For Provision to the
Indians, and rapairing their Arms, 130 19 07 Cash for Messengers, Indian Scouts
for ^ntelligence of the Enemy's motion, paid by Mr. Dellius, Mr. Banker Major
Schuyler, and Major Wessells, 100 00 00 From (...) l. sterling. in N. York Money
is 260 00 00 In all L. 660 04 11

At a Meeting of the Sachims of the five Nations, at Albany, the 1st of
October, 1696.
Present His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc: Coll. Nicholas Bayard, William
Pinhorn, Esquire of the Council. Major Peter Schuyler, Matthew Clarkson, Esquire
Secretary, The Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of Albany, etc.
Sononguirese, a Sachim of the Mohaques, was Speaker.

BRother Cajenquiragoe, We return you Thanks for what you have said the day
before yesterday, in condoling of our loss, and for the Kettles which you gave
us to boil our Victuals, in the room of those that are lost by the Enemy, as
also for the two Belts of Wampum, given us as a token of your Sincerity, by
which our hearts are mightily rejoiced and sifted up in this our poor Condition.

Brother Cajenquiragoe, We are exceedingly rejoiced that the great King, over
the Sea, has sent to us in this our low Condition, by which our hearts are
lifted up. We were ready to sink in a miserable perishing state, and this makes
us revive again. He laid down six Beaver Skins.

Brother Cajenquirago, We come to desire you to acquaint the great King, That
the Enemy has brought us to a very low Condition, and has destroyed five of our
Castles, one is now left, and if that be destroyed, we know not what to do, we
know not what shall become of us next. Pray let the great King know this.

Brother Cajenquirago, We desire, that since the great King of England, etc.
has Canows of seventy great Guns a piece, and many Forces, you may acquaint
him, That its a great pity we should be so plagued with so small an Enemy a^
^he French and ^^dians of Canada. We are not able of our selves to destroy
them. ^e are become a small People, and much lessened by the War the People of
Virginia, Maryland, Pennsilvania, the Jarseys, ^onnecticut and New England, who
have all put their hands to ^^e Covenant Chain, will join with the Inhabitants
of this ^ace, we are ready to go and root the French and all our Enemies out of
Canada. He then laid down a bundle of (...) Beaver skins, Quebeck, Troy Rivier
Mont Real.
and upon the outside thereof a ^raught of the River of Canada, with the chief
^laces thereof, marked, to show the smallness of the ^nemy, and how they are
seated upon Canada River, which they desire may be sent over and shown to the
^reat King.

Brother Cajenquiragoe, We again thank you for the Message ^ou have brought us
from the great King. And we pray you ^o send again (...) him for us, with all
vigou^ and speed, and to (...) before the King what we have here said: fail not
in writing, (...) not to let the King know it; we give these five Beavers to
^he man that writes, to pay for Paper, Pen and Ink.

Brother Cajenquirago, We desire you to acquaint the great ^ing, as before,
That we are a small People, and he has a great People, and many Canows with
great Guns. We desire ^ou to write to him to know whether he will send them to
^estroy Canada or not, against the next time the Trees grow ^reen; and if he
will not send Forces to subdue Canada, then ^o send us word thereof, that we
may make Peace for our selves ^orever* or for some time. And we earnestly pray
you will ^esire the great King to send us an Answer by the next time the Trees
gro^ green. He laid down a bundle of six Beavers.

At a Meeting of the Sachims of the five Nations, at Albany, the 2d of October,
1696.
Present His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Nicholas Bayard, of the
Council. William Pinhorn, Esquire of the Council. Major Peter Schuyler, of the
Council. Matthew Clarkson, Esquire Secretary, The Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of
Albany, etc.
Dackashata, a Sachim of the Sinnekes, was Speaker.

Brother Cajenquirago,

WE come to condole the loss you daily receive, havin^ daily Alarms of skulking
Parties of the Enemy doin^ mischief. Then laid down a Belt of Wampum.

Brother Cajenquirago, We come with the whole House to co^^sider what tends to
the common good of the whole House.

Brother Cajenquirago, We come here to quicken the fire, an^ renew the Covenant
Chain.

Brother Cajenquirago, We come to renew the Covenant Chai^ with all the
Brethren of New England* Connecticut, New-Yor^ the Jarseys, Pennsilvania,
Maryland and Virginia, that the may partake of the warmth of this fire.

Brother Cajenquirago, We recommend to all that are in the Covenant Chain to be
vigorous to keep it up.

Brother Cajenquirago, When all is said, I drink all yo^ Healths, and then I
deliver you the Cup.

Brother Cajenquirago, There has been a Cloud, and we co^^ to remove it, as the
Sun that comes in the Morning and remov^ the darkness of the Night

Brother Cajenquirago, The Tree of Safety and Well^^^^ (...) here, we confirm
it.

Brother Cajenquirago, As the Tree is planted here, and confirmed, so we make
fast all the Roots and Branches of it, all the Brethren of the five Nations,
and the Brethren of Virginia, Maryland, Pennsilvania, the Jarseys, New^York,
Connectic^^ and New England.

Brother Cajenquirago, We wish we may rest in quietness under that Tree, we
fill it with new Leaves, and wish that all that are in the Covenant Chain may
have the benefit to sit down quiet under its shadow.

Brother Cajenquirago, I do hereby renew the Covenant Chain with all that have
put their hands in it, Virginia, Maryland, Pennsilvania, the Jarseys, N York,
Connecticut and N. England.

Brother Cajenquirago, We renew the Covenant Chain in behalf of the whole
House, the Mohaques, Oneydes, Onondages, Cajonges and Sinnekes.

Brother Cajenquirago, We have lately had the loss of two Castles by the Enemy,
we have concluded to do our best to assist them, and we desire Cajenquirago
will do the same.

Brother Cajenquirago, We wish the Canows may go to and again in safety, that
the great King may know what we have here said, and that we may have an answer.
We have now made our word good, here is the Cup. Then laid down some small
bundles of Beaver, saying, it is but small, but is, as it were, saved out of
the fire.

His Excellency stood up, and said,

Brethren, I have heard what you have said, and have here renewed the Covenant
Chain with all the five Nations, the Mohaques, Oneydes, Onondages, Cojonges and
Sinnekes, in behalf of the Brethren of this Province, Virginia, Maryland,
Pennsilvania, the Jarseys, Connecticut and New^England. And I do (...) the five
Nations of his Majesty's Protection. I have provided for you some Victuals, and
Drink to drink the King^ Health^* and in Confirmation thereof, that it may last
so long (...) the Sun and Moon endures, I give this Belt of Wampsum.

The principal Sachim of the Mohaques, called, Oheee.

The whole Assembly answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Oneydes, called, Oheee.

The whole Assembly answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Onondages, called, Oheee.

The whole Assembly answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Cajonges, called, Oheee.

The whole Assembly answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Sinnekes, called, Oheee.

The whole Assembly answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

October. 2. In the Evening his Excellency did appoint the principal Sachims to
mee^ him at a private Conference next morning.

At a private Meeting of the Sachims at Albany, the 3d of Oct. 1696.
Present, His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Nicholas Bayard,
of the Council. William Pinhorn, Esquire of the Council. Major Peter Schuyler, of
the Council. Matthew Clarkson, Esquire Secretary.
His Excellency said,

BRethren, It was proposed by the Speaker of the five Nations the first day,
That I should write to my great Master* the King of England, etc. concerning
the War that (...) between the five Nations, and the French and Indians of
Canada and that I should g^t an Answer from the great King, to you, (...)
Brethren, against the next time the Trees grow green.

Brethren, I must assure you, its utterly impossible in so short time to send
over to my great Master, and to receive an answer, or Reasons which I shall now
give you.

The way over the great Sea is long, the danger and hazards ^^e many, and in
the Winter season happen many Storms and ^ontrary Winds.

Brethren, I do promise you to use all the speediest means with the first
opportunity, to write to the great King, and to get you an answer, which I am
sure will be to your content and satisfaction, and so soon as it comes I shall
communicate ^t to you.

Brethren, In the mean time I have appointed Major Schuyler, Mr. Delli^^, Major
Wessels, and the Mayor of the City of Albany ^o receive your Propositions, upon
any occasion that may offer (...) my absence.

Brethren, I do heartily wish you well home to your Castles, and that you may
look out, and be careful not to be surprised. You can never be too watchful. I
now take my leave of you, and give each of you a Keg of Rum, for a Dram, to
comfort you in the way home, and a Coat to keep you warm in the Winter. I shall
see you again, God willing, next Summer, or sooner if your affairs call, if it
please God to continue my health.

The Sachims offer to make some Propositions.

Sononguirese, Sachim of the Mohaques, was Speaker.

Brother Cajenquirago;

WE have been a long time in the Covenant Chain with the Brethren of New York,
in which afterward, at (...), the Brethren of Virginia, Maryland,
Pennsilvania, the Jarseys, Connecticut and New England, came and linked
them^selves* they liked the Chain of Peace* but where are the^ now? They do not
like to take part with us in the War. They are all asleep, They come not to our
Assistance against the Ene^my, Their hands hang down ^^aight, and their Arms
are ^^me* We see none to mind the War but the Brethren of New York.

We are now down upon one knee, but we are not quit down upon the ground. Let
the great King of England sen^ the great Canows with 70 Guns each, and let the
Brethren o^ Virginia, Maryland, Pennsilvania, the Jarseys, Connecticut and
New England awake, and we will stand up straight again upon both feet; our
heart is yet stout and good; we doubt not bu^ to destroy the Enemy. Then laid
down a Belt of Wampum.

Brother Cajenquirago, We again desire you to write to the great King, and to
get us an answer against the next time the Trees become green, and that there
may be no delay.

Let it not be said to us, that the Canows are lost under water, or that the
wind has carried them into anoth^^ Country or the like Excuse, but let us have
the Answer against the Tree^ become green without fail, for we are in great
need of it. The^ laid down a Beaver skin.

To which his Excellency made answer,

BRethren, I shall be faithful and exact to my Promi^^ to you, I shall send to
the great King* my Maste^ by the first Opportunity, and be careful in sending
yo^ the great Kings answer, as I told you before. But I ca^ not be positive to
a Time, when the Voyage depends upon Wind and Weather, which are so uncertain.
I wish you we^^ to your Castles.

The principal Sachim of the Mohaques, called, Oheee.

The whole Number of Sachims answered, Heeeeee Hogh*

The principal Sachim of the Oneydes, called, Oheee.

The whole Number of Sachims answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Onondages, called, Oheee.

The whole Number of Sachims answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Cajonges, called, Oheee.

The whole Number of Sachims answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

The principal Sachim of the Sinnekes, called, Oheee.

The whole Number of Sachims answered, Heeeeee Hogh.

October 4 th. Clothes were delivered out to the Companys, ^eing the gratuity
of the Assembly to those Soldiers that had ^erved the preceding Winter, being
of the 500 l.

Oct. 5. The Companies were mustered by M. Clarkson, Esquire ^ecretary, and
afterward the Oaths administered to them, and ^very man had two Dollars paid
him of the 4 d. per day likewise ^rante^ by the Assembly. The Money was taken
up upon ^redit the Tax not being paid, nor the first Moiety payable ^ll the
29th of September last.

His Excellency, on the Head of each Company, did en^ourage the Men, and told
them not to believe the Reports of ^ctious disaffected People, promising, That
the 4 d. per Day should be paid into their own hands.

In the afternoon the same day, his Excellency imbarqued for New York, being
attended to the Shore by the Mayor, Recorder, ^ldermen and Common Council, with
the Soldiers and ^rain-bands in Arms. And having recommended to the
Ma^^strates of the City and Officers to be vigilant and amicable, ^^d to unite
in their Endeavors for the Defense of the place, ^^ok leave of them about
three a Clock afternoon.

Oct. 9. Friday Morning his Excellency arrived at New York.

David Jamison, Cl. Concilij.


