The Old Principles of New England. OR, Thirty Three Articles Extracted from,
and Contracting of, The Platform of Church Discipline, Agreed, by the Renowned
Synod, of Churches from Four Colonies, Assembled at Cambridge, 1647.
(I.)
THE parts of Church Government, Chap. 1. Arti. 2, 3*
are all of them exactly described in the Word of God, being parts and means of
Instituted Worship, and prescribed by the Lord Jesus Christ, the King, and Law
giver of His Church.

Necessary Circumstances, are also circumscribed in the Word, Arti. 4.
with many general Limitations, and all must be so done, as is most Expedient
for Edification.

(II)
The Catholic Church, which is the whole Company of those that are Elected,
Redeemed, Chap. 2. Arti. 1*
and Effectually Called, is either Triumphant, and Glorified in Heaven: or
Militant on Earth. Arti. 2 Arti. 3.
And this Militant Church, is either Invisible, in respect of Relation to the
Lord Jesus Christ, being by Faith united unto Him; or Visible in respect of
men's professing that Faith, in their persons, and in particular Churches; In
which regard there may be acknowledged, An Universal Visible Church.

(III.)
The State of the Visible Church, when the Members of it come to Walk in the
Order of the Gospel, Chap 2. Arti. 5
is, Congregational; (The Term, Independent, we approve not.) And a
Congregational Church, is, Arti. 6.
by the Institution of Christ, a part of the Militant Visible Church,
Consisting of a Company of Saints, by Calling, United into one Body, by an Holy
Covenant, for the public Worship of God, and mutual Edification of one
another, in the Fellowship of the Lord Jesus Christ.

(IV.)
The Saints, which are the Matter of a Church, Chap. 3* Arti. 2.
must not only have attained the Knowledge of the Principles of Religion, and
be free from gross and open Scandals, but also such as do together with the
profession of their Faith and Repentance, Walk in blameless Obedience to the
Word, so that in Charitable Discretion, they may be accounted* Saints, though
there may be some Hypocrites among them (And the Children of such also are Holy)

(V.)
A Church ought not to be of a Greater Number than may Ordinarily meet together
in one place; Chap. 3* Arti. 4*
nor Ordinarily fewer, than may conveniently carry on Church Work

(VI.)
One Particular Church is distinguished from another, by its Form: Chap 4.
Arti. 2. Arti. 3.
And this Form is the Visible Covenant, Agreement, or Consent, whereby the
Faithful give up themselves unto the Lord, for the observing of the Ordinances
of the Lord Jesus Christ together in the same Society; which is usually called,
The Church Covenant.

(VII.)
Though the Substance of the Church Covenant is kept, where there is a real
Agreement of a Company of Faithful Persons, Chap. 4* Arti. 4*
to meet constantly together in one Congregation, for the Public Worship of
God, and their mutual Edification: Which real Agreement they do Express, by
their constant practice in coming together for the Public Worship of God, and
religious Subjection to the Ordinances of God there: Yet this voluntary
Agreement or Covenant, the more Express, it is, the more fully it puts us in
mind of our mutual Duty, and stirs us up to it, and leaves less room for
the questioning the Truth of the Church State of a Company of Professors, and
the Membership of particular persons And all Believers ought as God gives them
opportunity, Chap. 4. Arti. 6.
to endeavor thus to join themselves unto a Particular Church.

(VIII.)
Though there may be the Essence or Being of a Church, Chap 6. Arti. 1. Arti. 2.
Arti. 3. Chap. 7. Arti. 6.
without Officers, yet Officers are Ordinarily necessary to its Well-being: The
Instituting whereof, in the Church, is the work of the Lord Jesus Christ, so
that it is unlawful to place or keep there any Officers which He has not
appointed. And the Ordinary Officers of a Church, are Elders, and Deacons.

(IX.)
Among the Elders, the Paster is to attend unto Exhortation, Chap. 6. Arti. 5.
the Teacher is to attend unto Doctrine; either of them are called alike to
Administer the Seals of the Covenant; and Execute the Censures.

(X)
Ruling Elders, are not to Exclude the Pastors and the Teachers from Ruling;
Chap. 7. Arti. 1.
but their Work is to join with these, in those Acts of Rule which are distinct
from the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; As, Chap. 7. Arti. 2*
in Admitting of Members, and Censuring and Restoring of Offenders, and Calling
the Church together upon occasion, and preparing matters in private for a more
easy and speedy dispatch in public, and Moderating the Carriage of Matters in
the Church Assemblies, and seeing that none in the Church Live disorderly, and
preventing all such Offenses as mightt arise to corrupt the Church, and give
words of Admonition as there may be occasion, and Visit, and advise and pray
with the Flock, especially in Times of Sickness.

(XI.)
The Office of a Deacon, is to Receive the Offerings of the Church, and keep
the Churches Treasury, Chap. 7. Arti. 3.
and therewith to Serve the Tables, which the Church is to provide for: but it
is limited unto the Care of the Temporal Good Things of the Church. And the
Lord has also appointed Ancient Widows, Arti. 7.
(where they may be had) to Serve the Church in giving attendance unto the
Sick, and others in like Necessities.

(XII.)
Officers are to be Tried, and Proved, concerning the Virtues required by the
Scriptures in such Officers before they be Chosen: Chap. 8. Arti. 8
for which it is conducing to the Well being of Churches, Chap. 8. Arti. 5.
Arti. 6.
that Neighbor Churches be advised withal. And they are to be called by those
very Churches whereunto they are to Minister; nor can the Churches become
Subject unto any, but by a Free Election.

(XIII.)
The Officers of the Church, are to be Ordained by Imposition of Hands, Chap.
5. Arti. 1.
with Prayer and Fasting; But yet the Essence and Substance of the outward
Calling of an Ordinary Officer in the Church, does not consist in his
Ordination, but in his Voluntary Election by the Church, and his Accepting of
that Election, whereupon is founded the Relation between a Pastor and his Flock.

(XIV.)
Though in Churches, where there are no Elders, Chap. 9. Arti. 4. Arti. 5.
Imposition of Hands may be performed by some of the Brethren orderly Chosen by
the Church thereto, yet Imposition of Hands may be performed by the Elders of
other Churches.

(XV.)
Church Officers are Officers to One Church, Chap. 9 Arti. 6. Arti. 7.
even that particular One, over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers.
And he that is clearly loosed from his Office Relation unto that Church,
whereof he was a Minister; not be Looked at as an Officer, nor perform any act
of Office in any other Church, unless he be again Orderly Culed unto Office:
Which when it shall be, we know nothing to hinder, Imposition of Hands to be
used toward him again.

(XVI.)
As the Body and Brotherhood of the Church, Chap. 10 Arti. 5.
has the privilege to Choose their own Officers, and Exercises a privilege in
Admitting of their own Members; Arti. 6.
Thus in case an Elder offend incorrigibly, the matter so requiring, the Church
has power according to Order (the Counsel of other Churches, where it may be
had, directing thereto,) to remove him from his Office; and after this, in case
he add further Contumacy, to his Sin, the Church have the same power to cast
him out, that they have concerning any other Member.

(XVII.)
Church Government, Chap. 10 Arti. 7.
or the Ruling of the Church, is by Christ, placed in its Officers, who are
therefore called Rulers, while they Rule with God; and the Duty of the People
is to Obey them, and Submit themselves unto them in the Lord. The power of the
Elders is to Feed and Rule the Church of God, Arti. 8.
and Call the Church together on weighty occasions; and the Brethren then may
not refuse to give attendance; nor may they without sufficient cause Contradict
the Judgment or Sentence of the Elders; unto the Elders also it belongs to
Examine such as are to be received by the Church, Chap. 10 Arti. 9.
and receive Accusations, and prepare them for the Hearing of the Church: And
to declare unto the Church, the Counsel of God, concerning matters before them,
and pronounce the final Sentence, with the Consent of the Church: and, lastly,
to dismiss the People with a Blessing in the Name of the Lord. Arti. 10
All which does not prejudice the privilege of the Brotherhood, but they
sweetly agree together.

(XVIII.)
A sufficient Maintenance for the Ministers of the Gospel, Chap. 11 Arti. 2.
is not a matter of Alms, and Free Gift, but a bounden Duty and due Debt. Yea,
all that are taught in the Word, are to contribute unto him that teaches,
Arti. 4.
in all good Things: And in case that Congregations are defective, the Deacons
are to call upon them, to do their Duty: If their call suffice not, the Church
is to require it of their members.

(XIX.)
The things requisite to be found in all Church Members, Chap 12 Arti. 2.
are Repentance for Sin, and Faith in Jesus Christ; and therefore, these are
the things, whereof men are to be Examined, at their Admission into the Church*
and which then they must Profess and hold forth in such sort, as may satisfy
Rational Charity, that the things are there indeed. Yea, Chap. 12 Arti. 7.
such members of the Church, as were born in it, and were Baptized in their
Minority, by virtue of the Covenant of their Parents, desiring (at years of
Discretion) to be made partakers of the Lords Supper, should, as well as
others, come under this Examination. Arti. 3
But yet the weakest measure of Faith, is to be accepted in those that desire
to be admitted into the Church, because weak Christians, if sincere, have the
Substance of that Faith, Repentance, and Holiness, which is required in Church
members, and such have most need of the Ordinances, for their Confirmation, and
growth in Grace. Severity of Examination is to be avoided.

(XX.)
A Personal and Public Confession, or declaring of Gods manner of Working upon
the Soul, Chap 12 Arti. 5
is both Lawful and Useful in sundry respects; but in case any be unable to
make their Personal Relation of their Spiritual Estate in Public, Arti. 4.
it is sufficient, that the Elders having received private Satisfaction, make
Relation thereof in Public, before the Church, they testifying their Assent
thereunto: This being the way, which tends most unto Edification.

(XXI.)
Church Members may not remove or depart from the Church, Chap. 13 Arti. 1.
and so from one another, as they please, without weighty Causes; about which
the Church it self should be consulted withal. To Separate from a Church, Arti.
2.
out of Contempt of their Holy Fellowship, or out of Coveteousness, giving just
Grief to the Church; or out of Schism, or want of Love; and out of a Spirit of
Contention, in respect of some unkindness, Arti. 5.
or some evil only conceived, or indeed in the Church, which might and should
be born and healed with a Spirit of meekness, and of which evil the Church is
not yet Convinced nor Admonished; For these or the like reasons, to withdraw
from Public Communion, in Word, or Seals, or censures, is unlawful and Sinful.
Arti. 6.
But such Members, as have orderly removed their Habitation, ought to join unto
the Church in order, where they do inhabit: the Examples of some neglecting to
do so, being tolerated, it threatens confusion of Churches. And a Member thus
removing should have Letters Testimonial, Arti. 7.
and of Dismission, from the Church, unto that whereto he desires to be joined.

(XXII.)
If an Offense be private, (one Brother offending another,) the Brother
offended, is privately to Admonish the Offender of it: Chap. 14 Arti. 2.
If the Offender hear not his Brother, the Offended is to take with him one or
two more; If still he hear not, the Offended Brother is, by the mouth of the
Elders, to tell the Church; if yet he be not convinced of his Offense, a
public Admonition is to be dispensed unto him, which does also withold and
suspend him from the Holy Fellowship of the Lords Supper, till his Offense be
removed by paenitent Confession. If he still continue obstinate, they are by
Excommunication to cast him out.

(XXIII.)
If an Offense be more public at first, Chap 14 Arti. 3.
and of a more heinous and criminal Nature, as condemned by the very Light of
Nature, the Church, without such gradual proceeding, is to cast out the
Offender from their Holy Communion. But yet, in dealing with an Offender, our
proceeding must be, Arti. 4.
with a Spirit of Meekness, considering our selves, lest we also be tempted:
and the Winning and Healing the Offenders Soul, (...) also the end of these
Endeavors, we must not heal the Wounds of our Brethren slightly. Chap. 14
Arti. 2
But upon his Repentance, giving of Glory to God, we are to Forgive him, and
Comfort him, and Restore him to the wonted Brotherly Communion.

(XXIV.)
While the offender does remain Excommunicate, Chap. 14 Arti. 5.
the Church is to refrain from their former Communion with him in Spiritual
things: and from all familiar Communion with him, in Civil things also, further
than the necessity of natural, domestic, or Civil Relations, does require.
Arti. 6.
But yet, Excommunication, does not prejudice the Excommunicate in any of his
civil Rights: The liberty of Hearing the Word, may also be permitted unto him:
yea, because we are not without hope of his Recovery, we are still to Admonish
him as a Brother.

(XXV.)
Separation from a Church, wherein Profane and Scandalous Persons are
tolerated, Chap. 14 Arti. 9.
is not presently necessary: It is unreasonable, that a Godly man should
neglect his duty, and punish himself by not coming for his portion in the
Blessing of the Seals, as be ought, because others are suffered to come that
ought not; especially considering that himself does neither consent to their
Sin, nor to their approaching to the Ordinance in their Sin, nor to the neglect
of others who should put them away, but on the contrary, does heartily mourn
for these things, and modestly stir up others to do what ought to be done. If
the Church cannot be reformed, they may use their Liberty.

(XXVI.)
Although Churches be Distinct, Chap. 15 Arti. 1.
and Equal, yet they ought to preserve Church communion one with another, not
only by a mutual care of each others welfare, and Relief and Succor
administered unto each other in various Necessities, but also, in a way of
Consultation: Arti. 2.
and when any Church wants Light or Peace among themselves, it is a way of
Communion of Churches, to meet together, by their Elders and other Messengers,
in a Synod, who having found out the way of Truth and Peace, Arti. 2.
are to commend the same unto the Churches concerned.

(XXVII.)
In case any Public Offense be found in a Church, which either they do not
Discern, Chap 15 Arti. 2
or are slow in using means to Remove, One Church, may without usurpation
Admonish them; and if the Church that lies under Offense, do (...) hearken
unto the Church which does admonish them, that Church is to acquaint other
Neighbour-Churches with that Offense, and of their neglect of the Brotherly
Admonition given unto them. Hereupon, these other Churches, are to join in
Seconding the Admonition formerly given; and if still the Offending Church
continue in Obstinacy* and Impenitency, they may forbear Communion with them;
and are to proceed to make use of the Help of a Synod, or Council of
Neighbour-Churches, walking orderly, (if a greater cannot conveniently be had,)
for their Conviction. If they hear not the Synod, the Synod having declared
them to be obstinate, particular Churches, approving and accepting the Judgment
of the Synod, are to declare the Sentence of Non Communion respectively
concerning them. Nevertheless, if any Members of such a Church as Lives under
public Offense, in due sort bear witness against the Offense, they are still
to be received unto wonted Communion with the Neighbour-Churches: and after due
Waiting, they may (with the allowance of a Council or Neighbor Churches) be
received into some other Church as if they had been orderly Dismissed from
their own.

(XXVIII)
The Members of One Church, Chap. 15 Arti. 2.
occasionally coming to another may be there admitted unto Sacraments; but if
they remove for a Time, Letters of Recommendation, are proper: Chap 13 Arti. ^
and Churches may afford one of their own Ministers, to supply the place of an
absent Minister of another Church for a needful season.

(XXIX)
When a Company of Believers purpose to gather into Church Fellowship, Chap.
13. Arti. 3*
it is requisite for their safer proceeding, and the maintaining of the
Communion of Churches, that they signify their Intent unto the Neighbor*
Churches, walking according unto the Order of the Gospel, and desire their
presence, and help, and Right Hand of Fellowship, which they ought readily to
give unto them, when there is no just cause to except against their proceedings:

(XXX.)
It belongs unto Synods and Councils to debate and determine Controversies of
Faith, and Cases of Conscience; Chap. 16 Arti. 4
to clear from the Word, holy Directions for the Holy Worship of God, and Good
Government of the Church; to bear witness against Male Administration, and
Corruption in Doctrine or Manners, and give directions for the Reformation
thereof? but not to exercise Church Censures in way of Discipline, nor any
other act of Church Authority or Jurisdiction.

(XXXI.)
The Synods Directions and Determinations, so far as consonant unto the Word of
God, are to be received with Reverence and Submission, Chap. 16. Arti. 5.
and this not only for their Agreement therewith, (which is the principal
Ground thereof, and without which they bind not at all) but also secondarily
for the power whereby they are made, as being an Ordinance of God appointed
thereunto in His Word.

(XXXII.)
Because none are or should be more fit to know the State of the Churches, or
to advise of the Ways for the Good thereof, Chap. 16. Article 6.
than Elders, therefore it is fit that in the Choice of the Messengers for
Synods, they have a special respect unto Such; yet, inasmuch as in the Assembly
met at Jerusalem, not only Elders, but other Brethren were assembled, therefore
Synods are to consist, both of Elders, and of other Brethren, Endued with
Gifts, and sent by the Churches: (not Excluding the presence of any Brethren in
the Churches.)

(XXXIII.)
Magistrates have power to Call a Synod, by calling on the Churches to Send
their Elders and other Messengers, Chap. 16. Article 3.
to Counsil and Assist them in Matters of Religion; but yet the Constituting of
a Synod is a Church act, and may be transacted by the Churches, even when the
Civil Magistrates may be Enemies to the Churches and their Assemblies.


