By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas in the Month of November last past, one Henry M^nd^^, Commander of a
Merchant Ship, called, The John Hopewell of London, had his Ship Pyratically
plundered upon the Coast of Guinea, by one Henry King, a notorious Pirate, who
formerly used the Pennsilvania Trade. At the same time there did revolt and run
away with him Nicholas Gil^ebrand, (...), Leonard Rawlins, Edward Atterberry,
Emanuel, a Portaguese, John Saunders, William Parker of Sunderland, John
Ha^us. (...) Francis Brown, a Negro, all Mariners belonging to the said Ship
John Hopewell of London, whereof the said Henry (...) Commander. And whereas it
is supposed that several of the said Pirates are lurking some where within this
and the (...) Provinces I have therefore thought fit, by and with the Advice of
his Majesty's Council, to issue this my Proclamation. (...) all the Majors,
Alder-men, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and all other of his
Majesty's Subjects, in their several and respective Cities, Counties, Towns,
Jurisdictions, Franchises and Precincts within this Province, that they do in
their several and respective Stations, take effectual care for the Apprehending
and Securing (...) and every of the abovenamed Pirates, if any of them shall
be found within their respective places aforesaid, and them to commit to Goal,
so that they may receive such Condign Punishment as the Law directs. And for
the better encouraging of the apprehending and securing of the aforesaid
Pirates, I do further, by and with the Advice aforesaid, Publish and Declare,
That whatever Person or Persons (...) apprehend and secure any of the aforesaid
Pirates, in order to their being brought to Condign Punishment, as aforesaid,
(...) that he or they shall so apprehend and secure, receive the Reward of Ten
Pound current Money of this Province, and the Sum of Thirty Pounds (...)
current Money for the apprehending and securing of the said Henry King, to be
paid by his Majesty's Receiver General for the time being. And all his
Majesty's good Subjects are hereby required to take Notice hereof acordingly.

Given at Fort William Henry the 26 th Day of July, in the Twelfth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque
Domine, 1700. Bellomont.

God Save the KING.
Printed by W. Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty in
New York, 1700.


