ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England: Begun and Held at
Boston, on Wednesday the Twenty ninth of May, 1700.
An Act against Jesuits and Popish Priests.
WHEREAS (...) Jesuits, Priests and Popish Missionaries have of (...) and for
some time have had their residen^e in the remote par^s of this Province, and
other His Majesty's Territory's near adjacent; who by their subtle
^nformations, industriously labor to deban^^, seduce and withdraw the Indians
from their due Obedience unto His Majesty, and to excite and stir them up to
Sedition, Rebellion and open Hostility against His Majesty's Government.

For prevention whereof,

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled: And it is Enacted by the Authority of the same. That
all and every Jesuit, Seminary Priest, Jesuits* Priests etc to depart the
Province by the 10 th. of September.
Missionary, or other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Person made or ordained by
any Authority, Power or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or pretended from the
Pope or See of Rome, now residing within this Province or any part thereof,
shall depart from and out of the same, at or before the tenth day of September
next, in this present year, One Thousand and Seven Hundred

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on J^suits or
Priests etc. that shall remain or come into this Province after the 10 th. of
September. 1700.
That all and every Jesui^, Seminary Priest, Missionary or other Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical person made or ordained by any Authority, Power or Jurisdiction,
derived* challenged or pretended from the Pope or See of Rome, Or that shall
profess himself, or otherwise appear to be such by practicing and teaching of
others to say any Popish Prayers, by celebrating Masses, granting of
Absolutions, or using any other of the Romish Ceremonies and Rites of Worship,
by or of what name, title or degree soever such person shall be called or
known, who shall continue, abide, remain or come in to this Province, or any
part thereof, after the Tenth Day of September aforesaid, shall be deemed and
accounted an incendiary, and disturber of the Public Peace and Safety, and an
Enemy to the true Christian Religion, and shall be adjudged to suffer perpetual
Imprisonment, And if any person being so Sentenced and actually Imprisoned,
shall break prison and make his Escape, and be afterward re^^ken, he shall be
punished with Death.

Penalty for receiving or harboring any Jesuit or Priest.
And further it is Enacted, That every person which shall wittingly and
willingly receive, relieve, harbor, conceal, aid or succor any Jesuit,
Priest, Missionary, or other Ecclesiastical Person of the Romish Clergy,
knowing him to be such, shall be fined Two Hundred Pounds, one moiety thereof
to be unto His Majesty, for and toward the Support of the Government of this
Province, and the other moiety to the Informer; and such person shall be
further punished by being Set in the Pillory on three several days, and also be
bound to the good behavior at the discretion of the Court.

And be it also Enacted, That every Offense to be committed or done against the
Tenor of this Act, How offenses against this Act shall be enquired of and
determined
shall and may be enquired of, heard and determined in the Court of Assiz and
General Goal Delivery, or before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer and Goal
Delivery specially to be appointed, to Sit either within the County where the
Offense is committ^d, or where the Offender is apprehended or taken, or in any
other County within the Province. Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for every (...) of the Peace ^^cause (...) person or persons
suspected of (...) a Jesuit, Justices of the Peace to apprehend persons
suspected to be Jesuits or Priests.
Seminary Prie^^ or of the Rom^sh Clergy to be apprehended and convented before
him^^^f or ^^me other of His Majesty's Justices. And if such person do not ^^ve
a s^^^sfactory account of himself, he shall be committed to Prison in order to
a Trial.

Any person without a warrant may apprehend any Jesuit or Priest.
Also it shall and may be lawful to and for any person or persons to apprehend
without a Warrant any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other of the Romish Clergy as
aforesaid, and to convent him before the Governor, or any two of the Council,
to be Examined and Imprisoned in order to a Trial; unless he give a
satisfactory account of himself.

And as it will be esteemed and accepted as a good Service done for the King by
the person who shall Seiz and apprehend any Jesuit, Priest, Missionary, Reward.
or Romish Ecclesiastic as aforesaid; so the Governor with the Advice and
Consent of the Council may suitably reward him as they shall think fit.

Provided, this Act shall not extend or be construed to extend unto any of the
Romish Clergy which shall happen to be Shipwrackt, Saving for any of the Romish
Clergy that shall be Shipwreckt, etc.
or through other adversity shall be cast on Shore or driven into this
Province, so as he continue or abide no longer within the same than until he
may have opportunity of passage for his departure, so also as such person
immediately upon his arrival shall forthwith attend the Governor if near to
the place of his residence or otherwise on one or more of the Council or next
Justices of the Peace, and acquaint them with his Circumstances, and observe
the directions which they shall give him, during his stay in the Province.

An Act for the Regulating of Prisons, and to prevent Escapes.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority of the same, Prison
keepers to return a List of their Prisoners.
That every Jailer or Keeper of the Kings Prisons within the several Countys in
this Province, at the opening of the Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery,
Court of Oyer and Terminer, and Court of General Sessions of the Peace,
respectively to be holden within such County from time to time, shall return a
List and Certify unto such Court the Names of all Prisoners than in his
Custody, with the cause of their commitment, And also the Names of all other
Prisoners that shall be committed unto him during the Sitting of any such
Court, whereby the Justices of said Courts respectively may take cognizance
thereof, and as well for the King as for the Parties, may proceed to make
deliverance of such Prisoners according to Law, for the Crimes proper to the
Jurisdiction of such Court: On pain that every Jailer or Prison Keeper for each
default by him made in that respect, shall forfeit such Sum as shall be set
upon him, by the Justices of the Court, not exceeding Ten Pounds.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever br^^keth
Person or shall make his Escape from an Officer, Prison breach or flight to be
accounted ^ o^e Evidence.
after his being Arrested or Imprisone^ for any Crime, his breach in Prison or
Flight shall be accounted and esteemed in the (...) other Evidence to Convict
him of the Crime wherewith he stands charged, in the Warrant for his Apprehend
on or Commitment.

And if any person whatsoever, Penalty on persons that shall convey any
Instrument or Tool into the Prison.
shall directly or indirectly by any ways or means howsoever convey any
Instrument, Tool or other thing whatsoever to any Prisoner, or into the Prison,
whereby such Prisoner or any other Prisoner either* may or might break Prison,
or work him or her self unlawfully out of the same, every person so offending,
and being thereof convicted, shall forfeit and pay such Fine, as by the
discretion of the Court shall be Imposed and set upon such Offender according
to the nature of the cause of the Prison^s C^mmitment, not exceeding Twenty
Pounds, or suffer corpral punishment by Whipping, not exceeding Twenty Stripes.

And if i^ happen any Prisoner or Prisoners to make his or their Escape by
means of any Instrument, Further Penalty in case any Prisoner by means of such
Inst^ument etc. do Escape.
Tool or other thing conveyed as aforesaid, the person or persons conveying the
same, shall be fined not exceeding Five Hundred Pounds, or be corporally
punished by Whipping, not exceeding Thirty Nine Stripes, and find Sureties for
the good behavior du^ring the space of one year at the discretion of the Court
according to the nature of the Crime or Crimes wherewith the Prisoner or
Pris^ne^s stood charged in their Mi^timu^s or Warran^s of Commitment, and other
circumst^nces aggravating the Offense. And if any Prisoner or Prisoners so
escaping shall stand Convict of any Capital-Crime, the person or persons
assisting or fur^h^ring their Escape as aforesaid, over and above their being
fined or co^^orally punished as before is directed and bound to the behavior*
shall also be stigmatized or burned in the Forehead or on the Cheek, with a hot
Iron of the figure of the Letter B.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Pris^ner or
Priso^ers so Escaping were Imprisoned for Debt, Escape of Prisoners for debt.
the person or pe^s^ns assisting and furthering their Escape as aforesaid,
shall be liable to pay the full Debt owing to the Creditor or Creditors at
whose Suit such Prisoner or Prisoners stood committed, to be recovered by
action or actions upon the Case therefore to be brought against the person or
persons so offending as aforesaid, who shall also be fined or corporally
punished as aforesaid, at the discretion of the Court, not exceeding the fine
or punishment beforementioned.

And be it further Enacted, That every Jailer or Prison Keeper, that shall
voluntarily suffer any Prisoner or Prisoners committed to his Custody to
Escape, Penalty on the Jailer for a voluntary Escape.
upon due conviction thereof, shall undergo and suffer the like pains and
penalties as the Prisoner or Prisoners so escaping should by Law for the Crime
or Crimes wherewith he or they stood charged by the Warrant or Warrants of
Commitment, if the Prisoner or Prisoners had thereof been convict.

Provided, That if any person assisting and furthering the Escape of any
Prisoner in manner as aforesaid, or if the Keeper of the Prison that shall
voluntarily suffer to Escape as aforesaid, Proviso.
shall by any ways o^ means recover any Prisoner or Prisoners so escaping, and
return them back to Prison again before prosecution had, and Judgment entered up
against such person or Prison Keeper for such Escape, (which shall not be until
six months past next after the Escape,) in such case the person or Prison
Keeper so offending shall be liable to no further punishment than to pay such
Fine as the Court that shall have cognizance thereof, in their discretion shall
think fit to set upon him, according (...) the offense may be aggravated by the
circumstances attending the same, and the degree of the Crime wherewith the
Prisoner stands charged.

And in case the escape of any Prisoner happen through the negligence of the
Jailer or Prison Keeper, For a negligent Escape.
he shall pay such Fine as the Justices of the Court in their discretion before
whom the Prosecution shall be, shall impose and set upon him according to the
nature or degree of the offense for which the Prisoner escaping was taken and
imprisoned* And i^ the Prisoner so escaping were Imprisoned for Debt, the
Prison Keeper shall be answerable to the Creditor for the full Debt, and he
shall have his remedy against the Prisoner.

All fines and forfeitures arising by virtue of this Act, shall be applied to
and for the repairing, maintaining and upholding of the Prison within the
County where the offense shall be committed, Fines and Forfeitures how to be
applied
And be paid in to the County Treasurer to be employed accordingly and not
otherwise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where the Escape of
any Prisoner or Prisoners for Debt shall happen through the defect or
insufficiency of any Prison from and after the twenty fifth day of March next,
Escape of debtors through defect of the Prisons to be answered by the County.
in the year One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, the County shall make good
such Debt as the Prisoner so escaping did justly owe unto the Creditor or
Creditors, at whose Suit he was Imprisoned, and the County shall have their
remedy against the Prisoner.

And further it is Enacted, That there be sufficient Prisons forthwith provided
within the several Counties, and from time to time kept so. And that the said
Prisons be Erected and Maintained in the Shire, or County Town of each County
respectively, Prisons to be Erected in each Shire or County Town.
and in such other Towns as the Court of General Sessions shall see needful.
And the Court of General Sessions of the Peace holden in the several Counties
are to give effectual Order thereabout.

Any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act relating unto the Office and Duty of a Coroner.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, Coroners to take Inquests on dead bodies.
and by the Authority of the same, That every Coroner within the County for
which he is appointed, shall be, and hereby is Empowered* to take Inquest's of
Felonies, and other violent and casual deaths committed, or happening within his
Precincts.

And before he undertake the Execution of his said Office, shall take the
following Oath for his due and faithful performance thereof, To be Sworn
before the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, or any two or more of the Council,
or such other person or persons as shall be thereto appointed by the Governor.

That is to say,

YOU Swear, That well and truly you shall Serve Our Sovereign Lord the King,
Coroners Oath.
in the Office of a (...) and as one of His Majesty's Coroners of the County of
S And therein you shall truly and diligently do and accomplish all and every
thing and things appertaining to your Office, after the best of your cunning
wit and power for the profit and good of the Inhabitants within the said
County; taking such Fees as you ought to take by Law, and no^ otherwise. So
help you God.



And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so soon as
any Coroner shall be Certified of the dead Body of any person supposed to have
come to a violent and untimely death, Coroner to make out warrants for Jurors.
found or lying within his County or Precinct, he shall make out his Warrant
directed unto the Constables of the same Town where such dead body lies, or of
three or four of the next adjacent Towns, (if need be) Requiring them forthwith
to Summon a Jury of good and lawful men of the same Town, or such number as
shall be sufficient with those sent for from the Neighboring Towns to make up
Eighteen in all, to appear before him at time and place in the said Warrant
expressed, which Warrant shall be made in this form, viz.

Suffolk ss. To the Constables of B. Or to any or either of them. (...)
Greeting.
THese are in His Majesty's Name to Require you immediately upon the receipt
and sight hereof to Summon and Warn (...) good and lawful men of the said Town,
to be and appear before me, Form of the Warrant.
one of the Coroners of the said County of S (...) at (...) house or place
(...) within the said Town of B (...) betwixt the hours of (...) and (...) of
the Clock in the (...) noon of this present (...) day of (...) then and there
to enquire upon the view of the Body of a certain person there lying dead, how
and in what manner he came to his death; Fail not herein at your peril as you
will answer the contrary. Given under my Hand and Seal at B (...) the (...) day
of (...) In the Year of our Lord (...) And in the (...) Year of His Majesty's
Reign.

By me W. G. one of the Coroners of the County above said.



And every Constable unto whom any such Warrant shall come, shall forthwith
Execute the same, Constables to Execute the Coroners Warrant.
and repair unto the place at the time therein mentioned, and make return of
the Warrant, with his doings therein unto the Coroner th^^ granted the same.

And every Constable failing of performing his duty by such Warrant required of
him, or returning the same as aforesaid, shall forfeit the Sum of Forty
Shillings Also every person Summoned and Warned to be a Juror failing to appear
accordingly* Penalty for default.
shall also forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings, without a reasonable excuse for
the same be made unto, and allowed of by the Coroner. Penalty for Jurors default
The aforesaid several Fines or Forfeitures to be to and for the de^^eving of
the Charges arising and happening within the same County, and toward the (...)
the necessary Charges of the Coroner and Jurors, to be recovered by Action,
Fines how to be applied.
Bill, Plaint or Information, therefore to be brought by the Coroner in any of
his Majesty's Courts (...).

And the Coroner shall Swear (...) or more of the Jurors that appear, and give
the Foreman (to be by him appointed) his Oath upon view of the Body in this
Form. That is to say,

YOU shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make on the behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King, how and in what manner A. B. here lying dead came to
his death: Jurors Oath.
And you shall deliver up to me His Majesty's Coroner a true Verdict thereof
according to such Evidence as shall be given to you, and according (...) your
knowledge. So help you God.



And then shall Swear the rest of the Jurors by three or four at once in this
Form, viz.

ALL such Oath as I. M. the Foreman of this Inquest for his part has taken,
You and every one of you shall well and truly observe and keep on your parts.
So help you God.



The Jury being Sworn, the Coroner shall give them a charge upon their Oaths to
declare of the death of the person, whether he dyed of* Felony, or by mischance
and accident? And if of Felony, whether of his own or of another? Coroners
charge to the Jurors
And if b^ mischance or misfortune, whether by the act of God, or of man? And
if he dyed of another Felony, who were principals and who ac^essaries? Who
threatened him of his life or members* with what Instrument he was struck or
wounded, and so of all prevailing circumstances that can come by Presumption.

And if by Mischance or Accident, by the act of God or man, whether by hurt,
fall, stroke, drowning or otherwise, to enquire o^ the persons that were
present, the finders of the Body, his Relations or Neighbors: Whether he was
killed in the same place or elsewhere; And i^ elsewhere, by whom, and how he
was thence brought, and of all other circumstances.

And if he dyed of his own Felony, then to enquire of the manner, means or
Instrument, and circumstances concurring.

After the Jury being charged, Proclamation to be made.
they must stand together and let Proclamation be made for any that can give
Evidence, to draw near, and they shall be heard.

And every Coroner is hereby further Empowered to send out his Warrant for
Witnesses, commanding them to come to be Examined before him, Warrant to be
sent out for Witnesses.
and to declare their knowledge concerning the matter in question. And to
administer an Oath unto the Witnesses in this Form. That is to say,

ALL such Evidence as you shall give to this Inquest concerning the death of A.
B. here lying dead, shall be the truth, Witnesses Oath.
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. So help you God.



The Examination of such Witnesses to be taken in Writing under their hands.
And if they relate to tho Trial of any person concerning the death of the party
found dead, then shall tha Coroner bind over, such Witnesses by Recogniscance
in a reasonable Sum, Witnesses to be bound over.
not less than Twenty Pounds a piece, personally to appear at the next Assizes,
or Court of Oyer and Terminer and Goal Delivery to be holden within the same
County, then and there to testify their knowledge concerning the death of the
said A. B. And the Jury having viewed the Body, heard the Evidence and made
what Enquiry they can into the manner and causes of the death of the person,
they shall draw up and (...) unto the Coroner their Verdict thereupon in
writing under their Seals in manner following; which shall pass by Indenture
interchangeably betwixt the Coroner and the Jury.

That is to say,

Suffolk ss.
AN Inquisition Indented, taken at B. (...) within the said County of S (...)
the (...) day of (...) in the (...) Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
(...) by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, Inquisition.
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Before T. E. Gent. one
of the Coroners of our said Lord the King within the County of S. (...)
aforesaid, upon view of the Body of A. B. of B. (...) aforesaid (...) then and
there being dead, by the Oaths of I. W. R. W. H. P. T. A. S. B. I. K. L S. E.
H. R. G P D. C. M. S. O. G. B and N. S. good and lawful men of B. (...)
aforesaid (...) within the County aforesaid; who being Charged and Sworn to
Inquire for our said Lord the King, when, by what means, and how the said A. B.
came to his death. Upon their Oaths do say, etc.



Then insert, how, where, at what time, by what means, with what Instrument,
and in what manner, the party was killed, or came by his death.

And if it appear the person to have been killed and murdered by another that
is known.

The Inquisition must be concluded after this manner, viz.

And so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oaths aforesaid, say, That the
aforesaid R. S. in manner and form aforesaid, the aforsaid A. B. then and there
feloniously did kill and murder against the peace of Our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity.



If it appear to be Self-murder, the Inquisition must conclude after this
manner, viz.

And so the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oaths, That the said A. B. in
manner and form aforesaid, then and there voluntarily and feloniously, as a
Felon of himself did kill and murder himself, against the Peace of Our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

If it appear the person to be Slain by misfortune, the Inquisition must
conclude after this manner, viz.

And so the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oaths, That the aforesaid A. B. in
manner and form aforesaid, was killed, or came to his death by misfortune.



If by the hands or means of any other person; thus, viz.

The aforesaid R. F. the aforesaid A. B. by misfortune and contrary to his will
in manner and form aforesaid, did Kill and Slay. In Witness whereof as well I
the Coroner aforesaid, as the Jurors aforesaid to this Inquisition have
interchangeably put our Hands and (...) the day and year above said.



And the Coroner shall make return of all such Inquisitions taken before him
unto the Justices of Assize, Oyer and Terminer and Goal Delivery.

Also upon any Verdict ^ound of the death of a person by the Felony or
misfortune of another, shall speedily Inform one or more of the next Justices
of the Peace thereof, to the intent, That such person killing, or being any
ways instrumental to the death of another, may be apprehended Examined and
Secured in order to a Trial.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That over and above the
Fee already allowed by Law, the Coroner shall be allowed the Sum of Ten
Shillings Per Diem for his Travail and Expenses upon every Inquisition by him
taken, Fees.
and every Juror attending the said Service shall be allowed Two Shillings Per
Diem, which allowances shall be paid out of the Estate of the Dead person, or
by the Parent or Master where any Apprentice or Child under Age shall happen to
be killed. And in want thereof to be paid by the County Treasurer, out of the
Treasury of such County; Upon Representation thereof made by the Coroner to the
Quarter Sessions.

And every Coroner within the County for which he is appointed, shall be, and
hereby is Empowered to Serve and Execute all Writs and Processes, directed unto
him against the Sheriff or Marshal of the same County; Coroners to Serve
Writts, etc.
And to return Jurors de talibus circumstantibus, where need shall be, to fill
up the Jury or Juries, in all causes wherein the Sheriff or Marshal is
concerned, or related to either of the parties in any cause. And shall have the
like Fee for Serving of Writts in Civil Causes as is allowed by Law unto the
Sheriff.

An Act providing for Posthumus Children.
FORASMUCH as it often happens that Children are not born till after the death
of their Fathers, and also have no provision made for them in their Wills.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
Posthumus Children to have a proportion, etc.
That as often as any Child shall happen to be born after the death of the
Father without having any provision made in his Will, every such Posthumus
Child shall have Right and Interest in the Estate of his or her Father, in like
manner as if he had died Intestate* and the same shall accordingly be assigned
and set out as the Law directs for the distribution of the Estates of
Intestates.

And whereas through the anguish of the deceased Testatur; or through his
solici^ous intention though in health; or through the oversight of the Scribe,
some of the Testators Children are omitted and not mentioned in the Will; Many
Children also being born after the making of the Will, though in the life time
of their Parents.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, And such (...) have no
Legacy given them*
That any Child or Children not having a Legacy given them in the Will of their
Father or Mother, every such Child shall have a proportion of the Estate of
their Parents given and set out unto them as the Law directs for the
distribution of the Estates of Intestates.

Provided, Such Child or Children have not (...) an equal proportion of his
Estate bestowed on them by the Father in his Lifetime.

And whereas it sometimes happens that a man having formerly made his Will,
Widows not to be prejudiced by Wills made before Marriage.
does afterward marry a Wife, and then dies; and the Will comes to be proved,
to the injury of such Wife: In all such Cases, the Widow shall have such
proportion of her late Husbands Estate assigned her, as if he had died
Intestate, as the Law directs for the distribution of the Estates of Intestates.

Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, That nothing in this Law shall extend to any Estate disposed of by
Will, already Settled.

An Act in addition to the Act for the equal distribution of Insolvent Estates.
WHEREAS in and by the Act Entitled, An Act, For the equal Distribution of
Insolvent Estates made and past in the ^^ghth Year of His Present Majesty's
Reign, amongst other things therein contained: It is Enacted, That every Judge
of Probate of Wills, and granting Administrations within the respective
Counties, be, and thereby is fully Authorized and Empowered to call before him,
and to require and administer an Oath unto any person or persons probably
suspected by any Executor or Administrator to have concealed, imbezel'd or
conveyed away any of the Money, Goods or Chattels left by the Testator* or
Intestate for the discovery of the same. And in case any such suspected person
was betrusted by the person deceased, attended upon, or was otherwise
conversant with or near unto him in the time of Sickness, or left in possession
of the Estate whereby to strengthen and make the suspicion more violent, and
shall refuse to clear and acquit him or her self upon Oath. It shall and may be
lawful for, and the Judge is Empowered to commit such person so refusing to
Swear, unto the Goal of the County, there to remain until he or she shall
comply to discharge him or her self upon Oath as aforesaid, or be released by
consent of the Executor or Administrator.

And whereas it has been observed, That sometimes Executors or Administrators
have neglected their duty or been too favorable in not complaining of persons
of whom there has been just suspicion of making concealments, imbezelments, or
conveying away part of the Estate belonging to their Testator or Intestate,
whereby great wrong and injury has (...).

For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That every Judge of
Probate, be, and hereby is alike Empowered to call before him, and to require
and administer an Oath unto any person or persons probably suspected of making
any concealment, All persons ^^^erested (...) complain of Imbezelment.
imbezelment or conveying away any of the Moneys, Goods or Chattels of any
person deceased, as well upon the complaint of any (...), Creditor, Legatary,
or other person having lawful right or (...) to or in such Estate, as of the
Executor or Administrator. And in case the party suspected (such suspicion
being strengthened and made more violent for any of the causes before mentioned)
shall refuse to discharge him or her self upon Oath, thou to proceed against
them by Imprisonment as the before recited Act directs. Saving to any person
agrieved, the liberty of an Appeal from any such Sentence to the Governor and
Council, the Appellant giving Security to prosecute such Appeal with effect in
manner as is by Law directed.

An Act Prohibiting the Exportation of Raw Hides, Upper-Leather, and Tanned
Calve-Skins, from out of this Province, other than for England.
WHEREAS the frequent Shipping out of this Province, Raw-Hides, Upper-Leather,
and Tanned Calve Skins, for Holland and other Places, has been much to the
Damage of this Province, not only by reason of the choicest of said Hides and
Upper-Leather going off: but the great quantities; That many times the
Necessity of the Province cannot be supplied.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth no Raw Hides,
Upper Leather, or Tanned Galve-Skins, To give Bond to Land in England,
be laden on Board any Ship or Vessel, before the Master give Bond to the
Commissioner for Impost or Receiver for the time being to the val^^ of Five
Hundred Pounds, with sufficient Surety, that the same shall be by the said Ship
or Vessel carried for England, Wales, Port or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and
no other place, and be there Landed, and put on Shore (the Danger of the Seas
only Excepted) and shall in Eighteen Months time return a Certificate of the
same. And if any shall pr^^^me, Hides otherwise laden to be forfeit.
to lade on board any Ship or Vessel, any Raw-Hides, Upper Leather, or Tanned
Calve Skins, before Bond be given as aforesaid, he shall forfeit the same, and
the Master of the Vessel shall forfeit the value of all such Raw-Hides, Leather
or Tanned Calve Skins that he shall know to be on board such Vessel.

And if any Ship or Vessel, shall carry from out of this Province, any Raw
Hides, Upper-Leather or Tanned Calve-Skins before Bond given as aforesaid*
Master knowing of it, to forfeit double the value.
or any Seiz^^e be made: Every Master of such Vessel knowing thereof, shall
forfeit and pay double the value of the same, and the Shipper doub^^ the value
of what shall be so Shipped. Provided that Information (...) or Prosecution for
the same be had and made within the space of Eighteen Months next after the
Offense committed, and not afterward.

The before mentioned several Forfeitures, to be (...) by Action, ^^ll, Plaint
or Information in any of His Majesty's Co^^^^ of Record, within this Province,
and to be employed and disposed of, one half thereof for and toward the
Support of His Majesty's Government within the same, and the other half to him
or them that shall Inform and Sue for the (...).

And it shall and may be lawful to and for every Justice of the Peace, upon
Information given of any (...) Hides, Upper Leather, or Tanned Calve-Skins
laden or put on board any Ship or Vessel, and (...) not given as aforesaid, to
Issue out his Warrant under his Hand* I S^^l, directed to the Water Bailiff, or
to the Sheriff or his Deputy or Constable, requiring them respectively to make
Sei^ure of any such Raw Hides, Upper Leather or Tanned Calve Skins Shipped as
aforesaid, and to Secure them in order to Trial, who are hereby respectively
empowered and required to Execute such Warrant.

An Act for the continuing and further granting unto His Majesty several Duties
of Impost and Tunage of Shipping.
WHEREAS the Act Entitled, An Act, For (...) the Duties of Impost granted at
the Session of the General Assembly, begun and held the Twenty fifth day of
May, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight, And for granting of other Duties of
Impost instead (...) and past at the Second Session of the said General
Assembly, continued by Pro^^gation unto Tuesday the Fifteenth of November
following, in the T^^th Year of His Present Majesty's Reign, is near Expiring.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That the before recited Act, Entitled, An Act, For discontinuing the Duties of
Impost granted at the Session of the General Assembly begun and held the Twenty
fifth day of May, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight: And for granting of
other Duties of Impost instead thereof, And all and singular the Paragraphs,
Articles, Clauses, Powers, Penalties and Forfeitures, and other matters and
things in the said Act contained, Except such as in and by this present Act are
altered, repealed, or otherwise provided and directed. Be, and are hereby
revived and further continued to be exercised, paid, demanded, recovered and
applied to and for the uses in the aforesaid Act mentioned, for and during the
full time here^^ alter set for the continuance of this present Act.

And it is further Enacted, That for every Hundred Pound Sterling in English
Merchandises at the prime cost in England, over and above the Sum of Ten
Shillings by the said Act provided to be paid, there be paid Ten Shillings more
to make up Twenty Shillings in the whole for every Hundred Pounds Sterling in
English Merchandises at the prime cost in England.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be paid
by the Master of every Ship or other Vessel above twelve Tuns coming into any
Port or Ports of this Province to Trade or Traffic, the major part of the
Owners whereof are not belonging to this Province, every Voyage such Ship or
Vessel does make, the Sum* of Twelve (...) per Ton, or one pound of good and
new Gun powder for every Tun such Ship or Vessel is in burden, to be paid unto
the Commissioner of Receiver of the Duties of Impost, and to (...) ^mployed for
the supply of His Majesty's Castle and For^^ (...) this Province. And the said
Commissioner is hereby empowered to appoint a meet and suitable person to repair
unto, and on board any such Ship or Vessel, to take the exact Measure and
Tunage thereof, in case he shall suspect that the Register of such Ship or
Vessel does not express and set forth the full burden of the same. The charge
thereof to be paid by the Ma^ter or Owner of such Ship or Vessel before she be
Cleared, in case she appear to be of greater burden; otherwise to be paid out
of the Public Treasury. And the said Commissioner and Receiver for his labor,
care and expenses in the management of his Office and what relates thereto,
shall have and receive out of the Public Treasury, the Sum of Seventy Pounds;
his Deputy or Deputies to be paid for their Service, such Sum and Sums as the
said Commissioner with the Treasurer shall agree upon reasonable Terms.

And further it is Enacted, That the Naval Officer within any of the Ports of
this Province, shall not Clear or give Passes to any Master of any Ship or
other Vessel outward bound on any pretense whatsoever, until such Master shall
produce and show forth unto him a Certificate under the Hand of the
Commissioner and Receiver of the Impost, that the Impost and other Duties for
the Goods last Imported in such Ship or Vessel are paid, or secured to be paid.

Provided, That this (...) shall (...) in force from the Publication thereof,
until the Twenty Ninth Day of June, which will be in the Year of our Lord, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and One, and no longer.

An Act for Granting unto His Majesty, an Excise upon Wines, Liquors and Strong
Drink Sold by Retail.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, taking into Consideration the
growing Charges of the Province; for Support of the Government thereof, and
d^freying of the incident and contingent Charges in and about the same; for the
subsisting and paying of the Soldiers belonging to the Garrison on
Castle-Island near Boston; to Fort-Mary at Saco; and such as shall be employed
in His Majesty's Service for and within this Province; for the payment of the
Salaries and Allowances to the Officers employed in and about the Execution of
this Act; and such other Salaries and Allowances as have been or shall be made
by the General Assembly, or directed by any Act thereof to be made out of the
Public Treasury. Have Cheerfully and Unanimously given and granted, and do
hereby give and grant unto His Most Excellent Majesty, for the ends, uses and
intents aforesaid and no other, an Excise upon a^l Wines, Brandy, Rhum, and
other distilled Liquors, Beer, Ale, Perry and Cider that shall be Sold by
Retail, in any Town or place within this Province, according to the several
Rates herein after-mentioned and expressed: And pray that it may be Enacted.

And be it accordingly Enacted by His Excellency, the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That from and after the Twenty Ninth Day of June, in this present year One
Thousand Seven Hundred, for and during the space of one whole year from thence
next Ensuing. Every person Licensed for Retailing of Wine, Brandy, Rhum or
other distilled Liquors, Beer, Ale, Perry or Cider, shall pay in current money
of this Province the Duties of Excise following. That is to say,

For every Gallon of Common Wines of the Western Islands, the Sum of Four Pence.

For every Gallon of Passado, Malago, Malmsey, Canary or Sherry Wines, Duties
of Excise.
the Sum of Eight pence.

For every Gallon of Madera, Port Wine, or other Wines not of any of the sorts
before mentioned, the Sum of Six pence.

For every Gallon of Rhum and all other sorts of distilled Spirits, the Sum of
Eight pence.

For every Barrel of Beer, Ale, Perry and Cider, the Sum of Twelve-pence.

And after the same rate for any greater or lesser quantities.

And for the due and orderly collecting and receiving of the Excise aforesaid.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person
and persons Licensed, or that during the space of one year from the said Twenty
ninth day of June, Licensed persons to k^^p ^n account of all Liquors etc.
which they shall have in their houses, on the 29 of June.
in this present year One Thousand Seven Hundred shall be Licensed to Retail
Wine, Brandy, Rhum or other distilled Liquors, Beer, Ale, Perry, or Cider,
shall keep a true and exact Account of all such Wine, Brandy, Rhum or distilled
Liquors, Beer, Ale, Perry or Cider, which such person or persons on the said
Twenty ninth day of June, shall have in his, her, or their House* or
dependencies thereof, or other place or places for Sale, or which such person
or persons at any time or times within the space of one year from the said
Twenty ninth day of June, shall make, brew, distill, buy, take or receive into
his her, or their Houses, Cellars or Dependencies thereof, or into the Houses,
Cellars, Vaults, Rooms or other place or places of or belonging to any other
person or persons for Sale: And that such Licensed person or persons shall at
the end and expiration of every three months successively from the twenty ninth
day of June aforesaid, render unto the Commissioner for Excise within such
County to be appointed as is hereafter mentioned, or the Officer or Officers
which he shall employ under him for that purpose, an Account upon Oath of all
Wines, Brandy, Rhum or distilled Liquors, And of that they shall further take
in etc.
Beer, Ale, Perry or Cider, by such person or persons made, brewed, distilled,
bought, taken or received as aforesaid for Sale at any time or times within the
said space of three months next foregoing or which at the beginning of such
three months, such person or persons, had in his, her or their Houses, Cellars
or other place or places as aforesaid for Sale, and no account thereof before
rendered. Which Oath to the Accounts of such Licensed person or persons shall be
made before the Commissioner for Excise, or any Justice or Justices of the
peace.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person and
persons Licensed or to be Licensed as aforesaid, for the Retailing of Wines, To
pay the duties to the Commissioners.
Liquors or Strong Drink, shall at the time of rendering his, her or their
Account as above mentioned, pay unto the Commissioner for Excise in the same
County, or other Officer or Officers to be employed under him for that purpose,
all such Sum and Sums of money as shall then have grown due from him, her or
them for the Excise of Wines, Liquors or strong Drink made, brewed, distilled,
bought, taken in or received by him, her or them for Sale, according to the
Ra^es herein before expressed: Saving, That Allowance shall be made such person
or persons of Five and Twenty Per Cent. for Waste and Leakage, which the
Commissioner for Excise in each respective County* or his Officer or Officers
as aforesaid, is hereby ordered and directed to allow unto such person or
persons accordingly. And every Licensed person or persons as aforesaid, that
shall neglect to render his, Penalty for neglect.
her or their Accounts, and pay his, her or their Excise in manner and time as
is herein before provided, shall thereby forfeit the Recogniscance by Law
appointed to be taken of such person or persons, for his, her or their payment
of the Duties of Excise according to Law, for his, her or their Draught. Which
Recogniscances the Commissioner for Excise in any County by himself or his
lawful Substitute or Substitutes is hereby empowered to put in Suit on His
Majesty's behalf against all and every Licensed person and persons so failing
as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
appointed for the Collecting and Receiving of the Duties of Excise granted by
the Act of the General Assembly past at their Session begun and ^eld the Thirty
first day of May, ^^^^issio^^^s power to Sue.
One thousand six hundred ninety nine, shall be and are hereby empowered to Sue
for and recover any Sum or Sums of Money, due or to be due from any Retailer or
Retailers according to said Act, notwithstanding the expiration of the same, in
as full and ^mple (...) as they might have done, during the year wherein the
same was of (...).

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid* That th^^e be one fit
person in each County respectively and (...) and chosen by this Court,
^^mmissio^^^s to be appointed for collecting the said duties.
to be Commissioner and (...) Duties of Excise, and to have the general
inspection, care and management of that Office, and of whatsoever relates
thereunto, within said respective Counties; Each of which Commissioners shall
receive Commission for the said Office from the Governor, with Authority to
nominate, appoint, employ and empower, such and so many Officers under him, as
he shall think necessary, for the Collecting and receiving the Duties of Excise
aforesaid within the County for which he shall be Commissionated. And the said
Commissioners and all other Officers under them, before their entering upon the
Execution of their respective Offices shall be Sworn to deal truly and
faithfully therein. And the said Commissioners shall also keep fair Books of
all duties arising by virtue of this Act, which shall (...) open at all
seasonable times to the view and perusal of the Treasurer and Receiver General
of this Province, with whom they shall likewise Account for all Collections and
Payments; and pay in all such Moneys as shall be in their hands, unto the said
Treasurer, as he shall demand it. And the said Commissioners for their labor,
Commissioners allowance.
care and expenses in the said Office, shall have and receive the Sum of Two
Shillings on the Pound for all such Sum and Sums as shall be Collected and
Received by them respectively by virtue of this Act, for their own Service,
Pains and Expenses, and the payment of all Officers employed under them,
Excepting the Commissioner for the County of Suffolk, who shall have One
Shilling on the Pound for such Sums Collected

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person that
shall presume to Sell any Wine, Brandy, Rhum, or other distilled Liquors, Beer,
Ale, Perry or Cider, by retail, Penalty for Selling without License.
without having License according to Law for the same, shall forfeit and pay
the Sum of Four Pounds, one half thereof to the Informer, and the other half to
and for the use and support of a Free Grammar or Writing School or Schools in
the Town where the Offense shall be committed: And in case there be not any
such School in the Town where the Offense shall be committed, then to the use
of any such School in the Town next adjacent, and that any justice of the Peace
be, and hereby is Empowered to hear and determine any such Offense or Offenses.
Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in force for the space of one whole
year from and after (...) Twenty Ninth Day of June, in this present Year One
Thousand Seven Hundred, and no longer.

An Act for preventing abuses to the Indians.
WHereas some of the principal and best disposed Indians within this Province,
have represented and complained of the Exactions and Oppression, which some of
the English exercise toward the Indians, by drawing them to consent to,
covenant or bind themselves or Children Apprentices or Servants for an
unreasonable term, on pretense of, or to make satisfaction for some small debt
contracted, or damage done by them.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Enacted and Declared by His Excellency the Governor Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same*
That from and after the Publication of this Act, no Indian shall c^n^^act, No
Indian to be put out Apprentice but by the allowance of two Justices.
or put or bind him or her self or Child Appren^^^^ or a Servant to any of His
Majesty's Subjects, for any time of term o^ years, but by and with the
Allowance and Approbation of two or more of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, who are required to take special care that the Contract or Covenant so
to be made, and the condition or terms thereof be equal and reasonable both
with respect to the time for Service and otherwise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
General Sessions of the Peace within the respective Counties, Sessions of the
Peace to hear and relieve such as are ^grie^ed.
be and hereby are empowered upon complaint made by any Indian Native of this
Country, that is or shall be agrieved by reason of any Indenture, Covenant or
Agreement heretofore made for any time or term of Service, not yet expired; to
hear and relieve such Indian according to Justice and Equity, and to regulate
and order the time for such Service, as they shall judge reasonable.

An Act in addition to the Act for due Regulation of Weights and Measures.
FOR Remedying of Unrighteousness and Oppression in dealing by the use of
Measures that are not of due breadth for Meal, Fruits and other things usually
Sold by h^ap.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all Measures by
which Meal, Fruits, and all other things usually Sold by heap, shall be Sold,
be conformable as to bigness to the declared Public allowed Standards
mentioned in the Act made and passed by the General Assembly in the Year One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Two, Entitled, An Act, For due Regulation of
Weights and Measures: And shall be of the full breadths following: That is to
say, The Bushel not less within side then Eighteen Inches and half wide. The
half Bushel not less than Thirteen Inches and three quarters wide. The wedth of
Measures for things Sold by heap.
The Peck not less than Ten Inches and three quarters wide. And the half Peck
not less than Nine Inches wide.

And if any person at any time from and after the first day of October next,
after the Publication of this Act, shall Sell, expose to Sale, or offer any
Meal, Fruits or other things usually Sold by heap, by any other measure than is
a^orementioned as to bigness and breadth. Such person being complained of, and
convicted before any Justice of the Peace of so doing shall forfeit and pay to
the use of the Poor of the Town where the Offense is commit^ed, Penalty for
Selling by other Measures.
the full value of the Meal, Fruits or other things so sold or offered to Sale;
and such Justice may commit the Offender to Prison until payment be made of the
said Forfeiture, or cause the same to be levied by Warrant of Distress and paid
in unto the Town Treasurer or Overseers of the Poor to the use of the Poor as
aforesaid, and shall also ca^se such Measure to be de^aced. Any Law, Usage or
Cust^^ to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for Reviving, and continuing of the Act Entitled, An Act for giving
necessary supplies to the Eastern Indians, and for Regulating of Trade with them
WHEREAS the Act Entitled, An Act for giving necessary Supplies to the Eastern
Indians, and for Regulating of Trade with them, made and passed by the General
Assembly of this Province in the Eleventh year of His present Majesty's Reign,
is near expiring.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority
of the same, That the aforesaid Act, Entitled, An Act for giving necessary
Supplies to the Eastern Indians, and for Regulating of Trade with them; and all
and singular the Paragraph's, Clauses and Ar^icles thereof, Powers, Penalties,
Forfeitures, matters and things therein contained, be, and hereby are revived
and further continued to abide and remain in full force, and to be exercised,
practiced and put in Execution for the ends, uses and purposes therein
mentioned, until the end of the Session of the Great and General Court or
Assembly to be convened, held and kept on the last Wednesday of May next, which
will be in the Year of our Lord God, One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, and no
longer.


