A Cloud of Witnesses; Darting out Light upon a CASE, too Unseasonably made
Seasonable to be Discoursed on.
THE CASE before us, is not, Whether People of Quality may not Employ a
Dancing Master, with due Circumstances of Modesty to instruct their Children
how to carry themselves handsomely, in Company? But, whether the Dancing
Humor, as it now prevails, and especially in Balls, or in circumstances that
Lead the Young People of both Sexes, unto great Liberties with one another, be
not a Vanity forbidden by the Rules of Christianity? And, If it be so, Whether
Virtuous and Prudent Parents, will not (...) Second Thoughts be very cautious,
how far (...) their Children to the Temptations of (...) a Vanity? If a
Nonconformist Minister should speak to this CASE, it may be thought Answer
enough, That it is HE. Wherefore that the Reader may have no pretense to be
Angry at any One such Minister, in the World, we will only bring some other
Authorities.

It Is fit we should begin with, The Sacred Scripture.

Romans XIII.13. Let us walk honestly, [or decently] but (...) in RIOTING.

1 Pet. IV.3. The Time past of our Life may suffice us, to have wrought the
Will of the Gentiles, when we walked in REVELLINGS.

All the World, that understand the Greek Tongue, (and the greatest
Interpreters) confess, That the Greek word, (...) Komos, which our Translators,
in one place render, by, RIOTING, in another, by, REVELLING, is truly
translated, by DANCING. It Is the very Thing, Expressly forbidden.

The ASSEMBLIES Larger Catechism.
Q. What are the Sins forbidden in the Seventh Commandment?

A. -- Light Behavior, -- Unchaste Company. --

DANCINGS, Stage Plays, and all other Provocations to Uncleanness in our
selves or others.

Behold, A great Authority, and Reason with it.

Phil. IV.8. Whatsoever things are of GOOD REPORT, Think on these things.

We will proceed unto some faithful Citations, from Fathers, yea, from Pagans;
from Councils from Divines of the Church of ENGLAND; yea, from
Roman Catholics, and even Courtiers among them too: And we will not Cite so
much as one word from any English Nonconformists, (who do not use to declare
for less Virtue, than the rest of mankind!) that we may have some Account of
the GOOD REPORT, which the Thing before us has had among all the Virtuous

FATHERS.
The words of Chrysostom, and of Arnobius, and of Austin, and other Ancient
Writers, are so full of Terrors and Thunders, against the Dances of their
Times, that ours will not bear to hear them. We will be so complaisant, unto
the Modern Customs, as only to Sum them up in this Epitome; A Dance, is a
Work of Satan, one of his Pomps and Vanities, which all Baptized Persons are
under Vows to Renounce.

Only we will make so free with Ambrose, (who was no Nonconformist, but a
Bishop, and a Courtier too!) as to quote his Advice; That if Godly Parents
would not have the Souls of their Children corrupted and Ruined, they should be
very cautious about sending them to the Dancing School.

PAGANS.
Macrobius informs us, That amongst the Ancient Romans, Dancing was looked upon
as Infamous.

Scipio Africanus, complained of it, as a Degeneracy in his Age, that Persons
of Quality sent their Children to the Dancing School.

Salust, the Historian, reproached Sempronia as infamous, for having been a
Dancer; their practice being, The Instrument of Luxury.

Cicero, in his Oration for Muraena, says, Nemo Saltat Sobrius, nisi forte
insamat. A man must be either Drunk, or Mad, (says the Orator,) that is fond of
Dancing. He Says, That this Vice never goes alone; and therefore he Reproaches
Gabinius and Antonius with it.

Seneca bewails it, That in his Time Young ones were corrupted with Dances; and
that Dancing-Schools were set up in the City. Tiberius himself, Banished the
Dancers out of the City.

Priamus, in the Poet, severely reproves his Children, Because he understood
they were, (...) Dancers.

Plutarch, in his Description of, A Virtuous Woman, mentions this, as part of
her Character, She must (...)

COUNCILS.
It is well known, That the old Councils, Ordained no less a Censure, Than that
of Deposition for a Clergyman, and that of Excommunication for other People,
to bear a part in a Dance. Particularly, One assembled in Trullo. Can. 51. Yea,
very many Councils, make it a Crime in Clergymen to be so much as the
Spectators of a Dance.

We will descend unto late ones.

Many provincial Assemblies in Holland, have declared, That the Scourge of
Ecclesiastical Discipline should be employed upon Dancers.

The National Synod of Dort, A. 1578. thus Express themselves.

Because Dances are for the most part attended with a levity, unbecoming
Christians, and are an offense to the Godly; Especially when practiced in a
Time of Common Danger and Calamity: they that go to Dances shall be Reproved;
and if after diverse Admonitions they persist therein, they are to be excluded
from communion.

The Reforming Synod in Poland, prohibited the Dances too commonly practiced;
and pronounced them censurable.

The Discipline of the Reformed Churches in France, has this Article.

Dancing is to be suppressed; and those that take the Liberty or Custom to
Dance, after they have been several times admonished, shall be Excommunicated,
when they show themselves obstinate in their Rebellion. And the consistories
are Exhorted well to put this Article into Execution, [ Read this, Ye Dancing
Refugees, and Reflect on Your strang^ conduct under the dreadful Judgments of
God.]
and to Read the same Publicly in the Name of God, and in the Authority of the
Synods: And the said Synods and Colloquies are Exhorted to take heed of, and
warn those Consistories that therein do not their Duties, to Censure the
offenders for it.

And in this, it is well known, they did but imitate the old Waldenses.

Divines of the Church of ENGLAND.
Three famous Bishops, have Written against Mixed Dances, as unlawful. Their
Names are, Dr. DOWNHAM, Dr. BABINGTON, Dr. ANDREWS. Their words are too long to
be Repeated.

An Archbishop, namely, Dr. USHER, has Written against these Vanities,
particularly in his Catechism. Page 279.

Yea, diverse have more lately had the Courage to do so. Amongst the rest, Mr.
H. De Luzancy, the Vicar of Harwich. In his Treatise of the Two Sacraments, he
shows, That Baptized Persons are to Renounce the Pomps and Vanities of this
sinful World. And says he, p. 91, 92 Such are the Vain Conversations, Empty
Visits, and Public Meetings of People of Different Sexes, where the Soul is
betrayed by the Eye, and Sinful Creatures are proud of poisoning one another.
Such are those Methods of Dressing, which are grown a Study and a Trade; and
Women are ashamed to appear with the Faces which God has given them, but choose
rather to be seen with those of the Devils making. Washing, Painting, PATCHING,
are become serious Occupations, and have turned out of Doors Morning Devotions.
Such are BALLS, and Plays.

ROMAN CATHOLICS.
How can Protestants Expect any other, but that the Vengeance of Heaven, will
Employ the (...) to Chastise them, to Destroy them, when (...) indulge
themselves in Vanities, which are (...) and condemned even by the very Papists?

We know not what Broad-sides may quickly be given us, from French
Roman Catholics. But there shall Two be now (instead of many more) turned upon
us.

Father Le Jeune, in his Le Missionarie de L' Oratoire, has a whole Sermon,
Contre Les Bals, Les Danses, et autres divertisemens mondains, qui sent
allumettes de Luxure.

I will faithfully Translate a few passages out of it. The Evil Spirit, has
invented and introduced into the World, BALLS, and DANCES, and other
Divertisements, which the Reproved call Innocent, but St. Augustine called,
Lugendas Latitius, The Sports which call for Sorrows.

He proceeds to show, how the Sacred Scriptures, which command Seriousness, and
Gravity, and Modesty, condemn Dances, and begs his Hearers to think on that
word; Job. 21.11, 13. Their Children DANCE, and in a moment they go down to the
Grave; (or as he renders it,) into Hell. Says he; There are some Sins thought
Venial, that will End so.

He mentions and commends Chrysostom, who having heard, That some of his
Hearers had been at a Ball, immediately he Preached a powerful Sermon against
it; and among other things that man of God said, (and his words are quoted with
Honor by this Papist; [The men of Rome, shall rise in Judgment with this
Generation, and shall condemn it!]
) If I could Learn, who they were, that were present at these Follies, I would
chase them out of the Church; I would not permit them to be present at our
dreadful Mysteries; And he goes on to call them, The Pomps of the Devil.

The Papist goes on to tell us, That Chrysostom observes, We read not of any
Dances at the Weddings of the Holy Patriarchs, and that the Weddings (...)
Blessings of God the more following of them.

This Papist proceeds; When you were Baptized, you Renounced these Follies; you
were Engaged by an Express promise, to shun these Pomps of the Devil. If you
Return to them, you are guilty of Persidy, and Forgery, and Disloyalty. But how
then can one grant you the Communion which is much more than Baptism?

Says he; Here you throw away the precious Time, which cannot be recovered;
the Time which is allowed you to work out your Salvation. You Extinguish in
your selves the Spirit of Piety, of Charity, and of Repentance; the Spirit of
Devotion. That Spirit is a precious Balm; or an Essence and a Cordial; nothing
so easily grows Dead and Flat: there needs but One Dissolute Hour, to ruin in
you, all that Spirit of Piety, which you have been gathering for many weeks, by
your Meditations, and Supplications. They have no Speech of GOD, at a Ball, or
at a Play; and if at Collations, they Speak of GOD, and of Divine Things, of
Devotions or of Devout Persons, it is ordinarily to rally upon them, and tell
merry Stories thereof.

Here are profuse Expenses of what should be Employed for the Comfort of the
Poor, and their Succor in their Miseries.

If the Young Gentlewomen would be well provided for in a Marriage, they should
prefer a man of Sense and Judgment. Now there is no man of Judgment, who would
not choose rather a Young Gentlewoman, that should be Wise, Modest, Reserved,
and Retired, than a Dancer, a giddy, and an idle Damsel.

Whence comes it that the Casaist informs me not, that the Ball and the Play,
are any other than Indifferent Things? But think you to be Excused from the
Judgments of God, because your Faith has been pinned on the Sleeve of, an
Alamods Casuist, who has a mind to render himself complaisant unto your
Inclinations, rather than (...) to St. Augustine, and St. Chrysostom, and St.
Cyprian, and other Fathers of the Church, who Flatter you not, because they
Need you not.

But, because this was a Churchman, we will hear no more from him. Let us at
last hear a Courtier.

M. Rabutin, in his Instructions to his Children. [In his Memoirs, Tom. 2 p.
155.] has these passages. I have ever believed Balls to be dangerous. Of this,
not only my Reason, but my own Experience made me sensible; and though the
Authority of the Fathers of the Church in this Case, be very considerable, yet
that of a Courtier may be of greater weight. The coldest Constitutions are
inflamed there. They that are Old, cannot go to them, without making a
ridiculous Figure, nor the Young, though within the Rules of Decency, without
Exposing themselves to great Dangers. It is my Opinion, then, That A CHRISTIAN
OUGHT NOT TO BE AT A BALL; And I think it the Duty of the Guides of
Consciences, to Interdict it fox ever unto those who are under their Direction.
A Question upon the whole.

Whether a Nonconformist Minister can be justly Reproached, for his faithful
and watchful Endeavors, to reclaim his Neighbors, from hazarding their own
and their Childrens Virtue, by Vanities, which have had no Good Report by the
Virtuous in all Ages, but been decried, not only by Fathers, by Councils, by
Divines of the Church of England, but also by Papists, both Preachers and
Courtiers, and by the very Pagans?

Think seriously upon it; and upon Amos 6.3, 5, 6. Woe to them that put far away
the Evil Day and chaunt to the sound of the Viol, -- but they are not grieved
for the Affliction of Joseph. And upon Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. In that Day did the
Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning; And behold Joy and Gladness;
Surely, This (...) Look it, Reader; for I Tremble to Write it!


