ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the General Court or Assembly of His Majesty's
Province of New Hampshire in New England.

Begun and Held at Portsmouth, on Monday the Seventh Day of August, 1699.

Anno Regni Gulielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Undecimo.



BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the Earl of BELLOMONT. 1699.

Acts and Laws, Passed by the General Court or Assembly of His Majesty's
Province of New Hampshire in New England.
An Act for Restraining and Punishing Privateers and Pirates.
WHEREAS nothing can more contribute to His Sacred Majesty's Honor then that
such Articles as are concluded and agreed on in all Treaties of Peace should by
all His Majesty's Subjects according to their Duty be most inviolably preserved
and kept in and over all His Majesty's Dominions and Territories. And whereas
not only against such Treaties of Peace made by His Majesty with His Allies,
but also contrary to His Majesty's Royal Proclamation several of His Subjects
have and do go, into Foreign Princes Services, and Sail under their
Commissions contrary to their Duty and good Allegiance, and by fair means
cannot be restrained from so doing.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by
Authority of the same, Felony, to serve in hostile manner under a^^ foreign
Prince without License
That from and after Publication hereof, it shall be Felony for any person
which now does, or within four years last past, has, or hereafter shall
inhabit or belong to this Province, to Serve in an Hostile manner under any
Foreign Prince, State or Potentate, or any Employed under any of them, against
any other Foreign Prince, State or Potentate in Amity with His Majesty of
Great Britain, without special License for so doing under the Hand and Seal of
the Governor or Commander in Chief of this Province for the time being. And
that all and every such Offender or Offenders, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this Act, being thereof duly Convicted in His Majesty's Superior
Court of Judicature within this Province, to which Court, Authority is hereby
given to hear and determine the same as other Cases of Felony: shall suffer
pains of Death without benefit of Clergy.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act nor any thing therein contained shall
extend to any person or persons which now are o^ have been in the Service or
Employ of any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate whatsoever, Saving for such
as shall desert before the 29. of September 1700.
that shall return to this Province, and leave and desert such Service and
Employment before the Twenty Ninth Day of September, Anno One Thousand Seven
Hundred, rendering themselves to the Governor or Commander in Chief for the
time being, and giving him such Security as he shall appoint for their future
good behavior. And also that they shall not depart the Province, without the
Governors Ticket License.

And for the better and more speedy Excution of Justice upon such who having
committed Treasons, Piracies, Felonies, and other Offenses upon the Sea, shall
be apprehended in, or brought Prisoners to this Province.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Treasons, Felonies,
Piracies, Robberies, Murders, or Confederacies committed, or that hereafter
shall be committed upon the Sea, or in any Haven, Creek or Ba^ where the
Admiral has Jurisdiction, Treasons, Feloni's, Piracies etc. committed on the
Sea to be inquired heard and judged, as if committed on the Land, by Commission
directed to the Judge of the Admiralty etc.
shall be punished with Death; an^ shall be Inquired, Tried, Heard, Determined
and Judged within this Pro^vince in such like form, as if such Offense had been
committed, in and up^on the Land; and to that end and purpose, Commissions
shall be had under the Seal of this Province, directed to the Judge of the
Admiralty of this Pro^vince for the time being, and to three or more such
substantial persons, as b^ His Majesty's Governor or Commander in Chief of
this Province for the tim^ being, with the advice and consent of the Council
shall be named and a^^pointed, which said Commissioners, or such a Quorum of
them as by suc^ Commission shall be thereunto Authorized, shall have full power
to do (...) things, in and about the Inquiry, hearing determining, adjudging
and punish^ing of any of the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid, as any
Commissioners (...) be appointed by Commission under the Great Seal of England,
by virtue (...) a Statute made in the Twenty Eighth Year of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth are Empowered to do and execute within the Kingdom of Englan^*
And that the said Offenders which are or shall be apprehended in, (...) brought
Prisoners to this Province, shall be liable to such Order, Proces^ Judgments
and Execution, by virtue of such Commission to be grounde^ upon this Act as
might be awarded or given against them if they we^^ proceeded against within
the Realm of England, by virtue of any Com^mission grounded upon the said
Statute. And all Trials heretofore ha^ against such Criminal and Criminals
before any Judge or Judges by vi^^tue of such Commission or Authority at any
time heretofore grante^ and all Proceedings thereupon are hereby ratified and
confirmed and (...) judged lawful. All Trials heretofore had by virtue of such
Commission ratified.
And all such Judges with all and every the Inferior O^^ficers that have acted
thereby, are hereby Indempnified to all intents an^ purposes whatsoever. And in
case they or any of them shall at any tim^ hereafter be sued, vexed, molested
or troubled for any such their Proce^^dings as aforesaid, he or they so sued,
vexed, molested or troubled, sha^^ plead the General Issue, and give this Act
in Evidence: Any Law St^^tute, Custom or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Persons knowingly entertaining, harboring, concealing or corresponding with
any Privateers or Pirates to be accounted Accessaries and confederates.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all an^ every
person and persons that shall any way knowingly entertain, harbou^ conceal,
trade or hold any correspondence by Letter or otherwise, with an^ person or
persons, that shall be deemed and adjudged to be Privateers, Pirate or other
Offenders within the Construction of this Act, and that shall no^ readily
endeavor to the best of his or their power to apprehend, or cause (...) be
apprehended such Offender or Offenders shall be liable to be prosecute^ as
Accessaries and Confederates, and to suffer the like pains and penalties (...)
in and by this Act is provided for the Principals.

And for the better and more effectual Execution of this Act.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Commi^sion Officers
in their several Precincts within this Province are hereb^ required and
Empowered, Commission Officers Empowered and required to seize and apprehend all
Privateers, Pirates etc.
upon his or their knowledge, or credible noti^^ given that any Privateers,
Pirates, or other persons suspected to be upon any unlawful design, are in any
place within their respective Precincts, (...) raise and levy such a number of
well Armed men as he and they sha^^ think needful for the seizing, apprehending
and carrying to Goal all an^ every such person and persons; and in case of any
resistance or refus^ to yield Obedience to His Majesty's Authority, it shall be
lawful to ki^^ or destroy such person or persons; And all and every person and
pe^^sons that shall oppose or resist by striking or firing upon any of the
Commanded parties, shall be deemed, taken and adjudged as Felon^ and shall
suffer the pains of Death. And every such Officer that shall omit or neglect
his duty herein, shall forfeit Fifty Pounds, Penalty for Officers neglect of
duty
current Money of this Province for every such Offense, to be recovered in any
of His Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, by Bill, Plaint or
Information, wherein no ess^ign, wager of Law or protection shall be allowed;
one Moiety thereof to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government Of this Province and
the contingent Charges thereof; and the other Moiety to the Informer. And all
and every person and persons that upon orders given him or them shall refuse to
repair immediately with his or their Arms well fixed and Ammunition, to such
place or places as shall be appointed by the said Officer, and not readily obey
his Command in the premises, Penalty for non appearrance in Arms.
shall be Imprisoned without Bail or Mainprize, until the next General Sessions
of the Peace within the same County, and by the Justices of the same Court
fined, not exceeding Ten Pounds, or be corporally punished, not exceeding Ten
Stripes, at the discretion of the Justices.

For the better Encouragement to make diligent Enquiry after, and Seizure of
Pirates Goods.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforsaid, That whatsoever person or
persons shall make discovery and seizure of any Goods or Treasure, that shall
be brought into this Province by any Pirate or Pirates, Recompenc^ for
discovering and seizing of Pirates Goods.
or inform of or disclose the same, so as that such Goods or Treasure be seized
and secured to be answerable in the Law, every such person or persons shall
have and receive as a recompense for such Service, one fifth part of the Goods
and Treasure so seized and secured, or of the value thereof within ten days
next after Condemnation of said Goods or Treasure, to be paid by order of the
Justices of the Court where the Trial shall be had, and all the remainder of
such Goods and Treasure to be secured by order of the Justices of such Court
for the use and benefit of the true and right Owners thereof if any such
appear, by themselves, Factors, Agents or Attorneys, within the time of
eighteen months next after such Condemnation, How such Goods shall be secured.
and shall make out their right thereunto, all just and reasonable Charges
being first deducted and paid thereout. And if no Claimer or Claimers appear
and make out their Right thereto within the said time of eighteen months then
all the remainder of such Goods and Treasure the Charges as aforesaid, being
first deducted and paid thereout to be delivered into His Majesty's Treasury
within this Province, there to be lodged until His Majesty's Pleasure shall be
signified, how the same shall be disposed of.

An Act to return able and sufficient Jurors to Serve in the several Courts of
Justice and to Regulate the Election of Represensentatives to Serve in the
General Assembly within this Province.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Clerks
of the several Courts o^ Justice within this Province fifteen days at least
before the day limi^ted by Law for holding such Courts from time to time, shall
make out a Wri^ of Venire Facias, Writ of Venire for Jurors to be issued 15
days before the Court
di^ected unto the Sheriff of the Province, Commanding him in His Majesty's
Name to Impannel and return so many good and lawful men for Grand and Petit
Jurors, out of the several Towns within this Pro^vince in as near a proportion
as may be according to the number of Inhabitants, each person so returned to
have an Estate of Freehold worth Forty Shillings Per Annum at the least,
Qualification of Jurors.
or Fifty Pounds Sterling in personal Estate; And the Sheriff shall cause each
person named in his Panel to be duly Summon^ed and Warned to attend the
Service of the Court where the same is returna^ble. The Grand Jurors for the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to Serve^ one whole year from the time of their
being Sworn, and every person Impannelled and Summoned as aforesaid, to Serve
as a Juror at any of the said Courts who shall make default by not appearing or
not attending the Service required of him, Penalty on Jurors making default.
shall loose and forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings, unless such persons make a
reasonable Excuse for the same to be approved and allowed by the Justices of
the said Court, the said Forfeiture to be unto the use o^ our Sovereign Lord
the King, for and toward the Support of the Govern^ment, and for answering the
incident charges thereof, and to be Imposed and set by the Justices of the
Court where the Venire is returnable. And when it shall happen by reason of
Challenge, default in appearance or otherwise there shall not remain a
sufficient number to make up a Petit Jury, ^a^es de circumstantibus.
the Sheriff by Command of the Justices of the Court shall return so many
persons de talibus Circumstantibus, as shall be requisite to make up a full
Jury. And in case where the Sheriff shall be a party, The Coroner to return
Jurors and serve Writs, in case
or related to either of the parties, the Jury shall be Impannelled and
returned by the Coroner, who is also hereby Empowered to Serve Writs in cases
where the Sheriff is concerned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
Inhabiting within this Province, Qualification of Representatives, and Electors.
other than Freeholders of the value or income of Forty Shillings Per Annum or
upwards in Land, or worth Fifty Pounds Sterling at the least in personal
Estate, shall have any Vote in the Election of Representatives; or be capable
of being Elected to Serve in the General Assembly, and the trial of such
Qualification as aforesaid, shall be by the last Lists of Rates and Assessments
which the Select men of each respective Town, are hereby required to bring with
them for that end, upon all days and times appointed for such Election.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be a suitable
person Chosen in each Town after the same manner used for Choice of other
Officers to be Town Clerk to Serve in the said Office until another be Chosen
and Sworn in his stead; Town Clerk to be chosen and sworn.
and every such Town Clerk shall have an Oath Administered unto him, by a
Justice of the Peace well and truly to Execute the said Office and Trust.

An Act for a Tax or Assessment, of Five Hundred Pounds.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of His
Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, Convened in General Assembly, do
cheerfully and unanimously give and grant unto His Most Excellent Majesty the
Sum of Five Hundred Pounds in Money, humbly beseeching Your Majesty, that the
same may be applied and appropriated unto the sole and proper use of His
Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Your Majesty's Governor in Chief of this
Province. In Testimony of our great regard and respect unto His Lordship, under
whose happy Conduct we assure our selves to enjoy great quiet and felicity; And
pray that it may be Enacted.

And be it Enacted accordingly by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the said
Sum of Five Hundred Pounds to and for the use aforesaid be Raised by a Tax or
Assessment to be made and laid in manner as is hereafter expressed, upon all
persons and Estates both real and personal lying, being and belonging to the
several Towns and the Districts thereof within this Province, according to each
Towns proportion toward the same, as follows: That is to say, l s d
Portsmouth, One Hundred and Twelve Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 112 15 00
Hampton, One Hundred Forty and Eight Pounds, Eighteen Shillings, and Nine
Pence. 148 18 09 Dover, One Hundred Pounds, Eleven Shillings and Three pence.
100 11 03 Exeter, Ninety One Pounds, Ten Shillings. 91 10 00 New Castle, Forty
Six Pounds, Five Shillings. 46 05 00

And that the Treasurer send out his Warrant to the Constables of the
respective Towns, Requiring them to Assemble the Inhabitants to make choice of
two Assessors where they are not already Chosen for the year, to join with the
Select men in making the Rate and Assessment according to this Act to whom the
Treasurer shall also give Warrants pursuant thereto. And the Rates and
Assessmen^s so made to be committed to the Constables of the respective Towns
by the last of September next ensuing, with Warrants from a Justice of the
Peace. And the Select men and Assessors to Collect the same, and pay unto the
Treasurer for the time being, in Money by the Twentyeth Day of December next
following.

An Act for Establishing Courts of Public Justice within this Province.
WHEREAS the orderly Regulation and Establishing of Courts of Justice, as well
in respect of time as place for the holding of the same, does very much tend to
the Honor and Dignity of the Crown, and to the ease and benefit of the
Subject.

Justices of the Peace Empowered to hear and determine causes of 40 s. value or
under, where title of of Land is not concerned.
Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Counc^^ and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the A^^thority of the
same, That every Justice of the Peace in the same Tow^^ where he resides, be,
and hereby is fully Authorized and Empowered to hea^ try and determine all Pleas
and Actions of Debt and Trespass, where Tit^^ of Land is not concerned, arising
or happening within this Province, to (...) value of Forty Shillings or under,
and to give ^udgment therein and to aw^^ Execution thereupon, and either party
agrieved at the Judgment or Senten^^ given by any such Justice in Civil Causes,
may appeal therefrom unto the ne^ Inferior Court of Common Pleas, the party
appealing giving Security b^^fore such Justice unto the Appellee in a
reasonable Sum to prosecute his A^^peal with effect, Appeal.
and to answer and pay such Cost and Damages as shall (...) awarded against him
in case the first Sentence be affirmed.

And for the better Conservation of the Peace, and punishment of Offenders.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there (...) be Held and
Kept by the Justices of the Peace within this Province or (...) many of them,
as shall be limited by the Commission of the Peace to (...) a Quorum. Court of
Sessions of the Peace.
Four Quarterly Courts or General Sessions of the Peace year^^ at the Town of
Portsmouth on the First Tuesdayes on the Months of Mar^^ June, September and
December from time to time; which said Court (...) have Cognizance of all
matters and things proper to the Jurisdiction of (...) Court relating to the
Conservation of the Peace, and punishment of Offe^^ders; according to the Laws
and Statutes in force within this Provinc^^ And the Sessions of the said Court
shall hold and continue by the space (...) two days and no longer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the^ shall be Held
and Kept at Portsmouth aforesaid, Inferior Court of Common Pleas.
an Inferior Court of Co^^mon Pleas by four Justices to be appointed and
Commissionated thereto (...) the Governor, or in his absence the Commander in
Chief for the time (...); any three of whom to make a Quorum; the said Court to
be held (...) begin at the time and days following: That is to say, on
Thursday next aft^^ the rising of the Court of the Quarter Sessions of the
Peace from time (...) time; which said Inferior Court of Common Pleas shall
have Cogni^an^^ of, hear, try and determine all Actions, Matters and Causes
tryable the Common Law, not exceeding the Sum or value of Twenty Pounds, (...)
where Title of Land is not concerned, and give Judgment therein and ward
Execution accordingly.

Provided nevertheless, That either party agrieved at any Judgment (...)
Sentence given in the said Court may appeal therefrom unto the next Su^^^riour
Court of Judicature; Appeal.
such Appellant giving sufficient Security in (...) the Sum or value recovered
unto the Appellee, before one or more of (...) Justices of the Inferior Court,
to prosecute his Appeal with effect, and answer and pay such Costs and Damages
as shall be awarded against him case the first Sentence shall be affirmed.

And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there held and kept
at Portsmouth aforesaid, Superior Court of Judicature
and not elsewhere within this P^^^vince a Superior Court of Judicature by one
chief Justice, and three (...) Justices, to be appointed and Commissionated
thereto by the Governor, in his absence the Commander in Chief for the time
being; any (...) of whom to make a Quorum, on the Second Tuesday in August, and
(...) the Second Tuesday in February yearly from time to time, which (...)
Courts shall have Cognizance of all Pleas, and Causes, as well Civil (not under
the value of Twenty Pounds except where Title of Land is concerned) as Criminal
as fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of
Kings Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer within His Majesty's Kingdom of
England, have or ought to have, and ^re hereby Empowered to give Judgment, and
award Execution therein, and i^ shall be in the liberty of any Party, Plaintiff
or Defendant agrieved at any Judgment or Sentence given in the said Superior
Court to appeal therefrom unto the Governor and Council. Provided the value
appealed for exceed the Sum of One Hundred Pounds Sterling, and that sufficient
Security be given, Appeal to the Governor and Counc^^
in manner as in and by this Act is before directed to prosecute the same, and
to pay such costs and damages as may be awarded in case the first Sentence
shall be affirmed.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That in all Civil Causes to be
commenced at the said Superior Court of Judicature, where the matter in
controversy exceeds the true value and Sum of Three Hundred Pounds Sterling,
Appeal to His Majesty in Council.
it shall and may be in the liberty of the party agrieved to review the said
Cause by a new Process out of the said Court once and no more; and if either
party shall not rest satisfied with the Judgment or Sentence of the said
Superior Court, either upon the first Trial, or upon the Review, such party
may appeal therefrom unto His Majesty in Council. Provided the matter in
difference exceed the true value and Sum of Three Hundred Pounds Sterling, and
that such Appeals be made, within fourteen days after Sentence given; And that
Security be likewise given by the Appellant, to answer such Charges as shall be
awarded, in case the first Sentence shall be confirmed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Writs to is^u^ forth of
the Clerks Offic^
That all Writs and Processes for bringing any Actions or Suits to Trial in any
of the Courts aforesaid shall be Summons, Capias or Attachment, and shall Issue
out of the Clerks Office of the same Court under the Seal thereof, and Signed
by the Clerk, and shall be directed to the Sheriff, Undersheriff or Deputy,
and Executed fifteen days before the day of the Courts Sitting, and ^o be
returned to the Court from whence the same Issued. For Trials before a Justice
to b^ granted by such Justice.
Writs or Processes for Trial before a Justice of the Peace, to be granted by
such Justice, directed unto a Constable or Constables, and to be Executed seven
days before the day appointed for such Trial, and to be returned to the Justice*

And be it further Enacted, That every person appealing from any Judgment or
Sentence given in any of the Courts aforesaid, Reasons of Appeal to b^ filed in
the Clerks Offic^
shall file a Declaration in the Clerks Office of the Court appealed from,
therein briefly assigning the Errors in such Judgment fifteen days at least
before the day of the Sitting of the Court appealed unto. And if the Appeal be
made from a Sentence or Judgment given by a Justice of the Peace, such
Declaration shall be filed with the Justice by the like time.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That as well the Justices of
the Inferior Court of Common Pleas, Power of Chancery in several cases
as the Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature respectively; where the
forfeiture or penalty of any Obligation with a Condition underwritten, or a
penalty annexed to any Articles, Agreement, Covenants, Contracts, Charter party
or other Specialty or Forfeiture of any Estate granted upon condition, executed
by Deed of Mortgage or Bargain and Sale with defeazance, shall be found by
Verdict of Jury, or by default or confession of the Obligor, Mortgager or
Vender, are hereby Empowered and Authorized to moderate the Rigor of the Law.
And on consideration of such Cases according to equity and good Conscience to
Chancer such Forfeiture, and to enter up Judgment, for the just Debt and
Damages, and to award Execution accordingly, only in real Actions upon
Mortgage, and Bargain and Sale, with defeazance, the Judgment to be
co^^ditional, that the Mortgager or Vender, and his Heirs, Executors or
Admin^^strators do pay unto the Plaintiff such Sum as the Court does determine,
Justices of the Courts to be Sworn before the Governor or Commander in Chief.
or such as he shall appoint
(...) be justly due thereupon within two months time after Judgment entered up,
(...) discharging of such Mortgage or Sale, and that the Plaintiff recover
possession of the Estate Sued for, and Execution to be awarded for the same;
and the Justices of the said several Courts as well Superieur as Inferior
respectivel^ shall take the Oath following, to be Administre^ to each of them
by the Go^vernour, or in his absence by the Commander in Chief for the time
being or such as shall be by him thereto appointed. That is to say, Oath.
YOU Swear, That well and truly you shall Serve our Sovereign Lord t^ KING and
His People in the Office of a Justice of the Court

And that you will do equal Law and Execution of Right to all people, (...) and
rich, after the Law's in force within this Province, and Usage within the sam^
and in such cases, as the Law does specially provide to be relieved in equity,
there proceed according to equity and good Conscience, without having regard to
any pers^^ whatsoever* So help you God.



Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstandin^

An Act for continuing several Rates and D^^ties of Custom, Excise, Impost and
Powde^ Money on Tonnage of Shipping.
WHEREAS in and by one Act of General Assembly of this Provi^^^ made and past
in the Fourth Year of the Reign of KING Willi^^ and Queen Mary, Entitled, An
Act for defraying the P^^^lick Charge of the Province, there was given and
gran^ unto Their said Majesty's several Duties of Impost, Excise and Tonnage
Shipping in the said Act particularly enumerated and set down: Which (...)
Duties have been and are continued by Acts since made, until the fifth day of
N^^vember next ensuing, at which time they will expire, unless revived by an
(...) of this Assembly.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Earl of Bellom^ Governor,
Council and Representatives Convened in General ^^^sembly; And it is hereby
Enacted and Ordained by the Author^^^ of the same, That from and after the
fifth day of November next suing, the several Rates and Duties set upon all
Wines, Liquors and M^^^chandizes that shall be Imported into this Province, and
all Duties Tonnage and Excise in and by the said former Act of Impost and
^^^cise, Custom and Tonnage Money, be, and are hereby continued to paid as in
and by the said Act is directed for and during the (...) and time of one year:
That it to say, until the fifth day of Novem^^^* which will be in the Year of
our Lord, One Thousand and Se^^^ Hundred. And the Money arising thereby to be
applied toward Support of this His Majesty's Government.

FINIS.

