His Excellency the Earl of Bellomont's SPEECH To the House of Representatives
convened in General Assembly at New York the 29th day of July, 1700.
GENTLEMEN;
I Thought a Session of the General Assembly absolutely necessary at this
(...), that you might advise such measures as will best secure the five Nations
of Indians in their Obedience to the Crown, which all of you know is of the
(...) consequence to this, and all the rest of the English (...) America. Our
Neighbors of Canada know the value of the (...) to us, and therefore with
indefatigable Pains are every day seducing them from us by their Jesuits; and
it is said, that such as will not be seduced, are many of 'em taken off by
Poison. I will order the Testimonies I have (...) of these wicked Practions to
be laid before you, which I believe will convince you of the truth of them.

The proper Remedies against these growing Mischiefs the Indians themselves
have chalked out to us. They have often pressed me with (...) Instance, that
they may have Protestant Ministers to instruct (...) in the Christian Religion,
and a Fort to cover 'em from the Incursions of the French and their Indians. I
hope there will be a way (...) them with (...) for a Fort that belongs to you
to provide. I am always very tender of engaging you in things o^ Expense, but
the building a Fort to secure the Indians, and satisfy them, is such an
Expense as I believe every Man of you will think indispensably Necessary, and
that it should be built also out of hand, that the Indians may be encouraged by
seeing there is care taken for their Protection.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:

I hope there needs no other Argument than that I have now offered to quicken
you to the giving such a Supply as may (...) convenient part of the County, for
defense of the five Nations. You need not be told how much the Honor and
Interest of the Crown, and your own private interest are engageds in the right
Management and Preservation those Indians, and you cannot give the King a
better Testimony of your Duty and Affection to his Majesty's Person and
Government, than by a cheerful compliance with what has been now proposed to
you. I would offer to you the passing some necessary Laws, but that I consider
it is Harvest time, and I will give as short an Interruption to your Country
Affairs as I can; besides, I have appointed a Meeting and Conference with the
(...) of the five Nations next week at Albany, which I intend accordingly to
perform.

BY virtue of an Order from the honorable House of Representatives, I do
appoint William Bradford to Print his Excellency's Speech. Abra. Gouverneur,
Speaker.


