VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for His Majesty's Province of New York
in America.
Die Jovis Anti Merid. May 19 School.
SEveral of the Representatives being returned by the Sheriffs of the Province,
pursuant to his Majesty's Writ, being met, to the Number of sixteen, viz. For
the City and County of New York Mr. Phillip French, Capt. Jacobus van
Cortlandt, Capt Thomas Wenham, and Capt. Johannes Kipp. For the City and County
of Albany, Mr. Jan Jansen Bl^ker, and Mr Ryer Sherm^chorne. For the County of
Vlster, Mr. Abraham Hansbrook^. For the County of Richmond, Mr. John Tounison
and Mr. Thomas Morgan. for the County of Westchestre, Mr. John Drake and Mr.
Joseph Purdy. For the County (...) S^ffolk, Lieut. Coll. Henry Pierson and
Major Matthew Howell. For Kings County, Mr. Myndert Courten. For Queens County,
Major John Jackson and Capt. Daniel Whitehead. They took ^he Oaths, and
subscribed the Test and Association before ^he Honorable Frederick P^illips,
Coll. Stephanus van Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, and Coll Gabril Minveil,
Esqrs. appointed by his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, ^o administer the
(...). And also, Mr Benjamin Jackson, appointed by his Excellency to be Clerk
of the Assembly, produced his Commission under the great Seal of the Province,
and was sworn, and signed as aforesaid.

A Message came from his Excellen^y by Mr. James Graeham, his Majesty's
Attorney General, signifying that the House should ^h^^e their Speaker, and
adjourn till three of the clock in the Afternoon, when his Ex^ellency would be
ready to receive them. And ^ccordingly, Mr. Phillp French, by the ^ajo^ity of
Votes, was chosen Speaker and was conducted to the Chair. And the House
adjourned till 3 a Clock in the afternoon.

Die Jovis P. M. May 19. 1668.
The House met according to adjournment, and sent a Message by Mr. Benj.
Jackson, Clerk of the Assembly, to his Excellency to know whether he was ready
to receive them Unto which he answered, he was ready. And accordingly the House
attended his Excellency at the Fort, where the Council being met, his
Excellency was pleased to make the following Speech, and deliver it to Mr.
Speaker in Writing, which the House ordered to be entered.

Gentlemen;
MY Voyage hither from England was very tedious, and attended with great
Hardships; but since my being among you I have endeavored to redeem that loss
of Time, by applying my self diligently to the Public business, in Duty to His
Majesty, and that I might be the better enabled to serve you.

I cannot but observe to you what a Legacy my Predecessor has left me, and what
Difficulties to strugle with, A Divided People, an Empty Treasury; a few
miserable, naked half-starv'd Soldiers, not half the Number the King allowed
pay for; the Fortifications, and even the Governors House very much out of
Repair; and in a word, Gentlemen, the whole Government out of Frame. To you
therefore I recommend the consideration of those Disorders, as best becoming
your Prudence to apply the proper Remedies, and you may be sure of my hearty
Concurrence in every thing that will conduce to the extinguishing those Heats
and Annimosities among you, which I fear have been of late years industriously
cherish't and fomented, and to the the curing all the other Disorders and
Mischiefs among you.

It has b^^n represented to the Government in England* That th is rovince has
been a noted Receptacle of Pirates, and the Trade of it under no Restriction,
but the Acts of Trade violated, by the Neglect and Connivance of those whose
Duty it was to have prevented it. I hope Gentlemen, you will put all the
Discountenance imaginable on that flagacious Crime of Pyracy, which is not only
the worst sort of Robbery, but is, for the most part attended with the horrid
Sin of Murder, which is a great aggravation of that odious Practice, detested
by all the Civil Nations of the World. It Is not only injurious to the Honor of
his Majesty, and the English Nation, but also highly prejudicial to the Trade
of England, and particularly to the East India Company. And the Gentlemen of
the Council here present will bear me witness, that my Orders from his Majesty
are very strict for enquiring into, and effectually preventing for the future
that Lawless and Vile Trade of Pyracy within all my Government.

As I have declared my self against Pyracy, and all Unlawful Trade* so I must
assure you I will giv^ you all the Encouragement I can possibly in carrying on
a lawful Tra^^, and every thing else that will make you Happy and Flourishing.

Mr. Speaker and you Gentlemen Representatives;

I Hope you will take into your Consideration, That the Revenue is near
expiring, and that you will provide for the Support of the Government for the
time to come; and therein give me leave to put you in mind, that your Duty and
Respect to his Majesty should be an agrument to you, no^ to leave the
Government destitute. It would be hard, if I that come among you with an honest
mind, and a Resolution to be just to your Interest, should meet with greater
Difficulties in the discharge of his Majesty's Service than those that have
gone before me. I will take care there shall be no Mis application of the
Public Money: I will Pocket none of it my self, nor shall there be any
^mbezilment by others, but exact Accounts shall be given you, when and as often
as you shall require.

I have ordered all the Accounts to be laid before you, that you may see the
state of the Debts of the Government, and take such course for the Discharge of
them as you shall think fit. I wish too you would consider how to restore
Credit to the Government, which I understand is now very low, if not wholly
lost.

I have ordered the Engineer to go and visit the Fronteers, and to report to me
the State and Condition he finds the Fortifications in, which Report I intend
for you, as soon as it comes to my hands.

Gentlemen, I must remind you of the Necessity there is of finding out some
Expedient to reconcile the Parties among you, I must own to you, I set my heart
so much on it, that I sh^^^ ^hink it the Glory of my Government to bring so
good a work to pass I desire therefore you will think of the proper Methods to
effect an entire Reconciliation among you To be of one Faith and one Mind is
not only an excellent Scripture Rule, but also a good Maxim in Government.
Union amongst a People is the Bound of Peace, and of strength too.

You cannot but know what Abuses have been formerly in Elections of Members to
serve in the Assembly, which tends much to the Subversion of your Liberties. I
do therefore recommend to you the making a Law to provide against it, and that
you will think of such other Laws as you will stand in need of to secure to
this Province a la^ting Happiness, to which I promise you my Concurrence.

I shall conclude Gentlemen, with recommending that which is chiefly incumbent
on us all, an inviolable Duty and Allegiance to his Majesty, who by his valor
has rescued us from the two greatest Plauges that ever infested the World,
Popery and Slavery, and by that, and his Wise and Temperate Government has
secu^'d us the free exercise of our holy Protestant Religion, the enjoyment of
our Liberties and Estates. And as a further Instance and Illustration of the
Glory of his Reign, His Majesty has, with repeated hazards of his precious
Life, procured for Us and all Christendom, a Glorious Peace, for which,
Gentlemen let ^s Address his Majesty, That he will be graciously pleased to
accept of the tender of our most humble Duty and Thanks.



And his Excellency in Council being pleased to approve of Mr Phillip French
for Speaker, the House returned, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and the
House Resolved, That his Excellency's Speech should be then Read, and it was
accordingly read to the House.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be given to his Excellency for his
favorable Speech.

Major Gerhard Beekman, one of the Representatives for Kings County was sworn,
and signed the Test and Association before the Honorable Frederick Phillips,
Coll. Stephanus van Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, and Coll. Gabril Minveil,
Esqrs. appointed by his Exce^lency to administer the same.

A Petition of Dr. Samuel Staats, Capt. Johannes d' Peyster, Alderman Leonard
Lewis and Mr Abraham Governoer, was presented to the House by Major Matthew
Howell, and read. And the House adjourned till to morrow Morning eight a Clock.

Die Veneris A. M. May 20. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be returned to his Excellency for his
favorable Speech in the following Form, viz.

May it please your Excellency;
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Representatives of this his
Majesty's Province, being very sensible of our great Obligation to your
Excellency for your most favorable Speech, think it our Duty to return our
most humble and hearty Thanks for the same, assuring you, That we shall have
all due regard to what your Excellency is pleased to recommend to us therein.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Phillip French, Speaker.



Ordered, That Mr. Gerrard Beekman, Mr. Johannes Bleker and Capt. Jacobus van
Cortland, Members of this House, do wait upon his Excellency with the Thanks of
this House. And the House adjourned till two a Clock afternoon, at the Ringing
of the bell.

Die Veneris P. M. May 20, School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr Speaker assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker, in behalf of this House, demand their Rights and
Privileges, viz. That none of the Members nor their Servants be Arrested or
Molested during the Session. That they have freedom of access to your
Excellency's Person when occasion presents. That they have liberty of Speech,
and a favorable Construction upon all Debates that arise among them. And that
this their Dema^d may be approved by his Excellency and Council, and
accordingly entered in the Council Books.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker give Direction that his Excellency's Speech and the
Votes of this House be printed.

Mr. Speaker and the House attended his Excellency in Council, and did demand
the Rights and Privileges of this House, which his Excellency was pleased to
accept and allow of.

Capt. K^llian van Ranslaer having taken the Oaths appointed by Act of
Parliament, and subscribed the Test and Association, as appeared to the House
by Certificate from Frederick Phillips, Coll. Stephanus van Cortland, Coll.
Nicholas Bayard, and Coll. Gabriel Minveili^, Esqrs. came to the House, and
took his place as Representative for the Baylwick of Ranslaers-wick. And the
House adjourned till to morrow morning eight a Clock.

Die Sabat. A. M May 21. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and
the Rod being read, all the Members were present except Mr. Thomas Garton, one
of the Representatives for the County of Vlster.

The Motion being made, and the Question being put by Mr Speaker, Whether this
House shall draw up an Address to his Majesty, to Congratulate his Majesty's
safe arrival into England, and his obtaining an honorable Peace; and also
congratulating his Excellency's safe arrival into this Government, or consider
of the Petitions concerning Elections and Grievances first. And it was carried
in the Affirmative, That his Majesty and his Excellency be first congratulated.
And the House adjourned till Monday two a clock in the afternoon.

Die Luna P. M. May 23. School.
The House met according to adjournment, Mr Speaker assumed the Chair, and the
Roll being read, all the Members were present, except Mr. Thomas Garton, Mr.
Jo^^ Drake and Mr. Joseph Purdy.

Ordered, That Major Gerrard Beekman, Mr. John Jansen Bleker and Mr. John
Tr^niso^ do wait upon his Excellency, and desire that a Commit of the Council
may be appointed to join with a Committee of this House to draw up an Address
to his Majesty.

James Graham, Esquire his Majesty's Attorney General, brought the following Order
of Council from his Excellency, which the House ordered to be entered, viz.

At a Council held at New York the 23d of May, School. Present his Excellency the
Earl of Bellomont, etc.
UPon the Reading of a Message of the Assembly this day, it is ordered, Coll.
Stephanus Cortland and Coll. William Smith be a Committee of the Council to
join with the Committee of the Assembly, in the forming and drawing up an
Address to his most Excellent Majesty; and that they take the Attorney General
to their Assistance.

Ordered, The Attorney General do deliver this Answer to the Assembly, and do
acquaint them that the Committee of the Council will be ready to meet their
Committee ^t Coll. Cortlands House at six a Clock this Evening.

By Order, David Jamison, Cl. Concilij.



Upon reading the aforesaid Order of Council, Ordered, That Major Matthew
H^well, Major John Jackson, Capt. Thomas VVenham and Capt* Daniel Whitehead be
a Committee to join with the Committee of Council at Coll. Stephen Cortlands
House at six a Clock this Evening, to draw up the Address to his Majesty. And
the House adjourned till to morrow morning eight of the Clock, at the first
Bell.

Die Martis A. M. May 24. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and
the Roll being read, all the Members were present except Mr. Thomas Garton and
Capt. Johannes Kipp

Ordered, That Lieut. Coll. Henry Pierson, Major John Jackson, Mr. Killian van
Ranslaer, and Capt. Johannes Kipp, be a Committee to form and draw up an
Address to Congratulate his Excellency's safe arrival into this Government, and
that they bring the same to the House to morrow morning. And the House
adjourned till two a Clock in the afternoon.

Die Martis P. M. May 24. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and
Major Matthew Howell, Major John Jackson, Capt. Thomas VVenham and Capt. Daniel
Whitehead reported from the Committee appointed to draw up an Address to his
Majesty, That they had made some progress therein, and delive^ed a Draught of
the Address to the House, which was read, and approved by the House.

Ordered, That Capt. Thomas VVenham and Capt. Daniel Whitehead do wait upon
his E^cellency and Council with the Address to his Majesty, for their
approbation.

Lieut. Coll. Henry Pierson, Major John Jackson, Mr. Killian van Ranslaer, and
Capt. Johannes Kipp, appointed a Committee to form and draw up an Address to
Congratulate his Excellency's safe arrival into this Government, Reported to
the House, That they had drawn a Draught thereof, which they delivered, and the
House ordered to be read, and it being approved by the House, they ordered it
to be entered.

To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Capt. General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, and the Territories depending
thereon in America, etc.
The Humble Address of the House of Representatives of his Majesty's Province
of New York.
AS we are most humbly Thankful to his Majesty for the greatest Honor and
Favor that ever was showed to this Province, in appointing so Noble, Just and
Pious a Governor, so we do most heartily Congratulate your Lordships safe
arrival into this your Government, being well assured, from the Zeal which has
been so eminently conspicuous in your Lordship in Europe, for the best Religion
and best Constitution of Laws, That your Government and Example will be a
constant encouragement to the Exercise of our holy Protestant Religion, and a
Support and Maintenance of the Rights and Liberties of ENGLISH MEN, We do
Return our most hearty Thanks for your Lordships most generous Expressions in
your Speech to Us, the Representatives of this Province. In Return to which we
shall make it our chief endeavor to study the best Methods to express the most
inviolable Duty and Gratitude to his Majesty, and the justest Respects and
Value for your Lordship, under whose Government we hope to lay the Foundation
of a lasting Happiness to this Province, by Uniting the Minds of the People,
supporting the Dignity of the Government, and establishing such a Constitution
of Laws as may forever exclude Popery and Slavery.



And the House adjourned till to morrow morning Nine of the Clock.

Die Mercurij A. M. May 25. School.
The House met according to adjournment, Mr Speaker assumed the Chair, and a
Petition of Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John Sh^te, in behalf of themselves
and others, complaining of an undue Election for the County of Westchester made
to his Excellency, and by him referred to this House, was read.

A Petition of Content Titus, Jonas Wood, William Lawrence, Hope Carpenter and
John Coe, complaining of an undue Election for Queens County, was presented to
the House, and read.

A Memorial of the Honorable Coll. Stephanus van Cortland, setting forth, That
one of the Representatives for the County of Richmond is not qualified
according to Law to act as such, was presented to the House, and read.

A Petition of Rocloff Sch^nk, Nicholas Stillwell, Gerrit Stoothoose, in behalf
of themselves, and others, complaining of an undue Return of Representatives
for Kings County, was presented to the House, and read.

Ordered, That Copies of all Petitions, Complaints and Memorials, that lie in
the House, be given, if desired.

Resolved, That Major Gerrard Beekman and Mr. Myndert Courten, Representatives
for Kings County, be heard to morrow at two of the Clock in the afternoon,
concerning the Complaint set forth in the Petition against them by Roeloff
Schenk, Nicholas Stillwell and Gerrat Stoothooff. And the House adjourned till
two Clock in the afternoon.

Die Mercurij P. M. May 25 School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair:

Mr. Thomas Garton, one of the Representatives for the County of Vlster,
Produced to the House a Certificate from the Honorable Frederick Phil^ips,
Coll Stephanus van Cortland. Coll. Nicholas Bayard, and Coll Gabriel Minviel,
Esqrs. that he had taken the Oaths, and subscribed the Test and Association,
and accordingly took his place in the House.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair, and with the House attended his Excellency, with
the Address to Congratulate his safe arrival into this Government; after which
the House returned, and Mr. Speaker to assumed the Chair.

A motion being made, and the Question being put by Mr. Speaker, Whether the
Petitions concerning Elections and Grievances shall be heard before the whole
House or a grand Committee of the whole House? And it was, carried in the
Affirmative, That they should be he^rd by the whole House.

Ordered, That Capt. Daniel Whitehead, and Capt. Thomas Garton do wait upon his
Excellency, and desire that he will be pleased to appoint a Sergeant at Arms to
attend this House

Ordered, That Ebenezer Wilson, Esquire* High Sheriff of the County and City of N.
York, do attend this House on Friday morning, and that a Summons be issued by
Mr. Speaker for his attendance. And the House adjourned till to morrow morning
at Eight of the Clock.

Die Jovis A. M. May 26. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the Sergeant at Arms do Summons Ebenezer Willson, Esquire
High Sheriff of the City and County of New York, to appear at the Bar of this
House to morrow morning at nine of the Clock, to answer the Complaints of Mr.
Samuel Staats, Capt. Johannes d' Peyster, Alderman Leonard Lewis, and Mr.
Abraham Governeer, concerning an undue Return of Representatives for the City
and County aforesaid, as is set forth in their Petition to this House.

Die Jovis P. M. May 26. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Resolved, That all Complaints concerning Elections and Grievances be brought
into this House in Writing, and all Answers to such Complaints be so likewise.

Resolved, That the hearing of the Petition against Major Gerhardus Beekman and
Mr. Meyndert Co^rten be deferred till Saturday next at eight of the Clock in
the morning, upon their request to the House. And the House adjourned till to
morrow morning at eight of the Clock.

Die Veneris Anti Merid. 27 May, School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Upon a Memorial given into this House by the honorable Coll. Steph. van
Cortland, against Mr. John Teunison, one of the Representatives of the County
of Richmond, that he was not qualified according to Law to act as such, which
was this day considered.

Resolved, That the said Mr. John Teunison is not qualified according to Law to
sit as a Member of this House.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker issue his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown that
there be a new Writ for electing a Representative for the County of Richmond.

The Serjant at Arms made Return to the House, of the Summons to Ebenezar
VVillson, Esquire High Sheriff of the City and County of New York, to appear at the
Bar of this House this morning And accordingly the said Ebenezar VVillson
appeared, and delivered in Writing to the House an Answer to the Petition of
Mr. Samuel Staats, Capt. Jo^annes d' Peyster, Alderman Leonard Lewis and Mr.
Abraham Gouverneur.

Ordered, That the said Answer of Ebenezar VVillson, Esquire be read. And it was
read accordingly. And the House adjourned till two a Clock in the afternoon.

Die Veneris P. M. May 27 School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

House of Representatives for the Province of New York.
FOrasmuch as the House of Representatives, upon a Memorial given to them
against Mr. John Teunison, one of the Representatives for the County of
Richmond, by Coll. Steph. van Cortland, Esquire have this day Resolved, That the
said Mr. John Teunison is not qualified by Law to sit in the House. These are
therefore, by virtue of an Order of the House of Representatives convened in
General Assembly, for this his Majesty's Province of New York, and
Dependencies, to require you forthwith to issue out a new Writ to the County
of Richmond, for the electing a new Member, to supply the said Vacancy. Given
under my Hand and Seal this 27th Day of May, in the Tenth Year of his Majesty's
Reign, Anno Dom. School.

To Matthew Clarkson, Esquire Secretary, and Clerk of the Crown, for his Majesty's
Province of New York.


And the House adjourned till to morrow morning eight of the Clock.

Die Sabat. A. M May 28. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That Mr. John Clapp, late Clerk of the Assembly, do enter fairly in
the Journal the Minuits of the Assembly, that are not yet entered, and also
give unto this House a true list of all Papers, Acts and Records, and of the
Assembly, that were in his Custody during the time of his being in the said
Office.

Major Gerrard B^ckman and Mr. Meyndert Courten, two Representatives for Kings
County, delivered to the House their Answer, in Writing, to the Petition of
Roeloff Schenk, etc. relating to their Qualification for being Members of this
House, which the House ordered to be read. And it was read accordingly, and
considered b^ the House. And thereupon a motion being made, and the Question
being put by Mr. Speaker, Whether Major Gerrard Beekman and Mr. Meyndert
Courten were qualified to sit in this House as Representatives for King County?
and it was carried in the Affirmative, They were not Qualified.

Ordered, Mr. Speaker do issue out his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown that
there be a new Writ for the electing two new Representatives for Kings County.

And the House adjourned till Monday at two of the Clock in the afternoon.

Die Luna P. M. May 30. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

A Petition was presented to the House by Mr. Samuel Staats, Capt. Johannes a'
P^^ster, Alderman Leonard Lewis and Mr. Abraham Gouverneur, which the House
ordered to be Read, and it was read accordingly.

Ordered, That the said Samuel Staa^s, Capt. Johannes d' Peyster, Alderman
Leonard Lewis and Mr. Abraham Gouverneur have time given them till Wednesday
next at eight of the Clock in the morning, to prepare their Reply to the Answer
of Ebenezer Willson, Esquire to their Complaint against him.

Ordered, That the Serjant at Arms do summon Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John
Shute of the County of Westchester to appear forth with before this House, to
make good their Complaint against Mr. Benja. Collier, High Sheriff of the said
County, now lying before this House.

Ordered, That the Sergeant at Arms do summon Mr. Benja. Collier, High Sheriff
of the County of Westchester, forthwith to appear at the Bar of this House, to
answer the Complaint of Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John Shute, exhibited to
this House against him, concerning an undue Election of Representatives for the
said County.

And the House adjourned till to morrow Morning at eight of the Clock.

Die Martis A. M. May 31. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Mr. John Harrison, High Sheriff of Queens County, presented to the House an
Answer to the Petition of Content Titus, Jonas VVood, William Lawrence, Hope
Carpenter and John Coc, exhibited against him to this House; which the House
ordered to be read, and it was read accordingly. And the House having caused
the Deposition of Thomas Hicks, Sam. Moor, William Hallet, John Tredwell, Edw.
White, Isaac Daughty, Nath. Pearsall, Jonathan Smith and William Fowler, being
the Witnesses to the said election, to be read.

Resolved, That the Return of the Sheriff of Queens County, of Major John
Jackson, and Capt. Daniel Whitehead as Representatives for the said County, is
a due Return.

And the House adjourned till to morrow morning at eight a Clock.

Die Mercurij A. M. June 1. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair*

Mr. Samuel Staats, Capt. Johannes d' Peyster, Alderman Leonard Lewis and Mr.
Abra, Gouverneur presented to the House their Reply to the Answer of Ebenezer
VVillson, Esquire High Sheriff of the City and County of New York, which the House
ordered to be read, and it was read accordingly.

Ebenezer Willson, Esquire aforesaid, presented to the House the Deposition of
Capt. Brandt Schuyler, Capt. John Hutchins, Capt. Jeremiah Tothell, Capt.
William Morris, Mr. Derrick Vanderburgh, Mr. Matthew Clarkson and Mr. James
Spencer, who were Witnesses to the Election of Representatives for the City and
County of New York, which the House ordered to be read, and it was read
accordingly.

A Motion was made and the Question was put by Mr. Speaker, Whether the Return
of Representatives for the City and County of New York be lawful, or not? and
the House was divided. And the House adjourned till two a Clock in the
afternoon.

Die Mercurij P. M. June 1. School.
The house met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

A Motion was made and the Question was put by Mr. Speaker, Whether the Return
of Representatives for the City and County of New York be lawful, or not? And
it was carried in the Affirmative, That it was lawful.

Ordered, That Coll. Henry Pierson and Major John Jackson attend his
Excellency, and desire that Accounts of the Taxes and Additional Duty be laid
before this House.

Coll. Henry Pierson and Major John Jackson attended his Excellency with the
said Order, and his Excellency desired the House to attend himself and Council
immediately. Upon which Mr. Speaker left the Chair, and the House attended his
Excellency accordingly.

The House returned, and Mr. Speaker re-assum'd the Chair. And the House
adjourned till to morrow morning at eight of the Clock.

Die Jovis A. M. June 2. School.
The H^use met according to adjournment. Ordered, That Major Matthew Howell and
Capt. Thomas VVenham do wat upon his Excellency to desire a Copy of his
Commission for this Government, to lie before this House And they attended his
Excellency accordingly, and he was pleased to give them a Copy of his
Commission, which they delivered to the House.

Mr. John Clapp, late Clerk of the Assembly, according to order, delivered to
the House a List of Papers, Acts, Records, etc. of the Assembly, which he says
are all that were in his Custody during his being in the said Office. And the
House adjourned till to morrow morning at eight of the Clock.

Die Veneris A. M. June 3. School.
The House met according to adjournment. The Sergeant at Arms made Return of
his Summoning Mr. Benja Collier, High Sheriff of the County of VVestchester, to
answer a Complaint against him by Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John Shute of
the said County; and of his summoning the said Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and
John Shute, to make good their Complaint against him.

Ordered, That Major Matthew Howell, Capt. Jacobus van Cortland, Capt. Johannes
Kip, Capt. Daniel Whitehead, Mr. Ryer Schermerhorne, Capt. Thomas Garton, and
Mr. Joseph Purdy be a Committee to examine the Accounts of the Taxes and
Additional Duty, and to make Report thereof to the House on Munnay next, at two
of the Clock in the afternoon.

Mr Benja. Collier, High Sheriff of the County of Westchester, appeared before
the House, according to Summons, and delivered an Answer to the Petition of
Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John Shute, who also appeared at the same time to
make good their Complaint against him, and after a hearing of the (...) on both
sides, Resolved, N^menie Contradic^nte, That the Return of the Sheriff of (...)
County of Westchester of Mr. John Drake and Mr. Joseph Purdy, as
Representatives for the said County, is a due Return. And the House adjourned
till two of the clock in the afternoon.

Die Veneris P. M. June 3. School.
The House met according to adjournment. And having taken into Consideration
those parts of his Excellencies Speech concerning the reconciling of Parties
and Regulating Elections, Ordered, That Lieut. Coll Henry Pierson, Major John
Jackson, Capt. Thomas VVenham, Capt. Killian van Ranslaer, Capt. John Drake,
Mr. Jan Jansen Bleker, and Mr. Abraham Heasbrooke, be a Committee to prepare
and bring in Bills accordingly to morrow Morning at 10 a clock. And the House
adjourned till to morrow morning at ten a clock.

Die Sabat. A. M. June 4. School.
The House met according to adjournment The Committee appointed for preparing
Bills for Reconciling of Parties and Regulating Elections, moved the House for
further time, which was granted till two of the Clock on Monday next. And the
House adjourned till Monday 2 a clock in the afternoon.

Die Luna P. M. June 6. School.
The House met according to adjournment. Mr. Cornelius Sebringh and Mr.
Cornelius Burnt produced to the House a Certificate from the Honorable
Fredrick Phillips, Coll. Steph. van Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard and Coll.
Gabril Minveile, Esqrs. that they had taken the Oaths, and subscribed the Test
and Association, and took their places in the House as Representatives for
Kings County, instead of Major Gerhard Beekman and Mr Myndert Coarten.

The Committee appointed to examine the Accounts of Taxes and Additional Duty,
Reported to the House, That for want of having the Accounts of the Taxes laid
before them, they can make no progress in that matter, and desired further
time, which was granted, til^ to morrow at three a Clock in the afternoon.

The Committee appointed to bring in Bills concerning Reconciling of Parties
and Regulating Elections, reported to the House, That they had agreed on some
Heads for a Bill for Regulating Elections, which was presented to the House,
and read; and they desired further time for preparing the Bills, which was
granted till to morrow at three a Clock in the afternoon. And the House
adjourned till to morrow at two a clock in the afternoon.

Die Martis P. M. June 7. School.
The House met according to adjournment. Mr. John Woglom produced Certificate
to the House that he had taken the Oaths, and subscribed the Test and
Association, and took his place in the House as one of the Representatives for
the County of Richmond, instead of Mr John Tennison.

The Committee appointed to examine the Accounts of Taxes and Additional Duty,
moved the House for further time, which was granted till Thursday next at three
of the clock in the afternoon.

The Committee appointed to bring in Bills for Reconciling of Parties and
Regulating Elections, presented to the House two Bills accordingly, which were
ordered to be read, and were read accordingly. And thereupon a Motion was made
and the Question was put by Mr. Speaker, Whether the Bill for Reconciling of
Parties should be read, the second time or not? And the House was divided.

A Motion was m^de, and the Question was put by Mr. Speaker, Whether this House
shall address his Excellency, that he will be pleased to appoint a Committee of
the Council to join with a Committee of this House to draw up a Bill for
Reconciling of Parties amongst us?

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That his Excellency be addressed accordingly.

Ordered, That Capt. Jacobus van Cortland and Major John Jackson do wait upon
his Excellency to desire that a Committee of the Council may be appointed to
join with a Committee of this House, to draw up a Bill for Reconciling of
Parties amongst us. And the House adjourned till to morrow morning at 8 of the
clock.

Die Mercurij A. M. June 8. School.
The House met according to adjournment. A Remonstrance was presented to the
House, which was ordered to be read, and was read accordingly.

And thereupon a Motion was made, and the Question was put by Mr. Speaker,
Whether the said Remonstrance shall be considered or rejected? And it was
carried in the Affirmative, That it should be rejected. And the House adjourned
till 2 a clock P. M.

Die Mercurij P. M. June 8. School.
The House met according to adjournment. A Message from his Excellency and
Council by Coll. William Smith was presented to the House* and read, which was
ordered to be entered, viz.

At a Council held at New York the 8th of June, School. Present his Excellency
Richard Earl of Bellomont.
HIs Excellency did communicate a Message from the House, praying a Committee
to be appointed to jo^n a Committee of the Assembly for drawing up a Bill for
Reconciling of Parties. Ordered, Coll. William Smith, Coll. Nicholas Baya^d,
and Lieut. Coll* Ga. Minveil be a Committee to join the Committee of the
Assembly for drawing up said Bill accordingly. And the Attorney General is
ordered to be assis^^^r therein.

Coll. William Smith proposed the recommending to the Assembly these following
Matters for their Consideration, viz. That the Act for establishing Courts o^
Judicature will expire by its own Limitation in October next. That the Inferior
Courts of Common Pleas, in the Counties, as established, are inconvenient, by
reason three Justices are commissionated, with one Judge in each County, three
of which are a Quo^am, and two of the four ^eing sick or abs^nt, the Court
cannot sit, by which means Justice has often been delayed. And that Drunkenness
and Debauchery cannot be suppressed by Authority, as it ought, for want of an
explanation of the Clauses in the Act of the Revenue, relating the Excise and
suppressing Unlisenced ^ipling-houses, which is agreed to, and ordered.
Ordered, Coll. William Smith do deliver the Copy of these Minutes, and explain
these Clauses recommended to the Assembly, and appoint the time and place of
the meeting of the Committees.

By Order, David Jamison, Cl. Concilii.



Ordered, That Co^l Henry Pierson, Capt. Killian van Ranslaer, Major John
Jackson, Capt. Thomas VV^^^ham, Capt. John Drake and Mr. Abraham Haasbrooke be
a Committee to join the Committee of the Council to morrow morning at eight a
clock, at the House of Coll. Gabril Minveil, to draw up a Bill for Reconciling
of Parties amongst us; and that they take into their Consideration the
Proposals of Coll. William Smith to this House, and make Report thereof to
morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon. And the House adjourned till to
morrow at two a clock in the afternoon.

Die Jovis P. M. June 9. School.
The House met according to adjournment. The Committee appointed to examine the
Accounts of Taxes and Additional Duty, moved for further time, by reason they
have not had all the Accounts till this day. And it was granted till to morrow
at two of the Clock.

The Committee for drawing up a Bill for Reconciling of Parties amongst us, and
considering the Proposals of Coll. Will. Smith, Reported to the House, That
they met the Committee of Council, and agreed upon Heads for the said Bills,
and ordered the Attorney General to draw them up.

Ordered, That the Bill for regulating Elections be read a second time; and it
was read accordingly, and rejected.

The House having agreed upon Heads for a Bill for regulating Elections,
Ordered, That the Heads of (...) Bill for regulating Elections this day read to
the House, be carried to Mr. Attorney General, that he may draw up a Bill
accordingly. And the House adjourned till tomorr^^ morning at eight of the
Clock.

Die Veneris A. M. June 10. School.
The House met according to adjournment. A Petition of Mr. George Scot,
referred by his Excellency to this House, was read, and lies under
Consideration.

A Memorial of Mr. Alexander Paxton was presented to the House, and read, and
lie; under Consideration. And the House adjourned till two a clock afternoon.

Die Veneris P. M. June 10. School.
The House met according to adjornment. The Committee appointed to examine the
Accounts of Taxes and Additional Duty, presented their Reports of the same to
the House in writing, which were read and approved, and are as follows, viz.

A Committee appointed by the House of Representatives to examine the Accounts
of the ^axes, do find, That from the arrival of Coll. Henry Slaughter,
Governor of this Province, till the 25 th day of March, School. there was raised
by several Acts of Assembly the Sum of 26795 l. 14 s. 8 d.

And do also find, that Mr. Daniel Honan has refunded to the Receiver General,
out of the 25 l. received to pay the Incidentals of the Fuzilers, 18 l. 17 s.
The Total Credit is 26814 l. 14 s. 8 d

And do further find, That the said Receiver General has paid, by Warrants of
the Governor and Council, as by Accounts and Warrants examined by us, app^ars,
the Sum of 2^5^7 l. 15 ^. 8 d.

So that there remains still due of the said Taxes, if all be received from
Fishers Island, R^e, Bed^^rd, and other Counties in Arrearage, 2286 l. 16 s.
Out of which said Sum is still to (...), as per Coll. Cortlands Memorial
annexed to his Account, said before us.

By Order of the Committee, Matthew Howell, Chairman



THe Committee appointed to inspect into the Accounts of the Additional Duty do
find, That March 25. 1696. there was in the Receiver Generals hands 2^3 l. 11
s. 2 d 3 farthings. And since, to the Expiration of the last Act, received the
Sum of 3591 l 17 s. 11 d. half penny. The Total, Sum is 6320 l. 9 s. 2 d. 1 qr.
And that there is paid out of the said Sum, according to the intent and Uses of
the respective Acts for establishing the said Duty, 4443 l. 15 s. 8 d. 1 ^^.
And there remains due to several Persons, that should have been paid before
this time, 290 l. 3 s. 11 d. 3 ^^. And there is now in the hands of the
Receiver General, 1592 l. 9 s. 6 d. 6^26 l. 9 s. 2 d. 1 qr

By Order of the Committee, Matthew Howell, Chairman.



And the House adjourned till to morrow morning at eight a clock.

Die Sabat. A. M. June 11. School.
The House met according to adjournment. The Committee appointed to join with a
Committee of Council to draw up a Bill for Reconciling of Parties amongst us,
and considering the Proposals of Coll. William Smith, presented to the House a
Bill for Reciling of Parties, which was ordered to be read, and was read
accordingly.

A Message from his Excellency was brought by Mr. Jamison, desiring Mr. Speaker
and the House to attend him immediately* And Mr. Speaker left the Chair, and
with the House attended his Excellency accordingly. And the House returned, and
Mr. Speaker re-assum'd the Chair, and reported to the House, That his
Excellency ordered a Petition given to himself and Council by six of the
Members of this House, who have withdrawn themselves, to be read, which his
Excellency was pleased to say, That being very tender in touching the
Privileges of the House, was not cognizable by him, but he did recommend it to
them and the said six Members to go together, and return and do the Countries
Service, that those things which he had recommended to us in his Speech might
not be frustrated; and ordered a Copy of the said Petition to be delivered to
the House, which was done accordingly.

Ordered, That the Bill for Reconciling of Parties be read a second time, and
it was read accordingly, and ordered to be engrossed.

The six Members that have withdrawn themselves, viz. Mr. R. Shermerhorn, Mr.
Jan Jansen Bleeker, Mr. Thomas Mergan, Mr. Cornelius Scbringh, Mr. Cornelius
Brun^, and Mr. Tho. Woglom came into the House, and do say, That they return to
the House as his Excellency recommended them, but cannot sit and act as Members
at present, but desire further time for Consideration. And the House adjourned
till Monday at two of the Clock in the afternoon.

Die Luna P. M. June 13. School.
The House met according to adjournment. And adjourned till to morrow Morning
at eight a Clock.

Die Martis A. M. June 14. School.
The House met according to adjournment. Ordered, That the Bill for Reconciling
of Parties be read the third time, and it was read and passed, and ordered to
be sent up to his Excellency and Council for their assent. Ordered, That Major
John Jackson and Capt. Killian van Ranslaer do carry the Bill for Reconciling
of Parties to his Excellency and Council for their assent. And the House
adjourned till two a Clock afternoon

Die Martis P. M. June 14. School.
The House met according to adjournment. A Message from his Excellency came by
Mr. Jamison, That Mr. Speaker and the House are desired to attend his
Excellency in Council immediately at the Fort. And accordingly Mr. Speaker left
the Chair* and with the House attended his Excellency, who was pleased to
Dissolve the Assembly.


