Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. By the HONORABLE, William
Stoughton Esquire. Lieutenant GOVERNOR and Commander in Chief. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS the Ship Adventure of London, of the burden of between three and four
Hundred Tuns, mounted with Twenty two Guns, Thomas Gulleck Commander, belonging
to the Subjects of His most Serene Majesty WILLIAM the Third, King of Great
Britain etc. being on a Voyage from London in His Majesty's Kingdom of England
unto Borneo in India in the Year of our Lord School. And the said Commander with
his second Mate, Surgeon, Carpenter and two passengers being on Shore at the
Island of Polonis in India aforesaid. Joseph Bradish then Boatswains Mate of
the said Ship, did combine and conspire with others of the said Ships Company
to the number of upwards of Twenty, and piratically and feloniously did seize
and run away with the said Ship and her Lading, consisting of Moneys and Goods
to a very considerable value, and left the said Commander and others on shore
with him as aforesaid, at the said Island of Polonis, exposed to perish there;
and having so done, brought the said Ship and Lading unto Block Island within
His Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island. Where, (having first taken out of her the
Moneys and such part of the Lading as was most valuable) the said Joseph
Bradish, and his Accomplices, have sunk the said Ship, and dispersed themselves
into diverse parts and places, as appears by the confession of some of the said
Ships Company already apprehended here.

I Do therefore, with the Advice of His Majesty's Council, strictly Charge,
Command and Require, all Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and other
His Majesty's Officers and Subjects within this Province, to use their utmost
Endeavors and Diligence, to Seize and Apprehend, or cause to be Seized and
Apprehended, the before named Joseph Bradish, and his Accompllices and
Confederates in the said Piracy and Felony, hereafter named, To wit, Andrew
Martin, John Pierce, Thomas Edgehill, Aylmore Clark, Edward Ham, Rowland
Martin, John Parrot, William Simpson, Robert Nox, Cornelius Larkin, Thomas
Deane, Robert Mason, and one Sweetman, and others whose names are not yet known
with the Money, Bullion, Treasure, Goods and Merchandises taken out of said
Ship, that shall be found with them or any of them, or in the Possession of any
others: And to ccarry such Person and Persons before One or more of the Members
of the Council, or other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to be Examined
and Proceeded against as the Law directs. And all Persons whomsoever are hereby
strictly forbidden, to Countenance, Harbor, Entertain, Comfort, Conceal or
Convey away, the said Joseph Bradish, or any of his Accomplices before named,
or any others, Suspected to be of that Company, or any of their Money,
Treasure, Goods or Merchandises, as they will answer the same at their utmost
Peril.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the First day of April 1699. In the
Eleventh year of His said Majesty's Reign. William Stoughton.

GOD Save the King.
(...) Governor and Council. 1699.


