To His EXCELLENCY, RICHARD, Earl of BELLOMONT, Baron of Coloony, in the
Kingdom of Ireland, GOVERNOR and Commander in Chief of the Provinces of the
Massachusetts Bay, New York and New Hampshire.
The Address of the Ministers met at Boston in New England, May 31^^. 1699.
May it please Your Excellency,
^

And indeed while we Congratulate Your Excellency's Arrival unto this part of
Your Government, We do but Congratulate our own Felicity, in having the Helm of
the Government, by His Majesty's Commission, put into the Hands of One, who is
Adorned with so Charming an Image of His Own Royal Virtues.

His Majesty has for ever obliged the English Nation, by His Royal Assent to
those Acts of Parliament, which have Enriched it with Blessings richly worth
all the Expenses of the Late Happy Revolution. But Your Lordships Most
Generous, and Prosperous Conduct, in laboring to bring about those Acts, has
laid England under the same Obligation to Your Lordship, that Ireland has to
Your Illustrious Ancestors.

From doing of Benefits to the best Island and Garden of the other Haemisphere,
Your Excellency is now come to be a Benefactor, unto the Continent of America,
and Countries that have subdued an American Wilderness, to be a significant
part of the English Empire.

His Majesty in His Royal Wisdom discerned, That the rare Temper, which
qualifies Your Excellency, for the most Honorable Undertakings, would best of
all express His own Gracious Intentions, to this part of His Dominions. And the
Prudence and Goodness, with which Your Excellency has managed the Affairs of
New York, is an actual Demonstration of His Majesty's Wisdom in the Choice of
an Healer for them.

The Condition of Scotland, has been so considered by His Majesty, That He
has not only consented unto their Laws, which have Established their
Church Government, as it is now Reformed; but more than once or twice assured
them of His Resolution to maintain that Church Government among them. This
Greatest of Monarchs that ever Sat on the Throne of Great Britain, and best of
Kings at this Day Swaying a Scepter upon Earth, has now given Your Excellency
the Command over New England; and a People that are a Nation of
Non-Conformists, which those in Scotland justly look upon as their United
Brethren.

Your Excellency expressing so much good will as You have done to the Late Act
of Parliament, which has made the Non-conformists in England, Legal Parts of
the Church in England; well knew what Hearty Friends, the vast Body of
Non-Conformists are to the English Liberties; and what Loyal Subjects to the
High and Mighty Prince, unto whom (under God) We are all Indebted, for the
Recovery of those Liberties; and how much an Union between all Good Men,
whether Conformists or Nonconformists, will contribute unto the Strength of the
Protestant Interest.

And we believe, That Your Excellency will on all occasions express the
good will of a Common Father unto the Churches of Non-conformists (if where
they bear the proportion of more than One Hundred unto One, it be proper to
call them So) in New England: Churches wherein the pure Doctrine in the famous
Articles of the Church of England is Owned and Preached with all possible
Purity; and the Primitive Discipline which even the Liturgy of the Church of
England wishes to see Restored, is practiced.

But we cannot single out any one point therein (...) Importunity more (...)
Your Excellency's (...) our University. It Is Languishing for want of it (...)
us to pray Your Excellency, That You would (...) ^uch a benign (...) upon it
(...) as that by Your Interest and Influence, in concurrence with our General
Assembly, there may be obtained from His Majesty a Settlement of that our
University, upon such Foundations as may (...) answer the Ends, for which both
It, and the Colonies hitherto kept alive by It, (...) Enlarged the English
Empire.

Now (...) shall in our several places Endeavor, That our People may be
Inspire^ (...) Evangelic^^ Principles of Subjection to Government, Obedience to
(...), and Readiness to every Good Work: So we shall make it not (...) That our
Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST, would Preserve the (...) MAJESTY, and bestow His
manifold Benediction on Your Excellen^^ (...) on Your Excellencys Noble and
Hopeful Family.

Increase Mather,
In the Name, and at the Desire of the Ministers, in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, who Met at Boston, May 31. 1699.
BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, 1699.


