ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England: Begun and Held at Boston, the
Thirty-first of May, 1699. And continued by several Prorogations unto Wednesday
the Thirteenth of March following, and then Sat.
An Act for putting the Militia of this Province into a readiness for defense
of the same.
WHEREAS by the Law of this Province, it is already Provided, That, in case of
Alarms made either from a Seaport Town, or other Town lying Frontier to or in
danger of an Enemy, the Captain or Captains of the adjacent Towns shall
forthwith go or send such relief as they shall judge meet for the Offense of
the Enemy, and Defense of themselves, etc. But Forasmuch as the Occasion may be
such and so sudden, as it may be necessary to call together, Arms, Array and
put into a posture for War the whole Militia and Forces of one or more
Regiments for the Defense of the Province, and His Majesty's Subjects therein,
in case of Invasion or near, approach of an Enemy before the notices thereof
can reach the Captain General or Commander in Chief, to have Directions or
Orders from him for the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by His Excellency the Governor, Military
Commission officers Empowered by force of Arms to encounter any hostile
enterprise.
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all persons
Commissioned by the Captain General or Commander in Chief of this Province for
the time being, to bear Office in any Military Company or Troop within the
same, be, and hereby are Empowered and Authorized by virtue of such Commission,
when and as Occasion shall require, in the cases and to the intents and
purposes above said, to Arm, Array and Weapon the Company or Troop respectively
under their Command, or part of them, and by force of Arms to Encounter, Repel,
Pursue, Kill and Destroy any that shall appear in hostile manner to attempt or
enterprise the destruction, invasion, detriment or annoyance of any of His
Majesty's Subjects, Forts, Garrisons, Towns or Plantations within this
Province. And that such Officer or Officers so taking to Arms, shall forthwith
dispatch notice to his or their Superior Officer of his or their motion and
the occasion thereof, and observe such Commands and Orders as he or they shall
receive from him.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Colonel or
Chief Officer of each Regiment be, and hereby is Empowered and Authorized, as
occasion shall require, Colonel or chief Officer of any Regiment his Power.
in any of the cases and to the intents beforementioned from time to time to
assemble in Martial Array, and put into Warlike posture the whole Militia of
the Regiment under his Command, or such part of them as he shall think needful,
upon any Alarm, Invasion, or notice of the appearance of an Enemy by Sea or
Land: And the Regiment, Companys or Troops so armed, arrayed and put into
Warlike posture, or part of them to lead, conduct and employ, or to appoint
some other fit person by writing under his hand to lead, conduct and employ
them as well within the Regiment and County whereto they belong, as into any
other adjacent County or place within this Province for the assisting,
succouring and relieving any of His Majesty's Subjects, Forts, Garrisons, Towns
or places that shall be assaulted by an Enemy, or in danger thereof, and with
such Party, Companies or Troops, by force of Arms to Encounter, Repel, Pursue,
Kill and Destroy such Enemy or any of them, by all fitting ways, enterprises
and means whatsoever. And the Colonel or Chief Officer of such Regiment so
taking to Arms, To post away Intelligence to the Captain General etc.
or sending forth any party of men, shall forthwith post away the intelligence
and ocasion thereof unto the Captain General or the Commander in Chief for the
time being; and shall attend and observe such Directions and Orders as he shall
receive from him. And in case it happen the Colonel or Chief Officer of any
Regiment be out of the Limits or Precincts of the Regiment for which he is or
shall be Commissioned, at the time of any Invasion, Attack or appearance of an
Enemy, The like power given to the next Commission Officer in case of the
absence of the chief Officer.
or Alarm given from any of the Neighboring Towns or Regiments, the next
Commission Officer then within the Regiment shall have, use and exercise the
same powers and authorities herein before granted, until the return of the
Colonel or other Superior Officer. And such Officer so acting shall post away
the Inteligence thereof with the occasion for the same as aforesaid unto the
Captain General, or the Commander in Chief for the time being, and shall attend
and observe such Directions and Orders as he shall receive from the Captain
General or Commander in Chief therein.

And for the better preventing of false Alarms by disorderly Shooting off Guns
in the night.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons
whatsoever in any Town or Garrison, shall, during the time of War, or of
keeping a Military Watch in such Town or Garrison, Penalty for Shooting off
Guns after Sun set, and before Sun rising.
presume to discharge or Shoot off any Gun or Guns after the Suns Setting, or
before the Sun's Rising, unless in case of Alarm, approach of an Enemy, or
other necessary defense. On pain that every person so offending and being
thereof convicted before one or more of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings for each Gun so discharged,
one Moiety thereof to and for the use of the poor of the Town where the Offense
shall be committed, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform or
prosecute for the same. And if such Offender shall not have wherewith to answer
the said Fine, or shall refuse or neglect to pay the same, then he shall be Set
in the Stocks not exceeding two hours time.

And in case any person so offending be belonging to any Garrison or Forces in
actual Service, and borne in His Majesty's Pay, he shall be punished at the
discretion of a Court Martial, or the Commission Officers of the Garrison,
Company, or Troop whereto he belongs, by putting into the Bilbo's, laying Neck
and Heels, or Riding of the Wooden Horse.

An Act for sending of Succors and Assistance to the Neighboring Provinces
and Colonies against His Majesty's Enemies.
FORASMUCH as there may be occasion for the Raising and Sending of Succors and
Assistance to the Neighboring Provinces and Colonies for the Defense of His
Majesty's Subjects and Interests.

Be it Enacted and Declared by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That in the Vacancy of the General Assembly, it shall be in the power of the
Captain General or Commander in Chief for the time being, by and with the
advice and consent of the Council, to Transport such part of the Militia of
this Province as they shall find needful, or oblige them to March into any of
the Neighboring Provinces or Colonies at any time or times as there shall be
occasion until the end of the Session of the General Assembly to Meet and Sit
in May, which will be in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
One, and not afterward.

An Act for Levying Soldiers.
FOR the more speedy and effectual levying of Soldiers for His Majesty's
Service, when and so often as there shall be Occasion of the same, for the
preservation and defense of His Majesty's Subjects and Interests, and the
prosecuting, encountering, repelling or subduing such as shall at any time
attempt in hostile manner to enterprise the destruction, invasion, detriment or
annoyance, of this His Majesty's Province, or any of His Majesty's Subjects
therein. And for the better preventing disappointments through default of any
employed in levying of such Soldiers, or by the non appearance of such as
shall be so levied.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That when and so
often as the Chief Officer of any Regiment of Militia within this Province
shall receive Orders from the Captain General or Commander in Chief for the
time being of the said Province, for the detaching and impressing, Chief
Officer of a Regiment upon orders receied to grant Warrants forth with for the
Impressing Soldiers.
or causing to be detached and impressed, for His Majesty's Service out of the
Regiment under his Command, so many Soldiers as in such Orders shall be
mentioned: Such Chief Officer of the Regiment shall forthwith thereupon issue
forth his Warrants to the Captains or Chief Officers of the Companies or Troops
within his Regiment, or such of them as he shall thinK fit, requiring them
respectively, to detach and impress out of the Militia in the Companies or
Troops under their Command, so many able Soldiers furnished and provided as
the Law directs, as in the whole shall make up the number which by the Orders
of the Captain General or Commander in Chief he shall be directed to detach and
impress. On pain that every Chief Officer of a Regiment that shall neglect or
not do his utmost to send forth his said Warrants seasonably (having Orders for
the same as above mentioned) shall forfeit and pay a Fine of Twenty Pounds.
Penalty for neglect.
And every Captain or other Chief Officer of any Company or Troop that shall
receive any Warrant from the Chief Officer of the Regiment whereto such Company
or Troop belongs, for the impressing out of the same, any Soldier or Soldiers
for His Majesty's Service, Captains of Companies to have so many Soldiers in
readiness as he shall be required.
shall there upon use his utmost endeavor to detach or impress, or cause to be
detached or impressed so many Soldiers as by such Warrant he shall be
required; and to have them at the place of Randevouz in time, as therein shall
be mentioned: On pain that every Captain or Chief Officer of any Company or
Troop that shall neglect or not do his utmost to comply with and perform any
Warrant to be by him received as aforesaid from the Chief Officer of the
Regiment, shall, for such his neglect and default, Penalty for neglect.
pay a Fine of Ten Pounds. And every Officer or Soldier that shall receive a
Warrant from his Captain or the Chief Officer of the Company or Troop in which
he is inlisted, Persons employed to Impress, their penalty for neglect.

Penalty for not assisting them.

No reward to be taken for sparing of any.

Forfeitures how to be recovered.


for the detaching or impressing of men, shall forthwith attend and perform the
same on pain of paying a Fine of Five Pounds; and all persons are required to
be aiding and assisting to him in the Execution of such Warrant, on pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Forty Shillings: And if any person authorized as
aforesaid, to impress any Soldier or Soldiers for His Majesty's Service shall
exact or take any reward to discharge or spare any from said Service, he shall
forfeit ten times so much as he shall so exact or take.

All which fines and penalties aforesaid, shall be one Moiety thereof unto His
Majesty, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Province, and
the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same by
Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person liable
and fit for Service being orderly impressed as aforesaid for His Majesty's
Service, Penalty for persons impressed neglecting to appear.
by being Commanded in His Majesty's Name to attend said Service, shall by
himself or other meet person in his room (to the acceptance of his Captain or
Chief Officer) attend the same at time and place appointed, on pain of
suffering six months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize, to be committed by
Mittimus from any Justice of the Peace or Chief Officer of the Company or
Troop, where no Justice of the Peace is in the Town, upon conviction of such
neglect, unless such person within the space of two hours next after his being
impressed, shall pay to his Captain or Chief Officer by whose Warrant he shall
be impressed the Sum of Ten Pounds, to be employed for the procuring and
fitting out of a suitable person in the stead of him so paying the said Sum,
for the Service for which he was impressed, if such other suitable person be
timely to be had, otherwise to the use of the Company or Troop whereto such
person belongs, for and toward the support of the necessary Charges arising
within the same, at the discretion of the Commission Officers. And if the
Captain or Officer to whom the said Sum of Ten Pounds shall be paid as
aforesaid by any person impressed cannot seasonably procure another suitable
person to Serve in the stead of him, so paying the said fine, such Captain or
Chief Officer shall in such case forthwith make out a new Warrant for
impressing another Soldier instead of him that was before impressed, and shall
renew his Warrants as often as there shall be occasion, until the number sent
for from him be completed. And all persons paying the said Sum of Ten Pounds
as before mentioned shall be esteemed as persons that have Served, and be no
further or otherwise liable to any after Impress than those that actually go
forth in Service at the same time.

And all persons lawfully empowered to impress, may pursue any person that hides
from the Press, or makes his Escape, and may by himself or Deputy, impress such
person in any place within the Province. Persons empowered to impress their
power to pursue.
And if any person impressed for His Majesty's Service being so duly returned,
shall remove or go out of the Province, and not attend the Service as required,
such person at his return shall be apprehended by Warrant from any Justice of
the Peace, and be by him committed to Prison, unless such person give
sufficient Security to answer it at the next General Sessions of the Peace, and
upon due conviction of the said Offense, by the Oath of him that impressed him,
shall suffer three months Imprisonment, Penalty on persons that remove after
being impressed
and before he be released, shall also pay a Fine of Ten Pounds to the use of
the Company or Troop whereto he belonged at the time of his impress: And if any
person directly or indirectly, by counsel or otherwise shall prevent the
impressing, conceal any person impressed, or knowingly further his Escape, such
person shall pay as a Fine, Forty Shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Soldiers shall
be in pay from the time of their being impressed or detached till they be
orderly discharged, Time of Soldiers pay
and have reasonable time allowed them to repair to their usual places of abode.

And if any Captain or other Chief Officer shall dismiss any Soldier Retained
in His Majesty's Service, and assume another for gain, Penalty for dismissing
any Soldier and assuming another for gain.
such Captain or other Chief Officer shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds to
be recovered and disposed of in manner as is before provided for the fine or
penalty on Officers neglecting to execute Warrants for impressing of Soldiers.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Soldiers
and Seamen that have been Wounded in His Majesty's Service within this
Province, and are thereby Maimed or otherwise disabled, and had yearly Pensions
heretofore allowed them, Pensions.
shall have the continuance of the same during their abode in this Province, to
be paid them out of the Public Treasury. And all such Soldiers and Seamen as
at any time hereafter shall be Maimed or otherwise disabled by any Wound to be
received in His Majesty's Service within this Province, shall be relieved out
of the Public Treasury, as the Great and General Court or Assembly shall Order.

And if any Soldier shall lose his Arms in His Majesty's Service, not through
his own neglect or default, such loss shall be born by the Public; Loss of Arms
and in case any Soldier be furnished with Arms for any Expedition in said
Service, he shall allow out of his Wages Four Pence Per Week for the same; and
return such Arms, or otherwise pay the value thereof.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in force unto the end of the Sessions
of the General Assembly, to be begun and held on the last Wednesday in May,
which will be in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, and
no longer.

An Act against Deserters.
FOR the better Preventing of Soldiers or Mariners Departure from their
Captains or Commanders without leave, or Deserting His Majesty's Service.

Be it Enacted and Declared by his Excellency the Governor, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Penalty for deserting His
Majesty's Service.
That no Soldier or Mariner retained in His Majesty's Service, and Born in
His Majesty's pay in Garrison or elsewhere by Sea or Land, shall Depart without
License of his Commander and Desert His Majesty's Service, on Pain of being
proceeded against as a Felon, and shall suffer the pains of Death, or some
other grievous Punishment at the Discretion of the Court before whom the Trial
shall be.

And every Justice of the Peace within his Precinct, is hereby Authorized and
Required to cause all such Deserters or Runaway Soldiers or Mariners which
he shall know or be informed of, How deserters shall be tried.
to be apprehended and secured in order to a Trial at the next Assizes to be
holden for the same County where they shall be taken; or at a Court of Oyer and
Terminer by Commissioners to be specially Appointed and Empowered for that
purpose.

An Act for Punishing of Officers or Soldiers, who shall Mutiny or Desert His
Majesty's Service.
WHEREAS the Raising and Levying of Forces is necessary in time of actual War,
or common danger by Insurrection or Rebellion, for the safety and defense of
this Province, and of His Majesty's Subjects and Interests therein, and in the
Neighboring Provinces in Colonies.

And whereas no man may be forejudged of Life or Limb, or subjected to any kind
of punishment by Martial Law, or in any other manner than by the judgment of
his Peers, and according to the known and Established Laws of the Province. Yet
nevertheless it being requisite for retaining such Forces as shall be Raised
for His Majesty's Service on occasion as before mentioned, in their Duty, that
an exact Discipline be observed, and that Soldiers who shall Mutiny or Stir up
Sedition, or shall Desert His Majesty's Service be brought to a more exemplary
and speedy punishment than the usual Forms of Law will allow.

Officers or Soldiers exciting or joining in Mutiny or Sedition, or deserting
the Service how to be punished.
Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and it is Declared by the Authority of the same, That every person
that shall be in His Majesty's Service being Mustered and in Pay as an Officer
or Soldier; who shall at any time during the continuance of this Act, excite,
cause or join in any Mutiny or Sedition in the Army, Fortress or Garrison
whereto such Officer or Soldier belongs; or shall desert His Majesty's Service
in the Army, Fortress or Garrison, shall suffer Death or such other punishment
as by a Court Martial shall be inflicted. Captain General or Commander in Chief
of the Province, with the consent of the Council to grant Commission for Courts
Martial.


And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, That the Captain General or
Commander in Chief of this Province for the time being, may by virtue of this
Act, and during the continuance thereof have full Power and Authority, by and
with the advice and consent of the Council, to grant Commission to any Colonel
or other Field Officer in His Majesty's Service, and under Pay from time to
time, to call and assemble Courts Martial, for punishing such Offenses as
aforesaid.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, That no Court Martial which
shall have power to inflict any punishment by virtue of this Act for any of the
Offenses aforesaid, shall consist of fewer than Eleven; Constitution of such
Court.
whereof none to be under the degree of a Commission Officer; And the
Praesident of such Court Martial not to be under the degree of a Field Officer,
or the then Commander in Chief of the Forces under Pay, where the Offender is
to be Tried. Power to Swear witnesses.
And that such Court Martial shall have Power and Authority to Administer an
Oath to any Witness in order to the Examination or Trial of the Offenses
aforesaid.

Ordinary Process of Law not exempted.
Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend or be
construed to Exempt any Officer or Soldier whatsoever from the ordinary
Process of Law.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the first
day of July, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, Time
of the continuance of this Act.
and no longer.

Provided always and be it Enacted, That in all Trials of Offenders by Courts
Martial to be held by virtue of this Act, where the Offense may be punished by
Death, Officers on Trials before a Court Martial to be Sworn.
every Officer present at such Trial before any proceeding be had thereupon,
shall take an Oath before the Court, and a Justice of Peace if any such be
there present; Otherwise the Praesident of such Court, being first Sworn by two
of the Members thereof, shall Administer the Oath unto the others. And the
Praesident of such Court, and any two other Members thereof are hereby
respectively Authorized to Administer the same in these words. That is to say,
YOU shall well and truly Try and Determine according to your Evidence the
matter now before you between Our Sovereign Lord the KING, Form of the Oath.
and the Prisoner to be Tried. So help you God.

And no Sentence of Death shall be given against any Offender in such case by
any Court Martial, No Sentance of Death to pass on Offenders, unless nine of
Eleven agree.
unless nine of the Eleven Officers present shall concur therein. And if there
be a greater number of Officers present, then the Judgment shall pass by the
concurrance of the greater part of them so Sworn; which major part shall not be
less than nine, and not otherwise. Nor shall any Sentance of Death passed by
any Court Martial upon any Offender, be put in Execution, until Report be made
of the whole matter by the Praesident of such Court, No Sentance of Death to be
Executed until the Captain General etc. give directions therein.
unto the Captain General or Commander in Chief of this Province for the time
being, in order to receive his directions therein, and the Prisoner shall be
kept in safe custody in the mean time And the Provost Martial shall have a
Warrant Signed by the Praesident of the Court to cause Execution to be done
according to Sentance before the same be Executed.

An Act to prevent the Deserting of the Frontiers of this Province.
FORASMUCH as the maintaining and defending of the Frontiers in time of War is
of very great import. And in regard it would greatly prejudice His Majesty's
Interest, and Encourage an Enemy if any of the Out Posts should be quitted or
exposed by lessening the strength thereof.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Town or Precinct, being a
Frontier of this Province, which the Towns hereafter named are to be so
accounted. That is to say, Wells, York, Kittery, Aimsbury, Haverhill,
Dunstable, Chelmsford, Groton, Lancaster, Marlborough, Frontier Towns etc.
Brookfield, Deerfield, Mendon, and Woodstock. Nor any of the Towns following,
To wit, Salisbury, Andover, Billerica, Hatfield, Hadley, Westfield and
Northhampton (which though they be not Frontiers as those Towns first named,
yet lie more open than many others to an Attack of an Enemy) shall be broken
up, or voluntarily deserted, Not to be broken up or deserted with out leave.
without application first made by the Inhabitants, and allowance had and
obtained from the Governor or Commander in Chief and Council for their drawing
off, if it appear to them that it may be of public advantage, or that the
place is not Tenable. Penalty on particular persons that shall desert.
Nor shall any Inhabitant of the Frontier and other Towns or Precincts
before-named, or of any of them, having an Estate of Freehold in Lands or
Tenements within the same, at the time of any Insurrection or breaking forth of
any War, remove from thence, with intent to sojourn or inhabit elsewhere
without special License first had and obtained as aforesaid. On pain of
forfeiting all his Estate in Lands and Tenements lying within the Bounds or
Limits of such Town or Precinct unto His Majesty to be disposed by Grant of the
General Assembly, and the produce thereof to be employed toward the defense of
such Town or Precinct, and support of the Garrisons within the same, and not
otherwise. And the Select men or major part of them together with the Chief
Military Officer of such Town or Precinct are hereby enjoined and ordered to
give notice by Certificate in Writing under their hands into the Clerks Office
of the Superior Court of Judicature, Forfeiture how to be Employed.
of the removal of any such person or persons as aforesaid: And the Clerk on
Receipt thereof shall issue out a Scire Facias, requiring the person or persons
so removing, to appear at the next Superior Court of Judicature to Sit within
the same County to show cause if any there be, why Judgment should not be
entered for the forfeiture of his Lands and Tenements as by this Act is before
directed. And in case any person being lawfully Summoned fifteen days before
the day of the Courts Sitting, Forfeiture how to be recovered.
and return thereof made by the Officer shall make default of appearance by
himself or Attorney at the Court where such Writ is returnable, his default
shall be recorded, and another Scire Facias be issued out for his appearance at
the next Court, and if such person, being duly Summoned, and return thereof
made as aforesaid a second time, do not then appear, or if he appear either at
the first or second Summons, and shall not produce a License from the Governor
and Council for his removal, Judgment shall be entered for the forfeiture of
such Lands or Tenements, notwithstanding any real or pretended Sale or
Conveyance thereof, or any part thereof made between the breaking out of a War,
Insurrection or Rebellion and such Judgment entered up.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Male person of
Sixteen Years of Age or upwards that shall be an Inhabitant of or belonging to
any of the said Towns or Precincts herein before named, Penalty on persons
removing that have no Estate in Lands
at the time of any Insurrection or breaking forth of any War as aforesaid, and
not have any Lands or Tenements in such Town or Precinct shall presume to
remove from the same to sojourn or remain elsewhere during the time of such
Insurrection or War without special License first had and obtained as
aforesaid, On pain of forfeiting unto His Majesty the Sum of Ten Pounds,
toward Support and Defense of said Town or Precinct from whence he shall so
remove, and the Garrisons within the same, upon Conviction of such removal at
the Court of General Sessions of the Peace in the County where such Town or
Precinct lies. And the Select-men or major part of them, with the Chief
Military Officer of any Town or Precinct from which any such person shall
remove without License as aforesaid, Forfeiture how to be applied and recovered.
are hereby ordered and enjoined, to send a Certificate in Writing under their
hands of the removal of such person, and time when, unto some of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace in the County where they shall be informed such person
may be found. And every Justice of the Peace unto whom such Certificate or
Complaint shall be brought, is hereby empowered and required to grant a Warrant
for the apprehending of such person, if he may be found within his Precinct,
and conventing of him before himself, or some other of His Majesty's Justices,
who shall require sufficient Security for such persons appearance to answer for
the same at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the same
County from whence he did so remove, Justices of the Peace to apprehend persons
so removed.
and transmit the Recognizance taken for such persons appearance accordingly
unto the Court. And in case the party can find no such Security, then such
Justice before whom he shall be convented, shall cause him to be conveyed, at
his own Charge from Constable to Constable, and carried before one of His
Majesty's Justices within the County from whence he removed, who is empowered*
and required to commit such Offender unto the Common Goal of the County, unless
he can find Security as aforesaid. And if such person be Convicted of the said
Offense, and be ordered by the Court to pay the fine or forfeiture aforesaid,
and shall neglect or be unable to pay the same, he shall be employed in Service
for the benefit of said Town or Precinct as the Select men shall direct, until
by his Service he shall have fully answered and satisfied the said forfeiture.

Provided this Act shall continue and be in force until the end of the Session
of the General Assembly, to begin and be held in May, in the Year of our Lord,
One Thousand Seven Hundred and (...) no longer.

An Act to Repeal one part of an Act passed by the Great and General Court or
Assembly, begun and hold at Boston the Twenty-fifth day of May, School.
Entitled, An Act for the Establishing of Precedents and Forms of Writts and
Processes in Civil Causes, and for making other Provision instead thereof.
WHEREAS in and by the aforesaid Act (amongst other things) it was Enacted,
That where any Execution shall be returned satisfied in part only, the Officer
who granted the same may ex Officio renew or make out an Alias Execution for
the Remainder, provided it be done within the space of Twelve Months next after
Judgment given, without a Scire Facias being sued forth by the party that
recovered the Judgment; which said Clause or part of the Act aforesaid being
found by Experience to be inconvenient and prejudicial in many respects.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That the aforesaid Clause or part of the said Act, and every Article, Matter
and Thing therein contained, shall and is hereby repealed, determined made
void, and of none Effect and Force, as if the same had never been made.

And that there may be no delay or failure of Justice in any kind within this
Province.

Be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That where any
Execution is, or shall be returned, That neither the Goods, Estate, or person
of the Defendant in such Execution named can be found, or that the said
Execution is satisfied only in part, the Officer from time to time, within the
space of twelve months next after return thereof made into the Office, may ex
Officio renew or make out an alias or pluries Execution for the whole, or the
remainder as the Case may be, until the Judgment be fully satisfied without a
Scire Facias being Sued forth upon the Judgment recovered; Any Law, Custom, or
Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act in Addition to the Act for building with Stone or Brick in the Town of
Boston, and preventing Fire.
FORASMUCH as notwithstanding the good and wholesome Provision made and
Established by the said Act, Entitled, An Act for building with Stone or Brick
in the Town of Boston, and preventing Fire, Past in the Fourth year of the
Reign of His present Majesty, and of the late Queen MARY, His Royal Consort of
happy Memory, diverse persons the penalty in said Act not regarding, have been
so hardy as to Erect and build Houses, Tenements, and Edifices of Timber,
contrary to the express prohibition, true intent and meaning of the said Law.
And Forasmuch as the demolishing of such Houses and Buildings (being now
finished) and proceeding according to the directions of the said Law, would
probably be thought over great Severity. Yet that such bold and open contempt
may not pass wholly unpunished, and to the intent that others may be deterred
from (...) like for (...).

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Court of
General Sessions of the Peace within the County of Suffolk, be and is hereby
Empowered and Required to take effectual Order for the enquiring after and
conventing before them, Penalty on such as have built with Timber contrary to
Law.
all persons that have so transgressed as aforesaid, in having presumed to
Erect, or that have caused to be Erected and Set up within the Town of Boston
aforesaid, any House, Edifice or Building of Timber; Or of Brick or Stone, and
not covered the same with Slate or Tyle contrary to the before recited Act, and
the true intent and meaning thereof; Not having had and obtained License from
the Governor and Council for his or their so doing; Or that have not observed
and performed the Terms or Condition of such License; and upon due conviction
of any such Offense, to fine every such person and persons at the discretion of
said Court according to the circumstances aggravating the Offense, with respect
to the place where such House or Building is Erected or otherwise, Fines how to
be applied.
not exceeding the Sum of Fifty Pounds, for one Offense, which shall excuse
them from any further penalty of the Law. All such Fines to be applied toward
the Raising of a Stock for the Setting of the Poor on work within the said
Town, at the Workhouse for that purpose appointed or to be appointed.

Grand jury to enquire and present such Transgressions.
And the Grand Jury for the said County from time to time are required
diligently to enquire after, and to present unto the Court all transgressions
of the Law in that kind, which shall come to their knowledge.

And inasmuch as it may be of no apparent hazard unto the said Town, and for
the ease and benefit of diverse Inhabitants and Proprietors within the same,
That in some parts of the said Town of Boston, Timber Buildings should be
permitted and allowed to be Erected.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of Peace,
Governor and Council may grant License to build with Timber.
and the Select-men of the said Town of Boston, or the major part of each,
certifying their approbation thereof, the Governor and Council may grant
License for the setting up of Timber Houses and Buildings, with and under such
Conditions, Limitations and Restrictions for the enclosing and covering thereof
as they shall think fit: Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An Act relating to Billerica Bridge in the County of Middlesex.
FOR Issuing of the Controversy between the Towns of Groton, Billerica and
Chelmsford, and the Inhabitants of the Farms adjacent arising by reason of the
refusal or neglect of the Agents for the Town of Groton aforesaid* to pay the
Sum set and proportioned on their Town, for and toward the Erecting and
Building of the Bridge in the said Town of Billerica, in the County of
Middlesex, which ought in equity to have been paid, the Sum being Twenty Four
Pounds and Ten Shillings.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Court of
Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden at Concord, in the said County of
Middlesex, on the Second Tuesday of June next, are hereby ordered and empowered
to issue and send forth a Warrant to the Select-men or Assessors of the said
Town of Groton, requiring them forthwith to Levy and Assess the said Sum of
Twenty Four Pounds and Ten Shillings Money, on the Inhabitants of their Town
according to Law, and with the Assessment to deliver a Warrant to the Constable
of their Town, requiring him to Collect and Gather the same, and said Sum so
collected, to deliver and pay in unto Major Thomas Hinksman, Major Jonathan
Tinge, and Mr. John Lane Undertakers for the Building of the Bridge lately
Erected in Billerica abovesaid, and said Constable to pay in the said Sum, and
issue and settle his account with the said Undertakers, at or before the first
day of August next. And Groton shall not be liable to Contribute any thing
further toward the Repair or Rebuilding said Bridge at any time for the future,
unless the General Court or Assembly shall order the same.

An Act directing how Rates or Taxes to be Granted by the General Assembly
shall be assessed and collected.
FORASMUCH as for the Support of the Government of this His Majesty's Province
of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and for the safety and defense of the
said Province, and defraying of the contingent Charges arising within the same,
it is necessary a suitable supply of Money should be from time to time granted
by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the said Province. To the intent
therefore that there may be due provision made and established for assessing
all such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be hereafter granted by the Great and
General Court or Assembly of this Province to be Levied upon the Polls or
Estates within the same, or upon both Polls and Estates, for the support of the
Government thereof, or any other public use or uses whereto the General
Assembly shall think fit to apply such Grant or Grants. As also that there may
be like due provision to enforce the collecting and paying into the Treasury
such Sum and Sums of Money so to be granted as aforesaid according to the true
intent of the Act or Acts granting the same.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the fame, That in the month of
March annually, at the same time when Town Officers are chosen by the
respective Towns within this Province according to the direction of the Act
Entitled, Assessors to be annually chosen in the Month of March.
An Act for Regulating of Townships, choice of Town Officers, and setting forth
their Power: There may be Elected and Chosen by the Freeholders and other
Inhabitants of every Town duly qualified to Vote in Town Affairs, then present,
or the major part of them, three, five, seven or nine meet persons to be
Assessors of all such Rates and Taxes as the Great and General Court or
Assembly shall by any Act or Acts to be by the same duly made and passed, order
and appoint such Town to pay toward the Public Charges of the Province,
within or during the space of one year from the Choice of such Assessors; Every
of which so Chosen, to be Sworn.
shall within the space of seven days next after, be Sworn before a Justice of
the Peace, or Town Clerk in any Town where no Justice of the Peace dwells (who
are hereby respectively empowered thereto) in manner following. That is to say,
YOU A. B. being Chosen an Assessor of such Rates or Taxes as the Great and
General Court or Assembly of this Province have or shall order and appoint the
Town of C. to pay into the Province Treasury, during the space of one year next
ensuing. Form of Assessors Oath.
Do Swear, That in assessing or apportioning such Rates or Taxes you will
proceed equally and indifferently according to your best skill and judgment and
the Rules to be prescribed in the Act or Acts granting the same. So help you
God.

And the Town Clerk or two of the Select-men of every Town shall forthwith make
and give out unto the Constable or Constables of the same, a List of the names
of those that shall be Chosen Assessors at any Town meeting as aforesaid. Which
Constable or Constables shall thereupon Summon each of the said Assessors, to
appear at a certain time and place within the space of seven days from the day
of their Election, before a Justice of the Peace, if any dwell in such Town, or
otherwise before the Town Clerk thereof, to take the Oath above mentioned And
if any such Assessor shall neglect to appear accordingly; Or appearing, shall
refuse to take the said Oath, he shall forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor
of such Town, the Sum of Forty Shillings, and if in Boston, Five Pounds, to be
recovered in manner and form as is by Law provided for recovering of fines and
forfeitures to the use of the poor. Penalty on Assessors chosen that shall
refuse.


And the Select-men of every such Town where any one or more of the Assessors
so chosen as aforesaid, shall refuse to Serve as aforesaid, shall forthwith
after notice thereof, Summon a Meeting of the Freeholders and Inhabitants of
such Town, to choose one or more Assessor or Assessors in the room or rooms of
such so refusing. Which Freeholders and Inhabitants duly qualified to Vote, a
new choice to be made.
being so assembled, shall accordingly choose so many Assessors as shall be
wanting to complete the number, which the Town at the time of their first
choice voted and agreed should be Elected for the same. Provided nevertheless,
That it shall be in the power of the Court of General Sessions of the Peace
upon reasonable excuse made unto them by any Assessor or Assessors chosen for
any Town or Towns in the County for which such Court is holden and kept, Court
of General Sessions of the Peace Empowered to abate or remit the Penalty.
that shall refuse to accept as aforesaid, to abate and remit unto such
Assessor or Assessors (if they see cause) the forfeiture or penalty aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Town shall
not choose Assessors as aforesaid, or if so many of them so chosen as
aforesaid, Select-men or Trustees of Towns to be Assessors in case.
shall refuse to accept as that there shall not be such a number of them as any
Town shall agree to be the Assessors thereof: Then and in either of the said
Cases, the Select-men or Trustees of such Town shall be* and are hereby
declared and appointed the Assessors of the same, and every of them shall take
the Oath before recited in manner as aforesaid. And each Assessor attending
that Service shall be allowed and paid out of the Town Treasury, Two Shillings
Per Diem for each day, Assessors Allowance.
he is necessarily employed thereabout.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if at any, time
there shall be a default or neglect in any Town or Precinct, Penalty on Towns
that shall neglect to choose Select-men or Assessors.
to make choice of Select-men or Assessors, the said default or neglect being
certified and made appear unto the General Sessions of the Peace within the
same County, such Town or Precinct shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty
Pounds, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Province, and in
such case, as also where neither the Select men nor Assessors chosen by any
Town shall accept thereof, the Justices of the Court of General Sessions of the
Peace in the same County shall and are hereby empowered to nominate and appoint
three or more sufficient Freeholders within such County to be Assessors of the
Public Rates or Taxes in any such Town as aforesaid. Court of General Sessions
of the Peace to appoint Assessors in case.
Which Assessors so to be appointed by the said Court shall take the Oath
before recited, and shall then assess the Estate and persons of such Town or
Precinct of which they shall be appointed Assessors their due proportion to any
public Tax according to the Rules set down in the Act for Raising of the same,
together with the aforesaid forfeiture of Twenty Pounds where the Town makes
default, and such additional Sum as shall answer their own reasonable Charges
for time and expense in said Service, not exceeding Five Shillings a man Per
Diem; and having assessed the same, Allowance to such.
shall transmit a Certificate there of to the Treasurer, with the names of the
Constables or Collectors to whom they shall commit the same to be collected.

And such Assessors shall be paid their Charges as abovesaid (the same being
adjusted and certified by two or more Justices of the Court by whom they were
appointed Assessors, To be paid out of the Public Treasury.
under their hands) out of the Public Treasury by Warrant from the Governor,
with the advice and consent of the Council.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Assessors as
aforesaid, shall duly attend and observe all such Warrants as during the time
of their Office they shall receive from the Treasurer and Receiver General of
this Province, Penalty on Assessors that shall neglect their duty.
pursuant to any Act or Acts to be made and passed by the Great and General
Court or Assembly of the same; for the assessing and apportioning any Province
Rate or Tax upon the Inhabitants or Estate within the Town whereof they are
Assessors; On pain that the Assessors of any Town or Precinct falling of their
duty by such Warrant or the Treasurer of them required, shall forfeit and pay
the full Sum and Sums in such Warrant mentioned to be by them Assessed upon the
Inhabitants or Estate of the Town or Precinct whereof they are Assessors, if
the said Sum and Sums be therein made certain. Which shall be Levied by
Distress and Sale of the Estates real or personal of such defective Assessors
by Warrant from the Treasurer directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of the County
in which such Town or Precinct lies. And the Treasurer is hereby authorized and
required in such case ex Officio to issue his Warrant, requiring the Sheriff or
Marshal to Levy the said Sum and Sums accordingly, and for want of Estate to
take the bodies of such defective Assessors, and to Imprison them until they
pay the same. Which Warrant the Sheriff or Marshal is hereby empowered and
required to execute accordingly.

Provided nevertheless, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That if the Sum to be paid by any Town or Precinct to any Province Rate or Tax
be not made certain by the General Assembly, Then and in such case any
Assessors failing as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay a fine, Penalty of
defective Assessors when the Sum to be paid by any Town to a Tax is not made
certain.
not exceeding Twenty Pounds, at the discretion of the Court of General
Sessions of the Peace in the same County, being thereof convicted before said
Court at the suit or complaint of the Treasurer and Receiver General or any
other on his behalf: And such fine to be unto His Majesty, for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Province; And the Court before whom such
conviction shall be, shall forthwith thereupon appoint other meet persons to be
Assessors of such Rate or Tax according to the directions contained in the
Treasurers Warrant issued unto the former Assessors; And the Assessors which
shall be then so appointed by said Court, shall take the Oath and be liable to
the same duty and penalties as the former Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall at the time be agrieved at the Sum or Sums to be set and
apportioned upon him or them by the Assessors of any Town or Precinct, Persons
overrated to be eased.
and shall demonstrate that he or they are Rated more than his or their
proportion with others according to the Rule given to said Assessors, to the
Sum set upon such Town or Precinct by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly,
said Assessors shall ease him or them so agrieved; And if they shall refuse so
to do, such person or persons agrieved, complaining unto the next General
Sessions of the Peace within that County, and making appear that he or they are
assessed more than his or their proportion as aforesaid, shall be heard and
relieved by the Justices in said Sessions, and shall be reimbursed out of the
Town Treasury so much as the said Justices or Assessors respectively shall see
cause to abate him or them, with the Charges. And the Court of General Sessions
of the Peace are Empowered upon the complaint of any party grieved to require
the Assessors to produce the Lists of their Assessment.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all County and Town
Rates and Assessments shall be apportioned by the Select-men or Assessors of
the several Towns and Precincts within this Province, Town and County Rates to
be apportioned by the same rule as public Taxes granted the same year.
upon the Inhabitants and Estates within the same, according to the Rule that
shall from time to time be prescribed and set by Act of the General Assembly
for the apportioning and assessing of the Public Taxes that shall be granted
unto His Majesty in that same year; And such Select-men or Assessors shall be
under the like obligation of the Oath administered unto them for making of the
public Tax equally and impartially to proportion such County or Town
Assessments by the same Rules.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Freeholders and
Inhabitants of any Town duly qualified to Vote in Town Affairs may (if they see
cause) at the same time that they choose Assessors as is before provided,
Collectors of public Taxes may be chosen at the same time with the Assessors.
likewise Elect and Choose a meet person or persons to be Collector or
Collectors of the Public Rates or Taxes that shall be assessed upon such Town,
and agree what Sum or Sums shall be allowed and paid out of the Town Stock unto
such Collector or Collectors for his or their Service therein. But if such
Collector or Collectors so to be Chosen shall refuse to accept that Service, or
that none such be chosen, Then the Constable or Constables of such Town shall
collect and gather such public Rates or Taxes; And every Collector or
Constable shall have a Warrant from the Treasurer and Receiver General,
impowring him to collect such Rates or Taxes as shall be committed to him to
collect; and shall pay in the same according to the directions in such Warrant.

And in case of any Constables or Collectors decease before his (...) the
Collection of any public Assessment committed to him, Provision in case of
Constables or Collectors decease.
the Assessors of such Town shall procure and appoint, at the Towns Charge,
some other fit person or persons to perfect the same Collection, and present
his of their names unto the Treasurer, who is hereby authorized and required to
enable and empower such person or persons to collect the same, by granting him
or them his Warrant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer and
Receiver General shall send such Warrants as he shall be from time to time
ordered to issue for the assessing or collecting any public Rate or Tax,
Sheriff to disperse the Treasurers Warrants.
enclosed to the Sheriff or Marshal of each respective County, who is required
immediately to disperse and transmit the same unto the Assessors, Constables or
Collectors of the several Towns and Precincts within such County, according to
the directions thereof. And for his Service, Charge and Expense therein, shall
have a reasonable allowance ordered him by the Justices of the General Sessions
of the Peace in the same County, To be paid out of the County Treasury.
to be paid out of the County Treasury upon his laying the account thereof
before them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall refuse to pay the Sum or Sums whereat they shall be assessed as
their proportion to any public Rate or Tax in the List committed to any
Constable or Collector under the hands of the Assessors of such Town, or of the
major part of them, upon demand thereof made by the said Constable or
Collector, by virtue of the Warrant to him given; Constable or Collector
empowered to distrein in case, etc.
It shall and may be lawful (...) and for such Constable or Collector, and he
is hereby authorized and required in such case to distrein the person or
persons so refusing, by his or their Goods or Chattels, and the distress or
distresses so taken to keep by the space of four days at the cost and charges
of the Owner thereof. And if the said Owner do not pay the Sum and Sums of
Money so assessed upon him within the said four days, then the said distress or
distresses to be forthwith openly Sold at an outcry by the said Officer for
payment of the said Money, Distress to be Sold by Outcry.
(notice of such Sale being posted up in some public place in the same Town,
twenty four hours before hand) and the over plus coming by the said Sale (if
any be) over and above the Charges of taking and keeping the said Distress or
Distresses to be immediately restored to the Owner. And if any person or
persons assessed as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to pay the Sum or Sums
so assessed, by the space of twelve days after demand thereof where no
sufficient distress can or may be found whereby the same may be levied. Persons
to be committed, not having whereof to distrein.
In every such case two or more of the Assessors in such Town are hereby
Authorized by Warrant under their hands and seals to commit such person or
persons to the Common Goal, there to be kept without Bail or Mainprize until
payment shall be made.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any person or
persons shall remove from any Town or place where he or they lived, or had his
or their residence at the time of making the Lists of any public Tax or
Assessment, Persons removing from the place where they were assessed, may be
taken in any other
not having before paid the respective Sum or Sums set upon him or them by such
Lists. It shall and may be lawful to and for the Constable or Collector to whom
any such Tax or Assessment shall be committed with Warrant to collect, and he
is hereby authorized and empowered to demand the Sum or Sums assessed upon such
person or persons, in what Town or place soever he or they may be found, and
upon refusal or neglect to pay the same, to distrein the said person or person*
by his or their Goods or Chattels as aforesaid; and for want of such Distress
to commit the party to the Common Goal, there to remain until payment be made*

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where the Owner or
Tennant of any Lands liable to public Taxes shall not reside or be an
Inhabitant of the Town or Precinct in which such Lands lie, Provision in case
of Lands being need in any Town, in which the Owner or Tenant thereof does not
dwell.
and no Stock, Corn or Hay can be found upon the said Lands, whereof the
Constable or Collector may make distress to satisfy such Sum or Sums as from
time to time such Lands shall be assessed at, either to the Province, County,
or Town Charges; In such case any Justice of the Peace in the County where the
Occupant of any such Lands dwells or resides, upon application to him made by
the Constable or Collector to whom the List wherein such Lands shall be
assessed shall be committed, and upon sight of the same, or authentic Copy
thereof, may, and hereby is empowered and required to grant a Warrant unto the
Constable of the Town or Precinct where such Occupant dwells or resides, to
distrein such Occupant, by his Goods or Chattels, the full Sum at which said
Lands are set in such List of Assessment with the Charges occasioned for making
such Distress and to satisfy the same by Sale thereof, returning the overplus
(if any be) to the Owner. And in case no Goods or Chattels can be found whereon
to distrein, to commit the party to the Common Goal of the County, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize, until he pay and satisfy the Sum or Sums so
assessed with the Charges.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when at any time
the General Assembly shall order any public Rate or Tax by them granted, to be
paid into the Treasury at two or more several times or days of payment,
Provision in case of persons being about to remove before the time for payment
of the Second part of any Tax.
and any person or persons being Inhabitants or Dwellers in any Town or
Precinct within this Province at the time of making such Rate or Tax, and being
assessed thereunto, shall be about to remove him or themselves from thence
before the time that shall be prefixed for payment of the same; It shall and may
be lawful in such case to and for the Constable or Collector of the same Town
or Precinct, to demand and levy the whole Sum and Sums which such person or
persons shall be assessed at in the List or Lists to such Constable or
Collector committed, notwithstanding the time for collecting the second part of
such Rate or Tax may not then be come; And in default of payment to distrein
for the same, or to take any other way or course for the obtaining thereof,
according to the rules and directions herein before provided. And when and so
often as it happens that Constables be a new Chosen and Sworn for any Town
before the former Constables have perfected their Collection of any Tax or
Assessment to them committed to gather; Constables to whom any Tax shall be
committed to perfect their collection although other Constables be chosen.
Such former Constables are notwithstanding hereby fully empowered and required
to perfect all such Collections, and may exercise the same powers and
authorities for the gathering and enforcing the payment thereof as by this Act
they might have done before other Constables were Chosen and Sworn.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Constable or
Collector to whom any Public Tax or Assessment shall be committed to collect,
Penalty on defective Constables or Collectors
shall be remiss and negligent of his duty, in not levying and paying unto the
Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies, such Sum and Sums of Money, as from time to
time he shall have received and as ought by him to have been paid within the
respective times set and limited by the Treasurers Warrant, according to the
directions therein pursuant to Law: The Treasurer is hereby empowered after the
expiration of the time so set by Warrant under his hand and seal, directed to
the Sheriff or Marshal to cause such Sum and Sums of Money to be levied by
Distress and Sale of such defective Constables or Collectors Estate, real or
personal, returning the Overplus (if any be) and for want of such Estate to
take the Bodies of such Constables or Collectors, and to imprison them until
they pay the same. Which Warrant the Sheriff or Marshal is hereby empowered and
required to execute accordingly.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Constable or Collector so failing as
aforesaid, have no Estate to be found whereon to make distress, and his person
cannot be taken within the space of two months from the time which was set for
his paying the same into the Treasury: The Town or Precinct in which any
defective Constable or Collector lives to be answerable for his payment in to
the Treasury the Sums committed to him to collect.
In such case the Town or Precinct whereof the Constable or Collector so fails
of his Duty, shall within three months from the expiration of said two months
make good to the Treasury the Sum or Sums due and owing to the same from such
defective Constable or Collector: Which the Assessors of such Town, (having
notice from the Treasurer of the failure of any Constable or Collector as
aforesaid) shall forthwith thereupon, without any other or further Warrant,
assess upon the Inhabitants and Estates of such Town in manner as the Sum so
committed to such defective Constable or Collector was assessed: And commit the
same to some other Constable or Collector to collect, who is to be empowered
thereunto by Warrant from the Treasurer. Provided always, That such Constable
or Collector failing of his duty as aforesaid, for whose default the Town is
answerable as before expressed, shall at all times afterward be liable to the
Action or Suit of the Treasurer of such Town for all such Sum and Sums as were
assessed upon the same through his default, and for other damages accruing unto
the said Town thereby.

And in case of the decease of any Constable or Collector in any Town before
his having adjusted the Accounts of the Assessment to him committed, Executors
or Administrators of Constables deceased to make up their accounts etc.
the Executors or Administrators of such Constable or Collector shall within
two months after his decease, settle and make up Accounts with the assessors of
the same Town, of such part of the said Assessment as was received and
collected by the deceased Constable or Collector in his life time: With which
such Executors or Administrators shall be chargeable in like manner as the
deceased Constable or Collector should be if living; And such Assessors shall
thereupon procure and appoint other fit person or persons to perfect such
Collection as is before provided. And if the Executors or Administrators of any
Constable or Collector so deceasing, not having fully collected the Assessment
committed to him, shall fail of making up and settling the Account of what was
received by the deceased as aforesaid before the expiration of the time
aforesaid, such Executors or Administrators shall be chargeable with the whole
Sum committed to be collected by the Constable or Collector unto whom they are
Executors or Administrators in manner as the deceased Constable or Collector
should be if living, in case there be sufficient Assets.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Sheriff
or Marshal shall make default in accounting for, Penalty on defective Sheriffs
or Marshals.
or returning into the Treasury the Sum and Sums mentioned in any Warrant or
Warrants of distress by him to be received from the Treasurer, The Treasurer in
such case is hereby authorized and empowered to make out his Warrant directed
unto the Coroner of such County where any Sheriff is defective, or to the
Constable of the Town in which a defective Marshal lives, Requiring them
respectively to distrain the same upon the Estate real or personal of such
defective Sheriff or Marshal, as is before herein directed referring to the
Sheriff or Marshal, making Distress upon the Estate of defective Constables or
Collectors. Which Warrant the Coroner of any County, or Constable of any Town
to whom the same shall be directed, are hereby respectively empowered and
required to execute accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Sheriff
or Marshal or any of their Deputies shall, by Warrant from the Treasurer,
pursuant to this Act, distrain and levy the Lands or Tenements of any Constable
or Collector, or where any Coroner or Constable shall, by Warrant as aforesaid
distrain and levy the Lands or Tenements of any Sheriff or Marshal for their or
any of their defaults in not collecting or not paying into the Treasury any Sum
or Sums of money which ought to be by them collected, How real Estates levied
by the Treasurers Warrant shall be disposed of.
levied and paid in as aforesaid. In every such case the Sheriff or Marshal, or
either of their Deputies, or the Coroner or Constable executing such Warrant or
Warrants of distress shall cause a due apprizement to be made of any Houses or
Lands so levied by the Oaths of two or three sufficient Freeholders in the same
County; (which Oath any Justice of the Peace is hereby empowered to administer,)
and after apprizement thereof so made, is hereby fully authorized and empowered
to make Sale of such Houses or Lands, and to make Seal, acknowledge and execute
good and sufficient Deeds and Conveyances for the same, and our of the produce
thereof to pay and satisfy the Sum or Sums for which such Estate shall be
levied with all Charges arising thereon, and to return the overplus upon such
Sale (if any be) unto the Owner: And all Deeds and Conveyances of any such
Estate in Houses or Lands duly executed as aforesaid shall be good and
effectual in the Law unto the Purchaser and his Heirs and Assigns for ever to
all intents and purposes.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in
no case whatsoever any Distress shall be made or taken from any person or
persons of his or their Beasts belonging to the Plough, Things Exempted from
Distress.
nor of Tools or Implements necessary for his or their Trade and Occupation,
nor of his or their Arms, or Utensils of Household necessary for upholding of
life, nor of Bedding or Apparel necessary for him or themselves or Family. Any
Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the first
day of July, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Three, and
no longer.


