THE Surest way to the Greatest Honor: Discoursed in a SERMON, Delivered In
the Audience of His Excellency the Earl of BELLOMONT, Captain General and
GOVERNOR in Chief, and of the COUNCIL, and Representatives of the General
Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Convened at Boston in New
England, May 31st 1699. Being the day for the ELECTION of Counselors in that
Province.

By Increase Mather

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, for Samuel Philips, and
are to be Sold at the Brick Shop near the Old Meeting House. 1699.

Published by the Appointment of His Excellency, and of the Honorable Council,
and Representatives, of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England.

The Epistle Deditatory.
To His Excellency, RICHARD, Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and GOVERNOR
in Chief of the Provinces of the Massachuletts-Bay in New England, and of
New York, etc.
May it Please Your Excellency,
A Congratulatory Address has been presented to Your Excellency, in the Name of
about Forty Ministers of the Gospel, that a few days since occasionally met in
Boston. And although there are above Forty more Public Preachers in this
Province, who were not there, at that Time, I am satisfied, they would have
heartily concurred with the rest, had the Opportunity been offered to them.

The Deserved Character which Persons of Worth and Eminency in London, who had
the Happiness of an Acquaintance with Your Lordship, had given of You, made the
People of New England, who heard thereof, (...) that Your Arrival to Your
Government here, would prove a rich Blessing to us all. Your having in the
Administration of Your Government over New York, espoused the Interest of
Religion, and of Our Great KING WILLIAM, and of the People, has confirmed them,
in those Hopes, (...) can those Interests Now be separated, Now, if ever, the
old celebrated Maxim i^ true, Qui pro veritate (...) pro Rege est.

It was the noted saying of a Great. Em^eror, That the Chief Ruler is to Serve
the Senate, by hearkening to their good Advice, and to Serve the People by
promoting the Public Good, and to Serve single Persons by an Equal
Distribution of Justice. That Your Excellency will approve Your Self such a
Ruler, You have given us sufficient cause to believe. Your late Noble Speech to
our General Assembly has won their Affections, and cannot but be pleasing to
every English, and in a peculiar manner to every New England Heart.

God does sometimes pour signal Blessings on the Posterity of them, who have
done signal Service for His Name. Your Illustrious Grandfather, Sr. Charles
Coots (who will be had in Everlasting Remembrance) was such, an One. I find it
recorded in the History of his Life, published by Mr. Clark, That he having
been a Man of War from his Youth, was Sent a Commander into Ireland, in the
Year 160^. where he was an Eminent Instrument of Good to the English Nation.
And Forty Years after, that he again Fought the Battles of the Lord against the
Irish Rebels, with most Remarkable Successes, and at last Dyed (as Sampson did)
Victorious over the Enemies of His Nation, and of the True Religion, of whom it
might be said, as one speaks of that Excellent King of Sweedland, Carolus
Gust^vins, That he Dyed with Victory Bleeding at his Side. But Your Noble
Grandfather's Piety made Him more Illustrious than His Prowess and Valor. He
was (as both Mr. Clark, and Dr. Teat have reported) One that manifested a
singular Love to all Good Men, and in a special manner to such as were the
Faithful Ministers of Christ; an Hater of all Vice, and Vicious persons; and an
Encourager of all that was Virtuous and Praiseworthy: Yea, and One that by his
Faith and Prayers could prevail with God. For when he was, (and had been for a
long time) through Bodily Infirmities, hardly able to set his Feet on the
Ground, seeing his Nation in Danger, he earnestly prayed, that God would
strengthen him to appear in His Cause, and to Fight His Ba^els. When a
mavelous Spirit of Fortitude from Heaven suddenly ^ell upon him, and
immediately to the Admiration of all men, By Faith out of Weakness he was made
strong, and put to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Which things I have
mentioned, that so those in this Country, into whose Hands this shall come, may
be (...) hence induced to have the Greater Respect and Honor for Your
Excellency, Humbly Praying, That that God, who was with Your for ever Famous
Grandfather, making Him so Great a Blessing to Ireland, will make Your
Excellency as Great a Blessing to New England.

Three Mighty Emperors, Constantine the Great, Vale^tinian, and Th^odos^^s,
were wont to Style themselves, The Vassals of JESUS CHRIST. And one of them
professed, That He counted his being Christ's Servant, a greater Honor to him,
than His being Emperor of the World. And well might He so Judge, since the
Highest Angel in Heaven, and all the Nobles that attend the Throne of the
Infinite Majesty, esteem Themselves Honored in being Employed to Serve Christ
as Guardians to His People. They are Ministers of God, and Ministers for them
that shall be the Heirs of Salvation.

My Lord.

Great Men are happier than others, chiefly in this Respect, That they have
greater Opportunities to Honor God, and consequently in being Faithful in the
Improvement of those Talents, to obtain a more weighty Crown of Glory than
others, in the Day of Christ. God has put into Your Hands a singular Advantage
to Serve His Interest and to promote His Glory. Now that He, by whom Princes
Rule, and Nobles, and all the Judges of the Earth, will assist You by His Grace
to discharge the Great Trust reposed in You, so as that You may leave a most
Honorable Name to Posterity, and have Immortal Honor conferred on You, by the
King Eternal, at the Last Day, has been, is, and shall be the Prayer of

My Lord, Your Excellency's most Humble Servant, Increase Mather.
Boston, June 7: 1699.
The Surest Way to the Greatest honor.
1 Samuel II. 30. -- The LORD GOD of Israel says -- Them that Honor me, I
will Honor; --


THESE words were spoken in the Name of God, and by a Man of God unto Eli, who
was an Honorable Person, being both the High Priest and the chief Judge in
Israel, which were great Offices both in Church and State. Eli was a Descendent
from Ithamar, who was Aarons Second Son. How the High Priesthood came to be
Translated from the Family of Eleazar, who was the Elder Brother, to that of
Ithamar, the Scripture no where informs us. It is probably conjectured, that
the High Priests of Eleazars Family, had by some heinous crimes in the Days of
the Judges, provoked God to lay them aside for several Generations. When Eli
was advanced to this Dignity, the Lord promised to continue that Honor to him,
and to his Posterity; but this Promise must be understood as conditional, viz.
if they should acquit themselves in those Honorable Employments, as became
them to do; but he and his, miserably failing in their Duty, God did justly
deprive them of their Dignity The reason of which Dispensation is mentioned in
the words before us. For it is everlastingly true, that they who honor God,
shall be honored by him; and they that do otherwise, shall sooner or later be
lightly esteemed.

The Doctrinal Truth which may be insisted on from the words, as suitable to the
present Occasion, and to the Honorable Assembly in this House Convened before
the Lord, is, That to Honor God is the surest and the only way to obtain
Honor from Him.

We shall only Enquire into two particulars, in order to the clearing of the
Doctrine before us.

1. What are the Characters of one that does Honor God; whereby we may judge
whether we are such or no?

2. What Honor it is that God will surely confer on such persons?

Quest. 1. What are the Characters of one that does Honor God?

Answ. 1. He is one that does yield Universal Obedience to the Commandments of
God. They that Honor me (says the Lord, h. e. they that obe^ me. When in the
Fifth Commandment, Children are required to Honor their Parents, this is a
special thing intended, that they should obey all their lawful Commands. The
Lord said to the Jews, If I am a Father, where is my Honor? Mal. 1. 6. i. e.
the Obedience which is due unto me Kings are Honored when their Laws are duly
observed; so is the God and King Eternal, when his Laws are complied with.
There is an Internal Obedience. For we are required to love, and Fear, and
Delight, and Trust in God. And there is an External Obedience: When a man's
words and outward actions are as to the matter of them such as the Divine Law
Enjoins. There may be something of an External Obedience where that which is
Internal is wanting* Mat. 15. ^. This people honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me. Whereas if a man's heart is set upon honoring God,
that Internal Obedience will discover it self in an Universal Conformity to the
Law of God in outward acts of Obedience thereunto. The Commands of God may not
any of them be disputed, but obeyed without any Reserve or Limitation. Suppose
the Commandment to be never so difficult, and never so contrary unto a man's own
will and desires, i^ he knows that God commands it, and has in him an heart
that honors God, he will do the Commandment. When God Commanded Abraham to
Sacrifice his only Son, he Rose early to do it. Genesis 22. 3. And by that high
act of Obedience did greatly honor God: And so did Joshua. The Lord said to
him, Have not I Commanded thee? Josh. 1. 9. And then he did as commanded though
to the hazard of his li^e. This Honor of absolute Obedience is due to God
alone. Inferiors are to obey their Superiors, but with this Reserve always*
(...) far as shall consist with Obedience to the Will of God. If the Greatest
man on Earth command a thing which God has forbidden, he must not be obeyed.
Although Nebuch^dnezzar was the Emperor of the World, and perhaps the greatest
Monarch that ever lived; yet nevertheless, when he Enjoined that which God had
expressly prohibited, the three Princes who were his Captives told him plainly
to his face that they would not obey him. Dan 3. 18 Be it known unto thee, O
King, that we will not Serve thy gods, nor Worship the Go^den Image which thou
have set up. Or, if men should inhibit what God Commands, we must honor God by
obeying him rather than them. Thus the Holy Apostles, when the Jewish Rulers
straightly commanded them that ^hey should not Preach Christ, they replied, we
must obey God rather than men. Act. 5. 29.

2. The Honourer of God is one that does Worship (...) and Him only, and this
according to his Will. The true Worshipper of God is one that (...) him. It
becomes the Greatest on Earth so to do. Psalm. 29 1, 2. Give unto the Lord O ^e
Mighty, give unto the Lord Glory and Strength; give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his Name, Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. When we Worship God
if we do it in the Beauty of Holiness, we give unto him the glory that is due
unto his Name. As the neglect of Divine Worship is a disrespect and dishonor
put upon him Isa. 43. 23. Thou have not honour^ed me with thy Sacrifices. So
the due performance thereof is an honor to him. In Prayer we honor God. A
King is honored when his Subjects humbly kneel before him with their
petitions; so is the King of Heaven. When we praise him then we honor him. God
says, Whosoever offers praise glorifyeth me. Psalm. 50. 23. when we give him
Thanks, we give him glory. The Thanksgiving of many redounds to the Glory of
God. 2 Cor. 4. 15. when we do with prepared hearts receive the Sacraments which
are of Divine Appointment, we honor the Author and Institutor of them. When we
Sanctine the Lords Day, we honor him whose day it is. Isa. 58 13. If thou call
the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him.
The man that honors God, has this Character belonging to him, he is constant
in Prayer, conscientious in observing all Divine Institutions, and one that
Remembers the Sabbath Day to heep it Holy. Now that which we make an Object of
Relious Worship, we put the highest honor upon that possibly can be. We own
that which we Worship, to be the c^ief good, the first cause, and the last end
of all. And therefore it is that God only may be Worshipped. Mat. 4. 10 Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: It is the
highest dishonor to God that can be, to yield Religious Adoration to any other
Object besides Himself: For it is to make other things to be as good as He with
whom none may be compared. Nor may we worship him in any other way, or by any
other means then what Himself has appointed. To do so would be a great
reflection on the Wisdom and Honor of the Glorious God; (...) i^ ^e did not
know how to prescribe means (...) for his own Worship; and therefore must be
beholden to men for their Inventions. This was the Sin which the Children of
Israel were guilty of in the Wilderness; they would worship the God which
brought them out of Egypt, but by an Image of their own devising, whereby they
incurred his high displeasure. The Jewish Doctors say, that God never visited
their Nation with any Judgments; but he put in one Ounce of Vengeance for that
Sin of their making the Calf in the Wilderness. This also was Jeroboa^s Sin,
when he sat up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, and Ordained a Feast in that Month
which he had devised of his own heart. 1 King. 12 33. Nor do we honor God as
we should do except we are duly careful as to the manner of Worship, that it be
according to the will of God. Christ said, Take heed how you hear. Luk.8. 18.
so we must take heed how we pray, and take heed how we come to Sacraments. God
is a Spirit, and will be worshipped after a spiritual manner. He seeks such
to worship him. Joh. 4. 23. because He is honored by a Spiritual Worship, and
by them who worship Him after a spiritual manner. Men may as to the matter of
Worship, and as to the means of Worship, do as the Law requires, and yet
displease and dishonor God by being careless as to the manner of Worship. In
David's Time the Levites sought the Lord, nevertheless He made a breach upon
them, for that they sought him not after the due order. 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. In
Hezekiaks Time they kept the Passover otherwise then was written, they were not
cleansed as they that came into the Sanctuary ought to have been: for which
cause many of the people fell under the Holy displeasure of God. 1 Chronicles. 3018,
19, 20. So the Corinthians because they approached to the Table of the Lord
after an unprepared manner, were visited with a disease that proved mortal to
some of them. They by such an unworthy manner of worship dishonored God, and
God lightly esteemed of them.

3. The Honourer of God is one that has an Holy Zeal for His Name. A man that
honors another has a Zeal for him. He cannot bear it that the person whom he
has an high value for should be abused. So he that honors God is greatly
concerned at the injuries which are done to his Name. Psalm. 69. 9. The
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me. He ^elt those
reproaches that were ca^^ upon the Name of God more sensibly than if they had
fallen upon Himself. The Prophet Elijah was a man that honored God: And he was
a Zealous man. I (said he) have been very Jealous for the Lord God of Hosts,
for the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thy alters,
and slain the Prophets with the Sword. ^ King 19 10. Never man did honor God
so much as the man Christ Jesus did, who never in all his Life did any thing
but with a respect to his Father^ Glory. Now his Holy Heart was always burning
with Zeal for God. Therefore was it said of him, The Zeal of thy House has
eaten me up. Joh. 2. 17. This Zeal which is the Character of one that honors
God, discovers it self in two things especially.

^. By ^^aring a due Testimony against the Sins of men. When Gods Law is
Transgressed, his Name is dishonored. Rom 2. 23. Through breaking the Law
dishonourest thou God? Therefore when those Transgressions are duly Testified
against, He is honored. A Minister that would honor God in his place, must
faithfully reprove the sins of men, and spare none: They must cry aloud and
spare not, and li^^ up their Voice like a Trumpet showing to the house of Jacob
their sins. John Baptist did not spare Herod himself, notwithstanding his
greatness, when he was known to be a vicious person. That his Faithfulness cost
him his Life, and he was willing rather to loose his Life, than God should
loose the honor due to his Name. If r^proofs will not do, they that have
Authority to punish Transgressors are bound out of respect to the honor of God
in that way to express their Love and Zeal for his Name. So did Christ show his
Zeal in punishing them that had profaned the Temple. When Phineas Executed
Judgment on several filthy debauched persons, God was honored and highly
pleased with that his Zeal. And so he was with the Zeal of Elija^ in causing
the Priests of Baal to be slain. Elis sin for which the Lord did so severely
threaten and punish him and his family was his want of Zeal. He is charged with
honoring his Sons above God. 1 Samuel 2. 29. For if he had punished them
according to their deser^s they must have been Exposed to public shame, but
rather than such disgrace should come to them, he suffered them to make
themselves vile and restrained them not. Indeed he reproved them, but
notwithstanding they were his Sons, considering he was the Judge of the Land,
he ought to have put them to death, because they were guilty of Crimes which
the Law of God had made Capital.

2. Zeal discovers it self in promoving those things whereby God is Honored,
as well as in suppressing those things whereby He is dishonored. If we promote
the Establishment of the worship of God in the purity of it, we honor His
Name. Hezekiah, Josiah, and other Reforming Kings of Judah, manifested their
Zeal not only in destroying Idolatry, but in settling the true worship of God
according to his written word. Nehemiah that Excellent Governor of the
Province of Judea, honored God by the good deeds which he did for his House
and for the Offices thereof. Neh. 13. 14. He that has an ^nseigned Love for the
House of God, has a Zeal for the honor of God. Psalm. 26. 18. Lord, I have
Loved the habitation of thy House, the place where (...) honor dwells. The
great God has many Temples, many spi^^^ual House^ on the Earth. Every
particular Church consisting of a number of Believing Regenerate Souls, is an
House of the Living God. To protect and encourage these Holy Churches is to
honor God.

4. Another Character of one that honors God, is that he does Reverence the
Image of God wherever he sees it. Now the Image of God is seen in two things
especially.

1. In that Authority and Dominion which he gives to some over others. On this
account man is said to be the Image and Glory of God. 1 Cor. 11. 7. The divine
Image in man when first Created did consist partly in his dominion over the
Creatures. Wherefore he that honors God will be afraid to speak evil of
dignities, or to despise dominion, but he will make Conscience to give honor
to whom honor is due. That man who makes no Conscience of the fifth
Commandment which requires subjection unto Lawful Authority, does not honor
but despise that God whose Image is seen in that Authority. We may not think
that because Christ has purchased a blessed liberty for them who are his
Servants, that they are therefore Exempted from Obedience unto such as God
shall Set over them* The Apostles were very careful both by word and writing to
instruct Christians in their duty as to this particular, and this out of
respect to the Name of God. The Apostle Paul writing to Titus says, Put them in
mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates ^it. 3. ^.
And the Apostle Peter faith, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of men for
the Lords sake whether it be to the King as Supreme, or (...) Governors as
unto them that are (...) the punishment of evil doers, and (...) praise of them
that do well. ^ Pe^. 2. ^3, (...) Church Government is not an Ordinance (...)
man, God having in his Word described (...) of it, as to all Essentials
therein, and expres^^ declared what Officers, what Ordinances, (...)
Administrations He allows to be in his (...) which Commandments He would have
to be kept until the Appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, but the form of Civil
Government ^s ANTHROPINE KTISIS A^ Humane Crea^ure. For although Civil
Government in general is an Ordinance of God, neverthele^s, this o^ that
particular Form of Civil Government is a^ Ordinance of man. God has lest it
unto men to determine what it shall be; but when there is a legal
Establishment, Christians must submit thereunto for the Lords sake, i. e. out
of respect to his Glory. They will honor him if they do, and dishonor him if
they do not submit: He is no good Christian that will not. He that does truly
fear and honor God, will certainly be a good Subject.

2. The Image of God appears in that Holiness which some are adorned with.
Holiness is the Divine Nature. He is Gl^rious in Holiness. That Is His chief
Glory. Therefore if a man does Love and Honor God, he has, and cannot but
have a singular delight in them that ^^ar his Image, in this respect. The
Scripture gives this as the Character of a sincere Servant of God, he is one,
in whose Eyes a vile person is (...) but he honors them that fear the Lord.
Psalm. 15. 4. Yea, though it may be, he is great, and they are mean in the
World; if he ^eeth the fear of God, and so the Image of God in them, he has a
love and honor for them on that account. David, though the Greatest man in the
Nation, would honor such persons so far as to make them his Companions. Psalm.
119. 63. I am a Companion of all the^ that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts. A man whose heart honors God, respects every Good, Holy man as
such. He does not respect men merely because they are of his party, or
particular persuasion in matters not Essential to Salvation. Suppose him to be
Epis^opalian, Congregational, Pr^^byterian, Antipedebap^^^, in his Opinion, if
he is a Godly man, he (...) Godliness wherever he sees it. As Jerome said of
Austin, when there was some difference of Opinion between them, Dilig^ Christum
in Augustino, I see Austin is an Holy man, and I cannot but Love Christ in
Austin, though I differ from him in some matters of Opinion. The man that has a
Regenerate Soul in him, cannot choose but love and honor them in whom ^he
Regenerating Grace of God is conspicuous. He (faith John) that loves him that
begat, loves him also that is begotten of him; by this we know that we love
the Children of God, when we love God. ^ Joh. 5. ^, 2. so by this we may know
that we love and honor God, when we love and honor his Children as such,
because they do in respect of Holiness resemble him more than others in the
World do.

5. Another Character of one that Honors God, is that he is willing to suffer
in his Cause, and for the Glory of his Name. He is one that had rather suffer
than sin, like Moses, who chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin. Heb. ^^. 25. Indeed, no man ought
needlessly to bring Sufferings upon himself; but he may be called to stand up
and appear in Gods Cause, and then if his heart is right in the sight of God,
though he knows he shall be exposed to Sufferings for it, he will appear on
Gods side, and glad that he may honor God, by being himself dishonored, and
exposed to the Contempt and Reproaches of the World. The Apostles when
Convented before ^he Jewish Council were most ^^gnominiously treated by them,
for their Faithfulness to the Truth and Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ, but
they rejoiced in that they were ^ounted worthy to suffer s^ame for his Name.
Acts 5. 41. God is honored not only by the Active Obedience, but by the
Sufferings of his Servants. ^ Pet. 4. 14. I ye ^e reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are you; on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he
is glorified. When the Pagan Enemies of Christianity be^eld the Constancy and
Courage of the (...) they said, (some of them) Vere (...) Christian ^um, there
is no God like the (...) Christians, who can enable his (...) with such
patience to Endure such things ^or his sake. Many were thereby Converted from
Paganism to Christianity, and in these Latter Ages from Popery to the
Protestant (which is the only true Christian) Religion, by beholding the Faith
and Patience of them who have been the Martyrs of Jesus. A man may by suffering
in Gods Cause, bring more Honor to his Name in one hour, than in his whole
life before, though it may be he has been a very active Instrument in promoting
the Glory of God. It was therefore said of Peter, that by his death ^e should
Glori^ie God. Joh. 21. 19. Now Ecclesiastical Story tells us, that he was
Cruci^ied to death. And very often it is so, that they who have been the
greatest Instruments of doing Service for God, shall at last be honored with
the Crown of Martyrdom, and so Honor God by their death (as Sampson did) more
than ever they had done by their life. The Holy Prophets honored God much by
their Ministry; and we find in the Scripture that several of them honored him
by suffering and dying for the Testimony which they had given to his Name and
Truth. And the Jewish Historians tell us of more that did (...) That the
Prophet Isaia^ was Sawn (...) with a wooden Saw, by the cruel (...) of King
Manasseh, who nevertheless (...) near Kinsman. And that Jeremy (...) in Egypt
through the malice of (...) who informed the then King of Egypt, (...) Jeremy
had Prophesied of his Destruction and Conquest by the King of Babylon. (...)
^hey say was slain in Babylon. The Prophet Amos had his Brains Knocked out by
some of his wicked Country men. Micah was thrown down a steep place, and killed
with the fall. All the Apostles (excepting John, who suffered an Exilement into
the desolate Isle of Patmos, whither the Romans were wont to banish the vilest
Criminals) Sealed the Truth which they had Preached with their own Blood. So
did they Honor God both in life and in death.

6. He that Honors Jesus Christ the Son of God, Honors God. The Father takes
whatever Honor is put upon his Son Jesus Christ as done to Himself. All the
men on Earth, and all the Angels in Heaven have not Glori^ied God, so much as
Christ has done. And God has given unto him a Name which is above every Name
that is named in this World, or in that which is to come; and he expects that
we should honor him accordingly. Yea, that we should give unto Jesus Christ
that Honor which we may not give unto any but unto God Himself. Job. ^. 22,
23. The Father Judges no man; that is not without the Son, but has committed
all Judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father; be that honors not the Son, honors not the Father
which sent him. The Jews say, that God made the World for the sake of the
Messiah. And the Scripture says, that all things were (...) for him. Col. ^.
16. It is a Glorious (...) that the Heart of God is set upon (...) much as upon
having his Son Jesus Christ Glorified: And when he sees our hearts is set upon
it, He takes it kindly at our hands. If a man would study to please God, let
him Honor Christ; without which, let him do what he will, he can never please
God. To believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, is to honor him. Nor can we put a
greater honor upon him, than to depend upon his Righteousness for the Eternal
Salvation of our Immortal Souls. And when we live as Believers ought to do,
when our Conversations in the World are as becomes the Gospel, we glorify
Christ. It is said of Titus and some others, that they were the Glory of
Christ. 2 Cor. 8. 23. They lived such holy lives, that it was an honor to
Christ to have such Servants. When Christians live so as that the World may in
them see something what manner of one Christ is, they cause his Name to be
honored: Men will say, how good is Christ, if they that ^elong to him have
such goodness in them? When we make Christ and his Glory the end of our lives,
we please and honor God. So did the Apostle, Phil. ^. 21. for me to live is
Christ. He knew that if he dyed immediately, he should gain Heaven; but he was
willing to be a while longer out of Heaven, that so he might do Service for
Christ, and promote his Interest amongst his Churches in this World. The man
that is often thinking with himself, what shall I do for Christ? Is there
nothing wherein I may serve his Interest more than as yet I have done? And that
has an heart desirous above all things to glorify the Lord Jesus Christ, he is
one that honors God, and whom God will honor. For Christ Himself says, Joh.
12. 26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

We proceed therefore unto the Second Enquiry, viz. What Honor it is that God
will bestow on such as do thus honor him?

A. ^. Sometimes the providence of God does pu^ honor upon them that have
honored him, by putting them into honorable Stations and Employment. No man is
put into any honorable Station, but it is the Lord that has done it. Psalm. 75.
6, 7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, but God is the Judge, he puts down one and sets up another. A man
may go from one end of the world to another, from East to West, and he may
cross the World from North to South, and yet never find promotion, except God
shall see meet to set him up. It is true, that men may be the instruments of
promoting a man: They may d^ it ^y their Election. Nevertheless, God does it.
For Prove.16. 33. The Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whols disposing thereof
is of the Lord. Or a man may be promoted to an honorable Station and Employment
by a Commission from a Superior Power* (...) neither is that without the
Providence of God. When Pilate ^oasted of his power, Christ said to him, thou
could have no power at all, except it were given thee from above. Joh.19.
^^. He ha^ his Authority by virtue of a Commission from the Emperor, but there
was an hand of Heaven in it. No man shall be promoted to honor without the
Providence of God. The King of Moab said to Balaam, I thought to promote thee
to great honor, but the Lord has kept you back from honor. Numb 24. ^^.
Notwithstanding the intentions and inclinations of Kings, they shall promote no
man to honor whom God is resolved to keep back from that honor. Nor is this
so to be understood, as i^ no man were by the Holy providence of God set in an
honorable Station, but such as have honored God; for many Times the Vilest of
men are exalted, and God does it not to honor them, but to punish a ^in^ul
world by them. Before honor, goes Humility. If a proud ambitious man obtains
the honor which he has been aspiring after it is in Judgment to himself and
others: but if an humble man has honor conferred on him, it is in mercy to
the people concerned in him. And sometimes the Lord promotes his faithful
Servants to honorable Stations as a reward for their Fid^lity unto his
Interest; which is in special the honor intended in the Text before us. E^^
was set in an honorable Station, and his posterit^ should (...) had that honor
continued to them, ^ad they honored God as they ought to have done. We see the
Truth before us veri^ied in David. He was the youngest of all the Sons of
Jesse, but the most pi^us of them al^ God found his heart faithful, and he took
him from the Sheepfold, and made him to be the feeder and the leader of his
people Israel. We see it in Joseph: By ^is Exempla^y obedienc^ to the
Commandment, God has had honor in all ages of the world which have been since
that time: Him did God make Governor of the Land of Egypt. We see it in Moses:
He honored God by espousing the cause of his afficted people: And God made him
to be a King in Jeshurun: The most precious people in the whole world were put
under his Government, which was a greater honor than if he had been made the
Monarch of the Universe, without having the Lords people committed to his
Inspection and Jurisdiction.

2. God causes them that honor Him to be honored, in respect of the Esteem
and Reputation which they have in the world. He gives them a great room and
interest in the hearts of them whose esteem or good word is to be valued.
Indeed, if a man will be Zealous for God, and faithful to his interest, there
are wicked men that will reproach and revile him. David found it so. They that
sat in the gate; some that had been in power, spoke against him, and he was the
song of the Drunkards. Psalm. 69. 12. Lew^ debauched persons who were for King
Saul's Interest, would make Lampoone^ against David, and when they were over
their Cups they would sing them: but the reproaches and mockings of such men
are an honor, and to be worn as a Crown. It is an honor and an happiness to
be reviled and ^landered by such vile persons. Matthew. 5. ^^. Blessed are you
when men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of Evil of you ^alsely for
my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward, for so
persecuted they the prophets. If it is for Christ's sake, for our appearing in
his cause or to maintain his Truth and Interest that we are reproached and
slandered, we may wear those reproaches as our Crown for they are a part of our
blessedness: Usually they that have honored God most, have the honor to be
most reproached by the wickedest men in the world. Who honored God more than
the Prophets and Apostles in their day? And who were ever more reviled? So the
chief Reformers in the last Century. Luther and Calvin especially, no men were
reproached more than they that had deserved better usage from the age wherein
they lived. It is not a desirable thing for a man to be Cried up by the
generality of wicked men. Luke 6. 26. We unto you when all men shall speak well
of you: for so their Fathers did by the false Prophets. All the profane men in
the Land would be ready to speak well of the false Prophets, because they would
daub their Consciences with untempered Mortar. They would say though you live
in your sins, as long as you are called by the Name of the true God, and go to
the Temple, and say your Prayers* you shall go to Heaven. There is no need of
any such Repentance as the true Prophets say is necessary for your Salvation.
Just as some ungodly Preachers in these days say, if men call themselves
Christians and are Baptized, there is no need of preaching Conversion to them.
It is a sign that a man has not been so faithful to Gods Interest as he should
have been, when the wickedest of men extol him. One having heard that a very
vicious person commended him, was troubled at it, Alas (said he) quid ma^^
feci, what have I done amiss that so wicked a man should speak so well of me.
So then a Reputation amongst such is no honor, nor desirable: but to have the
love and respect of good men is desirable: therefore David prayed for that.
Psalm. 119. 79. Let those that fear thee, Turn unto me. And God did give him an
Interest in their hearts. Verse 74. They that fear thee will be glad when they
see me. Good men if they did but see David, they were glad: their hearts
rejoiced to see that there was such a man yet living in the world. And this
honor had the Governors in Israel who had generously ventured themselves in
the cause of God and of his people. Wherefore the inspired Deborah said of
them. Judge. 5. 9. My heart is toward the Governors of Israel. h. e. I do in my
heart love and honor them. And doubtless all the good people in the Land did
so. And thus it was with Mordecai, out of respect to the Honor of God, he
would not bow the knee to Haman. Haman was a Type of Antichrist, and no
question aspired after, and expected a Religious Worship as Antichrist does,
which Mordecai would not yield unto him: Now God did not only advance Mordecai
to a very honorable Station, he was next to the King Ahasuerus, but also gave
him a great Reputation amongst his people. E^^h. 10. 3. He was great amongst
the Jews, and accepted of the Multitude of his Brethren. The Hamanites could
not endure him, but all good men loved and honored him.

3. As for them that honor God, he makes their Names to be precious and
honorable after they are dead and gone to a better World. Their Names are like
an Ointment that is poured forth* Cant. ^. 3. They have a sweet favor with
them. Their Names live after their bodies are dead. Psalm. 112. 6. The Righteous
shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. A long time after they are dead, they
that knew them will speak honorably or them; and such as never knew them, only
have heard of the Grace of God in them, will have honorable thoughts of them
in their hearts. Many times their Names are more precious after their death,
then they were whilst alive. This we see in Moses: Whilst he was living, the
people were always complaining and murmuring against him: Nothing could happen
amiss, but presently they were ready to say, we may thank, Moses for all this;
yet when he was dead they were ready to Idolize him: So the Jews would build
the To^^^s of the Prophets, and (...) the Sepulc^res of the righteous, whom
whilst living, they cared not for. Mat. 23. 29. But as for wicked men they
lea^^ an ^^^ Name behind them. Prove. 10. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed,
but the Name of the Wicked shall rot. What rotten Names do some wicked men
leave behind them in the world: Their putri^ied Carcasses are not so unsavory
as the vile Name which they have left toPosterity. But all the Honor mentioned
is nothing compared with what God will bestow on his Faithful Servants.
Therefore,

4. They that have with a sincere heart endeavored to promote the Honor of
God in the World, shall certainly be honored by him at the last day. All the
Promises in the Scripture will receive their full accomplishment in that day.
Whatever Services have been done whereby God has been Honored, Christ will
make an honorable mention of them; and praise his Faithful Servants for what
they have done before the whole World in that day. As their faith, so their
good works will be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing
of Jesus Christ. ^ Pet. ^. 7. An honorable reward shall then be given to them*
Christ will make them Judges of the World; yea, and of Angels too* ^ Cor. 6. 2,
3. Do you not kn^w that the Saints shall Judge the World* we shall Judge
Angels. Christ will make them to Sit upon Thrones in that day. Mat. 19 28. In
the Regeneration, h. e. at the Resurrection, when the Son of Men shall Sit on
the Throne of His Glory, you shall Sit upon Thrones. Christ will put a Scepter
into their hands in that day. Rev. 2. 26, 27. I will give him power over the
Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron; i. e. with a Scepter.
Christ will give them a Crown in that day. Yea, a Crown of Glory, and a Glory
that ^adeth not away. All Earthly Glory soon ^adeth away: Transit gloria mundi:
Worldly Honor is (as one expresses it) subject to the Epilep^y* Men in high
places are Se^ in slippery places. Psalm. 73. 18. They are like men standing on
Ice, that get a ^all before they are aware. But the Honor which God confers on
his Servants at the last day, will be an Everlasting Honor. It shall not
continue for a few Generations, but thro^ghout Everlasting Ages. This Honor
have all the Saints, All whose hearts are (...) serve and honor God. Thus
shall it be done to the man whom the King of Heaven delights to honor.

We proceed to make some APPLICATION of the Doctrine, which has been Opened and
Confirmed in the particulars insisted on.

USE. I. This Directs them who are concerned in the Elections of this Day, whom
they should choose. Put honor upon them, who will honor God. It was a
principle and practice amongst the (...), to choose men into the Senate, not for
their Riches, but for their Virtue. This did the light of nature direct them
unto. It is a great privilege which you enjoy this day, that there can be no
Civil Rulers over the Province (excepting the Commander in Chief, and his
Deputy) but what the People by their Representatives shall approve of. No other
Plantation enjoyes the like Privilege. Nor should we, if the Sen^alla^s and
To^ija^^ amongst us could have had their desires. But since God and the King
has granted us this favor, to make a right improvement of it, is the way to
have it continued; that is to choose such as will use their power for God: And
they that have an heart to do so, will also seek the welfare of the People over
whom God has let them, It is said, Prove. 39. 2. When the Right^eous are in
Authority the (...) Well they may, because then such are in Authority as will
seek their prosperity. Whenas they that are unfaithful to God, though it may be
they may carry it w^ll as long as it is fair weather, they I shrink in the
wetting. If a Storm of Temptation happens, that the Interest of the Public,
and their own personal are in Competi^ion, they will make the Public give way
to their personal Interest. It is related concerning that famous Emperor
Constantius Clorus, (who dyed in England, then known by the Name of Britain
only) that having in his Court many Christians, that so he might Try their
Fidelity, he gave out, that such as would not renounce their Christianity
should no longer be his Servants. Whereupon some who were only Christians in
Name, but not in Sincerity, thinking to please the Emperor, declared, that they
would renounce the Christian Name: which when they had done, Now (said he) I
see what you are. You that will be false to your God, will never be faithful
unto me, and therefore he banished them his Court. Well then, if you would have
those to be over you, that will Conscientiously seek your good, choose them
that will be sure to do as God would have them do. When God chose a Ruler for
his People, He chose one that would fulfill all his will. Act 13.22. This has
the Scripture recorded, for the direction of them who may have the power of
Election, that they should (so far as they are able to judge) Elect God-^earing
men. Choose such as will both by their Authority and by their Example Encourage
the worship of God. That will say with Joshua, I and my house we will serve the
Lord. That say after David, Psalm. 122. ^. I was glad when they said unto me,
let us go into the house of the Lord, where God was publicly and solemnly
worshipped as Himself had commanded. Choose such as will be Zealous for God:
That will Exact their Authority for the suppressing of all manner of Vice, and
for the Encouragement of Virtue and Piety: That will be a Terror to Evil doers*
and a praise to them that do well. A few such Counselors and Rulers may Save a
Land from destruction. Jer. 5. ^. Run ye to and fro, through the Streets of
Jerusalem, if there be any that Executes Judgment, I will pardon it. That great
City would have found the better for a few such, nay, for one such Magistrate.
Choose them that will Fear GOD and Honor the KING. That will be faithful to
his present Majesty, whom God and ail the good people in England have set upon
the Throne. It is needless for me to say, Let no man give a Vote for any one
that has the (...) heart of a Ja^^bite in him. There are very few of that sort
of men in New England. I hope not an hundred of them in the whole Province; and
I hope not so much as one in this General Assembly, in which respect such a
caution may seem supefluous. Choose them that will show singular respect to good
men, because they are such: As David was resolved to do. Psalm. 101. 6. My eyes
shall be on the Faithful in the Land. Such as were Faithful to the best
Interests, he would cast an eye of peculiar respect and favor toward them. So
did the Rulers in Judah. Hos. 11. 12. Judah Rules with God and is faithful
with the Saints. The Rulers in Judah adhered to the true pure Worship of God;
they also adhered to the Holy Prophets and Godly people in the Land. Choose such
as will be willing to be reproached and so pers^^^^ed on the account of their
being Faithful in the discharge of their duty: Such a Magistrate was Job, as we
may see by what he says, Job 31. 34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the
contempt of Families Terrify me. He knew that if he discharged the duty of his
place, in bearing witness against those things whereby God was dishonored, a
multitude of bad men would be offended: He knew that if he punished a Criminal,
the Families that were related to that Criminal would be in^aged* But he
mattered it not, as long as he did nothing besides what the duty of his place
as a Magistrate obliged him unto. Choose such as will prefer the Interest of
Christ above their own; that will not warp with the Times, and make the
Interest of Christ's holy Kingdom to truckle under their secular Interests, as
it is the manner of Time servers to do.

USE. II. Let this excite us all in our several places and stations to
Endeavor that God may be Honored. Let the Mo^ive in the Text quicken ^s unto
that which is our duty. The Orat^r observes that the nature of man is desirous
of honor. And the Gentiles by the light of nature knew that Virtue is the way
to that which is truly to be accounted Honor. The Romans had a Temple which
was called the Temple of Virtue, and another called the Temple of Honor. These
were so built as that no man could pass into the latter, but through the
former. God is so Gracious as to reward the Virtuous actions of moral Heathen.
The justice of Aristides made him ^amous. Codrus and Regulus because they
preferred the safety of their Country above their own lives, were honored in
the world. The external Services of Hypo^^ites have a Temporal reward. God will
never be in any man's debt. When Je^u executed Judgment on the house of A^^^
according as God had commanded him, he was rewarded with the honor of a
Kingdom, ^or four Generations. But what is that to the honor which God will
give to them that are his ^aithful Servants? The honor which comes from God
alone is transcendently better than that which is from men only. It is a maxim,
that the King i^ the Fountain of honor. So it ^s as to Civil honor. But there
is an honor which none but the King of Kings and lord of Lords is the (...)
of: Let no honor but that satis^y us: Nor let any of us be (...) without that
honor. If we approve our^selves sincere in his sight, we shall have the p^aise
(though it may be not of men, yet) of God, and that is honor and happiness
Enough.

Let us moreover consider, That some amongst* us* are under peculiar
Ob^^gations and Advantages to honor God. They whom God has honored above
others, are under an Obligation to honor him more than others.

There is one in this Assembly, a more honorable Person than ever was seen in
these Territories from the beginning unto this day. Many a prayer has been sent
up to Heaven that God would send us a Governor, who should be a Rich Blessing
to this his people. We have reason to hope that God ^as and will Answer those
pray^rs in His Excellency's now arrival amongst us. It may be thought to be
beneath the Character of so illustrious a Person to accept of the Government o^
so mean a people; but My Lord, Considering that they are the Lords people, give
me leave to say to you, that the God of Heaven has put honor upon you, in
^^mmitting so many of his Jewels to your charg^. I remember an honorable
personage interceding with His pres^^t Majesty in behalf of His Subjects in New
England, used this argument, That (...) to the number of people, there were
more Good Men in New England than in any place in the whole world; and I shall
ever remember the Kings gracious Rep^^, That He did believe that the people in
New England were a Good people. It must be con^es^ed that we are much
degenerated from what once we were, and that there are ^ar more ill men amongst
us than there were Forty ^ears ago, Nevertheless, there are at ^his day, some
Thousands of them who ^ear God, and whom he has purchased with his own blood.
So that, My Lord, God has committed unto your inspection and protection, a
people that are dear unto Him. My Lord, I am low, but my Message is from on
high. Thus says the God of Israel to you; yea, the God of New England says,
Love my people because they are mine. Be kind to them for ^my sake; and God
will give unto you that which shall be in^ini^ely better than all the Honors,
or Emoluments which this world can afford. And one word let me speak for your
Encouragement. There is not a Governor on the face of the Earth at this day,
That has so many prayers going up to God for him every day, by a praying people
who have an Interest in Heaven, as your Excellency has; and these prayers will
be a greater Mercy to you, and to your Noble Family, than all the Baronies or
Earldoms in the whole world would ever be. The Lord of Heaven grant that is may
be ^o.

There are others in this Assembly whom God has or may Establish in an
Honorable Station. I mean such as may be called to Assist in Government. You
(Much Hono^red) have singular Advantages put into your hands to promote the
Honor of God. You may do so by giving wise and faithful Advice, whereby Gods
Interest, and his peoples shall be promoved. And by taking effectual care that
Proclamations, and good Laws for the Suppressing of those Evils whereby God is
dishonored, may be duly put in Execution. Blessed be God, who has given our
Nation a King that has from the Throne declared against those Immoralities
which some of his Predecessors had corrupted the Kingdoms with. And blessed be
God, who has given New England a Governor, that has Emitted a like
Proclamation in that part of his Government, where there was the greatest need
of it. There are good Laws amongst us for the Suppressing of Swearing,
Drunkenness, Sabbath breaking and other Immoralities. But if these Laws he not
duly put in Execution, they had as good, nay better never have been made. I
speak this, not as doubting of your ^idelity in this matter, since it is a
known Rule in moral policy, that a bad Executor of Laws, is worse then a great
breaker of them: But to Encourage your Zeal.

There are also in this Assembly many of them who Minister in the House of God,
whom he has in that respect put Honor upon. It was said of Samuel that he was
an, Honorable man, a man of God. 1 Samuel 9. 6. To be God^ man, (...) be his
Servant, is to be Honorable. The Apo^^le speaking concerning the Ministerial
Function, (...) No man takes this honor to himself, but he that (...) called
of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5. 4. The Ambassadors of Kings are Honorable. And
are not they so, whom the Scripture calls the Ambassadors of Christ, who is the
King of Kings. Therefore ought they above all men to be careful of the honor
of him who is in a singular manner their Lord and Master. And they have in
respect of their Ministry great opportunity, as well as obligations thereunto.
A man may sometimes by one Sermon be Instrumental to promote that whereby God
shall have Everlasting Honor. The blessed Martyr Ridley, by a Sermon which he
^reached to King ^dward 6. was an Instrument of ob^aining that which continues
to be a National Benefit at this day; so by endeavoring the Conversion of
Souls, we shall cause God to be honored. Every one of those Souls will
continue honoring God throughout the Days of Eternity. My Bret^ren, Let us
make the Exaltation of the Glorious Name of the Lord Jesus Christ the great
design of our Ministry. What has a Minister to do, but to ^ry down sin, and to
Preach up the Lord Jesus Christ? It is a sad thing, when Ministers Preach it
may be who^e Sermons one after another, and no mention of the Blessed Name of
Chirist in them Nay, (which is horrid to be spoken) they ^^ve not to speak of
him, although they pre^^^^ to be his Ministers. How (...) are such men to the
blessed Apostle Paul, concerning whom Austin observes that he mentions the Name
of Christ no less then four hundred and fifty times in his Epi^^les. They that
call themselves his Ministers* and yet love not ^o hear his Name mentioned, may
fear, that at the last day, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall say unto some who
have Prophe^ied in his Name, Depart from me, I never knew you, they will be
found in that Number. And let us remember, that God has set us for the defense
of the Gospel. And that not only as to the Faith, but as to the Order of the
Gospel. New England differs from all other Plantations in this. Other
Plantations were built upon a Worldly Interest, but New England was founded on
an Interest purely Religious, and this not so much in respect of the Faith of
Gospel (in which we agree with all other Reformed Churches in Europe) as of the
Order o^ it. Our Fathers (who are now beholding the Glory of Jesus Christ in
Heaven) did therefore come into this Land, when it was a Wilderness, a Land not
^own. God was pleased to show unto them the form of his House, and the Goings
out thereof, and the Comings in thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof. This
they left to us their Children as a Legacy. The Platform which they d^ew out of
the Word of God, they have left with us. If we faithfully adhere to those Holy
Truths which from the Scriptures have been delivered to us, we shall please and
honur God; but if we depart from them, or any of them, we shall dishonor his
Name.

There are moreover in this Assembly, those who have the Honor to Repr^sent
the several Town^ that have sent them hi^her. Be you also Ex^orted in the Name
of God to improve the present Advantage ^ut into your han^s, to promote his
Glory. One thing let me mention to you, and no^ to you only, but to the whole
General Assembly, wherein the Honor of God is very much concerned. I mean that
which respects the happy Settlement of the College. God has had much Glory
from that Society, throughout all New England, and not only throughout
New England, but in other Plantations in America, there are those Preaching
Christ who have been in that Society prepared for public Service. And more
than so, many have gone from thence, some of them men of great Renown and
Worth, to England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, in which Lands they have done
Eminent Service, and Glorified God and Jesus Christ. If that Society should
fall, or if that which is worse then a dissolution and desolation should happen
to it, The Glory is then departed from New England. And God will be ex^^^dingly
dishonored if we do not use all possible means to prevent it. Therefore I
be^eech you take this matter into your Consideration without any delay. Now is
your Time: And it may be such a favorable opportunity will never again be had,
if this be neglected. God has given us a King who will favor us, if we (...)
Address our selves to Him in this matter. When I was in England above Seven
years since, Soliciting the affairs of this People, His Majesty was graciously
pleased to say to me, that He would willingly Countenanc^ the College in
New England, for that He knew many worthy Pro^estant Divine^ had their
Education there. And God has given us a Governor, who is ready to do any thing
that we shall reasonably desire of him, and (...) improve his Interest for us,
that ^o we may have an happy Settlement and Establishment of that Academy in
which the honor of God and the welfare of future as well as of the present
Generation is concerned. I^ we neglect the present Opportunity, how shall we
Answer it either to God, or to Posterity? Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

And let us all pray that God may be Honored the whole world throughout, and
this the more, because the day is certainly at hand, when God shall be honored
throughout all the Earth, more than ever yet ha^ been from the beginning of
(...) world, and unto this day. The Time approach^^ when all the Kingdoms of
this world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. Let us then
Turn the Prediction of the (...) into a Prayer, with which ^ conclude Psalm. 86.
9. All Nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord,
and Glorify thy Name. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 33. ^. 12. for Exact ^. Exert. ^. 20. for (...)


