A TREATISE Concerning The Lords Supper: WITH Three Dialogues For the more full
Information of the Weak, in the NATURE and USE of this SACRAMENT.

By THO. DOOLITTEL.

The Nineteenth Edition. With Additions.

1 Cor. 11.24 This Do in Remembrance of Me.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips at the
Brick Shop. 1700

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
TO get assurance of the Love of God and Eternal Life, should be thy Great Work
and Business in this World, else how can thou dye with Comfort, while thou
art doubting, whether thy departing Soul shall be damned or saved? Live with
God or Devils eternally? If when thou must bid farewell to all things in this
World for ever, and enter into an unchangeable, everlasting state of joy or
torments in another World, thou know not which must be thy Portion: What
the^ can all thy Friends do for thee? What Comfort can thy Riches, Honors,
bring into thy Heart at such a time as this when thou have not secured thy
Eternal Happiness.

For this end God has given to fallen Man his Word, whereby he might
understand his Misery, and how he came into it; the Remedy, and how he might
get out of it; by making known the conditions and terms, upon which he is
freely willing to receive Sinners into his love and favor, and confer upon
them Gospel Privileges here, and Eternal Glorious Life hereafter, and has set
to his Seal, for a firm conveyance of these great Eternal ^lessings, upon such
reasonable, free, and holy terms, as are propounded in the Gospel.

But after such Love and Grace of God to man appeared, for his Happiness and
Comfort, how great an Enemy is Man unto his real happiness, and well grounded
comfort! One to his Happiness, when he will not come up to the terms of this
Salvation: Another to his comfort, when he has consented to, and accepted of
the Conditions thereof, neglects the ratifying Seal of the Coven^^^ of Grace: A
third to both, while (...) increases his sin, and false deluding comforts, by
a prepostero^^ coming for the Seal, before he has performed the conditio^^ of
this Covenant.

And indeed the long absence of some Believers from, and the careless hasting
of all ungodly to, the Supper of the Lord, is much to be lamented. The former
being straightly charged by the Lord, to do this in Remembrance of him, yet
will not* The Latter threatened with Damnation if they do, yet will. The former
whom God has habitually prepared for it, and it for them, and yet will not
come, are in danger of being cut off, because they do not, Numb. 9.13. The
Latter being neither prepared for it, nor it for them, (while such) are in
danger of being cut down by death, because they do, 1 Cor. 11 30. The one
neglect his means of their Spiritual growth; and slight the love, and forget
the words of their dying Lord, as though they could thrive in Grace, while they
do neglect their Spiritual Food: The other neglecting the means of their
Spiritual Birth, forget the words of the Apostle, Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup: As though Food
c^nverted into Poison, could make a dead man alive. The one dare not omit to
pray, and lead a Holy Life, and yet will not come to wash their Hearts; the
other will not pray, nor lead a holy life, and yet will come to imbrue their
hands in the blood of Christ. Such is the unthankfulness of some, that should,
but do not; and the wickedness of some that do, but should not come unto this
Gospel Feast.

Now, to prevent these two great evils, for the time to come, (as it might
prove at least, I hope to some that might peruse this little Treatise) in which
something is said to provoke the one to their duty, and deter the other from
their sin and danger.

And because the best are too slight in their preparation for, and the weak
unskilful in, and all in some measure (...) short of living suitably to the
Sacrament; something is contained herein, to excite thy slothful heart to
greater seriousness and diligence in preparation before thou con^^st, and how
it should be done; something for direction, how thou should behave thy self
when thou art there, and the manner how particular Graces are to be acted, for
the better improving of this Ordinance, and something to direct thee what thou
art to do when thou come from thence; low thou might know, whether thou
art the better or the worse, and what thou art to do, which of either be thy
case. To which are annexed three Dialogues concerning the Lords Supper, for the
help of those that are the weaker sort of Christians, that do desire to partake
thereof. The first between a Minister and a private Christian, that desires to
partake of the Lords Supper. The second between a weak Believer, that dares not
come to, and a strong Believer, that dares not absent himself from the Lords
Supper. The third between one Believer that has Assurance, and another that
has hopes, and another that is under doubtings of the love of God, and of good
by the Sacrament, as they come away from the Lords Table. In all which, if thou
find any thing profitable to thy Soul, and tending to promote the Work of
Grace wrought in thy Heart, and thy fitness for, and to help thee in this duty,
give God the Glory; but where thou find any thing that savoureth of the
weakness of the Author, do not censure, but pray for him, who is willing,
according to his own Talent he has received from the Lord, to further thee in
thy way to Heaven and Eternal Life,

Tho. Doolittel.

OF THE LORDS SUPPER.
1 Cor. 11 23, 24 25, etc The Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, Eat, this is my
body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the Cup* when he had supped, saying, This
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; this do ^e as often as y^ drink it, in
remembrance of me, etc.


CHAP. I. Containing the Explication of the Text, and the general Conclusion
handled in this Treatise.
THE Riches of the Goodness and Love of God were exceeding abundant toward Man
in his first Creation, when God brought him out of the state of nothing, and
advanced him to the excellency of the humane Nature, capable not only of ruling
his Fellow Creatures in this World, but of knowing and conversing with his Lord
Creator, who was graciously pleased to condescend to enter into Covenant with
his then innocent Creature, that upon condition of his perfect obeying the Will
of his Maker, (which he had then power to perform) he should continue in that
state of Happiness. But great were the Riches of his Mercy to Man fallen from
so great happiness to so great misery in making a Covenant of Grace,
establishing it in the Blood of his Son, adding his Oath, annexing his Seals
for the confirmation of our Faith, that we should upon condition of believing,
be Partakers of the great and glorious Privileges purchased by Christ,
promised in the Scripture, sealed in this Sacrament; concerning which the
Apostle spends the latter part of this Chapter, 1. In reproving the Corinthians
for their abuse and profanation thereof: In that some that were contentious,
and some that were vicious, even when they were drunken did approach thereto;
who degrading themselves below the rank of men, could not then well act their
Reason, when they should have acted Faith, and Love, and other Graces. It is an
heinous sin, that those that are reeling in the street should be seen kneeling
at the Sacrament. 2. In reducing them to the Primitive Institution, in which
there is observable,

1. The Author of this Ordinance, the Lord Jesus Christ, he alone has power
and Authority for the appointing of Ordinances in his Church, and for the
Instituting of significant Sacramental Signs. He is the King and Prophet of his
Church, and has not left it to his Officers at their will and pleasure to
introduce any thing that is a part of holy Worship; for Christ was neither
short in wisdom that he could not, nor in goodness that he would not appoint
whatsoever was sufficient for the Edifying of his Church, and the Comfort of
his People: Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the
Tabernacle, that he should make all things according to the pattern showed to
him in the Mount, Heb 8.5. Exodus 25.40. And Paul delivered nothing but what he
had received of the Lord.

2. The Time when this Ordinance was appointed by our Lord Jesus, that same
night in which he was betrayed, when he was so near unto his death, and knew
all that was to be done to him, and suffered by him; whereby you might perceive
the greatness of the Love of your dying Lord, that when he was so full of
Sorrow, he made provision for your Comfort; and the excellency of this
Sacrament, that had its Original from Christ, when he was so near his end, that
should be for the maintaining of his Peoples Spiritual Life, which was ordained
by him now drawing near to death. Great and w^ighty things take up the thoughts
of wise and serious dying Men; that sure is great and weighty which our dying
Lord ordained at such a time as this.

3. The external Elements and Signs, Bread and Wine. In Sacraments there is
something seen, and something understood; something perceived by Sense, and
something apprehended by Faith. Sacraments are Glasses for our understanding,
and Monuments for our Memories, that by mean and visible signs, we might
perceive and call to mind sublime and invisible things. Here is Bread, even
bread of Life, to fill the hungry Soul, and Wine to satisfy the thirsty, and
to cheer the drooping Soul.

4 The Sacramental Actions, 1. Of Christ, He took the Bread, and blessed it,
and brake it: He took the Cup and blessed it; and did distribute both. 2. Of
the Receivers, who are to take and eat, to take and drink; Christ is the Giver,
Christ is the Gift: And what Christ in love does give, Believers with joy and
thankfulness should receive.

5. The Explication of this Mystery. This is my Body: This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood: The Bread was not turned into Christ's real Body; nor
the Wine into his Blood: For, did the Disciples eat Christ's real Body, when he
was with them at the Table? or did they drink his real Blood, which then was in
his Veins, and in his Body, and not in the Cup? Or did they not then see that
Christ's real Body and Blood was really distinct from the Bread and Wine? And
did they not see it was real Bread, and taste it was real Bread, and handle it
as real Bread? Or is now Christ's glorious Body subject to Corruption, as is
the Bread that is in the Sacrament, and when it is received? Or can a finite
Body be in Heaven and upon Earth, in so many places at once, as the Sacrament
might be administered in at the same time? Or do Drunkards and Swearers,
Hypocrites and Unbelievers, really eat and drink Christ's real Body and Blood?
The meaning is, this is a sign of my Body, and a sign of my Blood, the
Communion of both. As Circumcision is said to be the Covenant, so the Bread is
Christ's Body; Gen 17.10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and
you, and thy seed after thee: Every man Child among you shall be Circumcised:
But yet Circumcision was not the Covenant, but a Sign and Seal thereof, Romans 4
11. And he (that is, Abraham) received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith which he had being yet uncircumcised -- So the Cup
in the Sacrament is said to be the New Testament or Covenant, but it is not the
very Covenant, but the Sign and Seal thereof.

6. The Application of this unto its proper Subject; Christ declaring who they
be that this and the things signified do belong unto, Which is broken for you,
it is according to the mind of Christ, that Believers in the Lords Supper
should make particular application of himself, and of the fruits of his Death
and Sufferings to themselves: a Believer may take the Bread, and say, The Lord
Jesus dyed for me; and the Wine, and say, Christ Jesus shed his Blood for me.

7 A plain Injunction given to Believers to celebrate this Ordinance: Do this.

8. The Frequency of attending upon God ^t his Table: As often as ye do this.

9. The End for which we should approach unto the Table of the Lord: Do this in
remembrance of me: Whenever we celebrate the Lords Supper, we commemorate the
Lords Death.

10. The Time, how long this Ordinance must be used in the Church, Till the
Lord shall come. The Lord will come, and till then this Sacrament must
continue; but when he comes to take us to himself into his glorious Kingdom, we
shall need this and other* Ordinances no more: When the end is attained, the
means shall cease; but as the Sacraments of the Old Testament did continue till
Christ's first coming in the flesh; so the Sacraments of the New Testament shall
continue till Christ's second coming in Glory.

11. A serious Admonition of the Apostle, that those that come to this
Ordinance, be careful how they eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ver.
27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. Unworthy
receiving is a great aggravation of their sin and guilt, who shall presume in
their heart so to do.

12. A suitable Direction to a right use of this Ordinance, to prevent that
great wickedness and crying sin of being guilty of Christ^ Body and Blood, ver.
28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup.

13. The dreadfulness of the Punishment that they be in danger of, that come
unworthily; and this is either Temporal, ver 30. For this cause many are weak
and sickly among you, and many sleep, that is, are dead; or Eternal, without
Repentance, ver. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks Damnation to himself; which Word is used to signify as well Eternal
Damnation as Temporal Judgments; and if any Man be damned for unworthy
receiving, it will be great Damnation.

14. One Cause or Reason specified why some do eat and drink unworthily, ver.
29. Not discerning the Lords Body, not distinguishing betwixt this and common
Bread. Thus you have the parts contained in the Verses in this Chapter, that
concern the Institution of the Lords Supper, and of the Apostles Doctrine, in
order to a right receiving of the same.

In this little Treatise* I shall not endeavor to take in the whole Doctrine
of the Sacrament, because many learned and holy men (whose Shoes I am not
worthy to un^ye) have written concerning the Nature, Use, and Ends thereof, the
Qualifications of the Persons that have an immediate right thereto, the Graces
that are to be exercised therein, which are to be drawn forth into act, by
se^ing the Sacramental Representations, by considering the Sacramental Actions
of the Minister that stands in Christ's stead, in taking, breaking and
distributing; of the Receivers in taking, eating, drinking; all which are signs
of something spiritual, not discerned by unworthy Receivers; by believing and
applying of Sacramental Pr^mises. [This is my Body which is broken for you.]
But what I shall speak, shall be comprised in some following Conclusions, for
the preventing of these following evils.

1. Some that are truly gracious, do live long in the neglect of this
heart-warming affection-inflaming, grace-strengthning Ordinance. Some that have
no right to it, will not be excluded from it, but count that Minister their
greatest Enemy that would willingly prevent their being guilty of the Blood of
the Lord. Others whom God calls and has prepared it for, will not be prevailed
with to come unto it.

2. Some that though they do approach unto it, yet it is but very seldom.

3. Some that do come, and that often, are too careless and remiss, that they
do not endeavor to prepare themselves, as a work of that weight and
consequence does require; and herein some of Gods own people are blame worthy.

4 Some while they be actually engaged in this du^y, do not rightly consider
the Blood of Christ therein, nor act their Graces thereupon.

5. Some that are partakers of the Lord: Supper, do not enquire after
participation, what benefit they have received thereby. In opposition unto
which evil, I shall lay down these Conclusions bottomed upon some particular
passages in this Chapter.

1. Conclusion.
That it is a necessary Duty incumbent upon all Adult Believers, to partake of
the Lords Supper, ver. 24. Do this in remembrance of me.

2. Conclusion.
That it is the Duty of Christ's Disciples often to partake of the Lords
Supper. Ver. 25. This do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance (...): Verse.
26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come.

3. Conclusion.
That whenever ye are to partake of the Lords Supper, you are to be painful
and serious in making preparation for it. Ver. 28. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

4. Conclusion.
That a Believer should eye the Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper, in the
several properties, virtue and efficacy of it, ti^ suitable Graces thereby are
drawn forth into act and lively exercise. Ver. 24. This is my Body which is
broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. Ver. 25. -- This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood; This do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me.

5. Conclusion.
That such as are partakers of the Lords Supper should enquire after
participation, what benefit they have received thereby: Whether they be the
better or the worse by receiving. Ver. 1^. Now in this that I declare unto you,
I praise you not, that ye come together not for the better, but the worse. I
begin with the first.

CHAP. II. Containing the first Conclusion, and Explication thereof.
1. IT is a necessary Duty incumbent upon Adult Believers to partake of the
Lords Supper. 1. Necessary, as it is opposed to Arbitrary: It is not left to
the pleasure of the people of God, that if they will they may; if they will
not, they may refuse; but as it is their privilege that they may, so it is
their duty, that they must receive it. We may, and we must pray; we may, and we
must hear: so we may, and we must receive. Yet it is my Observation, that the
same Christians that are much troubled if they omit praying, and hearing, and
reading the Word of God, and their Conscience does accuse them for the neglect
of these, yet have for a long season absented themselves from the Table of the
Lord, and seldom put the neglect thereof amongst their Confessions of sin, as
if it were not a sin of Omission and made them not guilty before the Lord,

2. I say, it is a necessary Duty; not necessary to the Being and Essence of a
Christian, for that is supposed: for Conversion must go before participation of
this Holy Ordinance, which is not appointed of God to beget, but to increase
Grace: and Grace must be in Truth, before it can receive its growth by an
Ordinance. Dead M^n must not sit down at the Table of the Living God; Here Men
come to Christ, and Faith is the foot of the Soul; here men must receive
Christ, and Faith is the hand of the Soul; here men must fea^^ upon Christ, and
Faith is the Mouth of the Soul; it would be more seemly to set a dead Man at
our Table, than that a Man dead in Sin should sit down at the Table of the
Lord* It is Childrens Bread, and must not be given unto Dogs; But there is a
degree of necessity of this Ordinance for the more comfortable being of a
Christian: You must then bring some Grace with you, and come hither for more;
you must bring some Faith, and Love, and Hope, and come hither to have more
degrees of all these: Growth supp^seth Life.

3. I say, it is necessary, but not absolutely to salvation; because where
there is Faith in Christ, Love to God, and real implacable hatred unto Sin,
there is at least an Objective certainty of Salvation, and may be a Subjective
c^rtainty without it, though not so usual, nor so full and constant, if it be
wi^^fully neglected, where opportunity of receiving it is afforded; for the
wilful neglect of this duty does administer just ground of jealousy, whether
our obedience be true, because not universal unto all Gods Commands, and
therefore not universal, because it extends not unto this* Lo this in
Remembrance of me. A Believer without this Sacrament may be sure of Heaven,
especially where opportunity of participation is denied: but a Believer that
may receive it, and yet lives in the neglect of it, will not be so fully, well
groundedly, comfortably sure that he is sure of Heaven.

4. I say necessary, being so by Gods Command; what God enjoins is not
arbitrary to u^, nor indifferent whether we will do it or no.

5. I say, it is a duty of Believers, that are adult, and have the use of
reason; so it is not incumbent upon Infants and distracted Persons, because
they are not capable of the condition and antecedent duty unto this, viz
Self-examination. A diligent strict examination. 1. Of our State, whether in
Christ or no. 2. Of our Sins, both of heart and life. 3. Of our Wants 4 Of our
Graces, of Repentance for sin, Faith in Christ, Love to God, Obedience, and a
firm and holy purpose of walking with God, must precede the participation of
this Ordinance, and therefore such persons as may have grace in the habit, and
in no measure capable of Self-examination (as may be the case of some Infants
and distracted Persons) lie not under an obligation to celebrate this Ordinance
So much for the explication of this Conclusion.

CHAP. III. Showing that Christ's Disciples must receive the Lords Supper.
THat it is the necessary duty of Believers to partake of the Lords Supper, I
prove:

First, There is the same parity of Reason that Believers under the Gospel
should receive the Lords Supper, as the Israelites under the Law should eat the
Lords passover: This was their duty, as is prescribed, Exodus 12. where is the
First Institution, the manner how, the end for which. And the command for it is
again renewed, Numb. 9 1, 2, 3. And if a man were unclean that he could not
keep it the first Month, yet he must the second: yea, God was much provoked by
the Neglect of the Passover, Numb. 9.13. But the Man that is clean, and is not
in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even the same shall be cut
off from his People, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his
appointed season: that man shall bear his sin. Here you see was Guilt
contracted, and punishment severe to be inflicted, upon the Person that should
neglect to eat the Lords Passover.

And there is as great reason for Believers to eat the Lords Supper, as appears
by the agreement betwixt them in these particulars:

First, in the Author and efficient Cause; God appointed both.

Secondly, In the Matter principally signified in both, and that is Christ, and
the same benefits and privileges held forth, and conveyed to Believers in
both, as remission of Sin, Justification, and spiritual Nourishment and Growth
in Grace.

Thirdly, In the End, to commemorate the mercy and goodness, of God in the
deliverance of his People from Captivity of Sin, and Bondage of the Devil.

Fourthly, In the Instrument of receiving and applying the thing signified by
both, and that is Faith*

Fifthly, In the Parts; in both, something (...) sign, and something signified.

Sixthly, In the Properties of the Paschal Lamb, which are in Christ our
Passover.

1. That was to be without blemish; so was Christ, Isa. 53 9. 1 Pet 1.19 and
2.22 Heb 7.26.

2. That must be a Male; so Christ for Sex and Strength a mighty Savior, Jer.
31.32

3. That must be of a year old, in a perfect age; Christ about thirty four
years, in the prime of his age.

4 That must be taken out of the flock. Christ must be taken from among
mankind, that was partaker of Flesh and Blood, Deuteronomy. 18.18 Heb 2.11.

5. That must be separated from the flock; Christ was separated from Sinners,
Heb. 7.26.

6 That roast with fire; Christ with the heat of Gods wrath.

7 That must be eaten; Christ must be received by Faith.

That must be eaten,

1. By every Family; Christ to be received by every Person.

2. With unleavened bread; Christ and this Sacrament is to be received in
sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5 7, 8.

3 With bitter Herbs; Christ and this Ordinance, with bitter Repentings.

4. Wholly, all of it must be eaten, whole Christ must be received in all his
Offices, Prophet, Priest, and King, Christ as the Paschal Lamb must be received
with all his appurtenances

5. In have; Christ must be received presently, without delay.

Seventhly, In the Subject that must eat thereof, they were Israelites, and
those that were Circumcised. Those that should partake of this Ordinance ought
to be Israelites indeed; and Circumcised in their hearts, if they would have
benefit thereby. Thus you see the great agreement betwixt those two Ordinances:
And were the Jews bound to observe that, and not Believers under the Gospel
engaged unto this; Nay, I may argue, that there is a greater reason why we
should be more forward to this duty, in as much, wherein they differ, this is
more excellent. As,

1. In the manner of their signification, the Passover signified Christ that
was to come; the Lords Supper, Christ already come.

2. In the Duration. The passover was to continue till the coming of Christ in
the Flesh: The Lords Supper till he come again in Glory, in the end of the
World.

3 In the perspicuity and clearness: In the former, Christ's death was signified
more darkly, in the latter more plainly.

Now I beseech you, see what the Passover was to the Jews, and consider that
that the Lords Supper is to us, and there will appear the same parity of reason
for our receiving of this, as for the Jews eating of that.

Secondly, It is the plain Injunction of our dying Lord, that we should do this
in remembrance of him; Why do you pray? One reason you will give is, because
God Commands it: And if you pray because God commands you, you must then do
every thing that God commands you, and so this: Is it not strictly commanded?
Read Luk 22.19 The whole is commanded. This do in remembrance of me, Mat.
26.26, 27. The particular Acts are commanded, Take, Eat, Drink, and will you
say you will not? Will that become a Disciple of Christ? You say not, you will
not, but you know you do not, and that is as bad.

Thirdly, Christ did ordain it for this very end, that believers should have a
remembrance of him in the partaking of this Ordinance: We are apt to forget the
Works of God, Psalm. 106.13. Too apt to forget the benefits we received from
God, Psalm. 103.2. But which is most to be wondered at, we are too prone to
forget God our Savior, to forget him that delivered us from the curse of the
Law, by being made a Curse for us: From the wrath of God, by bearing it
himself; from the sting of death, by dying for us, Psalm. 106.21. They forgot
God their Savior: Oh, what memories have we! that can remember our Relations,
our Worldly Affairs, and forget that God that made us, and Christ that did
redeem us: Now Christ would live in our thoughts and memory, and to heal and
help the slipperiness thereof, has instituted this Ordinance, which you cannot
partake of aright, but you must remember him

Or will you say you remember Christ without this? That you have no ne^d to use
this Ordinance for that end? Why then, tell Christ so, if you dare; What is
this but to correct the wisdom of your Lord by your own folly? but I tell you,
you cannot so well remember Christ without this Ordinance as you may, by a
careful frequent attendance upon God in it; for it is not a speculative,
historical remembrance that he did bleed and dye: for so the Devils themselves
remember Christ's death: Not as a Scholar may remember his notions; but the
remembrance that Christ would have in your ^houghts, is,

1 An Aff^ctionate Remembrance, that the sight of your eye should affect your
heart: That you should so remember him, as to love him, and desire him, and
delight in him.

2. A Sorrowful Remembrance* that you should remember him so, that your heart
should break, and your eyes should weep: when you remember your sin was the
Judas that betrayed him, your sins were the Spears that pierced his blessed
side, and let out the blood from his Holy Heart: That were the Thorn^ that
Crowned him, and the Nails, that fastened him to the Cross. When David would
sorrow for his sins, he penneth a Psalm, which he intitles a Psalm to bring to
remembrance, Psalm. 38. And when you would have your heart to sorrow afresh for
your Pride and Unbelief* and other sins, go to the Sacrament; which is a
Sacrament to bring to remembrance; there remember the dignity and Innocence of
the Sufferer, the greatness of his Sufferings. 1 From God. 2 From Men. 3. From
Devils; the causes of his sufferings, your own wicked doings, and this will
help you to a sorrowful remembrance of your sins.

3. A joyful and thankful Remembrance; you must look upon your sin, and be
troubled that you have done that which put Christ to death, and you must here
look upon Christ, and rejoice that by his death he has taken away the sins
that you had done against God*

4 A fiducial Remembrance; that you may so remember Christ, as to trust in him,
and rely upon him, and cast the care of your Souls upon him.

5 A silencing Remembrance; that you may so rem^mber Christ, as to silence all
the Clamours of an accusing devil, and an accusing C^nscience, and every one
that would lay any thing unto your Charge: When you remember Christ's death, it
will furnish you with suitable supplies to all Charges laid unto you. The Devil
will accuse you of sins before and since Conversion, and you cannot deny them;
but you may remember Christ's death, and say, it is true, I did so, but Christ
has born mine iniquiti^s in his Body upon the Cross: what now, O mine Enemy!
he will tell you of your si^s of om^ssion, of commission, and you cannot ^eny
them; but you may reply, Christ has undergone the punishment that was due to
me for them; what now, Oh mine Enemy: the Law of God will accuse and curse you
for the breaches thereof that you have made, and you cannot deny them; but here
you may remember Christ, and say, that he ha^h perfectly obeyed the Law, and
satisfied for your bre^king of the Law, and may be comforted: Your own
Conscience will accuse you, but here you may remember Christ's Death, and
Conscience is answered, and ^ightly quieted: Thus the remembrance of Christ's
death will answer all charges, Rom 8.33, 34 And will you neglect it?

6 A Sin-^^athing remembrance; you will not only mourn for sin, but loath it
too; when you do this in remembrance of Christ, you will abhor the Knife that
killed your Father, and the Sin that killed your Lord; when you remember him
and it. Now you cannot have such a remembrance of Christ as this, so well
without the Lords Supper, as with it: except you will unadvisedly and wickedly
charge Christ with a superfluous Institution of a needless means that has no
tendency in it to beget such a remembrance of him in your thoughts; and whom
will you delight to remember, if not your Lord? Who shall live in your
thoughts, if not your Savior and Redeemer? And how will you thus remember him,
if you do neglect the means appointed by him for the attaining of this end?

Shall Christ himself bespeak you to do this in remembrance of him, saying* Do
this in remembrance of me.

First, That came down from Heaven to Earth, for your sake, that left the Bosom
and the Glory of my Father, to be clothed in the rags of Humanity for your
sake, and will you not do it?

Secondly, Shall he say, Do this in remembrance of me, that led a life of
suffering, from the Manger in which I lay, to the Cross on which I hung, and
will you not do it?

Thirdly, Shall he say, Do this in remembrance of me, that underwent a
shameful, painful, cursed death for your sake, and will you no^ do it?

Fourthly, Shall he say, Do this in remembrance of me, that was buried and rose
again for your sake, and will you yet neglect it?

Fifthly, Shall he say Do this in remembrance of me, that go from Earth to
H^^ven again, to prepare a place for you in glo^^, and take possession of
Heavenly Mansions for you, and will you yet absent your self from it?

Sixthly, Shall he say, Do this in remembrance of me, that am going to the
right hand of God to intercede for you, to plead your cause with the Father,
and will you yet turn your back upon it?

Seventhly, Shall he say, Do this in remembrance of me, who will come again at
the last day, and openly absolve you before Angels, M^n and Devils; and will
you yet slight it?

Eighthly, Shall he say, Do this in remembrance of me, with whom you shall for
ever be, with whom you shall for ever live, a holy, happy, blessed life, and
will you yet be indifferent whether you do it or no? Nay, be backward to it? Oh
seriously weigh these things, and then say, Though you have not done it all
this while, yet now you will.

Fourthly, You are bound to use all means for ^he increase of your grace, for
the enflaming of your love, the strengthening of your Faith, and the renewing of
your repentance, and the subduing of your sin, and you sin if you do not: You
cannot neglect it, but you increase your guilt; and would it not be better for
you to go in a right manner, and have the pardon of your sin sealed to you, and
your gui^t removed from you, than by a constant neglect contract more guilt
upon your Soul? are you not b^und to grow in grace? Or have you enough alread^?
Do you not want more m^asures and degrees of Faith, and Love and Hope? And can
you neglect the means of growth, and yet grow? Can you neglect your food, and
yet b^ nour^sh^d? Or do you not sin, if you do not grow? And do you not sin, if
you do neglect the means of growth, think of this.

CHAP. IV. Containing twelve Questions to those Believers that neglect the
Lords Supper.
LET me proceed to show you the aggravations of your long neglect of the Lords
Supper: I pray you therefore tell me,

Quest. 1. Is not this to live in the neglect of a plain commanded duty? You
see it proved to be your duty, and is it nothing to you to live in a known sin?
Nay, and to plead for it too? As you do for not coming to this Ordinance, it
may be it is because you doubt of your sincerity, and might not this increase
your doubts, when you are partial in your Obedience to Gods Commands?

Qu^st 2. Is not this great Hypocrisy to complain of the hardness of your
Hearts, and yet will (...) use the means to have it s^^^ned? To comp^^^n of the
Power of your sins, and yet will not bring them to the Cr^ss of Christ to have
them mortified and subdued? Is not this great diss^mulation, to run to
Ministers with Complaints in your Mouth, and Tears in your Eyes, because of the
prevalency of Cor^up^ion, and yet will not use the means for the further
conquering of them? If it be not so, why then do you complain? If it be so why
then will you not diligently and conscientiousl^ use the means, that it might
be better with you? Oh come, bring your hard Heart unto the Blood of Christ,
and see if it will not soften it; bring your strong corruptions to this Blood,
and see if it will not weaken them?

Quest. 3 Is not this to set light by a special Token of the love of your dying
Lord? The nearer Christ was unto his death, the more lively were the
discoveries of his love unto your S^ul and will you take no more notice of it?
Methinks Christ when he was to die, speaks thus unto his people, You are they
whom I have loved; you are they for whom I will do and die; you are they whom I
will always think upon, and in whose Thoughts I love to live; and because the
hour of my death is come, and I must go away from you, therefore I will leave
you a Memorial of my Death and Love, that as often as you see it, you may
remember me; when you behold it, then think of me: And was Christ mindful of
your good and comfort in that very night in which he was betrayed; and will you
thus neglect and distesteem it? If your most dear and special Friend upon his
death bed had bequeathed you some token of his love, and said, When you behold
this, then think on me when I am dead and gone, would you throw it by, and
never view it? Do not the Expressions of your dying Friends make a deeper, and
a more large impression upon your heart, and thoughts? And shall not the words
and entreaties, and commands of your dying Lord?

Q^^^t 4. Is not this to disesteem a firm Conveyance and Assurance of all the
Gospel B^essings and benefits purchased by the Death of Christ? Is not this
Ordinance Gods bread Seal, to confi^m unto your Soul the great and everlasting
B^^ssings of the Covenant of Grace? Would you be contented with the Writings
for your Lands and H^uses, without a Seal? or wou^d you not desire a Sealing
day, and be glad when it comes, that you may be the surer, and your Title made
more clear? And are not the pardon of your sins, and your Title to the Kingdom
of God greater things? And the assurance of these more, infinitely more
desirable? Or do you doubt you have them not, and yet will not come to have
your Evidences to be cleared? This Sacrament it is Signum rememorativum, to
bring to your remembrance the Passion of your Lord, where he would testify to
your Conscience, and assure you that he died for you: It is Signum
demonstrativum, a Demonstration ^f his Love, where he would assure you that he
loves you: It is Signum prognosticum, or prenuntiativum, a Prognostic of your
future and eternal Happiness, where he would assure you that you shall
undoubted^y be Partaker of it, and w^ll you yet neglect it?

Quest. 5 Is no^ this too great a sign of the littleness of your Love unto him?
Did you love him, would you not desire to be there where he is wont to take his
walk? Did you love him, would you not desire to eat and drink at his Table,
yea, to feast upon him? And to be there where you may find him, and where he
manifests himself unto them that love him? Did you hunger after him, and thirst
for him, would you not desire to be there, where you may be filled and
satisfied?

Quest. 6 Is not this too great a sign of your slighting Communion with him?
That you do not set so high a price and valuation of fellowship with him? Or do
you complain that you have it not, and yet will not come where you may have it?

Quest 7. Is not this too great a sign that you set little by the comforts of
the Spirit, and the warming joys of the Holy Ghost? Is it not here that God
has shed abroad his love into the hearts of true believers, and sent them away
with their hearts full of joy, and their mouths of praises? Or do you complain
you have no comfort, and that you are a stranger to spiritual joy, and will not
come where you may not only have a taste, but drink full draughts of the Well
of Consolation.

Quest 8 Is it not this to grieve the Spirit of God, and to make him more angry
and displeased with you, and to withdraw himself further from your Soul? Can
God take it kindly at your hands, when he has killed the fatted Calf, and made
ready his Marriage Supper, and sent his Servants forth to call you and invite
you, and you turn your back upon it? Do you not provoke him to leave your
hearts to great deadness, and let you go sorrowing to your Grave, and never let
you taste of the sweetness of these comforts till you get to Heaven? Or how can
you complain that God d^parte^h from you, when you will not come near unto him;
that he withdrawe^h from your Soul, when you withdraw from your duty?

Quest 9 Is it not too great a sign that when you did receive i^, you tasted
not of the sweetness of i^? and that you missed of the comfort and the ben^fit
of it, that you have since so long neg^^cted it? Do you think you have not
cause to repent of your former receiving, when he did not leave an earnest
longing in your Soul to come again? Was it possible for you to meet with God,
and taste the sweetness of the fullness of Christ, and not desire and long for
the like opportunity again? Had you experimentally found the reachings forth of
your love to God, and desires after him, and have tasted the sweetness of such
actings of love and joy, could you have abstained so long?

Quest 10. Is it not all one to you, if there had been no such O^dinance
appointed? What is it to you, if you receive it not? I^ it be a Sacrament to
others, yet it is not to you: If it be a Seal to others, yet it is not unto you
that live in the neglect of it. The Lamb was not the passover, but the Lamb
killed and roast, and eaten, was the Passover. Nay, let me tell you, it had
been better for you if Christ had not ordained it at all; for you could then
but have been without the benefit of it, and so (...) are now, while you do
neglect it: But th^n you would have been without that sin and guilt that now
you contract by forbearing of it?

Quest. 11. Is it not great unthankfulness in you thus to live in the neglect
of it? Can you be thankful unto Christ for adding Seals unto his Covenant,
while you omit it? Have so many Souls unfeignedly blessed God for this
Institution, and will you be guilty of so great Ingratitude?

Quest 12. Do you know what it is that you have lost by neglecting of it? And
might it not have been better with you in your Spiritual condi^ion, if you had
frequently attended upon God therein? If there be any thing in Law and Gospel
to awake you first, and comfort you afterward, this O^dinance would have done
it. Here you might have seen the deserts of sin, and the evil of trangressing
the Law of God, to rouse you out of your Spiritual Security: Here you might
have had the Cordials of the Gospel to have comforted and revived your swooning
Souls under the Affrightments and Terrors of the Law; if there be any thing in
the wrath and Love of God to work upon your heart, here you might have seen
lively Discoveries of both: O^ Gods Wrath against sin in the Death of Christ,
of God's Love toward the Sinner in the Death of Christ: On! You cannot tell
what you have lost by omitting of it, what Grace you have lost, what Comforts
and Joy you have lost, that others have found, in the frequen^ and
conscientious use of this ever to be prized Ordinance.

CHAP. V. Containing some Doubts of weak Christian^ that hinder them from
receiving the Lords Supper, with a Resolution of those Doubts.
Doubt. BUT you say, you question your right unto the Lords Supper, because you
fear you are yet in a natural Condition; and this is Childrens Bread; it is
Bread of Life, and belongs only unto them that are living Christi^ans, that
have indeed the Life of Grace.

Sol. 1 Either this is so indeed, or it is not* and let it be what it will, you
do undoubtedly sin; if you be not fit, that is your sin; if you be in your
natural condition, that is your sin, as well as your misery; and one sin will
never excuse you from another; if it be so, why do you not forthwith look out
after Christ, and be fitted for it, and then come?

2 But do you not proceed upon a great mistake? For I hope better things of
you, and things that accompany Salvation; therefore I beseech you in the Fear
of God, after true debate and search into your own Soul, answer me these
Questions.

First, Do you not see your self utterly lost and undone? Do you not see your
misery out of Christ?

Secondly, are you not sensible of the sins that brought you into this
miserable Condition? Is it not the burden your Soul groans under, and would
willingly, heartily willingly be eased of it, as ever sick man was of his
sickness, or Prisoner of his chains? Does it not ^rieve you, that your (...)
have been committed? and if they were to do again, by the Grace of God you
would not do them?

Thirdly, Do you conscientiously practice whatever you have been convinced is
your Duty, and dare not omit it when you know it? Do you give your self to
Prayer and Meditation, and other du^ies? And yet do you see the emptiness and
the insufficiency of them to justify you in the sight of God? that as you dare
not omit them, so you dare not rest in them, or rely upon them* because you see
your Prayers have need of Pardon, and your Tears have need of being washed in
the Blood of Christ? That you do go out of your self, and seek for Salvation in
another. And therefore,

Fourthly, Do you not unfeignedly desire after Christ, and hunger and thirst
for him and his Righteousness? Are you not willing^^ to accept of him upon any
terms, upon (...) own conditions, for your Lord and Saviour^^ are you not
willing that he should sancti^^^ as well as save you? And bring you to
obe^dience as well as unto glory? Does not yo^^ judgment value him above all?
And yo^^ will choose him before all? And are not yo^^ affections of love, and
desire, and joy set up^on him? If you doub^ whether you lo^^ him, yet tell me
whether you would lo^^ him? If you would, you do. If you doubt wh^^ther you
have received him, yet tell me wh^^ther you are willing, unfeignedly willing
(...) take him upon his own terms, and choose (...) for your treasure, and your
happiness, an^ your chiefest joy? If you are willing thus (...) receive him,
you have received him, and so yo^ are habitually prepared for this Ordinan^^
and ought not to continue in the neglect of (...)

Doubt. You say upon serious search, you fi^^ you are willing upon any terms to
accept (...) Christ, you would have him to be your Lord (...) Savior, you are
willing to be his, to be ruled (...) him, to be made like to him, to have
communi^^ with him, but you fear Christ is not willing; (...) believe he is
able to help and save you, and (...) give you grace and glory, but whether he
be willin^ you do not know

Sol. 1. That you should be willing, and (...) Christ, is impossible: For as
much as your wil^lingness to accept of Christ, is a fruit of Christ's
willingness to give and bestow^ himself upon you: I pray you tell me, Is real
and unfeigned willingness to be holy, to be like to God, to be in all things
guided and directed by the Spirit, and the Word of God, a flower that grows in
Natures Garden? Is not the will of (...) the great rebel against God, and the
great opposer of the work of Grace* Is it not the complaint of Christ against
natural men that they will not come to him, though thereby they may have Life?
John 5 40 How (...) would I have gathered you, and you would me? Mat. 23.37 You
must therefore know, when the will is subdued, the greatest enemy in your Soul
against Christ and Grace is subdued; and indeed when the will is wrought upon
to choose Christ, to be willing to receive him, the work of saving Conversion
is wrought in that Soul.

2. Do you say you are willing and Christ is not? That is your intolerable
pride so to think and speak It is usual ^ith many dejected Souls, that complain
of their own unworthiness, and vileness, and sins, that loath and abhor
themselves for their sins, in the great work of humiliation, that yet have this
insufferable pride remaining in them, that they are willing but Christ is not.
Indeed! have you such good thoughts of your self, and such low, and mean, and
hard thoughts of Christ? Is it not Pride enough in you, to have better thoughts
of your self, than of other of your fellow Christians, but must you have higher
thoughts of your self, than of your Savior: or do you say you are worse than
others, and yet in this advance your self above God and Jesus Christ? It may be
you never perceived so much pride to be at the bottom (...) such conceptions
and expressions; that you are willing, but God is not willing, but Christ is
not willing. Oh proud Creature* proud Sinner! proud Mourner! is not thi^ to
have too high and proud thoughts of your self, to think you are more willing to
receive good than God is to give it? To be good, than God is to make you so? Is
it possible that a Sinner that by nature is a bitter Enemy to Goodness and
Holiness, should be more willing to be made good and holy, than God that is by
nature good and holy, and a Lover of it, should be to make men so? Oh, fall
upon your Knee^, and let those Tears that you shed in lamenting your sad
Condition, that God is not willing to be y^^^, when you are willing to be his,
be better spent in weeping for the Pride of your Heart, in thinking you are
willing to receive Grace and Christ, and he not willing to bestow himself and
it upon you.

3. If this might be, that a Soul may be unfeignedly willing to accept of
Christ upon his own terms, and yet perish, then at the last day some might
plead and appeal to God: Lord, I was willing to be holy, but thou wast not
willing to make me holy: I was willing to receive thee upon thine own terms,
but thou would not give thy self unto me, no, not upon thine own terms; and
I am not damned because I was not willing to be truly sanctified and renewed,
but because Christ would reject me willing to come to him. But there shall not
be a man that shall dare to open his mouth in this manner unto Christ at the
last day.

4. But this will be manifest, that Christ i^ more willing than you, in that he
did die more willingly for you, than you ^an for him; He did die more willingly
to make you holy, than you can for holiness sake, or for his sake, when you are
made holy; has he died for you, to purchase Holiness, and Grace, and Glory for
you, and yet will you think that you are willing, and not Christ? Nay, Christ
was more willing to die for you, than you are to live to him, and was he not
yet willing? when you think Christ is not willing, think upon the Sorrows, the
(...) Sufferings he endured in his Body, (...) ^oul, how he sweat as it were
great drops of Blood; nay, bled and died for you, and then say no more you are
willing, but Christ is not.

Doubt But you will reply* If Christ died for me. I should not doubt but he is
willing to give himself, and his Grace, and his Kingd^m to me, but that is my
fear, in that I am not satisfied; and therefore I cannot in the Sacrament
Commemor^^^ his Death, because I cannot see he died for me.

Sol. 1. If you be one of Christ's people, then he died for you; he died to save
his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. And you are one of his people, i^ you
are made willing in the day of his Power, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy Power: Are you therefore willing to forsake every
known sin? Willing to perform every known Duty? Willing to bear every burden he
shall lay upon you? Willing to be what he would have you be? Then you are one
of his people, and you may be sure he died for you in particular.

2 If you are one of Christ's Friends, then he died for you, and you are his
Friend, if you make conscience of doing whatsoever he commands you, and are
grieved where you do come short, Job 15, 13, 14.

3. If you are dead to sin: you cannot be mortified to sin, if Christ had not
been crucified for you. Sin had never been dead in you, if Christ had not (...)
you, Gal. 6.14.

4. If you live (...) ^^rist, Christ died for you: if it be your care to walk
in his ways, to do his will, and make him your end, and his glory your aim in
all your actions, or in the general scope of your life, Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.24.
2 Cor. 5 15.

CHAP. VI. The Second Conclusion, showing that Believers must often receive the
Lords Supper.
THat it is the duty of the Disciples of Christ, often to partake of the Lords
Supper.

Baptism is but once to be administered, but the Lords Supper is often to be
received; the frequency of it is not determined, often it must be, how often is
not expressed; if you had opportunity every Lords Day, and you redeemed and
improved it, your Soul may thrive and grow the more in grace and holiness:
Meals which are for nourishment must be often; you often eat, and you often
drink for the nourishment of Nature, and yet it is not told you how often you
must eat, how often you must drink, but the sense and feeling of the want of
your ^ood, will direct you unto this: So if you have but a sense and feeling of
the want of this Ordinance, and the things that are there conferred upon
Believers, that would guide to a frequent iteration of this Ordinance. Consider
therefore,

Do you not often stand in need of being washed in the Blood of Christ? Do you
not often defile your self, and gather filth upon your Soul* And should you not
often apply your self to the Fountain of the cleansing Blood of Jesus Christ?

Secondly, Do you not often blot your Evidences, and disturb your peace? and
have you not need of the frequent use of that Ordinance, wherein God might
renew your evidence and speak peace unto your Conscience? Do you often contract
guilt, and should you not often come to have your pardon sealed and confirmed
to your Soul in the blood of Christ?

Thirdly, Do you not often need the means of spiritual warmth and quicknings?
Are you not often dull, and often dead, and often lukewarm? and do not those
that are often sick, often need their Physic to purge and make them well? If
you are sometime warmed in an Ordinance, do not your affections abate again?
That you have not that liveliness of affections, nor that reviving joy, which
in the actual performance of the duty you did find? and is it needful to exhort
you that have found the benefit of this Ordinance, to go often to it? Let the
Experience of what you have found in it, and the want you do lie under by
seldom approaching unto it, quicken your desires after a frequent attendance
upon God in it.

Fourthly, Do you not often need so great an help for the breaking and so^tning
of your heart, for the renewing of your repentance for sin, and strengthening
and confirming of your resolutions against it? Is not your heart too apt to
fall in love with sin, and to renew its League with sin? Do you not often need
to be put in remembrance of Gods displeasure against it, his hatred that he
bears unto it, and the dreadful effects and deserts thereof, and is not this
done more livelily in the Lords Supper? Gods displeasure against sin is more
discovered in the Death of Christ, than in turning the Angels out of Heaven, or
Adam out of Paradise; or in the Destruction of the Old World, or in the burning
of Sodom, or in the Damnation of innumerable unbelieving and impenitent Persons.

Fifthly, Do you not often need so great an help for the increasing of your
Love to God and Christ? Do you often complain that you love God no more, and
will you not more often use this so great a means for the increasing of your
Love?

Sixthly, Do you not often need so great an help for the strengthening of your
Faith and Hope, that you may be more able to make a particular application of
Christ and his benefits to your Soul, and to have a more lively Hope of the
Kingdom of Heaven?

Seventhly, Do you not often need so great an help to put you in remembrance of
your Lord Jesus? Are you not too apt to forget him and his Love in dying for
you? Is he so much in your Thoughts as he does deserve? Or is it enough to have
some Occasional Thoughts of Christ? Or should you not more solemnly dwell in
your Meditations upon him? And does not the Nature and the end of this
Ordinance lead and help you to fix your thoughts more permanently upon him,
when you see how he was crucified and died for you?

Eighthly, Do you not often need so great an help to make you more thankful for
the matchless Love wherewith he has loved you, and the unparalled B^essings
he has purchased for you, and conferred upon you? Is it not a shame and sin,
you are no more in praising God, and rejoicing in him for such privileges that
were procured b^ the blood of his only Son, and your dearest Lord? And can you
sit at the Table and not have your Souls raised in the highest Admiration of
his Love and Mercy to you?

Ninthly, Do you not often need so great an help for the getting and
maintaining of more intimate Communion with God, and fellowship with Jesus
Christ? Is it not here, that God does abundantly let forth himself into his
peoples Hearts? Is it not here, that Believers feel the goings forth of their
Hearts in Love unto him, and Desires after him, and Delight and Joy in him? Do
you complain you have so little of God, and will not more often go where you
may receive more influences from him.

Tenthly, Do you not more often need so great an help for the closer knitting
of your Heart unto the people of God in greater affection and love unto them?
Do you love them as you should? Or is there not too great an alienation of your
heart and Affection from them? Or does not this Ordinance which shows you the
Love of Christ to all his People incite them that attend upon it, to imitate
the Lord Jesus in loving of them? That we should love one another as he has
loved us: When we see we are one Bread, and redeemed by one Lord, and fed at
one Table, and are washed in the same Blood, and enjoy the same Privileges,
and are here assured of the same Inheritance and Glory; does it not engage us
to be of one Heart, and to be kindly affectionate to one another, as Christ was
to us all? Though it is to be bewai^ed with Tears of Blood, that this Ordinance
which should have cemented us in love, and sodered our hearts together, though
our corruption has been the occasion, not the cause of great breaches and
divisions in the Church of God.

Thus if you seriously consider your own frequent wants, and often reflect upon
your often need of this Ordinance, you will see sufficient reason for your
often participation of so frequently needful an Ordinance

CHAP. VII. Third Conclusion, proving we are to give great diligence to prepare
our selves for the receiving of the Lords Supper.
THat whenever you are to partake of the Lords Supper, you are to be painful
and serious in making preparation for it.

This preparation must be for these reasons, which you may lay to your heart,
and find them to be quickening motives to stir you up thereto.

First, From the preparation they were wont to make (...) the Passover under
the Law, 2 Chronicles. 30.3. They could not keep it at that time, because the
Priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently: They did for a while defer
it till they had made more preparation for it: And after their diligence to
prepare, they prayed for the pardon of their imperfect preparation, 2 Chronicles
30.18, 19* The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God,
the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary: If any man were unclean, he was to stay another
Month, and then eat it, Numb. 9.10, 11.

That they prepared for the Passover, appears by,

1. The Actions they did before the Passover.

2. The Discourse they had with their Children before the Passover.

3. The Time they took up before the Passover.

First, From the Actions before.

First, Before they did eat the Passover, they were to cleanse their
Houshold^stuff, their Vessels and U^ensils from all leavened Bread, that none
might be found in them, no^ cleave unto them.

The Parallel is, Before we eat the Lords Supper, we must cleanse our hearts
and lives from all known sin, that we allow our selves in no known wickedness,
that we do not drive a trade of sin, nor be drudges to the Devil, nor Factors
for Hell; we may come with many sins bewailed, striving against, and groaning
under them, but not with one sin allowed and approved of.

Secondly, Then they made a stricter search after any bit of leavened Bread, by
lighting a Candle, and looking into every little Corner and Chink in the House,
the Night before the Passover.

The Parallel of this is, a Closer searching of our hearts, by lighting the
Candle of Conscience at the Fire of Gods Word, and looking into every Room and
Corner of our Hearts, lest there should be any sin lurking in our Souls, and
remaining undiscovered: We should enquire after the sins in our understanding,
Will, and Affections, what is amiss in our Love, Delight, Joy, etc.

Thirdly, Then having sound the Relics and Fragments of leavened Bread, they
cast it out: That they would not only not use it, but not have it in their
sight, that they may not set their Eyes upon it, nor look toward it, or would
burn it till it were consumed.

The parallel of this is, The casting away of our sins, when by diligent search
we have found it ou^. We must not find our sin, to indulge it, but to forsake
and kill it: Not to have our Hearts to hanker after our sin, when we come to
the Lords Table.

Fourthly, They had a Form of Words for the cursing of that leavened Bread,
which they could not find out, viz. All the Leaven that i^ in my power, whether
seen by me, or not seen, cleansed by me, or not cleansed; let it be nothing,
let it be esteemed as nothing; as the dust of the Earth, let it be scattered
and destroyed.

The Parallel of this is, The disowning of every sin, seen or not seen, after
this manner, Lord, if there be any sin in me, which after all my searching of
my Heart, I have not found out, let it be accursed, let it be as nothing, as
the dust of the Earth; if there be any sin in me, which i^ not dealt severely
with, it is not because I love it, but because I could not find it.

Secondly, From the Discourse they had before they came, appears they did
prepare for it. This was betwixt the Father and hi^ Children.

First, The Children inquired, What is the meaning of this Service; Then the
Parents answered, It is the Lords Passover, who passed over the houses of the
Children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our
Houses, Exodus 12.26, 27.

The Parallel of this is, That Christians should discourse together, or speak
unto themselves in holy Soliloquy, viz. What is the meaning, O my Soul, of this
Service, of this Love of Christ in appointing this holy Ordinance? What does it
bring to thy remembrance, O my Soul? And here you have Occasion of expatiating
the whole method of God in exalting the freeness of his Grace in Man's
Redemption. Oh, what meant my dearest Lord in shedding of his blood, and
ordaining this for the commemoration of it! Surely it was, O my Soul, to
deliver thee from misery, to make thee Partaker of his Grace and Love* and to
Seal it to thee, and make thee to rejoice in the remembrance of it.

Secondly, The Children ask, Why do we eat it with bitter Herbs? The Parents
answered, Because the Egyptians made the Life of our Fathers bitter in Egypt,
that they may be stirred up to greater thankfulness unto God.

The Parallel of this is, That we should reflect upon our sins, which made our
lives bitter while we lived in them, and that now we should taste more
bitterness in our sins, than ever we found sweetness, pleasure and delight
therein.

Thirdly, Why do we eat it with unleavened bread? The Parents were to answer,
Because the Dough of our Fathers had not time to be leavened.

The Parallel of this is, That we must make haste to Christ, and eat this
New Testament Passover with the unleavened Bread of sincerity and truth: That
we must not delay to come out of spiritual- Egypt, nor go to Christ in
hypocrisy, but in truth.

Thirdly, From the time there was betwixt the taking, and the killing of the
Paschal Lamb; the Lamb was taken the tenth day, and killed the fourteenth day
of the month, Exodus, 12.3. ad 7. And it is received as a Tradition among the
Jews, that for the duration of those four days, the Lamb was tied to their
Bed-posts, that in the Evening when they went to bed, and in the Morning when
they arose, and in the daytime when they were private in their Chambers; the
sight of the Lamb might affect their hearts, and put them in mind of the work
they were to do, and bethink themselves of the greatness of Gods Mercy toward
them, in delivering them from Egyptian Bondage.

The Parallel of this is, That believers, before the Lords Supper, should take
^ competent measure of time to bethink themselves of the Love of God in
delivering them from Sin and Hell, infinitely worse than Egyptian Bondage, and
prepare themselves to commemorate the Death of Christ, and be partakers of the
great Blessing that at the Lords Table true Believers have conferred upon them.

It is not sufficient to spend an hour the night before, or in the morning you
are to approach unto it, but some day before to have it in your thoughts, that
you may consider the greatness of the work you are to go about.

This Example of the Jews is cogent unto us, forasmuch as the Lords Supper is
not inferior to the Passover.

1. Neither in the Institution of it; the Passover was by Gods Ordination, and
so is the Lords* Supper, but God appointed that by Moses: But this was by
Christ himself in his own person.

2. Nor in the signification of it: That to put them in remembrance of their
deliverance from Egypt, and Typically from Hell: This puts us in remembrance
of the love of Christ, in bringing us from misery, and freeing us from torments
infinitely worse than Egyptian slavery.

3. Nor in the use and end of it, this being a seal of the Covenant of Grace,
to convey to Believers an assurance of the blessings of the Covenant of promise.

4 Nor in the manner of its signification: That a sign of Christ that was to
come and suffer; this, that Christ is come, and has already suffered.

This is my first Argument why, and Motive that we should approach to the Lords
Supper, after painful and serious preparation: No Preparation, no
participation. It is not then putting on our finer Clothes on a Sacrament day,
but the Trimming of our hearts, that God expects at our hands.

The Second Argument for preparation for the Sacrament, is taken from the
Author of it, which is God: The more he that does invite you to his Table is
your Superior, the more you prepare your selves to go to sit down thereat,
more than if he be your Inferior, or your equal. God is infin^ely your
Superior: Consider what this God is that prepares this Banquet for you, and
prepare for it.

1. He is a great and a mighty God, a God of inconceivable Majesty, and
transcendent Glory, whose perfection is infinitely above the most raised
apprehensions of Angels and Men: and would you go unto the Table of a great
King with filthy hands, and in your rags? And would you go to the Table of the
great King of Heaven and Earth with a filthy heart, and in your sins?

2. He is a pure and an holy God: Indeed every thing here is holy, the Signs
are holy Signs, the things signified are holy things, the Ends of the
Institution are holy ends, and the Author of it is the holy God; and shall our
hearts only be unholy? the very externals and utensils about it, are and should
be clean; the Cups are clean, the Cloth is clean, else you would be offended,
and should not your Heart be clean? If not, would not your God be offended?

3. The Author of this Ordinanc^ is a God of infinite Jealousy, and he is most
jealous in the matters of his Worship. In the Second Command, which sets forth
the manner of Gods^Worship, he makes himself known by this Attribute, That he
is a jealous God; and if his Jealousy should be kindled against you at his
Table, it would be uncomfortable, it will be terrible to you.

4. The Author of this Ordinance is an Omniscient God, and cannot be deceived;
if there be but one among a thousand that receives unworthily, his eye will be
upon him; he knows his Name, and sees where he sits, God knows the frame of
your heart, he knows your end why you are there, and what your diligence was
before you came; then come prepared.

The third Argument for diligent preparation is taken from the matter of this
Sacrament: The more excellent and noble any thing is, the more heinous is the
abuse thereof. If a Servant brake and spoil some earthen Pitchers, his Master
may more easily pass it by, but if he take his Jewels, and his precious Pearls,
and cast them in the kennel, and bury them in the dunghill, he will be more
difficultly pacified. If a man shall deal unjustly with another, it will be
displeasing unto God; but if he shall deal unworthily with his Son, he will be
provoked: If you should abuse your common Bread and Drink, which God daily
gives you for your ordinary repast and nourishment, you commit a Soul-damning
Sin; but if you profane these spiritual dainties, without repentance, your
damnation will be aggravated.

Here you have to do with blood, and then if ever, you should be serious; but
most of all when it is the Blood of God. Consider before you go, that you have
to do with the Blood of Christ, and let that quicken you to preparation.

The fourth Argument for diligent preparation is from the subject that is to be
partaker of it; as we may be considered in a twofold state or capacity.

What we were. What we are.
First, Every Man is born unfit for the Lords Table: We were Enemies to God,
and therefore except we will come in our enmity to God, we m^st prepare and fit
our selves, by being reconciled unto God: We are born spiritually dead, and it
would not be so loathsome a sight to us to have a dead Corpse full of plague
sores set down at our Table, as a man dead in Sin to sit down at Gods Table, is
loathsome unto God: Where there is no Life, there is no Appetite; and where
there is no Appetite, there is no actual preparation to this duty.

Secondly, Such as are truly converted, may yet be indisposed for this duty;
therefore there must be preparation. It is not every one that has true grace,
is presently to be judged actually fit for this Ordinance: As a man that is
asleep, is a living, real man, but yet ^e it not fit to eat, and drink, and
converse with men; so a man may have Faith, and Love, and Hope, and yet not be
fit for this duty, if his Faith be asleep, and Love and Hope be asleep: For a
man that is a worthy Receiver; might receive unworthily; my meaning is, That
one that is habitually prepared by having the truth of grace (...) receive
amiss, by being not actually pre^^^ed by the drawing forth of his graces into
act and exercise; and how much time must be spent in fervent prayer, in holy
meditation, and other duties, before you can feel the actings of Faith and
Love, Desire and Delight in God, before you can bring your heart to be broken
for your sin, etc.

Fifth Argument for Preparation, is taken from the Consequents which will be
answerable to our preparation, or neglect thereof, which will be either bad or
good For though God does not bestow the great things in the Sacrament for our
preparation, yet he will not give them without our preparation.

First, The consequents of coming unprepared will be very dreadful.

1. Such do fearfully increase their guilt, in a very high degree, in making
themselves guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, though not as an Actor in
his death, yet virtually as an Abetter and Consenter; for an unworthy Receiver,
is a Christ murderer, as he that defaceth the Kings Picture, does reflect upon
his Person. He that dares rush upon the Sacrament with reigning-sin in his
heart, would be a Judas unto Christ, if he were personally upon Earth; and had
Judas his opportunity, temptations and other circumstances, he would wash his
hands in the blood of Christ: that comes, but not to have his heart washed in
the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.27. And will you so come, to have your sin increased,
instead of having of it pardoned?

O what a crying Sin is Blood guiltiness, though it be but the blood of a common
man: But what will it be to be guilty of the Blood of the Son of God! Did not
the Blood of Abel cry against Cain for vengeance? Oh what a voice and cry will
there be then in the Blood of Christ! and will you have the Blood of Christ cry
against you, instead of pleading for you? Nay, you will sin more than many of
the Jews, that did actually crucify him, for many of them did it ignorantly;
for had they known him, they could not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor.
2.8. But you know and acknowledge him to be such, and yet will be guilty of his
Blood; they did it in his state of humiliation, but you do it in his state of
Exaltation. It would have been better for Judas if he had not been born, and it
would be better for you if you never had received.

2. Such draw down great Judgments upon themselves; and no wonder if great
guilt and great sin be followed with great Judgments; for God will proportion
men's sufferings to their sinnings. He that comes without the Wedding Garment
on his Soul, shall go away with a Curse upon his Head and Heart.

Consider,

(1.) Such deserve eternal torments, and the damnation of Hell, 1 Cor. 11.29 He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself:
Not to another that partaketh with him. Eats Damnation! Oh what a dreadful
Morsel is damnation! whence you see the reason why the Devil puts on many
Drunkards to be so eager after this Sacrament, it is that they may drink their
own damnation, there is Death to them in this Cup. The word (...) as well as
(...) is rendered damnation in other places, John 3.17. 2 These. 2* 12. Yea, this
might be the case of a Child of God, that he may deserve damnation, though not
be (through repentance) actually damned. Damnation is the desert of this sin,
though not the portion of the sinner that is brought to repentance for his sin
God may send an Hypocrite from his Table unto Torment. The same Red Sea that
was Salvation to the Israelites, was death and destruction to the Egyptians.
Eats Damnation! Oh what a dreadful word is this Damnation! And that when a
man comes to be Partaker of a Savior* Take heed what you do when you receive:
Damnation is not a business to be jested with, nor the Sacrament a work to be
trifled at. Adam did eat his own death, and so may you your own Damnation.

(2.) Such provoke God to inflict upon them oftentimes heavy and dreadful
punishments in this life: So that though God will not send a Believer to Hell
for this his sin, yet he might send him to his Grave for this sin, 1 Cor. 11.30
For this cause many are sickly among you, and many weak, and many are fallen
asleep. It is thought that God sent a Plague among the Corinthians for
profaning the Lords Supper. It is not usual with people in their sickness to
reflect upon their unworthy receiving as the Cause thereof: They say, such a
time I did over heat my self, and caught cold, and so my sickness came: But
not, I went to the Lords Table in my sin, or without actual preparation, and so
my sickness came: If unworthy Receivers had no love unto their Souls, yet for
the love they bear unto their Bodies, they should be persuaded to forbear till
they were prepared. If Damnation and Hell being out of sight will not affright
them, yet Death and the Grave, that is a nearer Object methinks should. Oh how
careful should we be to prepare for that which else might be death to our
bodies, and damnation to our Souls?

(3) Such Provoke God to take away this Ordinance from them. Gods own People by
abusing of this privilege, might forfeit the opportunity of approaching unto
it: As a Father, when he sees his Children abuse their food, may call his
Servants to take away, and set it up, till they shall prize it more, and use it
better.

Secondly, The good Consequents are very great if you rightly receive it, with
due preparation and care; and is not that your end in coming to it, that you
may be better for it? He that aims not at this spiritual advantage in
subordination to, and conjunction with the Glory of God, comes he knows not
why* And to come for this, without prepartion, is to separate betwixt the end
and the mean^* Consider,

1. Such as come in a right manner, shall receive more from God when they come:
The time of preparation is your sowing times: When you should sow in tears, and
the time of receiving is your reaping time; and he that prepares negligently,
shall reap sparingly: he that prepares diligently, shall reap abundantly. For,

1. Such shall receive more grace from God, they shall come away with more love
to God, with m^re desires after God, with more faith in Christ, and hatred to
their sins.

2 Such shall receive more comfort, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. If
you sorroW and weep before you go, you shall come away with your heart full of
joy, and your mouth of praises. When you have been formal and lukewarm in your
preparation, your heart has been dull and dead in, and after your receiving;
but when lively and diligent, God has spoken peace unto your Conscience, and
assured you of the pardon of your sins, and sent you from his Table to your
own, with a joyful heart, and with a cheerful countenance.

3. Such shall be more acceptable and welcome unto God: What you have done
aright, he will graciously accept; and wherein you failed, he will freely
pardon? then the Father will bid you welcome, and the Son will bid you welcome,
and the Holy Ghost will bid you welcome, when you have been weeping any
mourning in secret for your sin, whereby you have crucified the Lord of Life;
when you have been begging at the Throne of Grace* Lord give me a spiritual
Appetite after the Heavenly food: Lord give me power against my pride, and
passion, and earthly mindedness; after you have been searching into every
corner of your heart, that you may find out every Achan in your Soul, God will
say, Yonder is a Soul that has taken pains with himself in secret, and has
cried unto me for a gracious acceptance of his person and performances, and no^
he shall find that he is welcome; for I will sen^ forth my Spirit, and comfort
him, I will giv^ him my Grace, and quicken him, I will give him my Son, and
satisfy him Oh it will be swe^^ to have God to smile upon you at his Table^
But to have him frown when you are there will be uncomfortable; and to have hi^
withdraw, will make your du^y to be unprof^^table: Could you take delight at a
Man Table, if he frown upon you for every Morsel that you eat? and will it not
be worse when you take the Bread, then to have God to frown? And when you take
the Cup, then to have God to frown, and say, Friend, how came you in hither
amongst my Children, when you have not on the Wedding Garment? or if you have
Grace, you have not endeavored by painful preparation, to have it drawn forth
into act and ex^rcise.

Sixth Argument; God makes great preparations for us in this Ordinance,
therefore we should make great preparations when we come to partake of it; and
shall not we be preparing to receive, what God is preparing to give? Does the
Great God make preparations to entertain poor Sinners at his Table, and shall
we come rashly and carelessly to it? Matthew. 22 4. Tell them that are bidden,
Behold I have prepared my dinner, my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready. Oh what delightful words are these! Oh that they were
delighting to my Soul! Oh how refreshing are these things prepared! and how
(...) is the invitation of God to us to come and be partakers of them! Justice
might have prepared Torments for us, but behold, Mercy has prepared precious
Privileges for us! Oh what great things were to be done, that this Supper
might be prepared for us. The Son of God must come down from Heaven to Earth,
and become the Son of Man; he must suffer and bleed, and dye, and have his
garments dyed in blood, that this Ordinance might be prepared for Believers.
Besdes, here are great things prepared to be given to such as do prepare to
come rightly to it; here is pardon of sin prepared for you; here is peace and
comfort prepared for you; here is further increase of Grace prepared for you:
But where are your preparations to receive them? Here is merit ready to
justify you: Here is blood ready to wash and sanctify you; here is
righteousness ready to be imputed to you: But is your faith ready to receive
them? Is your love ready to be acted toward this Go^ that has made them ready
for you? (...) your heart ready to give thanks and praises to this God that
will bestow these things upon you? Or will you give occasion to your God to
complain of you, and say, I am ready to give increase of Grace to yonder
Believer, but he is not ready to receive it; he has not enlarged the capacity
of his Soul, by getting greater hungrings and thirstings after it: I am ready
to give in peace and comfort, when his Soul wants both peace and comfort, but
yet he is not ready to partake thereof.

But if you come in your sins, great an^ terrible things are prepared for you;
a hea^vy charge is drawn up against you, tha^ you do abuse the blood of Christ;
that yo^ crucify the Lord afresh: And Conscience i^ ready to accuse you, the
Law and Gospe^ ready to condemn you, Satan ready to sei^ upon you, and Death
and Judgment ready to invade you, and Hell ready to tormen^ you, and this is
dreadful.

Seventh Argument, God looks for great entertainment in our hearts, and at
our hands, and therefore we should prepare for him: God welcomes you unto his
Table, and you must welcome God into your heart; and both require preparation.
When you expect some Noble Man to come into your house, what preparations do
you make for him? Your house is cleansed, your best furniture brought forth,
and all your Servants ready to attend him* When you come unto a Sacrament, the
great God is to come into your heart, therefore set open the everlasting gates
of your Soul, that the King of Glory may enter in: And let every room in your
heart be washed and cleansed, and hung with the Tapstery, and Embroidery of the
Spirit, and let all the Faculties of your Soul and the Graces in your heart, be
ready to attend him. Let Love receive him, let Faith eye him, and your Soul
have Converse and Communion ^ith him.

Eighth Argument, The many Duties that here in order are to be performed, and
the many Graces that are here to be exercised, call for diligent preparation.
If you were to perform any of those duties singly, which you are here to do
jointly, it is your duty to prepare for each of them. Here sometimes you are to
pray to him: Here sometime you are to be employed in pra^sing of him: Here
sometime you are to hear from him: And here sometime you are to meditate upon
him, and upon the great work of Man's Red^mption: and will you not prepare for
all these Duties which are so hard and difficult rightly to be done? Here your
heart is to be broken, and to be bound up: Here your Soul is to have a mixture
of affection of joy, and sorrow; Sorrow that you sinned; and by your sins and
^^ing all this sorrow, and sufferings upon your Lord: Joy, that your Lord would
die and suffer for your sins; here you are to love him, and to hate your sins;
here you are to receive him, and apply him, and all his privileges to your
Soul. And do not such great things as these require your greatest preparations?

CHAP. VIII. Containing several Questions to excite us to greater diligence in
preparation.
BUT because your hearts are too apt to do the greatest work with slightness,
and where there should be the greatest care and diligence? I shall further add
a few considerations to your mind, where with you would do well to urge your
heart whenever you are to go unto this Ordinance: In the fear of God I beseech
you answer these following demands.

Quest. 1. What if you were to dye this day, what preparation would you have
made then? The same you are to make when you are to receive the Lords Supper.

Two things especially concern a man to get before he dies, and look what
degrees of necessity there is of both for a ma^s Death, the same proportion of
nec^ssity there is of both for the Lords Supper*

1. It does concern a man before he dye, to get the truth of Grace, that he
have real Love to GOD, Faith in Christ, Peace with God through Christ, and
without this a man cannot dye happily: This is as necessary for a man that is
to come to the Lords* Supper, that he love God, that he do indeed believe and
hate his sins, or else he cannot receive worthily: Woe be to that man that goes
down to his Grave before he be converted; and woe be to that man that comes to
the Sacrament before he be born again.

2. It concerns a man before he dye, to get some evidences of his grace, and
this is necessary to his more comfortable dying: a man may have grace, and so
be delivered from the hurt of death; but if he have not some evidences of this
Grace, he will lie under the fears of death. So a man, before he goes to the
Lords Table, should endeavor to get the knowledge, sight and evidence of his
interest in Christ, and this is necessary to his more comfortable receiving;
without which, though he may receive worthily, yet not without some fears; I
fear Christ did not dye for me, I fear this blood was not shed for me, I fear I
do not love God; and so will be deprived of those joys and comforts which
would come in by a particular application of Christ to himself; i^ he can
conclude, Here is blood, and it was shed for me; Here is righteousness, and it
is imputed unto me: I think a man that is not fit to dye, is not ^it to
receive: A Man should sit down at the Lords Table with as great care as he
would lie down in his Grave; and be as serious for his Soul at this Ordinance
as he would upon his dying Bed: You should go to the Lords Table, as carefully
as if you were going into another World.

But do you so? Tell me, if you had been to dye this day you come so receive,
would you not have prayed more than you have done? Would you not have shed more
tears for your sins? would not more of your groans and sighs have pierced the
Heavens, and reached the ears of God? Would you not have searched your heart
more narrowly? and passed sentence upon your self more impartially? And been
humbled more deeply? Would you not have said, if I be mistaken about the truth
of Grace, now I am to dye, I am lost for ever? And will you not say, if I be
mistaken about the truth of Grace, now I am to sit down at the Lords Table,
without my serious Repentance, I am undone for ever? And instead of having the
pardon of my sin sealed to my Soul, by my unworthy going, I bind the guilt of
all my former sins upon my Soul, as if the other were not burden great enough.
I have added this to all the rest, in making my self guilty of the blood of
Christ.

But that you may receive with the same, seriousness as if you were to dye, ask
your self th^se three Questions.

1. What sin would most disturb the peace of my Conscience, if I were to dye to
day? And mourn most for that sin at the Lords Table: What is the Sin that would
make you most afraid to die, and be a trouble to your departing Soul? Would it
be your Pride or Passion, or your inordinate loving of the world? Would it be
your neglect of secret duty, or your careless performance of it, that you
prayed no more frequently, no more ferven^ly* Would it be that you forgot the
Lord so long, and neglected your precious Soul so long, that you have done no
more for God, that you have lived no more unto him? That so much of your
precious time is gone, and so little of your necessary work is done? Let that
cause trouble to your heart, and fetch ears from your eyes, when you are at the
Lords Table.

2. What Mercy is it you would beg from God if now you were dying? O beg that
mercy when you are receiving; if you were dying, would you ask for Riches, or
for Honors, or the great things of this World? alas, these would not fit you
for your death; or would it be the truth of grace, the favor of God, assurance
of his love, an interest in Christ, in his Promises, in his Privileges, and an
evidence of your title to his Kingdom? Would you not then wish, O that God
would pardon me, and tell me he has pardoned me! Oh that he would now be mine,
and own me for his own! would not these be your desires if you were to dye?

Desire the same when you are to receive the Supper of your Lord. Will you go
thither with desires after riches, and temporal enjoyments? or with desires
that others would think well of you, and esteem you as a Christian, though you
care not to be so? These things will not fit you for receiving no more than for
dying: If you were to dye, would you desire to be thought godly, rather than be
so indeed? What if one should think you dye with grace in your heart, and you
do not? and what if others should think you receive with grace in your heart,
and do not; neither of these would do you real good: beg then the same things
when you receive, as you would if you were to die.

3. What mercy is there you would especially bless God for, if you were to dye?
Give thanks to God for that mercy when you do receive: If you were to die,
would you chiefly bless God for making of you rich and great in the world? or
for making of you truly good and holy toward God? would you not upon a dying
Bed bless God for Christ, for the pardon of your sins, and for the hopes you
have of an eternal blessed life? give thanks to God for these, with as great
reality at the Lords Table, as if you were going to the Bar of God from a dying
Bed.

Quest. 2. What if Christ were personally present, and were to administer the
Sacrament to you with his own hands, what preparation would you make then? If
Christ your Lord and Master were now upon the Earth, and were to sit with you
at the Table, what care would you have used to have got your heart into an holy
frame? If Christ had been with you in your Closet, when you were upon your
knees, would you not have prayed more earnestly, and wept more abundantly than
you did? If Christ had been with you the night before, and seen you look more
into your Shop-Book, than into the Book of God, and the Book of your Heart, and
seen you turn over the leaves of your Books of Account, and not the Volume of
your life; and been with you when you were more busy in cleansing of your
House, than of your Heart? would you not have blushed to look him in the face
at his Table? Why, Christ as God, was really with you, when you were preparing
of your heart, and took special notice of your diligence, or remisness in that
work. He is with you in the morning before you go, he observes what time you
rise, what time you spend, what pains you take in order to this duty: And
though they be poor, mortal, sinful men, that do administer this Ordinance to
you in Christ's Name and stead, yet he requires you should be as serious as if
he himself were visibly present; for as he is God, he is really present: And
will you not reverence and dread Christ as God, as much as you would Christ as
Man? The Master of the Feast does surely come and view his Guests, and if there
were one Hypocrite among a thousand Receivers, he would know him by name, and
fix his eye upon him, and say, Friend, What make you here amongst my people,
when you have not that love to me as they have, nor take that pains to prepare
your self as they have done? Mark 22.11, 12, 13. He did say, this is the Judas
that will betray me; and he will say, This is the man that profanes my Table;
this is the woman that abuses my Blood: Think of this when you are to come unto
this duty, and this dignity, to be a Guest at this Table of the Lord.

Quest. 3. What if you should see God strike every unworthy Receiver down dead
in the place with the bread in his mouth, or with the Cup in his hand, what
preparation would you make then? Or if God should inflict some painful and
tormenting disease upon every one that comes amiss, how careful would you be
then? if God should say ^o Death, as Absalom did to his Servants concerning
Amnon, 1 Samuel 13 28. Absa^om commanded his Servants, saying, mar^ ye n^w when
Amnons heart is merry with Wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon, then
kill him, fear not, have not I commanded you? What if God should say to Death,
when such a man is receiving the Sacramental Wine, and I say unto thee, Smite
him, then kill him; fear not, I have commanded thee! If God should deal with
you as he did with the Israelites, in Psalm. 78.30, 31. While the Meat was in
their Mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and s^ew the fattest of them. It
would surely be a dreadful sight to se^ an unworthy Receiver go down to his
Grave, and to Hell with the Sacrament in his mouth: Or what if God should do as
it is expressed in another case, Job 20.23. When he is about to fill his Belly,
God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while
he is eating. How would you come then? Or what if you should fall down at the
Ministers feet, as An^nias and Saphira at the Apostles feet, if you should dare
to come unworthily, what care would you take then?

You do not know but God may do so, and to venture upon a Trial here, is
dangerous. Unworthy Receiving has been the death, as well as the damnation of
many ^ha^ ^o come. Therefore beware.

Quest. 4. What if men could look into your heart, and observe the frame and
temper of your soul, what preparations would you make then? If it should be
known to the Minister, and to all ^he Receivers, what time you spent in secret,
in praying and self examination, would you not spend more time than now you do?
Else many would have a less esteem of your Piety than now they have. If an Holy
Man (unknown to you) had stood at your Closet door and overheard you pray so
lukewarmly as you did, would you not have blushed that he should have seen you
at the Sacrament? And all this is known to God; and should not the eye and
knowledge of God affect you more, than if all the Men in the world could know
and see your heart? He sees your principle and end more exactly than men could
do, if your breast were all of transparent glass.

Quest. 5. What if this were the last opportunity you should ever have to be at
Gods Table, what preparation would you make then? If you were to do that which
is of so great concernment, which you must never do more; If God from Heaven
should call to you the night before, and say, Now look well to the frame of
your heart, that you go with care, and eat in Faith, and come away with profit,
for you shall never receive more; would you then be so slight as now you are?
Why, how do you know you shall? Are you not Mortal; And have you not seen some
at one time at a Sacrament that were dead and in their Graves, and their Souls
in Heaven or in He^^ before the next? Has God given you a Leas^ of your life?
Or has he told you when you have one opportunity, that he will give to you
another? Come then every time as you would do if you were sure it were your
last, as you are not sure but it may be indeed your last.

Quest. 6 What if you were to go from the Sacramental board to Gods Bar, from
his Table to his Tribunal, what preparation would you make then? If God should
from Heaven tell you, The same day you do receive, the same day I will judge
you, the same day I will require an account of you, how you came, and why you
came, and whether you did eat in faith, and drink in faith, and do all as one
that did believe a Judgment, and a life to come; why this may be your case, and
thus God might deal with you, and how if he should, after you have come
unpreparedly?

Quest. 7. What if you had been then present under the Cross of Christ, when he
was crucified, and seen his Wounds, and heard his dying groans, and were then
to come to commemorate this Death of Christ, what preparation would you have
made then? What if you had seen your Lord sweating drops of Blood in a cold
season, and seen the Thorns upon his head, the Spear thrust into his side, that
you might have a window to look into his heart, to see how he has loved you,
and seen the Nails in his hands and feet; and were, after such a sight as this,
to come unto this Table, with what affection would you then come? Why, all this
is really represented to you in this Ordinance, and should be as certainly
believed, as if you had with your eyes beheld it done. What affections do some
discover in beholding the execution of a common Malefactor? And shall not we
beforehand endeavor to raise our affections when we are to come to see the
Crucifixion of our dearest Lord?

Quest. 8. What if one that has been damned for unworthy receiving, should
come unto thee from the place of Torment, and tell thee he has found it a
provoking sin, and that which makes damnation more intolerable, to eat
unworthily at the Table of the Lord, what preparation would thou make then?
It is no breach of Charity to conceive, or to conclude, that some that have
been at the Lords Table, are now in Hell, and shall be there for ever: for if
drunkards, swearers, or hypocrites shall come unto this Ordinance, that shall
not save them, dying such. Christ himself that at the terrible day of his
coming shall judge these men for abusing of his Blood, has told us
beforehand, than many such shall be cast into everlasting torments, Luke 13 25
When once the Master of the House is risen up, and has shut too the Door, and
ye begin to stand without and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to
us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are: ver.
26. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets; As if they should say* Lord, we think it
strange to find the Gat^s o^ Heaven shut against us; we think it strange that
we that have been thy hearers, and have been at thy Table, that thou should
not know whence we are, that thou should not approve us nor receive us: But
Christ again replies, ver. 27 But he shall say, I tell you, (...) know you not
whence you are, depart from me (...) workers of Iniquity: As i^ he should say,
I told you once before, that I did not know you, love you, nor approve you; and
though you plead your outward Church privileges of hearing and receiving, yet
I tell you once again, I know you not; go get you gone, go, get you down into
eternal torments, depart, depart! You were Professors of Piety, but you were
Lovers and Workers of Iniquity. Now, suppose that thou have known and seen at
this Table with thee, that has died in his sins, and been damned for them, and
has been in Hell a year or two suffering the Vengeance and the wrath of God
for this, a^ for his other sins, should he come to thee and tell thee, I have
known since I departed out of this life, in which thou now do live, what is
the punishment that is due unto unworthy Receivers, for I have felt it; believe
me, though a damned Soul, for I have felt it; I suffer much for my unjust
dealing with men, but I suffer more for my unjust meddling with the Blood of
Christ; I suffer much for my excessive use of provision at my own Table, for my
Gluttony and Drunkenness, but I suffer more for abusing of the Body and Blood
of Christ in the Lords Supper, when I was upon the Earth. Or suppose he had
been an Hypocrite that is now in Hell for this so heinous crime, and should
come and tell thee, When I was in thy capacity of life; when it was my time to
live where thou now do, I was admitted to the Lords Supper, a^ now thou art,
and I gave as good an account unto the Minister (as to words and expressions)
as thou have done; I told him I was convinced of my lost estate, that I was
weary of sin, and grieved for it, and was willing to accept of Christ upon his
Gospel-terms* and this I said with tears in my eyes; that the Minister thought
my Condition good, but I deceived him and my self too, by lying to him; for now
I find I was not willing to let such a particular lust go, that parted betwixt
me and Christ: And the Congregation with whom I did receive, did think my
condition to be good, because they saw me weep when I took the Bread, and saw
my tears run down my cheeks when I took the Wine, but they did not see the
Hypocrisy of my heart, nor the sin I did indulge, and would not part with at
Christ's command: But now I am under the sentence of damnation, and have
suffered more than thou can conceive for this my sin; Oh, I am damned, for
the abusing of that Blood that should have saved me! I am for ever damned for
dabling in that Blood as an unholy thing, in which I was often entreated to
have had my heart been washed: It is dreadful, dreadful, dreadful! Thou do
not know that yet art upon the Earth, what a dreadful thing it is to lie in
Hell, and bear the punishment that is inflicted upon unworthy Receivers. After
such an admonition as this from a damned Soul, what preparations would thou
make; why, the Ministers of God do tell thee so, and why will thou not credit
our Doctrine as much as the words of a damned Soul! Nay, God himself does tell
thee plainly in his Word the greatness of this sin, and the punishment thereof,
and will thou not believe the true eternal God before a damned Reprobate? Or
shall not the words of that God that shall Judge thee, aff^ct thine heart, and
make as deep an impression upon thy Soul, as would the words of one that should
come to thee from ^^ongst the damned?

Quest. 9. What if Christ should call from Heaven as he did to Saul in another
case; Saul, Saul, why persec^test thou me? So what (...) he should call to thee
while thou art eating, (...) thou art drinking at his Table, Sinner, Sinner,
why prophanest thou my Blood? And should mark thee out, and make thee known,
what preparation would thou make then? When Christ was upon the Earth, eating
with the Twelve, he said, Verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray
me: Oh what an amazing word was this! how did it fill their hearts with fear
and sorrow, yet not knowing who was the Man that should do this! How did they
look one upon another! and said, one by one, Lord is it I? and another, Lord is
it I? and were very inquisitive to know who was the man that should do this so
heinous fact; whom the Lord discovered by a sign, He that dippeth with me in
the dish, the same shall betray me, that is the Man, that is the Traitor.

So, if while the Congregation is met to commemorate his death, Christ should
cry from Heaven, saying, There is one amongst you that is profaning of my
Blood, that is unworthily eating of my Body, that is come hither in his sins;
how wistly would they look upon one another, with paleness in their faces, and
fear in their hearts, not knowing who should be the Person that is doing this?
one saying within himself, Lord, I hope it is not I; and another, Lord, I hope
it is not I. No says Christ, it is yonder man, that has now the bread in his
mouth, or yonder man that sits in yonder seat, and is now taking the Cup into
his hand, and drinking of it; this is the man, have him out from among you: If
this should be the course that Christ would take, what preparation would thou
make then? how narrowly would thou search thy heart? how fervently would
thou pray before thou come, that thou might not be the person that Christ
should thus cry out against from Heaven; nor thus shame thee before the public
Congregation? Why, though Christ does not thus for the present, yet he will
discover the sinner, and publish the sin, at a more Dreadful day, and before a
greater Congregation; when all the World shall be gathered together, and before
them all, he shall lay this unto thy charge, before Angels, Men and Devils:
This is the man that did carelessly come unto my Table, and did profane my holy
Institution, therefore take him Devils, and drag him down with you into eternal
torments, and cast him into the Lake of Fire, where he shall suffer the
vengeance of eternal burnings, for his bold adventure in coming unprepared, and
in his sins unto my Table: Devils take him with you, for he shall never come
into my Kingdom.

These questions I would desire you with greatest seriousness to propound unto
your self when you are to approach to this solemn duty, and find your hearts to
be slight in, and backward to proportionable Preparation to the weightiness of
the work.

CHAP. IX. Containing some Directions to get our hearts rightly disposed for
the receiving of the Lords Supper.
HAving thus far proceeded in proving it your important duty, to prepare your
hearts for this Ordinance, and laying down some serious Questions for quick^ing
you thereunto; I next come to give you some Directions what you must do, that
your receiving may be acceptable unto God, and profitable unto you: And they
are these four.

1. Search your own heart, exquiring narrowly into the state of your Soul, how
it is betwixt God and you.

Secondly, Solemnly consider such things a^ have a tendency in them to dispose
your heart thereto.

Thirdly, Fervently pray to God before you go, that you may receive worthily
when you are there.

Fourthly, Seriously discourse with some (if you have opportunity) about such
things as may conduce to raise your Affections, and quicken your Graces before
you go

First, Strictly search thine own heart, 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. The word
signifies a diligent and narrow search into the Nature and Properties of the
thing that is the Object thereof, as a Goldsmith proves the goodness of his
Mettle. Now, Christian Reader, for thine help therein, I would advise thee to
put such Questions as these unto thy self, and after due deliberation with thy
self, and prayer unto God, that he would discover the state of thy Soul unto
thee, give in a true and serious Answer, as one that knows then must again be
called to an Account, and be examined by God himself at the last Day.

Quest. 1. Have I a principle of spiritual life, or am I yet dead in Trespasses
and Sins? O^ my Soul! the work thou art intending at a Sacrament, it is lively
work; and if thou art dead thou can not do it: thou art to go feed upon the
bread of life, and if thou art dead, thou can not do it. Thou art to feast
no^ only with, but upon the Lord? But if thou art dead, thou can not do it. I
find it recorded in Numb. 19.10, 11. If any man was defiled by reason of a dead
body, he was not to eat the Lords Passover till the second month. How much more
unfit am I to eat the Lords Supper, if yet my heart be dead, not only dull, but
dead; there is no converse between the living and the dead; dead men do not
converse with living men; and a dead heart altogether void of spiritual life,
cannot converse with a living God.

In order therefore to the discovering of thy spiritual life, I will propound
these following Enquiries, to which give in thy answer seriously, as in the
fear of God; and solemnly, as in the presence of that God that does search thy
heart, and know thy state, and let thy Conscience make reply as thou would
do if thou wast now to dye.

First, Have thou ever had any spiritual sense of things good and evil? Did
thou ever see the excellency and the beauty of Christ, and the vileness and
deformity of sin? Is Christ most lovely, and sin most loathsome in thine eyes?
Did thou ever taste such sweetness that there is in Christ, in a Promise, or
in communion with God, that it makes thee choose Christ, embrace a Promise,
prefer Communion with God above all things in this World? or did thou ever
taste such bitterness in sin, that makes thee loath it, and unfeignedly willing
to leave and to forsake it? once thou had no relish in spiritual things, but
have thou now? time was when thou did taste sweetness in thy sin, when thou
did delight therein: but is it as bitter to thee now, as then it was pleasant
and delightful? Thou have had an ear to hearken to the Temptations of the
Devil, the Flatteries of the World, to Sinners ^^^icing thee to Sin, to the
corruptions of thine own heart, calling thee to yield to all these: but thou
had not an ear to listen to the motions of the Spirit of God, nor to the
voice of the Ministers of God, nor to the voice of the Mercies, nor the
Judgments of God, nor to the voice and cry of thy own Conscience* but now thou
art deaf unto the former, the Devil calls, but thou will hear, and Sinners
call, but thou will not hearken; and thine ears are open to the Latter, if God
calls, thou say, Speak Lord, thy Servant hears. If the Spirit whispereth
to thy Heart, thou perceivest his meaning, and obeyest, etc. Thou once did
feel Ordinances and Duties to be a Burden to ^hee, and groanedst under them as
a Load too heavy for thee to bear, and this was when thou did make light of
Sin: Christ's easy yoke thou thoughtest to be intolerable, but Sins
intolerable yoke thou judge to be easy, because Sin was in thy Heart, as (a^
Element) in is proper place: But tell me* do thou not now groan under the
weight o^ Sin? Do thou not really think there is no evil of affliction so
heavy as the evil of transgression? Does it not make thee cry out, (...)
Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death? That now
thou could, at least sometimes, desire that thou might be loosed from thy
body of flesh* that thou may be freed from this body of sin? if so, thou art
alive.

Secondly, Have th^^ mortified sin, or have thou not; is sin dead or alive? if
thy sin do live and reign, then thou art dead; if thy sin be dead, then thou
do live; the life and reign of sin, and the life and power of grace cannot
consist in the same Soul at the same time: though sin be in thine Heart yet
thine Heart is not for, nor in thy sins, though sin be in thy affections, yet
indeed Sin has lost thine affections; as there is sin in thy love, but thou
^ost not love thy Sin; there is Sin in thy joy, but thou do not rejoice in
thy sin; thou do not ^ind those flaming desires of thine Heart ^^ter
forbidden things, as sometime thou did; neither has sin that universal
acknowledged Authority in thy Soul, as once it had; nor that peaceable
possession in thy heart, which once thou wast contented to give and yield unto
it; but it is even Death to thee to feel these lusts so much as crawling in thy
heart, though they do not rule; if so, then Sin is dead, and thou do live; if
not so, then Sin does live, and thou art dead.

Thirdly, Can thou gr^an and cry unto the Lord, and will nothing still thee
but a Christ? then surely thou do live; though thou can not word thy
D^sires at the Throne of Grace (as New born Babes cannot ask, but yet can cry
for the breast) nor in such Language (as others) ask for Christ and Grace; yet
thou can Cry for Christ, and weep for Grace, and all the Creatures cannot
quiet thee till thou have hopes that Christ is formed in thee: Surely they have
spiritual Life, that in this sense do thus cry after Christ.

Fourthly, Do thou grow in the Graces of the Spirit? It may be thou dare
not say thou have more Grace, but this thou find, thou have more desires
after Grace; that is more Grace. Art thou indeed thankful for a little Grace,
but yet art reaching after more? Thou prizest one dra^^ of Grace above
thousands of Gold and Silver; yet it is not a little will serve thy turn; do
thou grow more weary of thy Sin? Do thou grow more earnest after Christ, and
God, and Heaven? Surely growth is a proof of life.

Fifthly, Do thou work for God, and Christ, and Heaven, and for thy Soul in a
spiritual manner? Spiritual Operations do discover spiritual life. Many live a
natural life, that will not work; but those that be spiritually alive, be at
work, though some more, and some less. Do thou pray, and labor in thy
prayers? Do thou hear, and take pains with thy heart in hearing? Do thou do
thy work according to those spiritual Rules which God has given thee in his
Word, or wherein thou failest thou art grieved for it? Do thou work from a
spiritual principle of love to God, and holy fear of him? do thou pray unto
him because thou love him? and do thou abstain from sin, and watch and pray
against it, because thou would neither offend or grieve him? Have thou a
spiritual end in working while thou live, that thou may glorify and
honor God? Though all thy working in this manner deserve nothing from the
Lord; neither do thou thus labor in all thy duties, to rely upon them, and
to take thee off from resting upon Christ; yet are they evidences that thou art
raised from the death of sin, to a life of grace; and having life thou must
have food, and God has prepared it for thee upon his Table, and thou may go
and feed thereon. This is the first thing that you should enquire after, a^ to
your state, whether you be spiritually alive.

Quest. 2* Do I hunger and thirst after Christ? This also will be an evidence
of your spiritual life; for dead men do not hunger, they do not thirst: Say
then to thy self, Lo, Oh my Soul! thou art invited to a Feast, to a Banquet of
Gospel-dainties, to a Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat
things full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees, well refined, Isa. 25.6 Lo, Oh my
Soul, Wisdom has killed her Beasts, she has mingled her Wine, she has also
furnished her Table, she has sent forth her Maidens, she cries upon the high
places of the City; whosoever is simple let him turn in hither: As for him that
wants understanding, she says unto him, Come eat of my Bread, and drink of
the Wine which I have mingled, Prove. 9.2, 3, 4, 5. Thus the Lord does call
thee, O my Soul! to rich and costly provisions, but where is thy hunger? where
is thy appetite? If I could find I hunger, I could find an Invitation to go,
for I read my Lord has said, Isa. 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye
to the Waters, and he that has ^^ money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy
Wine and Milk without money, and without price. And John 7.37. In the last day,
the great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst
let him come unto me and drink. If I could find I hunger, I can find a promise
that I shall bes^ti^^^^d. Mat 5.6. Blessed are they which hun^ger and thirst
after righteousness, for they sha^^ be filled Come then, tell me, O my Soul*
Do thou feel an emptiness in thy self, and (...) want of those things which
alone can satisfi^^ spiritual hungerings? Art thou ^inched? A^^ thou p^ined
with the sense of the want of Christ? Art thou impatient till he come unt^
thee? Do thou think the time is long till he does fill thee? Can thou take
any pains th^^ thou might enjoy him? Must thou have (...) Christ, or nothing
will content thee? Th^^^ thou art one whom God does call; be encou^raged,
arise, and go to the Table of thy Lord This is another thing that thou must
enquire after, because it is not only thy duty to have life, but to have
spiritual hungrings after Christ when thou go unto the Table of the Lord*

Quest. 3. Do I love God and Christ, or do not? If I do not love him, what have
I to d^ to go unto his Table? If God be an enemy to me, and I yet an enemy to
God, where^fore should I go and bring down wrath upon my self? but if I love
him, why should I (...) so dismayed because I am a Sinner, since the Lord is
willing freely to bestow all things that are here provided, upon them that love
him (...) The more sin I find I have, if I love him, (...) see the greater need
I have to go unto him. Put then the question to thy self, as Christ did unto
Peter, John 21.15. So when they (...) dined, Jesus said unto Simon Peter, Simon
Son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord,
thou know that I love -- And this question Christ put to him the second, and
the third time: So do thou before thou go to this Supper; ask thy Soul, O my
Soul! love thou the Lord Jesus? Can thou say, the Lord knows that I love
him? Yet ask again the second time, Oh my Soul, love thou the Lord Jesus?
Can thou again with Peter answer, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee?
but that thou may be sure, enquire again the third time, Tell me, Oh my
Soul! Love thou indeed the Lord Jesus? For there are many that be mistaken,
and think they love him, but they do not: Can thou therefore appeal to God,
and say, Lord, thou that know all things, thou know that I love thee; I
do not indeed love thee as thou have loved me, yet I love thee: I do not love
thee as much as others do, nor as much as I my self desire to do, and that is
my grief and sorrow; but yet I love thee, and that is my peace and comfort: And
I have these evidences of my love, that makes me say, Lord, I love thee, for I
hate that which is a grief unto thee, and that because it grieves thee. Lord, I
love thee, for I am grieved at thy absence, and am rejoiced at thy presence:
Lord, I love thee, for I love any that are like thee, that bear thy Image, and
thy Stamp upon their hearts: O my Lord, I love thee, for I love the place and
duties where thou were wont to warm thy peoples hearts; but if thou bees^ not
there, I cannot take up contentedly with them, except I see thee. Lord, I do
humbl^ say, I love thee, for I dare not deny but that I am grieved when thou
art dishonored by my self or others; though I grieve for th^^ less then I
should, because I love thee less than I ought. Lord, I love thee, for I desire
to have an heart that should be willing to pa^^ with all for thee; things
sinful in themselves at all times, and things lawful when thou call me to
it. Once more, I humbly say, ^ love thee, for I would have an heart to love*
and long, and look for thy coming and appearance in thy Glory: Come away then,
O my Love, (says Christ unto thee) and commemorate the Death of thy Lord whom
th^^ do love. O my Soul! thy Lord does ca^^ thee, arise and go unto his
Table, where thou shall see how he has loved thee, and when thou might have
thy love to him more ^^creased and inflamed. Thus thou should enquire
concerning thy love to Christ, wh^^ thou art to go unto this Feast of Love.

Quest. 4. Do I believe on Jesus Christ, or do I not? Have I the Faith of Gods
Elect? or have I not? If I should not eat in Faith, and drink in Faith, I
should not receive aright; but if I do believe, though my Faith be weak, I have
a right to him, and to his privileges which he has purchased by his death,
and will seal unto me in the Sacrament. Then turn thy Speech to God, and say,
Lord, If I do prize thy Son above all things in the World, may I then conclude
I do believe? God tells thee that thou may, 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you therefore
that believe, he is precious. If I make it my business to purify my heart, do
I then believe? God tells thee that thou do, Act^ 15.9. Purifying their
hearts by Faith. If I take thy Son for my Lord and Savior, and receive him
upon Gospel-terms into my heart, might I then conclude that I have Faith? God
tells thee that thou may, John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
If so, then Lord, I will in obedience to thy command, do this in remembrance of
thee.

Quest. 5. Once more enquire of thy self, and say, Have I repented of my Sins
that I have committed against the Lord, and am I truly humbled for the same?
For how shall I behold my Savior broken for my sins, if my heart was never
broken for my sins? Though I do come short of that degree of brokenness of
heart for sin, as some of God's People have attained unto, yet have I that
repentance which will prove repentance unto life? Though my ^ears are not so
many as my sins, nor my sorrow as great as my transgressions, yet have I so
much sight and sense of sin, as makes me loath my self, and abhor my sins, and
willing to forsake them; and separates me from the love of them, and delight in
them: Oh my Conscience, can thou not bear me witness, that it is the breaking
of my heart that I have broken Gods Commands; that my mourning proceeds from
love, and a sense of Gods kindness and his goodness to me; that (...) is my
unfeigned desire to be washed from the filth, as well as delivered from the
guilt of sin* to be freed from the power and dominion, (...) well as from the
punishment and damnation that is due unto me for my sins; that though I did not
know but Hell might be my portion, yet I would not sin against the Lord* Can
thou not bear me witness, that I do endeavor (though I come short in my
endeavors) to keep my self unspotted from the World* and that I have the
Garments spotted with the flesh? That sin in the Temptation t^ it, is grievous
to me, as well as after the Commission of it: that I do groan (though not so
much as I should) under this body of sin longing for the time when I shall be
delivered from it; crying out in the bitterness of my Soul, Lord; when shall it
be? Lord, when shall it be, that I shall be perfectly freed from this loathsome
body of sin, which (through thy Grace) is so offensive to my Soul? if so, then
I will arise, and approach unto this Ordinance, where I may be assured of my
pardon, and be furnished with further Strength and Power against my Sin. Thus
thou should enquire, whether thou have repented of thy sin, when thou art to
go and see what has been done unto thy Lord, by reason o^ thy Sins* Thus far
for Trial.

Secondly, When thou have thus proceeded to find out the truth of thy grace,
then next go on to solemn meditation, to consider of those things which might
excite and stir up thy graces, the truth of which thou find to be already
wrought in thy heart; that so thou might go unto this Ordinance with lively
exercise of grace, that all thy graces might be ready to act according to thy
duty in this work: For it will be thy Sin to go unto the Table of the Lord with
dull affections, and deadness upon thy heart; and it is an aggravation of thy
sin, if it be through want of diligent endeavor to get thy Soul affected and
inflamed with love before thou go. Now for thy help therein, I shall
instance in some of those things which will be fit and suitable objects for thy
thoughts before thou go, and not unseasonable to meditate upon while thou
art there.

First, Meditate and dwell in thy thoughts upon the Love of God in the great
work of Man's Redemption. Consider that thou wast in a fallen and miserable
estate, under the Curse of the Law, liable to the wrath of God, the Torments of
Hell; under the power of thy lusts, and the bondage of the Devil; and could
not help thy self, nor recover thy self to the Happiness from which thou did
fall: then get thy heart affected with the Love of God, who in the eternal
project of his Council, has contrived a way for thy Salvation: And here, if
thy heart be not yet affected.

1. Urge it with the freeness of this love* Consider, O my Soul! it was free
love, that God would send his Son to die for fallen Man, and not for fallen
Angels; to take upon him not the nature of Angels, b^^ the seed of Abraham. But
yet consider, O^ my Soul! the freeness of this love to thee, who has ordained
thee to Salvation by the death of Christ, when thousands of others are passed
by, and suffered to perish in their sins! God might have Passed thee by, and
applied it unto others, whereas he has passe^ many others by, and applied it
unto thee; i^ may be thy nearest Relations have no share nor saving benefit by
this Redemption, when there was no more in thee to move God un^to this love,
than there was in them: Yea, a^ much in thee to oppose, and resist the
ap^plication of this Redemption, as was in the heart of the vilest of the
Children of me^* Surely some believing thoughts of the free^ness of Gods love
to thee in particular, wi^^ warm thy heart before thou approachest to the Table
of the Lord, and fill thee with desires to be there, and the more inflam^ thine
heart when thou art there. If yet the heart be dull, do but ask it this one
qust^^on, What would thou have done, O my Soul* and where should thou have
for ever been if God had not loved thee, freely loved thee?

2. Urge thine heart till it be affected with this Love of God, which is such
pure love; no advantage redoundeth unto God, by his loving of thee; if thou
h^dst been damned, God had not been prejudiced thereby. Nay, he could have
glorified himself in thy damnation: And if thou shall be saved, there is no
addition made thereby to Gods happiness, for that was perfect before the world
began. Oh, the difference betwixt the love of God, and the love of men! Men do
Love, where their love does redound to their benefit and advantage: Yea, the
love of Saints ^o God, though it should be purely for himself, yet there is
real, lasting the greatest benefits redounding to them thereby: But the love of
God is altogether pure in this respect, that he is not profited by his love.

3. Urge thine heart till it be affected with this love of God, which is such
manifest and undeniable Love, as does appear in sending of his Son, 1 John 4 9.
In this was manifest the love of God toward us, because God has sent his only
begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him. Herein God does
commend his love to poor Sinners, Rom 5.8. But God commends his love toward
us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us. When Abraham would
have offered up Isaac, the Angel of the Lord said unto him, Gen 22.12. Now I
know that thou fear God seeing thou have not with held thy Son, thine only
Son from me. So might thou say, Now Lord, I know that thou love me, seeing
thou have not with held thy Son, thine only Son from me. Especially if these
differences be considered.

1. It was possible for Abraham to have another Son, but it is not possible for
God to have another begotten Son.

2. God loved his Son better, infinitely better than Abraham loved his.

3. That Abraham was Commanded* by his Superior to offer up his Son; but there
could be no Law given unto God to send his Son.

4. Abraham received his Son from God, and therefore he was to be at his
disposal, as all his Creatures are; but Gods Son was from himself by eternal
generation.

5. Abraham would have offered his So^ unto his Creator, and to God that w^^
his Friend, but God gave his Son for h^^ Creatures, and those that were his
Enemies*

6. Abraham offered up his Son in pu^^pose and intention, but God gave his So^
to dye for us really and indeed.

7. Isaac was to be offered by his Fathe^^ hands, but Christ was given to be
slain b^ the hands of his Enemies, that did hate him and reproach him;
therefore if Abraham's lov^ to God was manifested by his offering up (...) Isaac
his Son, the love of God is much more manifested unto us by giving us Christ
h^^ Son; and will not such manifest and undenia^ble love yet affect t^y heart?
Thus thou might proceed to other properties of the love of God in sending of
his Son to suffer for thee, which I purposely omit, because I would not be
large.

Secondly, Meditate and dwell in thy thoughts upon the Sufferings of thy Lord
Redeemer when he came into the world. It will be profitable before thou go
to the Sacrament, to view over the History of his Sufferings, from his Birth to
his Cross Oh what love was this, that God should give his Son, and the Son
should give himself to dye for thee! Never love like this! Joh 15.13. Greater
love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. But
greater love than this had the Son of God, when he laid down his life for his
Enemies. But if thine heart be not yet affected, consider,

1 The Dignity of the Sufferer: He that had the Heavens for his Throne, was
laid in a Manger; The Ancient of days became a Babe: He that was above all, was
abased more than all; He that was richer than any, b^ing Lord of all; was made
so exceeding poor, that he had not where to lay his head: He that was the
wisest in the World, that never man spoke like him; was derided and laughed to
scorn, and was reproached in all his Office: The King of Kings, the great and
only Potentate is crowned with Thorns; the Prophet of Prophets has his face
covered, and then smitten, and then they reproached him, saying, Prophesis who
it was that smote thee. To the great High Priest it was said in scorn, He saved
others, himself he cannot save. The most Mighty is bound; the most Inno^e^^ is
scourged and condemned; the most Love^^ is despised; the Physician is wounded,
th^^ the sick Patient may be healed: The Lo^^ dies for his Servants. Oh think
of this* ti^ thou feel thy heart to work in love, and (...) reach forth in
burning desires after him.

2. The Variety of his Sufferings; He tha^ was more precious than Rubi^s, and
(...) things that can be desired are not to be com^pared to him; yet was sold
for thirty piece^ of Silver, a goodly price that he was prize^ at by the Sons
of Sinners, Zech. 11.13. H^ was sold by one, denied by another, forsak^^ of
all. He was buffeted and spit upon; (...) Murderer preferred before him* While
he (...) he was accounted a Blasphemer, and when (...) died, we was reckoned
among Transgre^^sors. I cannot tell what it was he did endure but I can tell it
was his love that moved hi^ to it. Oh with what heart it flamed with love
should thou go unto that Ordinance, wherein all this is represented to thy
Faith! O Love, Love, Love! art thou banished from my Soul* that I do not feel
thee more working in (...) heart while I ponder these things within (...)
thoughts? O my Lord, thou lovedst me (...) my blood, and when I see thee in thy
bloo^ (if my heart were not so very bad) I could not but exceedingly love thee!
When thou saw me in my blood, it was polluted Blood: but when I see thee in
thy blood, I see, I find, I feel it is love inflaming blood.

Thirdly, Meditate and dwell in thy thoughts upon the privileges and benefits
that were purchased by the death of Christ: And surely if we ^ay judge by the
price that was paid for them, they must be very great. Some believing thoughts
upon this Subject, would affect and warm thy heart before thou go to this
Table, and when thou art there. Oh what a privilege is it to be united unto
Christ, to be justified by his Blood, to be sanctified by his Spirit, to have
sin pardoned and subdu^^, to be reconciled unto God, to be adopted ^^w, and
saved hereafter! All these be blessed ^^uits that thou will find to grow upon
the Tree on which thy Savior dyed: and there is much in these, in every one of
these, to in^^^e thy Love to God and Christ, and to stir up thy heart to go
unto that Ordinance, where thou might be assured of them, by having them
sealed to thy Soul.

Fourthly, Meditate and dwell in thy thoughts upon thy sin, that thou may be
humbled, because thy sins were the procuring cause of (...) the Sufferings of
thy Lord It was not for himself but for thee; there was no guile in his ^outh,
nor Wickedness in his heart, but the just suffered for the unjust. Thy sins
were the Judas that betrayed him, the Thorns that Crowned him, the Spears that
pierced him, the Nails that fastened him upon the Tree. To see an ordinary man
dying for thy faults, would it not aff^ct thine heart? Yonder is one that is
groaning, bleeding, dying, for the evil I have done! Oh then, how should thy
affections work when thou see the Son of God bleeding (having his side opened
th^^ thou might look into his heart) when tho^ s^est him wound^^ his hands
and his feet pier^^d; when thou hear him cry out with a loud voice, and
see him give up the Ghost* and all this for thy pride and unbelief, for thy
worldliness and passion, for thy Disobedience^ and Rebellion! how will this
fill thy Soul^ with sorrow and joy, thy eyes with tears, and thy mouth with
praises; the one, because tho^ have sinned, the other because thy Lord would
dye to save thee from thy sins.

And here it would not be unuseful nor un^reasonable to produce the Catalogue
of th^^ sins, that thou may see how far thou ha^^ acted, to bring all these
sorrowings and suffer^ings upon thy loving Lord: For if thou shall be saved by
his Death; surely then thy sin^ were Causes of his Death; for it was the pardon
of thy sins, the sanctifying of thy heart, and the saving of thy Soul, with the
rest of Gods E^^ct, that he intended effectually to procure, when he was lifted
up upon the Cross; but did not intend or purpose the certain Ap^plication of
his Death and Sufferings unto reprobates; So that had it not been for the sakes
of Gods Elect and Chosen People, h^^ never had exposed himself to so great
Sufferings, nor come down from Heaven, nor gone up upon the Cross: And will not
this yet aff^ct thine heart? Consider then what thy sins have been before and
since Conversion, in their Nature, in their Numbers, and in all the^^
aggravations; every one of which deserved the heavy and eternal Wrath of God.
Oh then, what loads and heaps of Wrath did they all deserve? How much more all
the ^in^ of all the Elect of God! Oh what a burden did thy Savior bear, when
all these were laid upon him? What did thou do against thy Lord, all those
years thou livedst in an unconverted state? How many sins did thou commit
every Day, every Week, and every Month* When thou wast in that estate in which
thou did nothing else but sin, when all thy thoughts were sin, and all thy
Words and Actions, all were sin; all which, thy Lord was to make satisfaction
for, when he was dying on the Cross; Dear Jesus, how unkind and cruel was I
then to thee, who wast so kind and merciful unto me!

But yet consider, what thy sins have been since thy Lord has applied his
Death to thee, which should have engaged thee to be more holy, and to walk m^re
closely with him; but since thy sins in some respects, have been worse than all
thou did before thou wast converted; for thou have sinned against dearer
love, and clearer light: thou have sinned against that Lord that died for thee,
and after by his Spirit he has applied his death unto thy Soul; thou have
sinned after thou have had a Pardon of thy sin, and after he did assure thee of
thy Pardon: thou have sinned against the Father who did ordain thee unto life;
against the Son that did redeem thy Soul from death, and purchase for thee
eternal life; against the Ho^y Spirit, that has been fitting and preparing
thee to be partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in light; thou have sinned
after rich and large Experiences of God's Goodness and Mercy to thy Soul; after
thou have tasted the bitterness of sin, and sweetness of the love of God; after
thou have resolved against thy Sin, and promised unto God upon thy knees, that
if he would pardon thee, and tell thee he had pardoned thee, thou would be
more watchful for the time to come: God did what thou did desire, but thou
have not done that which thou did promise. Let all this then awaken thee to
sorrow and repentance, before thou go to the Table of the Lord.

Thirdly, Then next proceed to solemn, s^^rious, fervent Prayer, and make thine
Addresse^ to thy God: For all that thou can think upon, and all the course
that thou can take, will not affect thine heart, except the God o^ Heaven
shall work* them on thy heart, and cause them to make some Impression on thy
Soul: Then go to God, and say, O Lord, I am ashamed to think how dully I do
think of these great affecting things: With what an hard and stupid heart I
roll over in my mind the Death and Sufferings of thy Son: O Lord, it is time
that I should come to thee, that I might have some warmth from thee, that I
might he inflamed with love; and were it possible, might be turned into love,
that I might be made up all of Love. O Lord, I have been trying to get my heart
affected with the Death of Ch^^st, and with thy love and his manifested unto my
Soul therein; but, Lord, my heart is dull: And sometime when the Coal begins to
glow, it is covered with ashes before I am aware, It is too great a work for me
to raise my heart to him who condescended to come down for me; if I could, I
would Lord, I would, but cannot: but this I know, that if thou will, thou
can: Yea, Lord, I do be^ieve that both thou can, and wilt; and therefore it
is that I am come to thee, O Lord, the time draws near in which I am to go unto
thy Table, but shall the time of receiving come, before thou come into my
heart, to stir up thy graces in me, that I may be fitted to receive? True,
Lord, I am unworthy, altogether unworthy of what I do desire; but what thou
do to any, it is not because they be worthy, but because it pleases thee to
do for thine, what they ask of thee according to thy will: I am vile, I am
vile, O Lord, I am exceeding vile; but if thou will cloth me with the
righteousness of thy Son, and look upon me through his wounds, then thou will
love me. Remember not my sins against thee, but remember what thy Son has done
and sufferd for me; thou command me in the Sacrament to remember what thy
Son has suffered that I may be thankful unto thee; do thou remember what thy
Son has suffered, and be thou gracious unto me: that I might see thy smiles,
and perceive thy love, when I am there; that I might come from thence with my
pardon sealed, my sins subdued, my Soul strengthened to run the ways of thy
Commandments, till thou shall come and take me to thy self, where I shall see
my Savior in his glory, and behold my Lord that dyed for me on the Cross.

Fourthly, Next I would advise thee (i^ thou have opportunity) to discourse
with others of such things that may tend to raise, and not to damp thy heart.
When thou have been taking pains with thy self in secret; when thou come from
thy Chamber, take heed with whom thou do Converse, and what thou say: For
if in secret thou did find thy love excited, thy desires enlarged, thy faith
fastening upon Christ; frothy and unseasonable discourse before thou go,
might damp all again: or if in secret thy heart were dull, yet God might bless
a word or two in holy discourse for the quickening of thy heart, and rassing of
thy affections toward him: when thou s^ttest at thy Table, or by the fire the
Night before the Sacrament, by speaking of the wonderful grace of God, the
Death of Christ, of the benefits thereby, of hope of Heaven, of the coming of
the Lord, of the glory there is above, of the Sabbath the redeemed of the Lord
shall keep above in the Kingdom of their Father* When the two Disciples were
discoursing of Christ's Death and Sufferings, Christ came and joined himself
unto them, Luk 24*13, 14, 15. If you be two discoursing together, Christ might
come and make the third, and ^hen your hearts will burn within you.

Having thus* endeavored to get thine heart prepared as thou passest from
thine house to the House of God, from thine House unto this Ordinance, watch
over thy thoughts as thou walk along, and let thine heart be working toward
God and Christ. Oh that I might feel the Power of Christ's Death this Day! Oh
that I might have my Pardon Sealed to (...) this day? That I might be made
conformable to Christ's Death, see his smiles, taste his love, and be strengthened
with strength in my ^oul: And when thou come to join in the Public Solemn
Worship, with others of Gods people, then mind the Work that is before thee,
and labor so to behave thy self in the Duty, th^^ thou might not lose thy
pains thou have taken in preparing for the duty. And this brings me to the next
Conclusion, to answer to this Case or Question.

Under what Consideration should a believer eye the blood of Christ in the
Lords Supper, and have his Graces drawn forth into act, when he does so
consider it?

CHAP. X. Conclusion 4. Containing Twenty Properties of the Blood of Christ.
A Believer should eye the Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper in the several
properties, virtue and efficacy of it, till suitable Graces thereby are drawn
forth into Act

This Conclusion consists of Two Parts.

First, That a Believer should eye the Blood of Christ in the several
properties thereof, in its efficacy and virtue.

Secondly, That this eying of the Blood of Christ must draw forth those
suitable Graces that are to be exercised in the Lords Supper.

For your help in the first of these, I would advise you to eye the Blood of
Christ in these properties, which also set forth the virtue and efficacy
thereof.

1. Eye the Blood of Christ in the Sacrament as it is a precious Blood, 1 Pet.
1.18, 19 We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but
with the precious Blood of Christ, etc.

Now the Blood of Christ it precious.

1. Comparative, by way of Comparison, being more precious, than all the
precious things in nature, as Silver and Gold, which are vile, corruptible, and
contemptible in comparison of the Blood of Christ; of no worth and value to
redeem Souls, as this is.

2. Absolute; Consider it absolutely in it self: and so the dignity and
excellency of his person makes it so exceeding precious, being the Blood of
that person that was God as well as Man, Acts 20.28.

3. Effective, by way of causality, because it does produce precious effects:
As, 1. It does redeem precious Souls. 2. It does make a precious people. 3. It
does confirm precious promises* 4. It does purchase precious Privileges. 5. It
is the meritoriou^ ^^use of precious Graces. 6. It is the foundation (...)
precious Comforts.


2. Eye the Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as it is satisfying blood: And
this it is because it was such precious blood; it was most precious blood,
therefore it was blood of value and merit: The Law of God was transgressed, the
Covenant of Works by us was violated, the Justice of God was wronged, and the
Sinner was indebted unto Justice, and did owe the suffering of the penalty due
for the breach of the Law; which was all miseries in this life, death it self,
and the torments of Hell for ever. But in the Sacrament, eye Christ's Blood as
the payment of our debt, as shed nostro bono, for our good; and nestro loc^, in
our stead. Christ has endured as much as our sins had deserved; whose
sufferings were satisfactory, though they were not eternal, and therefore were
not eternal, because they were satisfactory: Eternity of torment not being
essential to the punishment due to sin, but accidental, upon supposition, that
the sufferings of sinners cannot satisfy; if the damned could satisfy Gods
Justice by lying in Hell ten thousand millions of years, at the expiration of
those years they should come forth; but because they can never satisfy,
therefore they must for ever suffer.

But Christ's Blood is satisfying Blood, because it was a sufficient price which
he lai^ down for the redeeming of his People, Mat. 20.28. Christ came to give
his Life by shedding of his blood, (...), a ransom, and pric^ of Redemption
for many. As when the price is paid, the Creditor is satisfied; so when Christ's
blood was shed, Gods Justice was satisfied, 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a
ransom for all, (...), a common price; the word signifies a price that is paid
by another, which the Offender or the Captive person could not pay for himself;
when the life o^ one is bought out by the death of another^ Oh wonderful,
astonishing love of Christ^ that would lay down life for life; he laid down his
life that we may live. Then when you sit under Christ's Cross at the Lords
Sup^per, look upon the blood you there see shed* and poured out, to be
satisfying blood.

Thirdly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sa^crament, as pacifying and
recon^^^ing blood; an^ it is therefore pacifying blood, because it wa^
satisfying blood. If God had not been satis^fied for sin, he had never been
pacified to the sinner. But when sin was expiated, God was appeased; Rom 3.25
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood* 1 John
2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins* By this Blood Gods wrath is turned
aside, and he becomes propitious to believing Souls, Col. 1.20. Having made
peace through the blo^d of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to
himself. Sin made the branch, but the blood of Christ makes peace betwixt God
and the sinner: Ephesians. 2.13, 14. Ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by
the blood of Christ. Sin set us at a distance from God, but the blood of Christ
brings us nigh unto him; for he is our peace, that is, our Peacemaker. Oh
blessed is such a Peacemaker between God and man, 2 Cor. 5 19. God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Consider it then as such.

Fourthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as purchasing Blood; by
this he purchased his Church and People: Acts 20.28. Feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own Blood By this blood (...) has bought us
out and out, i. e. quite out of the hands of Justice, quite ou^ of the power of
the Devil and sin, 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought with a price. But besides the
purchasing of our persons, he has purchased and bought by his Blood all things
necessary for grace and glory, for peace and comfort; he has purchased enough
to supply all your wants, be they never so many, be they never so great* Eye it
th^n as purchasing blood.

Fifthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as justifying blood; as
that which makes you righteous in the sight of God, tho you have no
Righteousness of your own in which you may dare to sit before God at his Table,
or stand before him at his Tribunal. Romans 5.9. Much more then being justified
by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Christ's blood is your
righteousness, it is imputed to you for your justification.

Six^hly, Eye the blood of Christ in t^^ Sacrament as pardoning blood, as that
b^ which you have the full, and free, and everlasting pardon of all your Sins
If Christ had never died, you never had been pa^^doned; for without the
shedding of bl^^^ there is no remission, Heb* 9 22. But (...) this blood of
Christ we have redemption, to wit, the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians 1.7. C^^^ 1.14.
The blood of Christ is that which procures pardon for you, and seals the
promise of pardon to you: Think on it (...) such.

Seventhly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament as he^^t purifying blood:
as it is a blood of value and merit, so it is a blood of virtue and spirit.
Adam's blood was staining blood, and this corruption runs in a blood but the
blood of Christ is purifying an^ cleansing blood. Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the
blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of (...) Heiser, sprinkling the unclean
sanctifyeth to the purifying of the flesh; how much more sha^^ the blood of
Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
pur^^ your Consciences from dead works to serve the living God? It must be
Physic made of blood that must purge our Consciences, 1 John 1.7* And the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin Rev. 1.5. Who loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood. (...) was not only pure blood,
but it is purifying blood: It was not only holy blood, but it is ^^nctifying
blood. Oh how great was that love of Christ, that would give his pure pre^ious,
sinless, and princely Blood, to be the ^aver, in which our filthy and polluted
souls (...) dipping into it, might be made clean! look upon it then as
purifying, sanctifying, cleansing blood.

Eighthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as pleading blood, Heb. 12
24. The ^^ood of sprinkling spe^keth better things than the ^^ood of Abel.
Ab^^'s blood did plead against the Offender, but the blood of Christ pleade^^
for the Believer. Abe^'s blood did cry for vengeance, but the blood of Christ
does cry for mercy: Satan pleads against you, and the Law pleads against you,
and in many things, and a^ many times, your own Conscience pleads against you,
all crying out to God, Lord, this ^an has had so many vain thoughts, and has
made so many dead prayers, and has neglected so many Duties; But as soon as
ever Satan can ^ut in his Bi^l against you, Christ casts its out of the Court
of Heaven, and pleads for you with the Father; He has so sinned, but so many
^ounds were made in my side and heart for him, (...) many drops of blood I have
shed for these very si^s: Your Sin also does cry against you, and the cry of
Sin is a very loud cry, that reach^th unto Heaven, Genesis 18 20. The Lord said,
because the cry of Sodom is great; and because their sin is very grievous:
Mark, grievous sins make a great cry, but yet there is a louder cry in the
voice of Christ's blood, that is entered into the Heavens; if you fear the cry
of your sin should be louder, greater, than the cry of your Prayers, yet be
comforted, it is not greater than the cry of Christ's blood, for it is pleading
blood.

Ninthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as comforting blood; that
it must need^ (...), because of all the former properties already mentioned. It
is blood that pleads for you, and it is Blood that speaks peace unto you:
It is blood that satisfies Gods Justic^* and pacifieth Gods anger, and
therefore it is blood that might quiet your Conscience, an^ comfort your heart;
it is cooling blood; the Soul that is scorched with the fiery apprehensions of
Gods burning displeasure might b^ cooled by one drop of the blood of Christ*
The wounds of your Conscience, and the wounds of Christ, brought together, will
make work: The wounds of Christ shall heal the wounds of your Conscience; your
wounds are festring, killing Wounds, but the Wounds of Christ are healing,
comforting Wounds* There is no such solid lasting comfort, as tha^ which is
fetched from the blood of Christ.

Tenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as heart softning blood; as
that which can dissolve the most stony heart, as that which can break the
hardest Sinner. This blood on^^ applied to those that were so hard hearted to
spill this blood, I mean the Jews, who are hardened to a Proverb, (viz Do you
think I am a hard hearted Jew,) will ^urn this Rock of their hearts into a
Fountain of Tears, Zech 12.10 They shall took upon me whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, (that is great
mourning) and shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for
his firstborn. Oh! lay your heart a steeping in this blood, and try if it be
not softning blood.

Eleventhly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as sin mortifying blood*
it is indeed soul saving blood, but it is sin killing blood; and therefore it
saves your Soul, because it kills your Sin: As that Physic saves a man's life
which removes his Sickness: That which is life to your Soul, is death to your
Sin. In the Sacrament you must look upon your sin, as that which was the death
of your Lord, and look upon your Lord as one that is the death of your sin: Sin
drew out the lifeblood of Christ, and the blood of Christ shed, will draw out
the lifeblood of Sin: Here you may behold these two great Combatan^s both
fighting, both bleeding, both dying, and they are reciprocal causes of each
others death: Christ he bleeds, and sin it bleeds: Christ dies, and sin dies:
But Christ gets the Victory, for Christ dies, and rises again, and lives for
evermore; but sin once dead, lives never more.

Oh! come cast your sins, those cursed Egyptians, into the Red Sea of Christ's
blood; and they shall be drowned to death, and never live to reign over you
more; your Soul shall be safe by passing thorough this Red Sea, but your sins
shall fall and die therein. This blood will kill your pride, and mortify your
earthly mindedness, and subdue all your Inordinate Affections; yea, the whole
body of sin by this blood shall be destroyed, Romans 6 6. Knowing this, that our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. Gal. 6.14. But God forbid that I should
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is
crucified to me, and I unto the World. Christ's Cross is a Christians Glory,
because it puts his Sin to open shame, in crucifying his lusts to death. Oh
then bring your strong corruptions to the blood of Christ, for it is a sin
killing blood.

Twel^thly, Eye the Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as quickening blood. The
blood that did flow from Christ's heart, it was warm blood; and believe me, it
will warm your heart. It is quickening blood, though it be killing blood: It
lays your sin sprawling within you, and dying in your heart; but it will give
life unto your heart. Joh. 6 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you; if you drink it, then it will enliven
you. Sin has often deadned your heart, and the World has often deadned your
affections, but the blood of Christ will put life into both. The blood of
Christ it is the life of all your Duties; it will make you pray with life and
hear with life, and discourse of the things of God, and the life to come, with
life. The blood of Christ is the life of ^ll (...) will make you act faith with
life, it will make you love with life, it will make you sorrow and repent with
life; the blood of Christ is the life of your Comforts. Oh then bring your dead
heart, and ^^ll affections to the Blood of Christ, it will quicken and enliven
them, for it is an enlivening blood.

Thirteenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as a blood of
sprinkling, as a blood applicable, and to be actually applied to your soul;
that you may say, Here is blood, and it is mine; Here is blood shed, and it was
for me; Here is blood to be sprinkled, and I hope one drop will fall upon my
Soul. Heb. 12.24. Ye are come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to
the blood of sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledg of God
the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, and sprinkling of the blood
of Jesus Christ. Heb 9.19. Moses took the blood of Calves and Goats, with Water
and Scarlet-wool, and Hyssop, and sprinkled both the Book, and all the People;
Heb. 10.22 Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water. The Blood of Christ was spilt upon the Cross, and it will be
sprinkled on your Conscience at the Sacrament: It is not the blood of Christ
poured out that will save you, but the blood of Christ sprinkled on your heart,
will.

Fourteenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as Satan conquering
blood The Devil put it into Judas's heart to betray Christ, and into the Jews
heart to murder Christ; but by his Death and Blood shed he overcame the Devil;
and when he was bleeding to death, he triumphed over all infernal fiends: Col 2
15 And having spoiled all Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it. And by this blood of Christ shall you be
enabled to overcome the Devil: Rev 12.10, 11. The Accuser of the brethren is
cast down, which accused them before God, day and night, and they overcame him
by the b^o^d of the Lamb.

Fifteenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as sealing blood; as
that which was poured out, not only to purchase Heaven for you, but also to
assure you of it. Christ's blood sh^d upon the Cross, does ratify and confirm
the Covenant of Grace: Heb 9 15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the
New Testament, that by means of death, for the Redemption of the Transgressions
that were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of Eternal Inheritance; ver. 16 For where a Testament i^, there must
also of necessity be the death of the Testator: ver 17. For a Testament is
(...) for^^^ after men are dead. So then when you see Christ's blood shed,
remember God has promised Believers pardon and eternal life, and this promise
is of force. Christ has bequeathed precious Legacies to his people, and his
Will and Testament is of force, for his blood is shed.

Sixteenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as an innocent blood;
Consider there, it was the just that suffered for the unjust; in his hands
there was no wickedness, in his heart no Sin, in his mouth no guile. The
innocent bleeds for the nocent, Mat. 27.4. I have betrayed the innocent blood;
and will it not affect you to see innocent blood thus shed.

Seventeenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as a copious Blood;
as being sufficient for you and all the Elect of God: As sufficient for you, as
if none had been saved, justified thereby, but your self: There is fullness of
merit in it, it is a Fountain, Zech 13.1. In that day there shall be a Fountain
opened. Now a Fountain is,

1. Living water, and the blood of Christ is living blood.

2. It is running water, it is communicative, it overflows, it feeds the little
rivol^ts; and the channels in which the blood of Christ does run, are the
hearts of Gods El^ct.

3. It is plentiful water; there is but little in a Cistern, but abundance in
the Fountain.

4. It is inexhaustible, and perpetual: it overflows, and yet it ever flows.
Such is the blood of Christ; Christ has not expended all the virtue of his
blood upon David, and Peter, and Paul, and the Saints that are already got to
glory; but there is enough for you, it is a copious blood, if you consider the
real quantity of blood which Christ at six several times did shed. Six times
Christ bled for you.

1. In his Circumcision. 2. In the Garden. 3. When he was Scourged. 4. When he
was Crowned with Thorns. 5. When his hands and feet were nailed to the Cross.
6. When his side was pierced with a Spear. Thus if you consider the real
quantity of his natural blood, it was much; but if you consider the
supernatural efficacy and virtue of it, it was infinite.

Eighteenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as perfecting blood:
It was the fruit of Blood that you have any Grace, and it is the fruit of his
Blood that your Grace is growing and increasing Grace. You c^mplain your Grace
is small, your Love is little unto God, your Faith is weak, and your desires
feeble, and faint after Christ, but Christ's blood shall make you perfect.
Christ will so moisten your Grace by laying his blood often at the root
thereof, that it shall grow, and you shall go from grace to grace, till you
come from grace to glory: Heb 13 20* 21. Now the God of peace that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of his sheep,
through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
work, to do his will, etc.

Nineteenthly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as cementing blood; as
that which soders the hearts and affections of Gods people one to another: We
are all made to drink of one Blood, which should provoke us to be of one Heart.
As Christ shed his blood, and thereby manifested, that be loved all his People;
so when we partake of it in the Sacrament^ we are engaged to love one another
as he has loved us, 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 2 13.14, 15, 16.

Twentyethly, Eye the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as such blood, that
makes all you do, to be pleasing unto God. Your best doings would be
provocations unto God, had it not been for Christ's dying: If Christ had not
dyed, your very praying would have been provoking of God; it is the sufferings
and the blood of Christ, that makes all your religious duties to be acceptable
unto God. This is the sweet Incense, which he offers with the Prayers of
Saints, Rev. 8.3. Through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, is that
wrought in you, and by you, which is pleasing in the sight of God; and indeed
in this respect you should eye the virtue and efficacy of the blood of Christ
in every Duty; your tears are but puddle water, and your righteousness but
rags without this blood of Christ

Thus far to the first part of this Conclusion, In what respect you may eye the
blood of Christ in this Ordinance, for the affecting of your heart, and the
exciting of your Graces, which are next to be spoken of for the improving of
the blood of Christ for your comfort and spiritual advantage in this Ordinance.

The Graces to be exercised, are chiefly;

1. Faith. 2. Love. 3. Desires. 4. Joy. 5. Sorrow. 6. Hatred unto Sin.

CHAP. XI. Showing how Faith is to be exercised at the Lords Table.
1. WHen you thus consider the Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, set Faith o^
work A Crucified Christ is the Object of justifying faith; and one that has a
quick-sighte^ Faith, will perceive enough in the Blood o^ Christ, whereby he
may resolve his doubts, scatter his fears, supply his wants; as tha^ which is
an universal Medicine against all Soul-distempers.

Let Faith make use of this Blood in respect of, God, Satan, Your self.


Viz. In Appealing to God, Replying to Satan, Applying it to your self.


First, When you are at the Lords Table, ^et your Faith be busied in appealing
from this blood to God; after this manner:

Lord, of my self, I am exceeding vile, even by ^in made worse than the very
Beasts of the field, than the croacking Toad, or the most venomous Serpent; y^^
is not here precious Blood, which thy Son has shed to make me precious in thy
^^ght? Though without it I acknowledge I am (...) some and abominable before
thee; yet by it I trust I shall become one of thy Jewels, one of those that are
honorable in thine eyes: Lord, be not offended, for thou thy self thus
speak of thy people; else I durst not have thought it, had I not found thee
thus speaking in thy Prophet, Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight,
thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee. O Lord, these are thy words,
and I believe them, and am humbly bold through this precious blood, to apply
them with it unto my self.

Lord, I have violated thy Law, and broken thy Covenant, and most fearfully
sinned against thee, yet is not here satisfying blood? I was an Enemy unto
thee, yet is not here reconciling blood? In this I do believe, thou art now my
Friend, and my appeased God.

Lord, I was in worse than Egyptian Bondage, a Captive to the Devil, a very
drudge and slave unto my lust; but is not here purchasing blood? am I not
bought with it as with a price, (...) thy Son has paid for my ransom? Through
(...) I humbly trust I am delivered and redeemed, (...) am indeed under Soul
pressing wants: I was peace and comfort, I want love unto thee, (...) more holy
fear and dread of thee; but is not (...) purchasing blood? And will thou be
offended if (...) r^ly upon thee for supplies, especially since I a^ nothing,
but what this blood has bought an^ purchased for me?

Lord, I have no righteousness of mine own but what is as filthy rags before
thee, when (...) would be justified in thy sight; I am ashame of my prayers,
and I blush to see my best pe^^formances, but is not here justifying blood Is
not a Crucified Christ made of thee, to (...) righteousness to thy people? By
thine assist^ance I ^iducially will rely upon this Crucifie^ Savior, to make
me righteous in thy pu^^ eyes, and disclaiming all my Duties, read^ forth the
hand of Faith* to be justified by the blood.

Lord, I am a guilty Sinner, and my sin are both many for number, and heinous
^o^ their nature, and aggravating circumstance^ I have such a sinful heart
within this brea^^ that I know not the man that has a wor^^ If m^ Fellow
Communican^ should know (...) heart they would look and stare upon me, (...)
consider that I have so long professed my (...) to be thy Disciple, should yet
come with suc^ a proud and worldly heart unto thy Table I am guilty of sins
against love and light, a^gainst thy ^^^cy and thy judgments, against ^hy
Spirit and my own Conscience; yea, against the very Law of Nature written in my
^^art, that a very* Heathen would abhor to do ^^at I have not blushed to do;
yet is not ^^ere pardoning blood, that can pardon great ^^ns as well as small,
and many as easy as ^^w? will not Mountain sins as well as Mole ^^ill sins be
covered in this blood? Lord, thy ^on has dyed for these sins, therefore I
trust (...) shall not be damned for these sins; though (...) them I have
deserved greatest condemnati^n. Lord, for this blood I do believe that ^hou
wilt pardon me, and by this blood wilt (...) my pardon to me. I trust in this
blood ^or a pardon; yea, in this will I trust that thou will pardon me.

Lord, I am not only guilty, but polluted; Sin has as well defiled me, as it
would condemn me Lord, I have a heart as black as Hell, as fil^hy and unclean
as the unclean Spirits themselves; but is not here blood to wash (...), as well
as pardon me? To purge me from my filth, as well as save me from the guilt of
all my sin? To this cleansing blood (...) bring my defiled Soul, and I will
believe that thou will wrince, and make me clean. Lord, here is blood, and what
may hinder, but may wash and be clean?

Lord, Sin has stopped my mouth, and I cannot plead my own cause before thy
Majesty, but is not here pleading blood? Let that plead for me, this is my
Advocate; my sins (...) plead against me, but here is blood that pleads for
me, and I do believe that wilt rather hear the pleadings of thy So^^ blood for
me, than the pleadings of my ow^ sins against me.

Lord, my Soul is cast down within me, and ^ am often filled with thy terrors,
till I am almos^ distracted: There are many things that do dis^comfort me; my
sins they do discomfort me, an^ my very duties as I do perform them, do
discom^fort me; but is not here comforting blood? O^ this blood it Aqua vitae
to my swepning an^ dejected Soul. I will lay the mouth of my faith, (...) the
bleeding wounds made in thy Son, and wi^^ suck and draw till my Soul is
comforted.

Alas, O Lord, my sins have not only made me filthy, but have hardened my
heart* Sometimes I may feel it to relent, and to give a little, but other
whiles it is hard and ston^ within my breast; sometimes I think never heart so
hard as mine; but is not here hear^ softning blood? if there be not, let me go
away as hardened as I came; but if there be, let m^ feel the virtue and the
power of it, in making i^ me a heart of flesh O Lord, I will lay my heart a
sleeping in this blood, and will believ^ that then it shall be softened.

Alas, O Lord, my sins are very strong and powerful within me, that sometimes I
think they do not only rage but reign, sometime they act so mightily in my
heart, that I am apt to think there is nothing but sin in my Soul, and no
principle of Grace to check and to control it: My pride is strong, my passion
is strong, and my lusts exceeding mighty; but is not here sin mortifying blood,
that can take down the strength and power of it? this blood has subdued i^ in
others, and now I will believe it will subdue it in my Soul?

Oh, my Lord, my heart is often dead and dull, that I cannot pray with life
unto thee, that I cannot be lively in thy Service; sain I would, but lo my
heart is dead, and cannot: But is not here quickening and enlivening blood? why
then will thou suffer such a heart to be in me? Lord will thou give me leave to
apply it to my self, that I may be quickened to thy* Service? Yea I know it is
thy will I should so do: Now Lord, my heart is warm.

Thus you may in respect of God, by Faith, make use of all the Properties of
the blood of Christ, you may go on in all the rest. Let it suffice that I have
showed you how Faith may be set on work in the former particulars.

Secondly, When you thus consider the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, set
Faith on work to reply unto the Devil. He will be with you at the Sacrament, to
rob you of the comfort, and hinder you from that joy that there you might be
filled with; but by faith in the blood of Christ you may resist him. And
^hatsoever his Accusations are, from some of ^hese properties of the blood of
Christ, you may put the Devil unto silence.

Does the Devil cast your sins in your teeth, and rank them in order before
your eyes Does he tell you of your pride, and ignorance? Does he tell you of
your formal Duties, and your want of close walking with God? You may reply, Oh
mine Enemy! So far as there is truth in thine accusation, I am as willing to
accuse my self: yea, before I come unto this Ordinance, thou heardest me
accuse, and judge, and co^^emn my self* but lo, O mine Enemy! here is blood
that has been shed for me, that was not shed for thee; here is blood to
purchase pardon for my sins, which was not shed to pardon thee: Oh, how would
such a believing Reply make the Devil to slink away, and leave thee to make the
best improvement that thou can of this holy Supper! What say thou, Oh thou
Enemy of my Souls Salvation and Comfort? Have thou ought to lay unto my Charge?
It may be he will tell thee of the hardness of thy heart; but thou may reply,
Because I found and felt it hard; therefore I came unto this Blood to have it
softened: What now Satan! It may be he will tell thee of thy dullness in thy holy
Duties: Thou may reply, I did indeed to the grief and burden of my Soul,
find too much deadness upon my heart; and therefore I have brought it to the
quickening blood of my dearest Lord, and he will out life into me. What now, Oh
mine Enemy! Indeed there is nothing that Satan can charge upon you, or bring
against you, but from one of these properties of the blood of Christ, you may
put him to the worst. You may go on in any of the rest, as you have occasion to
make use of them

Thirdly, When you thus consider the blood (...) Christ, you may set Faith on
work, in apply^^g it to your self; and stopping the mou^h of our own
Conscience, clamouring against you (...) the Lords Table, or else rightly and
justly ^ccusing of you: For Conscience may know ^ore evil by you than the Devil
can, viz. ma^y vain thoughts and inward sinful workings (...) your heart: But
you may use some of these Excellencies of the blood of Christ, upon ^ounds
sufficient to quiet and to allay it; after ^^is manner, Thou tellest me, Oh my
Conscience, (...) such blasphemous vain, distracting thoughts!

I do subscribe unto my accusations; but lo, Oh (...) Conscience! here is blood
that has satisfied God, and wilt not thou be satisfied? Here is blood ^^at
has reconciled God unto me, notwithstanding those my sins; and Oh my
Conscience, wilt not thou then be reconciled unto me? For the sake of his
blood, God is at peace with me, and will thou (...)? Thus may you procure peace
of Consci^^ce, and upon lasting grounds go away ^^th a firm peace concluded
betwixt your self (...) your self.

Let Faith make particular application of this (...) in all its Virtues and
Efficacies, and say, I ^ook (...), Oh my Soul! Here is pardoning blood, and it
is ^hin^; Here is q^^ckning softning blood, and it is ^hine; here is
justifying, sanctifying, pleading blood, and this belongs to thee, Thus for the
drawing ^^rth of Faith to do its work at the Lords ^upper.

CHAP. XII. Showing how Love, Des^^^, and other Gra^ces are to be exercised in
the Sacrament.
II. WHen you thus consider the Blood of Christ, ^hen draw forth holy Love to
do its part, as Faith has done its. And indeed, when Faith goes thus before
(...) will be more easy to act all the rest* Le^ but Love see with Faiths
Eyes, and it will quickly be inflamed. Let Faith make ap^plication, and love
will quickly feel the b^^nefit of it, and show it in its actings: O^ how will
Love flutter in your breast, when i^ shall behold that precious blood that di^
redeem you, and reconcile you unto God* Oh then bespeak your Love for God an^
Christ: Look here, O my Soul! wha^ love was this in God, to give his Son for
thee! what love was this in Christ to give his life and blood for thee!
precious blood for a vile and worthless sinner! O loo^ again, O my Soul! here
is pardonin^ blood for thee a sinner, here is softni^^ blood for thee an
hardened sinne^, and (...) is reconciling blood for thee, who wa^ once an Enemy
to God Oh what lov^ is this! Oh never love like to this! Has God and Christ
thus loved thee, Oh m^ sinful Soul! and wilt not thou love hi^ back again? Has
God sent his Son to dye, and said unto him, O my well-beloved Son, go and dye
for yonder sinner, and thereby commend my love unto him. O Lord, this love of
thine does overcome me? O Lord, thou have out-loved me, if now my love were
better, thou should have it, but such as it is, thou shall have it, Make it
more and make it better, and still it shall be set upon thee. Oh my Soul, can
thou behold justifying blood, and not love him that shed it for thee? Can
thou behold precious, quickening, softning blood, and not love him that laid it
down to quicken, and to soften thy heart, and redeem thee from Hell, and Sin,
and Wrath.

III. When you thus consider the blood of Christ, then let desires be upon the
Wing, to fetch in unto your Soul such things that this blood, by its efficacy
and virtue, does purchase and pro^ure. O! here is pardoning blood, O! that I
could have the pardoning of my sins! Here is sealing blood: Oh that I could
have my pardon sealed and confirmed to my Soul! Oh that now my sin might be
subdued by this blood! Oh that now my dull heart might be enlivened by this
blood! Oh that now my wounded Soul, and troubled Conscience, might be healed,
and comforted by this blood! Oh th^^ ^ow I may receive more degrees of love to
God, and faith in Christ, which this blood has purchased for me! O that now my
poor distressed Soul may have rich experience of this softning, quickening,
healing virtue of the blood of Christ which he has so willingly, and so freely
poured out for me:

IV. When you thus look upon the blood of Christ, let your Soul rejoice in God;
and call upon all the powers of your Soul to joy and to delight in God and
Christ Oh! Can you think that by this blood you are justified and pardoned, and
not rejoice? that you are redeemed and reconciled by this blood, and not
rejoice? Is it p^ssible you should feel the quickening power, and comforting
influences of thi^ blood, and not rejoice? Is it possible you should believe
that this blood is pleading for you, and not rejoice? O Lord, my Soul does joy
in thee; my Soul does magnify the Lord my Redeemer: Oh how good it is to be
here ^ Oh what comfort is this my Soul is thus delighted with! Oh what joy is
this I feel so warm about my heart! There is no joy like unto it, I never found
any like unto it.

V. When you thus consider the blood of Christ in all those excellencies. Oh
then be grieved that you have so long neglected it! that you did that which was
the cause why preci^us blood was spi^t; that you should thrust your Sin into
his side, to fetch this blood from his very heart O Lord, was I the cause ^is
blood was, shed? was it my pride and vain glory, that did set a Crown of Thorns
upon this Crucified bleeding Christ? Was it my u^^^lief and my apostasy from
God that broached his blessed heart, from whence I see these streams of blood
so plentifully gushing forth, that I may be washed therein, and justified
thereby? What, was I the cause of it, and yet, must I have the benefit of it?
Did Christ suffer me to murder him, and stab, and pierce his very heart, and
then pardon me, and save me when he had done* O Lord, my Soul is grieved, my
heart is sorrowful: O that I had never sinned! Lord, I hope if my sins were
undone again, I should never do them. Oh that since this blood is shed, it
might fall upon my heart, that it may be dissolved into tears! Oh that my eye
may weep, when I see my Saviors heart to bleed: Oh that my heart may be rent
asunder, when I see my Saviors flesh to cleave asunder, that this Blood may
issue forth.

Is this Blood such quickening Blood? Then, Lord, I am ashamed, that my heart
has been, and is so dull; that I have brought such a dead ^^art to behold my
dying Lord: But if it be a quickening B^ood, then, O that I might feel and ^ind
it to be so.

Is this such pleading Blood? Then, Lord, that did I mean, when I did plead so
long against ^t? When I framed Arguments and Excuses to ^eep me from coming
under the power and influence of it!

Is this indeed such mortifying Blood? Oh ^hen, what did I do when I did
neglect to bring ^y ^usts unto it, but to consult how they may live, when
Christ had dyed that they may be subdued!

Is there so many precious Excellencies (...) this Blood of Christ? Oh sinner,
wretch, and fool that I was, that did prefer any thing, ever^ thing so long
before it, and have so often trampled it under foot.

But must I joy and sorrow too? Will no^ either sorrow keep me from rejoicing,
or rejoicing prevent my sorrowing? No, both these may be, both these must be:
this mixture, medly of affection, does well become (...) Believer at the Lords
Table. You may mourn that your sins did put Christ to death, and y^^ you may
rejoice that Christ has, would die for your Sins.

VI. When you thus consider the Blood of Christ, then let your Soul hate and
abhor your sin that was the cause of its effusion, and would have hindered (if
mercy had not prevented) its effectual, timely application. Oh that now your
heart might rise against your sins, and that you might hate them while you
live, with a perfect and implacable hatred! You do no^ love to see the Knife
that killed your Friend^ and will you love to think upon that Sin th^^ killed
your Lord? Or will you ever do (...) with delight? Oh, had thou any Love unto
(...) Lord, Oh my Soul! thou could not then (...) hate thy Sin. Oh now my
Soul! be wrought (...) to a heightened resolution, with greatest indignation and
abhorrence to cast away thy Sins. Now, Lord, I see that thou have loved me, and
I will hate my sins, and the more I taste of the sweetness of the blood of
Christ, the more thou will cause my Soul to hate my Sin.

Thus I have given you my thoughts for your satisfaction in this question. How
you should consider the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, and have your graces
exercised when you so consider it?

CHAP. XIII. Conclusion 5. Showing the necessity of Examination after the
Sacrament.
THat such as are partakers of the Lords Supper, should enquire after
participation, that benefit they have received thereby.

There are some that before the Duty, take no pains to prepare themselves, and
after the Duty do not refl^ct how they went, nor enquire what is that they got.
Afte^ R^flecti^n is nec^ssary as well as Previous Examinati^n. What good have I
got? should be a Qu^stion we should put to our ^elves after every Duty we do
perform. Had I any warmth of affection in it? Have (...) any more love to God,
more d^si^es after him, more ability to duty, to bear affliction, to resist
temptation, to walk with God? This you should do after every prayer you make,
after every Sermon you hear, at the end of every Sabbath, and af^^^ every
Sacrament you receive. For wa^^ of this reflection, these evils follow.

First, For want of this, many think they (...) better, when indeed they be the
worse. For want of strict and narrow Examination before the Sacrament, they
think they have faith in Christ, love to God, and repentance for their sins;
but what they had was but a Counterfeit of Faith and Love, and other Graces, as
Hypocrites may have: So for want of reflection after the Sacrament, they might
think they had some workings of Faith, and Love, and sorrow for Sin, and joy in
God; and yet it was not so, but something like to these, as Hypocrites might
sometimes have in their attendance upon God at his Table, and in hearing of the
Word, and other Duties. Hypocrites might shed many tears at a Sacrament, and
might have some flashes of Joy through a false apprehension that this Christ
did dye for them, and has applied his blood unto them, and that they are
partakers of the benefits of his Death, as Grace, Pardon, Hopes of Heaven, etc.
and yet shall be for ever damned for not having any of these in truth and in
reality; and this mistake is very dangerous, and oftentimes pernicious: In as
much as it does strengthen the presumption of these men's hearts, when they do
think their Faith is strengthened, and are more confirmed in their false hopes
of Heaven and Eternal Life, and often go away rejoicing at the thoughts of
their good Condition, and yet might lie for ever roaring amongst the Damned,
for their folly and mistake; and might bless God for that which they thought
they received from him at the Sacrament, and yet might be for ever cast from
God, because they had not that Grace which they thought they felt working in
their hearts therein; therefore After-examination is nec^ssary.

Secondly, For want of Examination after the Sacrament, you will be kept from
After-humiliation, and Repentance for your sins committed at the Table of the
Lord. If you did review and look back upon the frame of your heart, and find
you have miscarried in your work and management of your Duty, you should see
what cause you have of lying low before the Lord for so great a Sin, as to get
no good by such an Ordinance, that tends so much to promote the work of Grace
in the hearts of them that come worthily to the same. Your Heart, when the
Minister broke the Bread, was not brok^n for your Sin; When you tool the bread,
your heart was dull and dead, and did not reach forth the hand of Faith, to lay
hold upon Christ and his Benefits, and apply them to your self, and ^o did play
the Hypocrite before God and your fellow Communicants: When the Wine was poured
forth, and you saw how Christ did shed his blood for sinners, you could not
drop a Tear for your sins that caused it; or if you did, it was not from a
heart sensible of your Sin, or of Gods love unto your Soul; when you took the
Cup and drank thereof, you did not remember Christ as you should have done:
And, while you were present at this Table, your mind wa^ filled with
distracting Thoughts, and you thoughts were wandering when they should have been
fixed on God and Christ: And how shall you be humbled for this, if you do not
reflect that you are guilty of suc^ Sins? And how shall you confess this before
the Lord upon your Knees, when you d^ not afterward consider how it was with
you at that time? And how great a Sin is this, and how bad is your heart,
neither to be affected at the Table of the Lord, not to be afflicted in your
Soul after you are gone, that it was not so with you! This was your Sin, while
you were there tha^ you got no good thereby: and this is also your Sin, that
you do not bewail it when you come away? Whereas it should be lamented from one
Sacrament to another, that your heart was indeed so bad and out of frame, when
it should have been Delighting in God, and Loving of God, and Sorrowing for
your Sin.

Thirdly, For want of Examination after the Sacrament, you might receive good
and not perceive it, nay, perhaps deny it. As many have Grace, and yet think
they have none; so many here might receive good, and yet think it is not so:
Y^u go away and soon forget the workings of God upon your heart, and the
workings of your heart toward God; and so are tempted to believe it was no
otherwise with you, than it may be wi^h H^pocrites in this Ordinance: And
because you do not seriously consider, and faithfully keep in your remembrance
the experience you had from God, while you were there, you yield to t^is
temptation when you are come away.

Fourthly, For want of refl^ction after the Sacrament, you are not so thankful
after the duty is done, for what you did receive, as else you would be. Many
Hypocrites go away and rejoice when they should mourn; and many gracious Souls
go away and mourn, when they should rejoice; and both because they do not
afterward refl^ct upon the inward working of their hearts, to judge of them
according to what indeed they were, God did come into your heart and humble i^;
God did come into your heart and break it; God did come into your heart, and
caused it to abhor your Sin, and to long after Christ, which you should
remember while you live, to adore the riches of his Grace, that he should look
upon such Sin and Dust as you are, and cause you to feel such operations of his
Spirit, that every time you go into secret, you should give him thanks for
these his workings upon your heart: But how shall this be done, if you do not
often reflect how it was with you, when you were there?

Fifthly, For want of reflection after the Sacrament, you will oftentimes take
up with the ^are performance of the duty, and rest in (...) work done; and rest
satisfied that you have (...) and drunk at the Table of the Lord; though you
have not eaten the flesh of Christ, no^ drunk his blood: and it is too great a
sign that you rest in the work done, when you do not consider afterward how
you have done it, not enquire, Did I please the Lord while I was eating? Did I
please the Lord while I was drinking at his Table? Did I eat in Faith, and
drink in Faith? Did I find God coming down into my Soul by his Grace and
Spirit, and my Soul ascending up to God by Faith and Love?

Sixthly, For want of this refl^ction after the Sacrament, you will not be so
earnestly desirous after renewed opportunities of Receiving, nor have such
longings in your Soul to come again. One would think that the entertainment
which God gives unto his People at his Table, the smiles that there they see in
his Face, the love that there they perceive to be in his Heart, and the favors
there they receive from his Hands, should stir up in their hearts such earnest
breathings as these. Oh when might I come again! Oh when shall I be thus (...)
again! Christ was exceeding sweet unto my Soul, his Comforts were delightful to
my heart; Oh when shall I return again unto this Table, that I might have more
of that which (...) such a day I found! But if this be so much out of your
thoughts, the other will be too much out of your desires.

Seventhly, For want of this reflection after the Sacrament, you will be less
experienced, and less acquainted with the workings of (...) own hearts. If you
r^flect upon what your heart did promise when you were there, and how you have
come short of your promise, how your heart did work in hatred unto sin, and how
afterward (if it be not strictly watched) it will be ready to consent and
yield unto it: if you thus compare your self, what you are at the Sacrament,
and what your heart would be if not heedfully observed afterward, you would be
more acquainted with the deceitfulness of your own heart.

Eighthly, For want of this reflection after the Sacrament, you will be fuller
of d^ubts, and more empty of comforts, than else you would be. Sometimes God
did so powerfully work upon your heart when you were at his Table, in drawing
forth your love to him, your hatred to, and sorrow for your sins, that you
could not deny that you had grace: But at another time you might lose the sense
of this, when it might not be so with you, and then the Devil does assault you,
to persuade you that you have no grace, because now you do not feel the
workings of it; but if you would reflect how it was with you such a time at the
Sacrament, you might repel this temptation: Though I do not now find the lively
workings of my love to God, yet at such a time in the Sacrament I did; though
now I do not find my heart to b^e^k, but is dull and ou^ of ^rame, yet such a
day in the Sacrament^ did: Th^^ I found my sins my burden, and the brea^^ing
of my heart: Then I did feel my heart to burn in love to God and Christ; and
this will help to resolve your present doubts, and to expel your present fears,
and to resist his temptation of the Devil: But if you do not refl^ct, you might
lose so good an evidence of the truth o^ your grace.

Ninthly, For want of this Reflection after the Sacrament, you will be a grief
to the Spirit of God, whether you did meet with God or no; whether it was well
or ill with you when you were there; If you did meet with God, and if he did
comfort your heart, or humble you for sin, and do not reflect, you grieve the
Spirit of God, that he was so kind and loving unto you, and you so soon forget
it, to be thankful for it; If you did not meet with God, and do not reflect,
you grieve the Spirit, that though he absented himself from your Soul, you do
soon forget it to be humbled for it.

Tenthly, It argues your end was not so right as it should have been; had you
aimed indeed at Communion with God, and increase of Grace, would you not
enqui^e whether you had attained your end?

Eleventhly, It argues great carelessness of heart, and too great a slighting
of the benefi^^ of the Sacrament; did you esteem them, you would enquire
whether you had enjoyed them.

Twelfthly, It argues you are not so wise for your Soul, as you are for your
Body; not so wise for the things of Heaven, as for the things of this world;
for after you have been trading for the things of this Life, you will cast up
your accounts to see what are your gains, and what is added to your stock.

Thirteenthly, This will provoke God in after-duties to withdraw from you, and
to deny that to you in following Ordinances, which you would not so much as
enquire whether you had got in former Duties.

Fourteenthly, You may decline in Grace, and be on the losing hand, and not
easily and quickly perceive it, and fall into a frame of dullness before you are
aware.

Therefore let it be your constant practice, as to examine your self before,
that you may know your fitness for this Duty; so to examine your self
afterward, that you may know whether you are the better or the worse by this
Duty; for every one is made better or made worse by coming to the Lords Table.
Physic makes the Body better or worse: All God's Ordinances will have their
operation. The Word is a savor of life or death to every one that ^ears it, 2
Cor. 2 15, 16 So many are the worse by coming to the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 11.^7
You come together not for the better but the worse: That you are not better, is
satis culpabile, sufficiently blame worthy; but that you are the worse, this is
mali auxesis, the aggravation of your sin. Grande id nefas, quando medicina non
modo non proficit aegro, (...) in venenum vertit^^. It goe^ ill with that man
whose Food and Physic i^ turned into Poison, and proves to be his ban^; not
for his profit, but his detriment.

Here for your satisfaction, I shall enquire after these things.

1 What are the causes that some go to the Lords Table, and receive no benefit
thereby?

2 How may a Believer know when he does receive benefit thereby?

3. What must a believer do, if upon this search he finds some advantage by
this Ordinance? And what if he does not.

CHAP. XIV. Containing the Reasons why some receive (...) benefit by the Lords
Supper.
THE Reasons why some are not the better by going to the Lords Table, are such
as these:

First, Because they are not habitually prepared for it; they have not those
necessary qualifications, nor habitual graces that must be in that man's heart
that shall be benefi^ed by the Sacrament: they had no lif^, and therefore are
(...) capable of growth and nourishment. Growth of Grace supposes truth of
grace: They that have not first received a whole Christ in the Gospel in all
his Office^, cannot receive a broken Christ in the Sacrament: They are not
united unto Christ, and where there is no union, there can be no communion;
they are not ingrafted into Christ, and therefore they receive no fruit from
the Cross of Christ. All the benefit that must come in by the Sacrament, must
be by the exercise of grace, of faith, (...) love, and sorrow for sin, etc. but
they that have it not, cannot exercise it.

Secondly, Because many that are habitually prepared, may be too slight in
actual preparation^* They did not seriously, thoroughly search their hearts and
lives, nor enquire after their sins and wants; they do not solemnly, but
slightly pray to God before hand: They do not quicken their hungrings after
Christ, nor go with great, believing expectations of receiving great things
from God in this duty.

And God will check you at his Table, by withdrawing himself from you, for your
neglect before you came? It may be you were busy about the World, when you
should have been preparing for your Duty: It may be you were in your Shop, when
you should have been in your Chamber, or your Closet: It may be God saw you
reading your Account book^ when you should have been reading the History of the
Death of Christ in the Book of God, and should have been studying the Book of
your own heart: God saw you think^ing of the World, when you should have been
endeavoring to have warmed your^ heart in the believing thoughts of the Love
of God, in the great transactions of Man's Redemption.

Thirdly, Because after diligent actual preparation, you have rested in your
foregoing duties, and expected that for your preparations sake, which you must
only receive for Christ's sake. It is hard to make diligent preparations, and
then deny them when we have done, and expect all through Christ, and after our
most serious preparations, to acknowledge them as nothing, and that it will be
Free Grace if God discover himself unto us at his Table. Sometimes you may
observe, that after greatest enlargements in secret preparation, you have been
most strai^ned in the duty; Not that God is displeased with your diligence in
preparation, but that you lay too great a stress upon your previous duties; and
mounted them up above their place, and would have made a Christ of your duties,
and would have de^^acted from the merits of Christ, in hoping that from God,
because you had prepared, which you must only hope for, because Christ has
dyed: Not but that you may and ought to look after your Prayers which you make,
and see what returns the Lord does give you; but there is a diff^rence between
an expectation of good things from God according to your prayers and
preparations; and between an expectation of good things from God for your
prayers and preparations; and yet you may disclaim this in word, and in your
heart secretly too much rely upon them.

Fourthly, Because God is offended that some sweet and secret sin is too much
savoured* Though there might be no reigning sin in you which is inconsistent
with the sta^e of grace, yet there might be too much connivance and favor
showed to some particular Sins: The reason why God smiles no more upon your
Soul at his Table, may be, because you frown no more upon your Sins. God shows
no more mercy to you at his Table, because you show no more severity against
your sin; and must not God take (...) unkindly when you come to commemorate the
death of his Son with too much kindness in your heart to sin, that was the
cause of his death?

Fifthly, Because you were too remiss; and let down your Spiritual Watch in the
time of receiving You lost holy time at the holy Sacrament, by entertaining of,
and being filled with vain distracting thoughts; when you are there you should
be careful to do nothing else, and to think of nothing else, but what is
pertinent to the duty you are engaged in; your own heart will be frequently
straggling if you do not keep it* and the Devil will be injecting thoughts of
things of another nature: or will fill your minds with thoughts of holy things,
but not pertinent to your present work: And ^f you would receive benefit by
your receiving, you must say to Satan, as Nehemiah to Sanballat, when he would
have diverted him from building of the Wall' Neh. 6.2, 3, 4 Sanballat sent to
him saying; Come let us meet together in some one of the villages; but they
thought to do me mischief. And I sent Messengers to him, saying, I am doing a
great work, so that I cannot come down; Why should the work cease, while I
leave it and come to you? Yet they sent unto me four times after that sort, and
I answered them after the same manner. When you are receiving, the Devil would
parley with you, but it is to do you mischief, therefore reply unto him, I am
doing a great work, so that I have no time to entertain thy suggestions O mine
enemy! I have other things to think upon; here is the death of my Lord, and his
love in dying for me, to think upon; and why should this work cease, while I
entertain thy suggestions? So far as your thoughts wander, so far your work at
the Lords Table stands still. And if Satan solicit you four or more times,
still answer after the same manner; be as constant in resisting, as he is in
soliciting, and you will find benefit by the duty, if you ply your work when
you are there.

Sixthly, Because you have not conscientiously endeavored to live up to
resolutions made in former receivings. Did you not there promise, if God would
please to manifest himself unto you, and warm your heart, and pardon your Sin,
and speak peace unto your Soul, you would carefully avoid the like
Transgressions^ That you would resist Satan's Temptations, and be better in
every relation, and fill up the duties that God requires at your hands? That
you would pray more, and pray better; That you would take heed of
after-passion, if God would pardon your former passion? And yet you have come
short of all this, not only through unavoidable infirmity, but through
carelessness and letting down your Spiritual Watch. When the Temptation has
assaulted you again, you have quietly yielded again, and God has seen as much
uncircumspection in your Conversation as before; and do you think the next time
you do receive, that God will not make you go away without the comfort of this
Ordinance, who deny to him the care of your conversation? If you would have God
to do you good by his Ordinances, you must walk so holily, when one Ordinance
is over, that you may meet with God in another, or in the same at another time.

CHAP XV. Showing how we may know whether we get good by coming to the Lords
Supper.
THat you may know whether you receive benefit to your Soul by coming to the
Lords Supper, you must be careful that you do not Mistake; To prevent which,
let me pr^mise.

First, Take heed that you do not conclude, you have no benefit at all because
you have not so much as you perceive some other Christians to have: For Gods
discoveries to his People are arbitrary and gradual, when he will, to whom he
will, and in what measure he will.

Secondly, Take heed that you do not conclude, you have no benefit at all, if
you have not so much as you hoped for, or expected You aimed at much, and found
but little, ye^ do not say it was altogether an emp^^ Ordinance to your Soul

Thirdly, Take heed that you do not conclude, you have no benefit at all, if
you have it not in that particular and kind that you looked for: It may be you
may aim at a great deal of comfort and joy when you w^nt; and God may deny you
that, and make you to sorrow and be broken more for your sins; this is
spiritual benefit, though not in that way as you looked for it.

Fourthly, Take heed you do not conclude the Sacrament does you no good at all,
if you do not sensibly perceive it in the very act of Receiving. or while you
are actually under the O^dinance; To have no ben^fi^ by it then, is very sad
and uncomfortable; but yet limit not the efficacy of the Ordinance only to the
time of receiving, but observe how it works with you after it is past; it may
be sometimes you (...) mourn more, and rejoice more afterward, than when you
were at the Table. Now to resolve your doubt, consider, you do g^t real benefit
by the Lords Supper.

First, When you find your heart thereby much ^^trongly engaged to inward and
universal holines^^ When you feel your heart more obliged to walk with God with
more circumspection and ^^re than you did before.

Secondly, When you find your Faith is more increased, you can rely upon Christ
more ^^ducially than you could before; when you ^ent, you did purpose to take
Christ upon his own terms, but when you come away, your purpose is more settled,
and you are more resolved in Christ's way, to venture the everlasting
concernments of your Soul upon (...)

Thirdly, When you find your love to Christ hereby to b^ more inflamed: You
loved him truly before, but now you love him strongly; your Soul is sick while
he is absent, but when he is with you, you are satisfied; he now dwells more
in your thoughts than before ^he did, a sign, you love him more than before you
did.

Fourthly, When Commu^^^^ with God in the Sacrament is obtained, and God gives
you the meeting. The Ordinance then will certainly do you good, when you find
your grace go forth in exercise toward God, and the Spirit of God breathing
upon your Soul by the powerful influences thereof affecting of you.

Fifthly, When your Spiritual delight and (...) in God and Christ is more
raised: Before you did delight too much is the World, and in your Friends* and
in your Riches, and less in Christ; but now more in Christ, and less in these;
When you think of God you can rejoice; when you speak of Christ, your Soul^
triumphs in him.

Sixthly, When your Soul under the sight and sense of sin is more deeply
humbled. If you have not joy in a Sacrament, yet if you have more ingenuous
sorrow for your sin, God has done you good thereby: If you do not come away
with a rejo^cing hear^, yet if you come away with a weeping eye, proceeding
from a truly contrite Spirit, bless God for his mercy to you in that Ordinance.

Seventhly, When corruption and sin is more hated, and becomes more loathsome
to your Soul* When the thoughts of sin are more loathsome to you than the
actings of it formerly were* when you groan more under the weight and load of
sin, and do set your self more resolvedly against it*

Eighthly, When your desires after full enjoy^^ment of God and ^^^ist in glory
are more enlarged: Here you feel the workings of his Spirit, that makes you
long to behold his face in his glorious Kingdom, that the little taste you have
of Gods manifested love unto your Soul makes you almost impatient till God
shall take you to himself.

Ninthly, When your heart is more suspected, and you wa^^ with a greater Holy
Jealousy, that you do not lose the end of your going; and that you have a holy
fear, that you break not Covenant with God, when his vows are upon you.

Tenthly, When you set a high valuation and esteem upon this Ordinance, and
prefer it before your necessary food, and find that your Soul desires, you may
come again for this very end, that you might meet with more of God another time.

Eleventhly, When you are more strengthened and emboldened to undergo the loss
of all things for Jesus sake: When you see how Christ has suffered for you,
even unto death, you ^ow count not your very life too dear to lay down for
Christ.

Twelfthly, When you come away truly thankful for what you had, and truly
sorrowful you had no more; If you come away sorrowful, thinking you have not
met with Christ, that very sorrow proves you did meet with Christ, else you had
not sorrowed when you think you missed of him: By such things as these judge.

CHAP. XVI. Showing how we are to Live after we have (...) at the Lords Supper.
IF you did find no benifit, then do these three things*

First, Examine what may be the cause why God withheld the benefit of the
Ordinance from you: Why it was, it proved an empty duty unto you.

Secondly, Greatly bewail this before the Lord, that through your own
miscarriage, you should lose the great advantage that might have been received.

Thirdly, Labor to feel the benefit of the (...) by Repentance, and exercise
of (...) upon Christ, when the Duty is over; And (...) for the efficacy of it.

If you have had good success, do likewise three things.

First, Give to God the Glory of it; take you the Comfort, give God the Glory.

Secondly, The more good you get, the more frequent it: It is good to be often
there where you meet with God.

Thirdly, Let your Conversation after the Sacrament witness the good that you
receive in and by the Sacrament: You say so, live so, that all may see it: An
holy, suitable conversation, in living up to Sacramental Obligations, will
convince your self and others* that there is^ some real good, that you do get
by attending upon God therein

But alas! how few do live as becomes those that have been at the Table of the
Lord! If you did but listen to their discourse as soon as they are gone from
this Ordinance, you should hear some talking presently of the World, or of
something impertinent to what ^hey have been about: If you did but follow them
from the Lords Table to their ^wn, what unsavory words should you ^ear from
them! How frothy and vain i^ their discourse! And if you observe their actions,
even upon the same day, and sometimes in the same hour that they have been
eating and drinking at the Table of the Lord, you would perceive that they have
presen^ly forgot where they have been, and what they have been doing, and the
obligations that th^re was laid upon them to ^^ve better. You should see one
drunk with passion, another filled with carnal mirth, another careless in the
after duties of the ^abbath: trace them in their lives in the week following,
and you shall see them as worldly, as vain, as negligent as others that never
had been at such an Ordinance.

Therefore that I might be instrumental (and Oh that I may) to stir you up to
live as becomes those that frequent the Lords Table, I shall speak to th^se
three things.

First. Why you should give all diligence in endeavoring to live suitably to
the obligations laid upon you at the Table of the Lord.

Secondly, How you should live and walk after the Sacrament, that your
Conversation might be suitable to your Sacramental Obligations.

Thirdly, What are the Aggravations of this sin, in not living as becomes
those that have been at the Table of the Lord

First, It requires your utmost diligence to endeavor to live suitably to the
Sacrament, if you consider,

1. That your privilege is greater than the privileges of many others, whom
God dot^ not invite nor call (while such) to come unto his Table. God honors
you above the wicked in the World, above the ungodly and profane; and the
greater your privilege and dignity is, the greater should your dil^^gence be
in living up to after-duties, Meph^^^bosheth esteemed it a great dignity and
favou^ that he should eat bread at King David's Table, 2 Samuel 9 7, 8. And is it
not a great^^ dignity to eat of the Bread of Life, at the Ta^ble of the King of
Heaven.

2. The Devil will be assaulting you with new temptations, to (...) you unto
sin, after you have been at the Table of the Lord. If God ha^h spoken peace
unto your Conscience, the Devil will be endeavoring to break your peace; If
you have got a pardon of your old sins, he will be tempting you again to the
commission of new; and the greater discoveries you have had of God, when you
were there, the greater will his temptations be to draw you into sin, when you
come from thence. When Christ was Baptized, and God had owned him, by a voice
from Heaven, then he was tempted by the Devil, Mat. 3.17. and 4 1. And if the
Devil will be diligent to tempt you after such a Duty, should not you be
diligent to resist him? Or, if you be not, is it not likely you will do
something that will be unbecoming ^ne that has been at this Ordinance? (...)
your self be Judge.

3. You are to go again in the following (...) unto your worldly business and
employments, and to trade in things below; and how soon will you lose the sense
of Gods love, and the sweet delights your Soul was filled with, by dealing in
the world, if you are not watchful?

4 Your own heart is apt to grow cold and dull again, after you have been
warmed and heated in the Sacrament; Therefore you must be diligent after such a
duty. The water that is heated by the fire still retains a principle that
reduces it to its former coldness, when it is removed from the fire; and so
does your heart*

Secondly, ^f you would walk and live as becomes one that has been at the
Table of the Lord, you must,

1. Endeavor to live and walk as Christ did when he was here upon the Earth.
When, you have been commemorating Christ's death, you must come away purposing
to imitate his life. For as Christ in his sufferings has left us an example
how we ought to suffer, 1 Pet. 2 21. So Christ in his life has left us an
example how we ought to live, 1 John 2.6. Then you will walk suitably to that
Ordinance, which is a Commemoration of Christ's death, when you tread in his
steps while he lived upon the Earth.

2. Walk and live as one that is redeemed by the Blood of Christ should live.
In the Sacrament you have seen the greatness of the price that was paid for you
to redeem you from the Torments of Hell, from the Wrath of God, the Curse of
the Law, the Power of Sin: Here it is, you see you are redeemed and bought, and
therefore you are no longer your own, but his that died for you: 1 Cor. 6.19^
And ye are not your own; ver. 20. For ye are bought with a price; therefore
glorify God, in your B^dy, and in your Spirit, which are God^* Oh how should a
man redeemed from eternal torments walk and live?

3. Wa^k and Live as one that has been sealed up to the day of Redemption
should live. In the Sacrament you do not only see that you are redeemed, but
also that you are sealed unto the day of Redemption: You are assured of Heaven
and eternal Life, and Oh how should a person that in the Sacrament has had the
Seal of the Covenant of grace assuring him of Life and Glory, wa^k and live!

4 Wa^k and live as one to whom the Lord has spoken peace should live. In the
Lords Supper God has told you, he is reconciled unto you; he has said unto
you, My Son, My Daughter, be of good cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee: Then go
and live as one pardoned by the Lord should live.

5. Wa^k and live as one that has renewed his Covenant with God should live.
Be as strict against sin after the Sacrament, as you did purpose when you were
there. God has avouched himself to be your God, and you have avouched your
self to be the Lords, then live accordingly.

1. Walk and live as one that has seen such (...) at a Sacrament as you have
seen. Here ^ou have seen the dreadful wrath of God against sin, the severity
and the strictness (...) his Justice against Sin: Here you have ^^en the evil
of Sin, and the deserts thereof; ^^ere you have seen what a precious thing ^he
Soul of man is, by the price that was said for it: Here you have seen the love
of God and Christ to poor Sinners; then ^^ve with that fear of Sin, with that
care of your immortal precious Soul, with that ^^^^gence to please and love
God, as one that has such sigh^^ should do.

But more particularly:

1. After you have been at the Table of the Lord, you must make Conscience of
abstaining from those sins that there you did bewail, that there you sorrowed
for: To weep for sin at the Sacrament, and to indulge it when you come awa^, is
great Hypocrisy. Will you (while there) seem to be grieved for your si^, and
yet afterward be unwilling to forsake it? Did you resolve against it, or did
you not? I^ you did not, the Lord forgive you, your sin is great, and your love
to sin was great, when you would not so much as purpose to leave your sin, nor
resolve against it; no, not when you saw what Christ ha^h suff^red for sin; if
^ou did, then do as you did purpose, and resolve: Especially watch most against
that sin that you have often^st found prevailing against you, that your heart
is most read^ to yield unto, and your Conscience (...) most reproach you for
when you were (...) the Table of the Lord. Your endeavou^ must be against all
sin, but chiefly against your chiefest sin. O^ never smile upon your sin which
you see has put to death you^ Lord the Prince of Life!

2. After you have been at the Sacrament be conscientious in discharging of
other Duties which this Ordinance does engage you to Yiel^ Obedience to the
Commands of God, whi^^ he has given you to be the Rule of yo^^ Life: This was
your du^y before, but no^ there is another bond to tie you to it^ there is a
superadded obligation laid upon you so to do; and your neglect and disobedience
will be more heinous if you do not.

First, Be more frequent, and more fervent in your secret Addresses unto God.
Besides your worshipping of God in your Family (which some that come to the
Table of the Lord, do shamefully neglect) be much with God alone. Oh how should
you love and delight to have Communion with God in secret, when no Eye does
(...) you but the E^e of God, whom you have seen in the Sacrament, has given
his So^ to you and for you!

Secondly, Labor after growth in Grace: This should have been in your desires
before you went, and it should be your endea^vour when you come from thence to
have more love to God than you had before, ^o have stronger Faith in Christ
than you had before, to have more delight in God and Christ, and more ardent
desire^ than you had before

Thirdly, Be more resolved to suffer, and to dye for Christ, than you were
before. At the Lords Table you have seen what Christ has done and suff^red for
you, (...) you thereby more resolved not only to do, but to suffer also for his
s^ke: Be not only mo^e eminent in your active, but more patient in your passive
Obedience than before.

Fourthly, Live in love with all that are partakers of the same benefi^s with
you. Yea, in this Ordinance you have an example of loving your very Enemies, as
Christ did when he died for you; but a more special and peculiar love you are
taught to have to all the Members of Christ's Mystical Body, when you see in
this Ordinance, how Christ has loved them all, Ephesians. 5.2 Walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.

Fifthly, Be not so afraid to dye, after you have seen the Death of Christ in
the Sacrament represented to you. Christ has conquered this Enemy, he has
made Death your Friend to open the door to you, that you may go and live with
him who has died for you.

Thirdly, If you do not live as becomes one that has been at the Table of the
Lord, consider the greatness of your Sin in these aggravations of it. If you
live a loose and carnal life, after you have partaken of this Ordinance.

1. You break Covenant with God, and those promises which you made to him of
better obedience: you did again resign your self to be the Lords; If you did
not, that was your sin^ if you did, and do not answer it in your life, this is
your sin.

2. You dishonor Christ, if you live not suitably to this Ordinance; You
profess your self to be one of his Disciples, else what did you there? If you
be, and do not live accordingly, you dishonor him whom you there have seen so
much vilified and reproached by others for you, and yet shall he be reproached
by others, by reason of you.

3. You do grieve the Spirit of God, if you live not holily after the
Sacram^nt! Did not the Spirit of God come and bea^ you witness that you were a
Son of God, and did secretly and powerfully p^^swade your heart, that God
through the death of his Son was reconciled to you, and that you^ sins were
pardoned, and that your Soul should be saved when you di^^; and must not this
be a grief unto him to see you walk so unworthy of his love?

4 Y^u discredit your Prof^ssion, and cause the Holy ways of God to be evil
spoken of: if you lead not an Holy life after you have been at the Table of the
Lord, those that will not be holy themselves will blame you, and reproach your
profession if you be ^o, holy. Such a man goes to the Sacraments and yet will
be unjust, and yet is vain in hi^ discourse, and we see but little difference
betwixt his life and ours; and so will ^e hardened in their evil ways, and be
prejudiced against Religion, by the Unsuitable Conversations of those that do
profess it.

5. F^lling into Sin, which you have purposed and resolved against at the Lords
Supper, will (...) wound your Conscience, and disturb your peace; When
Conscience shall tell you. You resolved against this sin, and yet you have
committed it; you promised to be more watchful against the occasions and
appearances of this evil, but you have wilfully run into the commission of it,
or when tempted to it; you willingly consented.

6. Unsuitable walking after you have been at the Lords Table, will cause you
to lose much of your ho^y confidence when you go again It will much hinder your
application of Christ unto your self, that you cannot with that holy confidence
say, This Christ did die for me; especially if you be not deeply humbled for
your failing before you come again.

7 Unsuitable walking after this Ordinance, will provoke the Lord to withdraw
from you, and to leave you in a deserted state, to leave you to the dullness and
the deadness of your heart; to take away his comforts from your heart, and to
conceal his love from your Soul, till you learn to walk more worthy of it.

8. Unsuitable walking after this Ordinance, will be great unthankfulness unto
God for the giving of his Son, and all the Privileges you have been partakers
of by him. It is not your praising God with your lips, but chiefly with your
lives; not only in your words, but principally in your works, that will prove
you truly thankful unto God. All that God requires from you for all the
blessings purchased by the death of Christ, and made over to you in the
Sacrament, is that you should be thankful unto him, and to improve them to his
praise and glory; but you cannot have a thankful heart, if you have not a
suitable conversation.

These are some of those evils and aggravations of your sin in this respect,
which you should be careful to prevent, that in nothing you may provoke your
God to anger and displeasure, but behave your self before, and in, and after
your participation of this holy Ordinance, that God may delight in you through
Christ, and might welcome you to his Table here, and to his Kingdom when you
leave this World; where you shall be filled with those delights and joys of
which you have a taste in this imperfect state at the Table of the Lord.

A short Dialogue between a Minister and a private Christian that desires to
partake of the Lords Supper.
Christian, SIR, if it will not be an interruption to you in your work, I
desire your advice and counsel about a duty that concerns my Soul.


Minister. It is the work which God has committed to my charge, to further
Souls in their way to Heaven, and direct them in their duty in order thereunto;
therefore if your business with me be such, tell me what it is you desire?


C. My earnest desire is to partake of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.


M. Did you never receive this Sacrament?


C. No


M. Why have you lived so long in the neglect of this Ordinance?


C. Because I have been full of doubts and fears concerning my fitness for it.


M. Have you then got your doubts resolved? and are you persuaded that you are
an invited Guest unto this Holy Supper?


C. Sometimes I have some hopes that God does call me to it, but sometimes I
fear that I am not yet prepared for it, and therefore I beg your direction what
I ought to do.


M You know that a Minister cannot look into your heart, nor infallibly
discern, whether you have grace (...) no, should you not than rather search and
examine your self, since you may know the state of your own Soul, which another
cannot?


C. I know that no man can know my heart, and whether I be sit before God; but
you may take account of my knowledge in order to it, and if I speak the truth,
and do not lie (which in the presence of God, at whose Tribunal I must shortly
stand, I promise,) while I declare to you the workings of the Spirit of God
upon my Heart, you may tell me from the Word of God, what my condition is;
neither do I come to spare my pains in examining of my self, but that thereby I
might be the better enabled for it.


M Are you willing then that I should try your knowledge concerning the Lords
Supper, and enquire into the grounds and Reasons of your hopes, why you think
you are fitted for this duty?


C. I ought to be always ready to give an answer to every man that asks me a
reason of the hope that is in me, much more to such whom God has set to watch
for my Soul, and especially when I desire to partake of the Lords Supper.


M Tell me then what is the Lords Supper?


C The Lords Supper is the Second Sacrament of the New Testament, 1 Cor. 11.25.
instituted by Christ, Luke 22 19, 20 wherein by the signs of Bread and Wine,
and the actions that concern the same, Mat. 26 26, 27. we show forth his death,
1 Cor. 11.26 and God signifies, seals, and exhibiteth the Body and Blood of
Christ, 1 Cor. 10 16. with all the benefits of his death and passion, to every
worthy Receiver, for his spiritual nourishment and growth in Grace.


M Why is it called the Lords Supper?


C. Not because it is appointed a Supper to us, but because Christ sitting at
his last Supper, ordained it instead of the Passover, Mat. 26.26.


M. How long is the Lords Supper to continue in the Church?


C. Till Christ's coming in Glory, 1 Cor. 11.26.


M. Is it the Duty of Believers to receive the Lords Supper?


C. Yes: Else, 1. They disobey Christ's Command, Luk 22 19. 2 S^ight Christ's
love in appointing it for them. 3. Neglect a profi^able means for their growth
in Grace. And 4 Provoke God to great displeasure* Mat. 22 2. to verse 9.


M Is it the Duty of Be^ievers often to partake of the Lords Supper?


C. 1. Christ's Command, 1 Cor. 11 26* 2. The Apostles practic^, Acts 2 42 and
20.7 3 Their own necessity, being often dull, John 20 9 and often doub^ing, Mat
28.17 and often backward to b^lieve, Luk 24.25. or to remember Christ's Doctrine
about his Death, Luke 24 5, 6, 7, 8 their often spiritual wants, Phil 4 19
their too often decays in Grace, Rev. 2 4 and ^ 2. their often sinning against
God, Jam 3 2 and their often need of cleansing by the Blood of Christ, John
13.8. 1 John 1.7. and often need of pardon, Mat. 6.12 do require that Believers
should often partake of the Lord Supper.


M Do Hypocrites and Unbelievers eat and drink Christ's Body and Blood?


C. No: Such receive only the outward Elements.


M. Is not then their case dangerous?


C Yes: Because, 1. Their Sin is great, being guilty of Christ's Body and Blood,
1 Cor. 11.27. 2. They eat damnation to themselves. v 29 3. Are sickly and do
die for this sin, v 30. For this God casts some men's Bodies to the grave, and
their Souls to Hell.


M. What course then must you take to prevent this sin and danger?


C. I must give all serious diligence to prepare my heart for so great a work.


M. Why do you think preparation is so needful?


C. Because, 1. All men are naturally unfit. 2 After Conversion, Believers are
often indisposed for it. 3. God will come and view his guests, Mat. 22.11 4. We
have to do with the Blood of the Son of God. 5 Many duties here do meet And 6.
God has made great preparations for us.


M. How must you prepare your self for the Lords Supper?


C. By a serious narrow search of my heart, whether I have those Graces which
God requires of worthy receivers; and by fervent solemn Prayer.


M What are those graces which God requires in worthy receivers?


C. Knowledge, Faith, Love to God, Repentance and New-Obedience.


M. Why is Knowledge necessary?


C. Because without knowledge the heart cannot be good, Prove 19.2 Nor can a man
else examine himself, or discern the Lords Body.


M What knowledge is necessary?


C. It is necessary to know how we are created, how we fell from God, and how
we are recovered.


M. How were we created?


C. After the Image of God, Genesis 1.27. in Knowledge, Righteousness, and
Holiness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4 24


M How came we then to be so sinful and miserable?


C By the first Transgression of our first Paren^s, Rom 5 12.18


M. Wherein consists the sinfulness of our estate by reason of our first
Parents fall?


C In the imputation of Adam's first sin, Romans 5.19 The privation of the ^mage
of God which we had at first, Rom 3 10. And in the propensi^y of our hearts to
the vilest sin, Genesis 18.12. and 6 5.


M. Can you not declare more particularly the sinfulness of the several
faculties of the Soul, and members of the B^dy


C The understanding is dark and ignorant, 1 Cor. 2 14 Ephesians. 4 18 An Enemy to
God, Romans 8 7. Vain, Ephesians 4 17. The will is stubborn and rebellious, John 5 40
Mat. 23.27 Unable to choose good, Phil. 2.13. The Conscience is defi^ed, Tit.
1.15. In some feared, 1 Timothy 4.2. Erroneous, John 16.2. Doub^ing* Rom 14 23. The
heart as hard as an Adamant, Zech 7.11, 12 The Affections turned from the best
Objects, the liking Affections which should be placed upon God, are toward
evil; Naturally Men love pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy 3 4. And Riches, Mat
19.21, 22. And themselves, Mat. 10.24 And their Relations, Mat. 10.37 And
desire any thing rather than God and Christ, Isa. 53.2. J^b 21.14 And delight
in evil, not in God, Prove. 2.14 Their disliking Affections which should be
against Sin, are against God: Haters of God, Rom 1.30. Grieving (...) Gods
goodness to others, Mat. 20.11 to 16 The memory apt to forget good, Heb 12 5
Deuteronomy 1.10, 11, 14. To remember evil, Ezekiel 23.19, 21. And when it remembers
g^od, it is for a wrong end, Mat. 27 63. So all the Members of the Body are
instruments of sin, R^m 6 19 Eyes are full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2 14. (...)
swift to sin, Throat, Tongue, Lips, Mou^h, full of sin, Rom 3 13, 14, 15.


M Wherein will the knowledge of this sinfulness of man be useful to you when
you go to the Lords Table.


C. It will be an help to break my heart when I am there, that I should be such
a bund^e and lump of sin; to feel a need of Christ, and to admire ^he Love of
God in sending his Son to dye for such a filthy loathsome, and polluted Wretch.


M. What is the misery of that estate into which Man fell?


C. The punishments that are due to Man for sin, are 1. All Temporal Miseries,
as Gods Curse upon the Creatures, Genesis 3.17. Romans 8 20 Upon his Estate, Deuteronomy.
28.17. Children, v 18 And all he takes in hand, v 20. Sickness^s, as Plague, v.
21. Consumption, Fever, Agu^s, etc v. 22, 27. Levit. 26.16. Famine, Deuteronomy. 28
22, 23, 24 Madness, v. 28 Death, Romans 6.23 Gen 2.17. and 3 19. Yea; all the
Curses that are written in the Book of God, Deuteronomy. 29.20, 27. And that are (...)
written, Deuteronomy. 28 16 2. Spiritual Miseries By Nature man is dead in sin, Ephesians. 2
1. A (...) of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. And of the (...): John 8.44. Loathsome to God,
Ez^k 16 ^ A Stranger to him, Ephess 2 19. (...) b^indness of mind, Isa 6 9. In
danger of H^ll but does (...), Rom 11.8 Nor fear i^, Deuteronomy. 29 ^9 Insensible of
sin, Isa 48 4. But sometim^s (...) with such horror of Conscience, that he is
^eary of his Life, Genesis 4.13, 14. And wi^^ die b^ his own hands rather th^n
b^a^ it, Mat. 27 3, 4 5. Has a (...) Mi^d, R^m 1 28 And vile Affections, Rom
1^ 26 Is under the power of the Dev^^, E^^ 2 2. And of lust, v. 3. And is pro^e
to (...) wickedness* Genesis 19.5. (...) this is his (...), that God is angry with
him every day, Psalm. 7.11. And that nothing he can do, does please God, Rom 8
8.3. Eternal miseries: As banishment from the comfortable presence of God for
ever, Mat 7.23. 2 These. 1.9 The pains of Hell, Rev 20.15. In a Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, Rev. 21.8 That never shall be quenched, Mark 9 44. With the company
of cursed, tormented, and tormenting Devils, Mat. 25 41. Where the Worm shall
never die, Mark 9 46. And the Torment shall be easeless, Luk 16.24, 2^.
Remediless, verse 26 Endless, Rev 14 10, 11.


M. Wherein will the knowledge of this promote your fitness for the Lords
Supper?


C. It will make me the more importunately to cry for mercy, Luke 18.13 To s^e
my need of Christ, Mat 9.12. To hasten to him, and believe on him, Acts 16 29,
to 35. To value Christ above all, Phi^. 3 7, 8 To confe^^ my sins, Luk 15.18.
And to grieve for them, Acts 2 37


M By whom are you recovered from this sin and misery?


C. By Jesus Christ alone, Acts 4.12.


M. Who was Christ?


C. The Eternal Son of God, Psalm 2 7. Who became man, John 1.14 Who was and is
God, John 1.1. and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5. In two distinct Natures, Mat. 22 41. to 46.
and Romans 1.3, 4. And one person for ever, John 3 13.


M Why was it necessary that the Mediator betwixt God and Man, should be both
God and Man?


C. If he had not been Man he could not have died, 1 Timothy 6 16 And if he had not
been God his death had not been satisfactory for our sins, nor have purchased
his Church, Acts 20.28


M. How does Christ recover us from our sin and misery?


C. By executing the Office of Prophet, Acts 3.2^ Priest, Heb 5 6. and King,
Psalm 2.6.


M Why was it necessary that Christ should execute this threefold Office?


C. To cure us of a threefold misery that we lay under.


M. What was the first?


C. We were blind and ignorant, Mat. 15.14. and 23.16, 17, 19, 24, 26.
Therefore he became a Prophet to reveal to us the will of God for our
Salvation, John ^.18.


M. What was the second?


C We had sinned, and could not satisfy the Justice of God, Mic 6* 6, 7.
Therefore he became our Priest, by dying to satisfy Gods Justice, and to
intercede for us, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6 Heb. 7.25.


M What was the third?


C. We were weak, Rom 5 6. and could neither turn to God, Jer. 13.18. and
17.14. Lam. 5 21. nor subdue our Enemies, Mark 5.2. to 14 Therefore he became
our King, to subdue us to himself, Psalm. 110.3. And to save us, Isa 33.22. And
to restrain and conquer his and our Enemies, Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor. 15 24, 25, 26.


M. How are we made partakers of Christ and his benefits?


C. By Faith, John ^ 16. Acts 13.39. Ephesians. c. 2 v 8.


M. What is Faith?


C. It is an hearty receiving of Christ for Lord and Savior, John 1.12. Or, a
res^ing upon Christ alone for Salvation.


M Why did you say that Faith i^ necessary to worthy receiving?


C. Because, 1. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb 11.6 and we
should not displease him at his Table 2. By Faith we are the Children of God,
John 1.12 Gal 3.26. And this is Childrens B^ead, and Gods Household Provisions:
And we are not of the Household of God, till we are of the Household of Faith*
Ephesians. 2.10. Gal. 6.10 3. The Lords S^pp^^ does not sanctify Unbelievers, but
Unbelievers profane the Lords Supper. Hag. 2 12.13, 14.4 Because of many
Scripture (...), setting ^orth the (...) Fa^^^, it is the (...) of the Soul*
and i^ the Lords Supper (...) to Christ John 6.35 (...) Sou^, John 6.53 And
^here (...) upon Christ it is the hand (...) Christ* John 1 12. And we should
tak^ Christ, (...) is the eye of the Soul, Is^ ^^ 22 And ^here we should (...)
is the Life of the Soul (...) 2 20 And ^ dead m^n cannot read upon Christ.


M. Why do you say that Repentance is necessary to worthy Receiving?


C. Because, 1. We are to Judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31. 2. A soft heart will
receive the impression of this Seal. 3. Because a man is to turn from sin when
he comes to the Lords Table.


M. Why did you say that love to God is necessary?


C. Because it is uncomfortable to sit down at the Table of an Enemy, but
dreadful and dangerous to sit down in our enmity at the Table of the Lord: If a
man keep up his fellowship with the Devil, he provokes God if he comes to his
Table, 1 Cor. 10 21, 22.


M. Why did you say that new Obedience is necessary?


C. Else a man would come in his rebellion. God prefers obedience before
sacrifice, else a man does not receive out of obedience unto God, but for some
sinister end. A disobedient liver cannot be a worthy receiver, nor have
communion with God, 1 John 1.6, 7.


M. If these things be so necessary, does it not concern you to examine whether
they be wrought in your heart?


C. Yes.


M. What are the signs of true Faith?


C. 1. A prizing of Christ above all things in this world. 1 Pet. 2.7 2.
Willingness to receive him into the heart upon Gospel-terms, for Lord and
Savior, John 1.12. 3. If it purifi^ the heart, Acts 15 9 4. If it be fruitful
it good works, James 2 17 5. If it enable us to overcome the world, 1 John 5 4.


M. How do you know you love God?


C. Because, 1. ^ am grieved at his absence, and cannot be satisfied, till I
find him, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. 2. By my d^s^^es, to be like him, and love to those
that are like him, 1 John 4.7.12. 3. By my hatred unto sin, Psalm 97.10 4. By my
obedience unto his commands, Exodus 20.6 John 14 21, 23. 5. By my desires to
have an heart to part with all for him, that he might have the predominancy of
my love, Mat 10 37 6 By my g^ieving when he is dishonored by my self or
others, Psalm. 51.4 and 119 53.136 158*


M. How do you know you have repentance for sin?


C. Because. 1. My Soul groans under it as a burden heavier to me than any
affliction, Luk 15.16, 18, 19, 21. Mat. 11 28 2. Because I am ashamed of my
secret sins before God, that never exposed me to shame amongst men, and loath
my self for all, Ezekiel 36.31. 3. Because I desire to forsake all sin, even the
dearest* Prove. 2^ 13. 4. Because what I cannot get fr^^d from, I fight against,
that sin might never have a peaceable possession in my heart, Gal. 5.7,


M. How do you know the truth of your new Obedience?


C Because, 1. My Obedience spring from a new principle, love to, and fear of
God, Deuteronomy 10.12 2. Is guided by a new Rule, not by my own will; but he Word of
God, Gal 6 16. And 3. I aim at a new end, the Glory of God, 1 Cor 10.31.


M. But if a man cannot say, he loves God, and say, he has faith, but yet find
he hunger after Christ and thirsts for him, may he comes to the Lords Table?


C. Yes, 1. Because assurance is not necessary. 2. Because Weak Believers have
a ^ight unto it. 3. Because God inviteth those that hunger and thirst, Isa 55.1
John 7.37. 4. Christ pronounces them blessed. And 5 Promises that they shall
be filled, Mat. 5 6.


M But would it not tend much to your comfort at the Lords Table to know before
you go, that Christ died for you in particular?


C. Yes, Because then I could say, Here is Blood, and it was shed for me, etc.


M. How may you know that Christ died for you in particular?


C 1. If I be one of his People, Mat. 1.21. and this I am, if I be willing to
be, to do, to suffer what Christ would have me, Psalm 110.3. 2. If I be one of
Christ's Friends doing his Commands, John 15.13, 14. 3. If I be dead to sin,
Gal. 6.14. 4. If I ^ive to Christ, 2 Cor. 5.15. I may conclude he died for me,
Gal 2 20


M. If upon serious search you find these Graces wrought in your heart; is it
necessary you should spend some time in solemn prayer before you go?


C Yes, because, 1. I cannot act what Grace I have without Gods assistance,
John 15.5. 2. The duty is solemn and weighty. 3. Though God will give the
blessings of the Covenant of Grace, yet he will be sought unto for them, Ezekiel.
36.37.


M. Is it sufficient for your worthy Receiving, that you have found these
graces in your heart, and prayed to God before you go?


C. No; But I must see that my End be right, and that I behave my self as I
ought, while I am there.


M. What is your end in going to the Lords Table?


C. My End must be, 1. To have Communion with God. 2. To increase my Faith in
Christ, and Love to God: 3. To further my joy in the Holy Ghost: 4. My peace of
Conscience: And 5. Hope of Eternal Life: 6. To renew my Covenant with God: 7.
To quicken me to Obedience: 8. To make me thankful to God for his mercy
bestowed upon me in Christ: 9. To get power against my sins: And 10 Especially
to remember and show forth the Death of Christ.


M. What remembrance must this be of the Death of Christ?


C. Not an Historical remembrance of Christ's Death only; for so the Devils
remember that Christ has died, but such a remembrance that should affect my
heart with love to him, desire after him, joy in him, with sorrow for my sin
that caused his Death; and whereby I might answer all the charges of the Law,
the clamours of my Conscience, and the accusations of the Devil, Rom 8.33, 34.


M. Having found the truth of Grace in your heart, and that your End is right,
what must you do when you are there?


C Give all diligence in endeavoring to draw my Graces in^^ act


M. What are these Graces that you must endeavor to exercise when you are at
the Table of the Lo^d?


C Faith, Love to God and Christ, sorrow for sin, d^sires after Christ, and
thankfuln^ss.


M What means would you use when you are there to exercise these Graces?


C Sometimes I would meditate upon such things ^s are here (...) to my thoughts
from this O^dinance, ^endi^g thereunto; and sometim^s put up circu^ations unto
God that he would please to h^lp me*


M What would you meditate upon at the Lords Table for this end?


C 1. Sometimes I would think upon the Love of God and Christ. 2 Som^times upon
his Wrath and Sev^rity against Sin. 3. The (...) nature of sin. 4 The
preciousne^ of my Soul. 5 The suff^ri^gs of my Lord. 6 Of my sitting with God
in his Kingdom. An^ 7 The privileges I am made partaker of in ^his lif^ by the
death o^ Christ.


M What are th^se privileges purchased by the death of Christ, sealed in the
Sacrament, the believing thoughts whereof will (...) to warm your heart, and
act your Graces at the Sacrament?


C. These are, 1 Peace with God, Rom 5:1: Col 1:20, 21 2 The Righteousness of
Christ imputed. 2 Cor 5:21: 3 Pardon of Sin. Ephesians 1:7^ 4 The death of Sin, Rom
6.6 5 Adoption, Ephesians 1:5: Gal 3:26 6 Perseverance, Phil 1:6: 7 Deliverance from
Wrath to come, 1 These 1:10 8 Communion with God, 1 John 1:3: 9 Hope of Heaven
and eternal li^e, 1 Pet 1:3, 4.


M. What is there in the Sacrament presented to your senses, that represents
these things to your Faith?


C. Sacramental Elements, and Sacramental Action^.


M. What are the Sacramental Elements?


C. Bread and Wine, signifying Christ's Body and Blood, Mat 26:26, 27.


M. Is not the Bread and Wine changed into Christ's Body and Blood?


C. No surely: For then, 1 Christ's glorious Body now would be subject to
Corruption. 2 Then a finite Body can be in Heaven and Earth, and in many places
upon Earth at the same time. 3 Then I do not know Bread and Wine when I do see
it and taste it. 4 Then there would be no Signs of the things signifi^d, and so
this would be no Sacrament. 5 Then a Drunkard might eat and drink Christ's Body
and Blood, as well as a true Believer. 6 Then the Minister may as surely give
the thing signified as the outward Signs, whereas this is the Gift and
Prerogative of God alone, Luk 3:26 7 Then at the first institution there were
two Christ's, one that gave, and another that was given. 8 The Cup is said to be
the New Testament, as well as it is said to be Christ's Blood, 1 Cor 11:25 But
in that there must be a Figure, whether Papists will or no, and so there is in
this.


M. Why then are the outward signs graced with the names of the things
signified?


C. 1 To show the inseparate Conjunction of the things signified, with the
outward signs to the worthy Receive^ 2 Because of the fit proportion and
agreement between the signs and the things signified.


M. Wherein is the agreement betwixt the outward signs, and the things
signified?


C. In regard, 1 Of the preparations; that bread might be prepared, the Corn
must be threshed in the floor, grounded in the Mill, baked in the Oven; and
that Wine may be prepared, the Grape must be Crushed in the Wine press. So,
that Christ might be a Savior unto Sinners, he must be brui^ed for our sins,
and scorched in the Oven of his Fathers Wrath, and alone must tread the Wine
press, Isa 63:3: 2 In regard of usefulness; Bread is of daily use, whatsoever
be our other refreshments: So Christ is of daily use unto us, whatsoever be our
other enjoyments: Bread is the sta^^ of life, and Wine cheareth the heart of
Man: Such is Christ unto our Souls.


M. What may you meditate upon, when you see that Christ ordained both Bread
and Wine to be the signs in this Sacrament?


C. The plentiful Redemption we have in Christ, that from him we might have a
supply for all our wants, complete nourishment; here being Bread that satisfies
our hunger, and Wine tha^ quenches our thirst.


M. What may you meditate upon when you see the Bread and Wine given apart?


C. That Christ's B^ood was separated from his Body, that we might not be
s^parated from God for ever.


M. Does the C^p belong also to the People as wel^ as to the Minister?


C Y^s, forasmuch as Christ in the first Institu^ion, Mat 26.27: and the
Apost^e^ afterward, 1 Cor 11.25, 26: (...)* D^^nk ye all of this. The same
that are commanded to (...), are al^^ commanded to drink, without d^fference.
And ^his Sacrament is the Communion (...) Ch^^sts Blood, as well as of his
Body, 1 C^r 10:16.


M. What be the Sacramental Actions?


C. The Acti^n^, some are of the Minister, some (...) R^ceiv^rs:


M. What are the Actions of the Minister?


C. The (...).


M Which is the first?


C. He is to ^^ke the Bread and Wine into his hands, and separate them from
ordinary Bre^d and Wine.


M. What may you meditate upon when you see the Minister do this?


C. That God in his eternal Purpose and Decree has separated Christ from all
other men, to be our Mediator, Exodus 12.5. Heb. 7 26


M. Which is the second action of the Minister?


C. He is to bless and consecrate the Bread and Wine by the Word and Prayer.


M. What may you meditate upon as signified by this?


C. That God in the fullness of time sent his Son into the World, furnishing him
with all Gifts needful for a Mediator, Gal 4* 4


M. What is the third action of the Minister?


C. To break the Bread and pour out the Wine.


M. What may you meditate upon when you see him do this?


C. The Passion and Suffering of Christ, and all that he endured both in Body
and Soul for our Sins, his bl^ss^d Body b^ing bruised, and his precious Blood
sh^d, and that his Soul was poured out unto the death, Isa. 53 5, 10, 12 H^b 9
14*


M. What is the fourth action of the Minister?


C. To give and distribute the Bread and Wine unto the R^c^ivers.


M. What may you meditate upon when you see him do this?


C That G^d is giving of his Son, and the Son giving of himself; and really,
though invisibly d^aling for^h to every worthy ^eceiver the benefits of his
death, according as he needs.


M. What be the Sacramental actions of the Receivers?


C. Two.


M. Which is the first action of the Receiver?


C. To take the Bread and Wine offered by the Minister.


M. What may you meditate upon, and do then?


C. I ought to stretch forth the hand of Faith, and receive Christ and all his
benefits, else I play the Hypocrite at the Lords* Table, before God and the
whole Congregation.


M. Which is the second action of the Receiver?


C. To eat the Bread and drink the Wine.


M. What does that signify?


C. My Union unto Christ, and Enjoyment of him, by feeding upon Christ by
Faith, for the strengthening of the Graces of Gods Spirit in my Soul.


M. What must you do after the Sacrament is over?


C. Consider with my self, if I have received any benefit thereby.


M. How will you know this?


C. 1. By the increase of my Faith in Christ, and Love to God. 2. By my greater
hatred unto sin, and power against it. 3. By my longing after the enjoyment of
God in Heaven. 4. By my prizing of this Ordinance above my necessary Food: And
5. By my resolutions in the strength of Christ, to suffer for him who died for
me.


M. What must you do if you have found good by this Ordinance?


C. I must give God the Glory, and desire to (...), and walk suitably in my
Conversation.


M How must you live that you might walk suitably?


C. I must make it my business to forsake all sin, and to perform all the
duties that God requires from me.


M What if you do not?


C. I then, 1 Dishonor Christ. 2. Grieve the Spirit. 3. Break my Covenant made
and renewed with God. 4. Discredit my Profession. 5: Wound my Conscience. 6.
Provoke God to withdraw from me. 7. Shall be guilty of great unthankfulness.
And 8. Weaken my Conscience when I go again.


M. What if you find no good by the Sacrament?


C. I must examine what was the cause, and be humbled for it, and forsake the
sin, and pray to feel the benefit of it, when I am come away, and better
prepare my self, and humbly, wait upon God therein another time.


A Dialogue between a Weak Believer that dares not come to, and a Strong
Believer that dares not absent himself from the Lords Supper.
Weak Believer. MY Friend! I am glad I met with you on such a day as this?


Strong Believer. I rejoice in your health, and in the mercy vouchsafed to us
both, that we have one Lords day more to wait upon our God.


W. I may account it mercy indeed, who have been so dull and dead, and out of
frame all the week long, and yet uncertain what the state of my Soul is; but I
pray you whither are you going so cheerfully?


S. I am going to a Feast this day.


W Do you spend holy time in Feasting?


S. Yes, in such feasting as I am going to.


W. What Feast do you mean?


S A Feast o^ fat things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of
Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined.


W. Who invites you to this Feast, of which you speak (...) great things as
these?


S. God himself does make this Feast, and invites me to it; our Father makes a
Banquet for his Child^en.


W If God do call you to a Feast, the Provisions surely are according to the
state of so Great a King?


S. Wisdom has killed her B^asts, she has mingled he^ Wine* she has
furnish^d her Table; ^he Ox^^ and Fat^^ing^ are killed, and all things are
ready: The^e is Mi^k for the weak, and Wine for the strong and sorrowful of
Heart There is Bread for the Hung^^, Water for the Thirsty, every thing that is
necess^ry or delightful. Indeed it is the Body and Blood of Christ, who is both
the Matter and the Master of this Feast.


M. Now I understand you mean the Lords Supper: And I have heard indeed of some
that have partaken thereof, that great and precious things are there prepared.


S. Yes, there are, and methinks I feel my heart to burn within me, while I am
speaking of them, and of the love of him that has prepared them and called me
unto them.


W. Surely you will be much delighted when you are there, since your heart is
thus raised as you are going to it.


S. Raised! through the mercy of my God, at this time it is, but sometimes it
is not so, but I am without a sense and feeling of the Love of God, yet then I
should not dare to absent my self from this Holy Supper, for when I am without
the sense of the love of God, I then endeavor to keep upon my heart a sense of
my duty toward him, and of my wants, to fetch supplies from him by this and
other means, as he has appointed in his Word.


W. Then, if you have the light of Gods countenance or not, you are desirous to
be partaking of the Supper of the Lord?


S. Though I have no comfort, I would do my duty, yea then my Soul does long,
does thirst and exceedingly desire, that (through the mercy of my God, and
merits of my Savior) I may taste of these Provisions, and feed upon my Lord
Redeemer, whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed.


W. But I pray you, what are those Provisi^ns that are there prepared, that do
thus affect your heart?


S. What are th^^! They are Rich and Costly Provisions; they are free,
suitable, plentiful, sufficient, Soul-nourishing, lasting, heart-chearing
Provisions.


W. Will you not particularize some of these Provisions for my better
information?


S. Oh! my Soul rejoices within me.


W. Lord, how dull am I, while he is thus affected?


S. My Soul rejoices within me, while I consider what they be.


W. What are they?


S. What! Christ and all his Privileges are ready to be exhibited, and sealed
to my Soul this day.


W. What Privileges?


S. Peace with God, pardon of sin, righteousness imputed, peace of Conscience,
joy in the Holy Ghost, more grace, perseverance to the end, and at the end
eternal life.


W Show me the suitableness of these Provisions to your Soul?


S. A Savior is suitable to a lost Sinner; pardon to a guilty Sinner; peace
with God to a Sinner that was an Enemy to God; peace of Consci^nce to a Sinner
under apprehensions of Gods Wrath; Justification to a Condemned Sinner;
cleansing Blood to a polluted Sinner; comfort to a D^j^cted Sinner: These,
these, are the provisions which are set upon my Fathers Table.


W. These are great and excellent things indeed, but who are the Guests invited
to this Feast? who are these proviss^^^s for?


S For those that are burdened with sin, and do forsake it; for those that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for the Children of God, for the Friends
and followers of Christ; for those that are willing to take him in all his
Offices.


W. But might the poor and those that have no money go unto this Feast?


S. Yes, yes, the poor in purse might be welcome, and the poor in Spirit shall
be welcome. God loves to see his Table filled with those that are sensible of
their wants and sins, and these he will satisfy abundantly with the fatness of
his House, and cause them to drink of the Rivers of his pleasures, when the
full self-righteous Pharisee shall be sent empty away.


W. This revives my heart, if you can make it good?


S The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and therefore you may not doubt
thereof. He is most earnest with the hungry and thirsty to come, Isa. 55.1. Ho
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without money and without
price. And the Son calls such, John 7.37. In the last day, that great day of
the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thi^st, let him come unto
me and drink And the Spirit calls such, Rev. 22* 17. And the Spirit and the
Bride say* Come, and let him tha^ hears say, Come! and let him that is a
thirst ^^me, and (...) will, let him drink of the Water of life freely. And the
Ministers of God are still sent to call such, Luke 14.21 -- The Master of the
house said to his Servants, Go out quickly into the Streets and Lanes of the
City, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the
blind, verse 23. And the Lord said unto the Servant, Go out into the high way,
(where poor men wont to beg) and hedges, (where poor men wont to work) and
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.


W. And do these Scriptures encourage you to frequent this Ordinance?


S. Yes; And because the same God that Commands me to pray, commands me to
receive, and has given me hopes that I shall be partaker of the benefits
thereof, I am bound to wait upon the Lord therein.


W. What do you hope to be partaker of, by going to that Ordinance?


S. I hope to have my heart inflamed with love to God, and desires after
Christ; to have my Savior more endeared to my Soul, my heart softened, my sin
subdued, my faith strengthened, my evidences cleared, and my Soul assured of
eternal life.


W. What reason have you to hope that you shall have these advantages by going
to the Lords Supper?


S. Not for any worth in me; but God is pleased to give these things freely for
the sake of Christ to those that in obedience to his Command in a right manner,
and for a right end, do make Conscience of this Duty.


W. What course have you taken beforehand that you have had such hopes of such
benefits by this Ordinance?


S. I do not wont to declare what my secret duties are, but if it might be for
the edifying of your Soul, I shall not be unwil^ing to acquaint you.


W. I pray you do, for I do stand in need of help from others more experienced
in holy duties.


S. I cannot say I am more experienced; but this I did, I seriously searched my
heart to find the truth of Grace, my Interest in Christ, my Right unto this
Ordinance, to find out my sins, and have renewed my R^pentance for them; my
wants, and have begged of God as earnestly as I could, that I may be supplied
at his Table, and for his str^ngth to discharge this duty to his glory and my
own comfort.


W. O happy man! that have these provisions prepared for you, and can go with
this delight, and holy confidence to partake of them.


S. You also may draw near unto this Table of the Lord, and have a sh^re of
these G^spel b^n^fits, and be assured of them.


W. I! Alas! Alas! you know what I am, what I have been; I never did; I do not
dare to meddle with the B^ood of Christ in (...) Ordinance?


S. You may come and eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup


W. What I? shall a Dog eat of the Childrens Bread? I dare not do it.


S. You must, you sin if you do neglect it.


W. Sin! that I would not, that is it that makes me absent from it, because I
would not sin against the Blood of Christ: But why do you say, I sin if I do
not come?


S. Because you live in the neglect of a plain commanded duty; it is a
slighting of a special token of the love of your dying Lord.


W. My Lord!


S. It is a neglecting of the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, it is Hypocrisy
to complain^ of the hard^ess of your heart, and yet will not use the means to
have it softened; and of the power of your sin, and will not use the means to
have it weakened.


W. I never knew any under my doubts and fears that went to this Ordinance, and
found good thereby?


S. Not so, for I my self was long under the same doubts and fears, and I know
my heart was as bad as yours can be; but when I was willing to forsake my sin
and close with Christ; sense of duty, fear of sin if I did not, moved me to the
use thereof, and there God resolved my doubts, and removed my fears, and made
it profitable to my soul, for my comfort and increase of grace.


W But it would be sin to me to go, for that which is a duty, and would be food
unto another, might be a sin and poison unto me, because I am not fit for such
an Ordinance?


S. If you be not fit, that also is your sin.


W. Then my case is miserable indeed: if I do not come, I sin, and if I be
unfit and come, I sin. Ah Lord? Am I in this necessity of sinning? Oh tell me
then what must I do?


S. You must not abide in that condition wherein you are unfit for the Supper
of the Lord, but fit your self and come.


W. Alas! who will pity my pining soul, that has food before it, and yet
unworthy to meddle with it?


S. A legal worthiness you cannot have, neither does God expect it at your
hands; but an Evangelical worthiness you may have.


W. I would fain know what I may do in reference to this Ordinance; I pray you
tell me, when is a person said to be worthy in a Gospel sense?


S. When he is clothed with the righteousness of Christ, has grace infused
into his Soul, and does act it at the Lords Supper, he does worthily receive.


W. Then I perceive that a man might be a sinner, and yet be a worthy Receiver?


S. Y^s


W. What and a great sinner too?


S. Yes he may.


W. This is some support to my fainting Soul: But yet my soul is cast down
within me, for I doubt I am not one of those sinners that you do mean?


S. It grieves me to see you in this distress of spirit, I am persuaded if you
would go unto this Ordinance, you would in time hear God speaking peace and
comfort to your Soul.


W. My desires and my fears are such, I know not which exceeds. Fain I would,
but I dare not. It is a grief unto my Soul, when I see the Children of God
approach unto their Fathers Table, and I absent my self, as though not of his
Family* But I am such a sinner, that I dare not go.


S. Why, what a sinner are you?


W. I am the chiefest of Sinners, should I therefore go?


S. So was St. Paul in his own esteem, yet such Christ came to save, 1 Timothy
1.16. God^ mercy and Promise, Christ's merits are as great, yea greater than
your sins, Psalm 103.1^. Mat. 12 31. You have not been a greater Sinner than
Adam, or Manasseh, 2 Chronicles 33.1. to 14 or Mary Magda^en, Luke 7 37, 39. Or at
least, you have not committed more (...) than all these; if you have, yet you
have not committed more sins, than all the sins of all the Elect of G^d, in all
ages of the World amount unto: And has and will God pardon these? And are your
sins yet too great for pardoning a Mercy?


W. O wonderful! I see it is not the greatness or the number of a Sinners
ab^min^tions, that shall keep mercy from him; but these had their hearts of
stone turned into hearts of flesh; but my heart is hard, and like an Adamant,
and it should be a br^ken heart that should behold a broken Christ in the
Sacrament But this I want.


S. Sense of hardness of heart is some degree of softness of heart, Isa 63.17.
Pharaoh complained of his Judgmen^s, not of the hardness of his heart* You are
sensible, and do grieve for the hardness of your heart, or do you not; if you
do not, why then do you complain? if you do, your hardness is not the hardness
that there is in Reprobates, but such as may be, and is, in the People of God:
and this Sacrament is a means to have it softened.


W. This does a little help me, I pray you proceed to discover what things do
difference hardness in a Child of God, from the hardness that is in a wicked
man.


S. Sense of Sin, and of Gods dishonor, a judging of your self for sin, and
unfeigned turning from sin, earnest Prayers for softning grace, a rolling your
self upon Christ, tenderness of Conscience, an holy fear of sinning against
God; holy care to p^ease him, teachableness of heart and holy restlessness till
you have Christ, do distinguish your hardness from the hardness of heart in a
wicked man.


W. How else?


S. Your hardness is occasional not constant; the hardness of a Reprobate is
like the hardness of such stones that are harder by the heat of the Sun* but
your hardness is like the hardness of Ice, that when the Sun does shine upon
it, it is m^lted and d^ssolved.


W. But if I had a heart of flesh, I do not think there would be so much
hardness remaining in me more than others.


S. God cures the ^ardness of his Peoples hearts in their Conversion,
effectually; In Sanctification, gradually; and a^ their dissolution, perfectly;
but not till then.


W. This proves my hardness to be more than the hardness of Gods People,
because I mourn not for my sins as they do, nor can I be so deeply humbled for
it, and what should I do at the Sacrament, if I cannot mourn for sin.


S. Imitate those that mourn most for sin; but you conclude not right, that you
mourn not truly, nor at all, because you mourn no^ gradually, or as much as
others do. The word of God and not the seize of others, must be the Rule
by which you ought to judge of the truth of your mourning for Sin. Besides, if
you do not mourn directly, you mourn reflexively; you mourn that you cannot
mourn, and you pray that you may mourn. Besides, it is not your tears that can
justify you in the sight of God; for if you could mourn more than any, yet you
must be justified freely by the blood of Christ; and so you will when you mourn
truly, though less than some others do.


W. If it be so, then tell me when my mourning for sin is right, and is the
mourning of a true penitent.


S. When you mourn for sin as sin; for all sin, because it is against God,
Psalm. 51.4* as an evil greater than any affliction, Romans 7.24. Paul never cried
out so for the evil of affliction, as he did for the evil of sin. When you
rejoice in the Law of God that does discover it, and bless God he ever wrote
it, and that you ever know it, Romans 7.12. When your mourning for sin makes you
loath it and leave (...), and pr^ze Christ, and hasten to him, to close with
him.


W. This I fear, that my mourning for my sin arises from the fear of Hell.


S. You may quicken your heart to mourn for sin, from the Torments of Hell,
that it has deserved; but that this is not the principal ground of your
mourning, appears, because you can mourn and grieve for other men's sins as well
as for your own, and when you have no thoughts of Hell, and when you have
greatest persuasions of Gods mercy to you, in saving you from wrath to come,
you mourn most; and that you mourn as well for the power and filth of sin, as
for your misery thereby, and are willing to accept of Christ for your Lord* as
well as for your Savior.


W. I do not deny it to be thus with me, that I am willing to accept of Christ
upon any terms* Lord, a Christ upon any terms! But I (...) Christ is not
willing to give himself, nor G^d wi^ling to give his Son to such a one as I;
and what should I do at the Sacrament, if Christ be not willing to give himself
and his benefits unto me?


S. This is the Language of your Unbelief


W. I have enough of that.


S. For it is impossible you should be willing to receive Christ, if Christ
were not willing to give himself to you.


W. Indeed.


S. For you could not be willing, if Christ had not first been willing: And it
is the intolerable pride of your heart, to think that you can be more willing
to be, and receive good, than God and Christ is to give and make you good.
Besides, then such a one may come and plead at the last day, Lord, I am not
damned because I was not willing to accept of Christ, but because thou would
not give Christ to me, when I was willing to receive him.


W. Truly I think there shall be no such plea at the day of judgment.


S. Then your condition is good, if you be willing; for if you be willing to
receive Christ, and God be willing to give him unto you, you have him, and yet
will you not go to commemorate his death?


W. O Lord what strange conviction is this! surely I had Christ and did not
know it: I was happy, and did not perceive it. But alas! no sooner did I
perceive a little light to shine into my Soul, but it is clouded; for my heart
is deceitful, and I may think that I am willing when I am not.


S. Then I do discern you will not suspect, that you your self are not willing,
rather than that God is not will^ng, and so you have more reason to do; but
though your heart be so deceitful, that you cannot understand all the
particular sinful actings of your heart, yet by serious search, and Prayer unto
God, you may know what it is that you do love, desire, and choose above all
things in the world, and what is the general bent and inclination of your heart
and will.


W. I do not know my heart.


S. What would you ask of God, if he should say, Ask any one thing and thou
shall have it.


W. Christ, I think! but still I am afraid lest this should be from love unto
my self, and not unto the Person of Christ.


S. An holy self-love you ought to have, and that is not inconsistent with
predominant love to the person of Christ.


W. How may I know it is holy self-love (that God approves of) that moves me
to be willing to accept of Christ?


S. If you desire Christ to make you holy, as well as to make you happy, and to
free you from the power and dominion, as well as from the punishment and
damnation of your sin.


W If there were no Hell, yet I would not sin against the Lord.


S You have made an answer to your own enquiry.


W. But if I had been willing to accept of Christ, to take down the power of
sin, it would not have been so strong as yet it is, and the power of sin makes
me question the truth of grace.


S. Stength of sin might argue weakness of Grace, but not the nullity of it,
because it might rage, when it does not reign.


W. That I would know, for if sin reign you will sa^ I must not go.


S. True, but if you can say with St. Paul, Romans 7.15. That which I do, I allow
not: For what I would, that do I not; but what I hate that do I, ver. 19. For
the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. You
may the^ conclude with him, v. 20. Now if I do that which I would not, it is no
more I that do it, but sin that dwells (he says not reigns) in me: And if
it rage when it does not reign, you have the more need to go unto the Lord's
Supper, that sin this usurping Tyrant (not your acknowledged Lord) might be
taken down.


W. But sin has great power in my thoughts, for not only vain, but blasphemous
thoughts come frequently crouding in my mind, and I cannot sometimes remove
them.


S. That they have power over your thoughts is your sin, but that they have not
such power over your will, that proves your grace, for you would remove them
when you cannot: And whether they be injected by the Devil, or do arise from
your own heart, if grieved for, groaned under, and striven against, it is no
otherwise with you, than with many others of God's dearest Children.


W. I have long neglected Christ, now it is too late; to what end then should I
go unto this Ordinance?


S. Who told you it was too late? where do you read it? the damned in Hell
might say it is too late, but not you that would have him if you could, and may
have him i^ you will, and have him indeed, because you are willing: And it is
not what you have been, but what you are, and would be, that you must judge
your state by.


W. But if the day of grace be past with me, and the door of mercy shut against
me, it is too late* how then should I be sealed in this Ordinance unto the day
of Redemption:


S. The day of grace is not past with him that would fain have grace above all
earthly riches, nor is the door of mercy shut against him that does set open
the door of his heart for Christ the King of Glory to enter in; and does
importunately pray for the fruits of the Spirit.


W. But alas! I cannot pray, how then should I receive?


S. Though you cannot word your desires, yet you can cry to God, and nothing
will still you but a Christ. As the Infant cannot ask, yet cries for the
Breast. Some might utter words in Prayer, and not pray; and you might want
words, and yet pray fervently, acceptably unto God; for Prayer does not consist
in the exercise of parts, memory, etc. but of grace.


W. I cannot cry to God, my eyes are dry, and cannot drop a tear; sometimes
when I am confessing my sins, though so many and so heinous; when others can
shed many tears for one sin, I cannot shed one tear for many sins.


S. It is so with you but sometimes. Besides as there may be tears in the eyes,
when there is no sorrow in the heart; so when your eye is dry, your heart may
grieve. An Hypocrite, as he may have more words, so he may have more tears in
prayer, than a true Child of God.


W. How then may I judge of my prayers, when I want these outward signs of
sorrow, etc.


S. By your inward frame (...) heart, when you cannot shed a tear, you feel
your heart burdened with, and rising in hatred against your sin? and when you
beg for Christ and Grace, you find your heart sincerely reaching forth after
both Christ and Grace.


W. I do pray indeed, and hear, that I may have Christ, but I doubt all is in
hypocrisy; and that all my duties are the services of an hypocrite; and what
did Judas get by eating with Christ?


S. If you delight to do a duty so, that no man might know that you do it, and
that when you be with others in holy Ordinances, you find you had rather be
affected, and not seem to be so to others, than to seem to be affected, and not
to be so before God, where is your Hypocrisy? Besides, if you do your duties
from a right Principle, love to, and fear of God, in a right manner, viz
humbly, believingly, fervently in the name of Christ, and for a right end, that
you may glorify God, have Communion with him, be made more like unto him, that
you may have more love to him, and more power and strength against your sin,
you are sincere, and not an Hypocrite in your duties.


W. But sometimes I find a secret contentment in my heart, that men take notice
of the outward signs of inward affections, and that when the outward signs are
more than my inward affections; is not that Hypocrisy?


S. Yes it is, and much to be lamented and opposed: Mourn so if you can, that
none but God might perceive it, except when it might be more for the glory of
God, and the edification of another, that your mourning should be manifested
rather than concealed.


W. May such a duty then be accepted of God, that is done in such hypocrisy?


S. Such an Hypocrite a sincere Christian may sometimes be, and is; for as
there is something of Unbelief in one that has says in Christ, and something
of Pride in one that is humble, etc. so there is something of hypocrisy in
every one that is sincere; for in nothing are we perfect as to degrees, while
in this life: Therefore as you must not conclude, that your prayers and duties
are not accepted of God, because there are some actings of Unbelief and Pride
in them; so neither because there is something of Hypocrisy mingled with them
when (as is said) your (...) and manner, and end, in the main be rig^^.


W. I doubt whether the principle of my duties be love to God, or only a
natural Conscience: And if I should go to the Sacrament, and not from a
principle of Love, God would not be pleased with me.


S. And I pray you take heed that no time you do absent your self from Duty
against the dictates of a sanctified, enlightened Conscience.


W. I pray to God I may not: But speak unto my doubt.


S. You may perform duty from a p^inciple of Love, when it is not from a sense
of love: when a natural conscience is the principle, it puts you upon the duty,
but gives you no strength to perform the duty, but the Spirit of God does both.

Natural Conscience is satisfied, if the duty be done: But you are not
satisfied, except God be enjoyed in the duty* Natural Conscience puts on to
duty in time of temporal, or for fear of eternal punishments, but you pray,
etc. That you may please God, have communion with him, and be delivered from
the filth and power of sin: when natural conscience only is the p^inciple; a
Duty i^ done with much backwardness of Heart. Conscience hales and draggs the
Sinner to his knees; but you love it, and delight in Duty, or ^re grieved if
you do not. When natural Conscience only is the principle, if a man can get an
excuse which will silence Conscience, the Duty with gladness is omitted; but if
you are kept (though by lawful cause) from a Duty, it is some grief and trouble
to your Soul, and nothing but what is weighty, and judged by you to be a Duty
also, shall divert you from the Ordinances of God. Are you not yet satisfied,
in this, tha^ you may go unto the Lords Supper.


W. I have proposed to you the chiefest grounds of my doubts and fears, and for
the present, in some measure, have some hopes that God has done some special
work upon my heart.


S. Then I hope you will make Conscience of this duty, that it may be promoted,
and carried on in your Soul.


W. I shall further consider of what you have said, and shall beg of God his
holy Spirit, that I may know the things which are freely given (if given) to me
of God: And if I shall by further searching of my Heart, and prayer unto God,
be convinced that it is my duty, I will no more absent my self.


S. I should rejoice to go see you there.


W. But I find my heart is too slight and careless in what I know to be my
duty, I would therefore understand how I may get my heart to be diligent and
serious in preparing for it.


S. When you are to go unto this Ordinance, endeavor to confess your sins, and
to pray for Pardon, and for Christ, and Grace, as earnestly as you would do if
you were then to die; Prepare as you would do if Christ himself were to deliver
it to you, as if men could look into your heart, as i^ God should strike you
dead with the br^ad in your mouth, or with the cup in your hand, if you come
unworthily; as if it were the last time you should receive it, and go and stand
at God's Tribunal when you have done, as i^ a Soul that has been damned for
profaning of the blood of Christ should come unto you, and tell you what he is
suffering in Hell for this his sin; as if Christ should call to you from
Heaven, and mark you out, and make you know if you come unpreparedly, (see P.
92, etc.) but this is (...) discourage you from the duty, but to qui^ken your
heart to greater diligence in order thereunto.


W. (...) then must I prepare my self?


S For this I refer you to the Book it self, ( Page 109, etc.) and to the
former Dialogue.


W. I shall not then any longer keep you from your other businesses.


S. The God of Heaven guide you in this work, and smile upon your Soul, when
you shall be present at his Table.


A Dialogue between one Believer that has Assurance, and another that has
Hopes, and another that is under D^ubtings of the Love of God, and of good by
the Sacrament, as they come away from the Lord's Table.
Assure. WAs not this he that came from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah,
whom we have seen glorious in his Apparel, traveling in the greatness of his
strength, mighty to save us from our sins, that were mighty to condemn us?


Hope. This is he, who being red in his apparel, having his garments dyed with
Blood, with his own blood, with his own heart blood, does save us from our
scarlet crimson sins.


A Was not this he whom Judas did betray, whom Peter did deny, whom all
forsook, whom the Jews did crucify, whom the Soldiers pierced, that suffered
so much from men, from Devils, and from God himself?


H. This is he, who (I trust was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our Justification. This is he who being in the form of God, thought
it no robbery to be equal with God, but made him self of no reputation, and
took upon him- the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of man, and
being sound in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and b^came obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross.


Doubt. Certainly this was a righteous man^ the Son of God, willing and able to
save to the uttermost all these that come unto God by him, who once died upon
the Cross, but ever lives to make Intercession for them.


H. We have seen the Prince of Life did die, the Lord of Glory exposed to open
shame; we have seen his blood streaming down, and through the holes made in his
side have looked into his heart; what did you see in his blessed heart?


A. I saw a fight of love, a fire, a flame of love. When for our sins I saw
this blood flowing from his heart, I saw love still abiding there; my Lord
would part with his most precious blood, but not with his Love unto his People:
I saw I was not only gravened upon the palms of his hands, or set as a Seal
upon his Arm, but I was pourtrayed upon his Heart. The High Priest, that was a
Type of Christ, did bear the Names of the Twelve Tribes of Israel in the
Breast Plate in or upon twelve precious Stones; but I did see that our great
High Priest does bear the Names of his Elect gravened in his precious heart:
And when I did read my Name amongst the rest, what joy and comfort filled my
Soul, I am not able to express: His love was stronger than death, the coals
thereof were as coals of fire which had a most vehement flame, and methoughts
when I drew near unto i^, I felt my heart begin to warm. All the waters of
affliction, and sufferings, and sorrows which he endured, could not quench his
love; for he was resolved to ransom and redeem all that were given to him of
the Father.


H. And do not the thoughts of this blood that was shed, and of the virtue and
efficacy thereof exceedingly delight your Soul?


A When I consid^r that this blood which was shed upon the Cross, is pleading
for me in Heaven, that by this blood God is reconciled, Sin expiated, Death and
the Devil conquered, it makes me to cry out, Never love like this! Never any
like to this!


H. In this God manifested his love unto us, that he sent his only begotten Son
into the world to die that we might live through him.


A. Herein God recommendeth his love to us, that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us; and this Love of God unto my Soul. It is sweet, it is
exceeding sweet, beyond, beyond the sweetness of the honey, or the honeycomb.


H. His Love is better than Wine! a bundle of Myrrh is my beloved unto me, he
shall lie all night betwix^ my breasts.


A. As the Apple tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the
Sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet
unto my taste; he brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me
was love.


D. O stay me with Flagg^ns, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love!


A. Thou have ravished my heart, my Lord, my Savior, thou have ravished my
heart, while with an eye of Faith I have seen thy blood streaming from thy
heart to wash me from my sins.


D. With what admiring thoughts of the Love of God do these come away from the
Supper of the Lord!


A. Oh the height, the depth, the length, the breadth of the love of God! we
know it, we know it, and yet indeed it passes knowledge.


H By the Death and Resurrection of this crucified Lord, we have a lively hope
of an incorruptible Crown, he was crowned with Thorns, that we might have ^
Crown of Glory.


D. O Lord, how dull and dead am I, who have been there, where these have been,
but have not found what they have found!


H Why do you weep?


A. Do you weep for ^oy, or grief?


D. Who can but weep, when God does frown? you may say, his loving kindness is
better than life, and I can say, his frowns are worse than death.


H. Did you not fin^ Christ attemp^ing to get into your heart, to come down
from the Cross into your heart?


D. He knocked indeed, but I was sleeping.


H. Do you find no stirrings of aff^^ctions when Christ's hand was upon the
lock, and put hi^ hand into the hole of the Door of your hear^?


D. He put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my Bowels were m^ved for
him.


H. Why did you not set open then the everlasting gates of your Soul, that this
King of Glory might have entered in?


D. I rose up to open to him whom I desire to love, and my hands dropped with
Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the Lock.


H. How was it then you missed of him?


D. At first I was not heedful to let him in, whereby I grieved him, when I
made him stand without: Afterward I rose to open to him whom I would love, but
he had withdrawn himself; w^ me, he was withdrawn; my soul failed when he
spoke: I sought him in every part of the duty afterward, but I could not find
him; I called after him, but he gave me no Answer.


A. O Lord, what am I! a vile and worthless sinner, that thou revealest thy
heart and love to me when it is secret unto others.


H. I began to be dejected, when I saw how short I came of your joy and
comfort; but when I see his doubts and fears, I bless the Lord who has given
me some hopes of his favor and his love.


D. How is it that you come away with such hopes of mercy to your Soul?


H. When I knew my sin and misery, and the mercy of God to poor Sinners,
through the merits of his Son; when I did read Gods invitations, and commands
that I should come to Christ, and prom^se of pardon if I did; and in the
Sacrament have seen God setting to his Seal. I willingly cast away my sins; and
cast my self down at the foot of mercy; resting upon the merits of Christ, I
did, and do hope that God will not cast away my Soul from him, nor exclude me
from his Kingdom.


D. Then you have not yet got assurance of the Love of God, nor a full
persuasion of Gods mercy in the pardon of your sin, and salvation of your s^ul?


H. No, because though I do not question the truth of Gods promises, nor his
willingness to receive repenting Sinners, yet I am not without doubts and
j^alousies of the truth of my Faith, Repentance, etc.


D. And yet can you hope for Heaven?


H. Yes, because it is pleasing unto God, that we should trust him, when we are
not sure of our interest in him, and to see sinners hoping in his mercy.


A. And yet do you hope your hope is true?


H. Yes, because I find it puts me on to purify my heart?


H. And how is it that you come away with such assurance of the love of God and
eternal life?


A. When I had found the truth of my Faith in Christ, love to God, and hatred
unto sin, and the promises that God had made to such in Christ, I did, and do
believe, that as surely as I did eat the bread, and drink the wine; so surely
has God pardoned my sins and will save my Soul.


D. And does this alone give you this evidence of your title to his Kingdom,
and fill you with this joy?


A No, but moreover I did find the Spirit of God bearing witness to, and with
my spirit, that it was thus with me; and oh how sweet was Christ then to my
Soul!


D When did you find your heart thus raised in the apprehensi^ns of Gods love
to you?


A. When I saw the Bread broken, and heard the Minister say, Thus was Christ's
Body broken for you; and saw him pour out the Wine, and heard him say, Thus was
the Blood of Christ shed for you; and when ^e did distribute both, and I did
take and eat, did take and drink, I did believe that God was really, though
invisibly dealing forth his Son, and all his benefits to me, as well as unto
others; and I was enabled to apply him particularly to my self, and take him as
my own: Then, Oh then my heart was warmed with love, and filled with joy.


D. When else?


A. When the Congregation was singing forth the praises of the Lord, my Soul
being satisfied as with marrow and fatness, my mouth, my heart, my All did
praise him; and now my love, my faith, my joy, my sorrow for my sin, were
stirring in my heart.


D. And how do you know that this is true and spiritual joy, and not such which
an Hypocrit^ might have at the Table of the Lord?


A. Because I find it does engage me to inward and to universal holiness,
inflames my heart with love to God and Christ, increases my hatred to my sin,
and makes me more watchful against it, and makes my soul to long after full and
perfect enjoyment of God in glory.


D. I am glad and do rejoice in your mercy, while I must bewail my own
unprofitableness, even at the Table of the Lord; I must go home and eat my
bread with a sorrowful heart, and mingle my drink with tears, while you can go
and eat your bread with a cheerful spirit.


A: Nay, but go and examine your Soul, what good and benefit you have received
by this Ordinance, and give to God the glory of it.


D. Might one that has not got assurance of the Love of God, nor been filled
with joy, conclude he has got good by the Lord's Supper.


H. Yes, or else I must go home and weep for this as well as you.


D. How does that appear?


H. Because God does work variously upon diverse Persons, and variously upon the
same Person at diverse times. Sometimes he breaks the heart for sin, and
reserves his comforts for another time: If you do not find your heart inflamed
with love and filled with joy, yet if you do find your heart to rise more in
hatred unto sin, and to be grieved for it, and more resolve and watch against
it, you have received benefit by this Ordinance.


D. Then I must take heed of the stratagems of the Devil, that, as he might not
cause me to conclude, I have that which I have not; so neither to deny that I
have not that which through mercy God has given to me.


H. That will be your wisdom, because it will be your way to get more from God,
by being thankful for a little: God will another time give you peace and
comfort, if now you will give him thanks that you have wept for your sin, and
been grieved for the same.


D. O Lord! my heart begins to warm; I think the Sacrament may work and affect
my heart, after I am come away, though I was dull when I was there.


A* So it may, and so I have sometimes found i^, though to day God has
wonderfulfully smilled upon such a vile unworthy sinner as I am.


H. I would advise you to take heed, that you do not conclude, that you have no
benefit at all because you have not so much as you expected and desired, or so
much as you s^e other Christians to have; or that you have it not in that
particular or kind that you looked for; or though you did not sensibly perceive
it in the very act of receiving.


D. But what may be the cause that I found no more of God in the time of this
Ordinance.


H. It may be you were too slight in your Preparations for this Duty; or if
enlarged in them you trusted too much to them, and less to Christ than you
should have done; or were not watchful in the time of the Ordinance, or do too
much favor some peculiar sin; and God withholds what you expected, that you
might mend that with which he is offended.


D. This will be mercy, if I missed of Comfort, that I may have less of sin;
and shall desire of the Lord, that I may find some good by the Ordinance, and
your Discourse, now I do go in.


A. Stay, one word more, and that is, that we all remember the Obligations that
do lie upon us to walk suitably to the Privileges we are made partakers of by
the death of Christ.


H. That is well remembered, for we are apt to forget to make returns to God,
when we have received great things from him.


D. That will do well, for then it may be I might feel more the efficacy of
this Ordinance, than yet I have done.


A. Yes you may, and therefore let us all consider, and bear it upon our
hearts, where we have been this day, and how we have renewed our Covenant with
God, and that his Vows are upon us, and his eyes to observe how we shall walk,
and live after we have had, or do hope for peace and joy in him; and that we
watch each other, that where any of us fail, the other will reprove in love,
and restore him with a Spirit of meekness.


H. All this will be needful.


A. The Lord enable us by his Grace to discharge what God commands, that we may
expect what he does promise in his Word, and has sealed to us in this
Sacrament.


FINIS.
The Contents.
THE parts contained in the Text. Page 1 The conclusion handled in this
Treatise. Page 9 It is a necessary Duty incumbent upon Believers to receive the
Lords Supper. Page 9 Explained. Page 10 Proved. Page 13 Urged. Page 20 The
Argument and difference of the Passover and the Lords Supper. Page 15 How we
are to remember Christ's death in the Lords Supper, in six particu^ars Page 18
Twelve Questions propounded to those Believers that neglect the Lords Supper.
Page 22 Three doubts that hinder weak Christians from receiving, resolved. Page
28 to 34 Believers ought often to receive, etc. urged in ten particulars. Page
35 to 39 Preparation for, must precede participation of the Lords Supper, in
eight particulars. Page 39 to 58 Nine serious Questions proposed to stir up
Believers to prepare for it. Page 58 to 73 Directions for prepartion. 1.
Examination of our spiritual state. ibid. 2. Meditation of several things to
excite our Graces before we go. Page 95 3. So^emn Prayer. Page 100 4. A
Discourse Page 21
How a Believer is to eye the blood of Christ at the Lords Table, where twenty
properties of the Blood of Christ. page 103 The Exercise of Faith on the Blood
of Christ at the Lords Table. In Appealing to God, ^18 to 123 In R^plying to
Satan. ^18 to 123 In Applying to our selves. ^18 to 123
The Exercise of Love, Desire, etc. Page 126 The necessity of Examination after
the Sacrament, and the Evil if the neglect thereof, in fourteen particulars.
Page 131 Six Reasons why some get no benefit by the Lords Supper. Page 140
Twelve Evidences of good obtained in the Sacrament. Page 145 Four Cautions to
prevent mistakes in this Enquiry. Page 146 What we must do if we be better by
it. Page 149 What we must do if we he not better by it. ibid. Of giving
diligence to live suitably to Sacramental Obliga^ions. Page 152 Four Reasons
why we should live suitably to the Engagements of this Sacrament. Page 153 Six
Directions how we should live suitably to the Engagements of this Sacrament.
Page 155 More Directions how we should live suitably to the Engagements of this
Sacrament. Page 156 Eight aggravations if we do not live suitably to the
Engagements of this Sacrament. Page 158 to 160

