ACTS AND LAWS, Of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in
New England.



BOSTON.

Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, (Printers to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL,) for, and Sold by Michael Perry at his Shop over against
the Townhouse, and Benjamin Eliot under the West End of the Townhouse. 1699.

Reprinted, By Order of His Excellency the Governor, Council and Assembly.

Isaac Addington Secr.

Acts and Laws, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston the
Eighth of June 1692. and continued by Adjournment unto the Twelfth day of
October following.
An Act for Building with Stone or Brick in the Town of Boston, and preventing
Fire.
WHEREAS Great Desolations and Ruins have s^ndry times happened by Fire
breaking out in the Town of Boston, principally occasioned by reason of the
joining and nearness of the Buildings, being mostly of Timber, and covered with
Shingle.

For the better preventing of such Accidents for the future, and Damage and
Loss thereby.

Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly. And it is Enacted by the Authority of
the same, That henceforth no Dwelling House, Buildings in Boston to be of Brick
or Stone, and covered with Slate.
Shop, Warehouse, Barn, Stable, or any other Housing of more than Eight Feet
in Length, or Breadth, and Seven Feet in Height, shall be Erected and Set up
in Boston, but of Stone or Brick, and covered with Slate or Tyle, unless in
particular cases where necessity requires; being so judged and signified in
writing under the Hands of the Justices and Select-men of the said Town, or
major part of both; the Governor with the Advice and Consent of the Council
shall see cause to Grant License unto any person to Build with Timber, or cover
with Shingle. And if any person shall presume to Erect, Governor and Council
to grant License to Build with Timber in Case.

Penalty for transgressing this Act.


or cause to be Erected, any Frame or Building contrary hereto; upon Conviction
thereof, before two Justices of Peace ( Quorum Unus) such Building shall be
deemed a common Nuisance, and the Owner of such Frame or Building shall enter
into a Recognizance to Demolish the same; and in Default of Entering into such
Recognizance, shall be Committed to Prison, until he do cause the same to be
Demolished; or else such Building shall be Demolished by Order of the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace within the said County, and the Charges thereof to be
Levied by Distress, and Sale of such Offenders Goods, by Warrant from the Court
of Quarter Sessions.

And it is further Ordered and Enacted, That in all Void and Unbuilt Places,
which shall hereafter be improved for Building, or when at any time any total
Consumption or Desolation shall happen in any Street or Lane within the said
Town, Justices and Select-men ^o lay out ^treets, etc.
it shall be in the power of the Justices of the Peace of said Town then in
being, together with the Select-Men, or the major part of both, to State and
Lay out such Streets, Ways and Passages, as may be most for the Convenience and
Accommodation of the Place: As also where any Desolation has happened, to
Regulate and Enlarge other narrow and crooked Lanes or Passages. AND where any
particular persons shall have their Land taken awa^ or lessened thereby; a Jury
of Twelve Men shall be appointed by two J^stices o^ the Peace, and Sworn to
Ascertain the value thereof, A Jury to Ascertain the value of any Persons Land
laid to any Street.
to be paid b^ the person, to whose Land the same shall be added, or by the
Neighbou^hood or Town, in proportion to the benefit or convenience any shall
have thereby. And every person Building as aforesaid with Brick or Stone, shall
have liberty to Set half his Partition Wall in his Neighbors Ground, so that
he leave Toothing in the Corners of such Walls for his Neighbor to adjoyn
unto, who when he shall Build, such Neighbor adjoining, shall pay for one half
of the said Partition Wall, so far as it shall be Built against. And in case of
any Difference arising, the Select men shall have power to appoint meet persons
to value the same, Party Wall to stand half in the Neighbors ground.
or lay out the Line between such Neighbors. And whereas several Houses and
other Buildings have been Erected and Set up since the year 1688. contrary to
the Law made by the General Court of the Massachusetts Colony.

It is hereby Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Owner
of such House and Buildings so Set up, contrary to said Law, shall cause the
same to be Covered with Slate or Tyle; or otherwise such Houses or Buildings
shall be deemed a common Nuisance, and the Owner thereof Proceeded against
accordingly.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That when
any Fire shall happen to break out either in Boston, or any other Town within
this Province, Two or three of the chief Military Officers to order the pulling
down or blowing up of Houses to stop Fire.
two or three of the Chief Military or Civil Officers of the same Town, shall,
or may, and hereby are Empowered to give Directions for the pulling down, or
blowing up any such House or Houses that shall be by them adjudged meet to be
pulled down or blown up, for the stopping and preventing the further Spreading
of the same. And if it shall happen that the pulling down or blowing up any
such House or Houses by the Directions aforesaid, shall be the occasion of
stopping the said Fire, or that the Fire stop before it come to the same. That
then all and every Owner of such House or Houses, shall Receive reasonable
Satisfaction, and be paid for the same, by the rest of the Inhabitants, whose
Houses shall not be Burnt; who are hereby Empowered to make such Rate or Rates,
for the Raising and Lovying such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be thought
convenient by the Select-men and Justices of said Town for that end. Where the
Fire is stopped by pulling down or blowing up any House the Owner to be paid.


Provided always, That if the House where the Fire shall first Begin and Break
out, shall be adjudged fit to be pulled down or blown up to hinder the further
spreading and increase of the same. That then the Owner of such House shall
receive no manner of Satisfaction for the same. Any thing in this Act contained
notwithstanding.

An Act for the Settlement and Distribution of the Estates of Intestates.
WHEREAS Estates in these Plantations do consist chiefly of Lands which have
been subdued and brought to Improvement, by the Industry and Labor of the
Proprietors, with the Assistance of their Children, the younger Children
generally having been longest and most Serviceable into their Parents in that
behalf; who have not Personal Estate to give out unto them in Portions or
otherwise to Recompense their Labor.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Court or Assembly. And it is Ordained by
the Authority of the same, That every person lawfully Seized of an^ Lands,
Persons Seized of Lands in see simple may dispose of the same by will, etc.
Tenements, or Hereditaments within this Province, in his own proper right in
Fee Simple, shall have power to give, dispose, and devise, as well by his Last
Will and Testament in Writing, as otherwise by any Act Executed in his Life,
all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to and among his Children or
others, as he shall think fit at his Pleasure. And if no such Disposition, Gift
or Devise be made by the Owner of any such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments;
the same shall be subject to a Division, with his Personal Estate, and be a
like Distributed, according to the Rules herein after Expressed for Intestate
Estates. And when and so often as it shall happen, That any person dies
Intestate; Administration of such Intestates, Administrators to the Estate of
Intestates how to be granted.
Goods and Estate shall be granted unto the Widow or next of Kin to the
Intestate, or both, as the Judge for Probate of Wills, and granting of
Administrations shall think fit, who shall thereupon take Bond with Sureties in
manner as is directed by the Statute of the Twenty Second and Twenty Third of
Charles the Second, and shall and may proceed to call such Administrators to
account for, and touching the Goods of the Intestate: And upon due Hearing and
Consideration thereof, (Debts, Funeral and just Expenses of all sorts being
first allowed) the said Judge shall, and hereby is fully Empowered to Order and
make a just Distribution of the Surplusage, or remaining Goods and Estate as
well Real as Personal in manner following: That is to say, One Third Part of
the Personal Estate to the Wife of the Intestate for ever, besides her Dower or
Thirds in the Houses and Lands during Life, where such Wife shall not be
otherwise Endowed before Marriage, Distribution of Intestate Estates.
and all the Residue of the Real and Personal Estate by Equal Portions to and
among his Children, and such as shall Legally Represent them; (if any of them
be dead) other than such Children, who shall have any Estate by Settlement of
the Intestate in his life time equal to the others Shares. Children advanced by
Settlement, or Portions not equal to the others Shares, to have so much of the
Surplusage as shall make the Estate of all to be Equal, except the Eldest Son
then Surviving, (where there is no Issue of the First born or of any other
Elder Son) who shall have two Shares, or a double portion of the whole; and
where there are no Sons, the Daughters shall Inherit as Coparceners. The
Division of the Houses and Lands to be made by five sufficient Freeholders upon
Oath, or any Three of them, to be Appointed and Sworn by the Judge for that
end: unless where all the Parties Interested in any Estate being Legally
capable to Act, shall mutually agree of a Division among themselves, and
present the same in Writing under their Hands and Seals; in which case, such
Agreement shall be accepted and allowed for a Settlement of such Estate, and be
accounted valid in Law, being Acknowledged by the Parties Subscribing before
the Judge, and put upon Record.

Provided Nevertheless, Houses and Lands not capable of Division, to be ordered
unto the Eldest Son, he paying out proportionable parts to the other Children.
That where any Estate in Houses and Lands cannot be divided among all the
Children, without great prejudice to, or spoiling of the whole; being so
Represented, and made to appear unto the said Judge, the Judge may order the
whole unto the Eldest Son, if he accept it, or to any other of the Sons
successively, upon his Refusal: He paying unto the other Children of the
Deceased, their equal and proportionable Parts or Shares of the true value of
such Houses and Lands. Upon a just Apprizement thereof, to be made by Three
Sufficient Freeholders upon Oath, to be Appointed and Sworn as aforesaid, or
giving good Security to pay the same in some convenient time, as the said Judge
shall Limit, making reasonable allowance in the interim, not exceeding six per
Cent. per Annum. And if any of the Children happen to Dye, In case there be no
Children nor legal Representative of them, the Estate to be allotted to the
Wife and next of Kin.
before he or she come of Age, or be Married; the Portion of such Child
Deceased, shall be equally divided among the Survivors.

And in case there be no Children, nor any Legal Representatives of them, then
one Moiety of the Personal Estate shall be allotted to the Wife of the
Intestate for ever; and one Third of the Real Estate, for Term of Life. The
Residue both of the Real and Personal Estate, equally to every of the next of
Kin of the Intestate, in equal degree, and those who Legally Represent them. No
Representatives to be admitted among Colaterals after Brothers and Sisters
Children. And if there be no Wife, all shall be Distributed among the Children,
and if no Child, to the next of Kin to the Intestate in equal degree, and their
Legal Representatives as aforesaid, and in no other manner whatsoever. And
every one to whom any Share shall be allotted, shall give Bond with Sureties
before the said Judge of Probate; if Debts, afterward be made to appear, Right
of Appeal Saved.
to Refund and Pay back to the Administrator, his or her Ratable part thereof,
and of the Administrators Charges. The Widows Thirds or Dower in the Real
Estate, at the Expiration of her Term to be alike Divided as aforesaid. Saving
to any Person agrieved at any Order, Sentence or Decree made for the Settlement
and Distribution of any Intestate Estate, See Explanatory Act page*
their Right of Appeal unto the Governor and Council. Every Person so
Appealing, giving Security to Prosecute the Appeal with Effect.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Executor or
Executors of the Will of any Person deceased, knowing of their being so named
and appointed, shall not within the space of thirty days next after the Decease
of the Testator, Executors to cause Probate of Wills to be made in thirty days
next after the Testators Death.
cause such Will to be proved, and Recorded in the Registers Office, of the
same County where the Deceased Person last dwelt; or present the said Will, and
declare his or their refusal of the Executorship. Every Executor so neglecting
of his or her Trust and Duty in that behalf, (without just Excuse made and
accepted for such delay) shall forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds per Month, from
and after the Expiration of the said Thirty Days, until he or they shall cause
Probate of such Will to be made, or present the same as aforesaid. Every such
Forfeiture to be had and recovered by Action, Penalty for Neglect.
or Information, in the Inferior Court of Pleas, in the same County: And to be
disposed of, one Moiety thereof, to the use of the Poor of the Town, where the
Deceased Person last dwelt; and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
Inform and Sue for the same. And upon any such refusal of the Executor, or
Executors, the Judge shall commit Administration of the Estate of the Deceased,
Upon Refusal Administration to be committed: cum Testamento annexo.
Cum Testamento annexo unto the Widow or next of Kin to the Deceased, and upon
their refusal, to one or more of the Principal Creditors, as he shall think fit.

And if any person or Persons shall Alienate or Imbezel any of the Goods or
Chattels of any person Deceased, before he or they have taken out Letters of
Administration, and Exhibited a true Inventory of all the known Estate of the
Party Deceased. Every person or persons so acting, shall stand Chargeable, and
be liable to the Actions of the Creditors and other persons grieved, Executors
by wrong.
as being Executors in their own wrong. And the Judge shall cause a-Citation to
be made out unto the Widow, or next of Kin; and upon their Neglect of
appearance, or refusal, may Commit Administration of any such Estate, to some
one or more of the chief Creditors, if accepted by them, or others, as he shall
think fit, upon their refusal.

And whereas, according to the former practice of the Courts, Bonds for due
Administration of the Estates of Intestates, were taken in the Name of the
County Treasurer, and the Obligation made to him, his Successors in said Office
or Assigns; many of which are still depending.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Judge for Probate
of Wills, and Granting of Administrations* in the Counties respectively: Bonds
for Administration to the County Treasurer, to be put in Suit by the Judge.
be, and hereby are fully Empowered and Authorized, to call all such
Administrators to account, and if need be, to put the said Bonds or any of them
in Suit, who shall be, and hereby are to be held and esteemed the Assignees of
the County Treasurer in that behalf to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes
in the Law whatsoever.

An Act for Prevention of Frauds and Perjuries.
FOR Prevention of many Fraudulent Practices which are commonly endeavored to
be upheld by Perjury, and Subornation of Perjury.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court, and by the Authority of the same, That from and
after the last day of December in this present Year One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Two. All Leases, Estates, Interests of Freehold, or Term of Years,
or any uncertain Interest of, in, Parole Leases and Interest of Freehold shall
have the force of Estates at will only.
or out of any Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, made or created
by Livery and Seisin only, or by Parole, and not put in writing and Signed by
the Parties, so making or creating of the same, or their Agents thereunto
lawfully Authorized by writing, shall have the Force and Effect of Leases, or
Estates at will only, and shall not either in Law or Equity be deemed or taken
to have any other or greater Force or Effect; any consideration for making any
such Parole Leases or Estates, or any former Law or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Except nevertheless, Except Leases not exceeding three years, etc.
all Leases not exceeding the Term of Three Years from the making thereof,
whereupon the Rent Reserved to the Landlord, during such Term shall amount unto
two third parts at the least of the full improved value of the thing Demised.

And moreover, That no Leases, Estates or Interests, either of Freehold, No
Leases or Estates of Freehold to be granted or surrendered by word.
or Term of Years, or any uncertain Interest of, in, to or out of any
Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, shall at any time after the said
last day of December, be Assigned, Granted or Surrendered, unless it be by Deed
or Note in Writing, Signed by the Party so Assigning, Granting or Surrendering
the same, or their Agents thereunto lawfully Authorized by Writing, or by Act
and Operation of Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said last day of December, Promises and Agreements by Parole.
no Action shall be brought whereby to Charge any Executor or Administrator
upon any special Promise to answer Damages out of his own Estate, (2) or
whereby to Charge the Defendant upon any special Promise to answer for the
Debt, Default or Miscarriages of another person, (3) or to charge any person
upon any Agreement made upon consideration of Marriage, (4) or upon any
Contract or Sale of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or any Interest in, or
concerning them; (5) or upon any Agreement that is not to be performed within
the space of one year from the making thereof; (6) unless the Agreement upon
which such Action shall be brought, or some Memorandum or Note thereof shall be
in Writing, and Signed by the Party, to be Charged therewith, or some (...)
person thereunto by him lawfully Authorized.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said last day of December, Devises of Lands to be in Writing and attested by
three or four Witnesses.
all Devises and Bequests of any Lands or Tenements, shall be in Writing, and
Signed by the Party so Devising the same, or by some other person in his
presence, and by his express Directions, and shall be Attested and Subscribed
in the presence of the said Devisor, by three or four credible Witnesses, or
else shall be utterly void and of none Effect.

And moreover, no Devise in Writing of Lands, How the same shall be revocable.
Tenements or Hereditaments, or any Clause thereof, shall at any time after the
said last day of December, be Revocable, otherwise then by some other Will or
Codicil in Writing, or other Writing declaring the same, or by Burning,
Cancelling, Tearing or Obliterating the same by the Testator himself, or in his
presence, and by his directions and consent; (2) But all Devises and Bequests
of Lands and Tenements shall remain and continue in full force, until the same
be Burnt, Cancelled, Torn or Obliterated by the Testator, or his Direction in
manner aforesaid, or unless the same be altered by some other Will or Codicil
in Writing, or other Writing of the Devisor, Signed in the presence of three or
four Witnesses, declaring the same; any former Law or Usage to the contrary
Notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said last day of December, all Declarations or Creations of Trusts, All
Declarations or Creations of Trust to be in Writing.
or Confidences of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, shall be manifested
and proved by some Writing, Sign^d by the Party who is by Law enabled to
declare such Trust, or by his last Will in Writing, or else they shall be
utterly void and of none effect.

Provided always, That where any Conveyance shall be made of any Lands or
Tenements, by which a Trust or Confidence shall or may arise or result by the
Implication or Construction of Law, Trusts arising, transferred or extinguished
by implication of Law excepted.
or be Transferred or Extinguished by an Act or Operation of Law, then, and in
every such case, such Trust or Confidence shall be of the like Force and Effect
as the same would have been, if this Act had not been made; any thing herein
before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That all Grants and Assignments of any Trust or
Confidence, Assignments of Trust shall be in writing.
shall likewise be in Writing, Signed by the Party, Granting or Assigning the
same by such Last Will or Devise, or else shall be utterly void and of none
Effect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said last day of December, Contract for Sale of Goods for Ten Pounds or more.
No Contract for the Sale of any Goods, Wares and Merchandises, for the price
of Ten Pounds, or upwards, shall be allowed to be good, except the Buyer shall
accept part of the Goods so Sold, and actually receive the same, or give
something in Earnest to bind the Bargain, or in part of payment, or that some
Note or Memorandum in Writing of the said Bargain, be Made and Signed by the
Parties to be Charged by such Contract, or their Agents thereunto lawfully
Authorized.

And for prevention of Fraudulent Practices, in Setting up Nuncupative Wills,
which have been the occasion of much Perjury. Nuncupative Wills.


Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the aforesaid
last day of December, Not to be good for above the value of Thirty Pounds, that
is not proved by the Oaths of three Witnesses.
No Nuncupative Will shall be good, where the Estate thereby Bequeathed, shall
exceed the value of Thirty Pounds, that is not proved by the Oaths of Three
Witnesses (at the least) that (...) present at the making thereof, nor unless
it be proved that the Testator at the time of pronouncing the same, did bid the
persons present, or some of them bear witness, that such was his Will, or to
that effect; nor unless such Nuncupative Will were made in the time of the last
Sickness of the Deceased, and in the House of his or their Habitation or
Dwelling, or where he or she has been Resident, for the space of ten days or
more, next before the making of such Will, except where such person was
surprised or taken Sick, being from his own Home, and Dyed before he returned
to the place of his or her Dwelling.

And be it further Enacted, That after six months passed after the speaking of
the pretended Testamentary Words, no Testimony shall be received to prove any
Will Nuncupative, except the said Testimony, No Testimony to be received to
prove such Will after six months, Except etc.
or the Subs^ance thereof were committed to writing within six days after the
making o^ the said Will.

And be it further Enacted, That no Letters Testamentary, or Probate of any
Nuncupative Will, shall pass the Seal of any Court, till fourteen days at the
least after the Decease of the Testator, be fully expired, nor shall any
Nuncupative Will be at any time received to be proved, Probate of Nuncupative
Wills.
unless Process have first issued to call in the Widow, or next of Kindred to
the Deceased, to the end they may contest the same, if they please.

And be it further Enacted, That no Will in Writing, concerning any Goods or
Chattels, or Personal Estate, shall be Repealed; nor shall any Clause, No
written Will to be (...) out by writing.
Devise or Bequest therein, be altered or changed by any Words, or Will by word
of mouth only, except the same be in the Life of the ^estator, committed to
Writing, and Read to the Testator, and allow^ (...) him, and proved to be so
done by Three Witnesses at the least.

Provided always, Soldiers and Mariners Wills excepted.
That notwithstanding this Act, any Soldier being* in actual Military Service,
or any Mariner or Seaman being at Sea, may dispose of his Movables, Wages, and
Personal Estate, as he or they might have done before the making of this Act.

An Act for Affirming of former Judgments, and providing for Executions.
WHEREAS upon Trials had in the late Courts of Judicature within the several
Colonies, now by Their Majesty's Royal Charter United and Incorporated into one
Province, by the name of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, several
Judgments were obtained, of which Execution remains to be done, and some others
are depending by Appeal, according to the course and practice of the Courts
then in being. To the end that there be no failure of Justice for want of a due
course of Law, for the prosecuting, obtaining and levying of the same.

Be it Enacted and Or^ained by the Governor, Council and Representati^es,
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same* That
where any Appeal as aforesaid is depending, having not been heard; every such
Appellant shall have a Summons from the Clerk of the Superior Court, unto the
adverse party, to be Served upon him seven days inclusive before the Courts
sitting, requiring him to appear (...) the first Superior Court, to answer the
said Appeal; where the same shall be heard and tried according to former Usage
upon the first Evidence and no other: And the Judgment to be affirmed or
reversed as the Case shall there be Judged upon Trial. And if the Appellant
neglect to appear, or prosecute his Appeal, the former Judgment shall be
affirmed, and Execution awarded accordingly.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where Judgment has
passed in any County Court, or Court of Commissioners, and Execution has not
been taken out and levied for satisfying of the same; the Party for whom any
Judgment was so given, his Executors or Administrators shall have a Writ of
Scire Facias from the Clerk of the Inferior Court of Pleas within the same
County, in which such Judgment was obtained, unto the adverse party to appear
before said Court, to show cause (if any there be) why Execution should not
issue-forth. And in case of Nonappearance, or that sufficient cause be not
shown to the Court, the former Judgment shall be affirmed, and Execution
granted accordingly, the Costs of this Trial to be added unto the same.
Provided that the said Writ of Scire Facias be Served seven days inclusive
before the Courts sitting.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That after one year
expired next after giving Judgment in any Court o^ Record within this Province,
No Execution after one year expired, to be granted without a scire facias*
no Execution for such Judgment shall be Issued out, until a Writ of Scire
Facias has been granted out of the same Court, and Served upon the adverse
party, as is before directed, or left by the Sheriff, his Undersheriff or
Deputy, at his Dwelling, or place of usual and last Abode, requiring him to
appear and show cause (if any he have) why Execution ought not to be done. And
upon his Nonappearance, or not showing of sufficient cause as aforesaid; the
Court shall thereupon award Execution.

An Act for Regulating the Assize of Cask, and preventing Deceit in Packing of
Fish, Beef, and Pork for Sale.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and after
the first Day of December next, all sorts and kinds of Thight Cask used for any
Liquor, Fish, Beef, Pork or any other Commodities, within this Their Majesty's
Province, Assize of Cask.
shall be of London Assize. That is to say, Butts to contain One Hundred and
Twenty Six Gallons, Puncheons Eighty Four Gallons, Hogsheads Sixty Three
Gallons, Tearses Forty Two Gallons, Barrels Thirty One Gallons and an half;
Gagers to be appointed. Cask to be marked by the Gager and his Fee.

Every Cooper to have a distinct brand mark.


And made of sound well seasoned Timber, and free of Sap. And that fit persons
be appointed, from time to time, in all places needful, to View and Gage all
such Cask; and such as shall be ^ound of due Assize, shall be Marked with the
Gagers Mark, who shall have for his Pains, Four Pence per Ton: And every Cooper
shall set his distinct Brand Mark on his own Cask; on Penalty of Forty
Shillings. And whosoever shall put to Sale any New Cask, being defective,
either in Workmanship, Timber or Assize, as aforesaid; upon proof thereof, made
before one Justice of the Peace, he shall forfeit such Cask, and be Fined the
Sum of Ten Shillings.

Defective Cask to be Forfeited.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
Peace, at their First General Quarter Sessions, to be holden in each Respective
County, within this Province; shall Yearly, in every Town needful thereof,
Quarter Sessions to appoint gagers and packers and swear them.

Penalty of Refusal.

Ten Shillings penalty for packing in any Cask under Assiz^.


Choose and Appoint a fit person or persons, to be Gagers and Packers, and them
to Swear to the due Execution of their Office; which if any person so
Appointed, shall refuse, he shall pay the Sum of Forty Shillings, and another
shall be Chosen and Appointed in his stead. And every Gager and Packer shall
take care that all Cask in which he Packs Beef, Pork, Mackarel, Fish, or other
Goods committed to his care, be of true and full Assize, and that he Pack the
same in no other Cask whatsoever, on penalty of Ten Shillings for every Cask by
him Packed, that is or shall be defective in that Respect. And if any of the
before mentioned Provisions shall be Packed into Half Barrels, or ^i^kins, the
same shall be made in Proportion to the Assize aforesaid; and be ma^ked by the
Packer.

And for the preventing of Fraud and Deceit in the Packing of Pickled Fish,
Beef and Pork to be put to Sale.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in every Town, where
such Goods are Packt up for Sale, The whole half and quarter of meat ^ to be
put up and not the best left out. Fish to be all of one kind.
the Gager or Packer of such Town, or of the Town wherein they are put to Sale,
or Shipped, shall see that it be well and orderly performed, That is to say,
Beef and Pork the whole half and quarter, and so proportionably, that the best
be not left out, and so Fish and Mackarel, that they be Packed all of one kind;
and that all Casks so packed be full, and the Fish sound and well seasoned,
setting his Seal on all Cask so packed, and he shall receive of the owners for
so Packing, and Sealing, Four Shilling^ per Ton. Four Shillings per Ton for
packing and Sealing
And if any such Provisions be put to (...), or Shipped off without the Packers
mark, they shall be forfeited.

And it is further Enacted, That all sorts of green or pickled Fish* S^urgeon,
or Flesh that shall be put up for Transportation to a foreign Market, shall be
searched, surveyed and approved by a Sworn Packer, Fish and Flesh for
Transportation to be Searched and Repacked by the Packer.

Penalty on Masters and Mariners taking any Provisions Aboard Unsealed.


who shall take strict care that the same be put up in Thight Cask of full
Gage, Salted with suitable Salt. And such as shall be so saved, and for its
condition found Merchantable, and full, the Packer shall Seal with such Brand
Mark, a^ shall be assigned to the Town, and such other Cut-Mark added, as may
denote the sort of Provision, and time when Packed. And all such other
Provision as the Packer shall find wholesome and useful, though for its quality
it be not Merchantable; he shall cause to be well Packed, Salted, Filled, and
Sealed with the Letter R. and such other Letters as may signify the Town,
Specie, and time of Packing. And if any Master of a Ship, or other Vessel, or
any Officers, or Mariners, belonging thereto shall receive such Provisions not
Marked and Sealed as aforesaid, a^^^ard any of their Ships or Vessels, he or
they who shall offend therein, shall forfeit double the value of all such
Provisions; and he that owns the Provisions, shall forfeit the same. And if any
Cooper, or other Person shall Shift any Fish or Flesh, either on Board, or on
Shore, after the same has been so Sealed and Marked by the Packer, Penalty for
Shifting of Provisions after Sealing.
and Ship and Export the same, the Packer having not allowed thereof, and a new
Sealed and Marked the Cask whereinto such Provisions are Shifted: All Persons
acting, ordering or assisting therein, shall be set in the Pillory, not
exceeding one hour, and shall likewise pay double Damages to persons wronged
thereby.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Provisions that have
lain three months packt in the Summer to be Reviewed.
That where any such Provisions have lain above three months under the Packers
Mark, betwixt the Months of May and October, they shall again, upon Exportation
or Sale, be viewed or searched by the Packer, That is to say, so many of them
as may probably discover the condition of the whole; and if any be decayed or
deceitfully dealt with, the Packer shall Cull and Repack the same, so as to
distinguish and mark them for Merchantable, or refuse, according to their
condition. And if those who Ship or Export any such Provision, shall neglect or
refuse such second Search or Survey, the Packer is hereby Ordered and Empowered
to deface his former Mark, and for so doing, shall be paid as if he had Repackt
the same. And if the owner refuse to satisfy the Packer, such Packer shall
have redress on complaint to any Justice of the Peace; who is hereby Empowered
to compel the payment thereof by Distress.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Tarr that shall
be exposed to Sale, within this Province, shall be in Barrels, Assize of Cask
for Tarr.
half Barrels, and thirds of a Barrel of the Measure and Assize following;
(...) is to say, the Barrel to contain Thirty Gallons, the half Barrel and
third of a Barrel, of the same Gage proportionably, and in no other Cask
whatsoever. And all Cask to be made of the same Assize, and Branded the
Judgment or Sentence of any Judicatories or Courts within our said Province or
Territory in any personal Action, Appeals to the King in some Personal Actions.
wherein the Matter in difference does exceed the Value of three hundred pounds
Sterling, that then he or they may Apppeal to Us, our Heirs and Successors, in
our or their Privy Council, Provided that such Appeal be made within fourteen
days after the Sentence or Judgment given; and that before such Appeal be
allowed, security be given by the Party or Parties appealing, in the value of
the matter in difference, to pay or answer the Debt or Damages for the which
Judgment or Sentence is given, Execution not to be staid
with such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded by Us, our Heirs or
Successors, in Case the Judgment or Sentence be affirmed: And Provided also
that no Execution shall be staid or suspended by reason of such Appeal unto Us,
our Heirs and Successors, in Our or their Privy Council, so as the Party suing
or taking out Execution, do in the like manner give security to the Value of
the matter in Difference, to make Restitution in Case the said Judgment or
Sentence be Reversed or Annulled upon the said Appeal. And We do further, for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant to the said Governor, The general
Court has Power to make Laws, not repugnant to the Laws of England.
and the great and general Court or Assembly of our said Provinc^ or Territory
for the time being, full Power and Authority, from time to time, to Make,
Ordain and Establish all manner of wholesome and reasonable Orders, Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, Directions and Instructions, either with Penalties or
without (so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to the Laws of this our
Realm of England) as they shall judge to be for the good and welfare of our
said Province or Territory, and for the Government and Ordering thereof, and of
the People inhabiting, or who shall inhabit the same, and for the necessary
support and defense of the Government thereof. And We do for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant, that the said General Court or Assembly shall have
full Power and Authority to Name and settle Annually, To Name and Settle Civil
Officers Except etc.
all Civil Officers within the said Province, such Officers Excepted, the
Election and Constitution of whom We have by these Presents reserved to Us, our
Heirs and Successors, or to the Governor of our said Province for the time
being; and to set forth the several Duties, Powers and Limits of every such
Officer to be appointed by the said General Court or Assembly, and the Forms of
such Oaths not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm of England,
Power to impose Taxes on all the Inhabitants, to be disposed by warrant from
the Governor and Council, or according to such Acts as shall then be in force.
as shall be respectively administered unto them for the Execution of their
several Offices and Places; and also to impose Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments,
and other Punishments, and to impose and levy proportionable and reasonable
Assessments, Rates and Taxes upon the Estates and Persons of all and every the
Proprietors or Inhabitants of our said Province or Ter^itory, to be issued and
disposed of by Warrant under the Hand of the Governor of our said Province for
the time being, with the Advice and Consent of the Council, for our Service in
the necessary Defense and Support of our Government of our said Province or
Territory, and the Protection and Preservation of the Inhabitants there,
according to such Acts as are or shall be in force within our said Province,
and to dispose of matters and things, whereby our Subjects, Inhabitants of our
said Province, may be religiously, peaceably and civilly governed, protected
and defended, so as their good Life and orderly Conversation may win the
Indians, The Conversion of the Indians to be endeavored.
Natives of the Country, to the Knowledge and Obedience of the only true God
and Savior of Mankind, and the Christian Faith, which his Royal Majesty our
Royal Grandfather King Charles the First, in his said Letters Patents declared
was his Royal Intentions, and the Adventurers free Profession to be the
principle End of the said Plantation. And for the better securing and
maintaining Liberty of Conscience hereby granted to all Persons at any time
being and residing within our said Province or Territory as aforesaid, Willing,
Commanding and Requiring, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, ordaining and appointing that all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, Instructions and Directions as shall be so Made and Published under
our Seal of our said Province or Territory, shall be carefully and duly
observed, kept and performed, and put in Execution according to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents. Provided always, and We do by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Estab^ish and Ordain, that in the framing and
passing of all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, The Governor to
have a Negative on the Acts of the General Assembly, etc.
and in all Elections and Acts of Government whatsoever, to be passed, made or
done by the said General Court or Assembly, or in Council, the Governor of our
said Province or Territory of the Massachusetts Bay in New England for the time
being, shall have the Negative Voice, and that without his Consent or
Approbation signified and declared in Writing; no such Orders, Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, Elections, or other Acts of Government whatsoever, so to be made,
passed or done by the said General Assembly or in Council, shall be of any
force, effect or validity, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any
wise Notwithstanding. And We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Establish and
Ordain, that the said Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, be by the first
opportunity after the making thereof, sent or transmitted unto Us, our Heirs
and Successors, under the Public Seal, to be appointed by Us, for Our or their
Approbation or Disallowance. And that in Case all or any of them shall at any
time within the space of three Years next after the same shall have been
presented to Us, our Heirs and Successors, in our or their Privy Council, be
disallowed and rejected, and so signified by Us, our Heirs and Successors, Laws
to be sent to England for the Royal Approbation: If not disallowed within three
Years to be in force until Repealed by the Assembly.
under our or their Sign Manual and Signe^, or by Order in our or their Privy
Council, unto the Governor for the time being then such and so many of them as
shall be so disallowed and rejected, shall thenceforth cease and determine, and
become utterly void and of none effect. Provided always, that in Case We, our
Heirs or Successors, shall not within the term of three Years after the
presenting of such Orders, Laws, Statutes or Ordinances, as aforesaid, signify
our or their Disallowance of the same, then the said Orders, Laws, Statutes or
Ordinances, shall be and Continue in full Force and Effect, according to the
true intent and meaning of the same, until the Expiration thereof, or that the
same shall be repealed by the General Assembly of our said Province for the
time being. Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful for the said
Governor and General Assembly to make or pass any Grant of Lands lying within
the Bounds o^ the Colonies formerly called the Colonies of the
Massachusetts Bay, and New-Plymouth, and Province of Main, in such manner as
heretofore they might have done by virtue of any former Charter or Letters
Patents; The General Court has Power to pass any grants of Land in
Massachusetts Plymouth, or the Province of Mayn. Grants or Land between
Sagadahook and St. Laurence to have the Royal Approbation.
which Grants of Land^ within the Bounds aforesaid, We do hereby Will and
Ordain to be and continue for ever of full Force and Effect, without Our
further Approbation or Consent. And so as nevertheless, and it is our Royal
Will and Pleasure, that no Grant or Grants of any Lands lying or extending from
the River of Sagadahock, to the Gulf of St. Laurence and Canada Rivers, and to
the Main Sea Northward and Eastward, to be made or past by the Governor and
General Assembly of our said Province, be of any force, validity or effect,
until We, our Heirs and Successors, shall have signified our or their
Approbation of the same. And we do by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, grant, establish and ordain, that the Governor of our said
Province or Territory for the time being, shall have full power by himself, or
by any chief Commander, or other Officer or Officers, to be appointed by him
from time to time, to Train, Instruct, Exercise and Govern the Militia there;
and for the special Defense and safety of our said Province or Territory, to
Assemble in Martial Array, and put in Warlike Posture the Inhabitants of our
said Province or Territory, and to Lead and Conduct them, and with them to
Encounter, Expulse, Repel, Resist and Pursue by Force of Arms, The Governor to
Command the Militia.
as well by Sea as by Land, within or without the Limits of our said Province
or Territory, and also to kill, slay, destroy and conquer, by all fitting
ways, enterprises and means whatsoever, all and every such Person and Persons
as shall at any time hereafter attempt or enterprise the destruction, invasion,
detriment or annoyance of our said Province or Territory; and to use and
exercise the Law Martial in time of actual War, Invasion or Rebellion, as
occasion shall necess^^ily require; and also from time to time to Erect Forts,
and to Forti^ie any Place or Places within our said Province or Territory, and
the same to furnish wi^h all necessary Ammunition, Provision and Stores of War,
for offense or defense, and to commit from time to time, the Custody and
Government of the same, to such person or persons as to him shall seem mee^,
and the said Forts and Fortifications to demolish at his pleasure, and to take
and surprise of his Bond, that he may be forth coming when the Child is Born^

Further it is Enacted by the (...), That every Justice of the Peace in the
County where the Offense is Committed, may cause to be Staid and Arrested all
Affrayers, Power of the Justice of Peace.
Rioters, Disturbers or Breakers of the Peace, and such as shall ride, or go
armed offensively before any of Their Majesty's Justices, or other Their
Officers or Ministers doing their Office, or elsewhere, by Night or by Day, in
fear or affray of Their Majesty's Liege People; and such others as shall utter
any Menaces or Threatening Speeches: And upon view of such Justice or Justices,
confession of the party, or other Legal Conviction of any such Offense, shall
Commit the Offender to Prison, until he find Sureties for the Peace and good
Behavior; and seiz and take away his Armor or Weapons, and shall cause them
to be apprized and answered to the King as forfeited: Breach of the Peace*
Forcible Entry and detainer.
And may further punish the Breach of the Peace in any person that shall smite
or strike another, by Fine to the King, not exceeding Twenty Shillings; and
require Bond with Sureties for the Peace; or Bind the Offender over to answer
it at the next Sessions of the Peace, as the nature or circumstance of the
Offense may be; and may make enquiry of forcible entry and detainer, and cause
the same to be removed; and make out Hue and Cries after Runaway Servants,
Thiefs and other Criminals.

And it is further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons of the Age of Discretion (which is accounted fourteen years, Lying and
Libelling
or upwards) shall wittingly and willingly make or publish any Lie or Libel,
tending to the defamation or damage of any particular person; make or spread
any false News or Reports, with intent to abuse and deceive others: Every such
person or persons offending in any of the particulars beforementioned, and
being duly convicted thereof, before one or more Justices of the Peace, shall
be Fined according to the degree of such Offense; not exceeding the Sum of
Twenty Shillings for the first conviction, and find Sureties for the good
Behavior. And if the Party be unable to pay the said Fine, then to be set in
the Stocks, not exceeding three hours; or be corporally punished by Whipping,
at the discretion of the Justice or Justices, before whom the Conviction shall
be; according as the circumstances or nature of the Offense shall be. And the
said Justice or Justices may restrain and commit the Offender, until he pay the
said Fine, and find Sureties for the good Behavior; or may cause the fine to
be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods. And the Party or Parties
grieved or injured by reason of any of the Offenses aforesaid; shall or may
take his or their Suit against any such Offender or Offenders in any Court of
Record*

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons upon his or their own Head or Imagination, or by false Conspiracy and
Fraud with others, shall wittingly, subtly and falsely forge or make; or
subtly cause or wittingly assent to be forged or made any false deed, Forgery.
conveyance or writing Sealed, or the Will of any person or persons in Writing
to the intent that the State of Freehold or Inheritance, Right, Title or
Interest of any person or persons of, in, or to any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments shall or may be molested, troubled, defeated, recovered or
charged; or shall as is aforesaid, forge, make, or cause, or assent to be made,
or forged, any Obligation, or Bill Obligatory, Letter of Attorney, or any
Acquittance, Release, or other Discharge of any Debt, Account, Action, Suit,
Demand, or other thing personal; Or if any person or persons shall Pronounce,
Publish, or show forth in evidence, any such false and forged Deed, Conveyance,
Writing, Obligation, Bill Obligatory, Letter of Attorney, Acquittance, Release
or Discharge, as true, knowing the some to be false and forged as is aforesaid,
to the intent above (...); and shall be thereof convicted, either upon action
or actions of Forge^ (...) false Deeds to be founded upon this Act at the Suit
of the party grieve^, (...) otherwise according to the order and due course of
Law, or upon Bill or Information. That then every such Offender shall pay unto
the party grieved his double costs and damages, to be found and assessed in
such Court where the said Conviction shall be; and also shall be set upon the
Pillory in some Market Town, or other open place, and there to have one of his
ears cut off; and also shall have and suffer Imprisonment by the space of one,
whole year, without bail or ma^nprize. And the Party or Parties grieved by
reason of any of the Offenses aforesaid, may take his or their Suit against any
such Offender or Offenders, in any Court of Record; where no Essoign,
Injunction or Protection shall be allowed the party defendant.

Provided always, and it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to charge any Judge of
Probate, or Register, with any the offenses aforesaid, for putting their Seal
o^ Office to any Will to be exhibited unto them, not knowing the same to be
false or forged, for writing of the said Will or Probate of the same. Nor to
any other person or persons that shall show forth or give in Evidence any false
or forged writing for true or good, being not party or privy to the forging of
the same, nor knowing the same to be false or forged, any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, If any
person or persons, either by the subornation, unlawful procurement, reward,
sinister persuasion, or means of any other; or by their own act, consent or
agreement, Wilful Perjury.
shall wilfully and corruptly commit any manner of wilful Perjury, by his or
their deposition in any Court of Record, or being examined, Ad perpetuam rei
memoriam, That then every person and persons so offending, and being thereof
duly convict, or attainted by Law, shall for his or their offense, lose and
forfeit Twenty Pounds; the one Moiety thereof, unto Their Majesty's, and the
other Moiety to such person or persons as shall be grieved, hindered or molested
by reason of any such offense, that shall sue for the same by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint, Information, or otherwise in any Court of Record; in the which no
Wager of Law, Essoign, Protection, or Injunction to be allowed: And also to
have Imprisonment by the space of six months, without bail or mainprize. And
the Oath of such person or persons so offending, not to be received in any
Court of Record, until such time as the Judgment given against the said person
or persons, shall be reversed by attaint or otherwise; and upon every such
reversal, the parties agrieved to recover his or their damages against all and
every such person and persons, (...) did procure the said Judgment, so
reversed, to be given against them or any of them, by Action or Actions, upon
his or their case or cases; according to the course of the common Law.

And i^ it happen the said Offender or Offenders, so offending, not to have any
Goods or Chattels, to the value of Twenty Pounds, that then he or they be set
on the Pillory by the space of one whole hour, in some Market Town where the
offense was committed, or next adjoining to the place where the Offense was
Committed, and to have both his Ears nailed; and from thenceforth to be
discredited and disabled for ever to be sworn in any Court of Record, until
such time as the Judgment shall be reversed.

And all and every person and persons who shall unlawfully and corruptly
procure any Witness or Witnesses, by Letters* Rewards, Promises, or by any
other sinister and unlawful labor or means whatsoever; to commit any wilful
and corrupt Perjury, in any matter or cause whatsoever depending, or that shall
depend in suit and variance by any Writ, Action, Bill, Complaint or Information
in any Court of Record; or to testify in perpetuam rei memoriam: Every such
Offender, being thereof duly convict or attainted by Law, shall for his o^
their offense be proceeded against, and suffer the like pains, penalties,
forfeitures, and disability in all respects as abovementioned.

See Additional Act about Criminal Offenses, page.
And it is further Enacted by the A^^hority aforesaid, That all the aforesaid
Forfeitures and Sums of Money arising for any offense mentioned in this Act,
and every Branch thereof, and not otherwise disposed of shall be unto Their
Majesty's, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Province, and
the Incident Charges thereof.

An Act for the Suppressing of Unlicense^ Houses, and the due Regulation of
such as are, or shall be Licensed.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council (...) Representatives
Convened in General Court, and by the Authorit^ of the same, That no person or
persons whatsoever (other tha^ such as upon producing Certificate from the
Select men of the Town when they dwell, None to keep a house of common
Entertainment, or Sell strong Drink publicly or privately without License on
penalty of Forty Shillings. One half to the Informer and the other to the use
of the poor Upon second conviction, to give bond for the good behavior.
Licenses to be renewed yearly and bond given Justices may grant Lic^nse without
Certificate of the Select-men upon notice given.
or who shall be otherwise thought fit by the Justices themselves shall be
Licensed by the said Justices in Quarter Sessions) may presume t^ be a common
Victualler, Inn holder, Taverner, or Seller of Wine, Beer, Al^ C^der or strong
Liq^ors by Retail: Nor shall any presume without such Li^cence, to Sell Wine or
strong Liquors privately by a less quantity than Quarter Cask, and that
delivered and carried away all at one time: O^ pain of forfeiting the Sum of
Forty Shillings for every such offense upon d^^ Conviction thereof; one half
thereof to the Informer, and the other half t^ the use of the poor of the Town
where such Offense is committed. An^ upon a second Conviction, besides the
forfeiture of Forty Shillings as aforesaid shall enter into Recognizance with
one or more Sureties for the good Beha^viour, especially not to transgress the
Law in that respect.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all License be Renewed
yearly, and Bond given for the due Observance of the same and of the Laws, and
that the person Licenced, shall use his License in suc^ House as shall be
therein named, and no other.

And if the Justices in Quarter Sessions shall think fit to License any person
or persons not presenting a Certificate as aforesaid from the Select-men, the
Clerk of the Sessions, before granting License to any such, shall signify the
name and desire of every such person unto the Select-men of the Tow^ where such
person dwells, one month before hand, that so they may have opportunity and
liberty to offer their Objections against it, if any such be.

And forasmuch as the ancient, true and principal use of Inns, Taverns, Al^
Houses, Victualling Houses, and other Houses for common Entertainmen^ is for
Receipt, Relief and Lodging of Travelers and Strangers, and the Refreshment of
persons upon lawful Business; or for the necessary supply of the wants of such
poor persons as are not able by greater quantities to make their provision of
Victuals, and are not intended for Entertainment and Harboring of lewd or idle
people to spend or consume their Money or time there: Therefore to prevent the
Mischiefs and great Disorders happening d^^d, by the abuse of such Houses.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Taverner Inn keeper,
Alehouse keeper or Victualler, shall have or keep in or about their Houses,
Outhouses, Yards, Backsides, Gar^ens or Places to them belonging, any Dice,
Cards, Tables, Bowk, Shuffle^board, Billiards, Coyts, Cales, Logats, Games and
Gaming forbidden in Publick-houses, on pain of 40 s*

Penalty on Gamesters. Penalty for refusing to give Evidence against persons
Selling without License.

One Justice may hear and determine all Offenses against this Act

See Act for the better discovery etc. of unlicensed houses page

Act for suppressing of drunkenness page

And Act for the Inspecting and Suppressing disorders in Licensed houses page


or any other Implements used in Gaming; nor shall suffer any person or persons
resorting unto any of their Houses, to use or exercise any of the said Games,
or any other unlawful Game or Sport within their said Houses, or any of the
Dependences as aforesaid, or places to them belonging; on pain of forfeiting
the Sum of Forty Shillings for every such Offense, upon due conviction thereof;
the said Fine to be disposed of as aforesaid. And every person convicted of
Playing as aforesaid in any such House or Dependences thereof, shall forfeit
the Sum of Six Shillings and Eight-pence, to be disposed of as aforesaid.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any person duly
Summoned to give in Evidence respecting the Breach of this Act, in any of the
Branches thereof, (other than the party himself, his Chil^dren or Servants)
that shall refuse to give in upon his Oath, when so required, what he knows
relating to the Premises, shall forfeit Forty Shillings to the use of the Poor
of the Town as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Justice of
the Peace in the County where he dwells, as well as the Justices in Quarter
Sessions, are hereby respectively Empowered to hear and determine all Offenses
against this Act, and may commit the Offender to Prison, until he pay the said
fine, and enter into Recognizance as aforesaid for the good Behavior; or may
cause the fine to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods,
returning the Overplus, if any be.

An Act for the better Observation and Keeping the Lord's Day.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is Enacted by the Authority of
the same, That all and every person and persons whatsoever, shall on that Day
carefully apply themselves to Duties of Religion and Piety, publicly and
privately; Labor and Sports Prohibited on penalty of 5 s.
and that no Tradesman, Artificer, Labourer or other person whatsoever, shall
upon the Land or Water, do or exercise any Labor, Business, or Work of their
ordinary Callings; nor use any Game, Sport, Play or Recreation on the
Lord's Day, or any part thereof; (works of necessity and charity only excepted)
upon pain that every person so offending shall forfeit Five Shillings.

Further it is Ordered and Declared, That no Traveller, Drover, Traveling
prohibited on penalty of 20 s.
Horse-Courser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or any their Servants, shall Travel
on that Day, or any part thereof, except by some adversity they were belated
and forced to lodge in the Woods, Wilderness or High ways, the night before;
and in such case, to Travel no further than the next Inn or place of shelter,
on that Day; upon the penalty of Twenty Shillings.

Further it is Ordered, That no Vintner, Inn holder, Public houses not to
entertain any others than Strangers and Lodgers on penalty of 5 s. for every
person.
or other person keeping any Public house of Entertainment, shall entertain or
suffer any of the Inhabitan^s of the respective Towns where they dwell, or
others not being Strangers, or Lodgers in such Houses, to abide or remain in
their Houses, Yards, Orchards, or Fields drinking, or idly spending their time
on Saturday night after the Sun is set, or on the Lord's Day, or the Evening
following; upon the pain and penalty of Five Shillings for every persons,
payable by themselves respectively that shall be found so drinking or abiding
in any such. Public House or Dependences the^^of as aforesaid; and the like
Sum of Five Shillings to be paid by the Keeper of such House, for every person
Entertained by them.

And for the better Execution of all and every the foregoing Orders, every
Justice of the Peace within his County shall have power and authority to
Convent before him, One Justice of the Peace may hear and determine any breach
of this Act.
any person or persons, who shall offend in any of the particulars before
mentioned, and upon his own view, or other legal conviction of any such
offense, to impose the fine and penalty for the same, and to restrain or commit
the Offender until it be satisfied; or to cause the same to be levied by
distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, returning the Overplus (if any be)
and in case any such Offender be unable or refuse to satisfy such fine, Fines
for breach of this Act to be to the use of the poor.
to cause him to be put in the Cage, or set in the Stocks, not exceeding three
hours: All fines and penalties accruing by this Act, to be to the benefit and
^elief of the Poor of such Town where the Offense is committed; and delivered
into the hands of the Select-men, or Overseers of the poor for that end.

And all Masters and Governors of Families are hereby required to take
effectual care that their Children, Servants and others under their immediate
Government, do not transgress in any of the foregoing particulars.

And all and every Justices of the Peace, Constables and Tything-men are
required to take effectual care, Justices, Constables, etc. required to see
that this Act be observed.
and endeavor that this Act in all the particulars thereof be duly observed;
as also to restrain all persons from Swimming in the water, unnecessary and
unseasonable walking in the Streets or Fields in the Town of Boston, or other
places, keeping open their Shops, or following their secular Occasions or
Recreations in the Evening preceding the Lords Day, or on any part of the said
Day or Evening following.

And all persons are strictly required to be obedient to, and aiding and
assisting such Justices, Constables and other Officers herein, as they will
answer the contrary at their peril.

An Act for prevention of common Nusances arising by Slaughter-Houses,
Still-Houses, etc. Tallow Chandlers, and Curriers.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Select men of the Towns of Boston, Salem and Charlstown respectively, or
other Market Towns in the Province, with two or more Justices of the Peace
dwelling in the Town, or two of the next Justices in the County, shall at or
before the last day of March, One Thousand six Hundred Ninety Three, Assign
some certain places in each of said Towns (where it may be least offensive) for
the Erecting or Setting up of Slaughter-Houses, Slaughter Houses, Still-Houses,
etc. to be in certain places assigned, and no other.
for the killing of all Meat: Still-Houses, and Houses for trying of Tallow,
and currying of Leather, (which Houses may be Erected of Timber, the Law
referring to Building with Brick or Stone notwithstanding) And shall cause an
Entry to be made in the Town Book* o^ what places shall be by them so Assigned,
and make known the same by posting it up in some public places of the Town. At
which Houses and places respective^y, and no other, all Butchers and Slaughter
men, Distille^s, Chandlers and Cu^^iers, shall exercise and practice their
respective Trades and Mysteries; on pain that any Butcher or Slaughter-man
transgressing of this Act by killing of Meat in any other place, for every
Conviction thereof, before one or more Justices of the Peace, shall forfeit and
pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings. And any Distiller, Chandler or Currier
offending against this Act, for every Conviction thereof before Their Majesty's
Justices at the General Sessions of the Peace for the County, shall forfeit and
pay the Sum of Five Pounds; one third part of said forfeitures to be to the use
of Their Majesty's, for the Support of the Government of the Province, and the
incident Charges thereof; one third to the Poor of the Town, where such Offense
shall be committed; and the other third to him or them that shall Inform and
Sue for the same.

And for preventing of Cruelty to Bruit Creatures.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Calves, Cruelty to
br^^^ Creatures forbidden.
Sheep or Lambs brought alive to the Market, shall be either driven or carried
in Carts, Sleds, Panyers or Boats, and not otherwise; on pain of forfeiting of
all Calves, Sheep or Lambs passing toward, or brought a^ive to the Market,
laid across, or hanging by the sides of Horses, (as has been usual) or in any
other way contrary to the true intent of this Act: one half of all ^^ch
forfeitures to be unto the Informers, (who shall seize and prosecute for the
same; and the other Moiety to the use of the poor of the Town, where such
seizure shall be made, Select-men, Constables, etc. Empowered to seiz.
to be distributed by the Select-men or Overseers of the Poor.

And all Select-men, Overseers of the Poor, Constables, Tything men and other
Officers in any Town upon their own view, or information of any transgression
of this Act within their respective Precincts, Flesh blown or winded to be
forfeited.
shall and hereby are Empowered to seize or cause to be seized all Calves, Sheep
or Lambs that shall be carried or brought alive to the Market, in any other way
than is before directed. And upon due proof thereof, made before one or more
Justices of the Peace, shall be forfeited, See Additional Act page
and the same or the value thereof be disposed of as aforesaid.

And all Veal or other Meat exposed to Sale, that shall be blown up or winded,
shall be alike forfeited and disposed of.

An Act for the orderly consummating of Marriages.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Justices ^r
Ministers respectively to Solemnize Marriages.
That every Justice of the Peace within the County where he resides, and every
settled Minister in any Town, shall, and are hereby respectively Empowered and
Authorized to Solemnize Marriages, with in their respective Towns and Coun^ies,
betwixt persons that may lawfully enter into such Relation, having the consent
of those whose immediate care and Government they are under, and being likewise
first Published by asking their Banns at three several Public Meetings in both
the Towns where such parties respectively dwell; or by posting up their names
and intentions at some public place in each of the said Towns, fairly written,
Publishment how to be made.
there to stand by the space of fourteen days, and producing Certificate of
such Publishment under the Hand of the Town Clerk or Constable of such Towns
respectively.

And the Fee to be paid for every Marriage, shall be Three Shillings; Fee for
Marriage, etc.
and for Publishment and Certificate thereof, One Shilling.

And be it further Enacted, That whoever shall presume to deface or pull down
any such Publishment* posted up in writing, Penalty for pulling down
publishments
before the expiration of the time, shall be fined to the use of the Poor of
the Town, the Sum of T^^ Shillings, being Convicted thereof, before one or more
Justices of the Peace: And i^ the party be unable to pay the said fine, then to
be set in the Stoc^^ one whole Hour. Marriages to be Registered.


And every Justice and Minister shall keep a particular Register of all
Marriages Solemnized before any of them, and make a Return thereof at the end
of each Quarter of a year unto the Clerk of the Sessions of the Peace within
the same County, See Act to prevent Incestuous Marriages page.
to be by him Registered; who is hereby Empowered thereto, and shall be paid by
every such Justice and Minister, Threepence for each Marriage so returned.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Controversies
concerning Marriage and Divorce shall be heard and determined by the Governor
and Council. Divorce.


An Act for the Settlement and Support of Ministers and Schoolmasters.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Inhabitants of each Town within this Province, shall take due care from
time to time, to be constantly provided of an Able, Learned Orthodox Minister
or Ministers, of good Conversation, to Dispense the Word of God to them; which
Minister or Ministers shall be suitably encouraged and sufficiently supported
and maintained by the Inhabitants of such Town. Contracts and Agreements to be
made good.
And all Contracts, Agreements and Orders heretofore made, or that shall
hereafter be made by the Inhabitants of any Town within this Province
respecting their Ministers or Schoolmasters, as to their Settlement or
Maintenance, shall remain good and valid according to the true intent thereof,
the whole time for which they were or shall be made, in all the particulars
thereof, and shall accordingly be pursued, put in Execution and Fulfilled. And
where there is no Contract and Agreement made in any Town, Neglect of making
suitable provision for Ministers to be redressed by the Quarter Sessions.
respecting the support and maintenance of the Ministry; or when the same
happens to be expired, and the Inhabitants of such Town shall neglect to make
suitable provision therein; upon complaint thereof made unto the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace for the County where such Town lies; the said Court of
Quarter Sessions shall and hereby are Empowered to order a competent allowance
unto such Minister, according to the Estate and Ability of the Town: the same
to be assessed upon the Inhabitants by Warrant from the Court, directed to the
Select-men, who are thereupon to proceed to make and proportion such Assessment
in manner as is directed for other public Charges, and to cause the same to be
Levied by the Constables of such Town, by Warrant under the Hands of the Select
men; or of the Town Clerk by their Order.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Town shall be
destitute of a Minister qualified as aforesaid, The Court of Quarter Sessions
to take care that no Town be destitute of a Minister.
and shall so continue by the space of six months, not having taken due care
for the procuring, settling and encouragement of such Minister, the same being
made to appear upon complaint unto Their Majesty's Justices at the General
Sessions of the Peace for the County, the said Court of Quarter Sessions shall
and hereby are Empowered to make an Order upon every such defective Town,
speedily to provide themselves of such Minister as aforesaid, by the next
Sessions at the furthest; and in case such Order be not complied with, then the
said Court shall take effectual care to procure and Settle a Minister qualified
as aforesaid, and order the Charge thereof, and of such Ministers maintenance,
to be Levied on the Inhabitants of such Town.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Churches to enjoy their
privileges and freedoms.
That the respective Churches in the several Towns within this Province, shall
at all times hereafter, use, exercise and enjoy all their Privilledges and
Freedoms respecting Divine Worship, Church Order and Discipline. And shall be
encouraged in the peaceable and regular profession and practice thereof.

And further it is Enacted, Repealed.
That every Minister being a person of good Conversation, Able, Learned and
Orthodox, that shall be Chosen by the major part of the Inhabitants in any
Town, See Explanatory Act, page
at a Town-Meeting duly warned for that purpose, (notice thereof being given to
the Inhabitants fifteen days before the time for such Meeting) shall be the
Minister of such Town; and the whole Town shall be obliged to pay toward his
Settlement and Maintenance, each man his several proportion thereof. See
Additional Act, page


And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Town within
this Province, having the number of fifty House holders or upwards, School for
Reading and Writing. Grammar School.
shall be constantly provided of a Schoolmaster to teach Children and Youth to
Read and Write. And where any Town or Towns have the number of one hundred
Families or Householders, there shall also be a Grammar School set up in every
such Town, and some discreet person of good Conversation, well Instructed in
the Tongues procured to keep such School Every such School Master to be
suitably encouraged and paid by the Inhabitants.

And the Select men and Inhabitants of such Towns respectively, shall take
effectual care, Schoolmasters to be supported.
and make due provision for the settlement and maintenance of such School
Master and Masters.

And if any Town qualified as before expressed, shall neglect the due observance
of this Act, for the procuring and settling of any such Schoolmaster as
aforesaid, by the space of one year. Every such defective Town shall incur the
penalty of Ten Pounds for every conviction of such neglect, upon complaint made
unto Their Majesty's Justices in Quarter Sessions for the same County in which
such defective Town lies; Penalty for neglect.
which penalty shall be toward the support of such School or Schools within the
same County, where there may be most need, at the discretion of the Justices in
Quarter Sessions; to be levied by Warrant from the said Court of Sessions in
proportion upon the Inhabitants of such defective Town, as other public
Charges, and to be paid unto the County Treasurer.

An Act for the Settlement of the Bounds, and Defraying of the public and
necessary Charges arising within each respective County in this Province.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all Counties as
they now lie, and are named, Counties to continue as formerly.
continue and remain distinct Counties to all intents and purposes in the Law
whatsoever. And that there be a County Treasurer annually Chosen for each
respective County, being a Freeholder within the same; and to be Chosen by the
Votes of the Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of each respective Town, duly
qualified as is provided by the Act for the choice of Select-men, and other
Town Officers; and at the same time, such Votes to be given in Writing, and
Sealed up by the Constable, by him to be kept and returned unto the next
Quarter Sessions, to be h^ld for said County, there to be opened and sorted by
such as the Court shall appoint, in presence of the Justices; and the person
having the majority of said Votes, Choice of County Treasurer.
shall be Treasurer of such County for that year, and be Sworn before said
Court.

And for the due and equal Raising of Moneys for Defraying of the Charges
arising within each respective County, for the necessary repairs and amendment
of Bridges, Prisons, the maintenance of poor Prisoners, and all other proper
County Charges.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often from
time to time as there shall be need of raising Money for the ends aforesaid,
County Charges how to be defrayed.
in any County; the Justices in Quarter Sessions for such County, receiving
Information thereof from the County Treasurer, shall agree and determine the
whole Sum to be raised, and each respective Towns proportion of the same, as
near as may be according to the rule for raising of Money for the Province
Charges, and shall issue forth their Order unto the Select-men of the
respective Towns to assess the same upon the Inhabitants of such Town, each one
his one and equal proportion thereof according to the Rule beforementioned, as
near as may be, to be paid in Money, or equivalent thereto; and to make a
distinct List of each persons name and proportion, under their Hands; and such
List commit unto the Constable or Constables of such Town, with a Warrant
signed by the Town Clerk, directed unto the said Constable or Constables to
levy and collect the said assessment, of each one his respective proportion:
And to pay in their said Collections unto the County Treasurer, or his Order,
within the time set for the same: And to make distress upon every person
neglecting or refusing to make payment: And in default of Goods or Chattels
whereon to make distress, to commit the party to the common Goal of the County,
until he make payment, or otherwise be released by the Justices in Quarter
Sessions. And if any person or persons think themselves over-rated in any such
assessment, they shall be eased by the Assessors, making the same to appear; or
in default thereof, by the Court of Quarter Sessions.

And further it is Enacted, That all Moneys so Collected, be improved and
employed for the ends within mentioned, Money how to be applied
as the Court of Quarter Sessions shall from time to time by their Order in
writing, direct and appoint. And the County Treasurer in each respective
County, shall Account unto the Court of Quarter Sessions, Treasurer to Account.
or whom they shall appoint, for all his Receipts and Payments.

Bounds of Townships to continue as heretofore granted and settled: And to be
run, and marks renewed once in three years under a penalty.
An Act for Regulating of Townships, choice of Town-Officers, and setting forth
their Power.
BE it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Bounds of
all Townships shall be, and continue as heretofore granted and settled
respectively, and shall be run betwixt Town and Town, and marks renewed once in
three years, by two of the Select-men of each Town, or any other two persons
whom the Select-men shall Appoint; the Select-men of the most ancient Town to
give notice unto the Select men of the next adjacent Towns, of the time and
place of Meeting for such Perambulation, six days beforehand, on pain of
forfeiting Five Pounds by the Select men of any Town, that shall neglect their
Duty in any of the particulars aforesaid: Two thirds thereof unto the use of
the Poor of such Town; and the other third unto the Select-men of any of the
next adjacent Towns, that shall Inform and Sue for the same, in the Inferior
Court of Pleas within the same County, to be Recovered by Action or Information.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Proprietor of
Lands lying Unfenced, or in any common Field, shall once in two years, on six
days warning before given him, Proprietors of Lands unfenced or in common
Fields to run the Lines once in two years.
by the next Proprietor or Proprietors adjoining, run the Lines, make and keep
up the Bounds between them, by sufficient met Stones; on pain that every Party
so neglecting or refusing, shall forfeit the Sum of Ten Shillings: one half to
the party moving, and the other half to the use of the Poor of the Town, being
Convented and Convicted of such Neglect or Refusal, before any Justice of the
Peace within the same County, who is hereby empowered to hear and determine the
same.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Proprietors of
the undivided or common Lands within each Town and Precinct in this Province,
where the same have been heretofore stated, each ones proportion being known,
^^all, and hereby are Empowered to order, improve or divide in such way and
^^nner as shall be concluded and agreed upon by the major part of the
Interested; the Voices to be collected and accounted according to the
Interests. And the Proprietors of all undivided or common Lands not stated and
proportioned as aforesaid; shall, and hereby are Empowered to manage, improve,
divide or dispose of the same as has been, or shall be concluded and agreed on
by the major part of such Proprietors. Some more Lands, how to be improved.
That no Cottage or Dewlling Place in any Town, shall be admitted to the
privilege of Commonage for Woods, Timber and Herbage, or any other the
privileges which lie in common in any Town, or peculiar, other than such as
were erected or privileged by the Grant of such Town or peculiar before the
year One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and One, or that have been since, or shall
hereafter be Granted by the consent of any Town or Peculiar.

And whereas it has been a continued practice and custom in the several Towns
within this Province, annually to Choose Select-men or Tow^^men, for the
ordering and managing of the prudential affairs of such Town, and other Town
Officers for the Executing of other matters and things in the Laws appointed by
them to be done* and performed.

Be it further Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Freeholders and other Inhabitants of each Town Rateable at Twenty Pounds
Estate, to one single Rate besides the Poll; Qualification of Voters in
Town-Meetings.
shall some time in the Month of March annually meet and convene together upon
notice given by the Constable or Constables of such Town, or such others as the
Select men or Townsmen shall appoint, to give notice of such Meeting, and the
time and ^lace for the some: And by the major Vote of such Assembly, then and
there shall Choose three, five, seven or nine persons, able and discreet,
Select-men, Constables and other Town Officers to be annually Chosen in March
Town Clerk to be under Oath.
of good Conversation, Inhabiting within such Town, to be Select-men or
Townsmen and Overseers of the Poor, where other persons shall not be
particularly Chosen to that Office (which any Town may do as they shall find it
necessary and convenient) as also to nominate and choose a Town Clerk, who
shall be Sworn truly to enter and record all Town-Votes, Orders, Grants and
Divisions of Land, made by such Town, and Orders made by the Select^men; a
Commissioner for Assessments, Constables, Surveyers of Highways, Tything men,
Fence viewers, Clerks of the Market, Sealers of Leather, and other ordinary
Town Officers. See Additional Act page
And the Town Clerk, or two of the Select-men, shall forthwith make, and give
out unto the Constable or Constables of such Town, a List of the Names of those
that shall be then Chosen to the Office of Town Clerk, Constables, Tything men,
Clerks of the Market, Sealers of Leather, Constables to Summon Town Officers to
be Sworn under a penalty.
and other Officers, of whom an Oath is by Law required; which Constable or
Constables within the space of six days at furthest, shall Summon each of them
respectively to appear before the Quarter Sessions, if then sitting, or one of
the next Justices of the Peace, to be Sworn to the faithful discharge of their
respective Offices and Trust, on penalty of Twenty Shilling* to the use of the
poor of the Town, to be paid by each Constable neglecting of his Duty in that
behalf, upon Conviction thereof before one Justice of the Peace; Persons
exempted from Serving as Constables.
and upon non-payment, to be Levied by Distress; Provided, That no person in
Commission for any Office, Civil or Military, Church Officer, or Member of the
House of Representatives for the time being, nor any other who has served as
Constable within the space of seven years before, shall be chosen to the Office
of Constable.

Towns or Select men having Instructions, to make orders and bylaws.
It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Freeholders and
Inhabitants qualified as in this Act is mentioned in each respective Town, in
any Town Meeting, orderly warned according to the Usage in such Town, or the
major part so Assembled, or the Select-men having Instructions given them in
writing by the Town for that purpose; be, and hereby are Empowered from time to
time to make and agree upon such necessary Rules, Orders and Bylaws for the
directing, managing and ordering the prudential Affairs of such Town, Orders
and bylaws in Towns, to be approved by the quarter Sessions.
as they shall judge most conducing to the peace, welfare and good order
thereof, and to annex Penalties for the observance of the same, not exceeding
Twenty Shillings for one off^^ce, provided that they be not repugnant to the
general Laws of the Province: And such Orders and Bylaws being presented unto
the Justices in Quarter Sessions, and approved of by them, shall be
^stablished, and binding to all the Inhabitants of such Town, and the penalty
for breach of any of them by any of the Inhabitants, Penalty to be levied by
warrant from a Justice.
to be Levied by Warrant of Distress from any Justice of the Peace before whom
such Offender shall be Convicted, to the use of the Poor of such Town.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority af^resaid, That the Select-men or
Townsmen chosen as aforesaid, in each Town respectively, be, Select-men to make
Assessment for County and Town charges.
and hereby are Empowered to assess the Inhabitants and others Resident within
such Town, and the Precincts thereof, and the Lands and Estates lying within
the Bounds of such Town, in just and equal proportion as near as may be unto
the County Charges, according as they shall receive order from the Court of
Quarter Sessions to be held for the same County; and to all Town Charges, each
particular person according to his known Ability and Estate, such Sum and Sums
as has or shall be ordered, granted and agreed upon from time to time by the
Inhabitants in any Town meeting regularly assembled; or the major part of those
present at such Meeting, for the maintai^ance and support of the Ministry,
Ass^ssors or Town Clerk to make out a warrant for levying the same.
Schools, the Poor, and for the defraying of other necessary Charges arising
within the said Town, and thereof to make distinct and perfect Lists under
their Hands, or the major part of them, setting down every persons name, and
several proportion, and shall thereupon make out a Warrant to be signed by the
said Assessors, or the Town Clerk, by their Order (who are hereby respectively
Empowered thereto) directed unto the Constable or Constables of the said Town;
for the speedy Levying and Collecting of such Ass^ssments, Distress to be made
on de^inquents.
and to pay in the same unto the Select men, or to such person as they shall
appoint for Receiver, within the time thereby prefixed. And to make Distress
upon all such who shall neglect or refuse to make payment: And for want of
Goods or Chattels whereon to make Distress, to ^eize the person and Commit him
to the Common Goal of the County, there to remain until he pay the Sum upon him
assessed as aforesaid; Persons over-rated to be e^sed.
unless the same or any part thereof, upon application made unto the Quarter
Sessions, shall be abated. And if any person think himself Over-rated, and make
it so appear unto the Assessors, he shall be eased: And if they refuse, such
person agrieved may make his application unto the Justices in Quarter Sessions,
who are hereby Empowered to rectify the same: And all Constables having any
such Assessment committed unto them, shall settle and issue their Accounts
thereof with the Select-men, or Receiver appointed by them, Constables to
settle and issue their accounts within 3 months after the expiration of their
year.
within three months after their time or year is expired, on pain of forfeiting
the Sum of Twenty Shillings per Month, for each Months neglect afterward, to
the use of the Poor of such Town, and to be Levied by Distress upon such
Delinquent Constables Goods, by Warrant from one Justice of the Peace, being
Convented and Convicted of such neglect before him, who is hereby thereto
Empowered.

Provided nevertheless, that every Constable at the end of every three months
shall pay in as foresaid, See Act Relating to Town Assessments page
so much as he shall have Collected within that time.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Select-men or
Overseers of the Poor in each Town (where there are such Chosen, and specially
Appointed for that Service) are hereby Empowered and Ordered to take effectual
care that all Children, Youth, and other persons of able Body, Idle persons and
loiterers to be employed. Upon refusal to labor, to be sent to the house of
correction.
living within the same Town or Precincts thereof (not having Estates otherwise
to maintain themselves) do not live idly, or mispend their time in Loitering,
but that they be brought up or employed in some honest Calling, which may be
profitable unto themselves, and the Public. And if any person or persons fit
and able to work, shall refuse so to do, but loiter and mispend his or her
time, wander from place to place, or otherwise misorder themselves; and thereof
be Convicted before one or more Justices of the Peace, such person or persons
shall by such Justice or Justices be sent to the House of Correction, and at
their entrance, be whipped on the naked back, by the Master of such House, or
such other as he shall procure, not exceeding ten lashes; and be there kept to
hard Labor, until he or she be discharged by such Justice or Justices, or the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the same County. And it shall, and may be
lawful for the Overseers of the Poor, or Select-men in each Town, Poor children
to be bound out Apprentices.
where there are no other persons specially Chosen and Appointed to be
Overseers of the Poor, and they are hereby Ordered with the assent of two
Justices of the Peace, to bind any poor Children belonging to such Town, to be
Apprentices, where they shall see convenient; a Man-child, until he shall come
to the Age of Twenty one Years, and a Woman-child, to the Age of Eighteen
years, or time of Marriage: which shall be as effectual to all intents and
purposes, as if any such Child were of full Age, and by Indenture of Covenant
had Bound him or her self.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person and
person, Penalty for not serving in the Office of Constable.
(except as in this Act is before excepted) being duly Chosen as aforesaid, to
Serve in the Office of Constable, who shall refuse to take the Oath to that
Office belonging, and to serve therein, if h^ be able in person to execute the
same, shall pay the S^m of Five Pounds, to the use of the Poor of such Town.
And if in the Towns of Boston or Salem, the Sum of Ten Pounds, and shall
forthwith declare his acceptance or refusal, and the Town shall proceed to a
new Choice, and if such person refuse to pay down his Fine, he shall be
Conven^ed before the next Sessions of the Peace, to be held for that County, in
which such Town lies, who upon Certificate under the Hand of the Town Clerk,
or two or more of the Select-men, that such person was legally Chosen to the
Office of Constable, and showing no just cause to the Sessions for his excuse;
the Justices shall Order a Warrant to be signed by the Clerk of the Peace,
directed to any of the Constables th^n in being within such Town, to Levy the
said Fine by Distress and Sale of such Offenders Goods, returning the Over^plus
(if any be) said fi^^ to be delivered unto the Overseers of the Poor, or
Select-m^n, to the use of the Poor of such Town.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
person^ come ^o sojourn or dwell in any Town within this Province, Persons
Entertained in any Town by the space of 3 months, and not warned out, to be
reputed Inhabitants.
or Precinct thereof, and be there received and entertained by the space of
three months, not having been warned by the Constable, or other person whom the
Select-men shall appoint for that Service, to leave the place, and the names of
such persons, with the time of their Abode there, and when such warning was
given them, returned unto the Court of Quarter Sessions; every such person
shall be reputed an Inhabitant of such Town, o^ Precincts of the same; and the
proper Charge of the same, in case through Sickness, Lameness, or otherwise
they come to stand in need of relief, to be born by such Town; unless the
Relations of such poor impotent person, in the Line or Degree of Father or
Grandfather, Persons of ability to relieve their poor relations
Mother or Grandmother, Children or Grandchildren, be of sufficient ability;
then such Relations respectively shall relieve such poor person, in such manner
as the Justices of the Peace in that County where such sufficient persons
dwell, shall assess; on pain that every one failing therein, shall forfeit
Twenty Shillings for every months neglect, to be Levied by Distress and Sale of
such Offenders Goods by Warrant from any two such Justices of the Peace ((...)
Unus) within their Limits; which shall be employed to the use and relief of
such impotent poor person. Provided nevertheless this Act shall not be
understood of any persons committed to Prison, or lawfully restrained in any
Town, or of such as shall come, or be sent for Nursing or Education, or to any
Physician or Surgeon to be Healed or Cured; but the particular persons who
receive and entertain any such, shall be the Towns Security in their behalf;
and be obliged to relieve and support them in case of need; upon Complaint made
to the Quarter Sessions, who shall accordingly Order the same.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any person orderly
warned as aforesaid to depart any Town whereof he is not an Inhabitant, Persons
warned out of any Town to depart in 14 days or else to be sent by the Constable.
and neglecting so to do by the space of fourteen days next after such warning
given, may by Warrant from the next Justice of the Peace be sent and conveyed
from Constable to Constable, unto the Town where he properly belongs, or had
his last Residence, at his own Charge, if able to pay the same, or otherwise at
the Charge of the Town so sending him.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as there shall be occasion of a Town-Meeting for any Business of Public
Concernment to the Town, Constables to warn Town-meetings.
there to be done. The Constable or Constables of such Town, by order from the
Select men, or major part of them, or of the Town Clerk by their Order, in each
respective Town within this Province shall warn a Meeting of such Town, having
order for the same in Writing; on pain that every Constable neglecting his Duty
in that respect, and being thereof Convicted before one Justice of the Peace,
shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Shillings, Penalty for neglec^*
to the Use of the Poor of such Town, and to be Levied by Distress and Sale of
such Offenders Goods, by Warrant from such Justice of the Peace, upon neglect
or refusal of payment. And in case the Select men in any Town shall
unreasonably deny to call a Meeting of the Inhabitants of such Town, Justice to
give Warrant for Town-meeting in case.
upon any Public Occasion thereof, the same being complained of, and made to
appear to one of the next Justices of the Peace within the same County; such
Justice by his Warrant directed to the Constable or Constables, may order a
Meeting of the Inhabitants of such Town, therein signifying the occasion
thereof.

An Act for due Regulation of Weights and Measures.
TO the end that Weights and Measures may be one (...) the same throughout this
Their Majesty's Province.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Standard of
Winchester measure.
That the Brass and Copper Weights and Measures formerly sent out of England,
with certificate out of Their Majesty's Exchequer, to be approved Winchester
Measure according to the Standard in the Exchequer, be the public allowed
Standard throughout this Their Majesty's Province, for the proving and sealing
all Weights and Mea^sures thereby. And the Constables of every Town throughout
this Provinc^ not already supplied, Constables to provide Standards.
shall within three months next coming provide upon the Towns Charge One
Bushel, one half Bushel, one Peck, one half Peck, one Ale Quart, one Wine pint
and half pint, one Ell, one Yard, one set of Brass Weights, to Four Pounds,
after sixteen ounces to the Pound, with fit Scales, and ^teel Beam, tried and
proved by the aforesaid Standard, and Sealed by the Treasurer, or his Deputy in
his Presence, (which shall be kept and used only for Standards in the several
Towns) who is hereby Authorized to do the same, for which he shall receive from
the Constables of each Town, Two pence for every Weight and Measure so tried
and proved and Sealed. Sealer of Weights and measures, how to be chosen.
And the Constables of every Town shall commit those Weights and Measures unto
the custody of the Select men of their Towns for the time being, who with the
Constables are hereby enjoined to Choose one able man for Sealer of all Weights
and Measures for their Town from time to time, and till another be Chose, who
shall be presented unto the next Court of Sessions, and there Sworn to the
faithful Discharge of his Duty: And shall have power to send forth his Warrants
by the Constable to all the Inhabitants of such Town, to grant out warrant, for
Sealing of weights and measures in April yearly.
to bring in all such Weights and Measures as they make use of, in the Month of
April, from year to year, at such time and place as he shall appoint, and make
return to the Sealer in writing of all persons so Summoned. That then and there
all such Weights and Measures may be proved and sealed with the Town Seal
(which is likewise to be provided by the Constables at each Towns Charge) who
shall have for every Weight and Measure so Sealed* One penny from the Owner
thereof at the first Sealing. Fee
And all such Weights and Measures as cannot be brought to their just Standard,
he shall deface and destroy, Penalty for neglect.
and after the first Sealing shall have nothing, so long as they continue just
with the Standard.

Penalty for Constables, Select men or Sealers neglect.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, (...) if an^ Constable,
Select-man or Sealer, do not duly Execute this Law so far as to each and every
of them appertains, they and each of them shall forfeit to Their Majesty's for
every such neglect, by the space of one month the Sum of Forty Shillings,
toward the Support of their Government here. And every person neglecting to
bring in their Weights and Measures at the time and place appointed, being duly
warned thereto, shall likewise forfeit Three Shillings and Four-pence; Penalty
for not bringing in weights when warned.
the one half whereof to be to their Majesty's as aforesaid, the other half to
the Sealer aforesaid. And the penalty herein mentioned, to be Levied by
Distress by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in every
Sea-port-Town within this Province, the Constable or Constables are to provide
upon the Towns Cha^^e, Seaport Towns to be provided of great weights.
One Hundred Weight: one half Hundred, one quarter of an Hundred, and one
fourteen pounds Weight made of Iron, to be tried, proved and sealed as
aforesaid, and be kept as Standards in the said several Towns ^o (...) used as
before for other Weights and Measures is directed.

An Act for the Regulating and Encouragement of Fishery.
UPON Consideration of great Damage and Scandal, that has happened upon the
account of Pickled Fish, although afterward dried and hardly discoverable; to
the great loss of many, and also a^ ill Reputation (...) this Province, and the
Fishery of it.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is Enac^ed by the Authority of
the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, after the Publication hereof,
shall save or salt any sort of Fish (that is intended to be dried) in Cask or
Fatts, or any other way than what has formerly and honestly been practiced for
the making of dry Fish, Flow dry Fish shall be saved.
on penalty of forfeiting all such Fish so salted and pickled, whether it be
green or dry: The one Moiety thereof to the use of the Poor of the Town, where
the offense is committed, and the other Moiety to the person that shall sue for
the same.

No Mackrel to be salted up before the first of July.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That henceforth no
Mackrel shall be Caught (except for spending whilst fresh) before the first of
July annually: And no person or persons whatsoever after the publication
hereof, shall at any time or place within this Province, take, kill, or hale
ashore any Mackrel, with any sorts of Nets, or Sa'ns whatsoever, on penalty of
forfeiting all such Mackrel so taken or haled ashore, and also all such Nets
and Sa'ns which were so employed: See Explanatory Act page.
The one half thereof to Their Majesty's toward the suppor^ of this Their
Government, and the other half to him or them that shall Inform and Sue for the
same. And all Justices are hereby Empowered, and Required to Grant their
Warrants for the seizing of the same, Penalty for taking Mackarel in Netts or
Seyn^.
and the aforesaid forfeitures, or the receiving of the like value in current
Money of this Province.

An Act Requiring the taking the Oaths appointed to be taken instead of the
Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy.
WHEREAS Their Royal Majesty's in and by Their Charter for the Erecting and
Incorporating of Their Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, Have
Granted and Ordained, That the Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of
Their said Province, or Territory for the time being, or either of them, or any
two or more of the Council or Assistants for the time being, as shall be
thereunto appointed by the said Governor, shall and may at all times, and from
time to time, have full Power and Authority to administer and give the Oaths
appointed by an Act of Parliament made in the First Year of Their present
Majesty's Reign, (Entitled, An Act for the Abrogating of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and appointing other Oaths) to be taken instead of
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; to all and every person and persons
which are now Inhabiting or Residing within the said Province or Territory; or
which shall at any time or times hereafter go or pass thither.

Now to the intent that there be no failure herein, but that Their Majesty's
Subjects within this Their Province, may accordingly Recognize their Duty and
Allegiance.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That the Oaths in said Act mentioned, and thereby appointed to be taken instead
of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, All male persons of 18 years and
upwards to take the Oaths.
and each of them be and shall be forthwith Administered and given unto all Male
persons of the Age of Eighteen Years, or above, Inhabiting or Residing in any
Town or Place within this Province (that have not already taken the same, and
shall make it so to appear) by His Excellency the Governor, or the Lieutenant
or Deputy Governor, or any two or more of the Council or Assistants, or such
others as shall be thereunto appointed by the Governor; and the List of the
Names of all persons so Sworn, to be returned into the Secretary's Office.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall refuse to take the said Oaths* or either of them when tendered to
him or them by any persons lawfully Authorized as is aforesaid; to administer
or tender the same; the person or persons so tendering the said Oaths, Penalty
for refusing.
or either of them, shall commit the said person and persons so refusing to the
common Goal, or House of Correction; there to remain without Bail or Mainprize,
for the space of three months; unless such Offender shall pay down to the said
person or persons so Tendering the said Oaths, or either of them, such Sum of
Money, not exceeding Forty Shillings; as the said person or persons so tendering
the said Oaths, or either of them, shall require such Offender to pay for his
said refusal; which Money shall be paid to the Select-men, or Overseer^ of the
Poor of the Town, or place where such Offender did last Inhabit.

And unless every such Offender, shall also become bound with two sufficient
Sureties, with condition to be of the good Behavior; and also to appear at the
next General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the same County,
where such Offender does Inhabit or Reside; at which Court of Quarter Sessions,
the said Oaths shall be again Tendered to every such Offender by the Justices
of the said Court in open Sessions. And if the said Offender, shall refuse to
take the said Oaths, or either of them, when Tendered to him by the said
Justices in open Sessions as is aforesaid; the said Justices Tendering the said
Oaths, shall commit the said person and persons so refusing, to the common
Goal, or House of Correction, there to remain for the space of six months,
Penalty for a 2 d refusal.
unless every such Offender shall pay down to the Justices so Tendering the said
Oaths, such Sum of Money, not exceeding Ten Pounds, nor under Five Pounds, as
the said Justices shall require such Offender to pay for his second refusal;
the said Money to be disposed of in manner aforesaid; and unless every such
Offender shall likewise become Bound with two sufficient Sureties, with
condition to be of the good Behavior, until he or they do take the said Oaths.

And whereas there are certain persons who scruple the taking of any Oath.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such person shall make
and subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity following, viz: I A. B. Do sincerely
Promise, and solemnly declare before God and the World; That I will be true and
faithful to King WILLIAM, Declaration of Fidelity.
and Queen MARY: And I do solemnly profess and declare, that I from my Heart,
Abhor, Detest, and Renounce as Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine
and Pos^tion. That Princes Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any
Authority of the S^e of Rome may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or
any other whatsoever. And I do Declare, that no Foreign Prince, Person,
Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any Power, Jurisdiction,
Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within the
Realm of England, or any of Their Majesty's Dominions.

An Act for the Establishing of Forms of Oaths.
BE it Declared and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General ^ourt Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the several
Forms of Oaths here Underwritten, Be and are hereby Established. To be Given
and Administered unto the respective Officers for whom they are appointed. As
follows.

YOU A. B. being Chosen and Admitted of Their Majesty's Council within this
Their Province, Counselors Oath.
Do Swear by the Everliving God. That you will to the best of your Judgment at
all times, freely give your Advice to the Governor, for the good Management of
the Public Affairs of this Government; and that you will not directly nor
indirectly Reveal such matters as shall be Debated in Council, and Committed to
your Secrecy. But will in all things be a true and faithful Counselor when you
are thereunto Required. So help you God.

YOU A B. Do Swear, That as Justice of the Peace in the County of S. according
to the Commission given you. You shall Dispense Justice equally and impartially
in all Cases. Justice of Peace Oath.
And do equal Right to the Poor and to the Rich, after your cunning, wit and
power, and according to Law. And you shall not be of Council in any Quarrel
that shall come before you: You shall not Let for Gift or other Cause. But well
and truly you shall do your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf,
taking only appointed Fees. And you shall not direct or cause to be directed
any Warrant (by you to be made) to the Parties; but you shall direct your
Warrant to the Sheriff, his Under Sheriff or Deputy, Constable, Tything-men, or
other Officers, proper for the Execution of the ^ame in the County. And this
you shall do without favor or respect to persons. So help you God.

YOU Swear, That you will well and truly Serve the King and Queens Majesty's,
in the Office of the Sheriff of the County of S. And do the King and Queens
profit in all things that belongs to you to do by way of your Office, as far
forth as you can or may; Sheriff or Marshals Oath, Mutatis mutandis.
you shall truly keep the King and Queens Right^, and all that belongs to the
Crown; you shall not Respite the King and Queens Debts for any gift or favor,
where you may Raise them without great grievance of the Debtors; you shall
truly and uprightly treat the people of your Sheriffwick, and do right as well
to Poor as to Rich, in all that belongs to your Office; You shall do no wrong
to any man, for any gift or other behest or promise of Goods, for favor nor
hate; you shall disturb no man's Right; you shall truly acquit at the Treasury,
all those of whom you shall any thing receive of Their Majesty's Debts; you
shall nothing take whereby Their Majesty's may lose, or whereby the Right may
be let or disturbed, or Their Majesty's delayed; you shall truly return, and
truly Serve all their Majesty's Writs, as far forth as shall be to your
cunning; you shall take no Bailiff into your Service, b^t such as you will
answer for, and of true and sufficient men in the County, and shall cause each
of your Bailiffs to make such Oath as you make your self in that belongs to
their Occupation. And over this in eschewing and restraint of the Man
slaughters, Robberies, and other manifold grievous offenses that be done daily.
All these things you shall truly observe and keep as God help you.

YOU as Foreman of this Inque^^ for the Body of this County of S. You shall
diligently Enquire, and a true Presentment make of all such matters and things
as shall be given you in Charge; Grand Jurors Oath.
The King and Queens Majesty's Counsel, your Fellows and your own, you shall
keep secret; you shall present no man for envy, hatred or malice; neither shall
you leave any man unpresented for love, fear, favor or affection, or hope of
reward; but you shall present things truly as they come to your knowledge,
according to the best of your understanding. So help you God.

THE same Oath which your Foreman has taken on his part, you and every of you
on your behalf shall well and truly observe and keep. So help you God.

YOU shall well and truly try, Petit Jurors Oath.
and true deliverance make between Our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and
Queen, and the Prisoners at the Bar, whom you shall have in Charge according to
your Evidence. So help you God.

YOU Swear, That in all Causes betwixt party and party that shall be committed
unto you: Jurors Oath in civil cases.
You will give a true Verdict therein according to Law, and the Evidence given
you. So help you God.

YOU Swear, That in the Office of Town Clerk within the Town of B. whereto you
are Chosen: Town Clerks Oath.
You will diligently and faithfully attend and discharge the Duty of your
Place, and duly observe the directions of the Law in all things whereto your
Office has relation, and thereby committed to your care and trust. So help you
God.

Oath of Leather Sealer. Clerk of the Market, Culler of Fish, Packer, Gager,
Mutatis Mutandis.
YOU Swear, That you will from time to time diligently and faithfully Discharge
and Execute the Office of (...) within the Limits whereto you are Appointed for
the Ensuing Year, and until another be Chosen in your place; and that in and by
all the particulars mentioned in the Laws whereto your Office has Relation;
and that you will do therein Impartially according to Law, without Fear or
Favor. So help you God.

WHEREAS you A. B. are Chosen Constable within the Town of C. for one year now
following, and until other be Chosen and Sworn in your Place: You do Swear,
That you will carefully intend the Preservation of the Peace, the discovery and
preventing all attempts against the same: That you will duly Execute all
Warrants which shall be sent unto you from lawful Authority; Constables O^th.
and faithfully attend all such Directions in the Laws, and Orders of Court, as
are, or shall be committed to your care. That you will faithfully and with what
speed you can, Collect and Levy all such Fines, Distresses, Rates, Assessments
and Sums of Money, for which you shall have sufficient Warrants according to
Law; rendering an account thereof, and paying in the same according to the
direction in your Warrant. And with like faithfulness, speed and diligence,
will Serve all Writs, Executions and Distresses in private Causes betwixt party
and party, and make Returns thereof duly into the same Court, where they are
Returnable. And in all these things you shall deal seriously and faithfully
whilst you shall be in Office without any sinister respects of favor or
displeasure. So help you God.

An Act for Regulating Fees.
BE it Enacted and Ordained ^y the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by
the Authority of the same, That the Establishment of the Fees belonging to the
several Offices in this Province; be as follows.

Justices Fees.
l. s. d. FOR every Attachment or Summons for Actions not exceeding Forty
Shillings, Six pence. 00 00 06 See Act impowring Justices to decide differences
not exc^eding 40 s. page.
Sub paena, each Witness, Twopence. 00 00 02 Entering the Action, Three
Shillings. 00 03 00 Every Execution, Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Filing Papers,
each Paper, Twopence. 00 00 02 Every Warrant for Criminals, One Shilling. 00
01 00 Bond for Appeal, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Copy of Evidences, the least
Sixpence. 00 00 06 Copy of a Judgment, Six pence. 00 00 06 Every Recognizance,
Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Confessing Judgment, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Affidavit
out of Court, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Each days Attendance at the Sessions, to
be paid out of the Fines, Four Shillings. 00 04 00 Acknowledging of a Deed or
Mortgage or any other Instrument, Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Coroners Fees.
FOR taking every Inquisition, to be paid out of the Estate of the Deceased,
Thirteen Shillings and Four-pence. 00 13 04 If no Es^a^e then to be paid by the
County Treasurer, Six Shillings and Eight pence 00 06 08 Fees for Probate of
Wills, granting Administrations, etc.
FOR granting Administration, Bond and Letter of Administration, under the Seal
of the Office, if the Inventory amount to Thirty Pounds or upwards, to the
Judge Four Shillings, to the Register, Three Shillings Six pence. ^^ 07 06 If
the Inventory be under Thirty Pounds Five Shillings. 00 05 0^ Probate of a Will
where the Inventory amounts to Thirty Pounds or upwards; to the Judge Three
Shillings and Six pence, to the Register, Two Shillings and Six pence. 00 06 0^
If under Thirty Pounds, Four Shillings. 00 04 00 Recording a Will or Inventory
of one page, and Filing the same, Two Sh^llings and Si^ pence. 00 02 06 If
more, each page of twenty eight lines, eight words in a line, One Shilling. 00
01 00 For a Copy of a Will or Inventory, Twelve-pence a page, each page to
contain as aforesaid. 00 01 00 Allowing Accomp^s, Settling and Dividing of
Intestate Estates, Five Shillings. 00 05 00 Every Citation, One Shilling. 00 01
00 Every Quietus, Four Shillings. 00 04 00 Warrant for Apprizement, Two
Shillings. 00 02 00 Making out a Commission to receive and examine the Claims
of Creditors to Insolvent Estates and Registring of the same, Three Shillings.
00 03 00 Registring of the Commissioners Report after the rate of One Shilling
per page, to be accounted as aforesaid. For Entering an Order upon the
Administrator to pay out the Estate in proportion unto the several Creditors
returned by the Commissioners, One Shilling and Six pence. 00 01 0^ Secretary's
Fees.
FOR Engrossing the Acts or Laws of the General Assembly, Ten Shillings each,
to be paid out of the Public Revenue. 00 10 0^ Every Commission for the
Justices of each County, and Commission of Oyer and Terminer, Ten Shillings, to
be paid out of the Public Revenue. 00 10 0^ Every Commission for a Military
Officer, Three Shillings. to be paid out of the Public Revenue. 00 03 00
Special Warrant or Mittimus by Order of the Governor and Council* each Two
Shillings and six pence. 00 02 06 Every Commission under the Great Seal for
Places of Profit, Ten Shillings. 00 10 00 Every ^ond, Two Shillings. 00 02 00
Every Order of Council (...) the benefit of particular persons, Two Shillings
and six pence. 00 02 06 Every Petition to the Governor and Council or General
Assembly according to the Import from Two Shillings and Sixpence, to Ten
Shillings. A Pass or Sea Brief, Three Shillings. 00 03 00 A Bill of Health,
Three Shillings. 00 03 00 Every Writ for Electing of Assembly-men directed to
the Sheriff or Marshal, under the Province Seal, Five Shillings, to be paid out
of the Public Revenue. 00 05 00 For Transcribing the Acts or Laws passed by
the General Assembly into a Book, Twelve pence a page, each page to contain
Twenty Eight Lines, eight words in a line, and so proportionably, to be paid
out of the Public Revenue.

In the Superior Court.

The Justices Fees.
ENTRY of every Action for Trial, Twelve Shillings. 00 12 00 out of which to
the Clerk, Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Taking every special Bayl, Two Shillings. 00
02 00 Allowing of a Writ of Error, Three Shillings. 00 03 00 Allowing a Habeas
Corpus, Two Shillings. 00 02 00 Confessing Judgment, Two Shillings. 00 02 00
Acknowledging satisfaction of a Judgment on Record, One Shilling. 00 01 00 In
all Criminal Cases where a Fine is set, Six Shillings. 00 06 00 Taxing every
Bill of Cost, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Clerks Fees.
EVERY Writ and the Seal, One Shilling and Sixpence. 00 01 06 Every Rule of
Court, Sixpence. 00 00 06 Filing every Declaration, One Shilling. 00 01 00 To
the Jury to be paid down by the Plaintiff, Six Shillings Six pence 00 06 06
Entering Appearance, Six pence. 00 00 06 Signing a Judgment by default, One
Shilling. 00 01 00 Taking every Verdict and Recording it, One Shilling. 00 01
00 Copies of all Records, Twelve pence. a page, each page containing twenty
eight lines, eight words in a line. 00 01 00 Less than one page, One Shilling.
00 01 00 Every Action withdrawn or Nonsuit, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Every
Petition Read, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Order thereon, One Shilling. 00 01 00
Filing the Records of each Action, Twopence a Paper. 00 00 02 Every Execution,
Two Shillings. 00 02 00 In Criminal Cases.
Drawing and Engrossing every Indictment or Information, Two Shillings. 00 02
00 Every Appearance, Sixpence. 00 00 06 For the Discharge of any person upon
Bail for the peace, good behavior, contempt and the like and Warrant thereon,
One Shilling. 00 01 00 For Awarding and making forth Process against the
Defendant on Information, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Every Warrant for the peace or
good behavior, One Shilling. 00 01 00

In the Inferior Court.

Justices Fees.
ENTRY of every Action, Ten Shillings. Of which the Clerk 1 quarter. 00 10 00
Of which the Clerk is to have Two Shillings. Of which the Clerk 1 quarter. 00
02 00 Taking Special Bail, Two Shillings. Of which the Clerk 1 quarter. 00 02
00 Co^^essing Judgment, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Ack^^^ledging Satisfaction of
Judgment on Record, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Taxing every Bill of Cost, One
Shilling. 00 01 00 whereof Six pence to the Clerk. 00 00 06 To the Jury to be
paid down by the Plaintiff, Six Shillings, Six pence. 00 06 06 Clerks Fees.
FOR every Writ and Seal, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Entering Appearance, Six pence.
00 00 06 Entering and Recording the Verdict, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Making up
the Record, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Copys of all Records, Twelve-pence. each
page as before*. 00 01 00 Every Action withdrawn or Nonsuit, One Shilling: 00
01 00 Every Execution, Two Shillings. 00 0^ 00 Clerk of the Sessions or Peace,
his Fees.
ENTERING Complaint or Indictment, Two Shillings* 00 02 00 Discharge of a
Recognizance, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Making forth Process against Criminals,
One Shilling. 00 01 00 Every Summons, Three pence. 00 00 03 Every Warrant for
the Peace, or good Behavior, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Every License for Houses
of public Entertainment or Retailing, Four Shillings. 00 04 00 whereof two to
the Clerk. 00 0^ 00 Sheriff or Marshals F^^s. Or Constables
FOR Serving every Summons for Trial, One Shilling. 00 01 00 Every Capias or
Attachment, Two Shillings and if above one mile, Three pence per Mile besides;
Bayl Bond One Shilling. 00 02 00 Levying Execution, for the first Twenty Pound
or under, One Shilling per Pound, above that, not exceeding Forty Pound, Six
pence per Pound. 00 01 00 Above Forty Pound, not exceeding One Hundred Pound,
Three pence per Pound, for whatsoever it exceeds One Hundred Pound, Two pence
per Pound, besides Four pence per Mile for Travel from Home. Every Trial, One
Shilling. 00 01 00 Every Precept for Choosing of Representatives, Two
Shillings, to be paid out of the County Assessment. 00 02 00 Cryers Fees.
FOR calling of the Jury, Sixpence. 00 00 06 Every Non Suit, Twelve-pence. 00
01 00 Every Verdict, Twelve pence. ^0 01 00 Goalers Fees.
FOR Turning of the Key upon every Prisoner Committed Five Shillings, viz.
Commitment 2 s. 6 d. Discharge 2 s. 6 d. 00 05 00 For Diet for each Prisoner,
Two Shillings and sixpence per week, and so proportionable, he finding the
same. 00 02 06

And be i^ further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That what Officer soever
shall ask, demand and take any greater or other Fees than are beforementioned
for the matters aforesaid, Penalty for taking excessive Fees.
or any of them, and be thereof duly Convicted in any Court of Record within
this Province, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Pounds current Money, one
Moiety whereof to be unto Our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen,
Their Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government of
this Their Province, and the contingen^ Charges ther^^f: And the other Moiety
unto the Informer, or him that shall Sue for the same in any Court of Record;
wherein no essoign, protection, or wager of Law shall be allowed. And shall
further pay unto the party grieved, double the value of the excessive Fees so
taken.

An Act for Ascertaining the number, and Regulating the House of
Representatives.
WHEREAS Their Majesty's have been Graciously pleased by Their Royal Charter,
to grant power unto the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their Province
of the Massachusetts Bay; from time to time to direct, appoint, and declare,
what number of Representatives each County, Town or place shall Elect and
Depute to serve for and represent them respectively, in the said Assembly.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor, Cou^^il
and Representatives, now in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of
the same, That henceforth every Town within this Province, c^^sisting of the
number of forty Freeholders, and other Inhabitants qualified by Charter to
Elect, Towns consisting of 40 Freeholders or other In habitants qualifyed to
choose to send one Representative.
shall and hereby are Enjoined to Choose and send one Freeholder as their
Representative; and every Town consisting of the number of one hundred and
twenty Freeholders and other Inabitants, qualified as aforesaid, or upwards,
may send two such Representatives, and each Town of the number of Thirty
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants qualified as aforesaid, or upwards, under
Forty, are at liberty to send one or not; but may choose and send one
Representative, if they think fit, to serve for, and represent them
respectively in every Session of the Great and General Court or Assembly from
time to time. And all Towns under thi^ty Freeholders, One hundred and tw^nt^ or
upwards, may send two.
may send one to represent them, or join with the next Town in the Choice of
their Representatives, they paying a proportionable part of the Charge. And no
Town, shall at any time send more than two Representatives* except Boston, who
are hereby granted to choose and send four. B^ston four


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as His Excellency the Governor shall see cause to Convene and Hold a Great and
General Court or Assembly, Writs shall Issue out from the Secretary's Office
under the Seal of the Province, and signed by the Governor, thirty days at
least, Writts for calling a general Assembly to issue 30 days before.
before the time appointed for such Assemblies meeting, directed unto the
Sheriffs of the several Counties. And where there is no Sheriff in any County
or place, there to be directed to the Marshal, commanding each of them
respectively to send his Precepts to the Select-men of the several and
respective Towns within such County, to assemble and call together the
Freeholders and other Inhabitants qualified as aforesaid, to choose and elect
one or more Freeholders, as the number in each Town is more or less, as above,
to serve for and represent them in such Great and General Court or Assembly:
The major part of the Select-men in each Town respectively, to be present at
such Meeting, Select-men to regulate the meeting.
and to give directions for the regular and orderly carrying on of the same:
Who are to return the said Precept with the names of such as shall be Chosen by
the major part of the Electors present at such Meeting, under their Hands unto
the respective Sheriffs or Marshals by them to b^ returned into the Secretary's
Office, one day at the least, before the time prefixed for the said Court or
Assemblies Sitting.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, House of Representatives
judges of Elections etc.
That the Representatives Assembled in any Great and General Court, shall be
the sole Judges of the Elections and Qualifications of their own Members; and
may from time to time settle, order and purge their House, and make such
necessary Orders for the due Regulation thereof, as they shall see occasion.
Forty Representatives constitute a house.
And forty Representatives at any time so Assembled, shall be accounted a
number sufficient to Constitute a House, Pass Bills, and to transact and do any
Business proper to be done in that House; and such Acts to be esteemed valid
and of Effect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Town
respectively shall pay unto their several Representatives, Representatives
Allowance.
during their Attendance on the Court, and for the necessary time expended in
their Journeying to and from thence; Three Shillings in Money Per Diem, within
one Month next after the end of each Session commencing from His Excellencies
Arrival.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person Chosen
to Serve for, and Represent any Town in the General Assembly, Penalty for non
attendance.
and accepting thereof, shall give his constant Attendance, during their
Sessions, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Five Shillings Per Diem for his
neglect (without just excuse made and allowed of by the House of
Representatives) to be paid unto the Clerk of the said House, and is to be
disposed of and implo^ed as the House shall direct; and in default of payment,
to be Levied by Distress upon such Delinquents Goods, by Warrant from the said
Clerk, by Order of the House, directed to the Sheriff of the County, his
Undersheriff or Deputy, or Constable of the Town where such Representative
dwel^s; and no Representative shall depart or absent himself from the General
Assembly, until the same be fully finished, adjourned or prorogued, without the
License of the Speaker and Representatives Assembled, to be Entered upon Record
in the Clerks Book, Not to depart without leave of the Speaker and the house.
on pain to every one so departing or a^senting himself in any other manner, to
lose his Wages. And the Inhabitants of such Town for which he Serves, shall be
clearly discharged of the said Wages against such person, and his Executors for
ever.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Member of the
General Assembly, No Represensentative or his Servant to be arrest^d etc.
during the S^ssion.
or his Servant during the time of their Sessions, or going to and from thence
shall be Arrested, Sued, Imprisoned, or any ways molested or troubled, or
compelled to make answer to any Suit, Bill, Plaint or Declaration, or
otherwise: Cases of High Treason and Felony excepted.

An Act for the preventing of Danger by the French Residing within this
Province.
THere having been frequent Complaints made to this Court, That although
several French Protestants who lately fled from Persecution; came Over-Sea into
this Province, and were charitably Entertain^d and Succored here; yet since
that, many of a contrary Religion and Interest, have been brought hither, and
others have Obtruded themselves; which (especially in this time of War, between
the Two Crowns of England and France) proves a grievous Inconvenience; and the
Public Safety is endangered by suffering such a mixed Company among us.

For Remedy whereof,

It is Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, No French to
reside or be in any Seaport or Frontier Town without License.
That from and after the second day of January ne^t Ensuing; none of the French
Nation be permitted to reside or be in any of the Seaport or Frontier Towns
within this Province; but such as shall be Licensed by the Governor and
Council. Nor shall any of said Nation open Shop, or exercise any Manual Trade
in any of the Towns of this Province* without the Approbation of the
Select-men, first orderly obtained in Writing under their hands, on pain of
Imprisonment.

And any two Justices of the Peace ( Quorum Unus) within their respective
Precincts, are hereby Empowered to Commit to Prison any person or persons
legally Convicted of Offending against-this Act; upon the complaint of the
Select men in any Town, or any two of them; and to remain in Prison, until
Released by Order of the Governor and Council.

ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the M^^^^chusetts-Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston the
Eighth of June, 1692. and Continued by several Adjournments unto the Eighth day
of February following.
An Act for the Explaining and Altering of some Clauses, and Sentences; and the
Repealing of some others, contained in several Acts made and passed at the
Second Session of this Court in October last, 1692.
BE it Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and it is Enacted and Declared by the Authority of the same, That
whereas in the Act Entitled, An Act, For the Settling and Distribution of the
Estates of Intestates, amongst other things, thereby Enacted and Provided,
there is a Saving to the Party agrieved, at any Order, Sentence or Decree, made
for the Settlement and Distribution of any Intestate Estate, their right of
Appeal unto the Governor and Council.

It is now Declared and Enacted, That such Right of Appeal, shall to all
intents and purposes, exte^d and be taken and construed to extend, Appeals from
the Judge of Probate enlarged.
as well ^o any other Order, Sentence, Decree or Denial, that shall at any time
be made and given by the Judge of Probate, referring to the approbation and
allowance of any Will, gr^nt of Administration or other matter; Any thing in
said Act, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further it is Enacted and Declared, That the Judge of Probate in each
County respectively, when and so often as there shall be occasion; Guardians to
be allowed by the Judge of Probate.
Be, and hereby is Empowered, to allow of Guardians, that shall be Chosen by
Minors of fourteen years of Age, and to appoint Guardians for such as shall be
within that Age; taking sufficient Security of all such Guardians for the
faithful discharge of their Trust, according to Law: And to Account either to
the Judge or Minor, when such Mino^ shall arrive at full Age, or at such other
time as the Judge upon complaint to him made shall see cause.

AND whereas in one other Act, Entitled, An Act, For Affirming of former
Judgments, and providing for Executions. Amongst other things thereby Enacted,
It is Provided, that Appeals then depending, having (...) been Heard, shall be
Heard and Tried at the first Superior Court.

It is hereby Explained and Declared, to be understood and intended, and shall
be construed to intend, the first Superior Court to sit within or for that
County, where the Action was originally and first Tried.

And for further Explanation and an Addition to the Section or Paragraph of
said last mentioned Act, wherein provision is made, That a Scire Facias do
issue forth upon any Judgment passed in any County Court or Court of
Commissioners.

It is hereby Declared, to extend, and shall be construed and taken to extend
as well to any Judgment passed in any Court of Assistants, Superior or
Inferior Court at any time whatsoever; where Execution has not been taken out
or not levied for satisfying of the same, such Writ of Scire Facias to be
granted out of the Clerks Office, of the Superi^ur or Inferior Court
respectively to be held within or for the same County, where such Judgment was
given.

And whereas by the Pr^cedent or Form for an Execution, the Officer is
Commanded for want of Goods, Chattels or Lands of the Debtor, to be by him
shown or found within the Precinct, to take the Body of such De^^^r and Commit
him to Prison.

It is hereby Explained, Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
where Judgment is granted for Money, or any particular Specie, Judgments to be
satisfied in Specie.
the Creditor shall not be compelled to take any other Specie; but in every
such case, for want thereof, the Officer shall ta^^ the Body of the Debtor, in
Execution, and Imprison him; unless such C^^^^tor shall be content to receive
his satisfaction in such other Estate as may be tendered or found. And these
words, To the Acceptance of the said A. B. shall be supplied and inserted in
the Writ of Execution, to follow next the word Precinct.

And b^ it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That as
well Original as Judicial Writs Issuing out of the Clerks Office, of the
Inferior Courts of Judicature respectively shall run into any County within
this Province, Writs to run through the Province.
and be there Executed by the Officer or Officers of such County to whom they
are directed.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the Clause in the Act, Entitled,
An Act for the Regulating and Encouragement of Fishery, That henceforth no
Mackeril shall be Caught (except for spending whilst fresh) before the first of
July annually, Prohibition of Mackarel being caught before the first of July
Repealed.
be, and hereby is fully repealed and made void: Any thing therein to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas by one other Act, Entitled, An Act for the Settlement and Support
of Ministers and School Masters amongst other things therein Enacted: It is
Ordained, That every Minister, being a person of good Conversation, Able,
Learned and Orthodox, that shall be Chosen by the major part of the Inhabitants
in any Town, at a Town Meeting duly warned for that purpose; notice thereof
being given to the Inhabitants fifteen days before the time for such Meeting)
shall be the Minister of such Town, Repeal of the paragraph in the Act for
Settlement of Ministers.
and the whole Town shall be obliged to pay toward his Settlement and
Maintenance; each man his several proportion thereof. Upon further
consideration of the said Section or Paragraph in said Act, and the
impracticableness of the method therein proposed for the Choice of a Minister,
in diverse Towns, wherein there are more Churches than one, and Inconveniences
attending the same not so well before seen.

It is Enacted and Declared, That the before recited Section or Paragraph, and
all and every the Clauses therein contained, shall from henceforth be Repealed
and Revoked, and are hereby Repealed and utterly made void for ever: Any thing
in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Declared and Ordained, That the Paragraphs and Sections
hereafter following, Be Enacted, and by the Authority afo^^said are Enacted, in
Addition to the remaining part of said Act relating to Ministers: Ministers how
to be Chosen.
That is to say, That each respective gathered Church in any Town or Place
within this Province, that at any time shall be in want of a Minister, such
Church shall have power according to the directions given in the Wo^d of God to
choose their own Minister.

And the major part of such Inhabitants as do there* usually attend on the
Public Worship of God, and are by Law duly qualified for Voting in Town
Affairs, concurring with the Churches Act, the person thus Elected and
Approved, accepting thereof, and settling with them shall be the Minister,
toward whose Settlement and Maintenance all the Inhabitants and rateable
Estates lying within such Town, or part of a Town, or place limited by Law for
upholding the Public Worship of God, shall be obliged to pay in proportion.
Provided, That nothing herein contained is intended or shall be construed to
extend to Abridge the Inhabitants of Boston of their accustomed way and
practice as to the Choice and Maintenance of their Ministers.

Be it further Enacted, That in such Towns or Places where there is no Church
Gathered, the Ra^^^ble Inhabitants of such Town or Place, Advice of
Neighboring Ministers to be had.
at a Meeting duly warned for that pu^^^se, (notice thereof being given fifteen
days before the time of such Meeting) by the major Vote of such Assembly then
and there met, with the advice of three Neighboring Ordained Ministers, shall
Choose and Call an Orthodox, Learned and Pious Person, to Dispense the Word of
God unto them; to the Settlement and Maintenance of which Minister, all
Ra^eable Estates, and Inhabitants within such Town or place shall be assessed,
and pay proportionably.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Town or
Place shall be negligent of their Duty by Law required, respecting the
Maintenance of the Ministry, the Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace within
the same County, upon Complaint to them made, Sessions of the Peace to provide
Remedy in case of neglect of Maintenance of the Ministry.
are Empowered and Required effectually to provide for Remedy thereof, and by
Warrant from said Court, to Convent before them the Select-men, or oth^^s
specially appointed by the Inhabitants of such Town or place, to take care
(...) that matter, (having accepted such Betrustment;) and upon Conviction of
neglect therein, (...) ^^^pose a Fine upon the Delinquents not exceeding Forty
Sh^llings each p^^^^n ^or the first o^^ence: And upon a second conviction of
such neglect, to impose a Fine of Four Pounds upon each person, and the like
Sum of Four Pounds for every after Conviction: Such fines to be Levied by
Distress and S^^e of the Offenders Goods returning the Overplus (if any be)
and to be disposed to the use of the Poor of the same Town or place, by the
Select-men, or Overseers of the Poor.

An Act for the Registring of Births and Deaths.
FOR preventing of great uncertainty and inconvenience that may happen, for
want of a particular Register of Births and Deaths.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General C^^rt
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That every Town Clerk within this
Province, shall be, and is hereby Empowered and Required, to take an account of
all persons, that shall be Born, or shall Dye, Town Clerk to Register Births
and Deaths.
within each Town respectively, and the Precincts thereof; and fairly to
Register in a Book, their Names and Sirnames, as also the Names and Sirnames of
their Parents, with the time of their Birth and Death. And the Clerk shall
demand and receive the Fee of Three pence, and no more, for each Birth or
Death, by him so Registered; to be paid by the Parents, or others nextly related
to, or concerned with the party Born or Dying. And if any shall refuse or
neglect to give notice to the Town Clerk of the Birth or Death of any person
that they are so related to, or concerned for; or to pay for Registring as
abovesaid; by the space of Thirty Days next after such Birth or Death: every
person so refusing or neglecting, and being (upon the complaint of any Town
Clerk) thereof convicted before a Justice of Peace within the same County,
shall forfeit and pay unto such Clerk, the Sum of Five Shillings; to be Levied
by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods by Warrant from such Justice; if
payment thereof be not made within four days next after Conviction as
aforesaid. And every Town Clerk shall give forth from the Registry a fair
Certificate under his hand of persons Born or Dying in the Town, to any who
shall desire the same; and ^e shall receive Six pence and no more for every
Certificate so given.

ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston the
Thirty first Day of May, 1693.
An Act for the Restraining the taking Excessive Usury.
FORASMUCH as the abatement of Interest has always been found Beneficial to
the Advancement of Trade, and Improvement of Lands by good Husba^^dry; and
whereas the taking of Eight in the Hundred for the Interest of Money, tends to
the great discouragement of Ing^^^ity and Industry in the Husbandry, Trade, and
Commerce of this Province.

Be it for the Reasons aforesaid, Enacted by the Govern^^r, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and it is Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the
first day of August, in the year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
Three; Six pound Per Cent. Interest per Annum for loan of Money.
upon any Contract to be made after that time, shall take directly or
indirectly, for Loan of any Moneys, Wares, Merchandise, or other Commodities
whatsoever, above the value of Six Pounds for the forbearance of One Hundred
Pounds for a year; and so after that rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a
longer or shorter time; and that all Bonds, Contracts, Mortgages and Assurances
whatsoever, made after the time aforesaid, for the payment of any principal or
Money lent or covenanted to be lent, upon or for Usury, whereupon or whereby
there shall be Reserved, or taken above the rate of Six Pounds in the Hundred
as aforesaid, Penalty for Contracting for more
shall be utterly void; and that all and every person and persons whatsoever,
which shall after the time aforesaid upon any Contract, take, accept and
receive by way or means of any corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange, or by Coven, or
deceitful conveyance, or by any other way or means whatsoever, for the
forbearing or giving day of payment for one whole year, of, and for their Money
or other thing or things above the Sum of Six Pounds for the forbearing of One
Hundred Pounds for a year; and so after that rate for a greater or lesser Sum,
or for a longer or shorter time; shall forfeit and lose for every such Offense
the full value of the Goods and Moneys, or other things so lent exchanged,
bargained, sold, or agreed for; one Moiety thereof to Their Majesty's, toward
the Support of the Government of this Province, and the contingent Charges
thereof, the other Moiety to the Informer that shall Sue for the same; any
Custom, Usage or Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, nothing in this Act shall extend to the letting of Cattle, or other
Usages of like nature, A Saving.
in practice amongst Farmers, or Maritime Contracts among Merchants, as
Bottommary, or course of Exchange as has been heretofore accustomed.

An Act for Confirmation of Titles within the Islands of Capawock, alias
Martha's Vineyard, and Nantuckett.
WHEREAS Their Most Gracious Majesty's, our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King
William and Queen Mary, in and by Their Royal Charter, or Letters Patents,
bearing date at Westminster, the seventh day of October, In the third year of
Their said Majesty's Reign; for the Uniting, Erecting and Incorporating of the
Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, and Colony of New Plymouth the Province of
Main, the Territory called Accada, or Nova Scotia, and all that Tract of Land
lying between the said Territories of Nova Scotia, and the said Province of
Main, into one real Province, by the name of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England: have therein particularly named, comprehended
and included the Islands of Capawock and Nantuckett as part of the said
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, and annexed the same thereto: And also all
Islands and Islets, lying within Ten Leagues directly opposite to the main Land
within the said Bounds.

And whereas Their said Majesty's have also been graciously pleased in and by
Their said Letters Patents, to grant and ordain that all and every such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments and other Estates, which any person or persons, or
Bodies Politic and Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools, do hold
and enjoy or ought to have, hold and enjoy within the bounds of the said
Charter, by or under any Grant or Estate duly made or granted, by any General
Court formerly held, or by virtue of the Letters Patents herein before recited,
or by any other lawful right or title whatsoever; shall be by such person or
persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools,
their respective Heirs, Successors and Assigns for ever hereafter held and
enjoyed according to the purport and intent of such respective Grant: Under and
subject nevertheless to the Rents and Services thereby reserved or made
payable, etc. as in and by the before recited Charter, or Letters Patents,
reference thereto being had, does and will more fully and at large appear.

But forasmuch as the said Island of Capawock, alias Martha's Vineyard, and the
Island of Nantuckett, were for some time under the Rule and Government of the
Province of New York, and the Properties and Titles of the Lands upon the said
Islands respectively, being derived and founded upon several Grants and Patents
made and granted by the successive Governors of the said Province of New York;
and so legal there according to the constitution, usage and custom of the
Government of said New York. And the Inhabitants and Proprietors of Lands
within the said Island of Capawock, alias Martha's Vineyard and the Island of
Nantuckett, for their better quiet and satisfaction, desiring this Courts
confirmation of the same.

It is therefore Declared and Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That all Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other Estates held and enjoyed by
any person or persons, Towns or Villages within the said Islands of Capawock,
alias Martha's Vineyard and Nantuckett, and each of them respectively, by or
un^^r any Grant or Estate duly made or granted by any former Government, or by
the Successive Governors of New York, or any other lawful Right or Title
whatsoever; shall be by such person or persons Towns or Villages, their
respecti^^ Heirs, Successors and Assigns for ever hereafter held and enjoyed,
accordi^^ ^o the true purport and intent of such respective Grant, under and
subje^^ ^^^ertheless to the Rents and Services thereby reserved or made
payable: And are hereby ratified and confirmed as fully and amply to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as the Lands in any other parts or places
within this Province, by virtue of Their Majesty's Royal Charter.

An Act for Encouraging the Killing of Wolves.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, Convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, Wolves to be paid for out
of the Town Stock.
That whosoever has since the Fourteenth day of May, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Two: or shall hereafter Kill any grown Wolf within this Province,
and bring the head thereof unto the Constable of the Town in which such Wolf
shall be Killed, or to the Constable of the Town next Adjacent unto the place
of Killing such Wolf, without the bounds of any Township, shall have a Receipt
of the Constable for the same, and the Constable shall cut off both the Ears
from such Head; and the party producing the Constables Receipt unto the Select
men of said Town, or some one of them, shall be allowed and paid out of the
Towns Stock, the Sum of Twenty Shillings for every Head as aforesaid, of a
grown Wolf by him Killed, and the Sum of Five Shillings for every Wolves Whelp.

And the better to furnish the Select-men with a Stock sufficient to answer
such Payments.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Select men of each
Town respectively, Select men to Assess their Town yearly for this occasion, to
be reimburst out of the public Treasury.
shall be, and hereby are sufficiently Authorized and Empowered to assess the
Inhabitants of their Town yearly, in due proportion as near as they can, such
Sum and Sums as they shall judge necessary to serve that Occasion, together
with other Charges of the Town, and to cause the same to be Collected in manner
as is by Law directed for the gathering of Town Rates: And (...) such Sum and
Sums of Money, so paid out of any Town Stock, for the Killing of Wolves, the
same being made to appear, shall be allowed unto such Town by the General
Treasurer of the Province out of the Public Revenue.

ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston the
Thirty first day of May, 1693 and continued by Ajournment unto the Sixth day of
July following.
An Act for the Partition of Lands etc. and the Recovery of Legacies at the
common Law.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, Convened in
General Court, and by the Authority of the same, That all persons having or
holding, or that hereafter shall have or hold, any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, Partition of Lands betwixt Coparceners etc. to be forced by the
common Law.
as Coparceners, joint-Tenants, or Tenants in Common, may be compelled by writ
of Partition at the common Law to divide the same; where the parties cannot
agree to make Partition thereof by themselves.

Provided this Act shall not be understood to repeal, or any ways alter any
clause or clauses in the Act, for Regulating of Town-ships, referring to
undivided or common Lands.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any certain
Legacy is or shall be bequeathed and given by any person in his or her last
Will and Testament; Legacies to be recovered at the common Law.
As also where any residuary or uncertain Legacy is, or shall by the Account of
any Executor be reduced to a certainty; every such Legacy and Legacies as
aforesaid, may be Sued for, and recovered at the common Law; any Law, custom or
usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Additional Act for the punishing of Criminal Offenses.
WHEREAS the breach of sundry Criminal Laws of this Province, is only
Punishable by Fines, and many times the breakers of them have not Money to
satisfy the same.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives, Convened
in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, Criminal Offenses to be
punished by Setting in the Stocks etc. where the Offenders cannot otherwise
satisfy ^he Law.
That henceforward it shall be in the power of any Justice of the Peace, that
shall have Cognizance thereof, to Punish breakers of the Peace, Prophaners of
the Sabbath, and unlawful Gamesters, Drunkards, or profane Swearers or
Cursers, by setting in the Stocks, or putting into the Cage, not exceeding
three Hours, or Imprisonment twenty four Hours, or by Whipping, not exceeding
ten Stripes; as the case may deserve, and where the offender has not
wherewithal to satisfy the Law in that case provided.

ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston the
Eighth Day of November, 1693.
An Act Relating to Sureties upon Mean Process in Civil Actions.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same It is Ordered and Enacted, That
where Bail is given upon Mean Process in any Civil Action, not only for the
appearance of the party to answer the Suit, but also to abide the Order or
Judgment of the Court that shall be given thereon, every such Surety or
Sureties shall be obliged to satisfy the Judgment in case of the Principals
avoidance, and the Return of Non est inventus upon the Execution; unless the
Surety at the time of Entering up Judgment do bring the Principal into Court and
move to be discharged; upon which the Court shall Order the Keeper of the
Prison to receive him into Custody, that so his Body may be taken in Execution.
And the party for whom the Judgment was given may have a Writ of Scire Facias
out of the same Court against such Surety or Sureties, and in case no just
cause be shown to the contrary, the Judgment shall be affirmed against the
Surety or Sureties with the additional Costs of Suit and Execution be
accordingly granted.

Always Provided, That such Writ of Scire Facias be taken out and served upon
the Surety within Twelve Months after the first Trial and not afterward, and
every Surety of whom such recovery is made, may bring his Action for damages
against the principal Debtor.

An Act for Passing of Sheriff's Accounts.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That every Clerk of the Peace in
each County within this Province, and Clerk of Assize shall deliver unto the
Sheriff of the County a perfect Estreat of all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments,
Recognizances, Moneys and Forfeitures imposed, set, lost or forfeited in any
Sessions of the Peace, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, or Special
Court of Oyer and Terminer, by any Person, due to Their Majesty's within the
space of Thirty days next after the ending of the said Courts respectively;
and within said time shall deliver unto the Treasurer and Receiver General of
said* Province, a perfect Schedule of all such Estreats by him delivered to the
Sheriff, on pain of forfeiting to Their Majesty's for the Support of the
Government, the Sum o^ Five Pounds for each neglect, upon Conviction thereof
before the Justices of the same Court.

And the Justices of each of said Courts respectively are hereby Empowered to
audit, examine and adjust the said Accounts of the Sheriff, and upon Payment of
what shall be found remaining due thereupon, to grant the Sheriff a Quietus est.

And whenever any Sheriff upon passing his Accounts shall have his Quietus
est, he shall be thereby absolutely discharged of all Sums of Money by him
levied and received, and pretended not to be accounted for within the said
Account, whereupon he had his Quietus; unless such Sheriff shall be called in
question for such Sum or Sums of Money so pretended to be levied, within two
years after the time of such Account and Quietus.

An Act for Regulating of the Militia.
WHEREAS for the Honor and Service of Their Majesty's, and for the Security of
this Their Province against any Violence or Invasion whatever: It is necessary
that due care be taken that the Inhabitants thereof be Armed, Trained, and in a
suitable posture and readiness for the ends aforesaid; and that every Person
may know his duty and be obliged to perform the same.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Ordained and Enacted by
the Authority of the same.

1. THAT all Male Persons from Sixteen years of Age to Sixty, (other than such
as are herein after excepted) shall bear Arms, Persons liable to Train,
and duly attend all Musters and Military Exercises of the respective Troops
and Companies where they are lifted or belong, allowing three Months time to
e^^ry Son next after his coming to Sixteen years of Age; and every Servant so
long after his time is out; to provide themselves with Arms and Ammunition etc.

2. AND the Clerk of each Troop and Company once a Quarter yearly, Clerk to
take a list four times a year
shall take an Exact List of all Persons living within the Precincts of such
Troop or Company, and present the same to the Captain or Chief Officer, on pain
of forfeiting Forty Shillings for each default, to be paid to the Captain or
Chief Officer to the use of the Company. And in case of non payment, to be
levied by distress and sale of the offenders goods, by virtue of a Warrant from
the Captain or Chief Officer, who is hereby Empowered to grant the same.

3. THAT every Person listed in any Troop or Company shall so continue and
attend all duty in such Troop or Company, Persons to attend duty where listed
till orderly dismissed.
or otherwise suffer the penalty by Law provided, until orderly dismissed or
removed out of the Town or Precinct; and in case of removal into the Precinct
of another Company in the same Town, to produce a Certificate under the hand of
the Captain or Chief Officer of the Precinct whereto he is removed, that he is
listed there.

4. IF any Person liable to be listed as aforesaid, Penalty on such as shall
Shift to avoid listing.
do exempt himself by Shifting from house to house, or place to place, to avoid
being so listed; he shall pay as a Fine for every such offense, to the use of
the Company to which he belongs, Ten Shillings, being Convicted before any
Justice of the Peace of the County.

5. THAT every listed Soldier and other Householder (except Troopers) shall be
always provided with a well fixed Firelock Musket, Foot Soldiers how to be
Armed.
of Musket or Bastard Musket bore; the Barrel not less than three foot and a
half long, or other good Fire Arms to the Satisfaction of the Commission
Officers of the Company, a Snapsack, a Collar with Twelve Bandeleers or
Cartouch-box, one Pound of good Powder, twenty Bullets fit for his Gun, and
Twelve Flints, a good Sword or Cutlash, a Worm and Priming-wire fit for his
Gun; on penalty of Six Shillings for want of such Arms as is hereby required,
and Two Shillings for each other defect, and the like Sum for every four weeks
he shall remain unprovided; the Fi^e to be paid by Parents for their Sons under
Age, and under their Command; and by Masters or heads of Families, for their
Servants, other than Servants upon Wages.

6. THAT every Trooper shall be always provided with a good serviceable Horse
of Five Pounds value, and not less than fourteen hands high, (the same to be
determined by the two chief Commission Officers) covered (...) a good Saddle,
Troopers how to be furnished.
^it, Bridle, Holsters, Pectoral and Croope^, and furni^^ed with a Carbine, the
Barrel not less than two foot and half long, with (...) and Swivel, a case of
good Pistols; with a Sword or Cutla^^ a (...) or Cartouch box; on^ pound of
good Powder, three pounds of s^^eable Bullets, twenty Flints, and a good pair
of Boots and Spurs; on penalty of Twelve Shillings for want of such Horse as is
hereby ordered, and Three Shillings a piece for every other defect, and the
like Sum for every six weeks he shall remain unprovided: and that each Trooper
(...) his Horse, and shall not dispose thereof without the consent of his chief
Officer on the penalty of Five Pounds: And for nonappearance at the time and
place appointed for Exercise, every listed Trooper for each days neglect shall
pay Ten Shillings Fine.

7. THAT there may be two Troops in a Regiment, each of which Troops shall not
exceed Sixty men with Officers.

8. THAT Regimental Musters shall be but once in three years, (except in
Boston) And every Captain or Chief Officer of any Company or Troop in any
Regiment, shall be obliged on penalty of Five Pounds, to draw forth his Company
or Troop, Regimental Musters, and Training of particular Companies.
or cause them to be drawn forth four days Annually, and no more, to Exercise
them in Motions, the use of Arms, and Shooting at Marks, or other Military
Exercises, which every person liable to Train, having been duly warned, and not
appearing and attending the same, shall for each days neglect pay a Fine of
Five Shillings.

9. THAT the Commission Officers of any Company or Troop, or the major part of
them, may order the correcting and punishing disorders and contempt on a
Training Day, Commission Officers power.
or on a Watch, the punishment not being greater than laying Neck and Heels,
Riding the Wooden Horse, or Ten Shillings fine.

10. THAT there be Military Watches appointed and kept in every Town at such
times, in such places, and in such numbers, and under such Regulations as the
chief Military Officers of each Town shall appoint, Military Watches.
or as they may receive Orders from the Chief Officer of the Regiment: And that
all persons able of Body, or that are of Estate (and not exempted by Law) shall
by themselves or some meet person in their stead, to the acceptance of the
Commander of the Watch, attend the same, on penalty of Five Shillings for each
defect; there having been due warning given.

11. EVERY Soldier or other person liable by Law, refusing or neglecting to
attend Military Exercises, on Training days; or Military Watches, that shall
not pay, Penalty for not attending Military Exercises.
or have no Estate to be found whereon to levy the fine, it shall be in the
power of the Captain, or Chief Officers of such Company on the next Training
day after such neglect (he not having satisfied the Clerk) to punish him for
such offense, by laying Neck and Heels, or Riding the Wooden Horse, not
exceeding one Hours time: And if such Delinquent shall absent himself the
second Training day, without giving sufficient reason to the Captain, or Chief
Officer for the same; it shall be in the power of the Chief Officer of the
Company to direct a Warrant to the Constable of the Town, requiring him to
apprehend such Delinquent, and bring him into the Field, that he may be punished
according as by this Law is provided: And all Constables are hereby Required to
Execute such Warrants accordingly.

12. THAT the Persons hereafter named be Exempted from all Trainings, viz. The
Members of the Council, the Representatives, for the time being, Persons
Exempted from Training.
the Secretary, Justices of the Peace, Praesident, Fellows, Students, and
Servants of Harvard College Exempted by Colledge-Charter, Masters of Art,
Ministers, Elders and Deacons of Churches, Sheriffs, allowed Physicians, or
Chyrurgeons, and professed Schoolmasters, all such as have had Commissions, and
Served as Field-Officers, or Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns, C^r^ners,
Treasurers, Attourney-Gen^^al, Deputy-Sheriffs, Clerks of Courts, Constables,
constant Ferrym^n, and one M^^ler to each Grist-Mill: Officers employed in and
about Their Majesty's Revenues, all Masters of Vessels of Thirty Tons and
upwards, usually employed beyond Sea, and constant Herdsmen, Lame persons or
otherwise disabled in Body (producing Certificate thereof from two able
Chyrurgeons) Indians and Negroes.

13. THAT the Persons hereafter named be and hereby are Exempted from Military
Watches and Wardings, viz. The Members of the Council, Secretary, Persons
Exempted from Military Watches etc.
Representatives, for the time being, Praesident, Fellows, Students of Harvard
College, and the Gentlemen belonging to the Troop of the Governors Guard,
M^nisters and Elders of Churches, allowed Physicians and Chyrurgeons,
Constables, constant Ferrymen, and one Miller to each Grist-Mill.

14. THAT the Captain and Commission Officers of each Company or Troop shall
and hereby are fully empowered to nominate and appoint meet persons to Serve as
Sergeants and Corporals in the respective Companies or Troops, Commission
Officers to appoint Sergeants and Corporals.
and displace them, and appoint others in their room, (...) they shall see meet.

15. THAT twice every year or oftener, if required, every Captain or Chief
Officer of each Company or Troop shall give order for a diligent enquiry into
the state of his Company, and for taking an exact List of the Names of his
Soldiers, and Inhabitants within the Limits of his Company, View of Arms.
and of the defects of Arms or otherwise, and names of the defective persons,
that they may be prosecuted as the Law has provided, and such care may be
taken as is proper to remedy the same.

16. THAT if any person who is by Law obliged to provide Arms and Ammunition,
cannot purchase the same by such means as he has, How persons unable to
purchase Arms may be provided.
if he bring to the Clerk of the Company, Corn or other Merchantable Provision,
or vendible Goods, so much as by Apprizement of the Clerk and two other persons
mutually chosen, shall be judged of greater value by one fifth part than such
Arms or Ammunition is of: he thereupon shall be excused from the penalties for
want of Arms and Ammunition, until he can be provided, which said Clerk shall
provide as soon as may be by sale of such goods, and render the overplus to the
party, if any be: But the party shall notwithstanding give his personal
attendance upon all occasions as other Soldiers, until he be supplied, and at
such times shall perform any proper Service he may be put upon by the Captain
or Chief Officer of the Company he belongs to; but if the person be judged
unable to buy Arms, or to lay down the value proposed, if he be a single man,
he shall be put out to Service by the two next Justices of Peace to earn
wherewith to buy Arms and Ammunition; if such person have a Family and be
judged unable, by the Captain and major part of the Select men to lay down such
value for the end aforesaid, then he shall be provided for out of the Town
Stock, or by Arms procured at the Towns charge until such time as he be judged
able to provide for himself, and such Arms to be under the care of the chief
Military Officer and the Select men of the Town.

How Drums Trumpets etc. are to be provided.
17. THAT Drums, Drummers, Trumpets, Trumpeters, Colors and Banners be by the
Commission officers of each Troop or Company provided at the charge of the
respective Companies and Troops where there are not already provided, and the
fines will not reach to procure the same, and that such as have been employed
as Drummers or Trumpeters, or are fit and capable thereof, being appointed unto
such Service by the Chief Officer of any Company or Troop, shall attend the
Service, on penalty of Forty Shillings fine, and every Drummer for a years
Service shall have Twenty Shillings if he find his own Drum, and Ten Shillings
if the Captain finds the Drum; and a Trumpeter Forty Shillings a year, if he
find his own Trumpet; and Twenty Shillings, if the Captain finds it.

18 THAT such meet person as by the Commission Officers of any Company or Troop
shall be appointed Clerk, and shall refuse to serve, shall pay Forty Shillings
fine, and another be chosen in his room, and so until one do accept* which
person shall be under Oath for the faithful discharge of his Office, Penalty
for refusing to Serve as Clerk.
to be Administered unto him by a Justice of Peace in the same County, in the
words following.

YOu do Swear truly to perform the Office of Clerk of the Military Company
under the Command of A. B. Captain, to the utmost of your skill and power in
all things appertaining to your Office according to Law: Oath.
So help you God.

And (...) every distraint made for any fine not exceeding Forty Shillings, he
shall have one quarter part for his pains and trouble. And for such fines he
may distrain Ex Officio; Allowance.
and in distraining shall observe such Rules as the Law has provided in other
cases; and upon ten days notice shall account with and pay to the Captain or
Chief Officer what fines he has received, his own part being deducted.

19. THE Chief Military Officer of each Regiment as often as he shall see
cause, Meeting of the Chief Officers of the Regiment
shall require the Captain or Chief Officer of each Company in his Regiment to
meet at such time and place as he shall appoint, and then with them to confer
and give in charge such Orders as shall by them, or major part of them be
judged meet, for the better ordering and settling their several Companies, and
for the better pro^^ting of Military Discipline amongst them. And the Chief
Officer is hereby empowered by his Warrant directed to any Clerk or Officer of
his Regiment to summon or cause to be brought before them any Offender against
the Laws Military, Their Power
and according to Law to hear and determine all matters proper for their
Cog^^^ance, and to give sentence, and to grant Mittimus or Warrants for
Distraint to the Clerk of the Company where the Offense is committed, for
executing which Warrant, if above Forty Shillings, he shall have Ten Shillings
out of the same for his pains and trouble therein; and no more.

20. THAT there be a stock of Powder and Ammunition in each Town provided, and
from time to time as there is need, be renewed by the Select-men; Town-stock of
Ammunition, etc.
which shall be a barrel of good Powder, two hundred weight of Bullets, and
three hundred Flints for every sixty listed Soldiers, and after that
proportion for the listed Soldiers of each Town, whether more or less; Also
that the Select-men procure such a number of Arms, and so much Ammunition as
shall be made appear by the chief Commission Officers of each Company in the
several Towns to be needful for the supply of such Poor as by Law they are to
provide for: And such Town as cannot make it appear to the chief Commander of
the Regiment that they are thus provided at or before the first of May next,
shall pay Five Pounds fine, which shall be distrained by Warrant from said
Officer directed unto the Constable upon the Select men of the Town or any of
them, Penalty for being unprovided.
and disposed of for the use of said Town toward the supply of such Stock; and
the like Sum for every three months they shall remain so unprovided.

21. AND the Select-men where there is not a sufficient Stock of Powder, Arms
and Ammunition, and in such Towns where there is need of Watch-houses, Firing
and Candles for their Watches; in such case the Select, men for so much as is
wanting are to procure or satisfy what is required or needed as before,
Select-men to make a Rate for buying of Ammunition etc. in case.
and shall make provision for the same by a Rate equally and justly laid upon
the Inhabitants and Estate in such Towns, and such Rate signed and committed by
them to the Constables to collect, who shall, and hereby are required and
authorized to collect the same; and for non-payment to distrain as for other
Rates, and the Money or pay collected to be brought in to the chief Military
Officers and Select-men of the Town, to be by them improved for the ends
aforesaid. And the Select-men or so many of them as shall neglect their duty
herein, shall pay Twenty Shillings fine, Penalty for neglect.
to be paid to the Captain for the use of the Company, being convict before two
Justices of the Peace, who are hereby empowered to convent the party, and to
hear and determine the same, and if need be, to appoint other meet persons in
such Towns under the like penalties to perform said Service.

22. THAT no Clerk Ex Officio make distraint for any fine until four days after
the Offense committed; that so the party may have opportunity to make excuse,
if any he have, why he should not pay the fine; Clerk ex Officio not to
distrain with in four days
and every Clerk that neglects or refuses to account or make payment, as by
this Law is provided, he by a Warrant from the Chief Officer of the Company
directed to the Constable, Penalty for his neglect to account etc.
may be distrained on for so much as he has or should have collected or
distrained for.

23. THAT all Officers yield Obedience to the Warrants or Commands of their
Superior Officers on penalty of Five Pounds; Penalty for Officers disobeying
their Superior Officers.
to be heard and determined at the next meeting of the Chief Officers and
Captains of the Regiment* and the fine to be taken by distress and sale of the
Offenders Goods, (returning the Over^plus if any be) by Warrant from the Chief
Officer of the Regiment, directed to the Clerk of the Company to which such
Offender belongs, and to be improved to the use and benefit of such Company as
the Officers so met shall agree, their Expenses being first defrayed out of the
same.

24. THAT an Alarm at the Castle upon Castle-Island near Boston, being made
upon such causes as are agreeable to Instructions to be given by the Governor
to the Captain of the Castle, shall be by putting out two Flaggs, and firing of
two Guns toward the Town; Alarm.
at which time there shall with all possible speed such numbers (...) down for
their relief, as the Governor and Captain General, or such person as shall be
Commander in Chief in his absence, shall think necessary. At any other place an
Alarm may be made by firing three Guns one after another, or by firing a
Beacon, their Drums beating an Alarm, all persons being called upon to Arm:
Upon which all the Trained Soldiers, and others capable to bear Arms that are
then Resident in any Town, shall forthwith appear complete with their Arms and
Ammunition according to Law, at the usual place of Rendezvous, or where the
Chief Officers shall appoint; there to attend such Command^ as shall be given
for Their Majesty's Service, and that on the penalty of Five Pounds fine, or
three months Imprisonment: The Members of the Council, Justices and Sheriffs to
attend upon the Governor, if at or near Boston, and in other places, Penalty
for not appearing upon an Alarm.
to appear and advise with the Chief Military Officers of the Town, and to be
assisting in Their Majesty's Service according to their Quality; and such
Alarms shall at all times be carried on from Neighborhood to Neighborhood,
and from Town to Town throughout the Province, and from such Town where the
Alarm is made, there shall be forthwith dispatched one or more Horse men to
signify the occasion thereof ^o the Justice of Peace, Relief be sent to
Frontiers.
Chief Military Officer or Con^stable of the next Town or Towns, which all
persons are to take ^oti^^ of and attend as is before directed: And if the
Alarm be made either from a Seaport Town, or other Town that lies a Frontier
to, or in great danger of the Enemy; the Captain or Captains of the Adjacent
Towns shall forthwith go with or send such relief as they shall judge meet for
the offense of the Enemy, or defense of themselves and Neighbors, but so as
(...) be observant to any Commands or Orders they may receive from their
Superior Officers: And if any person shall wilfully make a false Alarm, he
shall be fined to Their Majesty's Twenty Pounds for support of the Government,
Penalty for a false Alarm
or suffer (...) months Imprisonment.

25. NO Officer Military or Civil, or other person shall Quarter or Billet any
Soldier or Seaman upon any Inhabitant within this Province, without his
consent (other than the Public Licensed Houses) under the penalty of One
Hundred Pounds; Penalty for quartering Soldiers etc. upon Inhabitants*
to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or information, in any Court of
Record; one half to Their Majesty's, for the support of the Government; the
other half part to the party grieved that shall inform and sue for the same.
And every such Inhabitant may refuse to Quarter any Soldier or Seaman
notwithstanding any order whatsoever.

See Additional Act page
26. THAT all persons Exempted by this Law from Trainings, shall notwithstanding
be provided with Arms and Ammunition complete upon the same penalty as those
that are obliged to Train.

27. ALL Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures arising by Virtue of this Act or any
breach thereof (not otherwise disposed of therein) shall be for the use of the
Regiment, Fines and forfeitures how to be disposed and recovered.
Company, or Troop respectively: That is to say, for procuring and repairing
Drums, Trumpets, Colors, Banners, Halberts, paying of Drummers and Trumpeters,
or other Charge of said Company; and the over plus (if any be) to be laid out
in Arms and Ammunition for a Town Stock, and be recovered by A^^ion, Bill,
Plaint, or Information in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record.

An Act for putting and keeping in repair the Townhouse in Boston.
WHEREAS the Townhouse in Boston within the County of Suffolk has formerly
been and is still continued to be made use of for the holding of Councils,
Courts of Judica^^^^, and other Public Assemblies for the whole Province; and
ha^ been accustomed to be uphold and repaired in part at the charge of the late
Colony of the Massachusetts, part (...) the charge of the said County, and part
at the charge of the said Town.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Count
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Charges of Repairing the
said House be from time to time (...) to be answered and paid in proportion
following; That is to say, one half part thereof out of the Public Revenue of
the Province; one quarter part out of the Treasury of the said County; Charge
of Repairing the Townhouse in Boston proportioned.
and the other quarter part out of the Treasury of the said Town. And the
Select-men of Boston, from time to time (...) there shall be need, are to take
care that the said House be sufficiently Repaired, and to lay the Account of
the Charge before the Governor and Council; as also before the Justices in
Quarter Sessions, that so orders may be respectively given as well for payment
of the part belonging to the Province, as that belonging to the County,
according to this Act.

An Act for Highways.
FOR the better amending and keeping in repair and clear the High ways, and
common (...), loading from Town to Town and place to place; and for laying out
new Highways, and turning old Highways where it shall be needful.

Be it Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives, in General Count
Assembles, and by the Authority of the same, Surveyers of Highways to be
annually chosen and Sworn.
That there be Annually chosen two or more Freeholders in each Town
respectively within this Province, to be Surveyers of the Highways, who shall
be Sworn before some Justice of the Peace in the County, diligently and
faithfully to perform the said Office for the year ensuing; which Surveyers
shall take care that all High ways, Private ways, Causeys and Bridges lying
within the Precincts of such Town, be kept in repair, and amended from time to
time, when and so often as shall be needful, at the Charge of such Town (where
it is not otherwise (...)) that so they may be safe and convenient for
Travelers, (...), and Drovers: And the Surveyers are hereby Empowered to (...)
down, dig up or remove, as well all sorts of Trees, Bushes, Stones, Fences,
Rayles, Gates, Enclosures, or other thing or things, Their Power
as may any ways streighten, hurt, hinder or incommode the Highways: As also
to dig for Stone or Gravel, Clay, Marl, Sand or Earth in any Land not planted
or enclosed, and to press any Carriage, Workmen or other things fit to be
employed in the Highways, for such reasonable satisfaction to the parties
concerned as such Surveyers can agree for; and in case of disagreement, such as
the two next Justices shall appoint.

And the Surveyers shall appoint certain days for providing materials and
working in the Highways; having respect to the season of the year, Surveyers
to give public notice for working on the Highways.
and the Weather, and giving convenient public (...); at which days all
persons liable to work ( That is to say, from sixteen years old and upward) by
themselves or other sufficient persons in their stead, shall attend: And if any
person make default of attending the said work, by himself or other sufficient
person in his stead, or with his Cart and Teem, as he shall be appointed, upon
complaint and proof thereof before the next Justice of Peace (without
reasonable excuse made and allowed by such Justice) he shall cause to be levied
of every such Offenders Goods, Penalty for non attendance.
the Sum or Penalty of Two Shillings Six pence for each days neglect of Labor,
(...) the Charge of making Distress; now for default of their Cart and Teem,
Six Shillings Per Diem, with Charge of Distress as aforesaid.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where a new
Highway or common Road from Town to Town, Quarter Sessions to give order for
laying out new Highways or altering old ones.
or place to place shall be wanting, and where old ways with more convenience
may be turned or altered upon application made to the Justices in Quarter
Sessions, within the same County, the said Court may appoint a Committee of two
or three sufficient Freeholders of the next Towns, who shall have most occasion
of said way, to inquire into the necessity and convenience thereof, and to make
their Report thereon; and being judged to be of common necessity or
convenience, the Justices of said Court shall order a Warrant to the Sheriff or
his Deputy to Summon a Jury out of the next Towns, to meet at some convenient
day and place therein mentioned, to view and lay out such Highways or Roads,
who shall have an Oath Administered unto them by a Justice of Peace, to lay out
such way according to the best of their skill and judgment, with most
convenience to the Public, and least prejudice or damage to any particular
person; which having done, the Sheriff or his Deputy is to make return thereof,
at the next Court of Quarter Sessions of the County where the same way is, as
well under his own as the hands of the Jurors, by whose Oath the same is laid
out, to the end the same may be allowed and recorded, and after known for a
public High way.

Provided that if any person be thereby damaged in his propriety or improved
grounds, the Town shall make him reasonable satisfaction by the Estimation of
those that laid out the same: Damage in proprieties to be made good
And if such person so damaged (...) himself agrieved by any act or thing done
by the Jury, either in laying of the said way, or estimate of his damages, he
may apply unto the Court of Quarter Sessions for relief, before any allowance
or determination be made by them; who are hereby Empowered to he^^ and determine
the same; but if no sufficient cause appear for complaint, he shall pay all
Charges arising thereby.

And be it further Enacted, That the Select-men of each Town respectively be,
Select men's power to lay out private ways.
and are hereby Empowered, by themselves or others whom they shall appoint, to
lay out or cause to be laid out, particular and private ways for such Town
only, as shall be thought necessary; so as no damage be done to any particular
person in his Land or Propriety without due recompense to be made by the Town,
as the Select men and the party interested may agree; Recompense for damage.
or as shall be ordered by the Justices in Quarter Sessions upon inquiry into
the same by a Jury to be Summoned for that purpose.

And it is further Enacted, That if any person or persons shall erect or set up
any Gates, Rayles or Fence upon or a cross any Highway or Country Road,
Nuisance upon highways to be removed.
or continue any such to the annoyance and encumbrance of the same (other than
such as shall be allowed by the Court of Quarter Sessions within the County) it
shall be deemed a common Nuisance, and it shall be lawful for any person or
persons to pull down and remove the same: And if any such encumbrance be in any
particular or private way, allowed and settled by any Town, upon complaint
thereof made to the next Justice of the Peace, he shall appoint a Committee of
two or more discreet and indifferent persons to view such encumbrance and cause
the same to be removed: And if any person be agrieved at the removal of any
such Gate, Bars or Fence, he shall be heard at the Quarter Sessions within the
same County, and upon just cause shown, shall be by them relieved. See Act in
Addition, page


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if through neglect
or not keeping in sufficient repair any High way, Causey-way, or Bridge, any
person happen to lose his life in passing any such High way, Causey way or
Bridge, or lose a Limb, break a Bone, or receive any bruise or breach in any
part of his Body, Damage happening through defect^ in Ways or Bridges, to be
made good by the County or Town.
through any defect in or want of necessary repair of such High way, Causey-way
or Bridge; the County or Town respectively to which of right it belongs to
maintain and keep the same in repair, having been warned or notified of such
defect and need of repairs and amendment thereof, either in writing under the
hand of two witnesses, or by presentment thereof made at the Sessions of the
Peace; shall pay unto the Parents, Husband, Wife, Children or next of Kin to
any person so losing his or her life, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds; and for
any other harm as aforesaid, double the damage sustained thereby; to be ordered
and set upon them by the Justices of the same County in Quarter Sessions; who
are hereby Empowered thereto; and to render like recompense for any carriage
Cart, Horse or other Beast harmed or lost, proportionable to the damage
suffered.

And if any person chosen a Surveyer shall refuse to accept and take his Oath,
he shall forfeit Twenty Shillings, Penalty on Surveyers r^^sing to accept or
neglecting their duty.
and having accepted do neglect his duty shall forfeit for every neglect, Five
Pounds; the said forfeitures respectively to be to the use of the Town, and to
be recovered by complaint before the next Justice of Peace, or at the Sessions
of the Peace in the same County.

No Person to be charged above a due proportion to the Highways either in
Labor or Teems.

An Act for Regulating of Fences, Cattle, etc.
FOR the better preventing of damage in Cornfieldsd, and other improved and
common Lands, by Horses, Neat Cattle, Sheep or Swine, going at large.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives* in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That in every Town and Peculiar
within this Province, Fence-viewers to be chosen and sworn.
there be Annually chosen by the Inhabitants thereof (at the time of their
Meeting, to choose Select-men and other Town Officers) two or more mere
persons, to be Viewers of Fences; who shall be Sworn before a Justice of Peace,
to the faithful discharge of their Office, in the particulars committed to
their care by this Act: Hawards or field-drivers.
As also two or more persons for Hawards or Field-drivers. And that all Fences
of four foot high, being of five Rayls, or four that are equivalent, Boards,
Stone-wall, Brooks, Rivers, Ponds or Cricks equivalent thereto, in the judgment
of the Fence-viewers, Fences of four foot high to be accounted sufficient.
shall be accounted sufficient Fences: And all Fences in common fields and
other grounds under improvement that shall be judged insufficient by the
Fence-viewers, and notice thereof given to the party that of right ought to
maintain the same, he shall sufficiently repair and amend all defects therein
within the space of six days next after such notice given him; and in case of
his neglect, Penalty for not repairing insufficient Fence.
the Fence-viewers are hereby empowered and ordered forthwith to cause such
defective Fence or Fences to be sufficiently made up and repaired; and the
person or persons to whom it belongs to make good such Fence, shall pay double
the cost and charge expended for doing of the same. And in case of refusal or
neglect, to make payment as aforesaid, How to be recovered.
by the space of one month next after an account presented, and demand thereof
made, such Fence viewers may recover the same by Action, Plaint or Information,
to be brought before any Justice of the Peace within the same County, if the
Sum exceed not Forty Shillings; but if it be above that Sum, then in the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, None but proprietors and
freeholders to have any Horse run to feed on the common.
That no persons other than Proprietors and Freeholders in any Town or
Peculiar, shall let any Horse or Horse kind run to feed upon any common Land
belonging to such Town or Peculiar, and every such Proprietor and Freeholder
may keep one Horse beast upon the Common and no more, except such Proprietors
and Freeholders, every of whom have a rateable Estate within such Town or
Peculiar, of the value of Fifty Pounds, they to have the privilege of two and
no more.

And the Owners of all Horse-kind going upon the Common are required to cause
the same to be entered with the Town Clerk, Horses going on the common to be
Entered with the Town Clerk.
who is to keep a Book for that purpose, and therein set down as well the
natural as artificial marks, and for every such Horse or Horse kind, shall pay
a Fee of Threepence to the Clerk for his Entry: Such entry to be made at or
before the tenth day of April next, and so annually, on pain that every person
neglecting so to do, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings for each
defaul^* And if any Freeholder or proprietor shall desire to put more Horses
upon the Common than is herein before allowed, he shall first repair to the
Town Clerk, and make Entry of the number and marks thereof as aforesaid, and
pay the Fee as aforesaid for every such entry, as also the Sum of Five
Shi^^ings per head, per Annum, to the use of the Proprietors of such Commons,
on pain (...) forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings per head for such neglect.

And every Town and Peculiar within this Province are required to choose
Annually two meet persons to see to the due observance of this Act relating to
Horses, Persons to be annually chosen to see to the observance of this Act.
and to prosecute the breakers thereof: And if any person so chosen shall
refuse to serve, or neglect his duty in any of the particulars herein committed
to his care, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings to the use of
such Town.

And the Town Clerk of each Town respectively shall once in the year give an
account and pay in to the Select-men of the Town so much as he shall receive by
virtue of this Act for any Horse kind going upon the Common. Town Clerk to
account annually.


All penalties and forfeitures arising for breach of this Act relating to
Horses going upon the Common, Penalties and forfeitures how to be disposed.
shall be one Moiety thereof unto the use of the persons to be appointed to see
to the observance of this Act, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
inform and sue for the same, before any Justice of the Peace within the County.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Swine going at
large on the Commons, shall be sufficiently Yoked from the first* of April to
the fifteenth of October yearly; Swine to be yoked and ringed.
and Ringe^ in the Nose all the year. And if any Swine be found unyoked or
unringed, their Owners shall be liable to pay Six pence per head; and if found
damage feasant being unyoked or unringed to pay Twelve-pence per head, over and
above double damages to the party injured. And the Haward or Field driver or
any other person may take up and impound such Swine.

And that there be paid unto the Haward or Field-driver, One Shilling per head
for all Neat Cattle or Horses, Fee for impounding
and Three pence per head for all Sheep and Swine by him impounded: And to the
Pound-keeper Two pence per head for all Neat Cattle or Horses, and One penny
per head for all Sheep or Swine, for taking in and letting out, to be paid by
the Owners of such Creatures.

And that for every Sheep in every Town going on the Commons without being
under the hands of a Shepherd, from the first of May to the last of October in
every year; Penalty for Sheep going on the common without a keeper.
the owners or keeper of the said Sheep shall pay the Sum of Threepence for
every Sheep at any time so found running on the Common, not under the hand of a
Shepherd or Keeper, betwixt the first of May, and last of October yearly.

An Act for Enabling the Treasurer to call in the Arrears of Public Rates, and
discharging of Public Debts.
WHEREAS by an Act made by this Court in the year One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Two; in the first Sessions Entitul^d, An Act for the Enforcing,
Collecting and Paying in the Arrears of Public Assessments, etc. The
Constables and Collectors were thereby Enabled to Collect said Assessments, and
ordered to Account with and make payments unto the respective Treasurers; and
for defect to be distrained as by said Act does more fully appear:
Notwithstanding which many Constables and Collectors have neglected to Account
with and pay to the respective Treasurers, as by said Act they were enjoined;
yet for such their neglect have not been proceeded with as said Law has
directed: By reason whereof great Sums remain uncollected, and many persons
unpaid their just dues.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all Constables
or Collectors that have had any Tax or Public Assessment committed to them to
collect in any Town, Village or Precinct, Constables or Collectors to account
for and pay in the Arrears.
within the late Colonies of the Massachusetts or Plymouth, since the first of
October, One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty nine, until the Arrival of His
Excellency the Governor; do forthwith Account with and pay to the Treasurer of
the Province so much of such Taxes or Assessments as is in their hands, or that
they have not already paid, or orderly discharged themselves of; which if they
shall neglect or refuse to do; the Treasurer is hereby empowered and required to
Issue out Warrants for so much as they have not paid or discharged themselves
of (...) aforesaid, directed unto the Sheriff of the County where any such
defective Constable or Collector dwells, Upon neglect the Treasurer to grant
Warrants for distress.
requiring him to levy all such Arrears by distress and sale of such Constable
or Collectors Estate, real or personal, returning the overplus (if any be) and
if no Estate can be found, or not sufficient to discharge the same; then to
commit him or them unto the Goal of the County, there to remain until he or
they have paid and satisfied such Arrears with charges; except any Constable or
Collector as the Treasurer, by order of the Governor and Council shall be
directed to forbear, either for the whole or part in order to his procuring an
abatement) as this Act has hereafter provided.

And the Treasurer is hereby Ordered out of the Arrears of the whole
Assessments, whether on the late Colonies of the Massachusetts or Plymouth;
Treasurer ordered to make payment of Debts.
or that have been laid on the Province, to pay all such Debts due from the
said Colonies respectively, or from the Province as have been allowed by the
former Governments, or by the Governor and Council, or that have been or shall
be allowed by such Committees as have or shall be appointed for such end.

And where any Constables or Collectors in any Town are Dead, and have not
adjusted the Accounts of the Assessments committed unto them respectively; The
Executor or Administrator of any deceased Constable, etc. liable in case.
the Treasurer is hereby empowered to bring his Suit against the Executor or
Administrator of such deceased Constable or Collector for the same, or what
shall appear to be due.

And forasmuch as diverse Constables have informed that they have been disabled
from Collecting the Rates committed to them to Collect before his Excellency
the Governors Arrival, or the greatest part of them, by reason of the breaking
up some Towns in whole or in part, or by the death or removal of diverse
persons, or by the Select men's Rating some persons that are brought into
extreme Poverty by reason of the War, and others that never were able to pay.

Be it therefore Ordered and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such
Towns, Committee to receive Allegations or Pleas for abatement.
Constables or Collectors that desire or expect any ease or abatement for or by
reason of any of the abovenamed particulars, or have any other just cause to
allege for the same, do by themselves or by some meet person in their behalf
appear at Boston, at or before the Twenty-fifth day of March next before John
Phillips and Peter Sergeant, Esqrs. Captain Nathaniel Byfield, Major Penn
Townsend and Mr. Edward Bromfield, or any four of them; who are hereby
appointed and empowered to be a Committee for the receiving and hearing of the
Allegations, Pleas or Proofs as may be offered for any such allowance or
abatement to be made as aforesaid, and to report the same unto this Court at
their next Session; that so they may give order therein as to them shall appear
just and reasonable: And for so much as shall not be by said Court a^owed and
abated, the Treasurer shall forthwith Issue out his Warrants as aforesaid, to
levy the same by distress and sale of the Estate of such Constables or
Collectors as were before indulged and forborne.

Also i^ having been made to appear that several Warrants Issued out by the
late Treasurer of the Province for making or collecting of the Tax since his
Excellency the Governors Arrival have miscarried.

Treasurer to issue out new Warrants where the former have miscarried.
Be it therefore Enacted, That the Treasurer forthwith Issue out new Warrants
to such Towns and Places for such Sum and Sums the other were sent out for,
which all Select-men are forthwith to assess, and Constables or Collectors to
Collect by such Rules and under such penalties as by the Law relating to said
Tax were made and enjoined.

And whereas the Treasurer has been ordered to make payment of what remains
due to several persons that lent their Bills of Credit to this Province in and
about June or July, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety two; many whereof have been
or may be longer unpaid then the time they were promised payment in.

Be it therefore Enacted, That such as are not already paid (discounting what
they owe to the Province) shall be allowed for what is due to them by the
Treasurer, Allowances to such as lent their Bills.
after the rate of Six Per Cent. per Annum, for the value lent from the
Expiration of the time they lent the same for, until they be paid or accept of
the Treasurers order for payment of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Constables or
Collectors shall duly pay and answer all Orders coming from the Treasurer out
of the Public Moneys in their hands, which they shall have Collected for any
public Tax or Assessment committed, Penalty on Constables or Collectors that
exact or receive any Fee to hasten payment.
or hereafter to be committed unto them to collect and that without delay. And
if any Constable or Collector shall require, exact, receive or take any Fee,
Reward, Allowance or Abatement directly or indirectly from any person or
persons to hasten or forward his or their payment, and be thereof convicted
upon complain or information brought before the Sessions of the Peace within
the same County; such Constable or Collector shall forfeit and pay the Sum of
Five Pounds over and above the Sum so taken; one half thereof unto Their
Majesty's toward the support of the Government, and the other half to him or
them that shall inform and prosecute for the same.

An Act for Bristol Fair.
WHEREAS the General Court of the late Colony of New Plymouth did in the year
of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty; Grant unto the Inhabitants of
the Town of Bristol within said Colony, that they should have liberty of
keeping two Fairs in said Town of Bristol annually for ever, one upon the third
Wednesday and Thursday in May, and the other upon the third Wednesday and
Thursday in November; And it being found by experience that two days is not
sufficient for the Transacting the business of said Fair; and that so late in
November is inconvenient both with respect to persons coming, it being many
times very bad Weather, and the chief time for selling (...) Cattle being
sooner.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives
Convened in Great and General Court, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
of the same, That from henceforth the said Fair shall be kept and held in
Bristol aforesaid within this Province, Times for holding Bristol Fair.
upon the third Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in May, and on the third
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in October annually for ever, and at no other
time; any Law, custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for Regulation of Seamen.
WHEREAS great loss and damage is frequently Occasioned to Trade and Navigation
by Seamen deserting their Employ or Voyage they are entered upon, or being taken
of from the same by Arrest and restraint for Debt, or pretense thereof*

For Remedy whereof.

It is Declared and Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any
Innkeeper, Victualler, Seller of (...) or strong Liquors, Shop keeper or any
other person whatsoever, shall trust or give credit to any Mariner or Seaman
belonging to any Ship or other Vessel, No Mariner or Seaman to be arrested for
any Debt made whilst he belongs to a Ship, etc.
without the knowledge and allowance of the Master or Commander thereof; no
Process or Attachment for any Debt so contracted without knowledge and
allowance as aforesaid, shall be granted against or served upon such Mariner or
Seaman, until he shall have performed the Voyage he is then entered upon, and be
discharged of the same: And every Process granted contrary hereunto and serving
thereof shall be deemed and adjudged utterly void in Law: And any Justice of
the Peace within the same County before whom it shall be made appear, that any
Mariner or Seaman belonging to any Ship or Vessel is committed or restrained
upon Process granted for any Debt or pretention of Debt made whilst such
Mariner or Seaman was engaged and actually entered and in pay on any Voyage,
shall forthwith order his release.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Master or
Commander of any Ship or other Vessel, Penalty on Masters Shipping Seamen first
entertained on board another Ship etc.
shall Ship any Seaman, knowing him to be first entertained and Shipped on Board
another Ship or Vessel, Or after notice thereof given him, shall not forthwith
dismiss him; every such Master or Commander so offending, being thereof
convicted, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds, one Moiety thereof to
the use of the Poor of the Town where the offense was committed, and the other
Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same, by Action, Bill,
Plaint or Information in any Court of Record; and such Seaman so Shipping
himself, Seamans Penalty.
shall forfeit and pay the value of one Months Wages that he shall so agree
for, to be recovered, employed and disposed of in manner as aforesaid.

And further it is Enacted, That if any Mariner or Seaman having Shipped himself
on Board any Ship or other Vessel to proceed in any Voyage, Seam^n deserting
their Service to be Imprisoned.
and under pay (the same being made appear by his hand set to the Masters Book
or other writing of such Agreement) shall neglect his attendance and duty on
Board, and absent himself from his said Service, upon complaint thereof made to
any Justice of the Peace within the same County, such Justice is hereby
empowered to convent such Mariner or Seaman before him; and upon conviction of
his so absenting himself as aforesaid, to commit him to Prison, that so he may
be secured and forthcoming to proceed on the Voyage he has so agreed to, and
to be delivered by order of the Justice that committed him, or some other
Justice in the same County.

An Act to prevent default of appearance of Representatives to serve in the
General Assembly.
WHEREAS there has been a neglect in some Sheriffs in Observance of Their
Majesty's Writ to them directed, for the Convening and holding of a Great and
General Court or Assembly, timely to issue forth their Precepts unto the
several Towns within their Bailiwick or Precinct, for the choosing of
Representatives to serve in the Great and General Court or Assembly, and have
also not taken due care to have Returns of their said Precepts. And forasmuch
as many Persons Elected for Representatives, and having Summons, are not
careful to give their attendance accordingly in due time, whereby the Public
Affairs for Their Majestices Service are prejudiced.

For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same* It is Ordained and Enacted, That
every Sheriff upon Receipt of Their Majesty's Writ for the Convening and
holding of a Great and General Court or Assembly, Sheriffs to make out their
Precepts in 7 days after Receipt of Their Majesty's Writ.
shall forthwith make out his Precepts under his Seal in form as by Law is
directed, unto the Select-men of the several Towns within his County, and cause
the same to be safely conveyed and delivered unto one or more of such Select
men, within the space of Seven days at furthest next after his Receipt of such
Writ as aforesaid; And shall likewise take effectual care for having his
Precepts returned to him again from the said Towns respectively, with what
shall be done pursuant thereto, by the day therein prefixed, and cause the same
to be brought in to the Secretaries Office as by Writ he is Commanded.

And the Select-men of each Town upon Receipt of the Sheriffs Precept, shall
cause the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of said Town duly qualified as in
the said Precept is mentioned, Select-men to cause the Town to be Assembled for
choice of Representatives.
to be Assembled and meet at such time and place, as the Select men or the
major part of them shall appoint, to Elect and Depute one or more
Representatives for such Town, as by Law they may, and shall cause the person
or person so Elected and Deputed by the major part of the Electors present at
such meeting, to be timely Notified and Summoned by one or more of the
Constables of said Town, to attend Their Majesty's Service in the Great and
General Court or Assembly, upon the day, and at the time and place appointed
for holding of the same: And the Select-men or the major part of them, shall
make Return of such Election under their hands upon the said Precept, Penalty
on Sheriff, for neglect of duty.
or annexed thereto, in manner and form as by Law is prescribed; and cause the
same to be delivered unto the Sheriff of the County, at or before the day
therein perfixed for return of the same; on pain that every Sheriff neglecting
his duty in any of the particulars before mentioned, shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Fifty Pounds.

Penalty on Select-men and Constables
And every Select-man or Constable in any Town neglecting his duty in any of the
particulars before mentioned, shall incur the pain and forfeiture of Five
Pounds.

And every Sheriff shall be allowed for his trouble and charge in sending out
his Precepts, Forty Shillings, to be paid out of the County Treasury. Sheriffs
allowance.


And the Select-men to be paid by the Town for the charge of returning their
Precept, for which shall be paid, three Pence a Mile. Select-mens allowance.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person
Elected to Serve a Representative for any Town in any Great and General Court
or Assembly, and being Summoned thereto, Penalty for Representatives
non-attendance the first day of the Court.
shall give his attendance at the said Court on the first day appointed for the
Courts sitting (without reasonable and just excuse for his absence, being made
and allowed of by the house of Representatives) on pain of forfeiting the Sum
of Forty Shillings: Unless such person being present at the Election, shall
declare unto the Assembly his non acceptance of the Service, or upon notice
thereof given him, shall forthwith signify his non acceptance unto the Select
men by writing under his hand: In which case the Select-men shall call the Town
together again to Elect a new, that so they may enjoy their privilege.

That not any Town in this Province shall choose any Representative,
Representatives to be Freeholders and Resident.
unless such be a Freeholder and Resident in that Town or Towns, such are
chosen to Represent.

And if any person not duly qualified according to Law, Penalty on persons
Voting, being not qualified
shall presume to Vote in the choice of Representatives, one or more for any
Town; or shall put in more than one Vote for any one person in such choice,
being thereof convicted, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds; (...)
Moiety thereof unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the
Government, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inf^^^ and sue for
the same.

All persons shall put in their Votes unfolded to the Select-men or Constables
appointed to receive the same.

And that where any person offering to give in his Votes for Representatives in
any Town, Voters questioned to make Oath.
shall be questioned by the Select men of the said Town as to his being capable
by Charter to Vote; the said person or persons giving his or their Oath that
they are, Bona fide, worth Forty Pounds Sterling, or an Estate of Freehold to
the value of Forty Shillings Per Annum, before a Justice of the Peace, or in
the absence of a Justice of the Peace, before the Town Clerk, who is hereby
empowered to Administer the same, he or they shall be accounted capable of
Voting and put in his or their Votes accordingly.

All Fines and Forfeitures arising for breach of this Act or any branch
thereof, and not otherwise therein before disposed of, Fines and forfeitures
how to be disposed.
shall be unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government;
and be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of Their
Majesty's Courts of Record.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun at Boston, the Eighth
Day of November, 1693. And Continued by Adjournment unto the Fourteenth Day of
February following.
An Act for the better Rule and Government of the Indians in their several
Places and Plantations.
TO the intent that the Indians may be forwarded in Civility and Christianity,
and that Drunkenness and other Vices be the more effectually Suppressed amongst
them.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority of the same, That
His Excellency the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the
Council, Commissioners to be appointed in several parts to have the more
particular care and Government of the Indians
may and is hereby empowered to appoint and commissionate one or more discreet
persons within several parts of this Province, to have the inspection and more
particular care and Government of the Indians in their respective Plantations*
and to have, use and exercise the power of a Justice of the Peace over them in
all matters Civil and Criminal, as well for the hearing and determining of
Pleas betwixt party and party, and to award Execution thereon, as for the
examining hearing and punishing of Criminal Offenses according to the Acts and
Laws of the Province, so far as the power of a Justice of Peace does extend. As
also to nominate and appoint Constables and other proper and necessary Officers
amongst them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons whomsoever, shall directly or indirectly Sell, Truck, Barter, or give
to any Indian, any Strong Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Wine, Rhum, Brandy, Penalty
for selling strong drink to Indians.
or other Strong Liquors, by what name or names soever called or known, on pain
of forfeiting the Sum of Forty Shillings for every Pint, and proportionably for
any greater or lesser quantity so sold, truckt, bartered, given or delivered to
any Indian, directly or indirectly as aforesaid, upon Conviction thereof before
a Justice of the Peace, where the penalty does not exceed Forty Shillings: And
if it exceed that Sum, at the Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the same
County where the offense is committed: One Moiety of all such Forfeitures to be
unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the Government, and the
other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and prosecute the same by Bill,
Plaint or Information. And if the Offender be unable or shall not forthwith pay
and satisfy the said penalty or forfeiture, then to be committed to the Goal of
the County; there to remain until he pay and satisfy the same, or suffer two
months Imprisonment.

Provided this Act shall not be intended or extend to restrain any Act of
Charity for relieving any Indian (Bona fide) in any sudden exigent of Faintness
or Sickness, not to exceed one or two Drams; or by prescription of some
Physician in writing, or by the allowance of a Justice of Peace.

And for the better discovery of such ill disposed persons, who through
greediness of filthy Lucre, shall privately Sell or deliver strong Liquors or
other strong Drink, to any Indian or Indians ( of which it is difficult to
obtain positive Evidence other than the Accusation of such Indian or Indians)
And to the intent that Murders and other Outrages frequently occasioned thereby
may be prevented.

It is Ordained and Enacted, Indian accusation with concurring circumstances,
to amount to a conviction, unless, etc.
That the Accusation and Affirmation of any Indian, with other concurring
circumstances amounting to an high presumption, in the discretion of the Court
or Justices, who have cognizance of the Case (the Accuser and Accused being
brought face to face at the time of Trial) shall be accounted and held to be a
legal Conviction of the person so accused of giving, selling, or delivering
Wine, Rhum, or any other strong Drink (...) Liquors, to such Indian; Unless the
party accused shall acquit him or her self thereof upon Oath; which the Court
or Justice respectively are hereby empowered to require, and Administer unto the
person accused, in form following: That is to say, YOU A. B. do Swear, That
neither your self, Form of the Oath.
nor any other by your order, general or particular, assent, privity, knowledge
or allowance, directly or indirectly, did give, sell or deliver any Wine,
Cider, Rhum, or other strong Liquors or Drink, by what name or names soever
called or known, unto the Indian by whom and whereof you are now accused. So
help you God.

And further it is Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for any
person or persons, to seiz any Wine, strong Liquors or Cider, which he or they
may (...) in the custody of any Indian, Strong drink found with Indians, to be
Seized.
not obtained by allowance as aforesaid, (other than Cider made of Fruit of
their own growth) and to deliver the same unto the Constable, or one or more of
the Select-men of the Town, where the same shall be seized, to and for the use
of the poor of such Town: And to Apprehend such Indian, and to cause him or her
to be conveyed before the next Justice of the Peace, to be Examined where, and
of whom they had such strong Drink.

And every Indian convicted of Drunkenness shall forfeit and pay unto the use
of the poor of the Town or place where such offense is committed, the Sum of
Five Shillings, Penalty for Indians convicted of drunkenness.
or else be openly Whipped by the Constable of such Town or place, or some
other that he shall procure, not exceeding Ten Lashes, as the Justice of Peace
before whom such Conviction is, shall determine.

An Act for the Relief of Idiots and Distracted Persons.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Select-men or Overseers of the poor to make
necessary provision for the relief of Idiots, and distracted persons.
Council and Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority
of the same, That when and so often as it shall happen any person to be
naturally wanting of understanding, so as to be incapable to provide for him or
her self; Or by the Providence of God, shall fall into Distraction, and become
Non compos mentis; and no Relations appear that will undertake the care of
providing for them; Or that stand in so near a degree as that by Law they may
be compelled thereto: In every such case the Select-men or Overseers of the
Poor of the Town or Peculiar where such person was Born, or is by Law an
Inhabitant, Be, and hereby are Empowered and Enjoined to take effectual care,
and make necessary provision for the relief, support, and safety of such
Impotent or Distracted Person, at the charge of the Town or place whereto he or
she of right belongs; if the party has not Estate of his or her own, the
incomes whereof may be sufficient to defray the same: And the Justices of the
Peace within the same County, Court of Quarter Sessions to order the Estate of
such persons for improvement.
at their General Sessions may order and dispose the Estate of such Impotent or
Distracted Person to the best improvement and advantage toward his or her
support; as also the person to any proper work or service he or she may be
capable to be employed in, at the discretion of the Select-men or Overseers of
the Poor. And where the Estate of any such person consists of Housing or Land,
in every such case the Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature, upon
Application to them made, may, and hereby are Empowered to License and Authorize
the Select-men or Overseers of the Town or place whereto such person (...); The
Justices of the Superior Court to License the Sale of Housing or Land of
distracted persons in case.
or such others as the said Justices shall think fit, to make sale of such
Housing or Land; the produce thereof upon sale to be secured, improved and
employed to and for the use, relief and safety of such Impotent or Distracted
Person (as the said Justices shall direct) as long as such person shall live,
or until he or she be restored to be of sound mind. And the overplus (if any
be) to and for the use of the next and right Heirs of such party.

And the like power and authority is hereby granted unto the Justices of the
Superior Court with reference to any person or persons now under Distraction
or Non compos mentis, as well for the satisfying of the Charges already past,
as for what may be future, for the support, relief and safety of any such
person.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Thirtieth Day of May, 1694.
An Act for Ascertaining the Fees of the Messenger attending the House of
Representatives.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted by the Authority
of the same, Messengers Fee 3 s. per. Diem.
That there shall be paid to the Messenger attending upon the House of
Representatives for the time being, out of the Public Revenue of this Their
Majesty's Province the Sum of Three Shillings Per Diem for every day that the
said Messenger shall attend upon, 3 s. for service of a warrant of Arrest.
or be employed in the Service of the said House of Representatives: And
further that the said Messenger shall and may demand, recover and receive, of
all and every person Arre^^^d, Imprisoned or taken into Custody by Warrant from
the House of Representatives, Three Shillings for the Service of such Warrant
of Arrest, Traveling Fees 3 d. per. Mile out.
with Traveling Fees after the rate of Three pence Per Mile out, and also
Three Shillings Per Diem for safe keeping and providing for such person so
apprehended and taken into Custody; 3 s. per. Diem for each person in Custody
etc.
and Three Shillings more upon the dismission or release of the party any Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding, except it be a Member of the
House that is so sent for, and then the Fees to be paid, shall be less, as the
House shall appoint.

And it is hereby further Declared, Sheriffs etc. traveling Fees, only 3 d.
per Mile out.
That the Traveling Fees mentioned in the Act for Regulating Fees, allowed to
Sheriffs, Marshals, or Constables for the Service of Writs, is to be alike
understood of Threepence per Mile from home, and no more.

An Act against Adultery and Polygamie.
WHEREAS the Violation of the Marriage Covenant is highly provoking to God, and
destructive to Families.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any man be
found in Bed with another man's Wife, the Man and Woman so offending being
thereof convicted, shall be severely Whipped, not exceeding Thirty Stripes,
unless it appear upon Trial that one party was surprised and did not consent;
which shall abate the punishment as to such party.

And if any man shall commit Adultery, the Man and Woman that shall be
Convicted of such Crime before Their Majesty's Justices of Assize and General
Go^l Delivery, shall be set upon the Gallows by the space of an Hour, (...)
Rope about their Neck, and the other end cast over the Gallows: Punishment for
Adulterers.
(...) in the way from thence to the Common Goal, shall be i^ every Whipped, not
exceeding Forty Stripes each: Also every person and persons so Offending, shall
for ever after wear a Capital A of two (...) long, and proportionable bigness,
cut out in Cloth of a contr^^y Color to their Cloa^^^, and Sewed upon their
upper Garments, on the out side of their Arm, or on their Back, in open view.
And (...) any person or persons, having been Convicted and Sentenced for such
Offense, shall at any time be found without their Letter so worn, during their
abode in this Province; they shall by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, be
forthwith apprehended and orde^^ed to be publicly Whipped, not exceeding
Fifteen Stripes; and so from time to time toties quoties.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person and
persons within this Their Majesty's Province, being Married, Polygamie to be
punished as Felony.
or which hereafter shall Marry, do at any time after the first of July in this
present year, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, presume to Marry any person
or persons, the former Husband or Wife being alive, or shall continue to live
so Married; That then every such Offense shall be Felony, and the Person and
Persons so offending shall suffer Death as in cases of Felony. And the party
and parties so offending shall rec^^ve such and the like Proceeding, Trial and
Execution in such County, where such person or persons shall be apprehended, as
if the Offense had been Committed in such County where such person or persons
shall be taken or apprehended.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not extend
to any person or persons whose Husband or Wife shall be continually remaining
beyond the Seas, Saving for persons where Husband or Wife shall be absent seven
years, etc.
by the space of seven years together; or whose Husband or Wife shall absent
him or her self the one from the other by the space of seven years together in
any part within their Majesty's Dominions, or elsewhere, the one of them not
knowing the other to be living within that time.

Provided also that this Act or any thing therein contained shall not extend to
any person or persons, that are or shall be at the time of such Marriage,
Saving for persons divorced or Married within the Age of Consent.
Divorced by any Sentence had, or hereafter to be had, as the Law of the
Province in that case has provided: Or to any person or persons, where the
former Marriage has been or hereafter shall be, by such Sentence had, declared
to be void and of no effect. Nor to any person or persons, for or by reason of
any former Marriage had or made; or hereafter to be had or made within the Age
of Consent. That is to say, the Man Fourteen Years of Age, the Woman Twelve.

An Act for Granting a Township in the County of Bristol, to be called Tiverton.
WHEREAS there is a certain Tract or Tracts of Land called by the Indians,
Pocasset and Puncateese, Situate lying and being between the Bounds of Little
Compton, and Freetown, within the County of Bristol, bordering upon the Sea, or
Salt Water toward the West, extending along the Shore between the Towns
aforesaid, about twelve miles Northerly and Southerly, and from the Salt Water
toward the East into the Country about four miles till it meet with Dartmouth
line; which Land belongs to sundry Persons the Proprietors thereof, and was put
under the Constablewrick of Little-Compton aforesaid, who upon their Petition
to this Court are reduced to their former State. Now forasmuch as there are
already a Competent number of Inhabitants, and a good quantity of Land
convenient for a Township.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same it is Enacted, That
henceforth the said Tract or Tracts of Land as now Bounded by the Limits and
Bounds of Little Compton, Freetown and Dartmouth aforesaid, is and shall be a
Township, and called by the name of Tiverton; and shall have and enjoy all such
Immunities, Privileges, and Powers as generally other Towns within this
Province have and do enjoy: And Joseph Palmer the late Constable is hereby
Required forthwith to warn the Inhabitants of the said Town to meet together to
choose Select-men, Constables and other Town Officers to carry on and manage
their Prudential Affairs in an orderly way as the Law directs, until the next
annual day of Election for Town Officers: and the said Inhabitants are enjoined
accordingly to assemble and attend the work.

And it is further Declared, That the Constable or Constables of said Tiverton,
shall Collect all such Arrears of Public Taxes as were assessed and
proportioned upon the Inhabitants of said Town by the Select men of Little
Compton, whilst they were annexed to that Town according to the Lists then
made, which the said Select-men are to furnish them with; and the Treasurer is
Ordered to Issue out his Warrant to the Constable or Constables of said
Tiverton, for Collecting the same accordingly.

AN ACT Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun at Boston, the Thirtieth Day of
May, 1694. And Continued by Adjournment unto the Fifth Day of September
following.
An Act for Granting a Township in the County of Barnstable, to be called
Harwich.
WHEREAS there are a Competent number of Inhabitants already settled upon that
Tract of Land commonly called and known by the name of Satucket within the
County of Barnstable, containing a sufficient quantity of Land, and lying
convenient for a Township: Therefore for Encouragement of the said Settlement.

It is Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all the said Lands lying
betwixt the bounds of the Town of Yarmouth upon the West, and the Town of
Eastham on the East, running from the head of Bound-brook, to the head of
Ma^skeket, about Ten Miles in Length, and about Seven Miles in Breadth,
extending from Sea to Sea; Be and henceforth shall be a Township, the Town to
be called H^rwich, and shall have and enjoy all such Immunities, Privileges
and Powers, as generally other Towns within this Province have and do by Law
enjoy. Provided, it does not Entrench upon former Grants referring to Townships.

And that for all Arrears of Public Taxes, and for the late Tax and Addition
thereto now granted by this Court, the Inhabitants of said Place do remain and
continue under the same Regulations, Directions and Officers (...) before the
making of this Act.

ACTS and LAWS. Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun at Boston, the
Thirtieth Day of May, 1694. And Continued by Adjournments unto the Sixteenth
Day of October following.
An Act to Enable Town, Villages, and Proprietors in common and undivided
Lands, etc. to Sue and be Sued.
WHEREAS amongst other things in Their Majesty's Royal Charter, for
Incorporation of this Province; it is Contained and Granted in these words
following: That is to say, Provided nevertheless, And we do for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, Grant and Ordain that all and every such Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments and other Estates, which any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic
or Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools, Do hold and enjoy, or
ought to have, hold and enjoy within the bounds aforesaid, by or under any
Grant or Estate, duly made or granted by any General Court, formerly held, or
by virtue of the Letters Patents herein before Recited, or by any other lawful
Right or Title whatsoever; shall be by such person or persons, Bodies Politic
and Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools, their Respective Heirs,
Successors and Assigns for ever hereafter, held and enjoyed according to the
Purport and Intent of such respective Grant, etc.

And whereas by one Act of the General Court, Entitled, An Act, For the
Regulating of Townships, etc. Amongst other things, I^ is Enacted, That the
Proprietors of the undivided or common Lands within each Town or Precinct in
this Province, where the same have been heretofore stated each ones Proportion
being known, shall, and hereby are Empowered, to order, improve or divide in
such way and manner, as shall be concluded and agreed upon by the m^jor part of
the Interested. And the Proprietors of all undivided or common Lands not stated
and proportioned as aforesaid, shall, and hereby are Empowered to manage,
improve, divide and dispose of the same, as has been or shall be concluded and
agreed on by the major part of such Proprietors.

Now for the better Enabling the said Persons, Towns, Villages, Trustees for
Schools and Proprietors aforesaid, to maintain, recover and defend their
Grants, Lands, Interests, and Estates.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Governor, Persons, Towns, Villages etc. to
Sue or defend in any Court.
Council and Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority
of the same, That i^ shall and may be lawful for all and every the said
Persons, Towns, Villages, Precincts, Trustees for Schools and Proprietors in
common and undivided Lands, Grants, and other Estates or Interests whatsoever,
to Sue, Commence and Prosecute any Suits or Actions in any Court proper to try
the same, either by themselves or their Agents or Attorneys, Towns, Villages
etc. to chose Agents or Attourneys to prosecute for, or defend them.
to be appointed by such as have in them the major part of the Interest: And in
like manner to defend all such Suits and Actions as shall be Commenced against
them or any of them.

And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Town,
Village and Precinct, and Proprietors in common or undi^vided Lands, which
shall have occasion to Sue or shall be Sued, may at a Meeting of the
Inhabitants of such Town, Village or Precinct* or Proprietors aforesaid,
orderly Warned, by the major Vote of such as shall meet, choose Agents or
Attorneys to prosecute for or defend them; such Choice being Certified by the
Clerk of such Town, Village, Precinct or Proprietors, or by such other person
as they shall appoint.

And when any Town, Village, Precinct or Proprietors aforesaid, shall be Sued,
How Summons shall be given to oblige Towns, etc. to answer.
it shall be sufficient notice to oblige them to appear and answer, to leave a
Writ or Summons with their Clerk or other Principal Inhabitant or Proprietor
(briefly declaring the Case) fourteen days before the Sitting of the Court,
where the Case is to be heard; as in other Actions is provided.

An Act for Regulating Ferrys.
TO the intent that all Ferrys within this Province be duly kept, and
constantly attended for the ends whereunto they are appointed.

Be it Enacted by the Governor Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That henceforth no person or
persons whatsoever, shall attempt to keep a Ferry (so as to demand pay) without
special License first had and obtained from Their Majesty's Justices in Quarter
Sessions of that County where such Ferry is; Ferry-men to be Licensed by the
Quarter Sessions.
who are hereby Empowered to grant Licenses to such persons as they shall judge
meet for that Service, in their respective Counties; and to state the Fare or
Prizes of each Ferry, both for Man and Beast, according to the nature and
breadth of such River, or Water they are to pass over; taking Bond of each
Ferry man, for the faithful discharge of his place (except such Ferrys as are
already stated and settled, either by the Court or Towns to whom they appertain)
And all Ferry-men are hereby enjoined to keep a good Boat or Boats in good
repair, to give Bond.
suitable to the waters they are to Ferry over; and also to give ready and due
attendance on Passengers upon all occasions, on penalty of Five Shillings, for
every default of non-attendance; and for want of a good Boat kept in good
repair, Penalties for non-attendance, and not keeping good Boats.
to pay Five Pounds; the one half to Their Majesty's for and toward the
support of the Government; the other half to him or them that shall inform and
sue for the same, before a Justice of the Peace, or at the Quarter Sessions
respectively, besides what damage may accrue to any Person through the Ferry
man's default.

And further it is Enacted, That the General Post that is settled for Their
Majesty's, and the Countries Service, be readily dispatched, and set over by
all Ferry men where they shall come, Penalty for delaying the Post.
without any delay. And if any Ferry-man shall be complained of, and duly
convicted before any Justice of the Peace, for delaying any Post, and not
forthwith Ferrying of him over, he shall Forfeit the Sum of Twenty Shillings,
unto Their Majesty's for and toward the Support of the Government.

And that Boats be constantly kept on either side of the water at Charlstown
Ferry, Assemblymen to pass F^rrage free.
for the more speedy Transportation of Passengers, the Ferry men on each side
to have a separate Interest; and that the Ferry be not from henceforth Leased
out otherwise. And all the Members of the General Assembly shall be Ferrage
free at all Ferrys in their passing to and from the Assembly, See Additional
Act, page
and shall be Transported without any unnecessary delay, on pain of forfeiting
Twenty Shillings as abovesaid.

An Act for Granting a Township within the County of Bristol, to be called
Attleborough.
WHEREAS there is a certain Tract of Land commonly called by the name of North
Purchase lying within the County of Bristol, containing in length about ten
miles from Patucket River to the Bounds of Taunton, and extending about eight
miles in breadth from the Line or Boundary betwixt the two late Colonies of
Massachusetts and Plymouth, to the Bounds of the Town of Rehoboth; being a
convenient Tract for a Township, and more than Thirty Families already Settled
thereupon.

For the better Encouragement and Setlement of the said Plantation.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That henceforth the said Tract of
Land as above described, and Bounded by the Townships of Taunton and R^^ob^^h
(no ways to entrench upon either of their Rights) be and shall be a Township,
and called by the name of Attleborough; and shall have and enjoy all such
Immunities, Privileges and Powers, as generally other Towns within this
Province have and do by Law enjoy. Provided that it be not in pre^udice of any
former Grant. Provided also that the Inhabitants of said Place do continue
under the power and directions of the Select-men, Assessors and Constables of
R^h^b^th (whereto they were formerly annexed) as well referring unto any
Assessments and Arrears thereof, as all other things proper to the duty of
Select-men, Assessors and Constables respectively, until they are supplied with
such Officers among themselves, according to the directions in the Law in that
case made and provided

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun at Boston, the
Thirtieth Day of May, 1694. And Continued by ^^^eral Adjournments unto the
Twenty-seventh day of February following.
An Act for reviving of Actions and Process lately depending in the Superior
Court of Judicature Court of Assize and general Goal delivery, within the
County of Essex, and discontinued by the not holding of the said Court at Salem
upon the Second Tuesday in November, 1694.
WHEREAS by reason of Sickness and other more weighty Occasions of the Province
intervening; the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Goal Delivery could not be held and kept, at the time prefixed by Law for the
Sitting of the same at Salem within the County of Essex, upon the Second
Tuesday in November, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
and Four: For which if due provision be not made, great delay of Justice, and
consequently great Expenses to the Suitors in the said Court will ensue
Therefore for the Continuing and Reviving all manner of Actions or Pleas lately
depending, and all manner of Process that were Retur^^ble or depending in the
said Court, and which were discontinued and put without day by the not holding
the said Court.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all Pleas,
Writs, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts or other things whatsoever,
that were Returnable, or had day or days in the said Superior Court of
Judicature, or Assize and General Goal Delivery, to have been holden and kept
as aforesaid, shall stand continued and be revived, and are hereby continued
and adjourned unto, and shall and may be pleaded, heard and proceeded upon at
the next Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Jail-delivery within the said County of Essex, to sit at Ipswich on the Third
Tuesday in May next ensuing.

And that all parties that had day by any Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits,
Plaints, Pro^^ss, Precepts or other thing or things whatsoever at or in the
said Court to have been kept at Salem as aforesaid, shall respectively appear
at the said next Court to be holden at Ipswich, under the penalty of forfeiting
any Obligations or Recognizances conditioned for the appearance of the said
parties, at the aforesaid Court in Salem, or under any other penalty that might
have incurred upon the said parties, for not appearing at the said Court in
Salem, if the same had been there holden and kept.

Provided nevertheless, and it is not to be understood by any thing herein
contained, That the Jurors Chosen and Summoned to Serve at the said Court at
Salem, are obliged to appear and serve at the said Court to sit at Ipswich; but
that new Jurors shall be chosen to serve at said Court as of course.

Provided also, that where it happens any person or persons being Principals
that were under Bond, Obligation or Recognizance for appearance at the said
Court to have been holden at Salem, are since that removed and gone beyond Sea
or out of this Province, and shall not be returned before the Sitting of the
next Court to be held at Ipswich: It shall be in the power of the Court Sitting
at Ipswich, upon motion made on that behalf, and they are accordingly to allow
a continuance of any such Bond, Obligation or Recognizance to such further time
as shall be thought necessary, that no person concerned may be surprised or
have advantage unreasonably taken against them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as it shall happen the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and
General Goal Delivery, or the Inferior Court of Pleas, Power for Adjourning of
Courts.
in any of the respective Counties within this Province cannot be hold and kept
on the day by Law prefixed for holding of the same, by reason of Death or
Sickness befalling any of the Justices of such Court or any providential
necessary and unavoidable let or hindrance of their attendance: It shall and
may be lawful to and for any two of the Justices of such Court respectively by
Writ under their Hands and Seals directed unto the Sheriff of the County,
therein inserting the occasion thereof, to adjourn the said Court unto a
further day, as in the said Writ shall be expressed, at as little distance of
time as possibly may be from the day whereon by Law the Court should have sat,
that so Justice be not deferred or delayed: And the Sheriff upon receipt of
said Writ, shall cause Publication to be made of the same at the usual place of
the said Courts Sitting, and some other of the most Public Places within the
same County, and also to cause a signification of such Adjournment, and the
time unto which it is made, to be posted up at or near the house or place where
the said Court uses to sit, and other Public Places as aforesaid; to the
intent that unnecessary Travail, Charge and Attendance of all persons concerned
may be prevented; and the Sheriff is to return such Writ with his doings
thereon into the Clerks Office of such Court: And all Pleas, Writs, Actions,
Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, Recognizances and other thing and things
whatsoever returnable or having day or days in said Court, shall stand, abide
and continue unto the said Adjournment, and be held, deemed and adjudged to be
as good, effectual and available in Law to all intents constructions and
purposes, as if such Court had been held and kept on the day by Law for holding
of the same, and no Adjournment thereof had been made.

An Act for the more Effectual Suppressing of Drunkenness, and putting in
Execution the Laws against such as shall presume to Sell Strong Drink without
License.
WHEREAS diverse persons that obtain License for the Retailing of Wine and
Strong Liquors out of Doors only, and not to be spent or drank in their Houses,
do notwithstanding take upon them to give Entertainment to Persons to sit
drinking and tippling there; and others who have no License at all, are yet so
hardy as to run upon the Law, in adventuring to Sell without; Tending to the
great increase of Drunkenness and other Debaucheries: Such Houses not falling
under the inspection of Officers, as those that are Licensed.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
Retailers to Sell no other sorts of drink than what they are Licensed to, nor
to suffer persons to drink in their Houses, etc.
That from and after the Publication hereof, every person and persons now
Licensed, or that shall hereafter obtain License to Retail Wine and Strong
Liquors to be spent out of Doors, and not otherwise, who shall be Convicted of
entertaining or suffering any person or persons to sit Drinking or Tippling in
their Houses, Cellars, Backsides, or within any of the dependences of such
Houses; Or of selling any other sort of Drink than what they have License for,
shall incur and suffer the like penalties and forfeitures as may by Law be
inflicted upon persons selling without License: to be recovered and employed in
manner as by said Law is directed.

And all Officers as well Grand-Jurors, Constables, Tything-men, as the
Officers employed in and about the Collecting of the Excise, Officers to
inspect Public Houses and to present such as Sell without.
are hereby Authorized and Required diligently to see that this Act be duly
observed; and to present and inform of all breaches of the same, either at the
Court of General Sessions of the Peace, or to some Justice of the Peace; who
are hereby respectively empowered to hear and determine the said Offense
according to Law: As also alike to present or inform of any that shall presume
to Sell any sort of strong drink without License. And it shall and may be
lawful to and for any of the aforesaid Officers respectively Ex Officio to
enter into and inspect the House of any person having once been convicted of
selling without License, as they may by Law into Licensed Houses. And if any of
the before mentioned Officers shall be convicted of taking or receiving any
Bribe, Penalty for receiving any bribe, etc.
Fee or Reward directly or indirectly to connive at, conceal, or not to present
or inform against any person or persons being Licensed to Retail for spending
out of Doors only, that shall suffer persons to Drink or Tipple in their Houses
or any of the dependences thereof; or for any others who shall presume to sell
without License; every Officer so offending, shall forfeit and pay three times
the value of all and every such Sum and Sums by him received as a Bribe, Fee or
Reward; one Moiety thereof unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of
the Government, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall inform and sue
for the same in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record. And if such Officer be
one that be employed about the Excise, over and above the forfeiture aforesaid,
he shall ipso facto be discharged of and from his said Office, and be rendered
incapable to be employed in any Public Service as an Officer, by the space of
three years next following.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
Licensed as a Taverner, Innholder or Retailer of Wine or strong Liquors out of
Doors, shall transgress this Act or any other Law of the Province made for the
Regulation of such Houses, License to be forfeited upon a third Conviction.
in any of the particulars therein mentioned, and shall be more than twice
convicted of such breach of Law within the compass of one year: Every person so
offending over and above the penalty in the Law for such transgression, shall
forfeit his or her License, not to be renewed again by the space of three years
next following.

And if any person or persons duly convicted of the breach of Law in any of the
particulars herein beforementioned, Persons unable, or neglecting to pay their
Fine how to be punished.
or of selling without License, shall be unable, or neglect to pay and satisfy
the Fine imposed by Law for such transgression: It shall and may be lawful to
and for the Court or Justice before whom the Conviction is to order such person
or persons either to stand Committed to the Goal of the County by the space of
twenty days without Bail or Mainprize, or to be set in the Cage, or Stocks, to
remain there, not exceeding the space of three hours.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Se^lect-men in
each Town shall cause to be Posted up in all Public Houses within such Town,
Select-men to cause reputed Drunkards etc. to be posted up.
a List of the Names of all persons reputed Drunkards or common Tiplers,
mispending their time and Estate in such Houses: And every keeper of such House
after notice given him as aforesaid, that shall be Convicted before one or more
Justices of the Peace of entertaining or suffering any of the persons named in
such List, to Drink or Tipple in his or her House, or any of the dependences
thereof, Penalty on the keepers of Public Houses giving them Entertainment*
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings; one Moiety thereof to him
or them who shall inform of the same, and the other Moiety to and for the use
of the Poor of the Town where such Offense shall be committed.

An Act for preventing of men's Sons, or Servants absenting themselves from
their Parents or Masters Service without leave.
WHEREAS Complaint has been made by sundry Inhabitants of this Province, that
they have sustained great damage by their Sons and Servants deserting their
Service without consent of their Parents or Masters, being Encouraged to enter
themselves on Board of Private Men of War, or Merchants Ships, and there
Entertained.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Commander of
any Private Man of War, or Master of any Merchant Ship or Vessel coming into,
tarrying or abiding in, or going forth of any Port, Harbor or Place within
this Province, shall receive, Penalty on Commanders or Masters of Ships etc.
for Entertaining men's Sons or Servants without leave.
harbor, en^ertain, conceal or secure on board such Ship or other Vessel, or
suffer to be there harbored or detained, any man's Son being under Age, or
Apprentice, o^ Covenant Servant, (knowing him to be such, or after notice
thereof given) without license and consent of his Parent or Master in writing
under his hand first had and obtained; on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Five
Pounds per Week, and so proportionably for a longer or shorter time that any
Son, Apprentice or Servant, shall be held, harbored, concealed or detained on
board any such Ship or other Vessel as aforesaid, without license and consent
as aforesaid; the one Moiety thereof unto Their Majesty's, to be employed
towa^ds the support of the Government of the Province, and the other Moiety
unto the Parent or Master of such Son, Apprentice or Servant that shall inform
and sue for the same in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record within this
Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Apprentice or
Covenant Servant who shall unlawfully absent himself from his Master, and enter
himself on board any Ship or Vessel as aforesaid, with intent to leave his
Masters Service; Penalty on Servants deserting their Masters Service.
or continue there more than the space o^ twenty four hours, and be thereof
convicted before Their Majesty's Justices in General Sessions of the Peace
within the same County, shall forfeit unto his Master such further Service from
and after the Expiration of the Term which his said Master had in him at the
time of his departure, as the said Court shall order, not exceeding one year.

An Act for Grand Jurors Serving at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and
Punishing defaults of Jurors attendance.
TO the intent that due Inquiry and Presentment may be made unto the Court of
Quarter Sessions of the Peace within the respective Counties, of all
Misdemeanors, Offenses and breaches of Law proper to the Cognizance of said
Court happening within such County, for the Suppressing and Punishing of the
same; And that Jurors may duly attend the Service for which they are chosen.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Clerk of
the Peace of each several County shall annually, fifteen days at least before
the day for holding of the Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace for such
County, Grand Jurors to serve a full year.
issue out Writs directed unto the Constables of the respective Towns within
the same; Requiring them or one of them forthwith to warn a Meeting of the
Inhabitants duly Qualified by Law, for the choosing of one or more Grand
Jurors, according to the number such Town has been accustomed to send, or
otherwise shall be appointed for them by the Justices of the said Court, and
the person or persons so chosen, to warn to appear at the next Court, and the
following Courts of Quarter Sessions successively to be holden for the same
County within the space of one year, and there to attend the Service belonging
to them; and to make return of the said Writ with his doings thereon
accordingly unto the said Clerks Office, before the opening of said Court: And
if any Constable shall fail of performing his duty by said Writ required, or
seasonably to return the same, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty
Shillings; and the persons chosen and returned as aforesaid appearing shall be
Impaneled and Sworn a Grand Inquest for the body of such County, and shall
continue in said Office for the space of one full year, Their duty.
and until others be chosen and Sworn in their stead, whose duty it shall be to
inquire and duly present the breach of all such good and wholesome Laws as are
or shall be Established within this Province, and all such misdemeanors as are
proper to their inquiry, and the Jurisdiction of said Court.

And if any person chosen to said Office, and Summoned by the Constable and so
returned by him, shall make default in appearance without reasonable excuse
made and allowed of by the Court, 40 s Fine for non appearance.
the said Court shall and may set a Fine upon him, not exceeding the Sum of
Forty Shillings. And a new Writ shall issue forth unto the Town to choose
another in his room, and so likewise in case of the removal of any by Death or
otherwise. Petit Jurors making default to be fined not exceeding 20 s.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons legally chosen and summoned to Serve upon the Petit Jury for Trials in
the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal delivery,
or in any of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, or of General Sessions of
the Peace; being so returned by the Constable under his hand, See Act to
prevent default in the appearance of Jurors page
shall make default of appearance, and not attend the said Service, without
reasonable excuse made and allowed of by such Court; every person and persons
so offending shall be fined by said Court (who are hereby empowered thereto) not
exceeding the Sum of Twenty Shillings.

All Fines and forfeitures accruing by virtue of this Act shall be paid into
the Treasurer of the County, where the same do arise, and be employed toward
the defraying of the Public Charges of such County. Fines and forfeitures to
come to the County.


And in case any person or persons Sentenced to pay any of the said Fines or
Forfei^ures shall neglect or refuse so to do, the same shall be levied by
distress and sale of the Offenders Goods or Chattels by Warrant from the Court
that awarded the same, to be Signed by the Clerk of said Court; together with
the incident charges arising for taking such distress according to the Fees by
Law allowed for levying of Executions, How to be levied.
and Two Shillings for the Warrant to be paid unto the Clerk that granted the
same.

And all Grand Jurors shall be allowed by the County Treasurer the Sum of Two
Shillings per Diem each man, during their attendance on any Court; the time to
be Certified unto the County Treasurer by the Clerks of the respective Courts.
Grand Jurors allowance.
And no Grand Juror shall be compelled to Serve more than one year in three:
Nor any Petit Juror more than at one Court within the compass of a year.

An Act for Supplying the defects in the Act Entitled, An Act Encouraging the
Killing of Wolves.
WHEREAS by the Act Entitled, An Act Encouraging the Killing of Wolves, made
and passed at the Session of the General Assembly, begun and held at Boston the
Thirty first day of May, in the Fifth Year of Their present Majesty's Reign;
there is Provision for payment to be made unto the person or persons who shall
Kill any grown Wolf or Wolves Whelp, out of the Town Stock, in which such Wolf
is Killed, or of the Town lying next Adjacent thereto, and that the said
disburst, the same being made to appear, shall be allowed unto such Town, by
the General Treasurer of the Province out of the Public Treasury.

But forasmuch as there is no particular direction in the said Act how or in
what manner such payment out of any Town Stock shall be made appear, so as to
justify the Treasurer in allowing of the same; and the better to prevent any
fraud therein.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That every person or
persons Killing any grown Wolf or Wolves whelp (other than such as shall be
taken out of the Belly of any Bitch Wolf) within any Town of this Province,
Constable and one or more Select-men to give Receipt for Wolves Heads.
and bringing the head thereof unto the Constable of such Town or of the Town
next adjacent, the Constable in the presence of one or more of the Select men,
shall cut both the Ears off the same, and such Select man or men and Constable,
shall give the party a Receipt for the said head, expressing whither it be a
grown Wolf or a Whelp; and upon producing such Recei^^, the party shall be paid
and allowed by the Select men or Treasurer of such Town out of the Town Stock,
for the same, as in and by the said Act is directed. And all such payments so
made shall be Certified unto the Treasurer and Receiver General, under the
hands of the major part of the Select men in such Town, and Town Treasurer
(where any such be) or Town Clerk, in manner following, That is to say.

Mr. Treasurer,
THis may Certify, That there has been paid unto sundry persons out of the Town
Stock of A. for (...) grown Wolves, and (...) Wolves Whelps killed in and near
unto our Town, Certificate to the Treasure^
since the (...) day of (...) last past, and the heads thereof brought unto our
Constables, and the Ears cut off in presence of some of our selves, as the Law
directs, and so Certified unto us, in the whole the Sum of (...) Pounds (...)
which Sum we desire you to allow unto our Town, by discounting the same with B.
C. Constable, out of the Public Assessment, committed to him to Collect in our
Town. Dated in A. aforesaid, the (...) day of (...)

Select-men. Town Treasurer. Or Town Clerk.




And be it further Enacted, That the Treasurer do cause a competent number of
blank Certificates in the Form abovesaid, to be printed at the public Charge,
and affix his own Seal thereto, and is hereby Ordered to deliver so many unto
the Select men of each Town and place respectively, or some one of them, as
shall be necessary for ^^e use of such Town or Place.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty-ninth Day of May, 1695.
An Act to prevent Incestuous Marriages.
ALTHOUGH this Court does not take in hand to determine what is the whole
Breadth of the Divine Commandment respecting unlawful Marriages. Yet for
preventing of that abominable Dishonesty and Confusion which might otherwise
happen.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no man shall
Marry any Woman within the degrees hereafter named in this Act, That is to say,
No man shall Marry his Grandfathers Wife, Degrees of Kindred forbidden
Marriage.
Wives Grand mother, Fathers Sister, Mothers Sister, Fathers Brothers Wife,
Mothers Brothers Wife, Wives Fathers Sister, Wives Mothers Sister, Fathers
Wife, Wives Mother, Daughter, Wives Daughter, Sons Wife, Sister, Brothers Wife,
Wives Sister, Sons Daughter, Daughters Daughter, Son Sons Wife, Daughters Sons
Wife, Wives Sons Daughter, Wives Daughters Daughter* Brothers Daughter, Sisters
Daughter, Brothers Sons Wife, Sisters Sons Wife, Wives Brothers Daughter, Wives
Sisters Daughter. And if any man have already Married, or shall hereafter
Marry, or have carnal Copulation with any Woman who is within the degrees
before recited in this Act; every such Marriage shall be and is hereby declared
to be Null and Void. And all Children that shall hereafter be born of such
Incestuous Marriage or Copulation, shall be for ever disabled to Inherit by
Descent, or by being generally named in any Deed or Will by Father or Mother.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Man and Woman
who shall Marry, or carnally know each other, being within any of the degrees
before recited in this Act, Penalty for any within the said Degrees that shall
Marry.
and shall be convicted thereof before His Majesty's Justices of Assize and
General Goal Delivery; such Man and Woman so convicted, shall be set upon the
Gallows by the space of an hour, with a Rope about their Neck, and the other
end cast over the Gallows: And in the way from thence to the Common Goal, shall
be severely Whipped, not exceeding Forty Stripes each. Also every person so
offending shall for ever after wear a Capital I of two inches long, and
proportionable bigness, cut out in cloth of a contrary color to their Clothes,
and sewed upon their upper Garments on the out side of their Arm, or on their
back in open view. And if any person or persons having been convicted and
sentenced for such Offense, shall at any time be found without their Letter so
worn, during their abode in this Province, they shall by Warrant from a Justice
of the Peace be forthwith Apprehended and Ordered to be publicly Whipped not
exceeding Fifteen Stripes, and so from time to time toties qu^ties.

Penalty on such whose Marriage is declared Null to converse or dwell together.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Man or Woman
whose Marriage is by this present Act declared Null and Void; shall be so hardy
as to converse together as Man and Wife, or shall continue to dwell in the same
House at any time after the space of forty day next after the Publication of
this present Act, and be thereof Convicted; or if any Man and Woman who shall
hereafter be divorced or their Marriage declared to be null and void, according
to the Law of this Province, shall Cohabit or Converse together as Man and
Wife, and be thereof Convicted, all and every such persons shall suffer the
pains and penal^ies mentioned in an Act made and passed by the Great and
General Court or Assembly, at their Sessions begun and held the Thirtieth Day
of May. One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, Entitled, An Act against
Adultery and Poligamy; which in and by the said Act are set and imposed upon
such as shall be taken in Adulter^ And it shall be in the power of the Justices
of the Superior Court of (...), to Assign unto any Woman so separated, such
reasonable part of the Estate of her late Husband as in their discretion the
circumstances of the Estate may admit, not exceeding one third part thereof.

And for the better preventing of Clandestine Marriages.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, In Addition to the Act Entitled, An
Act for the orderly Consummating of Marriages. That no Person other than a
Justice of the Peace, and that within his own County only, or Ordained
Minister, and that only in the Town where he is settled in the Work of the
Ministry; Justices and Ministers not to Marry persons out of their County or
Town respectively.
shall or may presume to join any Persons together in Marriage; Nor shall any
Justice or Minister, join any Per^sons in Marriage other than such, one or both
of whom are Inhabitants or Residents in such County or Town respectively, nor
without Certificate produced under the hand of the Clerk of the several Towns
where the parties respectively dwell, that the names and intention of the said
parties have been entered with him fifteen days before hand; and that due
Publication of such their intention or purpose has been made in manner as by
Law is directed; Nor without evident signification that the Parents of such
persons, Names and intention of Marriage to be Entered with the Town Clerk.
or others whose immediate care or government they are under, are knowing of
and consenting to such Marriage: On pain that every Justice, Minister, or other
person offending against this Act, shall for every such Offense, forfeit and
pay the Sum of Fifty Pounds, as a fine for and toward the defraying of the
Public Charges arising within such County w^ere the offense is committed, to
be sued for and recovered by the County Treasurer in any of His Majesty's
Courts of Record within the same, by Bill, Plaint or Information; Penalty on
Justices or Ministers offending.
and shall and are hereby for ever after disabled to join persons in Marriage;
and be further liable to the Action and Suit of the Parent, Guardian or others
whose immediate care or government either of the parties were under at the time
of such Marriage, that are agrieved thereat and shall prosecute the same.

And be it further Enacted, That if at any time the Banns of Matrimony betwixt
any persons shall be forbidden, the Publisher thereof shall forbear to proceed
therein, Banns forbidden not to be out asked till the matter be heard, etc.
until the matter have been duly inquired into and heard before two of the
Justices of the same County, and that they certify under their hands, either
that the cause was insufficient, or that it is removed.

And all Marriages shall be Registered by the Town Clerk of the same Town where
they are consummated; and every Justice or Minister as aforesaid, Town Clerk to
Register Marriages.
shall return a Note or Certificate unto the Clerk of the Town, of the names of
all persons which they shall Marry, and of the time when, within three months
at farthest after Consummation of the same, and shall allow and pay out of his
Fee unto the Clerk for Entering the same Three pence: Any Law, Usage or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on men and women
that shall wear contrary Apparel.
That if any Man shall wear Women's Apparel; or if any Woman shall wear Men's
Apparel, and be thereof duly Convicted; they shall be corporally punished or
Fined, at the discretion of the Quarter Sessions, not exceeding Five Pounds, to
the use of the County where the Offense is Committed, toward the defraying of
the County Charges.

An Act for Regulating the Assize of Shingles.
WHEREAS it has been accustomed that Shingles exposed to Sale, are close Packt
up in Bundles, so that the quality of them cannot be seen, and do frequently
fall short of the due Assize and Dimentions, whereby great Injustice may be
done.

For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all Shingles
exposed to Sale, shall be made of good sound Timber, Assize of Shingles.
and of the following Dimentions, That is to say, each Shingle to bear eighteen
Inches or fifteen Inches in length; and not under three and half Inches in
breadth, nor under half an Inch thick, and well shaved; all Shingles of
eighteen Inches and fifteen Inches respectively, to be made up in distinct
Bundles by themselves.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
first day of September next ensuing, No person shall expose to Sale any such
Shingles, All Shingles under due Assize, exposed to sale to be forfeited.
which are not of the full dimentions, of length, breadth and thickness
aforesaid; On pain of forfeiting every bundle, wherein any Shingles shall be
found under any of the said dimentions of length, breadth or ^hickness. And if
any person to whom any Shingles are tendered to be Sold, shall desire to have
them viewed, upon his application made to a Justice of Peace, such Justice is
hereby Empowered to make out a Warrant for the app^inting and authorizing some
able House-Carpenter to view and measure the same; Justices of the Peace to
appoint a Viewer.
and to administer an Oath unto him to deal faithfully and impartially therein;
and in the presence of the Owner or Vender of such Shingles (it be see cause to
be there) to perform the said Service, and to make seizure of al^ such bundles
of Shingles, in which there shall be any found under the full dimentions above
mentioned, Defective Shingles forfeited to be to the use of the poor.
in any particular thereof. And upon such return made by the said Officer under
his hand to the Justice who granted the Warrant, such justice shall declare the
said Shingles to be forfeited; and cause them to be de^ivered unto the Select
men or Overseers of the Poor of the Town, where they are offered to Sale, to be
employed to and for the use of the Poor of such Town: The charges of viewing
being first defrayed and answered for out of the same: But where there appears
no defects, the person at whose desire the Survey is appointed, shall answer
the whole charge thereof.

An Act for the better Settlement of the Islands of Marthas Vineyard, and
Islands adjacent.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Court or Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Islands of Marthas Vineyard, Elsabeth Islands, the Islands called Nomans
Land, and all the dependencies formerly belonging to Dukes County (the Island
of Nant^ckett only ^xcepted) shall be, remain and continue to be one County to
all intents and purposes, by the name of Dukes County: And all Appeals from any
Judgment or Judgments given or to be given in any of the Inferior Courts of
Pleas within the said County, Appeals from Courts in Dukes County to be to
Plymouth.
shall henceforth be heard and tried at the Superior Court of Judicature to be
holden from time to time at Plymouth within the Neighboring County of
Plymouth, any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding: the Jurors
to Serve at said Superior Courts of Judicature to be from time to time chosen
and summoned out of the several Towns within the said County of Plymouth and
Dukes County according to the directions in the Law in such case provided. The
Island of Nantuckett to remain and continue under the same Form of Government
as is already there settled: Appeals from Courts in Nantucket to be to Boston*
and Appeals from the Judgments given or to be given in the Inferior Court of
Pleas within the said Island, to be heard and tried in the Superior Court of
Judicature to be held at Boston within the County of Suffolk as is by Law
provided.

An Act in further Addition to the Act Entitled, An Act for the Settlement and
Support of Ministers.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That when at any
time a Church shall make choice of a Minister, and present their choice unto
the Inhabitants of the Town or Precinct in a Public meeting duly warned and
assembled for that purpose, to have their concurrance therein; and the
Inhabitants so Assembled, shall by a major Vote deny their approbation of the
Churches choice; the Church may call in the help of a Council consisting of the
Elders and Messengers of three or five Neighboring Churches, which Council are
hereby Empowered to Hear, Examine and Consider the exceptions and allegations
made against the Churches Election. And in case the Council shall
notwithstanding approve of the said Election, such Minister accepting of the
Choice, and settling with them, shall be the Minister of the Town or Precinct,
who shall be in all respects supported and maintained, as by the said Act is
provided; but if otherwise, the Church shall proceed to the Election of another
Minister.

And it is further Declared, That no person by reason of his Voting in the
Church shall be precluded from Voting as an Inhabitant of the Town: Any Law,
Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the M^^^^husetts-Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty ninth Day of May, 1695. And continued by several Adjournments until the
Twentieth of November following.
An Act for the better discovery and more effectual Suppressing of Unlicensed
Houses.
FORASMUCH as diverse Ill disposed and Indigent Persons, the Pains and Penalties
in the Laws already made not regarding, are so hardy as ^o presume to Sell and
Retail Strong Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Wine, Rhum, or other strong Liquors or
mixed Drinks, and to keep common Tippling Houses, therein harboring and
entertaining Apprentices, Indians Negroes, and other idle and dissolute
persons, tending to the ruin and impoverishment of Families, and to all Impiety
and Debaucher^es; And if detected and convicted of any such Offense, are unable
to satisfy the Fine imposed by Law for the same: And cannot be punished by
Imprisonment without wrong to their Families.

For Remedy whereof, and the more effectual deterring and suppressing of such
Evil Practices.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That when and so
often as any person being duly convicted of keeping a common Tippling House,
Persons unable to pay the Fine to be Whip't.
or Selling Strong Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Wine, Rhum, or other strong Liquors
or mixed Drink by Retail, without License first orderly had and obtained for the
same, shall be unable to answer and satisfy the Fine imposed by Law for such
Transgression, together with the Charge of Prosecution; or that shall not pay
such Fine and Charges (and likewise give Bond for the good Behavior, if it be
a second conviction) within the space of twenty four hours next after Sentence
declared in that respect: It shall and may be lawful to and for two Justices of
the Peace, or the Court before whom the Conviction shall be, to order such
Offender to be openly Whipped with so many Stripes as in their Discretion shall
be thought fit, not less then ten, nor exceeding fi^teen for one Offense; And
to restrain the Offender in Prison, until the Fine and Charges as aforesaid are
paid, or the Order for corporal punishment be Executed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any Grand Jurors, Officers power to se^z drink found in
Unlicensed Houses
Constable, Tything-men, and the Officers employed in and about the Excise, Ex
Officio to enter into the House and Dependencies thereof, of any such person as
aforesaid, suspected of Selling strong Drink without License, having once been
convicted thereof, and taking wi^h them such assistance as they shall think
needful, to make search for strong Drink, and finding any quantity of any kind
of the Drinks herein beforementioned, to seiz and secure the same, so as it be
within the space of one year next after such conviction, and to inform thereof
at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden within the same County,
or unto two Justices of the Peace ( Quorum Vnus) within the same; And if the
quantity of Drink so seized shall be judged by such Court or Justices to be
more than for the necessary use of the Family, and what their condition may
reasonably allow them to Expend, or otherwise to have in their Custody: It
shall and may be lawful to and for such Court or Justices to declare all such
Drink to be forfeited; one Moiety thereof unto the party that seized and
informed of the same, and the other Moiety to the Select-men or Overseers of
the Poor of the Town where it was Seiz^d, to the use of the Poor there, and to
order the disposal thereof accordingly.

Appeal from the Sentence of 2 Justices
Provided nevertheless. That any person agrieved at the Sentence of any two
Justices for either of the Offenses beforementioned may Appeal therefrom unto
the next General Sessions of the Peace within the same County; Provided such
Appeal be claimed in due time, and security given in manner as the Law in such
cases directs.

An Act for taking of Affidavits out of Court.
FORASMUCH as it is often necessary, That Witn^sses in Civil Causes be Sworn
out of Court, when by reason of their going to Sea, living more than Thirty
Miles distant from the place where the Cause is to be Tried, Age, Sickness or
other Bodily Infirmity, they are rendered incapable of Travail, and appearing in
Person at the Court. To the intent therefore that all Witnesses may
indifferently testify their certain knowledge, and the whole truth in the Cause
they are to speak unto.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Adverse party to
have notification.
That for either of the Reasons before mentioned, and not otherwise, every
Justice of the Peace, or others lawfully Commission^ted and Empowered thereto by
two or more of the Justices of the Superior or Inferior Co^rt respectively,
may take Affidavits out of Court, so as a Notification with reasonable time be
first made out and delivered to the adverse Party (if within twenty miles of
the place) or lest at the place of his Dwelling or (...) Abode, to be present
at the time of taking such Affidavit, if he think fit; and every such Witnes^
shall be carefully Examined and Cautioned to testify the whole truth; and being
Sworn, the Justice shall attest the same with the day, No person interested or
the Attorney to write Affidavits.
month and year of the Caption thereof, and that the adverse party was present
(if so) or that a Notification was sent him, and shall seal up the Testimony,
and deliver it to the Party (if desired) at whose Request it was taken: And no
person interested shall write or draw up the Testimony of any Witness in such
Cause, nor any Attorney in his Clients Cause; And if it manifes^ly appear any
Testimony to be written or drawn up by any Interested, Affidavits to be
returned to the Court Sealed up*
or the Attorney in the Cause, or be returned from any Justice of the Peace by
other hand than his own, into the Court where the same is to be used, unsealed,
or the Seal having been broken up, all such Testimonies shall be rejected by
the Court, and be utterly void, and of no effect in Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Justices to grant
Summons for Witnesses*
That every Justice of the Peace shall be, and hereby is Empowered, upon Request
to him made, to Grant Summons for the Appearance of any Witness before him in
any Civil or Criminal Cause, where such Witness is bound to Sea before the time
of Trial, and to take his Deposition in such Cause, the adverse party being
present, or notification sent him as aforesaid.

Provided nevertheless, That Witnesses to Bonds, Specialties, Witnesses to
Bonds and other writings may be Sworn without notification.
Letters of Attorney, and other Instruments in writing under the Hand of the
Party Executing the same, or to Accounts or Testimonies relating to persons out
of this Government, or to be sent beyond Sea, may be Sworn without such
Notification as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Affidavits in perpetuam
rei memoriam to be Sworn in Court or before 2 Justices,
That all Affidavits relating to the Possession of any Houses or Lands, or any
other matter, in perpetuam rei memoriam, shall be made and taken before some
Court of Record, or two or more Justices of the Peace, Quorum Unus.

And it is further Enacted, That all persons Forswearing themselves in any such
Affidavits taken as aforesaid, shall incur the same Penalties, Penalty for
perjury*
as if they had been taken in open Court.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty ninth Day of May, 1695. And continued by several Adjournments until the
Twenty sixth of February following.
An Act for the granting unto His Majesty, An Additional Tax of Two Thousand
Three Hundred Thirty Three Pounds, Nine Shillings and Threepence, unto the Tax
upon Polls and Estates, granted by an Act of this Court, at their Sessions
begun the Twenty-ninth Day of May last past.
FOR the Support of the Government within this His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and answering of the incident and contingent Charges in and
about the same: For a vigorous Prosecution of the War against the French and
Indian Enemy and Rebels; For the payment of just Debts already Contracted, or
to be Contracted on the Public Account within this Province, and such Grant^
(...) Allowances as have been or shall be made and ordered by the General Court
or Assembly to particular persons; For the Repairs and Support of His Majesty's
Castle, upon Castle-Island, and the Garrison there; For the making good One
Hundred Pounds Miscast in the Grant of Nine Thousand Five Hundred Fifty Nine
Pounds, including a former Grant by Act of the General Assembly, Passed at
their Sitting by Adjournment the Fifth Day of September, One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety Four, Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of the late Tax, and for
Granting an Additional Supply of Money. To the ends and (...) aforementioned,
and none other. We the Representatives of this His Majesty's said Province of
the Massachusetts Bay Do Grant unto His Most Excellent Majesty, a Tax of Two
Thousand and Eight Pounds, Nineteen ^hillings and Three pence in Money, to be
Raised and Levied upon Polls and Estates, both real and personal within the
same, as in and by this present Act for the manner and proportion thereof, is
directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Treasurer
do forthwith make out and send Warrants to the Select-men or Trustees, and
Commissioner of each respective Town and Precinct within this Province,
Requiring them to assess all their rateable Male Polls and Estate, both real
and personal, lying within such Town or Precinct, and the Dependences thereof,
one full and just third part of the Sum total of the two several Lists returned
unto the Treasurer, upon the Grant made at the Session of this Court, begun and
held the Twenty Ninth of May last past; the Lists of the same that are returned
amounting to the Sum of Six Thousand and Twenty Six Pounds Seventeen Shillings
and Eight Pence. Which said third part is to be assessed proportionably upon
Polls and Estates, according to the Rules and Directions in the Act for the
said Grant prescribed and particularly set down, and the said Lists so made, to
return unto the Treasurer, with a Notification of the Names of the Constables
or Collectors of such Town or Precinct respectively, at or before the last day
of March Instant. And the Treasurer is hereby further Empowered and Ordered to
send out Warrants directed to the Constables or Collectors of the said several
Towns and Precincts, together with the said Lists, requiring them to collect
and pay in the Sum therein mentioned, into the Treasury, and to Issue their
Accounts thereof with himself or Successor, at or before the Twenty Ninth Day
of May, which will be in the Year of our Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Six.

Provided nevertheless, Forasmuch as the Select-men or Trustees of the several
Towns and Precincts hereafter named, have omitted their Duty, in not returning
unto the Treasurer the Lists of their said Towns or Precincts respective Sums
and Proportions unto the aforesaid Tax Granted by this Court at their Session
begun the Twenty Ninth Day of May last past, and have hitherto paid nothing
toward the same. To the intent therefore that they may bear their just and
equal proportion of Public Charges.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said several Towns and
Precincts, shall pay toward the said former, and this Additional Grant the
respective Sums following. That is to say, l s d York, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00
Wells, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Kittery, Twenty-Pounds. 20 00 00 Isle of Shoales,
Five Pounds. 5 00 00 Edgar Town, Forty One Pound. 41 00 00 Chilm^^k, Twenty One
Pounds, six shillings, eight-pence. 21 06 08 Tisbury, Twenty One Pounds six
shillings eight pence. 21 06 08 Na^tuckett, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Southfield,
Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 E^field, Five Pounds^ 05 00 00 Eastham, Ninety Pounds,
sixteen shillings eight pence. 90 16 08

The whole proportion of the said before named Towns and Precincts, amounting
to Three Hundred Twenty Four Pounds Ten Shillings being added to the Two
Thousand and Eight Pounds Nineteen Shillings and Three pence before mentioned,
makes this Additional Grant to be Two Thousand Three Hund^ed Thirty Three
Pounds Nine Shillings and Threepence, and the whole Tax (including the Sum
formerly returned) to be Eight Thousand Three Hundred and Sixty Pounds Six
Shillings and Eleven-pence.

And the Treasurer is hereby Ordered forthwith to send out Warrants directed
unto the Select men, or Trustees and Commissioner for Asses^ment (if any such
there be) of the several Towns and Precincts before-named, requiring them
forthwith to assess the Sum herein set and proportioned, unto the said several
Towns and Precincts, upon all the rateable Male Polls and Estate, both real and
personal l^ing within the same, according to the Rules and Directions in the
Act for the aforesaid Grant, and in this present Act prescribed and set down
and to return a List thereof unto himself, at or before the last day of March
Instant: And the Treasurer upon Receipt of the same is hereby further Empowered
and Ordered to send forth his Warrants, together with the said Lists, unto the
Constables or Collectors of the said several Towns and Precincts requiring them
to collect and pay in the Sum therein mentioned into the Treasury, and to issue
their Accounts thereof with himself or Successor, as aforesaid, at or before
the said Twenty Ninth Day of May, which will be in the Year of our Lord God,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six.

And for the better Enabling the Treasurer to Enforce the bringing in of the
Moneys herein mentioned to be Granted, and the Arrears of all Public Rates and
Taxes whatsoever, at any time or Times heretofore granted either due from any
Town or Towns, or in the hands of any Sheriff, Constable or Collector, the
Accounts whereof lie open and unfinished, or where any Select-men or Assessors
have or shall fail of performing the Duty and Service lawfully required of them.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer shall be, and
hereby is fully Empowered and Authorized, to take, use and execute all such
Methods, Directions, Powers, and Authorities as have heretofore been given him
in and by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or in any Clause, Branch or
Article thereof, for the obtaining and drawing into the Treasury as well all
the Moneys mentioned to be Granted in and by this present Act, as all Arrears
of any former, and other Rates and Taxes whatsoever, as fully and effectually
as if the same Directions, Methods, Powers, and Authorities had herein been
again particularly Recited and Re-enacted, and notwithstanding any limitation
or restraint thereof in the particular Act or Acts wherein the same are
enumerated, set down and expressed. And all Select-men, Trustees or Assessors,
Sheriffs, Constables or Collectors failing of performing the Duty and Service
of them respectively required, shall be liable and subject unto the like Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures to be prosecuted, had and recovered of them in the
same way and manner, and before the same Judicatories, as in and by the said
Acts, or any of them are set, declared and prescribed.

And be it further Enacted, That the Treasurer be, and is hereby Empowered to
Issue forth and pay a certain number of Bills of Credit, to the value of Four
Thousand Pound^ more than what is before Ordered according to the aforesaid Act
for which this present Tax, and the Impost and Excise shall be a Fund.

And be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Accounts
of the Issuing and Disposal of Moneys and Sums of Money granted and raised, and
that hereafter shall be granted and raised by the General Assembly, for the
Support and Defense of this His Majesty's Province, and that has or shall come
into the Public Treasury, by any other ways or mea^^ whatsoever, shall be by
the T^easurer laid before the Great and General Assembly, when by them
required, for their Examination, Approbation and Allowance from time to time as
has been accustomed. And all such Approbati^ns and Allowances of the General
Assembly heretofore, and that hereafter shall be passed, shall be to the
Treasurer a full and final Discharge.

An Act for the Encouragement of making Salt, within this Province.
FORASMUCH as the Inhabitants of this Province are brought into great Straits
by reason of the dearness and scarcity of Salt; Many of our Vessels employed in
fetching of it from Tar^ooda, and other Places, being taken by Privateers, and
others Discouraged from Undertaking such Voyages during this time of War: And
whereas Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson, and John Foster, Esqrs. Have Informed
this Court, that Proposals have been offered them of the possibility of making
Salt here after the manner as it is made in France. For a Trial whereof, a
considerable Sum of Money must be advanced, and great pains taken, and that
with uncertainty of Success.

Wherefore for the promoting of a Design that will be so universally
beneficial, it it take effect.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and the Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the ^^me, That the whole
privilege and benefit of making Salt within this Province, shall be to the
said Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson, and John Foster and to their Associates,
during the space of Fourteen Years: And if any person or persons shall make any
Salt ^s abovesaid within this Province during the said Term of Fourteen Years
next coming; or shall Import any Salt into this Province, made as abovesaid in
any other Province or Place in New England: They shall yield and pay as a
Custom, the value of Ten Shillings per Hogsh^^d for all such as shall be
Imported as abovesaid; one half to the Undertakers, Elisha Cook, Elisha
Hutchinson, and John Foster Esqrs. and their Associates, the other half to the
use of the Poor of the Town where the same shall be Seized, to be Recovered, as
other Customs are; whether the sam^ be Seized on Board any Ship or Vessel
Importing it; or in any Store house or Place on Shore, within six months after
its being so Imported. Provid^^ that the said Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson,
and John Foster, shall cause to (...) made as above said, One Hundred Hogsheads
of good Merchantable (...) within this Province before the Expiration of the
Year One Thous^^^ Seven Hundred. Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
not^^^^^standing.

AN ACT Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty-seventh Day of May, 1696.
An Act against Piracy and Robbing upon the Sea.
WHEREAS diverse great Disorders, (...) practices and Depradations, have been
and are frequently committed by several of His Majesty's Subjects in and upon
the Seas, to the great damage and prejudice of His Majesty's Allies, and
contrary to Treaties of Peace, and the good Correspondence which ought to be
(...) amongst Christian Kings, Princes and States, is thereby lessened and
(...). And whereas, also diverse of His Majesty's Subjects have and do (...)
diverse Inhumane and Hostile Acts and Depradations upon the Subjects and Allies
(...) diverse Princes and States in Foreign Parts, in amity with His Majesty;
which by reason of the remoteness of the place where the Fact was committed,
can very rarely be proved by witness indifferent, and many times Kill and
Murder such persons being in the Ship or Boat where such Offenses are
perpetrated, which should bear witness against them in that behalf. And whereas
diverse persons to whom private Commissions of War are granted, do many times
take, rob and spoil the Ships, Goods, Merchandises, and things belonging to the
Subjects of Princes and States in amity with the Crown of England, and Burn,
Sink or Destroy such Ships or Vessels wherein such Goods, Merchandises and
Things were taken, that the same may not be discovered and known, contrary to
the intent and meaning of the Granting of such Commissions, and the
Instructions therewith given them. Which disorders, wicked practices and
depradations ought to be detested and abhorred by all His Majesty's Subjects:
And for prevention and reformation thereof.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Assembly, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the
same, That all Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders and Confederacies
hereafter to be committed in or upon the Sea, shall be Enquired, Treasons,
Felonies, Robberies etc. committed on the Sea, to be heard and judged in such
Counties and as shall be limited by Commission.
Tried, Heard, Determined and Judged in such Counties and Places as shall be
limited by Commission or Commissions from the Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
or Commander in Chief for the time being of this Province, by and with the
advice and consent of the Council, to be directed for the same in like manner
and form, as if such Offense or Offenses had been committed or done in or upon
the Land: And such Commissions shall be had under the Seal of the Province,
directed to three or more substantial persons from time to time, and as often as
need shall require to hear and determine such Offenses after the common course
of the Laws of this Province, used for Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders
and Confederacies done and committed upon the Land within the same.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such persons to whom such
Commission of Commissions shall be directed, Such Offenses to be enquired of by
the Oath of twelve men.
or three of them at the least, shall have full power and authority to enquire
of such Offenses, by the Oaths of twelve good and lawful Inhabitants in the
Shire limited in their Commission in such like manner and form, as if such
offenses had been committed upon the Land within the same Shire: And that every
Indictment found and presented before such Commissioners, of any Treasons,
Felonies, Robberies, Murders, Man slaughters, Alike Process to be made and
used as for such Offenses done upon the Land.
or such other offenses committed or done in and upon the Seas, shall be good
and effectual in the Law: And if any person or persons happen to be Indicted
for any such offense hereafter to be done in and upon the Seas, or in any other
place above limited; That then such Order, Process Judgment and Execution shall
be used, had, done or made, to, and against every such person and persons so
being indicted and found, as against Traitors, Felons and Murderers, for
Treason, Felony, Robbery, Murder, or such other Offenses done upon the Land,
as by the Laws of this Province is o^ shall be accustomed. And that the Trial
of such Offense or Offenses, if it be denied by the Offender or Offenders,
shall be had by twelve lawful men Inhabiting in the Shire, limited in such
Commission, which shall be directed as is aforesaid. And such as shall be
convicted of any such Offense or Offenses by Verdict, Confession or Process by
Authority of any such Commission, shall have and suffer such pains of Death,
losses of Goods and Chattels, a^ if they had been attainted and convicted of
any Treasons, Felony or Robberies, or other the said Offenses done upon the
Land, for and toward the Support of the Government within this His Majesty's
Province.

Saving for persons compelled by necessity that shall take Victuals, etc. that
may be conveniently spared.
Provided always, That this Act extend not to be prejudicial or hurtful to any
person or persons, for taking any Victual, Cables, Ropes, Anchors or Sails,
which any person or persons (compelled by necessity) takes of or in any Ship
which may conveniently (...) the same, so as the same person or persons pay out
of hand for the same Victua^* Cables, Ropes, Anchors or Sails, Money, or
Mony-worth, to the value of the ^^ing so taken, or do deliver for the same a
sufficient Bill Obligatory payable in reasonable time, not exceeding twelve
months; and that the makers of such Bills well and truly pay the same Debt at
the day to be limited within the said Bills.

And be it also furth^^ Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
suspected person or persons, Suspected persons to be seized and secured, as
also their Treasure.
shall hereafter bring into this Province any Foreign Coins, Gold, Bullion,
Merchandise and other Treasure, supposed to be taken in and upon the Seas, in
manner aforesaid: That then, and in every such case, the next Justice or
Justices of the Peace, or other Magistrate then present upon the place, are
hereby required and empowered upon his or their own knowledge or information
given to him or them thereof to Grant Warrants to the Sheriff or Constable of
the Place, to Apprehend and Seiz every such person or persons, his and their
Money, Gold, Bullion, Merchandise and Treasure, and to bring the same before
such Justices or Magistrates, to be Examined and Proceeded against as the Law
directs; and in case such suspected person or persons cannot produce a
Certificate, or produce two Evidences, where and how he came by such Moneys,
Gold, Bullion, Merchandise or Treasure, then such Justices or Magistrates may
commit such person or persons to Goal, without Bail or Mainprize, until he or
they be discharged by Law, and secure such Moneys, Gold, Bullion, Officers to
be assisted in making such ^eizur^^.
Merchandise or Treasure, to be dispo^^d of as the Law directs. And every such
Sheriff or other Officer, to whom such Warrant or Warrants shall be directed,
shall require and take such a number of persons with Arms, or otherwise, as he
or they shall think meet, for the seizing and apprehending such person or
persons, and carrying him or them before such Justice or Magistrate as
aforesaid, and every person or persons refusing or neglecting to be aiding and
assisting to such Officer or Officers, Penalty for neglect.
in the Execution of such Warrant or Warrants, shall be proceeded against as
the Law directs, and in such manner, and under such Penalties, as in other the
like cases is accustomed and provided; and every such Officer or Officers
offending or neglective in his Office, and Execution thereof, shall be punished
as the Law also directs.

Private men of War to bring what they take in to some of His Majesty's Ports
for adjudication according to their Instructions.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That if any person or persons to whom such
private Commission or Commissions is, are or shall be granted, do hereafter
take, surprise and seiz any Ship, Vessel, Goods, Merchandises and Things of the
Subjects of any Prince or State whatsoever, and do not bring such Ship, Vessel,
Goods, Merchandises and Things into some Port or Ports belonging to His
Majesty, pursuant to their Commissions and Instructions, there to receive legal
Condemnation, unless hindered by the inevitable Providence of God, whereof
sufficient proof shall be made, or produce two at least of the Company
belonging to the Ship or Vessel so taken, to manifest that the Ship, Vessel and
Goods so taken, belonged at the time of the Caption thereof to the Subjects of
the Enemies of the Crown of England, shall be prosecuted as Robbers and Felons,
and as if no such Commission or Commissions had been granted to them, and under
such pains and penalties as before in this Act is mentioned inflicted and
declared.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun at Boston, the
Twenty-seventh Day of May, 1696. And continued by several Adjournments until
the Eighteenth of November following.
An Act for the Equal Distribution of Insolvent Estates.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the
same, That when the Estate of any person Deceased shall be Insolvent or
Insufficient to pay all just Debts which the Deceased owed, Manner of
Distribution.
the same shall be set forth and distributed to and among all the Creditors in
proportion to the Sums to them respectively owing so far as the said Estate
will extend, saving that the Debts due to the C^^wn, the Sickness and necessary
Funeral Charges of the Deceased are to be first paid. And the Executor or
Administrator appointed to any such Insolvent Estate before payment to any be
made (except as aforesaid) shall represent the condition and circumstances
thereof unto the Judge for Pro^^te of Wills, and granting of Administrations;
Apprisers to be Sworn.
and the said Judge shall nominate and appoint two or more fit and indifferent
persons to make a true and equal Apprizement of such Estate, and Administer an
Oath unto them for that purpose; and shall also nominate and appoint two or
more fit persons to be Commissioners, with full power to receive and examine
all Claims of the several Creditors, and how they are made out: Commissioners
to receive the Claims.
And such Commissioners shall cause the times and places of their meeting to
attend the Creditors for the receiving and examining of their Claims to be made
know^ and published by Posting up the same in some public places in the Sh^^e
Town of that County where such Deceased person last dwelt, and of the two next
adjoining Counties. And six, twelve or eighteen months time (as the
circumstances of any Estate may require) shall be allowed by the Judge unto the
Creditors for bringing in their Claims, and proving their Debts At the end of
which limited time, such Commissioners shall make their Re^port, and present a
List of all the Claims unto the said Judge, who shall order them meet
Recompense out of the Estate, for their care and labor in that Affair: And,
the Debts due to the Crown, Sickness and necessary Funeral Charges as is herein
before provided, being first subducted, shall order the Residue and Remainder
of the Estate to be paid and distributed to and among the other Creditors that
shall have made out their Claims in due proportion to the Sums unto them
respectively Owing according as the Estate will bear; saving unto the Widow, if
any be, her right of Dower according to Law in the Houses and Lands of the
Deceased, the Widows Dower at the Expiration of her Term to be also distributed
among the Creditors in a like proportion.

Provided, Debts may be contested at common Law.
That notwithstanding the Report of any such Commissioners or allowance thereof
made, it shall and may be lawful to and for the Executor or Administrator, to
contest the proof of any Debt at the common Law.

And no Process in Law (except for Debts due to the Crown, Process suspended
whilst the Commission is depending
Sickness and Funeral Charges) shall be allowed against the Executors or
Administrator of any Insolvent Estate so long as the same shall be depending is
aforesaid.

Creditors excluded that bring not in their Claims.
And whatsoever C^edi^o^ shall not make o^t his or her Claim with such
Commissioners before the full Expiration of the limited time, such person s^all
be for ever after de^arred of his or her Debt, unless he or she can find some
further Est^te of the Deceased's, not before discovered and put into the
Inventory.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Judge for
Probate of Wills and granting Administrations within the respective Counties,
Persons suspected of concealment or Imbezelments to be Sworn.
be, and hereby is fully Authorized and Empowered to call before him, and to
require and administer an Oath unto any person or persons probably suspected by
any Executor or Administrator to have concealed, imbe^el'd or conveyed away any
of the Money, Goods or Chattels left by, the Testator, or Intestate for the
discovery of the same. And in case any such suspected person was betrusted by
the person deceased, attended upon, or was otherwise conversant with or near
unto him in the time of Sickness, or left in possession of the Estate whereby
to strengthen and make the suspicion more viol^^^, and shall refuse to clear
and acquit him or her self upon Oath. It shall and may be lawful for, Penalty
for refusing.
and the Judge is hereby Empowered to commit such person so refusing to Swear,
unto the Goal of the County, there to remain until he or she shall comply to
discharge him or her self upon Oath as aforesaid, or be released by consent of
the Executor or Administrator.

Saving unto any person agrieved at any Sentence, Order or Decree, made by the
Judge of Probate, Appeal.
liberty of an Appeal unto the Governor and Council; such Appellant giving
Bond in a reasonable Sum with sufficient Securi^y to prosecute his Appeal with
effect, and to abide and perform the determination that shall be made thereupon.

An Act for the due Assize of Bread.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and ^^^^^sentatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That henceforth
every Loaf-^read B^ker shall have a distinct mark for his Bread, and keep the
due Assizes herea^ter expressed as well for what he Bakes for Sale, as to be
spent in his Family. That is to say, The Assize of Bread shall be rated
according to the middle Price of Wheat not to be altered but upon the
increasing or decreasing of Sixpence in the Sale of a Bushel: The Penny-Loaf
to weigh by Averdupoiz weight as is hereafter mentioned, according to the
different (...) of Wheat by the Bushel.

Viz. Price of Wheat Weight of penny white loaf, Weight of penny whe^t^^,
Weight of penny (...). s. d. oz. dr. oz. dr. oz. dr. At 3 0 11 4 17 2 23 00 3 6
10 2 15 3 20 04 4 09 2 13 7 18 04 4 6 08 3 12 5 16 05 5 07 5 11 4 15 03 5 6 07
1 10 5 14 02 6 06 4 09 7 13 0^ 6 6 06 0 09 0 1^ ^^ 7 05 6 08 5 11 04 7 6 05 2
08 ^ 10 04 8 05 0 07 4 10 00 8 6 04 6 07 1 09 04 9 04 4 06 6 09 0^

And so proportionably under the penalty of forfeiting all such Bread as shall
not be of the several Assizes before mentioned, to the use of the poor of the
Town where the same shall be Seized, and otherwise as is hereafter expressed.

And for the better discovery and more effectual preventing of fraud and deceit
in the Assize of Bread.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerks of the Market in
each Town within this Province, or any one of them, shall and are hereby
empowered and required once every week or oftener as they shall see cause, Clerks
of the Market power and duty.
to enter into any Shop or Place where Bread is usually Sold or Baked for S^le,
and to weigh the same; and all such Bread which they shall find under the due
Assize according to the proportion before mentioned, or not being marked, to
make Seizure of, and deliver two third parts thereof unto the Select-men or
Overseers of the Poor in such Town, for the use of the poor within the same;
the Officer to have the other third for his pains. And the Constable or
Constables of such Town are hereby ordered to be aiding and assisting unto such
Clerk or Clerks of the Market for the due Execution of their Office, when he or
they shall be thereunto required.

And be it further Enacted, That the Select-men in each Town where Bread is
Baked for Sale* shall once a month, or oftener as they shall see cause inquire,
state and record the middle price of Wheat, Select men to state the price of
Wheat.
and cause the same to be made known by posting it up in some public place or
places in such Town, and the Bakers shall accordingly regulate the Weight of
their Bread after the Assizes herein beforementioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Biscuit Sold by
Tale shall be alike marked and made of the same Assize with the penny loaf, on
pain of forfeiture as aforesaid. Biscuit Sold by Tale to be Marked and of due
Assize
And the Clerks of the Market are hereby required and empowered to Weigh all
such Biscuit, and to make Seizure of all that shall be unmarked or under Weight,
to be employed and disposed of as aforesaid; and all Biscuit Sold by Weight
shall be dried fit for the Sea.

An Act for making of Lands and Tenements liable to the payment of Debts.
WHEREAS the Estates of Persons within this Province do chiefly consist of
Houses and Lands, which give them Credit, some being remiss in paying of their
just Debts, and others happening to dye before they have discharged the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ord^ined by the Lieutenant Governor, Lands and
Tenements liable to Execution.
Council and Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority
of the same, That all Lands or Tenements belonging to any person in his own
proper right in Fee, shall stand Charged with the payment of all just Debts
owing by such person, as well as his personal Estate, and shall be liable to be
taken in Execution for Satisfaction of the same; where the Debtor or his
Attorney shall not expose to view and tender to the Officer personal Estate
sufficient to answer the Sum mentioned in the Execution with the Charges.
Execution duly served and Recorded to make a good Title.


And all Executions duly Served upon any such Houses and Lands, be^ing
returned into the Clerks Office of the Court out of which the same issued and
there Recorded, shall make a good Title to the Party for whom they shall be so
taken, his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Also where the Goods and Cha^tels
belonging to the Estate of any person Deceased, shall not be sufficient to
answer the just Debts which the Deceased Owed, or Legacies given: Upon
Representation thereof, and making the same to appear unto the Superior Court
of Judicature holden for or within the County where such Deceased person last
dwelt; the said Court are hereby Empowered to License and Authorize the Executor
or Administrator of such Estate to make Sale of all or any part of the Houses
and Lands of the Deceased so far as shall be necessary to satisfy the just
Debts which the Deceased owed at the time of his Death, ^ustices of ^^e
Superi^ur Court ^mpowred ^o License the Sale of Lands, etc.
And Legacies bequeathed in and by the last Will and Testament of the Deceased.
And every Executor or Administrator being so Licensed and Authorized as
aforesaid, shall and may by virtue of such Authority, Make, Sign and Execute in
due form of Law Deeds and Conveyances for such Houses and Lands as they shall
so Sell; which Instruments shall make a good Title to the Purchaser, his Heirs
and Assigns for ever.

Debts to the Crown to be first paid.
Provided nevertheless, That any Debt or Debts due to the Crown from any such
Estate, shall be first secured and paid out of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when any person or
persons shall make Sale or other Alienation of any Lands or Tenements to him of
right belonging, with intent to defeat and defraud his Creditors of their just
Debts not bona fide for good and valuable consideration truly paid All such
Sales and Alienations are to be deemed covenous and fraudulent, Fraudulent
Deeds to be void.
and shall be of none effect to bar any Creditor from such Debt as is to him
Owing.

An Act to prevent the Destroying and Murdering of Bastard Children.
WHEREAS many Lewd Women that have been Delivered of Bastard Children, to avoid
their shame, and to escape punishment, do secretly Bury or Conceal the Death of
their Children, and after, if the Child be found Dead, the said Women do
allege that the said Child was Born Dead, whereas it falls out sometimes
(although hardly it is to be proved) that the said Child or Children were
murdered by the said Women their lewd Mothers, or by their assent or
procurem^nt.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That if any Woman be Delivered of any Issue of her Body, Male or Female,
which if it were Born alive, should by Law be a Bastard; and that she endeavor
privately, either by Drowning or secret Burying thereof, or any other way;
either by her self, or the procuring of others so to conceal the Death thereof,
that it may not come to light, whether it were Born alive or not, but be
concealed. In every such case the Mother so offending, shall suffer Death, as
in case of Murder: Exc^pt such Mother can make proof by one Witness at the
least, that the Child whose Death was by her so intended to be concealed, was
Born Dead.

An Act against High Treason.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, Compassing or imagining the Death of the King, etc.
and by the Authority of the same, That if any person or persons shall compass
or imagine the Death of Our Sovereign Lord the King, or of Our Lady His Queen,
or of the Heir apparent to the Crown. Or if any person shall Levy War against
our Lord the King, or be adherent to the Kings Enemies, giving them aid and
comfort in the Realm or elsewhere, Levying War against the King.
and thereof be probably attainted of open deed by his Peers upon the Testimony
of two lawful and credible Witnesses upon Oath brought before the Offender face
to face, at the time of his Arraignment, or voluntary Confession of the Party
Arraigned. Or if any person or persons shall counterfeit the Kings Great Seal
or Privy Seal, or the Seal of this Province, and thereof be duly Convicted as
aforesaid. Counterfeiting the Kings great Seal, etc.
Then every such person and persons so as aforesaid offending, shall be deemed,
declared and adjudged to be Traitors, and shall suffer pains of Death, and also
loose and ^orfeit as in cases of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Try^ls to be Regulated
according to the Law of England, in cases of Treason, etc.
That the Trial of all and every person and persons whatsoever Accused,
Indicted and Prosecuted for High Treason and Misprision of such Treason, shall
be regu^lated according to the Act of Parliament made in the Seventh Year of
His Present Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of Trials in
cases of Treason and Misprision of Treason: And the Party so accused, indicted
and prosecuted, to be allowed the benefits and privileges in and by the said
Act, granted and declared.

An Act in Addition to the Act for preventing of Common Nusances arising by
Slaughter-Houses, Still-Houses, etc.
FOR the better preventing of Desolation by Fire that may happen, by Drawing of
Spirits, or melting down of Tall^w.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Court of Quarter
Sessions Empowered to cause Stills for drawing of Spirits, or Furnaces for
melting of Tallow set up without Order to be taken down.
That if any Distiller or Tallow Chandler shall presume to Set up any Still or
Stills ^or the drawing of Spirits, Copper or Furnace for the melting of Tallow,
or make use of any Still, Copper or Furnace for either of the said ends in any
House or Place other than such as are or from time to time shall be assigned
for that purpose by the Select-men of the Town, with two or more Justices of
the Peace contrary to the intent of the said Act; Every person and persons so
offending, and being thereof duly convicted before His Majesty's Justices in
the Court of General Sessions of the Peace within the same County, shall not
only incur the penalty or Fine in the said Act mentioned; but shall also enter
into Recognizance to take down such Stills, Coppers or Furnace; and in default
of entering into Recognizance as aforesaid, to be Committed to Prison until he
do cause the same to be taken down; or else such Stills, Coppers or Furnaces
shall be taken down by order of the said Court, and the Charge thereof to be
levied by distress and sale of such Offenders Goods, returning the Overplus,
if any be.

An Act in Addition to the Act, for Regulating Ferries.
WHEREAS there is a constant Recourse of Travelers and others for Passage over
the Ferries betwixt Boston and Charlstown, and betwixt Boston and Winis^^^et.
Therefore for prevention of the great Inconvenience and Damage that does or may
happen to persons by being hindered and delayed at the said Ferries for want of
speedy Transportation over the same.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the person or
persons that are, or from time to time shall be employed for keeping Winis^^^t
Ferry, Stated hours for the Ferry Boats passing at Wenn^simit Ferry.
shall constantly maintain a good Boat or Boats in good repair suitable for the
said Ferry on each side of the Water, and that such Boats whether there be any
Passengers in the same or not, shall put off from their respective Shoars to go
to the other side upon each day in the week (the Lords Day excepted) at the
Hours of five, seven, nine and eleven a Clock before noon; and at one, three,
five and seven of the Clock after noon, throughout the whole year, so as it be
within daylight: On pain, That every such Ferry-man or Ferry-men being
complained of and convicted before any one or more of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of neglect of his Duty in not crossing the said Ferry at the several
times and hours beforementioned, Penalty for Ferry-mens neglect.
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings, one half to the Informer or
Complainant, and the other half to the use of the Poor of the Town of Boston.
And such Justice or Justices may restrain the Offender or Offenders until he or
they shall pay the said Sum.

Posts, etc. be speedily transported.
And be it further, Enacted, That all Posts and Expresses for His Majesty's
Service, and other persons having extraordinary Business as in cases concerning
Life and Death, shall be speedily Transported over the said Fer^y at any time
or season without delay, on the penalty aforesaid, any thing herein before
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Saving for stormy Seasons.
Provided nevertheless, That such Ferry-man or Ferry-men shall not be obliged
to put off from their respective Shoars, and pass the said Ferry at any of the
times or hours before stated, if it manifestly appear to be hazardous for them
so to do by reason of any Storm or (...) or that in the Winter the Ice do
hinder the passing of any Boat (...) the said Ferry.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as it shall happen, At Charlstown Ferry, two Boats not to lie on the same Shore.
That the Boats employed for the Ferry betwixt Boston and Charlstown, shall be
on the same Shore, upon the Landing of the second Boat, the first shall
forthwith put off, and pass over to the other side, Passengers or no
Passengers, on the like Penalty herein before expressed, and to be disposed of
as aforesaid, to the use of the Poor of Boston or Charlstown respectively.

An Act to supply the defect in the Law referring to the choice and power of
Tything-men, Enacted at the Session of the General Court in February, Anno.
1693.
WHEREAS it is provided in and by the said Act, That if any person Chosen to
the Office of Tything-man, shall refuse to take his Oath, or Serve therein, he
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings, the said Forfeiture to be
Levied by Distress and Sale of such Persons Goods; But no provision is made how
to come at the said Forfeiture, if the Goods of such Persons can be found to
(...) for the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, Persons chosen to the Office of
Tything-men to be (...), where no Goods can be found (...)
and by the Authority of the same, That in every such case where no Goods can
be found whereon to make Distress, it shall and may be lawful, to and for the
Officer, to Seiz the Body of the Offender, and him Commit unto the Prison, to
be there kept, until he shall answer and pay the said Fine or Forfeiture, with
the Charges of Levying the same; And the Warrant directed to the Officer for
Levying thereof shall contain in it such a Command: Any Law or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.

ACTS and LAWS. Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty sixth Day of May, 1697.
An Act Relating to Town Rates or Assessments.
WHEREAS diverse Constables and Collectors of Town Rates or Assessments are
defective and n^gligent of their Duty in not timely paying of the same as by
the Warrants or Estreats, to them committed they are required.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives ^n
General Court ^ssembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Constables
or Collectors within the several Towns in this Province, who have had, or
hereafter shall have any Rates or Assessments for the de^reying of Town
Charges, orderly made and committed unto them to collect the Accounts and
payment whereof are not issued; or that at any time or times hereafter shall
not pay in and issue their Accounts thereof with the Treasurer of such Town,
Constables or Collectors of Town Rates not issuing their accounts thereof by
the time prefixed in their warrants to be liable to Suit.
or other person appointed by the Select-men to be a Receiver of the same, by
the time prefixed in the Warrants to them respectively given for the collecting
and paying in thereof, or within the space of one month next after the
expiration thereof; every such defective Constable or Collector shall be liable
to the Action or Suit of the Treasurer or Receiver of such Town; And such
Treasurer or Receiver is hereby Empowered and Authorized to Sue for and recover
all such Rates and Assessments or any Arrears thereof, of and from the
Constables or Collectors respectively to whom the same were committed, and that
have, or shall neglect their Duty in that regard, by Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record: Any Law, Usage or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act Impowring Justices of the Peace to decide Differences not exceeding
Forty Shillings.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same, That all manner of Debts, Trespasses and
other matters not exceeding the value of Forty Shillings (wherein the Title of
Land is not concerned) shall and may be heard, Justices of the Peace to grant
Summons, Capias or Attachment for matters tryable before them.
tried, adjudged and determined by any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
within this Province in their respective Precincts, who are hereby empowered,
upon complaint made of any such Debts, Trespass or other matter as aforesaid,
to Grant Summons, Capias or Attachment against the Party complained of,
directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of the County, or either of their Deputies,
or Constables of the Town wherein such party lives; for which Summons, Capias
or Attachment, the Justice shall be paid One Shilling, and the Officer for
Serving the same, One Shilling and no more: And in case of Nonappearance upon
Summons duly Served being so returned by the Officer, such Justice may issue
out a Warrant of Contempt directed to the Sheriff, Marshal or other Officer as
aforesaid, to bring the Contemner before him, Fee for a Writ and Serving.
as well to answer the said Contempt, as the Plaintiffs Action, and may (if he
see cause) fine such Con^temner, not exceeding Ten Shillings, to be accounted
for to the Treasurer of the County toward defreying of County Charges: And
after Judgment given in any Case* may grant an Execution or Warrant of Distress
directed to the Sheriff, Marshal or other Officer as aforesaid, to levy the
said Fine, Debt or Damage, with Charges upon the Defendants Goods or Chattels.
Fine for Contempt in not appearing upon Summons.
And such Officer by virtue thereof shall expose the same to Sale, returning
the Overplus (i^ any be) to the Defendant, and for want of such Distre^^ to
take the Body of the Defendant, and him to carry and co^vey (...) the Common
Goal of the County or Precinct, there to remain (...) he (...) satisfied the
said Fine, Debt or Damage with Charges. And in case such Complainant be
Nonsuited, or Judgment pass against him, then the said Justice is h^reby
Empowered to assess to the Defendant re^sonable Costs against such Complainant,
Writs to be Served seven days before Trial.
to be levied and recovered in manner and form above expr^ssed.

Provided always, That all Summons, Capias or Attachment before such Justice of
the Peace, shall be served and executed at least seven days before the time of
Trial or Hearing. Party agrieved to appeal to the Inferior Court.


Provided also, That the party agrieved shall have liberty to apppeal to the
next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be holden for the same County, he
^ntring into Recognizance with one sufficient Surety in the value of the Debt
or Damage sued for, and sufficient to answer all Costs to prosecute the said
Appeal there with effect, and to abide the Order of said Court, Party appea^^ng
to bring the whole case.
where such case shall be tried and receive a final Issue and Determination.

And the Party appealing shall bring the Copies of the whole Case to the Court
appealed to, where each party shall be allowed the benefit of any further Plea
or Evidence; and if upon such new Plea or Evidence the Judgment happen to be
reversed, Reasons of ^ppeal to be given in seven days before the Trial.
the Appellant shall have no Costs granted for the fir^^ Trial, and such
Appellant shall also give in the reasons of his Appeal unto the Justice
appealed from, in Writing seven days inclusively before the sitting of the
Court appealed to. And all Justices are hereby required to keep fair Records of
all their Proceedings from time to time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Clerks of Towns to grant
Replevin, etc.
That the Cl^rk of any Town within this Province, may and hereby is Empowered to
grant Replevins, Summons or Attachments for any matter or cause tryable before
any Justice of the Peace, and Summons for Witnesses, and to direct the same to
the Constables of such Town, or to the party to be Summoned for Witness
respectively; and the Constable or Constables are hereby required to execute
such Replevins, Summons or Attachments accordingly, and to make due Return
thereof.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty-sixth Day of May, 1697. And continued by several Prorogations until the
Thirteenth of October following.
An Act for ascertaining the value of Coins current within this Province.
WHEREAS for many years (...) the Money Coy^^d in the late Massachusetts
Colony, has passed curr^nt at the rate or value it was st^^pt for, and good
Sevil Pillar or Mexico pi^ces of Eight of full seventeen (...) weight, have
also passed curr^^t at Six Shillings per piece, and half pieces of
proportionable weight pro rato, quarter pieces of the same Coin at (...) pence
per piece, and (...) of (...) same Coin at Eight-pence per piece.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor* Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same.
That all and every the Coins beforementioned, shall still be and (...)
current Money within this Province, and shall be accepted taken and ^eceived at
the respective values aforesaid, according as has heretofore been accustomed.

Provided always, That such of the said Coins as pass by tale, be not
diminished by Washing, Clipping, Rounding, F^ling or Scaling.

An Act against Murder.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same* That whosoever shall
comm^t wilful Murder upon premeditated Malice or Hatred, and be thereof
convi^^ed, the person or persons (...) ^^^ending shall be put to Death.

An Act against Ravishment or Rape.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Counc^l and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same* That if any man
shall Ravish any Woman committing Carnal Copulation with her by Force against
her will. Or if any man shall unlawfully and carnally know and abuse any Woman
Child under the age of Ten Years, every person and person^ offending in either
of the cases before mentioned, bei^^ thereof convicted, shall be accounted
Felons, and shall be adjudged to suffer the pains of Death as in cases of
Felony.

An Act for the punishment of Buggery*
FOR avoiding of the detestable and abominable Sin of Buggery with Mankind or
Beast, which is contrary to the very Light of nature.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Represen^^tives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.
At is Enacted, That the same Offense be adjudged Felony, and such Order and
Form of Process therein to be used against the Offenders as in cases of Felony.
And that every man being duly convicted of lying with mankind as he lye^h with
a Woman. And every man or woman that shall have carnal copulation with any
Beast or bruit Creature, the Offender and Offenders in either of the cases
beforementioned, shall suffer the pains of Death, and the Beast shall be Slain
and Burned.

An Act against Atheism and Blasphemy.
BE it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Convened in General Court or Assembly, and it is Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That if any person shall presume wilfully to Blaspheme
the Holy Name of God; Father, Son, or Holy Ghost; either by Denying, Cursing,
or Reproaching the true God; his Creation, or Government of the World: Or by
Denying, Cursing, or Reproaching the Holy Word of God; that is the Canonical
Scriptures contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament; Namely,
GENESIS, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel,
Samuel, Kings, Kings, Chronicles, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job,
Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Michah,
Nahum, Habbakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi: MATTHEW, Mark, Luke,
John, Acts, Romans, Corinthians, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Thessalonians, Timothy, Timothy,
Titus, Philemon, Hebrews, James, Peter, Peter, John, John, John, Jude,
Revelation: Every one so offending shall be punished by imprisonment, not
exceeding six months, and until they find Sureties for the good Behavior, by
setting in the Pillory, by Whipping, boaring through the Tongue, with a red hot
Iron, or setting upon the Gallows with a Rope about their neck; at the
discretion of the Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, before which the
Trial shall be; according to the Circumstances, which may aggravate or
alleviate the Offense. Provided that not more than two of the forementioned
Punishments shall be inflicted for one and the same Fact.

An Act for Registring of Deeds and Conveyances.
FOR the prevention of Clandestine and uncertain Sales of Houses and Lands. And
to the intent it may be the better known what right, title or interest persons
have in or to such Estates as they shall offer to Sale.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That henceforth all Deeds or Conveyances of any Houses or Lands within this
Province, Deeds executed by signing, s^aling acknowledgment and Record to be
valid.
Signed and Sealed by the Party or Parties granting the same, having good and
lawful right or authority thereto, and acknowledged by such Granter or Granters
before a Justice of the Peace, and Recorded at length in the Registry of the
County where such Houses or Lands do ly, shall be valid to pass the same
without any other Act or Ceremony in the Law whatsoever.

No Bargain Sale, etc. made three months next after this Act to be good against
any but the granter, without being acknowledged and R^^^rded. Proof of a Deed
by witnesses, in case to be equivalent to Acknowledgment.
And that from and after three months next after Publication of this Act* no
Bargain, Sale, Mortage or other Conveyance of Houses or Lands made and executed
within this Province, shall be good and effectual in Law to hold such Houses or
Lands against any other person or persons, but the Granter or Granters, and
their Heirs only, unless the Deed or Deeds thereof be acknowledged and recorded
in manner as is (...) expressed. Provided nevertheless that when and so often
as it shall happen any Granter to live in (...) beyond Sea, or to be removed
out of this Province, or to be dead before any Deed or Conveyance by him or her
(...), ^e acknowledged as aforesaid, in every such case, the proof of such Deed
or Conveyance made by the Oaths of two of the Witnesses thereto Subscribed,
before any Court of Record within this Province, shall be equivalent to the
Parties own Acknowledgment th^^eof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Granter or
Vender of any Houses or Lands shall ^efuse to acknowledge as is aforesaid, any
Grant, Bargain, Sale or Mortgage by him or her Signed and Sealed, being
thereunto required by the Grantee or Vendee, his, her or their Heirs or
Assigns. It shall be lawful for any Justice of the (...) within the County
where such Granter or Vender lives, Penalty for persons refusing to acknowledge
their Deeds.
upon complaint made, to send for the Party so refusing, and if he or she
persist in such Re^^sal, to commit him or her to Prison without Bai^ or
Mainprize, until such Party shall acknowledge the same. It being first made
appear and proved to be the Act and Deed of the same Party by the Oath of one
or more of the Witnesses thereto Subscribed; and such Grantee or Vendee filing
a Co^y of his Deed so proved in the Registers Office, (...) thereby se^^re his
Ti^l^ in the mean time, and the same shall be accou^^^d sufficient caution to
every other person and persons against purchasing the Estate in such Deed
mentioned to be granted.

Provided, That nothing in this Act shall be construed, deemed or extended to
bar any Widow of any Vender or Mortgager of Lands or Tenements from her Dower
or Right in or to such Lands or Tenements; Saving for Dower:
who did not legally join with her Husband in such Sale or Mortgage, or
otherwise lawfully bar or exclude her self from such her Dower or Right.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Mortgagee of
any Lands or Tenements, his or her Heirs, Executors or Administrators having
received full satisfaction and payment of all such Sum and Sums of money as are
really due to him by such Mortgage, How Mortgag^^ shall be discharged
shall at the request of the Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators
acknowledge and cause such satisfaction and payment to be Entered in the Margen^
of the Record of such Mortgage in the Registers Office, and shall sign the
same, which shall for ever thereafter discharge, defeat and release such
Mortgage, and perpetually bar all Actions to be brought thereupon in any Court
of Record. And if such Mortgagee his or her Heirs, Executors or Administrators
shall not within ten days next after request in that behalf made, and ^^der of
his, her or their reasonable charges, repair to the Registers Office, and there
make and sign such Acknowledgment as aforesaid, or otherwise sign and seal a
discharge of the said Mortgage, and release and quit claim to the Estate
therein mentioned to be granted, and acknowledge the same before a Justice of
Peace; he, she or they so refusing, shall be liable to make good all damages
for want of such discharge or Release: to be recovered by Action or Suit in any
Court of Record. And in case Judgment pass against the Party so Sued, he, she
or they so cast, shall pay unto the adverse party treble costs arising upon
such Suit.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Clerk of the Inferior Court of Pleas in each respective County shall also be
the Register of Deeds and Conveyances, Clerk of the Inferior Court to be
Register of Deeds.
and shall fairly enter and record at length all Deeds, Conveyances and
Mortgages of any Lands, Tenements, Rents or other Hereditaments, lying and
being within the same County, made, executed, acknowledged or proved in manner
as is aforesaid, which shall be brought to him to Record; and shall on Receipt
thereof into the Office note thereupon the day, month and year when he received
the same, and the Record shall bear the same date. And every such Register
before he execute the said Office, shall be Sworn before one or more of the
Justices of such Court, well, truly and faithfully to execute the same. to be
Sworn.
And it shall and may be lawful to and for every Register aforesaid, to ask and
receive for entering and recording any Deed, Conveyance or Mortgage, Registers
Fees.
Twelve pence for the first page, and Eight pence a page for so many pages more
as it shall contain, and no more, accounting after the rate of twenty eight
lines, of eight words in a line to each page, and proportionably for so much
more as shall be under a page, and Sixpence for his attestation on the
Original of the Time, Book and Folio where it is Recorded, and for discharge of
a Mortgage as aforesaid, Deeds Executed according to former Laws and usage
valid.
One Shilling, and no more.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Deeds of Bargain, Sale or Mortgage heretofore made and executed, according to
former Laws and Usage, shall be valid and effectual.

An Act of Limitation for Quieting of Possessions.
WHEREAS a good and beneficial Act was made by the late Governor and Company
of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in the Year of our Lord God, One
Thousand Six Hundred Fifty Seven, in the words following. That is to say,

That any person or persons that has either himself or by his Grantees or
Assigns before the Law made for direction about Inheritances, bearing date
October the Nineteenth, One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty and Two, possessed and
occupied a^ his or their own proper right in Fee simple, any Houses or Lands
within this Jurisdiction, and shall so continue, whether in their own persons,
their Hei^s or Assigns, or by any other person or persons from, by or under
them, without disturbance, let, suit or denial legally made by having the
Claim of any person thereto entered with the Recorder of the County where such
Houses or Lands do lie, with the names of the persons so claiming, and the
quantity, bounds of the Lands or Houses claimed, and such claim prosecuted to
effect within the term of five years next after the twentieth of May, One
Thousand Six Hundred and Fifty Seven. Every such Proprietor, their Heirs and
Assigns shall for ever after enjoy the same without any lawful let, suit,
disturbance or denial by any after claim of any person or persons whatsoever,
any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Which afore-recited Act
having by experience been found to be of great benefit and service to His
Majesty's Subjects within the said Colony, and prevented many contests and
Lawsuits which otherwise would have arisen by reason of a n^glect in many
persons to observe a legal course and method for the passing and confirmation
of Sales and Alienations.

And whereas sundry persons having a just and equitable Right and Title unto
Estates in Housing or Lands, either acquired by purchase or otherwise accruing
unto or settled upon them since the passing of the afore-recited Act, may want
formal Conveyances and assurances in the Law for the same, or the Deeds,
Instruments or other Writings concerning such Estates may be defective or
imperfectly made and executed, whereby such persons may be in danger of being
deprived and evicted out of their ho^est and just Rights and Possessions.

For prevention whereof, and for the further quieting of Possessions and
Settling of Titles.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, Quiet Possession from the first of
Octobe. 1692 until the first of October 1704. to give a Right.
and by the Authority of the same, That every person and persons who were
possessed in his and their own proper right of any Houses or Lands within this
Province upon the first day of October, in the year of our Lord God, One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Two, and all others deriving from, by or under him
or them, continuing the possession of such Houses or Lands until the first day
of October, which will be in the year of our Lord God, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Four, without molestation or disturbance by claim made thereto, and
action brought and prosecuted for the same with effect, shall by virtue of such
possession have, hold and enjoy such Houses or Lands unto him or them, his and
their Heirs and Assigns for ever in Fee. And all Actions and Process to be
thereafter brought for the same, are hereby excluded and for ever debarted.

Saving for the Kings Right.
Provided always, That there shall be a Saving of His Majesty's Rights, and all
public Lands belonging to the Province, not orderly disposed of.

Provided (...), That this Act shall not be understood to bar the Title of any
Infant, Feme Covert, or person Non Compos m^^tis, Imprisoned or in Captivity,
who shall be allowed the term of seven years next after such Imperfection
removed to pursue their Claim or Challenge to any Houses or Lands, Other
Savings.
wherein they have Int^^est or Title: And the like time of seven years shall be
allowed to persons having an Estate in reversion in any Houses or Lands, from
the time such reversion falls, to recover their Right, and persons beyond Sea
shall be allowed the term of ten years from the publication of this Act to
pursue their claim or challenge to any Houses or Lands as aforesaid.

And forasmuch as diverse Towns and Settlements in the Eastern Parts of this
Province have been deserted and broken up by reason of the Rebellion and War
made by the Indians, Five years time allowed from and after the ending of the
War with the Indians, to lay claim to Lands lying to the Eastward of Piscataqua
River, and in other the Frontiers.
and sundry persons in other the Frontier Towns, particularly Enumerated in an
Act of the General Assembly, have by means thereof been driven from their
Habitations and Improvements.

Be it therefore further Provided and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Limitation of time for the continuance of Possession by this Act prefixed,
shall not extend or be understood to extend unto any Houses or Lands lying to
the Eastward of Piscataqua River, or in other the Frontiers, but the same time
shall be, and hereby is enlarged and lengthened out for the space o^ five years
next after the ending of the War with the Indians, during which space all
persons may pursue their right and claim to any Houses and Lands lying in those
parts and places and every of them. And that no person or persons pretending
right or title in or to any Lands lying within this Province purchased of any
Indian or Indians, Lands purchased of Indians without orderly allowance, etc
not confirmed by this Act.
without orderly allowance and confirmation thereof had, according to former
Laws and Usage of the several late Colonies of Massachusetts and New Plymouth,
and Province of Main respectively, shall have or receive any benefit by this
Act with reference to such Lands.

FINIS.
An Act Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty-sixth of May, 1697. And continued by several Prorogations until the
Fifteenth of Decembe^ following.
An Act prohibiting the Exportation of Money and Bullion.
UPON Consideration of the scar^^^ of Money within this Province, and the many
difficulties arising thereby not only with respect to Trade and Commerce; but
also for carrying on the Public Affairs of the Government, necessary for His
Majesty's Service, more especially during the Rebellion and Troubles with the
Indians.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or
persons whatsoever, shall or may Export, Lade or put on Board any Ship or other
Vessel in order to Export out of this Province, any Coin or Silver Money
current within the same, or Bullion, over and above the Sum of Five Pounds, for
such persons necessary Expenses; on pain that all such Money or Bullion, Ship't
or put on Board any Ship or other Vessel for Exportation contrary to the true
intent and meaning of this Act, shall be liable to Seizure and become forfeit;
and the Shipper to forfeit the like Sum or value over and above.

And if it happen any Money as aforesaid, or Bullion (except to the value above
said, for any particular persons own Expense) to be Exported out of this
Province before Seizure thereof be made, or carried into any of the
Neighboring Governments, and exported from thence; the person or persons that
Ship't or caused such Money or Bullion to be carried out of the Province, Laden
or put on Board any Ship or other Vessel, or the person or persons that
knowingly carried out or exported the same, being thereof Convicted shall incur
the penalty and forfeiture of double the Sum or value of the Money or Bullion
so Exported. Provided that Information, Suit or Prosecution for the same be had
and made within the space of eighteen months next after the Offense committed
and not afterward.

The before mentioned several Forfeitures to be recovered by Action, Bill,
Plaint or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record within this
Province, and to be employed and disposed of, two thirds thereof for and
toward the Support of His Majesty's Government within the same, and the other
third to him or them that shall inform and (...) for the same.

And it shall and may be lawful to and for every Justice of the Peace upon
Information given of any Money or Bullion put on board any Ship or other Vessel
for Exportation or carrying out of the Province to be Exported, by Warrant
under his Hand and Seal to cause the same to be Seized and Secured in order to
Trial. And all Officers employed in and about the Customs or Imposts are hereby
empowered and required ex Officio to cause Seizure to be made as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Master of any
Ship or other Vessel before such Ship or Vessel be cleared at the Impost
Office, shall make Oath in manner following. That is to say, I A. B. Do Swear,
That neither my self nor any of the Company belonging unto the Ship or Vessel
whereof I am now Master, nor Passengers going upon the same, have or shall by
my knowledge privitly or consent, take on Board or Export in the said Ship or
Vessel, any Bullion, Coin or Silver Money current within the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, over and above the Sum or Value of Five Pounds, for my own
or any of my Mariners or Passengers particular Expenses. So help me God.

Which Oath the Commissioner for Impost or Receiver are hereby respectively
Authorized and Empowered to Administer.

Provided this Act shall remain in force until the end of the Session of the
General Assembly to be held upon the last Wednesday in May, which will be in
the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred, and not afterward.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty-fifth Day of May, School.
An Act to prevent Encroachments upon Highways, Streets, etc.
FORASMUCH as diverse Encumbrances and Encroachments have been made in and upon
the Common Roads, High waye^ and Streets heretofore Laid out in several Towns
within this Province.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That henceforth no
Edifice, Building or Fence whatsoever, shall be Raised, Erected, Built or Set
up in, upon or over any of the said Roads, High Ways, Streets, Lanes or Alleys,
in any Town within this Province, or any part of any of them, whereby to
streighten the passage, or any ways lessen the full breadth of any such Roads,
Highways, Streets, Lanes or Alleys; and if any Edifice, Building or Fence
whatsoever shall be Raised, Erected, Built or Set up, upon, in or over any such
Road, Highway, Street or Alley, contrary hereunto, every such Edifice,
Building or Fence shall be deemed and held to be a common Nuisance; and the
Court of General Sessions of the Peace for the County, in which such Town does
lie, upon complaint, and making out the same before them, are hereby Empowered
to order and cause such Edifice, Building or Fence to be taken down, demolished
and removed, and also to cause to be removed all such Encroachments, or
Encumbrances as heretofore have been made, upon, in or over any common Road,
Highway or Street as aforesaid, and the Charge thereof to be answered and paid
by disposing of so much of the Materials, as shall be necessary to satisfy the
same.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not be intended or construed to
intend the prohibiting of the setting up of any Conduit, Watch house, Cage or
Stocks, for public use in or upon any Highway or Street within any Town.

An Act for Regulating of Tanners, Curriers, and Cordwainers.
FOR the better preventing of Deceits and Abuses by Tanners, Curriers, and
Dressers, o^ Workers up of Leather.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, No Butcher, Curryer
or Shoemak^r, to be a Tanner.
That no person or persons whatsoever using or occupying the Feat or Mystery of
a Butcher, Currier or Shoemaker, by himself or any other, shall use or
exercise the Feat or Mystery of a Tanner, on pain of the forfeiture of Six
Shillings and Eight-pence for every Hide or Skin by him or them so Tanned,
whilst he or they shall use or occupy any of the Mysteries aforesaid. Nor shall
any Tanner during his using the said Trade of Tanning by himself or any other,
use or occupy the Feat or Mystery either of Butcher, No Tanner to use the Trade
of Butcher, Currier or Shoemaker.
Currier or Shoe maker, upon pain of the like forfeiture as aforesaid. And no
Butcher whatsoever by himself or any other person, shall gash or cut any Hide
of Ox, Bull, Steer or Cow in fleaing thereof or otherwise, whereby the same
shall be impaired or damaged, on pain of forfeiting Twelve-pence for every gash
or cut in any such Hide or Skin.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons whatsoever using, No Tanner to offer or put to Sale any Leather
insufficiently Tanned.
or which shall use the Mystery or Faculty of Tanning, shall at any time or
times hereafter, offer or put to Sale any kind of Leather which shall be
insufficiently Tanned, or which has been over limed, or burnt in the Limes, or
which shall not have been after the Tanning thereof, well and thoroughly dried,
or that shall not be Sealed as in and by this Act is hereafter directed, upon
pain of forfeiting the whole Hide, half Hide or other piece of such Leather, so
offered or put to Sale. And no person or persons whatsoever using, or that
shall hereafter use the Mystery or Faculty of Tanning, shall set any of his or
their Fatts in Tan hills or other places where the Woozes or Leather put to
Tann in the same, No unkind heats to be used in Tanning.
shall or may take any unkind heats, nor shall put any Leather into any hot or
warm Woozes whatsoever, on pain of forfeiting Twenty Pounds for every such
Offense.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons whatsoever, using or occupying, or that shall hereafter use or occupy
the Mystery or Faculty of Currying, No Leather to be Curryed that is not Sealed.
shall or may Curry any kind of Leather, except it be Sealed as is herein after
provided, nor shall curry any Hide being not thoroughly, dried after his wet
season, in which wet season he shall not use any stale Urine, or any other
deceitful or subtle mixture, thing, way or means to corrupt or hurt the same,
nor shall curry any Leather meet for outer Soal Leather with any other than
good hard Tallow, nor with any less of that than the Leather will receive, nor
shall curry any kind of Leather meet for upper Leather and inward Soales, (...)
with good and sufficient stuff, Penalty on Curriers for marring or hurting any
hide by evil workmanship.
being fresh and not salt, and thoroughly Liquored till it will recive no more,
nor shall burn or scald any Hide or Leather in the currying, but shall work the
same sufficiently in all points and respects: On pain of forfeiting for every
such Offense or Act done contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, every
such Hide marred or hurt by his evil Workmanship or Handling.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That no person or
persons using or that shall hereafter use or occupy the Mystery or Faculty of a
Shoe maker or Cordwainer, Penalty on Shoe-makers for working up insufficient
Leather.
shall work up into Shoes, Boots, or other Wares, any Leather that is not
Tanned and Curried in manner as aforesaid, nor shall use any Leather made of
Horses Hide for the inner Soales of any such Shoes or Boots, on pain of
forfeiting all such Shoes, Boots, or other Wares made or wrought up of such
insufficient Leather.

And for the more Effectual Execution of this Act.

All Leather to be Sealed before it pass out of the possession of Tanners or
Curriers.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Leather that is or shall
hereafter be Tanned or Curryed, shall before the same pass out of the Tanners
or Curriers Yard, House or place respectively where it was wrought, be viewed
by the Sworn Searchers and Sealers of Leather by Law directed to be annually
Chosen in such Towns where there shall be need, who shall have two several
Marks or Seals, to be prepared by each Town for that purpose, with one of which
they shall Seal all such Leather as they shall find well and sufficiently
Tanned in all respects as aforesaid, and with the other, all such Leather as
they shall find well and sufficiently Curried as is before mentioned, and no
other. And the said Searchers and Sealers shall, and hereby are Authorized and
Empowered Ex Officio, Sealers ex Officio to search and view Leather.
to make search and view in any House, Shop, Warehouse or other place within
the limits of their respective Precincts where they conceive any Leather to be,
whether wrought into Shoes, Boots, or other Wares, or not, as often as they shall
think meet, or as there shall be need. And if the said Searchers and Sealers,
or any of them, shall find any Leather sold or offered to be sold, brought or
offered to be Searched and Sealed which shall be Tanned, Curried, handled or
used contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act: Or shall find any
Leather in whole Sides out of the possession of a Tanner, not being Sealed with
the Mark or Seal to be used for Leather only Tanned, or out of the possession
of a Currier not being Sealed with the Mark or Seal to be used for Leather when
Curried: In every such case it shall and may be lawful for the said Searchers
and Sealers, or any of them, to seiz all such insufficient or unsealed Leather,
whether it be wrought up into Wares or not. And if the Owner or Claimer thereof
shall not submit to the Judgment of the Officer or Officers that seized the
same, To seiz all insufficient or unsealed Leather.
such Officer or Officers shall retain such Leather in his or their Custody,
until Trial thereof be had as is hereafter directed, and Judgment thereon
given. And in such case the said Officer or Officers shall within three days
next after such Seizure, inform some Justice of the Peace thereof, who shall
thereupon appoint four or six men, honest and skilful in Leather, to view the
same in the presence of the Owner or Claimer, or without him (if having notice)
he does not appear, Tryors to be appointed.
and to report unto him upon their Oaths the defects which they find in said
Leather: Which Report such Justice shall return unto the Court or Justice
respectively before whom the Trial of said Leather shall be. But in case the
said Viewers shall report that they do not find such Leather or Wares so Seized
in any respect defective according to the intent of this Act, the Justice that
appointed such Viewers shall cause the same to be forthwith discharged from the
Seizure made by such Officer or Officers.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons whatsoever shall or may withstand or resist the Searchers and Sealers
in the due Execution of their Office, nor in the Seizing of any insufficient
Leather or Wares, Penalty for resisting the Searchers.
on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Five Pounds for every such Offense. And the
Fee for Searching and Sealing of Leather shall be One Penny Per Hide for any
parcel less than five, and for all other parcels, after the rate of Six pence
per Dickar; which Fee the Tanner and Currier respectively shall pay upon
Sealing of the said Leather from time to time; Fee for Sealing.
and shall also pay Three pence per Mile for every Mile any Sealer or Searcher
shall travel above one, for which he is not to be allowed any thing.

And no Sealer or Searcher of Leather shall refuse within convenient ^^me to do
his Office, or shall allow any Leather or Wares which are not sufficient,
Penalty on Sealers for neglect of Duty.
on pain of forfeiting Forty Shillings, nor shall take any bribe, or exact more
than his due Fees, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Ten Pounds for every such
Offense.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines Penalties
and Forfeitures that shall arise and grow due by virtue of this Act or any
Clause therein contained, Fines and Forfeitures how to be disposed.
shall accrue and be disposed of in manner following, viz. one third part
thereof to the Treasurer of the County where the Offense is committed, for the
defreying of County Charges, one third part thereof to the Treasurer or
Select-men of the Town where the Offender inhabiteth, to the use of the Poor of
such Town, and the other third part to the Seizer or Seizers of such
insufficient Leather, or to him or them that shall inform and sue for the said
Fines, Penalties or Forfeiture, to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any Inferior Court of Common Pleas, or before any Justice of
Peace, when the matter does not exceed the value of Forty Shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as any Leather belonging to any Tanner or other person shall be Seized and
become forfeit for any defect of the Currier in his Workmanship about or
handling of the same, such Currier? shall be liable to make good unto the
Tanner or other Owner of such Leather so seized and forfeited, Curriers liable
to make good the value of all Leather seized for ill workmanship.
the full value thereof, with his just costs and damages, to be recovered by
Action to be therefore brought against such Currier in any Inferior Court of
Common Pleas, or before any Justice of Peace, if the value exceed not Forty
Shillings: For the better ascertaining of which value, the persons to be
appointed as aforesaid for viewing the defects in Leather, shall (when the same
is seized for being marred or spoiled by the Currier) through his ill
Workmanship or handling, be also appointed to estimate and judge the value
thereof, and make report of the same together with the defects.

An Act for Establishing the Form of the Writ and Precept, for calling a Great
and General Court or Assembly.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same, That the Writ to be at any time
hereafter issued by the Governor or Commander in Chief of this Province, for
calling a Great and General Court or Assembly, as also the Precept to be issued
by the Sheriff or Marshal in Observance thereof, to the Select-men of the
several Towns, and their Return thereupon (when any person or persons shall be
chosen to represent them in said Court) shall be in the Forms following. That
is to say,

WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Writ for calling a Great and General Court or Assembly.
To Our Sheriff or Marshal of Our County of S. (...) within Our (...) Province
of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Greeting.

We Command, That upon Receipt hereof, You forthwith make out your Precepts,
directed unto the Select men of each respective Town within your Precinct,
Requiring them to cause the Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of their several
Towns, duly qualifyed as in and by our Royal Charter is directed, to Assemble
at such time and place as they shall appoint, to elect and depute one or more
persons (being Freeholders and Resident in the same Town) according to the
number set and limited, by an Act of the Great and General Court or Assembly of
our aforesaid Province, to Serve for and Represent them respectively in a Great
and General Court or Assembly by Us appointed to be Convened, Held and Kept for
our Service: At the Town House in Boston, upon (...) the (...) day of (...)
next ensuing the Date of these presents, and to cause the person or persons so
Elected and Deputed by the major part of the Electors present at such Election,
to be timely notified and summoned by the Constable or Constables of such Town,
to attend our Service in the said Great and General Court or Assembly, on the
day above prefixed by nine in the morning, and so de Die in Diem, during their
Session and Sessions, and to return the said Precepts with the names of the
person or persons so Elected and Deputed unto your self, whereof you are to
make Return together with this Writ, and of your doings therein under your
hand, into our Secretaries Office at Boston, one day at the least before the
said Courts sitting. Hereof you may not fail at your Peril. Witness (...) and
Commander in Chief, in and over our Province of the Massachusetts Bay
aforesaid. Given at Boston under the Public Seal of our said Province the
(...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

By Command of J. A. Secr.



Suffolk ss.
IN Observance of His Majesty's Writ to me directed. These are in His Majesty's
Name to Will and Require you forthwith to cause the Freeholders and other
Inhabitants of your Town that have an Estate of Freehold in Land within this
Province or Territory, Precept to the Select-men for choice of Representatives.
of Forty Shillings Per Annum at the least, or other Estate, to the value of
Fifty Pounds Sterlin^ (...) assemble at such time and place as you shall
appoint, then and there to Elect and Depute one or more persons (being
Freeholders and resident in the same Town) according to the number set and
limited by an Act of the General Assembly, to Serve for and Represent them in a
Great and General Court or Assembly, appointed to be Convened, Held and Kept
for His Majesty's Service at the Townhouse in Boston, upon (...) the (...) day
of (...) next ensuing the Date hereof, and to cause the person or persons so
Elected and Deputed by the major part of the Electors present at such Election,
to be timely notified and summoned by one or more of the Constables of your
Town, to attend His Majesty's Service in the said Great and General Court or
Assembly, on the day above prefixed, by` nine in the morning, and so De Die in
Diem during their Session and Sessions. Hereof fail not, and make Return of
this Precept with the names of the person or persons so Elected and Deputed
with their being Summoned, unto my self (...) days at the least before the
said (...) day of (...) next. Given under my Hand and Seal at B. the (...) day
of (...) in the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini. (...) A. B.
(...) of the County of Suffolk.



To the Select men of the Town of (...) B. in the County abovesaid. Greeting.
PUrsuant to the Precept within Written, the Freeholders and other Inhabitants
of the Town of B. qualified as is therein directed, upon due warning given,
Return to be indorsed on the Precept.
assembled and met together the (...) day of (...) and then did Elect and
Depute (...) to Serve for and Represent them in the Session and Sessions of the
Great and General Court or Assembly appointed to be convened, held and kept for
His Majesty's Service at the Townhouse in Boston, upon (...) the (...) day of
(...) the said person being Chosen by the major part of the Electors present at
said Meeting. Dated in B. aforesaid the (...) day of (...) Anno Domini

A. B. Select man of B. C. D. Select man of B. E. F. Select man of B.

The person Chosen as abovesaid, notified thereof and Summoned to attend
accordingly by me A. B. Constable of B.





An Act for the Establishing of Precedents and Forms of Writs and Processes in
Civil Causes.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same, That the several Forms of Writs and
Processes in Civil Causes here underwritten, be, and hereby are Established to
be the Forms which the respective Officers that are or shall be appointed to
grant the same, shall observe and use.

That is to say,

Summons for Appearance before a Justice of Peace.
Essex ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of E. or either of their Deputies
or Constables of the Town of S. within the said County, or to any or either of
them. Greeting.

In His Majesty's Name you are Required to Summon and give notice unto T. P. of
S. aforesaid, (...) addition (...) (if he may be found in your Precincts) that
he appear before me J. H. Esqr. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for
the County aforesaid, at my Dwelling House in S. on (...) the (...) day of
(...) at (...) of the Clock in the (...) noon, then and there to answer to E.
L. of M. (...) addition (...) in an Action or plea of (...) which is to the
damage of the said E. L. the Sum of (...) Shillings, (...) as shall then and
there appear, with other due damages. You are also hereby further required to
signify unto the said T. P. That he may not fail in the premises as he will
answer the Contempt at the peril of the Law in this Case made and provided; and
of this Writ with your doings therein, you are to make true Return unto my self
at or before the said (...) day of (...) Dated at S. (...) the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of His Majestie^ Reign. Annoque Domini

J. H.



Essex ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of E. or either of their
Deputies, Warrant for Contempt.
or Constables of the Town of S. within the said County, or to any or either of
them. Greeting.

Whereas T. P. of S. (...) addition (...) was Served with Summons granted by me
J. H. Esqr. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
aforesaid, for his appearance before me, on (...) the (...) day of (...) to
answer E. L. of M. (...) addition (...) in an action or plea of (...) And
whereas the said T. P. has made default in his said appearance. These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name to will and require you to take the Body of the
said T. P. (if he may be found in your Precincts) and him safely keep, so that
he may be had before me the said J. H. at my Dwelling House in S. on (...) the
(...) day of (...) at (...) of the Clock in the (...) noon, as well to answer
the said E. L. of his plea aforesaid, as for his said Contempt, and make true
Return of this Writ with your doings therein, unto my self at or before the
said (...) day of (...) Da^ed at S. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of
His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini.

J. H.



Essex ss
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of E. or either of their Deputies
or Constables of the Town of S. within the said County or to any or either of
them. Greeting. Attachment before a Justice of Peace.


In His Majesty's Name you are required to attach the Goods or Estate of T. P.
of S. (...) addition (...) to the value of (...) Shillings and for want thereof
to take the Body of the said T. P. (if he may be found in your Precinct) and
him safely keep, so that he may be had before me J. H. Esqr. one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, at my Dwelling House
in S. on (...) the (...) day of (...) at (...) of the Clock in the (...) noon,
then and there to answer to E. L. of M (...) addition (...) in an Action or
plea of (...) which is to the damage of the said E. L. the Sum of (...)
Shillings as shall then and there appear with other due damages. Hereof fail
not, and make due return of this Writ with your doings therein unto my self at
or before the said (...) day of (...) Dated at S. the (...) day of (...) In the
(...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini

J. H.



Essex ss.
WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff or Marshal of our
said County of E. or either of their Deputies, or Constables of the Town of S.
within our said County, Execution granted by a Justice of Peace.
or to any or either of them. Greeting. Whereas E. L. of M. (...) addition
(...) on the (...) day of (...) before J. H. Esqr. one of our Justices of the
Peace for our County aforesaid, recovered Judgment against T. P. of S. (...)
addition (...) for the Sum of (...) Shillings Debt or Damage, and (...)
Shillings and (...) pence for Charges of Suit as to us appears of Record,
whereof Execution remains to be done. We Command you therefore, That of the
Money of the said T. P. or of his Goods or Chattels within your Precinct, at
the value thereof in money you cause to be levied, paid and satisfied unto the
said E. L. the aforesaid Sums being (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...)
pence in the whole, and also that out of the said Money, Goods or Chattels, you
levy Two Shillings more for this Writ, together with your own Fees; and for
want of such Money, Goods or Chattels of the said T. P's, to be by him shown
unto you, or found within your Precinct to the acceptance of the said E. L. for
satisfying the aforesaid Sums: We Command you to ^ake the Body of the said T.P.
and him Commit unto the Keeper of our Goal in S. in our County aforesaid within
the said Prison: Whom we likewise Command to receive the said T P. and him
safely keep, until he pay unto the said E. L. the full Sums above menti^ned,
and be by him released, and also satisfy your Fees. Hereof fail not, and make
due return of this Writ with your doings therein unto our said Justice within
Sixty Days next coming. Witness our said Justice at S. the (...) day of (...)
In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

J. H



Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. Attachment to the Superior or
Inferior Court respectively
To the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County of S. his Undersheriff or
Deputy. Greeting. We Command you to attach the Goods or Estate of D. T. of B.
(...) addition (...) to the value of (...) Pounds and for want thereof to take
the Body of the said D. T. (if he may be found in your Precinct) and him safely
keep, so that you have him before our Justices at our next (...) Court of (...)
to be holden at B (...) within or for our County aforesaid, on the (...)
Tuesday of (...) then and there to answer unto C. L. of R (...) addition (...)
in an Action of (...) which is to the damage of the said C. L. the Sum of (...)
Pounds, as shall then and there appear with other due damages: And have you
there this Writ with your doings therein. Witness E. H. Esqr. at B. the (...)
day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.



Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To D. T. of B (...) addition (...)
Greeting. Summons to the party whose goods are Attached.
We Command you, That you appear at our (...) Court of (...) to be Holden at B.
within or for our County of S. aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of (...) to
answer unto C L. of R (...) addition (...) in an Action of (...) which Action
the said C. L. has commenced, to be heard and determined at the said Court: To
respond which your Goods or Estate are attached to the value of (...) Pounds,
the damage laid in the said Action being (...) Pounds. Hereof fail not at your
peril. Witness E. H. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of
our Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.



Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. Execution out of the Superior or
Inferior Court respectively.
To the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County of S. his Under Sheriff or
Deputy. Greeting. Whereas C. L. of R (...) addition (...) recovered Judgment
against D* T. of B (...) addition (...) before our Justices of our (...) Court
of (...) holden for or within our County aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of
(...) for the Sum of (...) Pounds Debt or Damage, and (...) Pounds (...)
Shillings and (...) Pence Costs of Suit, as to us appears of Record, whereof
Execution remains to be done. We Command you therefore, That of the Goods,
Chattels or Lands of the said D. T. within your Precinct, you cause to be paid
and satisfied unto the said C. L. at the value thereof in money, the afo^esaid
Sums, being (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence in the whole, with Two
Shillings more for this Writ, and thereof also to satisfy your self for your
own Fees. And for want of such Goods, Chattels or Lands of the said D. T's to
be by him shown unto you, or found within your Precinct to the acceptance of
the (...) C. L. to satisfy the aforesaid Sums, We Command you to take the Body
of the said D. T. and him Commit unto the Keeper of our Goal in B^ in our
County aforesaid within the said Prison, whom we likewise Command to receive
the said D. T. and him safely to keep, until he pay unto the said C. L. the
full Sums above mentioned, and be by him released, and also satisfy your Fees.
Hereof fail not, and make Return of this Writ with your doing therein unto our
said (...) Court of (...) to be holden at B. upon the (...) Tuesday of (...)
next. Witness E. H. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our
Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.



Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith* etc. Writ of Facias haberi possessionem,
and Writ of Fieri Facias for damages and costs out of the Superior or
Inferior Court respectively.
To the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County of S. his Under Sheriff or
Deputy. Greeting. Whereas A. B. of C. (...) addition (...) before our Justices
of our (...) Court of (...) holden for or within our County aforesaid, at B.
upon the (...) Tuesday in (...) by the Consideration of our said Court,
recovered Judgment for his Title and possession of and in a certain Message or
Tenement with the appurtenances, or (...) acres of Land, etc. lying and being
in the Town of D. against E. F of G. (...) addition (...) who had unjustly put
out and amoved the said A. B. from his possession thereof; and also at the said
Court recovered Judgment for (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence for
Costs and Damages which he has sustained by reason of the said offense and
ejectment, and expended for the removal thereof, as to Us has been made to
appear of Record. We Command you therefore, that without delay you cause the
said A. B. to have possession of and in the said Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances of said (...) acres of Land, etc. We also Command you, That of
the Goods, Chattel or Lands of the said E. F's. within your Precinct, at the
value thereof in money, you cause the said A. B. to be paid and satisfied the
aforesaid Sum of (...) Pounds (...) Shilling and (...) Pence, which to the said
A. B. was adjudged for his Costs and Damages, with Two Shillings more for this
Writ, and thereof also to satisfy your self for your own Fees. And for want of
such Goods, Chattels or Lands of the said E. F. to be by him shown unto you, or
found within your Precinct* to satisfy the aforesaid Sum. We then Command you
to take the Body of^ the said E. F. and him commit to the Keeper of our Goal in
B. in our County aforesaid, within the said Prison: Whom We likewise Command to
receive him the said E. F. and him safely to keep, until he pay unto the said
A. B. the full Sum above mentioned, and be by him released, and also satisfy
your Fees. Hereof fail not, and make Return of this Writ, with your doings
therein unto our said (...) Court of (...) to be holden at B. upon the (...)
Tuesday in (...) next. Witness T. D. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of (...) In the
(...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.



Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, Writ of scire facias out of the Superior
or Inferior Court respectively.
etc. To the Sheriff or Marshal of Our said County of S. his Under Sheriff or
Deputy. Greeting. Whereas C. D. of B. (...) addition (...) before our Justices
of our (...) Court of (...) holden for or within our said County of S. at B. on
the (...) Tuesday of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. By the consideration
of our said Justices recovered against A. B. of E. (...) addition (...) the Sum
of (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence, Debt or Damage, and also (...)
Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence, for Costs and Charges by him about his
Suit in that behalf expended, whereof the said A. B. is convict as to Us
appears of Record, and although the Judgment be thereof rendered, yet the
Execution of the said Debt and Costs does yet remain to be made, whereof the
said C. D. has supplicated Us to provide remedy for him in that behalf. Now to
the end that Justice be done. We Command you, That by honest and lawful men of
your Precinct, you make known to the said A. B. that he be before our Justices
of our said (...) Court of (...) to be holden within or for our said County of
S. at B. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) to show cause (if any he have) wherefore
the said C. D. ought not to have his Execution against him of the Debt and
Costs aforesaid, and further to do and receive that which our said Court shall
then consider, and have there then the names of them by whom to him you shall
make known the same and this Writ. Witness E. H. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

J W. Clerk.



Suffolk ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Atachment to Review at the
Superior or Inferior Court respectively.
Scotland, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff
or Marshal of our said County of S. his Undersheriff or Deputy. Greeting. We
Command you to attach the Goods or Estate of I. M. of H. (...) addition (...)
to the value of (...) Pounds: And for want thereof to take the Body of the said
I. M. (if he may be found within your Precinct) and him safely keep, so that
you have him before our Justices at our next (...) Court of (...) to be holden
at B. for our County aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of (...) then and there to
answer unto L. K. of R. (...) addition (...) on review of an Action or Suit
commenced and Tried by the said I. M. against the said L. K. Defendant at the
(...) Court of (...) holden at B. aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of (...)
where Judgment was rendered for the said I. M. to recover of the said L. K.
(...) and costs of Suit, which Judgment the said L. K. says* is wrong and
erroneous, and that he is thereby damnifyed the (...) of (...) Pounds, as shall
then and there be made to appear: For the (...) whereof and recovering back the
said (...) granted (...) the said ^ M by the Judgment aforesaid; he the said L.
K. brings (...) (...) his cost and damage occasioned thereby. And have you
there this (...) with your doings therein. Witness T D. Esqr. at B. the (...)
day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.



Suffolk ss. To A. B. of C. Greeting.
YOu are hereby required in His Majesty's Name to make your apperance before
His Majesty's Justices of the next (...) Court of (...) to be holden within or
for the said County of S. at B. upon the (...) Tuesday of (...) to give
Evidence of what you know relating to a Plea or Action of (...) then and there
to be heard and tried betwixt A. B. of C. (...) addition (...) Plaintiff,
Summons for Witnesses to give Evidence.
and D. E. of F. (...) addition (...) Defendant. Hereof fail not, as you will
answer your Default under the pains and penalty of the Law in that behalf made
and provided. Dated in B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of His
Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini

J, W. Clerk.



Suffolk ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of S. his Undersheriff or Deputy
or Constables of the Town of B. within the said County, or to any or either of
them. Greeting.

Replevin.
In His Majesty's Name you are Required to Replevin (...) belonging unto T. P.
of B. (...) addition (...) now distreined or impounded by J. G. of B. (...)
addition (...) and deliver the said (...) unto the said T. P. provided he give
Bond to the value of (...) Pounds, with sufficient Surety or Sureties to
prosecute his Replevin at the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be Holden
for the County aforesaid, at B. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) and so from Court
to Court, until the Cause be ended, and to pay such Costs and Damages as the
said J. G. shall recover against him. Hereof fail not, and make true Return of
this Writ with your doings therein unto the said Court. Dated in B. the (...)
day of (...) In the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.



The like Form of a Replevin to be observed for matters cognizeable before a
Justice of Peace, Mutatis mutandis.

Suffolk ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To A. B. Esqr. Greeting. Whereas in
the Record and Process, and also in giving Judgment of a Suit which was before
you, and other our Justices of our Inferior Court of Common Pleas holden at B.
within or for our said County of S. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) between C. D.
of E. (...) addition (...) Plaintiff, Writ of Error.
and F. G. of H. (...) addition (...) Defendant, in an Action of (...) Error
manifest does appear to have intervened to the grievous damage of the said F.
G. as of his Complaint, We have received: We therefore being willing that
Error, (if any there be in this behalf) in due manner be corrected, and that
speedy Justice according to Law to the, said F. G. be therein done, as it
becomes Us, Command you, That the Judgment in the Suit aforesaid, and
Execution thereupon issued (if any be) together with the whole Record and
Process of the said Suit, and all things touching the same in any manner, you
have before our Justices of our Superior Court of Judicatu^e, it be holden at
B. for or within our said County of S. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) under your
Seal: So that our said Justices of our said Superior Court may then and there
have them, and the Process and Record aforesaid, and also may (after the same
are by them inspected) therein further ^o what of right ought to be done: And
if Execution of the Judgment aforesaid be not made out before the receiving of
this Writ, that then as well from granting thereof as from further taking,
imprisoning, or in any thing molesting the said F. G. on the occasion
aforesaid, until the Plea upon this Writ of Error to be corrected, depending
undiscussed* be fully determined, you altogether cease and supersede. Hereof
fail not, and have then and there also this Writ with your doings. Witness T.
D. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque
Domini

A. D. Clerk.



Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff or Marshal of our
said County of S. his Under Sheriff or Deputy. Greeting. Supersedeas where
Execution is granted before the taking out a Writ of Error.
Whereas C. D. of E. (...) addition (...) before our Justices of our Inferior
Court of Common Pleas holden at B. within or for our said County of S. on the
(...) Tuesday of (...) recovered Judgment against F. G. of H. (...) addition
(...) for (...) Pounds (...) Shillings Debt or Damage, and (...) Shillings for
Costs as to Us appears of Record. And whereas from the grievous Complaint of
the said F. G. We have received that in the Record and Process and in rendering
of Judgment in the Suit aforesaid, Error manifest has intervened to the
grievous damage of the said F. G. and We being willing that Error therein (if
any be) in due manner be corrected, and that to the said F. G. full and speedy
Justice in this behalf be done, have by Our Writ commanded A. B. Esqr. Justice
of Our said Inferior Court of Pleas: That the Judgment in the Suit aforesaid,
and Execution thereupon issued (if any be) together with the whole Record and
Process of the said Suit, and all things touching the same in any manner, he
have before Our Justices of Our Superior Court of Judicature, to be holden at
B. for or within Our said County of S. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) under his
Seal, that the Justices of Our said Superior Court (after inspecting the
Record and Process aforesaid) may therein further do what of right ought to be
done. But forasmuch as the Record and Process aforesaid, with all things
touching the same, cannot be returned until the Sitting of the said Superior
Court on the (...) Tuesday of (...) aforesaid, and so Error therein (if any be)
in the mean time cannot be discussed. We therefore Command you, That if
Execution be issued upon or by occasion of the Judgment aforesaid you cease and
supersede the levying of the same on the said F. G. or on any of his Goods,
Chattels, Lands or Tenements whatsoever, until the Plea upon Our Writ of Error
to be corrected, depending undiscussed, be fully determined. Hereof you may not
fail, and have with you this Writ with your doings therein at the Superior
Court aforesaid. Witness T. D. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...)
Year of Our Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.



To the Constables of the Town of B. in the County of S. Greeting.
IN His Majesty's Name you are Required forthwith to Levy and Collect of the
persons named in the List herewith committed unto you, A Warrant for Collecting
of Town Assessments.
each one his several proportion (as therein set down) of the Sum total of such
List, being a Tax or Assessment granted and agreed upon by the Inhabitants of
the said Town of B. regularly assembled, for defreying of the necessary Charges
arising within the same.

(...) And to deliver and pay in the Sum and Sums which you shall so Levy and
Collect unto A. B. Treasurer of the said Town (where any such is appointed) or
to the Select-men, or to C. D. (being by them appointed to receive the same) at
on or before the (...) day of (...) And if any person or persons shall neglect
or refuse to make payment of the Sum or Sums whereat he or they are
respectively assessed and set in the said List, to distrein the Goods or
Chattels of such person or persons to the value thereof, at an equal and
indifferent Apprizement, returning the Overplus (if any be) unto the Owner or
Owners. And for want of Goods or Chattels whereon to make distress, you are to
Seiz the Body or Bodies of the person or persons so refusing, and him or them
to Commit unto the Common Goal of the said County, there to remain until he or
they pay and satisfy the several Sum or Sums assessed upon him or them as
aforesaid, unless the same or any* part thereof upon application made unto the
Quarter or General Sessions of the Peace shall be abated. Dated at B. the (...)
day of (...) In the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini



And the like Form of a Warrant shall be used for the Collecting of County
Rates or Assessments, M^tatis mutandis.

And be it further Enacted, That when the Officer appointed for Collecting any
Rates by virtue of such Warrant as aforesaid, Copy of the Warrant to be left
with the keeper when any persons are imprisoned by virtue thereof.
shall Seiz the Body of any person or persons for want of Goods or Chattels
whereon to make distress, and shall commit him or them to Prison. A Copy of
said Warrant wi^h the Sum or Sums such person or persons are to pay, Signed by
the said Officer, shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Jailer to receive and
hold such person or persons, until he or they shall pay the said Rate, and his
or their Charges of Imprisonment, with One Shilling for the Copy of said
Warrant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person
bringing a Writ of Error for the removal of any Case out of the Inferior Court
of Common Pleas for another hearing and Trial in the Superior Court of
Judicature, Proceedings upon a Writ of Error.
shall assign the Errors in the proceedings and Judgment given in the Inferior
Court, in writing under his own or Attorneys Hand, and file the same in the
Clerks Office of such Inferior Court, fourteen days inclusive before the
Sitting of the Superior Court, at which the Case is to be heard, to the intent
the adverse party may have a Copy thereof (if desired) And shall also cause him
to be notified of the said Writ of Error, and Served with Summons out of the
Clerks Office of the Superior Court, by the like space of fourteen days to
appear and defend the said Suit: And the party taking out such Writ of Error,
shall at his own Cost and Charge cause the Record and Proce^^ of the Case in
the Inferior Court, and all the proceedings thereon, together with the Errors
assigned therein, to be Certified unto the Superior Court of Judicature; which
cost and charge shall be repaid by the Defendant if upon such Trial the
Judgment given in the Inferior Court be reversed.

And it is further Declared and Enacted, Clerks of Courts to grant an alias
Execution ex Officio, upon return of the f^^mer Execution being satisfied in
part only. Costs to be allowed against persons discontinuing their Suit or
becoming nonsuit.

Writs out of the Superior Court to bear the test of the chief Justice.

Writs out of the Inferior Court to bear the test of the first Justice named
in the Commission.


That where any Execution shall be returned satisfied in part only, the Officer
who granted the same* may Ex Officio renew or make out an alias Execution for
the Remainder; Provided it be done within the space of twelve months next after
Judgment given, without a Scire Facias being Sued forth by the party that
recovered the Judgment.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
cause Process to be Served upon any person or persons on pretense of Debt,
Trespass or other matter or cause, and discontinue his or their Suit* or be
Nonsuited, the person or persons on whom Process shall be so Served, making it
appear to the Justices of the Court where such Process is returnable, shall be
allowed his or their reasonable Costs and Charges.

And all Writs, as well Original as Judicial issuing out of the Clerks Office
of the Superior Court of Judicature shall bear the Test of the Chief Justice,
and upon any vacancy of such Chief Justice, then of the Senior Justice of the
said Court for the time being. And all Writs as well Original as Judicial
issuing out of the Clerks Office of the several Inferior Courts of Common
Pleas, shall bear the Test of the first Justice named in the Commission for
holding of said Court; And upon any vacancy by his death or removal then of the
next Justice in such Commission named for the time being.

Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary of any thing herein before contained
notwithstanding.

An Act for providing of Pounds, and to prevent Rescous and Pound breach.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That there shall be
a sufficient Pound or Pounds made and maintained from time to time in every
Town and Precinct within this Province, in such part or places thereof, Each
Town to maintain a sufficient Pound.
as the Select men shall direct and appoint, at the cost and charge of such
Town or Precinct, for the impounding and restraining of all Swine, Cattle or
Sheep, liable to be impounded or restrained, for any of the causes herein after
mentioned.

And that it shall and may be lawful to and for any other person or persons as
well as the Hawards or Field drivers, to take up, For what causes Cattle etc.
to be impounded.
and impound or cause to be impounded, any Swine, Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep,
as shall be found damage feasant in any Corn-field, or other enclosure; or
Swine found unvoked or unringed; Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep going upon the
Common, not allowed to seed there by the major part of the Propriety, who are
empowered to permit the same; any Law to the contrary notwithstanding. And the
Owners or Claimers of any such Creatures impounded as aforesaid, shall pay the
Fees set in and by an Act Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of Fences, Cattle,
etc. unto the Pound keeper, before they be delivered out of Pound, as also the
Fee to the party impounding and damage to the party injured, unless such Owner
or Claimer shall think fit to Replevie his Creatures impounded, and give
sufficient Bond with one or more Sureties to prosecute his Replevin with effect
in Law, either before a Justice of the Peace, within fifteen days inclusive
from the date of such Replevin, or at the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas
to be holden within the same County, according to the value of the damages
alleged to be suffered, and to pay all such costs and damages as shall be
awarded against him.

The Owner of Creatures impounded, to be notified thereof (if known) if not the
Creatures to be cried and posted up.
And every person impounding any Swine, Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep, shall give
present notice thereof unto the Owner, if known, or leave a Notification
thereof in writing at his house or place of usual abode, or if unknown, shall
cause the same to be publicly cried, or posted up in some public place in
such Town, and in the two next Neighboring Towns, from whence it may be most
likely such Creatures came. And shall also cause the Creatures so impounded, to
be relieved with suitable meat and water, the charge whereof shall be paid by
the Owner or Owners, as also of the crying of them after the rate of
Threepence Per Head, for a number not exceeding Twelve, and no more than Three
Shillings for a greater number. And if no Owner or Claimer appear within the
space of three days next after the impounding of any such Creatures, Fee for
crying.
then the person or persons so restraining of them shall proceed with them as
the Law provides respecting Strays. after three days to be proceeded with as
strays.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall Rescue any Swine, Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep taken up as
aforesaid, out of the hands of the Haward or other person being about to drive
them to the Pound, whereby the party injured may be liable to lose his damages,
and the Law be eluded, the party so offending, shall for such Rescous, Penalty
for a Rescous.
forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings to the use of the poor of the Town
or Precinct where the Offense is committed; besides all just damages unto the
party injured, to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record. And if any person or persons shall make any
Pound breach, or by any other indirect ways or means howsoever, convey or
deliver any Creatures impounded out of the Pound, the party so offending being
duly convicted thereof, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds to the use
of the Poor of the Town or Precinct where the Offense is committed, Penalty for
pound breach.
as also all just damages to the party injured by such Creatures to be had and
recovered in manner as aforesaid. And if such Rescous Pound breach or conveying
of Creatures out of the Pound happen to be committed by any Apprentices or
persons under Age, not having of their own wherewith to satisfy the Law, and
their Parents or Masters refuse to pay the Fine and Damages which the Law in
such case does inflict. It shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices
before whom such Action or Plaint shall be depending, Committed by apprentices
or persons under age, how to be punished.
upon a due conviction of the person or persons complained of, and prosecuted
for such Offense, to Commit him or them to the next Goal in the County where
the Offense is done, there to remain^i^ Satisfaction be made as abovesaid: Or
otherwise may punish such Offender by Imprisonment, not exceeding sixty days,
in lieu of the Fine, and leave the party injured to his remedy at Law, to
recover his damage of the Parent or Master of such Child or Apprentice; which
such Parent or Master respectively shall be liable to have recovered of him
upon Action to be therefore brought, and Execution to be accordingly awarded
upon Judgment given in that respect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as any Trespass or Trespasses shall be done in common or general Fields,
Trespass done in common or general Fields.
not being sufficiently Fenced in as the Law directs, the party injured shall
forthwith procure two sufficient persons of good repute and credit, to view and
adjudge of the damage done, giving notice of such Trespass unto the Owner or
Claimer of the Beast or Cattle that did the same (if known and resident in the
same Town or near by) that he may be present; and nominate one of the Apprizers
if he see cause, and the damage to be answered according to such Estimation.
The Owner of defective Fence to make good damages.


And where damage happens through the insufficiency of the Fence, the Owner or
Occupier of the Land to which the defective Fence belongs, shall be liable to
answer and make good all such Damage.

An Act for preventing of Trespasses.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Robbers of Orchards,
Gardens, etc. how to be punished.
That all and every person and persons which shall unlawfully cut or take away
any Grass, Corn or Grain, growing, or rob any Orchard or Garden, or break or
cut, pull down or remove any Hedge, Pale, Rail or Fence, or that shall hurt or
digg, or pull up, or take away any Grafts or Fruit Trees, and their Procurers
or Receivers knowing the same, being thereof convict by confession of the
party, or by the testimony of sufficient Witnesses upon Oath before any Court,
or any one Justice of the Peace in the County where the Offense shall be
committed, shall pay unto the party injured, such recompense as by the Court or
Justice before whom the Trespass is found shall be awarded.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty for cutting or
carrying of any Trees, Wood, etc. from off another man's Land, or off the common.
That if any person or persons shall cut or carry off any manner of Wood,
Underwood, Timber, Poles, or Trees standing, lying or growing on the Land of
any others, or off or from the Commons of any Town, other than that to which he
does belong, or within the same Town, having no right or privilege there,
without leave or license from the major part of the Propriety of such Commons,
or the Owner or Owners of the Land whereon such Wood, Underwood, Timber, Poles
or Trees were standing, lying or growing: Every person so offending, shall
forfeit and pay unto the party or parties injured or trespassed upon, the Sum
of Twenty Shillings for every Tree of one foot over, and Ten Shillings for
every Tree or Pole under that bigness, and for other Wood or Underwood treble
the value thereof; to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information
before any Justice of the Peace in the County where the Offense is committed,
if the forfeiture exceed not Forty Shillings, but if it be above that value,
then before the Inferior Court of Common Pleas within the same County.
Forfeiture upon a second conviction.
And if any person shall be convict of such Offense a second time, he shall
forfeit and pay to the use of the poor of the Town where the Offense is
committed, the Sum of Twenty Shillings, or suffer one months Imprisonment over
and above the forfeiture abovesaid, or damages to the party injured.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Children or
Servants shall offend against this Act in any of the particulars therein
mentioned, Children or Servants offending against this Act, how punished.
and their Parents or Masters refuse to answer the forfeiture or damage awarded
against them, they shall be punished by Whipping, setting in the Stocks or
Cage, or by Imprisonment, at the discretion of the Court or Justice before whom
the prosecution shall be, according to the nature and degree of the Offense and
circumstances aggravating.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when in Action of
Trespass brought before a Justice of Peace, In action of Trespass before a
Justice of Peace, if the Defendant justify on Plea of Title, the ca^se ^o be
removed, and bond given.
the Defend^nt shall justify and demur upon plea of Title, a Record shall be
made thereof, and the matter of Fact be taken pro confesso, and the party
maki^g such Plea shall become bound with one or more Sureties by way of
R^^cogniscance unto the adverse party in a reasonable Sum, not exceeding Twenty
Pounds; on condition that he shall pursue his Plea, and bring forward a Suit
for a Trial of his Title, at the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be
holden for the County in which such Trespass is alleged to be done, and pay
and satisfy all such damages and costs as by the said Court shall be awarded
against him; which Recogniscance the Justice is hereby Empowered to require and
take, and shall be paid for the same by the Reconuscer, Two Shillings, and One
Shilling for Recording his plea, and at the Charge also of the same party shall
certify the Process and Record of such plea, together with the Recogniscance,
unto the said Inferior Court of Common Pleas. And if such Reconuscer shall
neglect to bring forward such Suit at the Inferior Court according to the
tenor of his Recogniscance, the default shall be Recorded, and a Writ of Scire
Facias be issued out of the Clerk's Office of the same Court, in manner as by
Law is directed for the recovery of the Sum or penalty in the Recogniscance
mentioned of him, his Surety or Sureties. Or if upon Trial before the said
Court he shall not make out a Title to the Land or Tenement on which the
Trespass is laid to be done paramount to the possession or other Title of the
adverse party, Upon neglect or refusal to give bond, the case to proceed.
Judgment shall be rendered for the party trespassed upon, for treble damages
and costs of Suit. But if the Defendant in Trespass justifying on plea of Title
shall refuse or neglect to become bound in manner as aforesaid, then his plea
shall abate, and the Justice notwithstanding the same shall proceed to try the
cause, and upon due proof of the Trespass committed by him shall award damages
against him according to what shall be made out, and cost of Suit.

Breach of the Peace to be punished.
And be it further Enacted, That if in the opening and pleading of any Action
of Trespass there be disclosed and proved any breach of the Peace, the party or
parties guilty thereof, shall be Fined to the King, or otherwise punished as
the Law in such case provides.

An Act against Receiving of Stolen Goods.
WHEREAS diverse lewd and evil minded persons for the sake of filthy Lucre, do
frequently receive from Indians, Molato's, Negro's and other suspected persons,
Money and Goods Stolen, or obtained by other indirect and unlawful ways and
means, thereby Encouraging of Theft.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same*
That every person whomsoever which shall presume either openly or privately, to
buy or receive of or from any Indian, Molato or Negro Servant or Slave, or of
other known, dissolute, lewd and disorderly person, of whom there is just cause
of suspicion, any Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions: And it
appear the same Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions to have been
Stolen, gotten or obtained by any indirect or unlawful ways or means; Persons
receiving or buying Stolen Goods etc* to make restitution.
every person so offending, and being thereof convicted, shall be sentenced to
restore all such Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions, unto the
party injured in Specie (if not altered) and also forfeit to the said party the
value thereof over and above; or double the value, where the same are disposed
of or made away. And if the person so offending be unable, or shall not make
restitution as awarded, then to be openly Whip't with so many stripes, (not
exceeding Twenty) as the Justices or Court that may have Cognizance of the
Offense shall order, or to make satisfaction by Service. And the Indian, Negro,
Molato or other suspicious person as aforesaid of or from whom such Money,
Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions shall be received or bought shall be
punished by Whipping, not exceeding Twenty Stripes, If unable to make
restitution to be corporally punished.
and be further prosecuted as the Law directs in case of Theft, unless where
such Money, Good, or Provisions shall be taken from the Master of such person.

An Act relating to Stray's and lost Goods, etc.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor* Council and Representatives,
Convei^ed in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That whosoever
shall find any Money or Goods lost, whereof the Owner is not known, Money or
Goods found to be Entered with the Town Clerk in 6 days after finding.
the finder within six days at the farthest* next after, shall give notice
thereof in writing unto the Clerk of the Town in which they were found, to be
entered in a Book to be kept for that purpose; and shall also cause the same to
be Cried by the Constable or public Crier in such Town, on three several days,
at a Public Meeting of the Inhabitants thereof; and to be Posted up in some
public place: And if the Money or Goods so found be of the value of Twenty
Shillings or upwards, to be cried and posted.
then to be Cried and Posted up in like manner at the two next adj^cent Towns.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall find and take up any stray beast, Stray beasts to be cried posted and
wythed.
shall cause the same to be ^ntred with the color and marks natural and
artificial, and also to be posted up and Cried in manner and time as aforesaid,
and likewise within twenty four hours shall put, and from time to time keep a
With about the neck of such stray Beast, on pain of losing all his Charges
about it afterward.

And the finder of any lost Goods or Stray Beast shall also within the time
beforementioned, The next Justice to be notified of lost Goods and Strays* the
same to be apprized.
Notify the next Justice of the Peace within the same County thereof, and such
Justice shall forthwith thereupon order the same to be apprized by two meet
persons by him to be appointed, and shall administer an Oath unto them to deal
justly and indifferently therein.

And if the finder of any lost Goods or Stray Beast shall neglect to cause the
same to be entered, cried and posted up in manner and time as before is expressed,
or to with such Beast, Penalty on the finder for neglect of entering, crying and
posting, and on the Town Clerk for his neglect.
or if the Town Clerk shall neglect to enter any lost Money, Goods or Stray,
whereof he shall be Notifyed, and have tendered unto him the Fee of Six pence,
(which he may demand and receive and no more) such Finder or Town Clerk for
such omission and default respectively shall forfeit and pay to the use of the
poor of such Town, one third part of the full value of such lost Money, Goods
or Strays.

And it is further Enacted, That if the Owner of any such lost Money, Goods or
stray Beast appear within the space of one year next after such publication as
aforesaid, and make out his right and title thereto, Restitution to be made to
the owner.
he shall have restitution of the same, or the full value thereof; allowing and
paying Threepence for each time it was Cried, Six pence for Entering thereof as
aforesaid; as also paying such necessary Charges as shall have arisen for the
keeping of such Strays, lost Money or Goods, Fee for crying and entering.
or necessary Travel about them to be adjusted and determined by the Justice
that ordered the apprizal thereof, or by some other Justice in the same County.

And if no Owner appear within one year as aforesaid, then such Strays, No
owner appearing to be divided betwixt the Finder and the poor of the Town.
lost Money or Goods shall be to the Finder, he paying one half of the value
thereof (all necessary charges being first deducted) according to apprizement,
unto the Treasurer or Overseers of the Poor of such Town, for the use of the
poor thereof, and to be recovered by the Town Treasurer, Select-men or
Overseers of the poor respectively as in other Cases, upon neglect or refusal
to pay the same.

And it is further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Owner of any Stray Beast, Penalty for taking off the With, or taking away any
Stray.
or other person shall take the With off from the same, or take away such Stray
before all the necessary Charges arisen for the entering, crying, and keeping
thereof be defreyed, such person so offending shall forfeit and pay unto the
Finder of such Stray, the full value of the same.

All the Penalties and Forfeitures in this Act mentioned, to be recovered by
Action, Penalties, etc. how to be recovered.
Bill, Plaint or Information before a Justice of the Peace, where the value
exceeds not his Cogniscance, or in any other of His Majesty's Courts within
this Province.

No Strays to be made from the first of March to the first of December.
Provided, That no person from the first day of March to the first day of
December yearly, shall take up any Horse, Gelding, Mare or other Beast for a
Stray, or account or use them as Strays, though the Owner thereof be not known,
unless such Beast be taken damage feasant in Enclosures.

An Act for the Inspecting and Suppressing of Disorders in Licensed Houses, etc.
BE it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Inn-holders etc. to be provided for Entertainment of men and
horses.
Convened in General Assembly* and by the Authority of the same, That all
Inho^ders, Taverners and Common Victuallers shall at all times be furnished
with suitable Provisions and Lodging for the Refreshment and Entertainment of
Strangers and Travelers, Pasturing, Stable Room, Hay and Provender for Horses,
on pain of being deprived of their License.

And that no person who is or shall be Licenced to be an Inn holder, Taverner,
Common Victualler or Retailer, shall suffer any Apprentice, Servant or Negro to
sit D^inking in his or her House, Penalty for entertaining of Servants or
Negro's.
or to have any manner of Drink there, without special order or allowance of
their respective Masters, on pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings for
every such Offense. Neither shall any Licensed person suffer any Inhabitant of
such Town where he dwells, None to continue in public houses above one hour,
unless, etc.
or coming thither from any other Town, to sit Drinking or Tippling in his or
her House, or any of the Dependencies thereof, or to continue there above the
space of one hour (other than Travelers, persons upon business or
extraordinary occasions) on the like penalty of Ten Shillings for every Offense.

And every person who contrary to this Act, shall continue in any such House
Tippling or Drinking, or otherwise misordering him or her self, or above the
space of one hour (other than as aforesaid) shall forfeit and pay the Sum of
Three Shillings and Four pence, or be set in the Stocks, not exceeding four
hours time.

None to be suffered to be drunk there or to be there on the Lords day, unless
etc
And no person or persons Licensed as aforesaid, shall suffer any person to
Drink to Drunkenness, or excess in his or her House, nor shall suffer any
person as his or her Guest to be and remain in such House or any the
Dependencies thereof, on the Lords Day (other than Strangers, Travelers, or
such as come thither for necessary refreshment) on pain of forfeiting the Sum
of Five Shillings for every Offense in that kind.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines and
Forfeitures arising for any of the Offenses before mentioned, Penalties and^*
how to be employed.
shall be one moiety thereof to the use of the poor of the Town where the
Offense is committed, and the other moiety to him or them that shall inform and
prosecute for the same, (except where such Offenses are presented by a Grand
Jury, in which case, the whole forfeiture to be to the use of the Town.) And
every Justice of the Peace within his Precincts is hereby empowered to hear and
determine concerning any of the Offenses aforesaid, Justice of the Peace his
power.
and to restrain and commit the Offender to Prison, until he pay and satisfy
the penalty or forfeiture, or otherwise by Warrant cause the same to be levied
by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That before any person
shall receive License to be an Inn-holder, common Victualler, No Inn-holder
etc. to receive License before entering into Recogniscance.
Taverner or Retailer, every such person shall become bound by Recogniscance to
His Majesty, in the Sum of Ten Pounds the Principal, and two Sureties in Five
Pounds a piece, before one or more of the Justices of the General Sessions of
the Peace, On Condition following.

That is to say,

THE Condition of this Recogniscance is such, That whereas the above bounden A.
B. is admitted and allowed by the Justices of the Court of General Sessions of
the Peace, to keep a Common Inn, Alehouse or Victualling house, and to use
common Selling of Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider, Recogniscance for Innholders, etc.
and other strong Liquors by Retail for the space of one whole year next
ensuing, and no longer, in the now Dwelling House of the said A. B. in C.
commonly known by the Sign of (...) and no other: If therefore the said A. B.
during the time aforesaid shall not permit, suffer or have any playing at Dice,
Cards, Tables, Quoits, Loggets, Bowls, Shuffle^board, Nine pins, Billiards, or
any other unlawful Game or Games, in his House, Yard, Garden, Backside, or any
of the Dependencies threof, nor shall suffer to be or remain in his House any
person or persons, (not being of his ordinary Household or Family) on the
Lord's Day or any part thereof, contrary to Law, nor shall Sell any Wine,
Liquors or other Strong Drink to any Apprentices, Servants, Indians or Negro's,
nor shall suffer any person or persons to be there Tippling, Drinking, or
continue there after nine of the Clock in the night time, or otherwise contrary
to Law. And in his said House, shall and do use, maintain and uphold good ord^r
and rule, and do endeavor the due Observance of the Laws, made for Regulation
of such Houses. Then this present Recogniscance to be void, but on default
thereof, to abide and remain in full force and vi^tue.

And before any person shall receive License to Retail any Wine or strong
Liquors to be spent out of Doors, and not otherwise, such person shall become
bound by Recogniscance as aforesaid, On Condition following.

That is to say*

THE Condition of this Recogniscance is such, That whereas the above bounden A.
B. is Licensed and allowed by the Justices of the Court of General Sessions of
the Peace, to Retail for the space of one whole year next ensuing, and no
longer, out of his now Dwelling House in C. (...) Sort of Strong Liquors, (...)
to be spent out of Doors and not otherwise: If therefore the said A. B. shall
not entertain or suffer any person or persons to sit Drinking or Tippling in his
House, Cellar, Back-sides, Recogniscance for Retailers out of doors.
or any of the Dependencies of said House, nor shall Sell any other sort of
drink than what he is Licensed for as abovesaid. And shall and do in and by
all things observe the directions of the Law relating to persons Licensed for
Retailing out of Doors only. Then this present Recogniscance to be void, but on
default thereof to abide and remain in full force and virtue.

For each of which aforesaid Recogniscances the party to whom such License
shall be granted, shall pay Two Shillings, to be divided betwixt the Justice
and the Clerk.

And for the better inspecting of Licensed Houses, and the discovery of such
persons as shall presume to Sell without License.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Select-men in each Town
respectively shall take due care, Tythingmen to be annually chosen.
That Tything men be annually chosen at the General Meeting for Choice of Town
Officers as is by Law provided, and upon any vacancy to fill up the number at
any other Town Meeting: Which Tything men shall have po^er, and whose Duty it
shall be carefully to inspect all Licensed Houses, and to inform of all
disorders or misdemeanors which they shall discover or know to be committed in
them or any of them to a Justice of the Peace, Tythingmen their Power and duty.
or Sessions of the Peace within the same County, as also of all such as shall
Sell by Retail, without License, and other disorders or misdemeanors committed
in any such House; and in like manner to present or inform of all idle and
disorderly persons, profane Swearers or Cursers, Sabbath breakers, and the
like Offenders, to the intent such Offenses and Misdemeanors may be duly
punished and discouraged: Every of which Tything^men shall be Sworn before a
Justice of the Peace, or at the Sessions of the Peace, to the faithful
discharge of his Office in manner following.

That is to say, YOU A. B. being Chosen a Tything-man within the Town of C. for
one year next ensuing, and until another be Chosen and Sworn in your stead: Do
Swear, Oath.
That you will faithfully endeavor and intend the Duty of your Office So help
you God.

Which Tything men shall have a black Staff of two foot long, tip't at one end
with brass about three inches, Staff.
as a ^^dge of their Office, to be provided by the Select men at the Charge of
the Town.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person being
duly Chosen to the said Office, shall refuse to take his Oath, or Serve therein
he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings to the use of the Poor of
the Town whereto he belongs, upon Conviction of such refusal before the Justice
of the Peace* or Sessions of the Peace where he is Summoned to be Sworn*
Certificate being produced under the Hand of the Town Clerk, Penalty for not
serving.
that such person was legally Chosen to that Office. And the said Forfeiture to
be Levied by Distress and Sale of such persons Goods, by Warrant from a Justice
of the Peace, or Sessions of the Peace respectively, and delivered to the Town
Treasurer or Overseers of the Poor, for the use aforesaid. And for want of such
Goods whereon to make Distress, the Officer in the said Warrant shall be
required to Seiz the Body of the Offender, and him commit unto Prison, to be
there ^ept, until he shall answer and pay the said Fine or Forfeiture, with the
Charges of levying the same.

And all Tything^men that shall inform and prosecute for the breach of any
penal Act, shall have the benefit of such part of the Forfeiture as does by Law
accrue unto the Informer. Tythingmen allowed the benefit of Informers.
And all persons prosecuted for breach of any Act relating to Retailing without
License, the penalty whereof for one Offense exceeds not Forty Shillings,
besides Charges, may be convicted by two single Evidences upon O^th, though but
one to one breach of such Act, so as both the breaches be within one month, the
person accused or complained of not plainly and positively denying the Fact.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person to
whom any License shall be granted, before the receiving or exercising of the
same, Licensed persons also to enter into Recogniscance, for paying their
Excise.
over and above the Recogniscance required for the due observation of the Laws,
and keeping of good Rule and Order as aforesaid, shall also become bound unto
His Majesty in a distinct Recogniscance, with sufficient Sureties, in manner as
aforesaid, and in such Sum as the Justices in Sessions shall appoint. On
Condition that the person so Licensed shall duly and truly pay the Duties of
Excise for his Draught, according to the Rates by Law Established, or otherwise
perform such Agreement for the same as shall be made with the Officer or
Officers, that shall from time to time be appointed to agree for, and receive
the said Duties. For which Recogniscance he shall pay the like Fee
beforementioned.

And be it further Enacted, That for the fu^ure the time of granting of
Licenses to Inn holders and Retailers of Drink, shall be at the first General
Sessions of the Peace that shall be held and kept in course within the several
Counties at or next after the nine and twentieth day of June annually; License
to be granted at the next General Sessions of the Peace, after the 29 of June
annually.
and that such as have already obtained Licenses, shall hold them (unless they
forfeit the same by breach of Law) until the General Sessions of the Peace to
be held in the respective Counties as aforesaid, next after the nine and
twentieth day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Nine: Any Law or Usage
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And the better to prevent Nursery's of Vice and Debauchery.

It is further Declared, That the Justices of the General Sessions of the Peace
in each County respectively, be, No more persons to be Licensed to keep Public
houses, (...) what are necessary for refreshment of Travelers, etc.
and hereby are directed not to License more persons in any Town or Precinct to
keep Houses for common Entertainment, or to Retail Ale, Beer, Cider, Wine or
strong Liquors within or out of doors, than the said Justices shall judge
necessary for the receiving and refreshment of Travelers and Strangers; and to
Serve the public occasions of such Town or Precinct, having regard to the Law
for the Qualification and Approbation of the persons so to be Licensed. And all
Public Houses shall be on or near the high Streets, Roads, and places of great
Resort.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Public houses to be on
high-streets, etc.
That the Clerk of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in each several County;
And the Clerk of the Superior Court of Judicature respectively, by direction
of the Court from time to time, shall by Writ of Scire Facias prosecute to
effect all such Recogniscances as shall be taken in Court, or before any
Justice, Clerks of the several Courts to put in suit Recogniscances.
whereof default is or shall be made in not performing the Condition of the
same. And upon Execution awarded, to make out such Execution unto the Sheriff
of the County, or his Deputy; who are accordingly to Levy the Sum therein
expressed; and to account for the Moneys or Estate Levied for Satisfaction
thereof, unto the Treasury, as by Law he is obliged. And no Recogniscance for
the keeping of good Rule and Order in public Licensed Houses, or for Retailing
out of doors, shall be put in Suit for any breach thereof made, after the
Expiration of two years from the time of taking such Recogniscance.

An Act for the Relief and Release of poor Prisoners for Debt.
BE it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor* Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Justice of the Peace by Warrant
under his Hand and Seal, to require the Jailer or Keeper of any Prison within
his Juridiction, from time to time to bring without delay the Body of any
person being in Prison for Debt or Damages upon Execution (and petitioning such
Justice to be discharged) to some convenient place not exceeding the distance
of one mile from the said Prison, Justices of Peace on the Petition of
Prisoners for Debt to Administer an Oath to them.
and to certify the cause and causes of the Imprisonment before the same
Justice, which Warrant every such Jailer and Keeper is hereby commanded to obey.

And in case such Prisoner coming before such Justice shall take an Oath to
this Effect, viz. I A. B. do upon my Oath solemnly profess and declare before
Almighty God, That I have not any Estate real or personal in possession,
reversion or remainder of the value of Ten Pounds in the whole or sufficient to
pay the Debt or Damages, Oath.
for which I am Imprisoned, and that I have not directly or indirectly Sold,
Leased or otherwise conveyed, disposed of or entrusted all or any part of my
Estate thereby to secure the same, to receive or e^pect any profit or advantage
thereof, to defraud or deceive any Creditor or Creditors whatsoever, to whom I
stand Indebted.

Then after the taking of such Oath the said Justice shall Remand the Prisoner
to Prison, and shall give a Certificate thereof in Writing under his Hand and
Seal to the same Prisoner, Notice of such Oath being taken to be given to the
Creditor.
to be Served upon such person or persons, his or her Executors or
Administrators, or to be left at the place of the usual abode of such person or
persons, at whose Suit the Prisoner stands charged and imprisoned* thereby
appointing as well the said person or persons as the said Prisoner to appear
before the Justice at the next General Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for
the same County. And if it shall then appear upon Oath, (which Oath the said
Justices are empowered to administer) that the said Certificate was so served or
left fifteen days or more before the said Sessions, and that the said Oath
taken by such Prisoner, be not disproved by good testimony of any credible
person or persons upon Oath to be administered by the said Justices by virtue of
this Act. Court of General Sessions to set at liberty poor prisoners for Debt.
Then the said Justices being satisfied therein, shall direct their Warrant
under their Hands and Seals to the said Jailer or Keeper of the Prison,
Commanding him to set at liberty, and discharge the said Prisoner, if
imprisoned for the Causes aforesaid, and no other, without paying any thing for
Fee or Chamber Rent, which Warrant shall be a sufficient discharge to the same
Jailer or Keeper of Prison, and no Action of Escape, or other Action shall be
brought against such Justice or Justices, Jailer or Keeper of Prison for the
same in any wise, and upon any such Action or Suit brought, he or they may
plead the general issue, and give this Act in Evidence, which shall be a good
and sufficient Discharge, and shall save harmless every such Justice or
Justices, Jailer or Keeper, pleading the same. And if the Plaintiff in any such
Action, shall be Nonsuited, or Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall
have double Costs to be taxed by the Court where such Action is brought.

Provide^ always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Creditors to
make an allowance for the main^ainance o^ such Prisoner^ ^or Debt, as ^hey
shall desire to be continued in prison, notwithstanding their having taken the
Oath as aforesaid.


That when such Prisoner or Prisoners for Debt shall have legally taken the
said Oath in this Act proposed to be taken, and shall have duly Summoned his or
their Creditor or Creditors, if such Creditor or Creditors after the said
fifteen days time shall make no discovery of any Estate of such Prisoner or
Prisoners, no^ disprove the said Oath, and de^ect him or them of forswearing
him or themselves, and notwithstanding will not be satisfied therewith (that
the said Prisoner or Prisoners may be set at liberty) or will insist to have
the said Prisoner or Prisoners continued in Goal. Then the said Creditor or
Creditors shall at his and their own Costs and Charges allow and pay weekly a
reasonable maintenance to the said Prisoner or Prisoners themselves, such as
the said Justices shall order and appoint, not exceeding Two Shillings and Six
pence a week, and upon non payment of the same weekly, the said Prisoner or
Prisoners shall be for a^ liberty, according to the true intent and meaning of
this Act. And if within the space of three months after such weekly allowance
by any Creditor, no Estate of the Prisoner shall be discovered or made out
before two Justices of the Peace of that County where the said Prisoner is kept
in Prison, then the said Prisoner shall forthwith be discharged by Warrant
under the H^^ds and Seals of any two Justices of the Peace in the County where
the said Prisoner shall be so in Prison, The Prisoner upon default of having
such maintenance allowed him to be set at liberty.
to the Keeper of such Prison in that behalf directed, as fully and amply as if
such Prisoner had been discharged by the Justices of the Peace* the General
Sessions of the Peace, as is herein before directed, and from thenceforth the
said weekly allowance shall cease and determine, as if the same have never been
made.

Provided also, That if at any time after the taking of the aforesaid Oath, the
said Prison^^ or Prisoners shall upon any Indictment or Indictments, Penalty on
Prisoners convicted of false Swearing.
or by his or their own confession or verdict of twelve men, be convicted of
false Swearing in any point or article contained in the said Oath, then such
Prisoner or Prisoners so convicted as aforesaid, shall suffer the pains and
forfeitures as by Law are to be inflicted upon any person convicted of wilful
Perjury And also the Court by Process out of which the Prisoner was imprisoned,
shall award a new Process directed to the Sheriff or his Deputy of such County,
and shall remand the said Prisoner into the Prison whence he or she was
dismissed, there to remain in Execution in such manner and condition as he or
she was before h^s o^ her said Enlargement, and then and from thenceforth shall
be adjudge^ to be in Execution fully, as if he or she had never been discharged
thereof. And the Execution and Executions upon his or her Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, if an^ such happen to be, after his or her
said Discharge out of Prison, and before he or she shall be remanded, shall
stand also good and effectual in Law. Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, Judgments against the Lands etc. of any Prisoner to stand good
notwithstanding his discharge upon taking the Oath aforesaid.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That notwithstanding the
discharge of the person of such Prisoner as aforesaid upon taking the Oath
aforesaid, all and every Judgment had and given against him or her, shall be
and stand good and effectual in Law to all intents and purposes against the
Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels only, of the said Prisoner so discharged
as aforesaid; and it shall, and may be lawful, to and for such Creditor of such
Prisoner or Prisoners so discharged as aforesaid, his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, to take out any new Execution against the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of such Prisoner or Prisoners (his or her
wearing Apparel, Bedding for him and his, or her Family, and Tools necessary
for his or her Trade and Occupation only excepted) for the satisfaction of his
or their said Debt, in such sort, manner and form as he or they might have done
if the person or persons of such Prisoner or Prisoners had never been taken in
Execution. Any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, in case any Jailer or Keeper of Prison shall refuse or delay to
bring or discharge an^ set at liberty any Prisoner according to the order of
the Justice or Jus^^ces, Penalty on any Jailer refusing to set any Prisoner at
liberty when duly required.
to be made in manner as aforesaid. Every such Jailer or Keepe^ of Prison shall
forfeit and pay to such Prisoner detained contrary to such Order, the Sum of
Twenty Pounds, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any Court of Record, and
shall also be subject to such Fine and punishment as the said Justices of the
Peace shall upon Complaint thereof to them made, order and award.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted, That no person shall be discharged
by this Act that has not or shall not before such Oath made, No person to be
discharged that has not been in Prison one month, etc.
have remained in Prison by the space of one month, nor shall any person be
discharged by this Act, who shall stand charged in Execution, with more than
the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds to any one person, principal money and damages.

Provided also, That no Creditor insisting to have his Debtor continued in
Prison, shall be bound to make any weekly allowance for the subsistence of the
Prisoner where the Father, Mother, Son or Daughter, or other person who by the
Law of this Province, Creditor not obliged to maintain Prisoners having able
Rela^ions.
are bound to maintain him in discharge of the Town, if he were at large, are
of sufficient ability to maintain such Prisoner.

And if any Creditor insisting to have his Debtor continued in Prison, and
ordered to make allowance toward his maintenance, shall desire to have his
Debtor, (being a person formerly using any Handicraft or day labor, and not
having a Wise or Family) to satisfy such Debt by Service; Debtors used to
labor, etc to satisfy their Debts by Service, if desired by the Creditor.
the Justices at the General Sessions of the Peace within the same County,
shall direct and order the Term for which such Debtor shall Serve, and the
Creditor shall and hereby is empowered to detain and hold him in Service, during
such Term.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to any person or persons in
Execution for any Fine on him or her imposed.

And be it further Provided and Enacted, That the discharge of any person or
persons by virtue of this Act, shall not amount unto or be construed to free or
discharge any other person or persons jointly or severally bound for, Persons
liable to answer the Debt of any Prisoner, not to be freed therefrom by the
Discharge of the Prisoner.
or liable to answer or satisfy the said Debt, or any part thereof, either as
Principal or Surety, but that such other person or persons shall be liable to
answer the said Debt and Damages in such manner to all intents and purposes, as
they were before the discharge of such Prisoner.

Provided also, That no Prisoner shall be discharged by virtue of this Act,
until he shall before the Justices of the Peace, who are by this Act empowered
to discharge him; declare upon his Oath (which Oath the said Justices are
hereby empowered to administer) what Effects are belonging to him, or what Debt
or Debts are then owing to him within any of His Majesty's Dominions or
elsewhere, and by whom, and for what cause, and upon what security; Prisoners
when discharged to give in a Schedule upon Oath of Debts, etc. to them owing.
of all which a Schedule shall be made in the presence of such Justices, and
subscribed by the Prisoner, and shall be by such Justices returned to the next
Sessions, there to be kept for the better Information of the Creditors of such
Prisoner, who or such of them as will join may thereupon Sue for such Debt, or
so much thereof, as will reasonably satisfy them in the name of the Prisoner,
and after the same recovered, to render the Overplus (their own Debts and
Charges subducted) to the Prisoner.

An Act for Explanation and Addition to the Act for Regulating of Fences,
Cattle, etc.
FORASMUCH as in and by an Act of this Province, Entitled, An Act for
Regulating of Fences, Cattle, etc. made and passed in the Fifth Year of the
Reign of His present Majesty, and His late Royal Consort, Queen Mary, of
blessed Memory, amongst other things therein contained. It is Enacted, That in
every Town and Peculiar within this Province, there be annually Chosen by the
Inhabitants thereof, two or more meet persons to be viewers of Fences; but no
penalty provided by the said Act, in case the persons so Chosen refuse to
accept thereof.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That every meet person that shall hereafter be chosen a Viewer of Fences within
any Town, or Peculiar in this Province, Penalty for not Serving as a Fence
Viewer.
Refusing to accept thereof, or to be Sworn to the faithful discharge of that
Office, shall forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of such Town or Peculiar,
the Sum of Twenty Shillings, and another shall be forthwith chosen in his room.
And every person from time to time, chosen and sworn to the said Office, upon
due notice given him, and being requested by any person or persons interested
to view any insufficient and defective Fence in and about any general or common
Field, or in and about any particular Field or Enclosure, shall forthwith
attend the same: On pain of forfeiting the Sum of Twenty Shillings, one moiety
thereof to the use of the poor of the Town or Peculiar, Penalty for not
attending his duty.
and the other Moiety to him that shall inform or sue for the same. And each
Fence Viewer shall be allowed Three Shillings a day, and proportionably for
half a day, and under that Six pence an hour for his time spent in viewing of
any Fence or Fences, to be paid him by the party that sets him on work, who
shall be reimburst the same by the Owner or Owners of the defective Fence. And
when and so often as it shall happen, Allowance.
any Fence to be broken or fallen down, or to be otherwise defective, the Owner
or Occupant of the Land to which such Fence belongs, upon notice thereof given
him shall forthwith repair the same. And in case he refuse or neglect so to do,
the Fence Viewers shall cause the same to be sufficiently repaired as the Law
directs. And all divisional Fences betwixt man and man shall be kept up in good
repair for the whole year, unless the Proprietors of the Lands shall otherwise
agree.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
enabling of the Fence Viewers to discharge their Duty according to the true
intent of the Law, Fence Viewers to be empowered by a Warrant to impress
Workmen, etc.
It shall and may be lawful to and for any Fence Viewer by Warrant from the
next Justice of the Peace, or Select men, (in such Towns where no Justice
dwells) or the major part of them, who are hereby respectively empowered to make
out such Warrant, to impress Workmen and Teams for the speedy repairing and
making up of Fences that are defective or wanting; paying double the usual and
accustomed Rates for such Teams and Workmanship and to the Fence Viewer for his
time, to be adjusted and determined by the Select men, and to be by him
recovered against the Owner or Occupier of the Land about which such F^nce is
set down or repaired, in manner as the Law directs.

Fence of common fields to be maintained by the Proprietors in proportion.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every party
interested in any common or general Field shall from time to time m^ke and
maintain his just and due part and proportion of the Fence for enclosing the
same according to his interest therein, in such manner as has or shall be
agreed on by the major part of the Propriety, the whole being duly warned and
met to order the same, and the Orders so made shall be binding and obliging
upon the Proprietors absent. And a third part of the Propriety in such common
or general Field, shall and may call and summon a Meeting of the whole from
time to time, as there shall be cause.

And no Proprietor in any such Field shall put or cause to be put any Be^^^,
Cattle or Sheep thereinto, over and above the number allowed him, or keep them
longer there than the time set and limited by the major part of the Propriety
or Interested, on penalty of answering double the damages that shall happen or
accrue thereby, to be recovered in any Court proper to try the same.

And it ^s further Enacted, That all partition Fences betwixt Lands under
improvement, shall be made and maintained from time to time in equal halves by
the Owners or Propri^tors of such Lands respectively. And in case any
Proprietor of Land shall improve his Land (the Land adjoining not being under
^mprovement) and so make the whole partition Fence; Partition Fences to be
maintained by the Proprietors in equal halves.
When and so soon as the Owner or Proprietor of the adjoining Land shall also
improve his, he shall pay for the one half of such partition Fence, according
to the value thereof at that time, and keep up and maintain his half part
thereof from thenceforward; But if either of such Proprietors adjoining do
cease to make improvement of his Land, he that continues so to do, shall have
liberty to purchase the other part of such partition Fence, as it shall then be
valued to be worth, by persons indifferently chosen by each party for that
purpose: And in case any person improving as aforesaid, shall neglect or refuse
to make and maintain one half of the partition Fence betwixt his Land and the
Land next adjoining, the Owner or Proprietor of such Land adjoining, shall be
liable to a Suit, and to have recovered of him in any Court proper to try the
same, the full value of the one half of such partition Fence, according to
Estimation thereof upon apprizement, by the other party who makes and maintains
the whole Fence, together with his damage sustained by such neglect or refusal
as aforesaid: Saving always to every person and persons any particular
Agreement or Agreements touching the making and maintaining of such divisional
Fence between their Lands.

All Fines, Penalties, For^^i^ures or Payments accruing by virtue of this Act
from time to time to be had, Fines and Penalties where to be recovered Proviso
for house Lots not exceeding ten acres Major part of the Propriety in any
general field to lay down the same at pleasure.
sued for and recovered in any Court proper to try the same

Provided, This Act shall no^ extend to House Lots not exceeding ten acres, but
if the Owner or Owners of such Lots shall improve, his Neighbor shall be
compellable to make and maintain one half of the Fence between them, whether he
improve o^ not.

Provided also, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for the major part of
the Interests or Propriety in any common or general Field, to dissolve and lay
down the same at pleasure; All the Proprietors being first duly warned, and
there being six months time given before any such Field is laid down.

An Act to prevent Default in the appearance of Jurors.
WHEREAS the Issues or Fine set upon Jurors for default of appearing and
attending the Service of the several Courts of Justice within this Prrvince
whereto they are respectively Summoned, is by Law limited unto Twenty
Shillings; whereby persons most able, and sufficient often times decline the
Service, choosing rather to incur and undergo so small a penalty; which may
prove a general inconvenience, and tend greatly to the damage of particular
persons in cases of the greatest moment and concern.

For Remedy whereof,

Be it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of the Superior Court
of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, and the Justices of
the General Sessions of the Peace, and of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas
respectively, to set reasonable Fines upon Jurors duly returned to Serve in the
said several Courts, and making default, at the discretion of the said
Justices, not exceeding the Sum of Forty Shillings each; And to cause the same
to be Levied. Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act Establishing of Sea Ports within this Province, and for ascertaining
the Fees for entering and clearing of Vessels inward and outward bound.
FOR the better preventing of undue and unlawful Trading, and of Frauds and
Abuses in the Duties and Impositions that are or shall be laid upon all Goods,
Wares or Merchandises, Wines, Liquors, or other Commodities that shall be
Imported or Exported out of this Province, as also for the remedying and
preventing the demanding or taking of excessive and unallowed Fees.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Maritine
Towns and places hereafter named, and no other shall be held* deemed and
adjudged to be lawful Ports within this Province: That is to say, Boston, (of
which Charlstown is to be accounted a Member) Salem, (whereof Marblehead is to
be accounted a Member) Ipswich, Ports.
Newbury (of which Salisbury is to be accounted a Member,) Kittery, Plymouth
and Swansey: At every of which aforesaid Ports, an Office shall be held and
kept for the Entering and Clearing of all Ships and other Vessels Trading to or
from this Province, to be called and known by the name of the Naval Office, as
has been heretofore accustomed; and at one of the Ports aforesaid, For Lading
and unlading.
or some Member thereof, and not elsewhere, all Ships or other Vessels Trading
to or from this Province, shall Lade and Unlade all Goods, Commodities, Wares
and Merchand^zes whatsoever, which they shall Import or Export. And that an
Office be held and kept at Marthas Vineyard, and another at Nantuckett, to
^^^ter and Clear all Vessels passing to and from thence, but not to be
accounted Ports for the Unlivery or Lading of any of the Enumerated Commodities.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fees in the
said Office to be demanded and received, shall be these following, and no
other, viz. For entering all Ships and Vessels Trading to this place from abroad
(excepting from the Provinces or Colonies of Pensilvania, New York, East and
West Jerseys, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Narrag^^set, and New Hampshire,) One
Shilling. 00 01 00 For Examining and Recording Certificates that Bonds are
given according to the Act of Navigation. Two Shillings. Fees.
00 02 00 For a Bond given according to the Act of Navigation, Two Shillings.
00 02 00 For Clearing and Certificate of the Lading. Two Shillings Si^ pence.
00 02 06 For all Vessels Trading to and from the Provinces or Colonies of
Pensilvania, New York, East and West Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island,
Narraga^sett and New Hampshire, Four Shillings per year, or Six pence entry and
Sixpence clearing, each Voyage at the Masters choice.

Penalty for taking excessive Fees, and illegal delay of Entry and Clearing.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
employed in any of the said Offices shall demand or take any other or greater
Fees than by this Act are now made due, or shall illegally delay and defer the
Entering and Clearing any Ship or other Vessel, such Officer shall be liable to
double Costs and Damages, being thereof duly convicted in any of His Majesty's
Courts of Record within this Province.

ACTS and LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. Begun and Held at Boston, the
Twenty-fifth Day of May, School. And continued by Prorogation until the Fifteenth
of November following.
An Act for Regulating and Inspecting the Building of Ships.
FORASMUCH as the Building of Ships is a business of great Importance for the
common good, and not only the safety of men's Estates, but Lives are nearly
concerned in the well and orderly performing of the same. And forasmuch as
Builders and Workmen employed under them, are often times remiss and negligent of
their Duty in that regard, as has been found by experience; and it being
therefore necessary and agreeable to the course and practice of His Majesty's
Kingdom of England; That suitable provision be made, and effectual care taken
therein.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That when and so
often as any Ship or Vessel of Thirty Tuns or upwards, is to be built and set
up in any Town or Place within this Province, before any Plank be brought on,
Warrant to be obtained and Survey made before Planking.
the Carpenter or Undertaker shall repair unto one of the Justices of the Peace
within the same County, who, upon request made is hereby empowered to appoint
and authorize one or more able Shipwrights to be Overseers and Surveyers of the
said Building, and of all the materials and workmanship to be improved, made
use of, done and to be done to, on and about the same from time to time, as
often as the Carpenter or Undertaker shall see cause to call them thereto, and
especially at such times as in and by this Act is hereafter directed and
appointed; That is to say, Every Tear of Timbers shall be Surveyed before they
be enclosed or covered with Plank, and the Floor Timbers before the Kealson be
bolted down; The Beams and Timbers for the Decks shall be Surveyed after
laying, before any Plank be fastened on, Special times for a Survey.
and the Bottom to be Surveyed before Calking: Which Overseers and Surveyers to
be appointed as aforesaid, shall take care that all the materials in said
Building be sound, sufficient and suitable for the occasion, and that the works
be done and performed strong, substantial and in workman like manner, according
to the Rules of the Shipwrights art; and that all Trunnels be not only sound
and well seasoned, No Timber or Plank of Oak, other than white Oak to be used.
but also without Sap. And shall have a particular care and regard that such
Ship or Vessel be well Calked, and not to allow any Timber or Plank of Oak to
be used there in, other than white Oak, and shall direct that all insufficient
Materials be taken out, and that defective Workmanship be amended.

And the Surveyers and Overseers to be appointed as aforesaid, shall have an
Oath Administered unto them to be faithful and indifferent between the
Car^penter or Builder, and the Undertaker, Surveyers to be Sworn.
and to observe the directions given them by this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Carpenter or
Builder shall bring to, Penalty on Builders neglecting to have a Survey
and fasten any Plank upon any Ship or Vessel of the burden aforesaid, before
a Warrant of Survey be obtained as aforesaid, and the Surveyers and Overseers
have been to view the Frame; Every such Carpenter or Builder offending herein,
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Pounds: One Moiety thereof unto His
Majesty, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Province, and
the contingent Charges thereof, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
inform and sue for the same, by Bill, Plaint or Information in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province.

And if any Carpenter or Builder upon the advice and direction of such
Surveyers or Overseers shall neglect to take out, Builders penalty for not
attending the advice of the Surveyers.
reform and amend what is judged by them to be defective or amiss in any
materials or workmanship, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings
Per Diem, to the use of the Poor of that Town where such Ship or Vessel shall
be in Building, until the defects be amended; being convicted of such neglect
before one or more Justices of the Peace, or before the Court of General
Sessions of the Peace, unless such Justice or Court upon hearing of the
Carpenter or Builder shall see cause to allow him some further reasonable time
for doing of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when any Surveyers
and Overseers are called upon by the Carpenter or Unkertaker respectively to
Survey the work or materials as is provided in this Act; Overseers allowance.
Every such Surve^er or Overseer shall have for his care and attendance when
called, Three Shillings for every Survey; Which Charge of Surveying is to be
born by the Carpenter when he is in fault or defective; But when the Carpenter
is not in fault, then by the Undertaker. And when the Surveyers or Overseers
shall give their advice or judgment on or about any work unfinished, that the
same is faulty or defective, the Carpenter shall not thereby incur the Charge
of Surveying, but only when the Surveyers or Overseers see reason to direct the
taking out or shifting any Timber or Plank.

And in case the Surveyers and Overseers are occasioned to Travel out of Town
for the Surveying any Ship or Vessel in Building, they shall be further allowed
for their time and necessary Charge.

An Act in Addition to, and Explanation of the Act against Adultery and
Polygamie, made in the Sixth Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary.
WHEREAS in the Act Entitled, An Act against Adultery and Polygamie, It is
provided in these words; Provided always that this Act or any thing therein
contained shall not extend to any person or persons whose Husband or Wife shall
be continually remaining beyond the Seas by the space of Seven Years together;
or whose Husband or Wife shall absent him or her self the one from the other by
the space of Seven Years together, in any part within Their Majesty's Dominions
or elsewhere, the one of them not knowing the other to be Living within that
time. Which Limitation of Seven Years is in some Cases found to be Excessive
and Inconvenient.

Therefore for the better preventing the Violation of the Seventh Commandment,
and for obtaining the Blessings God is wont to bestow upon the Keepers of the
same.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives Condened in General Assembly: And it is Enacted and Declared by
the Authority of the same, That if any married person, Man or Woman, has lately
or shall hereafter go to Sea in any Ship or other Vessel bound from one Port to
another where the Passage is usually made in three months time; and such Ship
or other Vessel has not been, or shall not be heard of within the space of
Three full Years next after their putting to Sea from such Port; Limitation of
Three Years in case.
or shall only be heard of under such circumstances, as may rather confirm the
opinion commonly received of the whole Companys being utterly lost: In every
such case, the matter being laid be^fore the Governor and Council, and made to
appear; The man or woman whose Relation is in this manner parted from him or
her, may be esteemed single (...) unmarried; and upon such Declaration thereof,
and License obtained (...) that Board, may lawfully mar^y again. Any Law, Usage
or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act Enabling Sheriffs, Constables, etc. to require aid and assistance in
the Execution of their respective Offices referring to Criminals.
FORASMUCH as it is oftentimes necessary, That Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs and
Constables be aided and assisted in the Execution of their respective Offices.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That when and so often as any Sheriff, Undersheriff or Constable shall
be in the Execution of his Office for the preservation of the Peace or for
apprehending or securing any person or persons for violating the same, or for
any other criminal matter or cause. Penalty for refusal or neglect to aid or
assist the Sheriff, etc.
It shall and may be lawful to and for such Sheriff, Undersheriff or Constable
to require suitable aid and assistance therein. And if any person or persons
being required by any Sheriff, Undersheriff or Constable in His Majesty's Name
to aid or assist him in the Execution of his Office as aforesaid, shall neglect
or refuse so to do, and be thereof convicted before one or more of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, such Offender or Offenders shall be fined, to
the use of the Poor of the Town where the Offense shall be committed, not
exceeding Forty Shillings, at the discretion of such Justice or Justices,
according to the circumstances aggravating or lessening such Offense. And if
such Offender or Offenders be unable or shall not forthwith pay the said Fine,
such Justice or Justices may punish him or them by Imprisonment, not exceeding
forty eight hours, or by setting in the Stocks, not exceeding four hours.

And if any person or persons not being really and bona fide a Sheriff, Under
Sheriff or Constable, shall presume to abuse His Majesty's Name and Authority
in pretending him or themselves to be any or either of the said Officers, and
take upon him or themselves to act as such, Penalty for pretending to be a
Sheriff, etc and not so bona fide.
or to require any o^ther person or persons to aid or assist him or them in any
matter or thing belonging to the duty of a Sheriff, Undersheriff or Constable:
Every person or persons so offending, and being thereof convicted, shall
forfeit and pay (...) Fine not exceeding One Hundred Pounds, according to the
nature and circumstances aggravating his Offense, at the discretion of the
Court, before whom the Conviction shall be; one Moiety of the said Fine or
Forfeiture to be unto His Majesty, toward the Support of the Government within
this His Majesty's Province, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
inform and prosecute for the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any of His
Majesty's Justices o^ Peace, for the preservation of the same, or upon view of
the breach thereof, Justices may Command any person to apprehend an offender
or of any other transgression of Law proper to his Cognizance done or
committed by any person or persons whatsoever, shall, and hereby is empowered
(in the absence of a Sheriff, Under Sheriff or Constable) to require any person
or persons to apprehend and bring before him such Offender or Offenders. And
every person and persons that shall neglect or refuse to obey any Justice or
Justices in apprehending such Offender or Offenders, being thereunto required
as aforesaid, shall incur and suffer the like pains and penalties as is before
provided for refusing or neglecting to assist any Sheriff, Undersheriff or
Constable in the Execution of his Office as before mentioned*

And no person or persons so offending, unto whom such Justice is known, or
shall declare himself so to be, Penalty for neglect or refusal.
shall be admitted to plead excuse or pretense of ignorance of his Office*

An Act for the better Preservation and Increase of Deer within this Province.
WHEREAS the Killing of Deer at unseasonable times of the year has (...) found
very much to the prejudice of this Province, great numbers thereof having been
hunted and destroyed in deep Snows when they are very poor, and big with young,
the flesh (...) skins of very little value, and the increase thereof greatly
hindered.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That no person or persons whatsoever within this Province, from and after the
last day of December, in this present year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
Eight, No Deer to be killed betwixt December and August yearly, on penalty.
till the first day of August, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Nine, and so
from the last day of December, to the first day of August following annually
for ever hereafter, shall any ways whatsoever, Kill any Buck, Do or Fawn, on
pain that such person or persons so Offending, shall forfeit the Sum of Forty
Shillings for the first Offense, Three Pounds for the second Offense, and Five
Pounds for the third Offense, and so for every Offense after: One Moiety
thereof unto His Majesty, to be employed toward Suppo^t of the Government of
this His Majesty's Province, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
inform and sue for the same in any Court of Record within the said Province.

Persons unable to pay the Penalty, to satisfy by work.
And if any person or persons Offending as aforesaid, shall not have wherewithal
to pay his or their Fine or Fines, he or they shall for the first Offense work
twenty days, for the second thirty, and for the third Offense fi^ty days, as
shall be directed by the Justices, before whom the cause shall be heard and
determined; and the Wages or Earnings for his or their work to be employed to
and for the uses beforementioned. The flesh or skin of any D^^r found to be
sufficient conviction, unless, etc.


And if any Venison, Skin or Skins of any Buck, Do or Fawn newly killed,
shall, at any time in any of the aforesaid months wherein they are by this Act
prohibited to be killed, be found with, or in possession of any person or
persons whatsoever, such person or persons shall be held and accounted in the
Law to be guilty of killing Deer contrary to the intent of this Act, as fully
as if it were proved against such person or persons by sufficient witness viva
voce; except such person or persons do bring forth and make proof who was the
person, or who were the persons that Sold or Killed the same.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever, Tame Deer may be
killed at any time.
who shall keep or breed any Deer, tame, or in any Park or Island, at any time
to kill any Buck, Do or Fawn so kept and bred. And that any person or persons
whatsoever, shall have free liberty of Hunting as formerly to the Eastward of
Piscataqua River. Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for hearing and determining of Cases in Equity.
WHEREAS the Respective Courts of Justice within this Province are by Law
Empowered, where the Forfeiture of any Paenal Bond shall be found, in the
Entering up of Judgment in such case to chancer the same unto the just debt and
damages. The Practice whereof is found to give great ease and satisfaction unto
His Majesty's Subjects; whereby Oppression, Delay, and great Costs and Charges
are prevented; which otherwise would unavoidably arise. And Applications having
been unto this Court, That further provision may be made for relief in Equity,
in cases not releivable by the Rules of the common Law.

To the intent therefore that Justice and Equity may be jointly Administered.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That in all cases
brought or to be brought for Trial in the Superior Court of Judicature, Courts
of Justice Empowered to chancer Penalties annexed to specialties and forfeitures
of Estates granted on condition.
or in the inferior Court of Common Pleas within the several Counties; where
the Forfeiture or Penalty annexed unto any Articles, Agreement, Covenant,
Contract, Charter-party, or other Specialties or Forfeiture of Estates on
Condition Executed by Deed of Mortgage, or Bargain and Sale with Defeasance,
shall be found by Verdict of Jury, or Confession of the Obligor, Mortgager or
Vender; The Justices of the said Courts respectively where the Trial is had,
are hereby Empowered and Authorized, to moderate the rigor of the Law, and on
consideration of such cases according to Equity and good Conscience to Chancer
the Forfeiture, and Enter up Judgment for the just debt and damages, and to
award Execution accordingly; Only in real actions upon Mortgage or Bargain and
Sale, with Defeasance, the Judgment to be conditional; That the Mortgager or
Vender, or his Heirs, Executors or Administrators do pay unto the Plaintiff,
such Sum as the Court shall determine to be justly due thereupon, within two
months time after Judgment Entered up for discharging of such Mortgage or Sale;
Or that the Plaintiff recover possession of the Estate Sued for, and Execution
to be awarded for the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all cases of
like nature heretofore heard and tried in any of the Courts of Justice within
this Province, since the month of April in the Year of Our Lord God, One
Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Six, where the whole Forfeiture or Penalty of any
Bond or Obligation, Provision for cases of like nature heard and tried since
April. 1686.
Conditioned for the payment of Money, performance of Articles, Covenants,
Agreements, Charter parties or other Speci^lties has been Recovered and
Exa^^ed; Or where any Estate granted on condition by Mortgage, or Bargain and
Sale, with Defeasance has been recovered, and the Mortgagee or Vendee by
himself or assigns has entered into, or by any ways or means whatsoever
obtained possession thereof for default of the Mor^gager or Venders paying the
Money, or otherwise performing what according to such Condition or Defeasance
he ought to have done, the party agrieved and oppressed by such Exaction, or to
whom the Right or Equity of redemption of any such Estate does belong, may
bring his Suit for remedy and relief therein, by filing a Bill, Plaint or
Declaration, either in the Superior Court of Judicature, or the Inferior
Court of Common Pleas at his pleasure, and shall cause the adverse ^arty to be
Served with a Writ or Process out of such Court, fifteen days before the day of
the sitting of the same* briefly notifying the import of the said Bill, Plaint
or Declaration, and requiring him to appear at said Court, to make his Answer
and Defense. And in case of the Defendants Nonappearance, or on motion made to
the Court, and reasonable cause therefore shown, the Court may continue such
Suit unto the next Court and no longer. Provided no such Suit shall be brought,
after the Tenth Day of December, which will be in the Year of Our Lord, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and One.

And the Justices in the before mentioned Courts respectively are hereby
Empowered and Authorized to receive and hear every such case and cases that
shall be orderly brought before them as aforesaid, and on consideration of the
several pleas and allegations made by either party to decree and enter up
Judgment therein agreeable to Equity and good Conscience, The Justices of the
several Courts Empowered to receive and hear such cases and to grant releife in
Equity.
and to award Execution accordingly. And where any Mortgagee or Vendee of any
Houses or Lands granted on condition has recovered, or entered into, and taken
possession of the same for the condition broken, the Mortgager or Vender, or
his Heirs tendering payment of the Original Debt and Damages, or such part
thereof as was remaining unpaid, at the time of Entry; with reasonable costs
and allowance for any disb^rsements afterward laid out on such Housing or
Lands for the advancement and be^tering of the same, over and above what the
Rents, profits or improvements thereof made shall amount unto, upon a just
computation thereof by the Court, as on hearing of the parties shall be made to
appear; The Mortgagee or Vendee, or his Heirs, or the present Tenant in
possession (being the purchaser and holding in his own right) shall be obliged
to accept such payment, and to restore and deliver possession of the Estate
unto the Mortgager or Vender, or his Heirs, and Seal Execute, and Acknowledge a
good and sufficient Deed in the Law of Release and Quitclaim to the same. But
in case of his not appearing in Court, or refusal to accept such payment
tendered, the whole of said Moneys which the Court shall enter Judgment for
being left in custody of the Court on behalf, and for the use of the Mortgagee
or Vendee, his Heirs or Assigns, Judgment shall be Entered up for the Mortgager
or Vender, or his Heirs, to recover possession of such Houses or Lands, and
Execution be accordingly awarded. Suit for Redemption where the Mortgagee is in
possession to be brought in 3 years.
And further it is Enacted, That at any time hereafter where the Mortgagee or
Vendee shall be in actual possession of any Estate granted on condition, It
shall be in the liberty of the Mortgager or Vender, or his Heirs to bring his
Suit in manner as aforesaid, for redemption thereof within the space of three
years next after the term therein expired, and not afterward.

Provided always, That the party agrieved at any Judgment to be given as
aforesaid, Appeal.
shall have the same liberty of Appeal and Review as in other cases is provided
at the common Law.

An Act for Establishing the Form of an Oath to be administered unto the
Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature, and the Justices of the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas respectively.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor. Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Oath
following shall be administered unto each of the Justices of the Superior Court
of Judicature, and also to each of the Justices of the respective Inferior
Courts of Common Pleas within this Province, by the Governor or Commander in
Chief for the time being of the same, or such as shall be by him thereto
appointed.

That is to say, YOU Swear, That well and truly You shall Serve Our Sovereign
Lord the King and His People in the Office of a Justice of the (...) Court of
(...) and that you will do equal Law and Execution of right to all People, poor
and rich after the Laws and Usage of this Province: And in such cases as the
Law does especially provide to be relieved in Equity, there to proceed
according to Equity and good Conscience, without having regard to any person.
So help you God.

Which before recited Oath shall also be administered as aforesaid unto the
Justices that shall be appointed and commissioned, for the respective Courts
aforesaid from time to time, before their entering upon the Execution of their
Office.

ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England: Begun and Held at Boston the
Thirty-first Day of May, 1699.
An Act for Holding of Courts of General Sessions of the Peace, and
ascertaining the times and places for the same.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor Counc^^ and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That there shall be held and kept in each respective County within this
Province yearly, and in every year at the times and places in this Act
hereafter mentioned and expressed, A Court of General Session: of the Peace, by
the Justices o^ the Peace of the same County, or so many of them as are or
shall be limited in the Commission of the Peace. Their power.
Who are hereby Empowered to hear and determine all matters relating to the
Conservation of the Peace, and punishment of Offenders, and whatsoever is by
them cognizeable according to Law. And to give Judgment, and award Execution
therein.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the times and
places for the holding and keeping the said Courts of General Sessions of the
Peace within the respective Counties shall be as follows. The times and
places for holding a Court of General Sessions of the Peace in the several
Counties.
That is to say, For the County of Suff^lk, at Boston, on the first Tuesdays in
July, October, January, and April: For the County of Essex, at Salem, on the
last Tuesdays in June, and December; at Newbury, on the last Tuesday in
September; and at Ips^ich, on the last Tuesday in March; For the County of
Middlesex, at Cambridge, on the Second Tuesday in September, at Charlstown, on
the Second Tuesdays in December and March, and at Concord, on the Second
Tuesday in June: F^r the C^unty of Plymouth, at Plymouth, on the Third Tuesdays
in September, December and June, and on the First Tuesday in March. For the
County of Barnstable, at Barnstable, on the first Tuesdays in July, October,
January, and Ap^^l: For the C^unty of Bristol, at Bristol, on the Second
Tuesdays i^ July, October, January and April: For the County of York, at W^lls,
on the First Tue^^ays in July and October, and at York, on the First Tuesdays
in January, and April: For the County o^ Hampshire, at Springfield, on the
First Tuesday in September, and Third Tuesday in May, and at Northampton, on
the First Tuesd^^ in December and March: For Dukes County at Edgar-Town, on the
First Tue^day in Octob^^, and on the first Tuesday in March; and for the Island
of (...), at said Island, on the First Tuesday in October, and on the last
Tuesday in March yearly, and in every year from time to time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, for any person agrieved at the Sentence o^ the Justices in any Count of
General Sessi^ns o^ the Peace, ^
to make his appeal from such ^entence (the matter being originally Heard and
Tried in said Count) (...) Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery to be Held
within (...) County, there to (...) iss^^d.

(...) no Appeal shall be granted, unless it be claimed at the time (...) the
Sentence* ^
and the Appellant enter into Recogni^^nce* with (...) within the (...) of two
hours next after, in a (...) at the Court Appea^ed to, and (...) of his Appeal
there with effect; and to abide and perform the Order or Sentence of said Court
thereon, and to be of the good behavior in (...) mean time. And the Party
Appealing is to remain in Cust^dy of an Officer, until he shall have given such
Security. And the Officer not to be allowed above Twelve pence an hour for his
time and attendance.

Provided also, That every such Appellant do ^ile the Reasons of his Appeal in
the Cle^ks Office of the Court appealed unto, seven days before the day of the
Sitting of said Court: and also at his own Cost, Reason^ of Appeal to be fi^d
(...) days before (...) of the C^urt appeal^d to.
do take out and present unto the Court, an attested Copy of the Sentence, and
likewise attested Copies of all the Evidences upon which the same was grounded
And the Appellant shall pay the like Fee for the entering of his Appeal in the
Court appealed to, as is by Law required, for Entry of an Action in a Civil
Cause, and the like Fee to the Jurors, that shall try the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in convenient time
before the Sitting of the said Court of General Sessions o^ the Peace in each
respective County, Jurors how to be (...) and Summoned.
the Clerk of the Peace in such County shall issue out Warrants directed to the
Constables of the several Towns within the same County, or the most principal
of them. Requiring them to Assemble the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of
their Town qualified as in and by His Majesty's Royal Charter is directed, to
Elect and Choose so many good and lawful men of said Town or Districts thereof
alike qualified as aforesaid, as the Warrant shall direct, to Serve as Jurors
at such Court. And the Constable shall Summon the persons so Chosen to attend
accordingly at the time and place appointed; and make timely return of his
Warrant unto the Clerk that granted the same, on pain that every Constable
failing of his duty therein, Penalty on Constables neglecting to make their
return.
shall forfeit and pay unto the County Treasurer for the use of the County, a
Fine not exceeding Five Pounds, nor less than Forty Shillings, at the
discretion of the Justices of such Court: Unless such Constable so failing of
his duty as aforesaid, shall seasonably make a reasonable excuse unto the
Justices of said Court for his default and the same be allowed of by them.

And if by reason of Challenge or otherwise there do not appear a sufficient
number of good and lawful men to make up the Petty Jury, or Ju^i^s to serve at
the said Court: Sheriff to return Jurors in case th^re fail of a sufficient
number
Then and in such case the said Jury or Ju^i^s shall be filled up de talibu^
circumstantibus, to be returned by the Sheriff; And where the Sheriff is
concerned, or related to either o^ the pa^^ies in any case, to be returned by
the Coroner.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful (...) any person sentenced for any Criminal O^ ^ence, by one or more
Justices of the Peace out of Sessions, Appeal from the Sentence of one or more
Justices of the Peace.
to appeal from such Sentence unto the next Court of General Sessions of the
Peace to be held within the same County. Every such Appellant recognizing with
Sureties in a reasonable Sum not exceeding Five Pounds for his appearance at
the Court appealed to, and to prosecute his appeal there with (...), and to
abide and perform the Order or Sentence of said Court thereon, which is to be
final: and in the mean time to be of the good behavior. And every such
Appellant shall attend the same rules and method for bringing forward his
Appeal at the said Court of General Sessions of the Peace as before in this Act
is provided in case of Appeal from said C^urt, to the Court of Assize and
General Goal Delivery. And shall (...) the like Fee for entering of his Appeal
as for the entering of a Civil Action in the Inferior Court of Common Pleas;
and the like Fee to the Jurors as is paid them in the said Inferior Court.

An Act for the Establishing of Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in the several
Counties of this Province.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That there shall be Held and Kept in each respective County within this
Province, and at the Island of Nantuckett within the same, yearly and every
year, at the times and places in this Act hereafter mentioned and expressed,
Constitution and power.
An Inferior Court of Common Pleas, by four substantial persons to be
Appointed and Commissionated as Justices of the same Court in each County, Any
three of whom to be a Quorum for the holding of said Court, who shall have
Cognizance of all Civil Actions arising or happening within such County, tryable
at the Common Law, of what nature, kind or quality soever: And are hereby
empowered to give Judgment therein, and award Execution thereupon.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the times and
places for the holding and keeping the said Inferior Court of Common Pleas
within the several and respective Counties shall be as follows. That is to
say, For the County of Suffolk, at Boston, on the first Tuesdays in July,
October, Times and places for holding Inferior Courts
January, and April: For the County of Essex, at Salem on the last Tuesdays in
June and December; at Newbury on the last Tuesday in September: and at Ipswich
on the last Tuesday in March: For the County of Middlesex, at Cambridge on the
second Tuesday in September; at Charlstown on the second Tuesdays in December
and March; and at Concord on the second Tuesday in June: For the County of
Plym^uth, at Plymouth on the third Tuesdays in September, December and June*
and on the first Tuesday in March: For the County of Barnstable, at Barnstable
on the first Tuesdays in July, October, January, and April: For the County of
Bristol, at Bristol on the second Tuesdays in July, October, January and April:
For the County of York, at Wells on the first Tuesdays in July and October, and
at York on the first Tuesdays in January and April: For the County of
Hampshire, at Springfield on the first Tuesday in September, and third Tuesday
in May, and at Northampton on the first Tuesdays in (...) and March: For Dukes
County, at Edgar Town, on the first Tuesday in October, and on the first
Tuesday in March: And for the Island o^ Nan^^^kett, at said Island on the first
Tuesday in October, and on the last Tuesday in Mar^h yearly, and in every year
from time to time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Pro^^^ses and
Writs for the b^inging any Cause or Suit to Trial in any of the said In^eriour
Courts, Writs to issue out of the Clerks Office
shall issue out of the Clerks Office of such Court in His Majesty's Name,
under the Se^l of the said Court, to be Signed by the Clerk, and directed to
the Sheriff or Marshal of the County, his Under-Sherif^ or Deputy. And if such
Process or Writ be against the Sheriff or Marshal, to be directed to the
Coroner of such County, who is hereby empowered to execute the same And where
the Sum sued for is under Ten (...) may be also directed to the Constables of
the Town. Coron^r.
And Writs as well original a^ judicial issuing out of the Clerks Office of the
said Court, ^
(...) into any County and place within this Province, and be there exec^^^d by
the Officer or Officers of such County to whom they are directed. (...) a^l
proper Original Processes in the said Court, shall be Summon^. (...), ^
which shall be Served and Executed fourteen days before the day o^ the Sitting
of the Court where seen Writ or Process is (...).

Provided, That no Action under the value of Forty Shillings shall be brought
into any of the said Inferior Courts, unless where Freehold is concerned, or
upon Appeal from a Justice of Peace.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in convenient time
before the Sitting of the said Inferior Court in each respective County; The
Clerk of such Court shall issue out Warrants directed to the Constables of the
several Towns within the same County, Clerks to issue out Warrants.
or the most principal of them. Requiring them to assemble the Freeholders and
other Inhabitants of their Town qualified as in and by His Majesty's Royal
Charter is directed, to Elect and Choose so many good and lawful men of said
Town or Districts thereof alike qualified as aforesaid, as the Warrant shall
direct, to Serve as Jurors at such Court, and the Constable shall Summon the
persons so Chosen, to attend accordingly at the time and place appointed, and
make ^imely return of his Warrant unto the Clerk that granted the same: On pain
that every Constable failing of his duty therein, shall forfeit and pay unto the
County Treasure^ for the use of the County, a Fine not exceeding Five Pounds,
nor less than Forty Shillings, at the discretion of the Justices of such Court,
unless such Constable so failing of his duty as aforesaid, shall seasona^ly
make a reasonable Excuse unto the Justices of said Court for his default, and
the same be allowed of by them.

And if by reason of Challenge or otherwise there do not appear a sufficient
number of good and lawful men to make up the Petty Jury or Juries to Serve
(...) the said Court, then and in such case, the said Jury or Juries shall be
filled (...) de talibus circumstantibus, to be returned by the Sheriff: And
where the ^heriff is concerned or related to either of the Parties in any Case,
to be (...) by the Coroner.

An Act for the Establishing a Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize,
and General Goal Delivery within this Province.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
Superior Court of Judicature and Court of Assize*
That there shall be a Superior Court of Judica^^re, Court o^ Assize, and
General Goal Delivery over this whole Province, (...) be Held and Kept Annually
at the respective times and places in this Act ^^reafter mentioned and
expressed by one Chief Justice, and four other Ju^^^es to be Appointed and
Commissionated for the same. Any three of (...) to be a Quorum, who shall have
Cognizance of all pleas, real, personal (...), as well all pleas of the Crown,
and all matters relating to the Con^^^ion of the Peace, and punishment of
Offenders; as Civil Causes or (...) between party and party, and between His
Majesty and any of (...) Subjects, whether the same do concern the Realty,
Constitution
and relate to any (...) of Freehold and Inheritance, or whether the same do
concern the (...), and relate to matter of Debt, Contract, Damage or personal
Injury; (...) also all mixed actions which concern both realty and personalty
brought (...) them by Appeal, Review, Writ of Error, or otherwise as the Law
(...) And generally of all other matters as fully and amply to all intents
purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of Kings Bench, Power.
Common Pleas (...) Exchequer within His Majesty's Kingdom of England, have, or
ought (...). And are hereby Empowered to give Judgment therein, and award (...)
thereupon.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the times and
places for the holding and keeping of the said Superior Court of Judicature,
Times and Places for holding Superior Courts.
Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, shall be as follows: That is to
say, Within and for the County of Suffolk, at Boston upon the first Tuesdays in
November and May. Within and for the County of Essex, at Salem, on the second
Tuesday in November, and at Ipswich, on the third Tuesday in May. Within and
for the County of Middlesex, at Cambridge, on the last Tuesday in July, and at
Charlstown, on the last Tuesday in January. Within and for the County of
Hampshire, at Springfield, on the second Thursday in August. Within and for the
County of York, at Kittery, on the Thursday in the week next before the time
herein set and appointed for the Sitting of the said Superior Court at
Ipswich. For the Countys of Plymouth, Barnstable and Dukes County, at Plymouth,
on the last Tuesday in March: And within and for the County of Bristol, at
Bristol, on the second Tuesday in September yearly, and in every year from time
to time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be held
and kept ^ Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal
Delivery, for the hearing and determining of any Capital Offense or Offenses
that shall arise or happen within the Island of Nantuckett, Nantucket.
at such place within the same; and at such time as the Governor and Council
advising with the Justices of said Court shall from time to time direct and
appoint, according as occasion may be.

Provided nevertheless, That the Trial of all matters and causes by Appeal from
the Court of General Sessions of the Peace, or Inferior Court of Common Pleas
respectively within the said Island of Nantuckett, or (...) Writ of Error
relating to any Judgment given in the said Inferior Cour^ shall be in the
Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, to be
held within the Counties of Suffolk or Middlesex.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Processes and
Writs issuing out of the said Superior Court o^ Judicature to be held within
or for any County within this Province, shall be in His Majesty's Name, under
the Seal of the said Court, and Signed by the Clerk thereof, and shall be
directed to the Sheriff, his Under Sheriff or Deputy, or other proper Officers,
who are hereby Empowered and required to observe and execute the same: Process
to be Served 14 days before the Courts Sitting
And shall run into any County or Place within this Province, and be there
Executed by the Officer or Officers of such County or place to whom they are
directed. And all Processes for the Trial of Civil Causes in the said Court
upon Review or in other Cases which by Law may be originally there brought
shall be Served and Executed fourteen days before the day of the Sitting of the
Court where such Writ or Process is returnable.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in convenient time
before the Sitting of the said Superior Court of Judicature, Jurors how to be
chosen.
Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery in each respective County, the Clerk
of said Court shall issue out Warrants directed to the Constables of the
several Towns within the County or Jurisdiction of said Court, or the most
principal of them. Requiring such Constables to assemble the Freeholders and
other Inhabitants of their Town qualified as in and by His Majesty's Royal
Charter is directed, Penalty on Constables not returning their Warrants for
choice of Jurors.
to Elect and Choose so many good and lawful men of said Town or Districts
thereof, alike qualified as aforesaid, as the Warrant shall direct, to Serve as
Jurors at said Court: And the Constable shall Summon the persons so chosen, to
attend accordingly at the time and place appointed, and make timely return of
his Warrant unto the Cl^rk that granted the same; On pain that every Constable
failing of his duty therein, shall forfeit and pay unto the County Treasurer
for the use of the County, a Fine not exceeding Five Pounds, not less than
Forty Shillings, at the discretion of the Justices o^ said Court. Unless such
Constable so failing of his duty as aforesaid, shall seasonably make a
reasonable Excuse unto the Justices of said Court for his default, and the same
be allowed of by them.

And if by reason of Challenge or otherwise, Sheriff to return Jurors in case
there do not appear a sufficient number.
there do not appear a sufficient number of good and lawful men to make up the
Petty Jury or Juries to Serve at the said Court: Then and in such case the said
Jury or Juries shall be filled up de talibus circumstantibus, to be returned by
the Sheriff, and where the Sheriff is concerned or related to either of the
parties in any Case, to be returned by the Coroner.

An Act for the Regulating and Directing the Proceedings in the Courts of
Justice Established within this Province.
WHEREAS by two several Acts made and passed at this present Session of the
General Assembly, one Entitled, An Act, For the Establishing a Superior Court
of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery within this Province:
And the other Entitled, An Act, For the Establishing of Inferior Courts of
Common Pleas in the several Counties of this Province. Power is given to the
Justices to be appointed and commissionated for the said respective Courts, to
hear and determine such matters and causes as by the said Acts are made
cognizable in the same, and to give Judgment therein, and award (...) thereupon.

Therefore for the better Regulating and Directing the Proceedings in the said
respective Courts.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Appeal from the Inferior Court.
Council and Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority
of the same, That it shall be in the liberty of the party agrieved at any
Judgmen^ given in any Inferior Court of Common Pleas within this Province, to
Appeal therefrom unto the next Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize
and General Goal Delivery, Review in the Superior Court.
to be held within or for the ^ame County, And upon Judgment given at the said
Superior Court of Judicature upon such Action of Appeal, it shall be lawful
for either party, Appellant or Defendant to Review such Action by Process out
of the said Superior Court; Review in the Inferior Court and Appeal thereupon
or Writ of Error.
or otherwise the party agrieved at any Judgment given in any Inferior Court
of Common Pleas may by a new Process Review the said Case in the same Court
where it was first Tried; and after Judgment given upon such Trial by Review,
the party agrieved at the same Judgment may Appeal therefrom unto the next
Superior Court of Judicature, to be holden for or within the same County, Or
may bring his Writ of Error for a new Trial of the said Case in the said
Superior Court of Judicature. Three judgments given for one party to be a
final Issue.
And in all Cases wherein the Plaintiff or Defendant shall have obtained the
number of three Judgments, it shall be a final Issue and Determination of such
Case. And every Action of Review shall be brought within the space of three
years. And no Civil Action shall be originally brought into the Superior Court
of Judicature, Review to be brought in ^ years.
unless in cases where the King is concerned.

And be it further Enacted and Provided by the Authority aforesaid, That the
party appealing or bringing any Writ of Error as aforesaid, shall first enter
into Recognizance with sufficient Sureties if upon Appeal, Appellant etc. to
give Security.
before one or more of the Justices of the Court appealed from in a reasonable
Sum, that he will prosecute such Appeal with effect, and if upon Writ of Error
before one or more of the Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature, in the
value of the Debt or Damage recovered, that he will prosecute such Writ of
Error with effect, and abide the Order of the Court thereupon.

Provided also, That no Appeal (...) be admitted after the time of the Courts
Sitting, No Appeal to be admitted after the Courts sitting nor Execution
granted the Appellant to bring the whole case.
nor after Execution granted; and that the party appealing, or bringing any
Action of Review as aforesaid, shall bring attested Copies of the who^e Case
unto the Court Appealed to, or where such Action of Review is to be Tried;
where each party shall be allowed the benefit of any new and further Plea and
Evidence. And that every Appellant as aforesaid, shall also give in a
Declaration, brief^y setting forth the reasons of his Appeal unto the Clerk of
the Court appealed from fourteen days before the day of the Sitting of the
Court where such Appeal is to be Tried. Which Declaration or reasons of Appeal
shall have a signification written thereupon, and Signed by such Clerk of the
time of his Receipt of the same; and a true Copy thereof shall be then (...) by
the (...), to be filed in his Office. And the said Clerk shall thereupon make
up the Original Declaration or Reasons of Appeal under the Seal of the Court,
Reasons of Appeal to be filed 14 days before the Court.
and deliver the same to the Appellant, by him to be transmitted unto the Court
where such Appeal is to be Tried. And such Appellant shall pay the Clerk for
Copying the said Reasons of Appeal, to be filed in his Office as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Execution in any
Case shall not be granted until the expiration of twenty four hours next after
Entering up of Judgment, Execution not to be granted within 24 hours after
judgment.
and that n^ person Imprisoned upon mean Process, shall be held in Prison upon
such Process above the space of thirty days next after the rising of the Court
where the same shall be returned, notwithstanding Judgment thereupon recovered;
unless such person be continued there by having his Body taken in Execution.
No^ shall the Prison Keeper discharge any such Prisoner having Judgment entered
up against him, within the said space of thirty days after the Courts rising to
the intent his Body may be taken in Execution, but by special Order of the
Party at whose Suit he stands committed, signified in Writing under his hand.

Justice^ of the Courts to chancer Forfeitures of Bonds.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices in any
of the said Inferior Cour^^ of Common Pleas, o^ Superior Court of Judicature
respectiv^^y where the forfeiture of any Panel Bond shall be found, shall be,
and are h^^eby Empowered in the Entering up of Judgment in such Case to chancer
the ^^me unto the just Debt and Damages.

Saving always the liberty of Appeal unto His Majesty in Council, as by His
Majesty's Royal Char^^ in that behalf is provided. Appeal to the King in
Council.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case upon any
Process being (...) Serve^ and Return thereof made into the Court where the
same shall be re^^^^able, Judgment by default
the Defendant do not appear by himself or his Attorney, his Def^^lt shall be
recorded, and Judgment Entered up against him (...) the Jury (...) dismissed he
shall come into Court, and move to have a Trial, in which (...) shall be
admitted thereunto, first paying down unto the advers^ party double the Costs
he has been at so far, and the Plaintiff shall make a new Entry.

And be it furth^^ Enacted by the Authority ^^^resaid, That the Justices of the
said S^^eriour Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery,
^he Justices of the said Inferior Cour^^ of Common Pleas, and also the
Justices of the Court of General Sessions of the Peace in each respective
County within this Province, be, and hereby are respectively Empowered to
appoint and settle a Clerk to officiate in each of the said several Courts for
the granting of all Writs and Processes issuing out of the same, Justices of
Courts to appoint their Clerks.
Entering and Recording all Verdicts and Judgments that shall be therein given,
and other Acts of the Court, and to do all things proper to the Clerks Office
to all intents and purposes. And that the Justices of the said respective
Courts be, No Process etc to be abated etc. for circumstantial Errors.
and are hereby likewise empowered to make necessary Rules and Orders for the
more orderly practicing and proceeding therein. Provided they be not repugnant
to the Laws of this Province. And no Summons, Process, Writ, Judgment or other
Proceeding in Courts or course of Justice shall be abated, arrested or reversed
upon any kind of circumstantial Errors or Mistakes where the person and case
may be rightly understood and intended by the Court, nor through defect or want
of form only. And all Writs, Processes, Declarations, Indictments, Pleas,
Answers, Replications and Entries in the several Courts aforesaid, Writs etc to
be in the English Tongue.
shall be in the English Tongue and no other. And it shall be in the liberty of
the Plaintiff or Defendant in any of the said Courts to plead or defend his own
Cause in his own proper person, or with the assistance of such other as he
shall procure, being a person not scandalous or otherwise justly offensive to
the Court. And Attorneys Fees to be allowed at the Superior Court of
Judicature, shall be Twelve Shillings, Attourneys Fee.
and at the Inferior Court of Common Pleas, Ten Shillings, and no more, and
but one Attorney to be paid for in any Case.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerk of each
Town respectively within this Province, Town Clerk to grant Summons for (...).
as well as the Clerks of the several Courts aforesaid, may, and hereby is
Empowered to Grant Summons for Witnesses in Civil Cases, directed to the party
to be Summoned for Witness. Requiring him or them to appear at the said
Superior Court of Judicature or Inferior Court of Common Pleas respectively.
And if any person or persons upon whom any lawful Process or Summons shall be
Served to testify, depose or give Evidence concerning any Cause or Matter
depending in any of the said Superior or Inferior Courts, and having tendered
unto him or them such reasonable Sum or Sums of Money for his or their Costs
and Charges, as having regard to the distance of the places, is necessary to be
allowed in that behalf, do not appear according to the tenor of the Process or
Summons, having no lawful or reasonable let or impediment to the contrary. That
then the party so making default, shall for every such Offense lose and forfeit
Forty Shillings, and shall yield such further recompense to the party agrieved
according to the loss and hindrance that he shall sustain by reason of the Non
appearance of the said Witness or Witnesses, Penalty for Witness's non
appearance.
The said several Sums to be recovered by the party so grieved, against the
Offender or Offenders by Action of Debt, Bill, Plain^ or Information in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Ess^ign, Protection or Wager of Law
to be allowed. And Two Shillings Per Diem shall be accounted due satisfaction
to any Witness for his Travel and Expenses, their Allowance.
and no more to be allowed in Civil Causes, and if such Witness live within
three miles of the place of the Courts sitting whereto he is Summoned, and be
not to pass any Fer^y, then One Shilling and Si^ pence per Diem shall be
accounted sufficient.

And be it further Enacted, That no person Serving as a Justice, Juror,
Ceremony in Swearing.
Witness or otherwise shall be obliged to use any other Ceremony in taking of
their respective Oaths, than lifting up the hand as has been accustomed. Any
Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for Reviving of Actions and Processes, etc. depending in the several
Courts of Justice within this Province, and Discontinued by the Disallowance
and Repeal of the Act, For Establishment of the said Courts.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and all
manner of Pleas, Writs, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts,
Recognizances, Indictments, Presentiments or other things whatsoever that were
or shall be re^^^^able, had or shall have day or days in any of the Court^ of
Justice lately Established within this Province, Verdicts, Judgments and other
matters and things therein depending* not fully made up, determined or given,
shall stand continued, and be revived, and are hereby continued, revived and
adjourned unto, and may be pleaded, heard and proceeded upon at the next
Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery,
Inferior Court of Common Pleas, or Court of General Sessions of the Peace
respectively, to be holden for and within the several Counties, where the same
were or shall be returnable, had day or days, or are depending and undetermined.

And that all Parties that had day by any Pleas* Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits,
Plaints, Process, Precepts or other thing or things whatsoever, at or in any of
the said Courts (...) by means as aforesaid, shall respectively appear at such
next Court to be holden in or for the same County under the penalty of
Forfeiting any Bond^, Obligation^, or Recognizance for the appearance of the
said Parties, or under any other penalty that might have incurred upon the said
Parties for not appearing at any of the Courts discontinued as aforesaid, if
the same had been holden and kept.

Provided nevertheless, That where it happens any person or persons being
principals, that were under Bond, Obligation or Recognizance for appearance at
the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery,
Inferior Court of Common Pleas or Court of General Sessions of the Peace
within any County of this Province, discontinued as aforesaid, and since that
are removed and gone Beyond Sea, or out of this Province, and shall not be
returned before the Sitting of such next Court to be held in or for the same
County. It shall be in the power of the Justices of such Court upon motion made
on that behalf, and they are accordingly to allow a continuance of any such
Bond, Obligation or Recognizance to such further time as shall be thought
necessary, that no persons concerned may be surprised, or have advantage
unreasona^ly taken against them.

An Act in Addition to the Act, For Regulating the Militia.
WHEREAS in and by the Act Entitled, An Act, For Regulating the Militia,
amongst other things therein contained: It is Enacted, That Drums, Drummers,
Trumpets, Trumpeters, Colors and Banners be by the Commission Officers of each
Troop or Company, provided at the Charge of the respective Companies and Troops
where they are not already provided, and the Fines will not reach to procure
the same. But no direction being given by the said Law how or in what manner
such Charge shall be Raised and L^vyed upon such Company or Troop.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That when and so often as the Fines arising in any Military Company or Troop
shall not be sufficient to answer the Charge of providing suitable Drums,
Trumpets, Colors and Banners, Commission Officers to make Assessment for
Drums, Trumpets, etc.
and the support of Drummers, or Trumpeters. The Commission Officers of such
Company or Troop respectively are hereby Authorized and Empowered to assess so
much as shall be wanting and necessary for that use and occasion, upon their
Company or Troop; and to proportion the same in the most equal manner they may,
upon all the persons Entered in the Roll of such Company or Troop, and liable to
attend any Military Duty in the same, having due regard unto persons ability
for Estate and other Circumstances. And where there be Sons and Servants, their
Parents or Masters to pay for them if they cannot do it themselves. And the
Assessment so made being Signed by the Commission Officers, shall be committed
unto the Clerk of such Company or Troop, together with a Warrant from the Chief
Officer of the same, requiring said Clerk to collect and pay in the same unto
himself, to be employed and disposed to the use aforesaid: And to make distress
of all persons that shall neglect or refuse to pay their proportion thereof.
And such Clerk is hereby Empowered and Required to execute such Warrant
accordingly, and to pay in said Moneys unto his Chief Officer. And if any fail
in their betrustment and duty aforesaid, they shall be liable to give account
to their Superior Officer from time to time.

An Act for the better preventing of the Spreading of Infectious Sicknesses.
WHEREAS Ships and other Vessels arriving within this Province, from parts
beyond the Seas, are oftimes during their Passage, visited with the Small Pox,
and other Infectious Sicknesses: Or come from places where such Sicknesses are
prevailing and Ep^demical, bringing with them Cotton-Wo^^, or (...), in which
the Contagion is liable to be conveyed, and has in time pas^ proved to be of
pernicious and fatal consequence to the People of this Province, the Masters or
Commanders of such Ships or Vessels, not taking that due ca^^ (...) in such
case they ought to give Information thereof, before they bring their Ships into
Harbor, and have Landed their Passengers or Goods.

For Prevention of which Mischief for future, and that this Province by the
Blessing of God, may be preserved from the coming in and spreading of
contagious mortal Sicknesses.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled* and by the Authority of the same, That no Master or
Commander of any Ship or Vessel arriving to any Port or Harbor within this
Province, in which Ship or other Vessel, any person, Passenger or Seaman upon
their Passage shall be visited with the Small Pox, or any other con^^gious
Sickness; Or shall come from any Port or Place where any such Sickness is
Epidemical and prevailing, may presume to Sail, or (...) his Ship or Vessel
within or above the Castle or Fort (where any such is) or within the space of
hal^ a mile next unto any Peer, Ships visited with Sickness or coming from any
place visited with Sickness not to come above the Castle etc without License.
Whar^, or Landing place in such Harbor where no Fortification is, without
License first had for so doing from the Governor o^ Commander in Chief of this
Province for the time being, or from the two next Justices of the Peace, if
such Harbor lie more than ten miles distan^ from the place of the Governors
Residence; Nor shall permit or suffer any of his Passengers or Seamen to be
Landed or brought on Shore* or any p^^son or persons to come on Board without
License as aforesaid first had and obtained for the same, on pain that every
Master or Commander of any Ship o^ other Vessel offending against this Act,
shall forfeit unto His Majesty the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, for and toward
the Support o^ the Government of this Province, to be recovered by Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information in any o^ His Majesty's Courts of Record within the
same, wherein no Ess^ign, Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And to the intent, That all Masters or Commanders of Ships or other Vessels
not belonging to this Province, may be duly (...) of their duty by this Act
required, Captain of the Castle etc to enq^i^^ of the health of Ships.
the Captain of the Castle, (...) the Chief Office^ of every other Fort or
Fortification in any Port o^ Harbor within the same, are hereby Commanded and
Enjoy^^^, ^o examine and enquire of the Health of all Ships and other Vessels
arri^ing to the same, and to acquaint the Masters or Commanders thereof, of the
import of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Passengers
or Seamen arriving in any Ship or Vessel, visited with the Small Pox or other
Pestilential or Infectious Sicknesses upon her Voyage, shall presume (...) on
Shore before License had as aforesaid, Penalty for any passengers or Seaman to
come on shore without License.
it shall and may be lawful to and for any Justice of the Peace to require or
send such person (...) with their Clothing and Beding on Board such Vessel
(...) them to such other place or places as such Justice shall judge m^st
suitable for preventing of Infection, and all the (...) Charges arising
thereupon, to be answered and paid by the Passenger (...) so offending as
aforesaid. Who also shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds to the use
aforesaid, and to be recovered in manner a^ a^^res^id.

An Act for the Suppressing and Punishing or Rogues, Vagabonds, common Beggars,
and other lend, idle and disorderly persons; And also for setting the Poor to
work.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That there shall be
Erected, Built or otherwise provided in every County within this Province, at
the Charge of such County, a fit and convenient House or Houses of Correction
(where such a House is not already provided) with convenient Accommodation
thereunto adjoining and belonging, ^
to be used and employed for the keeping, correcting and (...) to work of
Rogues, Vagabonds, common Beggars, and other lend, idle and disorderly persons:
And until such House or Houses of Correction be Erected, built or othe^wise
provided the common Prison in each County may be made use o^ (...) that (...).

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
Peace in every County at the General Sessions of the Peace, Justices in their
Sessions to appoint a Master of the house of Correction.
to be holden for the same County, from time to time, may nominate and appoint
at their Will and Pleasure, an honest fit person to be the Master of such House
of Correction: And it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Court, or any
one Justice of the Peace out of Court to send and commit unto the said House,
to be kept and governed according to the Rules and Orders thereof, All Rogues,
Vagabonds, and idle persons going about in any Town, or County, begging or
persons using any subtle craft, juggling or unlawful games or plays, or feigning
themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy, Palmestry, or pretending that they
can tell Destinies, Fortunes, or discover where lost or stol^n Goods may be
found, common Pipers, Fiddlers, Runaways, stubborn Servants or Children, common
Drunkards, common Night walkers, Pil^erers, wanton and lacivio^^ persons,
either in speech or behavior, common Railers, or Brawlers, such as neglect
their Callings, mispend what they earn, and do not provide for themselves or
the support of their Families; upon due conviction of any of the Offenses or
Disorders aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master of such
House of Correction to be appointed as aforesaid, shall have power and
authority, and shall set all such Rogues, Vagabonds, Rogues, Vagabonds etc. to
be set to work.
beggars, and other lend, idle and disorderly persons as aforesaid, that shall
be duly sent or committed unto his custody, to work and labor (if they be
able) for such time as they shall continue and remain in the said house; and to
punish them by putting Fetters or Shackles upon them, and by moderate Whipping,
not exceeding Ten Stripes at once, which (unless the Warrant of Commitment
shall otherwise direct) shall be inflicted at their first coming in, And
punished by Whipping etc.
and from time to time in case they be stubborn, disorderly or idle, and do not
perform their Task, and that in good condition according as they shall be
reasonably stinted; or to abridge them of their food, as the cause shall
require, until they be reduced to better Order.

And for the better Support and Governing of the said House of Correction, and
for employing of such persons as shall be committed to the same.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of each
County in their Court of General Sessions of the Peace, shall be, Justices in
their Sessions to make orders for governing the house of Correction.
and hereby are authorized and empowered to make necessary Rules and Orders from
time to time, as they shall find occasion, for the ruling, governing and
punishing of such persons so to be committed, agreeable to the Laws of this
Province. And such Rules and Orders as shall be made in that behalf by the
Justices in their General Sessions, shall be of force and be duly performed and
put in Execution.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when any person or
persons shall be committed to the said House of Correction from any Town or
Towns in this Province, How persons sent to the house of Correction are to be
supported.
the Select men of such Town to which said person or persons belongs, shall
take care, and at the cost and charge or said Town shall provide, as there
shall be occasion suitable materials, such as shall be necessary and convenient
for the keeping such person or persons so committed to work during his or their
abode there, and shall deliver the same to the Master or Keeper of said House,
to be improved for that end. And where any stubborn Children or Servants that
are under the immediate Care and Government of their Parents and Masters, shall
be Committed to said House, the Parents or Masters of such Children or
Servants, (if able) shall take care to provide such things as may be necessary
for the keeping of them to work and labor during their abode in said House.
And no person to be Committed to the said House of Correction that is able to
work, shall in any sort be chargeable to the County for any allowance either at
their bringing in, going forth, or during the time of their abode there, but
shall only be allowed for their labor and work, the Sum of Eight-pence out of
every Shilling they shall Earn, and the Overplus of such their Earnings to be
unto the Master or Keeper of the said House to account for: And if such persons
are Masters or Heads of Families, then and in such case the whole profit and
benef^^ of their labor, or so much thereof as the Court of General Sessions of
the Peace shall think necessary and direct, shall be for the relief and support
of such persons and their Families. And if any person or persons to be
committed to the said House, shall be unable to work, or be weak or sick, then
to be relieved by the Master or Keeper of such House, who shall be again
reimburst what he shall so necessarily Expend for the relief of such person or
persons by the Select-men of such Town to which said person does belong, and
the Select-men to assess the same upon the Inhabitants of such Town (...)
Precinct: Except the person or persons so committed to said House, being unable
to work, or being weak or sick, were at the time of his, her or their
Commitment in their Minority, and under the care of their Parents or Masters:
Then and in every such case, the Parents or Masters of such person or persons
shall Reimburse what necessary Charges the Master or Keeper of the said House
of Correction shall necessarily Expend for their Relief.

Master of the house of Correction to be paid for his care etc.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master or
Keeper of the said House of Correction shall for his Care, Labor and Service
in looking after the person or persons that from time to time shall be
committed to his care and custody, and also for relieving any person or persons
that shall happen to be Weak or Sick in his custody, have such reasonable
allowance and satisfaction made him, by the Parents or Masters of such person
or persons so committed, if under their immediate Care and Government, or
otherwise by the Town to which said person or persons do belong, as the
Justices at the Court of General Sessions of the Peace for such County shall
direct and appoint, if the Earnings of such person or persons be not sufficient
to discharge the same, over and above what is allowed them out of their
Earnings for their relief

And the Master or Keeper of every such House, shall keep an exact Account of
all Profits and Earnings that shall be made by the labor of those under his
Custody from time to time, and present the same (upon Oath if required) unto
the Justices of the same County, And to keep an account of the earnings of
those committed to his custody.
at their General Sessions of the Peace, out of which Earnings the said Master
or Keeper of said House shall have his Allowance; and if any Overplus be, it
shall be to the Town to which said person or persons does belong, or to their
Parents or Masters according as the circumstance of the Case may be. And the
Master or Keeper of any such House of Correction that shall refuse to Accomp^
as aforesaid, or shall otherwise be negligent of his Duty required by this Act,
shall be liable to such Fine or Punishment as by the discretion of the Court of
General Sessions of the Peace in such County shall be awarded.

And for the better employing and setting the Poor to Work.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where there a House
already built in any Town with intent to be improved for Wo^k house, to set
their Poor on Work, or shall hereafter be built for that purpose, and the
Inhabitants of such Town shall grant a Tax or Assessment, Select m^n to
proporti^^ any Ass^ss^^nt that may be granted by the Inhabitants of any Town,
for a stock to set their poor on work.
for the raising of a Stock wherewith to provide necessary and suitable
m^^terials, tools and implements for employing and setting their poor on work
at such House. The Select-men of the (...) Town for the time being shall
proporti^n such Tax or Assessment upon the Inhabitants thereof in the most just
and eq^^l manner they may according to the rules and methods for the time being
p^^^scribed by Law for proportioning the Province Tax, and shall grant Warra^^
for collecting the same in like manner as the Law directs for the gathering of
other Town Rates or Assessments: And the Justices of Peace residing in any such
Town together with the Select men thereof, are hereby empowered and authorized
to nominate and appoint from time to time three or more sufficient persons of
their Inhabitants as a Master and Wardens, to govern, inspect and take care
that all person^ of the same Town employed at the said Workhouse, or sent
thither by any two Justices of the Peace, Quorum unus, to be kept to work
there, be held and kept strictly to work, Master and Wardens to be appointed
^or such work house.
and that all idle and disorderly persons, and such as do not duly perform such
reasonable Task or Stint as shall be set them, be punished by moderate
Whipping, or setting in the Stocks. And all Stock, Materials, Tools and
Implements to be raised and provided as aforesaid, shall be committed into the
hands of such Master and Wardens, to be managed, used and employed according to
their discretion, for the employing and setting to work all such persons as
shall be under their inspection and Government. And the said Master and Wardens
are also hereby empowered to demand, sue for, recover, accept, receive and take
any gifts, their power
bequests and donations that are or shall be made and given by any person or
persons to the use of the poor, for and toward a Stock for such Workhouse,
and to employ and dispose the same accordingly; and shall once a year, or
oftener from time to time, if required, render an Account upon Oath unto the
Town, of their management, employment and disposal of all Moneys or other St^ck
to be committed unto them, or that by any other ways or means as aforesaid,
shall come to their hands, and of the profits and incomes made thereof; and
shall have such reasonable allowance and recompense made unto them for their
trouble, pains and service in and about this affair as the Town shall agree and
order.

And all Stock to be raised or otherwise obtained as aforesaid, with the
increase, profits and improvements from time to time made thereof, shall be
kept entire, and applied to, and for the ends and uses beforementioned, All
stock to be kept entire for the said works.
and for answering of the necessary Charges arising on and about the repairing
and keeping of said House, and the subsisting of those that shall be there
employed, and to no other use whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any two Justices of the Peace ( Quorum unus) to send unto
such Work house to be there employed and kept to work all persons belonging to
the same Town, being able of Body, that live idly or disorderly, Two Justices
may comm^t to the work-hou^^.
mispend their time, or that go about begging, or receive Alms ^r^m the Town.
And the Master of such House shall receive and keep them to work accordingly.

An Act appointing the Sheriff to have the keeping of the Common Goal, and the
Prisoners therein.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same* That the Sheriff of
each several County within this Prov^nce, have the custody, Sheriff to have the
custody of the Goal and Prisoners therein.
rule, keeping and charge of every of the Kings Common Goals, Prisons, and
Prisoners in the same, in the County where he is Sheriff, during the time of
his Office, to be h^ld and kept by himself or his lawfu^ Deputy or
Under-keeper, for whom the Sheriff shall be answerable. And (...) very Sheriff
shall give sufficient Security at the discretion of the Court of General
Sessions of the Peace in the same County, unto the Kings Majesty, for the due
and faithful discharge and performance of his Office in all the part^ thereof.
to give security.


And for Encouragement unto the Sheriff to take and use all possible care and
diligence for the safe keeping of the Prisoners that shall be committed to his
custody.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff of every
County shall have such Salary allowed him for the same, Salary.
as the Justice^ of the Court of General Sessions of the Peace within the same
County shall think (...) and order* (...) exceeding Thirty Pounds Per Annum for
the County of Suffolk, and no^ exceeding Ten Pounds a piece in each of the
other Counties within the Province, to be paid out of the Treasury of such
County.

An Act for Keeping of Watches in Towns.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same* That from time to
time, when and so often (...) Milita^y Watch shall not be ordered and appointed
to be (...), Justice and Select men to appoint a Watch to be (...) in Towns.
^he Justices o^ Peace, together with the Select men of each Town within this
Province, and in such Towns where no Justice of the Peace dwell* the Select-men
by themselves are hereby empowered and authorized to (...) and order a suitable
Watch or Watches to be set up and kept (...) Town, from and after nine a Clock
in the Evening, unt^ (...) in the Morning, and the place or places where to set
the same; and (...) Ward to be kept every Lords Day, and other days, as they
shall think to be need^u^; and to appoint the numbers whereof such Watch and
Ward shall consist* and the time for the beginning and continuance of the sam^*
And the Constable or Constables of the Town, having Orders accordin^ly given
him of them in writing, by the Justices and Select men, or the ^el^^t-men only
in such Towns where no Justice of Peace dwells, To b^ war^^^ b^ the Constable
are hereby impow^ed (...) req^ired from time to time to warn such Watch and
Ward ^^spectively, and to (...) that all persons so warned by them do attend
and odserve their duty in that regard, and to take care in the Warning thereof,
that (...) Watch o^ Ward do not consist o^ all or the greater part Youths, but
that some able Householders o^ other sufficient persons be joined with them. And
the Constables are hereby enjoined to give in Charge to the Watch to (...) all
disturbances and disorders in the night he prevented or suppr^ss^d, (...) to
examine all persons whom they shall see walking abroad in the (...) ten a
Clock, of their business abroad at such season* and (...) they are going,
unless they be known orderly and peaceful person; and in case they give not
reasonable satisfaction therein, o^ (...) p^^son (...) ill behavior, or justly
suspected to have any unlawful (...) or design, then to secure by Imprisonment
or otherwise, all such disorderly and suspicious persons to be safely kept
until the morning and then to carry them before one of the next Justices of the
Peace to be (...) and Proceeded against according to the (...) of their Offense
as is by law directed. Houses of (...) Fame to be observed.
And such Watchmen shall wall the Rounds in (...) the ^^incipal In (...) parts
within such Town, to prevent any (...) by ^ire, and to see that good Orders be
kept, taking particular observation and inspection of all Houses and Families
of Evil Fa^^; and shall strictly observe the ^harge (...) be given them as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Persons liable to watch
That all (...) persons in each Town respectively, of the Age of Sixteen Years
or upwards, being able of Bo^y, or having Estate sufficient to ^ire, shall be
(...) to W^^ch and Ward either in their own persons, or by some other
sufficient person or persons in their room, when duly warned to attend the same
Except the Members of the Council, Justices of the Peace, Members (...)
Assembly for the (...) being, the President, Fellows and Students (...)
College, Minister^, Gra^mar Schoolmasters, the Sheriff of each County, the
(...) Commission Officer of each Military Company and Troop for the time being
the Officers of the Governors Troop of Guards, and persons living two miles
from the place where the Guard is kept.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That i^ my persons
liable to Watch or Ward as aforesaid, Penalty for not giving their attendance
when warned.
being duly warned by the Constable or other person by his Appointment, shall
refuse or neglect to appear, and attend their duty in that regard, either by
themselves, or some other sufficient persons in their stead, and be thereof
Convicted before a Justice of the Peace either by the Oath of such Constable,
or other sufficient Testimony upon Oath, without a just and reasonable Excuse
to be made and given for the same* Every person so offending, shall forfeit and
pay to the use of the Poor in such Town, the Sum of Five Shillings, and have
the said Sum with the Charges of prosecution le^ied by distress and sale of his
or her Goods or Chattels, or otherwise be Committed to Prison until the same be
paid. And the Constables of each Town are required from time to time to observe
and perform the Orders that shall be given them as aforesaid, on pain of being
Fined to the use of the Poor within such Town, not exceeding Forty Shillings.

Provided nevertheless, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That in any Town where the Members of the Council, and the Justices of the
Peace within such Town, together with the Select men thereof, or the Select men
by themselves, Provision for keeping a Watch in another form where it may be
judged better.
where no Member of the Council nor Justice dwells, shall judge that a Watch
may be kept in such Town more for the benefit and safety thereof in other
manner than is herein before directed, the Inhabitants also agreeing to support
the Charge thereof, The Justices in the Court of General Sessions of the Peace
within the County where such Town does lie, upon application to them made in
that behalf, are hereby empowered and authorized to direct and order the Rule
for apportioning and levying of such Sum upon the Inhabitants and Residents in
such Town, as shall be granted by the Town for that purpose in such manner as
they shall judge most equal and reasonable, by Polly Estate, or both, to be
applied accordingly.

An Act for Rebuilding the Great Bridge over Charles River in the Town of
Cambridge.
WHEREAS the great Bridge over Charles River in the Town of Cambridge within
the County of Middlesex, is of common use and Advantage to the greatest part of
this Province* considering the public benefit of the College, and was at
first by a General Contribution of the Counties of Suffolk and Middlesex
Erected. The said Bridge being now gone to Decay: And forasmuch as said Town of
Cambridge are not able to Rebuild the same; and for the encouragement to the
new building of said Bridge.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Allowance out of the
Treasury for Rebuilding said Bridge.
That for and toward the Rebuilding and a new Making the great Bridge
aforesaid* there shall be paid out of the Public Treasury of this Province,
the Sum of One Hundred Fifty and Three Pounds Money, ( One Hundred and Three
Pounds, part of a greater Sum formerly granted by the General Assembly for the
use aforesaid, not being paid, to be understood and intended to be part of the
aforesaid Sum of One Hundred and Fifty Three Pounds.)

And further for the use and and aforesaid.

It is Ordained and Enacted, That there shall be paid by the County of
Middlesex, How the further charge thereof is to be proportioned.
the Sum of Fifty Pounds Money: And by the County of Suffolk, the like Sum of
Fifty Pounds Money. And for the supplying of what shall be fu^ther necessary
for the Rebuilding said Bridge. The Town of Cambridge shall pay two third
parts, and the Town of Newton, shall pay one third part of the Cost and
Charges. And the Justices of the Peace for the respective Counties aforesaid at
the next General Sessions of the Peace, shall, and are hereby Empowered,
Authorized and Required to Assess and Collect, the respective Sums aforesaid in
manner and form as they Assess and Collect other County Charges; and the
Select-men of the Towns aforesaid, to Assess the proportions aforesaid, as in
other Town Charges.

And further for the more effectual Accomplishing the work aforesaid.

It is Enacted, That Nathaniel Byfield, Esquire. Major James Converse, Captain
Andrew Belcher, Committee to take care about rebuilding said Bridge.
Mr. Jonathan Remington, Mr. Thomas Oliver and Mr. Edward Jackson, shall be a
Committee, who are also hereby Empowered to receive out of the Public Treasury
and of the Counties and Towns aforesaid, the respective Sum and Sums in and by
this Act Granted, and to be Assest and Collected as aforesaid; and shall
according to the true intent and meaning thereof cause the said Bridge to be
forthwith Erected and sufficiently Rebuilt, any Law, Custom or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding: And that after the said Bridge is Rebuilt and
Finished. How to be repaired and maintained afterward.
It shall from time to time be Repaired and Maintained at the Charge of the
said Towns of Cambridge and Newton, in the proportion aforesaid.

An Act in Addition to the Act, For Regulating of Townships, etc.
BE it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor* Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled* and by the Authority of the same, That the Freeholders
and other Inhabitants of each Town du^y qualified to Vote in Town Affairs at
the time of their Annual Meeting, for the Choice of Town Officers, Town (...)
chosen.
shall Choose a suitable person to be Treasurer for such Town, who shall be
Sworn before a Justice of the Peace, to the true and faithful discharge of his
Trust who is hereby Empowered to administer the said Oath. And such Treasurer
shall, and hereby is Empowered to demand and recive all Debts* Rents and Dues
belonging or owing to such Town, or the poor thereon; And to Sue for, his (...)
and recover the same by due process in the Law; And shall pay out such Moneys
according to Order from the Select men, or Overseers of the Poor, pursuant to
such Instructions as they shall receive from the Town; And every such Treasurer
shall annually make and render a true Account to the Town of all his Receipts
and Payments: to (...)
And shall have such allowance for his Service, as shall be agreed and ordered
by the Town.

An Act for giving necessary Supplies to the Eastern Indians, and for
Regulating of Trade with them.
WHEREAS the Indians in the Eastern Parts of this Province, some time since in
Hostility and Rebellion, having submitted themselves, and recognized their
Subjection and Obedience to ^he Crown of England, have now dependence upon th^^
Government for supplies of Clothing and other Necessaries. To the intent
therefore that they may be ^u^nished with the same at such easy Rates and
Prices as (...) them to adhere firmly to the English Interest.

Be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same* That Provisions,
Supplies (...) Trade wi^^ the Indian^ be sent to (...) Mary at Sa^^ etc.
Clothing and all other Supplies suitable for a (...) the said Indians, to the
value of Six Hundred Pounds, be forthwith and from ^ime to time procured by the
Treasurer and Receiver General of (...), or such other person or persons as His
Excellency the Governor (...) the advice and consent of the Council, shall
appoint for that purpos^ (...) paid for out of the Public Treasury of this
Province: And that (...) quantity of said Supplies be sent and lodged from time
to time at (...) Fort Mary at Saco, to Trade with such Indians as shall come
there* And at such other place and places as the Governor, with the advice
(...) Council* shall direct and appoint, as far as the River of St. Georges, to
(...) Indians (...) shall be in those Parts: And that a sufficient quantit^ of
said Supplies be likewise sent unto Dunstable to Trade with the Indians of
Penne^^^k and parts thereabout, who are not to be allowed to come into any of
the Towns upon or near Merrimack River to Trade, but only to Wat^^ick, a place
so called within the said Township of Dunstable. And no Trade shall be allowed
in the County of Hampshire with any Indians.

And for the better management of (...) Trade with the said Indians.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That His Excellency the
^overnour, with the advice and consent of the Council, do appoint a suitable
person or persons to be Truck Masters to have the care and management of the
Trade with the said Indians. Truck Mast^rs to be appointed to manage said Trade.
Which Truck Masters shall have Instructions given them to Sell and Dispose of
such Provisions, Clothing and Supplies as shall be from time to time committed
to them to Trade with for the best profit and advantage of the Public that
they man* So as they be sure to Undersell the French; and not to Sell any
Strong Liquors to the Indians be any time, no^ to trust them for any
considerable matter, nor to take them considerable pledge of them, nor the
forfeiture thereof at any time. And the said Truck Masters shall return and
deliver unto the Treasurer or such other person or persons as shall be
appointed as aforesaid, for procuring the said Supplies, all such Goods, Skins,
Pelt^y, Castorium, and other things as shall be produced, or come to their
hands by the said Trade with the Indians, on in lieu of the Goods that shall be
Sold unto them; to be by the said Treasurer* or other person or persons as
aforesaid, Sold and Disposed to the best advantage, and the produce thereof to
be laid out in procuring such further Supplies as there may be occasion. And
the said Truck Masters shall keep fair Accounts of the Trade and Dealing^ with
the said Indians, Who are to keep fair Accounts, etc.
and shall return the same from time to time to the Treasurer, or other person
or persons to be appointed for procu^ing such Supplies as aforesaid. And such
Truck Masters shall, before they enter upon the Management of the said Trade,
be Sworn to be faithful therein, and to observe such Instructions as shall be
given them by the Governor, And to be Sworn.
with the advice of the Council from time to time, and not to Trade for any
thing with the said Indians on behalf or for account of themselves or any other
particular person or persons.

Penalty on other persons for Trading with the Indians.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons whatsoever, other than those to be employed as Truck Masters as
aforesaid, shall or may presume by themselves, or any other for them, directly
or indirectly to Truck, Ba^ter, Buy, Sell, Deal or Trade with any Indian or
Indians in any place within this Province, to the Eastward of P^^cataqua River
or in any other place or places on or near Merrimack River, or Nashaway River.
On pain that every person or persons so Trading, shall Forfeit the Sum of Fifty
Pounds, and all such Goods as he or they shall have been Trading with or for,
and the Vessel or Vessels such person or persons shall have been Trading in or
with, or the value thereof. One Moiety of the said Forfeitures to be unto His
Majesty* to be laid out in procuring supplies to Trade with the said Indians on
account of the Province, and the other moiety to him or them that shall inform
and sue for the same, in any of His Majesty's Courts within this Province that
shall have cognizance thereof. And the Commander or Truck Master on Board any
Vessel to be improved for Trading with the Indians to the Eastward of
Piscataqua River, shall be, and hereby is empowered to Sei^ any Vessel or
Vessels that shall have been Trading with the Indians, Power of Seizure.
and shall be afterward met with by him, and shall bring or send such Vessel
or Vessels into some Port in order to Trial.

And all persons that shall be employed as Truck Masters, or otherwise relating
to the said Trade with the Indians, shall have and receive such Salary or
Allowance for their Service therein, as the Governor and Council shall order
and appoint.

Provided this Act shall continue in force for one whole year, and to the end
of the Sessions of the General Assembly next after, and no longer.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ADministration Page. 5 Adultery Page. 65 Affidavits out of Court Page. 83
Allegiance to be Sworn Page. 29 Apparel of men or women worn by the contrary
Six. Page. 79 Appeal From the Judge of Probate Page. 39 From a Justice of the
Peace Page. 141 From the Sessions of the Peace Page. 140 From the Inferior
Court Page. 1^^
Appeal to the King in Council Page. 146 Atheism Page. 99 Attleborough Page. 71
Attorneys Fees. Page. 147
B
BAnns of Matrimony, how to be asked Page. 19, 79 Bastard Children Page. 13
Beggars Page. 151 Births and Deaths Page. 41 Blasphemy Page. 99 Bounds of
Counties and Towns Page. 21 Bread Page. 90 Breach of the Peace Page. 14 Bridges
to be made good and damage happening through defects Page. 54 Bristol Fair Page.
59 Buggery Page. 98 Building Burglary Page. 13
C
CAmbridge Bridge Page. 156 Cask Page. 10 Cattle Page. 55 Ceremony to be used
in Swearing Page. 147 Chandlers Page. 18 and 93 Churches to enjoy their
Priviledge^ etc. Page. 21 Clerks of Courts How to be appointed Page. 147 their
Fees Page. 34, and 35 to give out Estreat of Fines Page. 46 of the Inferior
Courts to Register Deeds. Page. 101
Constables penalty for not Serving Page. 25 their Oath Page. 32 may take no
reward to hasten payment Page. 58 penalty for not paying in Rates Page. 25 and
96 may require Assistance Page. 135
Cordwainers Page. 106 Coroners Fee^ to return Jurors in case Page. 141, 143,
145 to Serve Writts in case Page. 142
Correction House Page. 150 Idle persons etc. to be sent thither. Page. 25
Counselors Oath Page. 30 County Treasurer Page. 22 Charges ib.
Courts Adjournment Page. 73 held by one Justice Page. 96 Of Sessions of the
Peace Page. 140 Common Pleas Page. 142 Judicature and Assize Page. 143
Proceedings in Courts Page. 145 Power of Chancery Page. 137.146
Criminal Offenses Page. 12, 45 Cruelty to bruit Creatures forbidden Page. 19
Culler of Fish Page. 12 Curriers Page. 18.105 Cursing. Page. 12
D
DEeds and Conveyances to be Registered Page. 99 If Fraudulent to be void. Page.
92
Deer Page. 136 Distribution of Intestate Estates Page. 5 of Insolvent Estates
Page. 89
Distracted Page. 63 Divorce Page. 20 Drunkenness Page. 12, 45, 75
E
EQuity provided for Page. 137 Estates Intestate Page. 5 Insolvent Page. 8^
Execution The Form Page. 111, 112 not to be granted within 24 hours after
Judgment Page. 14^ nor after a year without a Sci^e Facias Page. 10 An alias
Execution to be granted in case Page. 1^^


F
Fees Page. 32 and 65 Fences and Fence Viewers Page. 55 and 129 Ferrys Page. 70
and 94 Fi^es how to be Estreated Forcible Entry and detainer Fishery Page. 28
and4^ Forgery Page. 14 Fornication Page. 13 Fortune Tellers Page. 151 Frauds
and Perjury Page. 7 French Page. 38
G
GAgers and Packers Page. 10 Gaming in Public houses Page. 17 Goalers Fees
Page. 36 Goal to be in the custody of the Sheriff Page. 153 Goods Stolen Page.
13 and 120 Lost Page. 121
Guardians how to be appointed Page. 39
H
HArwich Page. 68 Hawards or Field drivers Page. 55 Highways how to be repaired
Page. 54 damage happening through defect Page. 54 Annoyances to be removed Page.
54 Encroachments to be removed Page. 105

I
Idiots Page. 63 Idle Persons Page. 25 and 151 Incest and Incestuous Marriages
Page. 78 Incroachment on Streets and highways Page. 105 Indians how to be
governed Page. 62 Penalty for Drunkiness Page. 63 for Selling them Liquors etc.
Page. 62 Trade with them Page. 157
Judgments* to be satisfied in (...) Page. 40 by default Page. 146 three
Judgments to be final Page. 1^7
Jurors how to be chosen Page. 141, 142, 143 Oath Page. 31 Duty and Allowance
^6 penalty for non appearance ib. and 131
Justice of the Peace his Oath Page. 30 Power Page. 14 and 96 Fees Page. 32 and
96
Justices of Courts Oath Page. 139 Power of Chancery Page. 138.146 to appoint
their Clerks Page. 147 Justices of the Superior Court To License the Sale of
Lands for payment of Debts etc. Page. 92

L
LAnds Lying in Common how to be improved Page. 23 Partition to be Sued out
Page. 45 Liable to payment of Debts etc. Page. 91
Leather Page. 106 Legacies how recoverable Page. 45 Licenses how to be granted
Page. 16 Licensed and unlicensed houses. ib. 82.125 Limitation for Possession
Page. 101 Lords Day Page. 17 Lying and Libelling Page. 14
M
MArriages Page. 19.79 Martha's Vineyard Page. 43 and 80 Measurer of Salt Page.
12 Measures Messengers Fees Page. 65 Militia Page. 47.149 Money Page. 98.103
Mortgages how to be discharged Page. 100 Murdering of Bastard Children Page. 92
Murder Page. 98
N
NAntuckett Page. 43 Nusances Page. 18.93
O
OAths to (...) taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy Page. 29
Oaths of Officers Page. 30 Oath of Clerk of the Band Page. 50
P
PAcking of Fish and Flesh Page. 10 Peace broken Page. 14 Perjury Page. 15
Piracy Page. 87 Poligamie Page. 65.134 Poor Children to be bound out Page. 25
Poor to be relieved by their Relations Page. 26 Possession Page. 101 Pounds and
Pound breach Page. 117 Fee for Impounding Page. 56
Ports Page. 131 Prison to be kep't by the Sheriff Page. 153 Prisoners for Debt
Page. 126 Proprietors in common Lands may Sue Page. 69
R
RAtes of Towns Page. 96 Ravishment and Rape Page. 98 Register of Births and
Deaths Page. 41 Registry of Deeds Page. 99 Representatives Page. 36.60 Review
to be brought within 3 years Riots Page. 14 Robbery Page. 13.87 Robbing of
Orchards etc. Page. 119 Rogues Page. 151
S
SAlt Page. 86 Schools Page. 218 Sealers of Weights etc. Page. 27 Seamen Page.
59 Secretarys Fees Page. 33 Sheep Page. 56 Sheriffs Accounts Page. 46 Sheriffs
Oath Page. 31 his Fees Page. 35 and 65 to have custody of the Goal Page. 153 to
return Jurors in case. Page. 143.145
Shingles Page. 80 Ships Page. 133 Sicknesses Slaughter houses Page. 1^ Sons
and Servants Page. 75 Still houses Page. 18 Stolen Goods Page. 120 Strays Page.
121 Sureties Page. 46* Surveyers of Highways Page. 53 Swearing Page. 12.^5
Swine Page. 56
T
TAnners Page. 105 Tarr Caske Page. 11 Theft Page. 13 Tithingmen Page. 95.124
Tiverton Page. 67 Town ships and Town Officers Town house in Boston Page. 52
Towns Empowered to Sue Page. 69 Town Clerk to be Sworn Page. 23 his Oath Page.
31 to grant Writts Page. 97 and Summons for Witnesses. Page. 147
Town Treasurer Page. 157 Traynings Page. 48 Treasurer of the Province his
Accounts to be Allowed by the General Assembly Page. 86 Treason Page. 93
Trespasses Page. 119
U
USury Page. 42 Vagabonds Page. 151 Voters in Town Affair's Qualification Page.
23 for choice of Representatives Page. 61

W
WAtches, Military Page. 48 Constables Page. 154
Weights Wills, in what time to be proved Page. 6 to be attested by three or
four Witnesses Page. 7 Nuncupative Page. 8
Witnesses, Allowance Page. 147 Penalty for not appearing Page. 147
Wood or Trees cut or carried off another man's Land, the penalty Page. 119 Work
house Page. 152 Wolves Page. 44.77 Writ for calling* an Assembly Page. 108
Writts in Civil causes Page. 110 to be in the English Tongue Page. 147 not to
abate for circumstantial Error Page. 147 Issuing out of the Clerks Page. 40 and
142 Office of any Court to run through the Province Page. 40 and 142 What Test
to bear. Page. 117


