To the Honorable House of Representatives of this his Majesty's Province of
New York, in General Assembly met and convened.
The Humble Petition of Samuel Staats, Johannes D' Peyster, Leonard Lewis and
Abraham Gouverneur.
Humbly Shows,
That whereas Ebenezer Wilson, High Sheriff of this City and County, did, in
p^rs^ance of his Majesty's Writ to him directed, order the Freemen and
Freeholders of t^is City and Co^nt^, and the Freeholders of the County of
Orange to appear (...) Plains near t^is City, to make choice of four
Freeholders, to represent them in General (...), on the Twel^th day of this
instant month of May, the which being ^et, the Sheriff (...) twelve men as
VVitness^, and your Petitioners were then and there, by the major (...) the
Freemen (...) Freeholders, elected and chosen Representatives as aforesaid;
but (...) demanded, he the said Sheriff soon adjourned the same to the City
Hall, against (...) of your Petitioners, and being there met, did then and
there refuse your (...) to be present at the taking the same that day, and most
(...) one of your Petitioners* And (...), one of those Witnesses pretended to
be appointed on the side of (...) Petitioners, did not (...) the Argument of
those that had a right to Vote, declare against those would Vote for your
Petitioners; and at the shutting up of the Poll would not hims^l^ (...) for
them, by which mean^ they (...) many Votes; and all those of the County of
Orange men pretended to have no right to vote, although commanded by the
Sheriff, as abovesaid. N^^withstanding all which Ab^ses your Petitioners had
the majority of Voices, although many Persons voting against your Petitioners
were admitted of, as having their Freedom from the Major, notwithstanding they
had not, for many years, been resident in this City o^ County And although
every Person coming to poll was then and there at large examined of his
Qualifi^a^^on^ thereunto, some of both sides excepted, who were to be referred
to a Scrutiny; but so it is that the Sheriff has taken upon himself to make a
new Scrutiny on the Poll, whereof he pretended to have the whole management,
and would not allow unto those Person that voted for your Petitioners the same
Liberty which was allowed on the other hand, by which means above Eighty of
those that voted for your Petitioners were excluded although it is evident most
of them had an Undoubted Right to Vote, and were passed before (as
insufficiently qualified) thereby to bring the major Vote on such Persons as
otherwise could not be Elected, of which he the said Sheriff has made Return,
to the great Infringement of the Liberties of the Free men and Freeholders
aforesaid, against all which ^^ve of the Witnesses did then and there Protest.

Your Petitioners therefore in all Humility fly to the Honorable House for
Relief in the Premises, humbly craving, That the said Unjust Proceedings may be
examined, that your Petitioners may not be debarred of their Rights and
Privileges, but have such Remedy as the Law and Custom of A^^^mblies in such
Cases do direct, and as in your great Wisdoms shall seem meet. And your
Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

New York, May 19. School. Leonard Lewis, Abrah. Gouverneur, Samuel Staats. Jo.
D. Peyster.


To the Honorable House of Representatives met and convened in General
Assembly at New York.
The Humble Answer of Ebenezer Willson, Esquire High Sheriff of the City and County
of New York and Orange County, Unto the Contumelious Petition of Samuel
Staats, etc.
THat your Honors Respondant, pursuant unto his Majesty's Writ to him
directed, did make a true and just Return of the Persons that were truly
elected by the Freeholders and Freemen of the said City, according to the
Tenor of the said Writ, which is verified by the Electors of the said Persons,
by an Indenture under the Hands and Seals of the said Electors or Chu^er^,
according as the Statutes of the 8th and 10th of Henry the 6th do direct.

That your Honors Respondant, according to the purport of the said Writ, did
summons the Freeholders of the County of Orange, which he conceived by the
Writ to him directed, to be within his Baylwick; but the Mayor, and other of
the Magistrates of the City of New York, together with several other of the
Citizens of the said City, alleging it to be an Infringement upon the Right of
the said City, to admit any Persons of a Foreign County to be Chusers or
Electors of the four Representatives, which by the first Constitution of
Assemblies in this Province were allotted and appropriated to New York; and
that they conceived, That the Writ could not change the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government, which is confirmed by Act of Assembly.
Therefore he, with the Advice and Consent of the majority of the Electors, did
not admit of the Freeholders of Orange County to vote, but their Names to be
put in a List by themselves, that what may be offered against the Right of the
City, might be better considered afterward, if there should be any need of
disputing the same.

Your Honors Respondant, for the just observing of his Duty, by the aforesaid
Writ required, he did in open Field, after the Publication of his Writ, appoint
twelve of the Electors to be Witnesses of the faithful Execution of his Writ,
if an^ Controversy should arise about those that were elected to serve in
Assembly, and required ther^ to w^tness the Truth of his Execution of the said
Writ, whose Names are hereunto annexed; which Electors were approved of by the
Candidates of either Party.

The said Respondant on the said twelfth Day of May, according to the Request
of the Electors, that were then in the Field, upon the Nomination of several
Candidates that were proposed to represent the said Electors in Assembly, did
agree to the Poll that was demanded, but the Disorder of the People was so
great, and the little convenience in the Field for the taking the said Poll,
did adjourn the same to the Town Hall of the said City, as he humbly conceives
by the aforesaid Statutes, he has Power to do; the appointing of the Time and
Place of Election, by the said Writ, being wholly left to the Discretion of the
Sheriff, and by the Command of the Law he needed not the Consent of any Person
to join with him in the Adj^^^^ment of the said (...) to the Town Hall, because
he is authorized, both by the Statute Law and Customs of England to do the same.

Your Honors Respondant does further say, That he did not refuse any of the
Candidates to be present at the taking of the Poll, nor was he abusive to an^
of them* but the Candidates of one side being only present, and one of them so
Rude as to take his Chair from him, he did thereupon rebuk^ the said Candidate,
and ^id him get out of his ^hair, who replied, He had mo^e right to be there
than this (...); which he also conceives to be a Violence to the Right of his
Office, which makes him the sole Judge of the Poll, as the Statutes do express
at large, there being none invested with the Power of an Oath but himself.

And as for the Witnesses that were appointed for the Scrutiny the Poll, and
the returning of the Persons elected, they were the most Reputable I could ^ame
on either side, on behalf of the Candid^tes, and they were under no
Restriction, but had the freedom of their Judgment, without any Imposition; and
if Truth swa^ed or convinced them to be in the right, I hope it will not be
imputed as a blame to me, since I have taken all the care imaginable faithfully
to discharge my Duty.

And as for the Reproachful Allegation of the Petitioners, That they had the
majority of Votes, the Return under the Hands and Seals of the Electors, will
evidence it to be grossly false; for in the Examination or scrutiny of the Poll,
the Rules observed and agreed by the Witnesse^ were such, That no Person should
be admitted to elect on either side, but such as had a Freedom Freehold in the
City or County, or enrolled Freemen, and were of Age, Natural born Subjects,
Denizens or Naturalized, and that all those that were A^^ens, under Age, or had
not their Freedoms, or were not enrolled, nor had any Freehold, should not
have the liberty of Choice. Whereupon the Witnesses, upon the scrutiny, did
refuse forty eight Persons that were in the Poll, in right of those that I
returned, and excluded them from their Vote; and upon the scrutiny of the
Candidates of the Petitioners, there were in like manner eighty eight Persons
refused, who according to the agreement aforesaid, were not qualified to give
their Votes; and time was allowed for the Persons excepted to justify their
Right of Voting, if any they had, which not being done, they were excluded; by
which means, at the c^osing of the scrutiny, there did appear to be Fifty Eight
Electors more for those that I have returned, than there were in favor of the
other Candidates, or the Contumelious Petitioners. And there being but twenty
one of the Freeholders of Orange County, who did Vote, if they had been
allowed by the City, yet still there should be Thirty Seven more Votes for
those whom I did Return by my indentures, sealed and lawfully executed by seven
of the principal Freeholders of the said City. Which Return I know to be just
and true, and thereupon, according to my Oath and Duty I did it, and am ready,
upon the Oaths of the Witnesses to make appear. And therefore humbly pray to
be from this Calumnious and Vexatious Complaint dismissed.

Ebenezer Willson, Sheriff.
Witnesses appointed for the Election of Representatives of the City of
New York, Matthew Clarkson, William Morris Brandt Schuyler, James Spencer,
Jeremiah To^hell, Derrick Vanderburgh, John Hutchins, David Provoost, Jacob
Boelen, Hendrick Jellison, Gerret Onclebagh, Lawrance Thomas,


To the Honorable House of Representatives for the Province of New York,
Convened in General Assembly.
The Humble ^^tition of Samuel Staats, Johannes d' Peyster, Leonard Lewis and
Abraham Gouverneur.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioners having seen a Copy of the Answer of Ebenezer Willson,
High Sheriff of this City and County, to their Petition lying before this
House, whereby it appears, that it is highly necessary for your Petitioners to
have a Copy of the Poll, for which the Sheriff demands the Sum of Three Pound^,
which your Petitioners conceive to be very Unreasonable.

Wherefore your Petitioners apply themselves to this Honorable House for their
Opinion of said Demand, and that some reasonable Time may be allowed them to
make their Replication to the said Answer. And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

New York, 30 May, School. Leonard Lewis, Abrah. Gouverneur. Samuel Staats, J. D.
Peyster.


To the Honorable, the House of Representatives of the Province of New York,
convened in General Assembly.
The Replication of Samuel Staats, Johannes d' Peyster, Leonard Lewis and
Abraham Gou^erneur, to the Answer made by Ebenezer Willson, Esquire High Sheriff of
the City and County of New York and County of Orange, to their Petition
presented to this Honorable House.
To the first Paragraph:

HE the said Ebenezer VVillson, High Sheriff, by his Answer pretends, that he
has made a just and true Return o^ the Persons that were truly elected by the
Freeholders and Freemen of this City; Whereby he intimates, that the
Freeholders of the County of Orange were no ways concerned in the choice of
the Represe^tatives, although it does plainly appear by the Indenture, that the
Persons he returned are elected b^ the majority of Voice^ of the Freemen and
Freeholders of the City and both Counties; and how this can agree with his
Majesty's Writ, and Return thereupon, when by this Answer it is averre^, That
^e has returned the Representatives chosen by this City and County, and by
^^^entures of Return it appears, that another County was therein concerned; and
(...) can he make Return of the Voices of those Persons Freeholders of the
County of ^^ange, whose Votes upon the Poll he denied to admit, and yet all
this he pretends to justify by the Statutes of the 8th and 10th year of Henry
the 6 th; which, with humble submission to this House, we must say, seems very
strange, that Mr. Sheriff should pretend that the said Statutes were of Force
in this Province, when it is evident that the same were enacted before any of
these American parts were Dominions of the Crown of England; and that at the
Poll he should deny us the advantages we could pretend unto by a Statute made
in the 7th and 8th year of our Sovereign Lord William, now King of England.
But if we come to consider the said Statutes, it plainly appears, that Mr.
Sheriff ha^ not made a due Return; for the said Statutes positively ave^, That
the Chusers, who should vote for Knights of the Shires, should be dwelling and
resident in the County where they should give their Votes; whereby it is plain,
That all those Persons that live at New-K^^hell* and elsewhere, ought not to
have been admitted to poll on account of their pretended Freedom from the City,
which would greatly diminish the Number of Voices for the Persons he has
returned.

To the Second Paragraph,

That your Replyants do much admire Mr. Sheriff should so far forget himself in
(...) Answer, as to p^et^nd that he left the People of the County of Orange in
dispute, (...) by the Return it appears he allowed of them

To the Third, How faithf^lly Mr. Sheriff has executed his Writ will appear in
the (...).

To the Fourth, Mr. Sheriff pretends to Warrant his Proceedings, as to the
(...) Time and Place of El^ction, by the aforesaid Statutes, whereby no (...)
Power is (...) all given to him, as by an Over of them will appear But by the
(...) of the 7th and 8th year of our Lord the King that now is, it is Enacted,
^^at the Sheriff shall not adjourn the Poll without consent of the Candidates,
which (...) Sheriff did, contrary to our consent, which in thi^ Answer he
pretends to justify.

To the Fifth, As to what Mr. Sheriff pretends to be abused by one o^ (...),
will appear (...) f^^^^lous; but that he gro^ly abused Leo^^^d Lewis, one of
your Petitioners, Candidate and Justice of the Peace in this City, by pulling
him by the Arm, and ^awing his Chair from under him, when he was present, as
(...) Law (...) conceived to ^^ve a right to be, is evident And if no Person
had the Power to (...) ^^th but Mr. Sheriff, it is very strange that he being
often desired, wo^^d (...) admi^ister an Oath to those that came to Poll, as is
directed by the (...) of the ^th and 8th Year of our Lord the King that now is.

To the two last, We do say, as in our Petition. We have averred, That no
Scru^iny ^ould have been bu^ on those that were (...): Li^t by themselves,
(...) the ^ho^e Po^l, seeing every man was sufficientl^ questioned before he
was admitted to gi^e (...) Vote, and that at the Sc^utiny Mr. Sheriff claimed
the whole management, te^^i^g those that opposed him, the^ were only Wit^esses,
and if they did not like it they ^ight go about their Business.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That the Premises may be considered,
and that either those Persons that were set by themselves may be examined by
this House, or otherwise the whole Poll, wherein your Petitioners have the
majority of Voices, that so they may not be deb^^red of their Rig^ts and
Privileges.

New York, 31 May, School. Leonard Lewis, Abrah. Gouverneur. S^^uell St^a^s, J.
D. Peyster,


To the Honorable House of Representatives met and convened in General
Assembly at New York.
The Humble Petition of Ebenezer Willson, Esquire High Sheriff of the City and
County of New York.
Humbly Shows,
THat upon Complaint made to the honor House of an Illegal Return, made by the
Petitioner, of his Majesty's Writ, to him ^i^e^ted for the (...) of four
Representatives to serve in General Assembly for the City and County of
New York, The Petitioner was ordered by the House to answer the said Com^laint,
and also to attend the House, To which he has been Obedient, and has attended
the House with the Witnesses of the said Election, to justify the Fairness and
Legality thereof. And the Petitioner being informed, that the said Complainants
have desired further time for th^^r Reply to the Petitioners Answer,

The Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, That the honorable House will
forthwith examine the Petitioner, and such Evidences as he shall produce to
justify the fairness of the said Election and Return, because he has other
Service of his Majesty's to attend and execute; and also, that several of his
Witnesses are designed out of Town, and their being detained here will be of
great detriment to them And also, that he be discharged from the said Vexatio^s
Complaint. And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

Ebenezer Willson, Sheriff.

To the Honorable House of Representatives for the Province of New York,
Convened in General Assembly.
WE whose Names are here underwritten being Freeholders of the City of
New York, and Witnesses of the due Election of four Representatives chosen for
the s^id City, pursuant to his Majesty's Writ to the Sheriff of the said City
and County directed, do give the honorable House the following Information,

That on the 16th day of this instant Month of May, the Poll of the said
Election was closed by consent of the Candidates of both Parties, and the
Sheriff adjourned till four of the Clock in the afternoon, to scrutiny the
Poll, upon which (...) eight that had polled for the Representatives returned,
were excepted against, and it being then ten of the Clock at Night, were
ordered to appear to answer the Exceptions at six of the Clock the next
morning, by producing Evidences of their being Freemen or Freeholders, and
accordingly Twenty Eight of the said Forty Eight attended, who did produce to
us sufficient Evidence that they were Freemen and Freeholders. Whereupon we
proceeded immediately upon the Scrutiny of those who had voted for Sam^ell
Staats, Leonard Lewis, Johannes d' Peyster and Abraham Gouverneur, and upon
Examination thereof did except against Eighty Eight Persons that we did believe
nor qu^lified to vote, as the Law directs. And about twelve of the Clock on
Tuesday the 17th Instant, we gave Notice, That the said Person so excepted
against might appear and show cause, if any they had, why their Votes ought to
be allowed. Upon which we adjourned ti^l three a Clock in the afternoon; at
which hour we accordingly met, and waited ti^l near six a clock at night, and
only one Person, so excepted against, came to assert his Right of Vote; and
upon examination we were of Opinion, he had none, and therefore was not
a^lowed. Upon which, the Witnesses that were for the said Sam^ell Staatt, etc.
did declare they had Eighty Person^ there ready to produce their Evidence* of
their Right to Vote, which were excepted against upon the Scrutiny, as not
qualified, but if we would not admit the Person that appeared, to pass the
Scrutiny, and allow (...) his Right, they would not (...) any of the rest. We
offered several Arguments to ^e^swade the said Witnesses to admit the said
Persons, so excepted against, to appear upon the Scrutiny, and produce their
Right of Freemen and Freeholders; but they po^itively refused it. Whereupon
we examined the Poll Roll, and found that there were Fi^ty Seven Votes more for
the Persons returned by the Sheriff, to serve as Representatives for this City,
etc. than were for the other Candidates. Upon which J^^n Hatchins Esquire one of
the said Witnesses, prayed the Sheriff to allow them longer time, which we,
granted for three hours, or there-abouts; and the said Hutchins used Argument
to persuade the Witnesses for the said Staats, etc. to bring the Persons that
were objected against, upon the Scrutiny, to produce Evidence of their being
Freemen or Freeholders, etc. which they positively denied. Whereupon he told
them, It was a brea^h of the Trust reposed in them, and that if they did not,
he was obliged to sign the Indentures, for the Election was fair; and
accordingly the said Indentures were filled up and sealed. And afterward, we
offered to the said Witnesses for Dr Staats, etc. That if they would bring the
Persons, we had objected against, upon the Scrutiny, and let them produce
evidence that they were Freemen or Freeholders, etc. we would fit up all
Night, and tear those Indentures, notwithstanding they were already filled up
and sealed, and wanted nothing but signing; which they utterly refined. Upon
which we signed the same, and do believe, in so doing we have acted according
to Law. And the Truth of this Information we are ready to testify upon Oath

Brandt Schuyler, John Hutchins, Jeremiah Tothell, Will. Morris, Derick Vander
Burgh, M. Clarkson, James Spencer.

New York, June 1. School. THen appeared before us Fredrick Phillips, Esquire
Nicholas Bayard and Gabril Minveil, Esqrs of the Council for the Province of
New York, Capt. Brandt Schuyler, Capt. John Hutchins, Capt. Jeremiah Tothill,
Capt William Morris, Mr. Derick Vander Burgh, Mr. Matthew Clarkson, and Mr.
James Spencer, who being Sworn upon the holy Evangelist, declared, That the
matters contained in the above-written information were all True. Sworn before
Us,

Fredrick Phillips, G. Minveille, N. Bayard.




To the Honorable House of Representatives convened in General Assembly for
the Province of New York.
The Humble Petition of Reolof Schenk, Nicholas Stillwell and Gerrit Stoohoff,
in behalf of themselves and of several other Freeholders of Kings County on
Nassaw-Island.
Humbly Shows,
THat Your Honors Petitioners being Informed, that the Sheriff of the said
County had returned the Names of Gerrardus Beekman and Meyndert Coerten as
Representatives for the said County to sit in General Assembly, which Persons
have been attainted and convicted of High Treason, and for which Crimes they
have never, as yet, produced their Pardon, by which means they are rendered
unable to sit in General Assembly, being against the known Laws of England, for
any Person attainted and convicted of such Notorious Crimes to sit in
Parliament, or in any Assembly that has the Power to assist in the Legislative
Power, until the same be either pardoned under the broad Seal of England, and
the same made matter of Record in the Court or Province where the said
Attainder or Conviction was made, or that the said Attainder be reversed by Act
of Parliament. Therefore your Honors Petitioners humbly pray,

That the honorable House would take the same into their serious
Consideration, and cause to purge their House of such unfit Representatives,
according to the Customs and Laws of England, and thereupon order their Speaker
to issue his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown for a Writ for a new Election,
that other Freeholders of untainted Reputations may serve in their Room, and
your Petitioners, in Duty bound, shall ever pray,

New York, 24 th of May, School. Roelof Schenk, Nicholas Stillweli, Gerret
Steothoff.


The Honorable House of Representatives conve^^^ in General Assembly for the
Province of New York.
The Answer of Gerrard Beekman and Meyndert C^erten, upon the Petition
exhibited against them by Roelo^t Schenk* etc. relating to their Qualifications
for being Members of this House, as Representatives for Kings County on
Nassaw-Island.
YOur Respondants humbly Offer, That their most Excellent Majes^ies William and
Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen over England, etc. did by their Royal
Letters Patents under their Great Seal of England, bea^ing date at Westminster
the Twentieth day of February, in the Fifth year of their Reign, absolutely
Pardon and Discharge your Respondants of the Crimes they are charged with in
the said P^tition, a Copy of which said Royal Grant, attested unto by the Mayor
and Two Notary Pulbicks ^f the Port and Town of Dover, in the Kingdom of
England they are ready to produce, together with an Evidence that was
personally present at the Comparing of that Copy with the ^^^ginal: And that
this Copy i^ sufficient to prove the Veracity thereof, e^^dently (...) the late
Governor caused the same to ^e Printed in this Province, (...) can pretend any
ignorance of the passing of said Letters Patents.

And your Respondants (...) say, That some persons Condemned with them for the
said pretended ^rimes, even the chief of them, were ju^tified in that matter
for which they were condemned, as by an Act of Parliament made in the sixth and
seve^^h year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord William, now King of England,
etc. does and may appear.

Your Respond^nts theref^re humbly Pray, That the said Petition may be by this
House r^je^ted, and your Respondants continued in that Service they were by
their County elected unto.

Gerrard Beekman, Meyndert Koerten.


To the Honorable House of Representatives for the Province of New York, now
met and convened. The humble Petition of Content Titus, Jonas Wood, William
Lawrence, Hop^ ^^rpenter, and John Coe.
Humbly Shows;
THat whereas your Petitioners, together with the rest of the Freeholders of
Queens County, on the Island of Nassaw, were by his Majesty's Writ to the
Sheriff of said County directed, summoned to appear at the Town of Jamaica in
said ^ounty, at the public Meeting place of said Town on the tenth of this
Instant Month of May, t^en and the^e to choose Persons Representatives to sit in
General Assembly. In order thereunto we* your Petitioners with the rest of the
Freeholders met, and thought fit since there had heretofore been many
Irregularities perpetrated in the Elections* to Appoint four men to go and
Advise with the Sheriff, what measures (...), it be most properly taken for the
obtaining a Regular Election, which was accordingly done; and said Persons so
appointed Moved to said Sheriff, that they might choose their Representative, by
wri^ing the Names of the Persons to be ch^sen, on P^pers, and to have two men
of each Town, who should be Chosen by the Inhabitants of said Town, which
^ersons should search over said Papers, as also enquire into the sufficiency of
the (...) voting, by which means there might be a regular Election, and a just
R^turn (...). To which Reasonable Propositions the said Sheriff Answered, That
it was his (...) to appoint men for making said search; and as for the c^^^ing
by Papers, it was contrary to my Lords Order. Upon which the said Sheriff did
appoint ten men, two of a Town to enquire into the abovesaid affair; of which
Number your Petitioners were. After which the Sheriff read his Writ, and
immediately the Inhabitants drew off to the East, crying out, Jackson and Coe,
and others Coe Only; which brought all into a confusion: Upon which there was a
Regular Pole desired, and denied by the Sheriff. Whereupon a great Number of
the Inhabitants absented themselves from said place, and drew up a protest
against their Irregular Proceedings; which said protest was sent and delivered
unto said Sheriff; who afterward Acted in said fair according as he himself
thought fit, Notwithstanding said Protest. All which, we your Pe^itioners, in
the behalf of our selves and others his Majesty's faithful Subjects, commit to
your Honors serious Consideration, humbly De^iring that there may be such
measures taken for Redressing said Agrievance as your Honors in your great
Wisdom shall see meet and convenient. And your Honors Petitioners shall ever
be in all Duty bound to pray.

Hope Carpenter, John Coe. Content Titus, The mark of I Jonas Wood, William
Lawrence,


Province New York, sc. To the Honorable House of Representatives convened in
General Assembly, The humble Answer of John Harrison, High Sheriff of Queens
County.
YOur Honors Answerer humbly conceives, That for any thing that is contained
in the Clamorous Suggestions of the Petitioners, he cannot be obliged to
answer, But in humbl^ Obedience unto your Honors Summons, he presumes to lay
before your Honors, That he could not be obliged by Law or Custom to gratify
the Unlawful Requests of the Petitioners, by taking the Names of the Persons to
be chosen, by writing the Names on Paper, being commanded by his Majesty's Writ
to return the Persons chosen Representatives by the majority of Voices, which
Rule I followed, and am informed, is the only method that is practiced in
England, and in all his Majesty's Plantations that are immediately under the
Government of the Crown; so that I am the first Sheriff that ever was
complained of for following the Precep^ of my Writ.

The next thing suggested by the Petitioners, That they desired a regular Poll,
which I denied. They no sooner desired a Poll, but I yielded to it, as the
Witnesses returned with the Writ, can testify. And by the Poll there was Two
Hundred Eighty Three Electors for Capt. Jackson, Two hundred and eighty for
Capt. Whitehead, and only Two hundred and fifteen for John Coe; so that
according to the Tenor of his Majesty's Writ to me directed, I returned Capt.
Jackson and Capt. Whitehead, as being elected by the majority of Voices of the
Freeholders of my Baylwick, as will appear by the Oaths of Capt Moor, Capt.
Holler, Judge Hicks, John Tredwell, Justice White, Isaac Doughty, Nathaniel
Pearsall, Jonathan Smith, William Fowler, who are now attending to justify the
same.

Therefore your Honors Answerer prays, That he may be discharged from this
Clamorous and Vexatious Suggestions of the Petitioners, with a reasonable
allow^nce for his and his Witnesses Charges, which is submitted by

Your Honors Respondant, John Harrison.

Uent. Coll. Thomas Hicks, Capt. Samuel Moor, Capt. William Hallet, John
Tred^ell, Edward White, Isaac Doughty, Nath. Pears^l, Jonathan Smit^ and Will.
Fowler being duly Sworn upon the holy Evangelists, do depose and Declare, That
at the last E^ection of Representatives for Queens County on Nassaw-Island, the
10th Instant, they were chosen by the Sheriff of the County to be Witnesses for
the Election of Representatives, and do declare, That at said Election several
Persons were put up by the Freeholders then present. Whereupon a Poll was
desired by some of the Parties, which the Sheriff willingly did agree unto; and
the said Poll being duly taken in the presence of said Witnesses, upon the
closure it appeared that Major John Jackson and Capt. Daniel Whitehead were by
the majority of the Voices of said Freeholders elected to be the
Representatives for said County.

Tho. Hicks, Isaac Daughty, Nathaniel Pearsal, Samuel Moor, William Hallet,
John Tredwell, Edward White, Jonathan Smith, William Fowler.

SWorn before me by Thomas Hicks, Samuel Moor, William Hallet, John Tredwell,
Edward White, Isaac Daughty, Jonathan Smith and William Fowler. And Nath.
Pearsall declared in the Presence of God to the Truth of the above Deposition,
upon the Penalty of Perjury.

N. BAYARD.



To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Capt. General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, and the Territories depending
thereon in America, etc.
The Humble Complaint of Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John Shute, in behalf of
the selves, and others, Freeholders of the County of Westchester, in his
Majesty's Province aforesaid.
Most Humbly Shows,
THat whereas your Excellency has been pleased by your Proclamation to declare
That his Majesty's good Subjects of this Province of New York should have a
Free (...) of sit Persons to represent them in General Assembly, according to
the Rights and Privileges of the English Nation, (For which we give your
Excellency our most h^^ble and hearty Thanks) yet contrary to your Excellencys
said Proclamation, Mr. Benjamin Collier, High Sheriff of the County of
Westchester (When the Freeholders of the said County were met at the Town of
VVestchester to make choice of two Persons to represent the said County being
the fifth of this Instant (Month of May, School. did admit sundry Persons that
were not Freeholders, or duly qualified by Law, to vote at the said Election,
as your Excellency's Complainants suppose, they refusing to give us
satisfaction that they had Free-holdes to qualify them, although requested by
^s to do so) Who contrary to the Rights and Privileges of his Majesty's
^ubjects used many A^^ificies to disturb and hinder the order and freedom of
their choice, whereby they were put into Confusion, not knowing how to proceed.
And while they endeavored to put themselves (...) ^e^hod the said Sheriff,
before they had sufficient time to deliver the votes of all such as were
qualified to give them, closed the Election (...) the^ ^he time limited by
Law, whereby above fifty of the Freeholders were (...) giving in their Votes,
contrary to the Freedom of such Elections, and (...) Right^ and Privileges of
his Majesty's Subjects. Whereupon your Complainants (...) Publick^ly against
such Illegal Proceedings at the time and place of Election, (...) against the
Choice of Mr. John Drake and Mr. Joseph Purdy, (...) to be duly Elected, as
not chosen according to Law. And know^^^ (...) Proceedings are contrary to the
Inclinations of our most gracious ^overaign Lord, King William, and also of
your Excellency, we humbly present this ou^ Complaint, Imploring your
Excellencies Direction how to Proceed for Redress of so great a Grievance.

Josiah Hunt, John Shute, Henry Fowler.

By His Excellency, etc.
THE Consideration of the within Petition is referred to the Gentlemen of the
Assembly. May the 18 th, School.

BELLOMONT.



To the Honorable House of Representatives for the Province of New York,
Convened in General Assembly.
The Answer of Benjamin Coll^er, Esquire High Sheriff of the County of Westchester,
to the Unjust and Vexations Complaint of Josiah Hunt, Henry Fowler and John
Shute, etc.
IN Obedience to his Majesty's Writ to me directed, for the Election of two
Representatives to serve for the said County in General Assembly, I gave
public Notice, according to usual Method, That on the fifth Day of May last,
was the time appointed by me for the said Election* and accordingly at the
place appointed the Freeholders appeared, and after I had published his
Majesty's Writ at the time appointed, I desired them to proceed in their
Choice. Whereupon Capt. John Drake and Mr. Joseph Pur^y, Substantial
Freeholders of the said County, were named as Candidates, and no other Person
whatsoever was put up, so that the Election was Nimine Contradicente. It Is
true, some of the Freeholders of said County cried out, We protest against
the Election, but offered no Reason why, neither, as is already said, did they
name any other Candidate, neither were they a third part of the Freeholders
there met together to make the said Election; so that in my humble Opinion the
Representatives returned by me to serve in G^neral Assembly, were fairly and
duly elected, and accordingly the Witnesses appointed to see that the Election
was fair, signed the Indentures.

And whereas the said Complainants have declared, That several Persons that
voted for the said Representatives returned, were not Freeholders of the said
County; which is a Columnious Assertion, as will appear by the Names of the
Freeholders that made the said Election. That any Artifices were used to
disturb and hinder the Freedom of the Choice, is wholly erroneous And the time
appointed for the said Election was at ten of the Clock in the Fore-noon of the
said 5 th day of May, at which hour the Freeholders of the said County met
upon the Green (the place appointed) and elected the said Persons returned; and
that there might be no dispute for want of time, it was about 4 or 5 a Clock in
the afternoon before the Indentures of the said Return were signed. So that
that Assertion of the said Josiah H^nt, etc. in their Petition alleged, is
nothing but Vexatious. So that I am humbly of Opinion, I have made a due Return
of his Majesty's Writ, and acted nothing in the said Election but what is
according to Law. And that I, with the Witnesses of the said Election, are
ready to testify the Truth of this Answer upon Oath. Therefore I humbly desire
the honorable House, That I may ^e dismissed from the said Contumelious and
Vexatious Complaint.

Ben. Collier, Sheriff.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, School.


