VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for His Majesty's Province of New York
in America.
Die Martis A. M. 21 Mart. School.
THis Day all the Members elected and chosen to serve in General Assembly for
this Province, except the Members chose for the County of Suffolk, being met,
according to Adjournment, his Excellency sent Coll William Smith and Coll.
Abraham D' Peyster, and the Clerk of the Crown, with a Dedimus Potestatem, to
swear the said Members, and see that they signed the Test and Association,
directed according to Law, which was done accordingly.

Then the said Members sent the Clerk of the House to wait on his Lordship to
know his further pleasure for his Majesty's Service. Mr. Cosens, Clerk of the
Council, brought a Message from his Excellency and Council, requiring them to
proceed to choose their Speaker, and when they had so done, they should then
attend the Governor and Council, with him, who waited for them. And thereupon
the House did proceed on the said Message, and unanimously did choose James
Graham, Esquire for their Speaker, and conducted him to, and placed him in the
Chair acco^dingly

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker, in behalf of the House, demand their former Rights
and Privileges.

(...) their Members, (...) may be arrested or molested during the Session.
That they may have freedom of access to your Excellency's Person, when occasion
offers That they may have liberty of Speech, and a favorable Construction upon
all Debates that may arise amongst them. That in all Mis-understandings which
may happen or arise between the Council and this House, upon any subject matter
which shall be concluded by them, that then in such case a Committee of the
Council may be appointed to confer with the Committee of this House for the
adjusting and reconciling all such Differences; and that these their Requests
may be approved by his Excellency and Council, and entered in the Council Books
accordingly.

Then the Speaker left the Chair, and went with the whole House to wait upon
his Excellency and Council, who presented their said Speaker to his Excellency
for his approbation.

The Choice of the Speaker being approved by his Excellency, the Speaker
demanded the above Privileges, which were granted. Afterward they returned to
the House and the Speaker reassumed the Chair, and acquainted this House, that
^^^ording to their Order they had attended his Excellency in Council, who
approved o^ their Speaker, and granted their Privileges, as desired; and at
the same time his Excellency made his Speech unto the General Assembly there
convened; which Speech his Excellency was pleased to give unto him, which he
ordered to be read in the House. On which the House ordered, That the unanimous
Thanks of this House be given unto his Excellency for (...) kind, favorable
and affectionate Speech.

Ordered, That his Excellency's Speech, and the Proceedings of this Day be
forthwith printed. Then the House adjourned till to morrow 9 a clock in the
Morning.

His Excellency's Speech to the General Assembly.
Gentlemen;
THere had been no occasion for calling you at this time, if the last Assembly
had answered the good ends I proposed to my self for the Kings Service, and
that of the Province. But having sat a whole Month and done no business, I
thought it advisable to Dissolve them; and the rather, because there were
great Heats and Divisions among them, which I found Impracticable for me to
compose and put an end to.

You need not be told to what a degree Faction and Sedition have taken Root in
this Town, it is a thing so generally known. And there has been the utmost
Industry used by some ill Men to spread the Infection all over the Province,
and to alienate the Affections of the People by false Suggestions and Notions
of their Independance from the Crown of England, and that it is a Violence and
Wrong done 'em that England should put a Limitation on their Trade. How
extravagant and wild is this Notion; does not England put a Restriction on its
own Trade, in some Cases? And as for Pyracy, which some People are so fond of
here, it is held in such Abomination as not to be known or practiced there.
People must not be so deceived, this Province is subject to the Crown of
England; and it is its greatest Glory and Happiness that it is so. For by that
means the People are entitled to the Protection of the Crown, and are under
the best Constitution of Laws, and that in fellowship with the best and bravest
People in the World, the People of England; and they must be obedient to
English Laws, it is their Duty and Interest so to be. And the Angry Men of
New York must not expect from me that Connivance at their ill Practices that
they were accustomed to some years before my coming to the Government: The Oath
of a Governor, the Laws of England, and the King's Instructions, which are
made to square with the Laws, are sacred Ties and Obligations with me.

I have observed great Marks of Irreligion and Immorality in this place, and I
take it to proceed from a long Habit of breaking the Laws, which has introduced
Lisentious and Dissolute Living: And nothing can rectify and reform our Lives
and Manners but Religion. Religion is of that admirable frame and temper, it
inflames us with a true Devotion to our great Maker, which is our most
reasonable Service. Then it fits us for all the ends of Civil Society, by
uniting our Minds, Affections and Interests; it makes us good Men: And good Men
will of course be good Friends, good Neighbors good Subjects; and good
Patriots, that is, Lovers of their Country, and obedient to its Laws.

Now that I have stated to you the unhappy Circumstances we are in by the
contrivance of ill Men. I shall proceed to recommend to your Thoughts a few
things which are necessary for the Support and Peace of the Government, and
will be a manifestation of your Duty and Affection to the KING.

I therefore Propose to you Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, the
Continuance of the present Revenue (which will otherwise shortly expire) for
what Number of Years you shall think fit. I found the Government very
considerably indebted when I came to it, and it cannot be expected that Debt
should be much lessened in so short a time as I have been here: And I could
wish you would put the Government on a clear foot, by finding a way to
discharge that Debt. The Public Accounts I have ordered to be prepared for
you, with an estimate of the Debts of the Government. I promise you I will be
as good a Husband of your Money as it is possible for me to be: and when it is
either mis-apply'd or mis-mannag'd by my means, I shall not take it amiss if
you put me in mind of my want of Care therein. To induce you to the continuance
of the Revenue to the Crown, I cannot set before your Eye a better Example than
that of the great and glorious People of England, who out of a sense of the
inestimable Advantages they were restored to by the King, freely, and without
the least murmuring, supported him in a long and expensive War, well knowing he
bravely fought for the Liberties of all the Christian World, and that they had
as great a share as any others in that Quarrel; wherein also his Majesty often
ventured his Royal Person with the meanest Soldier in his Armies. Beside, the
King considering this Province as a Barrier between the French of Canada, and
his other Plantations, and therefore most exposed, was pleased to take a
peculiar Care of you, having been at great Expense this last War, in paying for
four Hundred Men, and maintaining a Man of War for your Defense, and constantly
supplying you with Stores of War. These are such Obligations as I hope you will
not only remember in the manner I have now recommended, but also with your
earnest Prayers to God for his Majesty's long Life and prosperous Reign over you

The next thing I recommend to you, is the Reconciling of People and Parties,
which will be a glorious Work, and will, I doubt not, be easily accomplished by
your prudent Care. You all know the Mischiefs, b^th public and private, that
Feuds and Divisions bring on a People or Nation: they cause an Interruption in
Trade, by the Discord they make in private Families and Friendships: and next
to a Civil War, it is the most Unhappy state and Condition a Country can be in.
I will heartily join with you in such Methods as shall be thought advisable
for the procurement of a through Reconciliation of Parties. And that you may
induce others to be peaceably and charitably minded, I earnestly recommend to
you, Gentlemen Representatives, that you manage your Debates and Proceedings
in your House with that Calmness and Moderation that becomes the Prudence of
Men, that are under such a Trust from their Country. The pre^ent Conjuncture
requires it at your hands; The King will thank you, the World will applaud you
for it, and God will bless and prosper you and your Affairs.

I mu^t acquaint you with the Circumstances of our five Nations of Indians,
with whom I had a Conference this last Summer at Albany* and then fixed their
Friendship and Fidelity to the Crown by extraordinary Presents and kind Usage;
and they parted with me in all the good Humor imaginable. But I am lately
advised they are grown very uneasy and dissatisfied at the French Governor of
Canada's detaining some of their Friends Prisoners, notwithstanding the late
Treaty of Peace, which is a very unfair Practice in that Governor. You shall
have all the Memorials and Proceedings with our Indians laid before you that
you may advise me what measures to take for preserving them firm to the
Interest of the Crown and this Province, which is a thing of very great
consequence, and deserves as much as any thing whatsoever to be the subject of
your Thoughts and Determination

I am ordered by the Kings Instructions to prepare and offer you 2 or 3 Bills
for your passing, which will be for the Service of the Province. And such other
Bills as you shall judge proper to offer me for securing your Liberties, and
advancing your Trade, I promise you my assent to their passing into Laws,
provided they be not Repugnant to the Laws and Interest of England.

Die Mercurij A. M. 22 Mart. School.
The House met according to adjournment. The Speaker ordered the Roll of the
House to be called over, which was accordingly done, and there was found Henry
Pierson and Matthew Howell, returned to serve for the County of Suffolk, absent.

Ordered, That Mr. Sp^aker issue out his Warrant to require the Members elected
for the County of Suffolk, to attend the Service of this House with all speed.

The Speaker ordered his Excellency's Speech to be read, which was read
accordingly. Then he proposed what part of his Excellencys Speech should fall
under the consideration of this House first. Thereupon it was moved, That in
regard that this House was sensible of the great advantages that does attend
this Province, by having so glorious a Prince as his Majesty to reign over us,
that in acknowledgment of so great a blessing, the settlement of the Revenue
should fall first under the consideration of this House. It was also moved,
that the consideration of the Reconciling of Parties may be first under the
consideration of this House Whereupon the Speaker put the Question, Whether the
settlement of the Revenue on his Majesty, or the Reconciling of Parties should
fall first under the consideration of the House? And it was carried by the
Majority of Votes, That the Revenue, etc. should first fall under the
Consideration of the House.

Ordered, That the House resolve it self into a grand committee of the whole
House, to take the Settlement of the Revenue, etc. into their present
Consideration. Whereupon the Speaker left the Chair.

The House being resolved into a Committee of the whole House, to take under
their Consideration the settlement of the Revenue upon his Majesty, for
defraying the necessary Charge of the Government, did elect Abra. Gouverneur to
be their Chairman.

The Speaker having re-assum'd the Chair, Abra Gouverneur, Chairman of the
grand Committee of the whole House, appointed to take the Settlement of the
Revenue, etc. into their Consideration, brought his Report, which was read in
these words following, VIZ.

Resolved, That they have made some progress in that matter, but come to no
Conclusion, and therefore desire leave of this House, that the said Committee
may sit again at another time, to consider further of that Business. Abra.
Gouverneur.

Whereupon it is ordered, That all other business shall be laid aside, and that
this House will Resolve themselves into a grand Committee of the whole House to
morrow Morning 9 of the Clock, to take the settlement of the Revenue, etc. into
their further Consideration.

The Summons for Lieut. Coll. Henry Pierson and Major Matthew Howell
WHereas Henry Pierson and Matthew Howell, returned Representatives for the
County of Suffolk, have neglected their Duty to their County, by absenting
themselves from the Service of this House convened in General Assembly. It is
therefore ordered that the Speaker do issue his Warrant for their immediate
Attendance at the House of Representatives, for the Discharge of the Trust
reposed in them by their County. And hereof they are not to fail.

By order of the House of Representatives, James Graham, Speaker.

GEntlemen, The House being sensible of your Neglect, in not attending the
Service of your County in General Assembly, according to the Tenure of his
Majesty's Writ, have ordered me to require your immediate Attendance at the
House of Representatives, for the Discharge of that Trust reposed in you, (...)
you will answer the contrary at your Peril.

By order of the House of Representatives, James Graham, Speaker.

Die Jovis 9 ho. A. M. 23 Mart. School.
This day the House met according to adjournment, and the Roll of the House
being called over, none of the Members were absent but the two Members returned
for Suffolk County.

The House being resolved into a Committee of the whole House, to take under
their Consideration the settlement of the Revenue upon his Majesty, for
defraying the necessary Charge of the Government, the Speaker left the Chair;
and after some Debate, the Speaker reassumed the Chair. Abraham Gouverneur,
Chairman of the grand Committee aforesaid, brought his Report, which was read
in these words following.

Resolved, That a Revenue, such as the House shall think fit, be settled on his
Majesty for six years, to commence at the expiration of the present Act of
Revenue.

Abrah. Gouverneur, Chairman.



Upon reading the Report, it was moved, that it might be re-committed; and it
was also moved, that the said Report might be approved by the House. Whereupon
the Speaker put the Question, Whether the said Report should be re-committed or
approved by the House? And it was carried by the Majority of Votes, That the
said Report should be approved, and the House does approve thereof accordingly.

A Message from his Excellency and Council brought by Coll. William Smith and
Coll. Abraham D' Peyster, was read, and the consideration thereof was referred
till another time.

At a Council held at Fort William Henry this 22th day of March, School. Present
his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, etc. Capt. John Nanfan, Lieut.
Governor, Steph. Cortlandt, Esqr. William Smith, Esqr. Abra. D' Peyster, Esqr.
Samuel Staats, Esqr. Robert Walters. Esqr.

HIs Excellency having been formerly informed by several hands, That there was
great Quantities of Goods run into Oyster-bay, and other places on
Nassaw-Island, which paid no Customs to his Majesty, did therefore constitute
and appoint John Townsend of Oyster-bay to be Surveyor and Searcher of his
Majesty's Customs in the Towns of Oyster-bay, Huntington and Masketo Cove in
the said Island, and that by Commission under his Excellency's Hand and Seal at
Arms, bearing date the 7th day of this i^stant March, etc. with a Sallary of 30
l. per Annum. And the said John Townsend appearing this day before his
Excellency and the Council, did declare, That he has met with such
Discouragement by the Abuses and Menaces of the Inhabitants of the said
Oyster-bay, that he dares not execute the said Office; and therefore desires to
be discharged from the same, and accordingly has surrendered up his Commission.
His Excellency and Council are of Opinion, That the aforesaid Complaint and
Surrender ought to be laid before the Assembly, and recommended to them, that
some Course may be taken to prevent Unlawful Importations and Exportations
there, and in all other places in this Province. And Coll. William Smith and
Coll. Abraham d' Peyster are desired by this board to go to the Assembly with
this Minit.

By Order of Council, B. Cosens, Cl. Concilij.



The Petition of Jacobas van Cortlands, Thomas Wenham, Johannes Kapp and Rip
van Dam, Candidates in the late Election for the City and County of New York
was read.

Ordered, That the Representatives for Kings County, Queens County,
VVestchester County, Richmond County, Orange County, and the City and County of
Albany be a Committee to examine the Allegations of the said Petition, and that
the Sheriff be served with a Copy of the said Petition, and attend the said
Committee: And ordered, that none of the Members for the City and County of New
York shall sit or vote in this House until the said Election be determined; and
that the said Committee do ^t this afternoon (...) 3 of the Clock. Then the
House adjourned till 9 a clock to morrow Morning.

Die Veneris 9 ho. A M 24 Mart. 1699
The House met this day according to adjournment, and the Speaker taking the
Chair, the Chairman for the Committee for examining the Election and Return of
the Members for the City and County of New York, delivered the Resolve of the
said Committee, which was in the words following, viz.

Resolved, That upon Reading the Petition of the Gentlemen abovenamed, and the
Sheriffs answer thereto, and hearing the Parties, it is concluded by the
Committee, That the Return of Representatives for the City and County of
New York, made by the Sheriff, is good, and according to Law.

Abrah. Gouverneur, Chairman.



Ordered, That the Petition be dismissed. Which was approved, and ordered that
the Members returned by the Sheriff of New York, for the City and County of
New York, take their places accordingly.

Ordered, That the Petition of Jeremiah Tothill, Ebenezer Willson, Thomas
(...), Robert Lurti^g and Adolph ^hillips; and the Petition of Denyse
T^e^nisse, Samuel Bayard, Johannes Cortl^nd^ and John Vanse^t, complaining of
undue Elections, be referred to the Committee of Elections.

Ordered, That the Sh^riff be served with the Copy of their Petition.

The Committee of Elections did choose Johannes a' Peyster Chair^man, and then
they proceeded upon the Examinati^n of the Petition of Jer. Tothell, Eb^nezer
VV^^son, Tho. B^rrough^, Robert Larting and Adolph P^^lli^s. And the matter
therein (...) against the She^iff being adjudg'd frivolous, are of Opinion,
that it will be a dela^ to the ^usiness of this House, as well as an
unnecessary Charge, ^o summons him to ^ttend at a certain day, he having
discharged his Duty, according to the tenor of his Writ. And as to the other
matters alleged, the said Abraham Gouverneur acknowledging, that he was of
foreign (...), but producing a Cirtificate under the hand and seal of the
Mayor, as well as by the Oathe^ of D^. Kyrtbyle and Mr. B^eaker, it does appea^
that he was actually in this Province i^ the Year 16^3 before and at the time
of the Act of Assembly for Naturalizing a^ such as were of f^^reign Birth, was
passed, in the time of Coll. Dungons Government, and therefore are of Op^nion,
that he has the benefit of the said Law, and is naturalized in the same manner
as ^ll the rest in this Province, who have the benefit of the same Law. And as
to his Conviction of Murder, the said Gouverneur having produced a copy of his
Majesty's Pardon, as well as ^n Act of Pa^liament for the reversing the
Judgments, Convictions and Attaintures of Treason and Felony, when he had been
attainted, we are also of Opinion, tha^ the same are authentic and sufficient
to reverse the s^id Ju^gments and Convictment of Murder, and therefore
qualified by the Law to be returned a Member to sit in this House, and that he
ought to take his place as such accordingly.

By order of the Committee of Elections, Jo d' Peyster, Chairman.



Ordered, That the Petition be (...), and th^^ M. A Gouverneur take his place
accordingly. Then the House adjourned until Monday next 2 a Clock in the
aft^r-noon.

An Order for John d' Pew, High Sheriff of Richmond County.

WHereas Denis Theunisse, Samuel Bayard, Johannes Cortland and John Vensan^
have preferred a Petition to the ^onourable House o^ Representatives for the
Province of New York, complaining therein of an Vnd^e Election and unfair
Return of Persons to sit in the Ass^mbly, made by John de Pew, Esquire High Sheriff
of the County o^ Richmond, It is ordered that Johanne^ De Peyester, Chairman
of the Committee for Elections, do summon, the said John de Pew to attend the
said Committee, tha^ he have a Copy of the said Petition* And you the said John
de Pew are hereby summoned to attend the said Committee on Tuesday next in the
City of New-Y^rk accordingly. And hereof you are not ^o sail.

By Order of the Committee of Elections, Jo. De Peyster, Chairman



Die Luna, 2 ho. P. M. 27 Mart. 1699.
This day the House met according to ^djournment* Ordered, That Mr Lewis, Major
Jack o^, M^ Gouverneur, M^. Rans^a^r, Mr. S^^ermerhorne and Mr. Hunt be a
Committe^ to ex^^ine the Books, and Records, and Papers relating to the House
of Representatives since they were convened in General Assembly, and make
Report thereof to the House to morrow Morning. The House adjourn^d till 10 a
clock to morrow Morning.

Die Martis 10 ho. A. M. 28 Mart. 1699
The House ^^et according to adjournment. Abraham Gouverneur, Chairman of the
Committee to examine the Books and Records, etc. read his Report to the House,
which was approved.

Ordere^, That the Report of the Committee to examine the Inventory of the
Books and Reco^ds, be entered, and that the Clerk require of Mr Cosens, the
former Clerk, the Books that are wanting, viz. a Journal of the year 1697 and
98. a printed Book of Laws from 1691 to 97. and Coll. Co^tland's Book of Taxes.

Resolved, They do find all the Books and Paper^ from the beginning of Coll.
Slaughters ^^vernment, mentioned in the Inventory h^^^unto ann^xed, except a
Journal Book of the Year (...)


