The Remonstrance of several of the Representatives for several Counties of the
Province of New York being Members of the present Assembly. Offered to the
Consideration of the House.
THat the Remonstrants are fairly and legally chosen and returned as
Representatives of their Country, without any dispute about their Elections

That by the false and unjust Returns of some Sheriffs, several who at present
sit as Members of the House) have been petitioned against, that their Elections
and Returns may be fairly tried and determined.

That contrary to all Law, Justice, and the constant Practice of all English
Assemblies, the said disputed Members have sat in the House, and by their
Number (joined with some few others) have made the greater Vote in the House,
and thereh have constituted Orders how their own disputed Elections should be
tried. By which Orders they have prevented all Complainants from being heard,
have unjustly excluded several legal Sworn Members, without hearing their
Defense, and have arbitrarily obtruded themselves upon the House.

That the Insolence of the present Speaker, Mr. Phillip French has been so
great, that (being chosen Speaker by Votes of the disputed Members) during the
Dispute about his own Election, (the Complainants being absent and unheard) he
continued in the House, argued and debated his own Cause, with Threats, Menaces
and Reproachful Language to the Representatives, and arbitrarily himself put
the Question about the justness of the Sheriffs Return of himself.

By which Proceedings these Remonstrants do apprehend, that the legal Rights
and Privileges of Assemblies are overturned and destroyed. Nor can they with
Honor, Conscience, or a just Discharge of the Trust reposed in them by their
Country, sit, join or act with these disputed Members, until they fairly submit
the hearing of the said Disputes before his Excellency, the Earl of Bellomont
and Council, and have their Judgment on the matter, to which these Remonstrants
will humbly submit.

June 8. School. Reyer Schermerhorne, Jan Jansen Bleeker, Cornelis Snebernigh,
Jan Woglom, Cornelis van Brunt, Thomas Morgan.


To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief, and Vice Admiral of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. and the
Honorable Council of the same.
The Humble Petition of several of the Representatives for several Counties of
this Province, being Members of the present Assembly.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioners did this day offer the annexed Remonstrance to the
Consideration of the House of Representatives, but by the Violence of the
Speaker, and the Votes of him and those others unjustly returned by the
Sheriffs, all Relief and Satisfaction was denied to be given to your
Petitioners, and the said Remonstrance was rejected; on which your Petitioners
did withdraw themselves, resolving not to sit and act, and betray the
Liberties of the People with such Persons whose Guilt makes them afraid of a
fair Scrutiny before your Excellency and Council; and your Petitioners being
six in Number, and three other Members of the House giving their Votes, That
the said Remonstrance should not be rejected, there are (with the said unjustly
returned Members) but Ten Persons against Nine, which ten Persons, as we are
well informed (to justify themselves) design to imprison your Petitioners, and
to act without them, against the Rules of Law and Reason, and contrary to the
Rights of the People, whom your Petitioners do represent.

Your Petitioners do therefore humbly pray your Excellency, who has been an
eminent Sufferer for your Zeal for the Laws and Liberties of England, that your
Petitioners may be protected from imprisonment by the Speaker and other
Members, who have no just Right to sit or be Members of the House, but who have
made themselves a major-Vote by the greatest Violence and Injustice; and that
you would please, since the said sitting Members will not submit their Cause
(as is desired in the said Remonstrance) to the Determination of your
Excellency and Council, to Dissolve the said Assembly, and not permit Laws to
be passed by them, to oblige the several Counties who have no Representatives
amongst them, and who cannot in Honor, Conscience and Justice join with such
who Legally represent nothing but the Corruption of the Sheriffs, made in the
late male Administration of Government, by which they were returned Members,
and their own Malice and Artifice since admitted into the House; and your
Petitioners humbly submit themselves and their Cause to the Determination of
your Excellency and Council, before whom they are ready to appear to justify
the Respect, Honor and Obedience they will always pay to your Excellency and
Government, and to demonstrate the Reasonableness of these their Proceedings.
And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc

New York, June 9. School. Jan Woglom, Cornelis van Brunt, Thomas Morgan Reyer
Schermerhoorn, Jan Jansen Bleeker, Cornelis Snebernigh.


To the Honorable House of Representatives for the Province of New York.
WE the Representatives of three Counties, nigh half of the eight Counties of
this Government, being indisputably elected and Returned, and sworn to serve in
this present Assembly, being fully persuaded of our own knowledge, Tat the
Sheriff of New York has, expressly contrary to his Oath and Duty, made a Return
under his Hand and Seal, of four Members for the City and County of N. York,
and County of Orange, of which the Speaker, Mr. Phillip French is one; the
falseness of which Return appears under the hand of the said Sheriff in his
Petition to the House, and the Oaths of several other Persons, on which we
have formerly made a Remonstrance to this House, which was rejected. Whereupon
we Petitioned his Excellency and Council, whose Advice to the House, to
reconcile our Differences, and give Satisfaction, was likewise absolutely
rejected. We do therefore in behalf of the Counties we represent, Protest
against all Proceedings that shall be made by this House, as null and void,
until the Members returned for the City and County of New York, and County of
Orange, submit their Elections and Return to a fair, judicial and reasonable
Trial of the House, that they withdraw during the same, all which hitherto
they have violently refused to do. Given under our Hands the 14 th of June, in
the tenth year of his Majesty's Reign, School.

Reyer Schermerhoorn, Cornelis Snebernigh, Jan Woglom, Cornelis van Brunt,
Thomas Morgan, Jan Jansen Bleeker.


To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General, Governor in
chief, and Vice Admiral of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. and the
Honorable Council of the same.
The Humble Protestation and Declaration of several of the Members of the
present Assembly of New York.
WHereas we have made an humble Petition to your Lordship and Council, setting
forth a Remonstrance we had made to the House of Representatives, which they
had rejected, and therefore praying we might be heard, or otherwise that the
present Assembly might be Dissolved, the major Vote of which being made by the
Unjust Returns of corrupt Sheriffs. On which Petition your Lordship did admit
us, with the House together, into your Presence, and did, with great Piety and
Justice, exhort us to go together and reconcile our Differences, and give and
receive Satisfaction, that his Majesty's Service, and the good of the Country
might be promoted. Accordingly we went to the House, and desired Mr. Speaker
that we might have some Satisfaction given us, in relation to our Remonstrance
and Petition, which he with great Violence denied, and would not permit our
Petition to your Lordship to be read, but instead thereof he himself, and
others with him, who are not chosen by the People, ^ave us reproachful
threatening Language, telling, We deserved to be Hanged if we were in England,
that our Counselors were Villians and Rogues. On which we did again withdraw
our selves, being resolved never to betrary our Country (whom we indisputably
represent by joining and acting with such Persons who represent none but
themselves, and have so apparently destroyed all the Rights and Liberties of
the People. And as we have made our Protests to the House against their
Proceedings, So we crave leave to assure your Lordship and Council of our
Inviolable Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty King William, (for whose sake two
Members of this present Assembly have been excluded the House, as attainted of
Treason for most early appearing in the late happy Revolution, for which they
have obtained his Majesty's Gracious Pardon) That with a cheerful and ready
Obedience to your Lordships Government, under which we are assured our English
Constitutions shall not be undermined by Wicked Men.

And we lastly crave leave to make this our Protest to your Lordship and
Council, (in behalf of the Counties we represent against all manner of Acts and
things that shall be concluded on or done by those pretended Members now
sitting, that our Country may not be obliged to obey Laws made by those who are
not chosen by the Country, but have, since their sitting, violently overrun
all common Decency and Order, as well as the Rights and Liberties of the
People. All which is humbly submitted to your Excellency and Council, by

Their Countries, and your Lordships and Council's Most Obedient and most
Faithful humble Servants, Reyer Schermerhoorn, Cornelis Snebernigh, Jan Woglom,
Cornelis van Brunt, Thomas Morgon, Jan Jansen Bleeker,

New York, June 14. School.
At a Council held at New York the 14th of June, School. Present His Excellency
Richard Earl of Bellomont, etc. Frederick Phillips, Esqr. Nicholas Bayard,
Esqr. William Smith, Esqr. Gabriel Minveille, Esqr. Thomas Willet, Esqr.

HIs Excellency did acquaint the Council, that the Heats and Annimosities in
the Assembly were so great that they did altogether obstruct the Kings Service,
that the matter is unpresidented, and no means can be found effectual to
reconcile the Differences; and his Majesty having entrusted him with the
Prerogative of Adjourning, Proroguing and Dissolving of Assemblies, he must now
make use of that Authority, and did declare his Resolution to Dissolve the
Assembly. And ordered to be read a Protestation of the six Remonstrators, in
behalf of the Counties they represent, against all Laws that may be made.

The Clerk of the Council was sent to call the Assembly. The Speaker and House
being present, his Excellency said, Gentlemen of the Assembly,
You have now sat a whole Month, without any Interruption by me, and have
done nothing either for the Service of his Majesty or the good of your Country,
except the Address to his Majesty, for which I thank you. I am sorry your
Carriage since has been so contrary thereto, that it is absolutely necessary
for the Kings Service, and the Safety and Peace of the Government that you
should be Dissolved. Your Proceedings have been so Unwarrantable, wholly
tending to Strife and Division, and indeed Disloyal to his Majesty and his
Laws, and Destructive to the Rights and Liberties of the People, that I do
think fit to Dissolve this present Assembly, and it is Dissolved accordingly.

Copia Vera, By Order, David Jamison, Cl. Concilij.



Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty in the City of New York, School.


