THE SHORTER Catechism, Composed by the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES With the
PROOFS thereof out of the SCRIPTVRES, in Words at length.

Which are either some of the formerly quoted Places, or others gathered from
their other Writings; All fitted, both for Brevity and Clearness, to this their
Form of Sound Words.

For the benefit of Christians in General, and of Youth, and Children in
Understanding, in Particular; that they may with more Ease acquaint themselves
with the Truth according to the Scriptures, and with the Scriptures themselves.

BOSTON, in New England. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. School.

The Shorter Catechism OF THE Reverend Assembly of DIVINES
QUESTION.

WHat is the Chief End of Man?

ANSWER.

Man's chief end is to glorify God 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore you eat or
drink* or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God.
, and to enjoy Him for ever Psalm. 73 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 26. My flesh and my heart
fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
.

Q What Rule has God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy Him?

A. The Word of God (which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets Jesus Christ himself being the chief ^^rner-stone.
) is the only Rule to direct us how we may glorify 2 Timothy 3 16. all Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness.
, and enjoy Him 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fe^lowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
.

Q. What do the Scriptures principally teach?

A. The Scriptures principally teach what man is to believe concerning God, and
what Duty God requires of man.

2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, in
Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.

Q What is God?

A. God is a Spirit Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and in truth.
, Infinite Job 11.7. Can th^^ b^ searching find out God? Can thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection?
, Eternal Psalm 90.2. From Ev^rlasting to Everlasting thou art God.
, Unchangeable Jam. 1.7. The Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning.
, in His Being Exodus 3.14. and God ^^id unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM; and He
said, thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel; I AM has sent me unto
you
, Wisdom Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power; His Understanding
is infinite.
, Power, Holiness Rev. 4 8 Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and
is, and is to come.
, Justice, Goodness and Truth Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful
and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sins, and that will by
no means clear the guilty.
.

Q 5. Are there more Gods than one?

A. There is but one only Deuteronomy 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is One Lord.
, the living and true God Jer. 10.10 but the Lord He is the true God* He is the
Living God, and an Everlasting King.
.

Q. How many Persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are three Persons in the Godhead; the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
, and these three are one God, the same in substance, equal in power and glory
1 John 5 7. For there are Three that bear record in Heaven; the Father, the
Word and the Holy Ghost: and these Three are One.
.

Q. What are the Decrees of God?

A. The Decrees of God are His eternal purpose according to the counsel of his
own will, whereby for his own glory, he has fore ordained whatsoever comes to
pass.

Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Being predestined according to the purpose of him who works
all things after the counsel of his own will; that we should be to the praise
of his glory.

Q. How does God execute his Decrees?

A. God executes his Decrees in the Works o^ Creation Rev. 4.11. Thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were ^^eated.
, and Providence Dan. 4.33. He does according to his Will in the Army of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth
.

Q. What is the Work of Creation?

A. The work of Creation is God's making all things Genesis 1.1. In the beginning
God created the Heaven and the Earth.
of nothing, by the Word of his Power Heb. 11.3. Through Faith we understand
that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, so that things which are seen,
were not made of things that do appear:
, in the space of six days, and all very good Genesis 1 31. And God saw every
thing that he had made, and behold it was very good; and the evening and the
morning were the sixth day.
.

10 Q. How did God create man?

A. God created man Male and Female, after his own Image Genesis 1.27 So God
created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created He him, Male and
Female created he them.
, in Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness Col. 3 10. And have put on the New
man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him.
Ephesians. 4.24. That ye put on that new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.
, with Dominion over the Creatures Genesis 1.28. And God blessed them, and God
said unto them, be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue
it, and have dominion over the ^^n of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and ove^ every living thing that moves upon the earth.
.

Q. What are Gods Works of Providence?

A. Gods works of Providence, are His most Holy Psalm. 145.17 The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works
, Wise Is^ 28.29. this also comes forth from the Lord of Hosts, which is
won^erful in Counsel, and excellent in working.
, and Powe^ful Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the Word of His power.
, preserving and governing all his Creatures, and all their Actions Psalm.
103.19. His Kingdom rules over all. Mat. 10.29 are not two Sparrows sold for a
farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.
.

Q What special act of Providence did God exercise toward man in the estate
wherein he was created?

A. When God had created Man, he entered into a covenant of life with him, upon
condition of perfect obedience Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of Faith? but the man
that does them, shall live in them.
; forbidding him to eat of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil upon pain
of death Genesis 2 17. But of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou
shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die.
.

Q. Did our first Parents continue in the estate wherein they were created?

A. Our first Parents being left to the freedom of their own will, fell from
the estate wherein they were created, by sinning against God.

Eccles. 7.29. God has made man upright, but they have sought out many
inventions.

Q. What is Sin?

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the Law of God.

1 John 3.4. Whoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law: for sin is the
Transgression of the Law.

15. Q. What was the sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate wherein
they were created?

A. The Sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate wherein they were
created, was their eating the forbidden Fruit.

Genesis 3.6, 7, 8. And when the Woman saw that the Tree was good for food, and
that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise:
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her Husband with
her, and he did eat, and the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that
they were naked. -- And Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the presence of
the Lord God among the trees of the Garden.

Q. Did all mankind fall in Adam's first Transgression?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but for his
Posterity Gen 1.28 And God blessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful
and multiply and replenish the Earth.

Genesis 2.16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the man saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou may freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die


, all Mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and
fell with him in his First Transgression Rom 5.18 -- By the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to Condemnation.


Q. Into what estate did the Fall bring Mankind?

A. The Fall brought Mankind into an Estate of Sin and Misery.

Romans 5 12 By one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin: and so Death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Q. Wherein consists the Sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A The Sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell, consists in the Guilt of
Adam's first Sin Romans 5.19. By one man's Disobedience many we^^ made Sinners.
, the want of Original Righteousness Romans 3.10. There is none righteous, no not
one.
, and the Corruption of his whole Nature, which is commonly called Original Sin
Ephesians 2.1. You has He quickened who were dead in tr^^passes and sins. Psalm 51.5.
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.
, together with all Actual Transgressions which proceed from it Mat. 15.19. For
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false witness, blas^hemies: These are the things which defile a man.
.

Q. What is the Misery of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A. All Mankind by their Fall, lost Communion with God Genesis 3.8, 24. -- Adam
and his Wife hid themselves from the Presence of the Lord God among the trees
of the Garden: So he drove out the man.
, are under his Wrath and Curse Ephesians. 2 3. And were by nature the children of
wrath, even as others. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them.
, and so made liable to all Miseries in this life, to Death it self, and to the
pains of hell for ever Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Mat 25 41* Then
shall He say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
Everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
.

20. Q Did God leave all Mankind to perish in the estate of Sin and Misery?

A. God having out of his mere good pleasure from all Eternity Elected some to
everlasting life Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in Him, before the
foundation of the world.
, did enter into a Covenant of Grace, to deliver them out of the estate of Sin
and Misery, and bring them into an estate of Salvation by a Redeemer Romans 3.21,
22 But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the prophets: Even the righteousness of God which is
of faith by Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe.
.

Q. Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect?

A. The only Redeemer of Gods Elect, is the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 2.5 For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus
, who being the eternal Son of God became man Joh. 1.14. And the Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us.
, and so was, and continues to be God and man, in two distinct Natures, and
one Person Rom 9.5 Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh,
Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever.
, for ever Heb. 7.24 But this Man, because he continues ever has an
unchangeable Priesthood.
.

Q. How did Christ being the Son of God become Man?

A. Christ the Son of God became Man, by taking to himself a true body Heb.
2.14. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same.
, and a reasonable Soul Mat. 26 38. Then said he unto them, My Soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.
, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin
Mary, and born of her Luke 1.31, 35. Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee.
, and yet without Sin Heb. 7.26. Such an High Priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.
.

Q. What office does Christ execute as our Redeemer?

A. Christ as our Redeemer executes the Office of a Prophet Acts 3.22. Moses
truly said unto the fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto
you of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall you hear in all things whatsoever
he shall say unto you.
, of a Priest Heb. 5.6 -- Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedeck.
, and of a King Psalm. 2 6. Yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Zion.
, both in his estate of Humiliation and Exaltation.

Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a Prophet?

A. Christ executes the Office of a Prophet, in revealing to us John 1.18. No
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
the Father, He has declared him.
, by his Word John 20.31. These things are written that you might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God: and that believing you might have Life
through his Name.
, and Spirit John 14.26 The Comforter, which is the Holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my Name, He shall teach you all things.
, the Will of God for our Salvation.

25. Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a Priest?

A. Christ executes the Office of a Priest, in his once offering up of himself
a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice Heb 9 28 Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of ma^y.
, and reconcile us to God Heb 2.17 In all things it behoved him to be made like
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in
things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of the people.
, and in making continual Intercession for us Heb 7 25 He is able also to save
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liv^th to make
Interc^ssion for them.
.

Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a King?

A. Christ executes the Office of a King, in subduing us to himself Psa 110.3
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy Power.
, in ruling and defending us Isa 33.22 The LORD is our Judge, the LORD is our
Lawgiver, the LORD is our King, he will save us.
, and in restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies 1 Cor 15.25 For he
must r^ign till He has put all Enemies under his feet.
.

Q. Wherein did Christ's Humiliation consist?

A. Christ's Humiliation consisted in his being born, and that in a low
condition Luk 2.7 And she brought forth her firstborn Son, and wrapped him in
^wadling clothes, and laid him in a manger.
made under the Law Gal. 4.4. God s^nt forth his Son, made of a Woman, made
under the Law.
, and undergoing the miseries of this life Isa 53.3. He is despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted wi^h gri^f.
, the wrath o^ God Mat. 27.46 and about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud
voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
, and the cursed death of the Cross Phil 2.8. He humbled himself, an^ became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
, in being bu^ied, and continuing under the power of Death for a time Mat 12.7
as Jonas was t^^ee days and three nights in the Whal^s belly, so shall the Son
of man be three days and three nights in the ^^art of the earth.
.

Q. Wherein consists Christ's Exaltation?

A. Ch^i^ts Exaltation consists in His rising again from the dead on the
third day 1 Cor. 15 4 And that he was buried* and that he rose again the third
day according to the Scrip^^res.
, in ascending up into Heaven, and sitting at the ^ight hand of God the Father
Mark 16 19 So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, He was received up into
(...), and sa^ (...) the right hand of God.
, and in coming to judge the World at the last day Acts 17.31. He has
appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness, by that M^n
whom he has ordained, whereof he has given ^ssurance unto all men, in that he
has raised him from the dead.
.

Q. How are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. We are made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the
effectual Application of it to us John 1 12. As many as received him, to them
gave he power to b^come the Sons of God.
, by hi^ Holy Spirit Tit. 3.5, 6. Not by works of righteousness, which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is shed on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior.
.

30. Q How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. The Spirit applies unto us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working
Faith in us Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By grace are you saved through faith, and that not of
your selves: it is the gi^t of God.
, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our effectual calling Ephesians. 3.17. That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom
you were called unto the Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
.

Q. What is Effectual Calling?

A. Effectual Calling is the Work of God's Spirit 2 Timothy 1.9 Who has saved us,
and called us wi^^ an holy Calling.
, whereby convincing us of our Sin and Misery Acts 2.37. Now when they heard
this, they were (...) in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest o^
^^e Apostles, Men and Brethren^ what shall we d^?
, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ A^ts 26.18. To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God.
, and renewing our wills Ezekiel. 36.26 I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.
, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ freely offered to us
in the Gospel John 6, 44, 45. No man can come to me, except the Father which
has sent me, draw him -- Every man therefore that has heard, and has learn^d
of the Father, com^^h unto me*
.

Q What benefits do they that are effectually called, partake of in this life?

A. They that are effectually called do in this life (...) of Justification Rom
8 30 Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified:
, Adoption Ephesians 1.5 Having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ unto himself.
, Sanctification, and the several benefits which in this life do either
accompany or flow from them 1 Cor 1 30 Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of
God is made unto us, Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and
Redemption.
.

Q. What is Justification?

A. Justification is an act of Gods free Grace, wherein he pardons all our
Sins Ephesians 1.7 In whom we have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace.
, and accepts us as righteous in his sight 2 Cor 5.21 For he has made him to
be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him.
, only for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us Rom 5.19 As by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous
, and received by Faith alone Gal 2.16 Knowing that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law* but by the Faith of Jesus Christ: even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ.
.

Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an act of Gods free Grace 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Son^ of God.
, whereby we are received into the number, and have right to all the
privileges of the Sons of God 1 John 1.12 As many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
Romans 8.17 And if Children, then Heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ.
.

35 Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is the work of Gods free grace 2 These. 2.13 -- God has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit.
, whereby we are renewed in the whole man, after the Image of God Ephesians 4.24* And
that ye put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness.
, and are enabled more and more to die unto sin, and live unto righteousness
Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
.

Q. What are the benefits which in this life do either ^^^ompany or flow from
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification?

A. The benefits which in this life do accompany or flow from Justifica^ion,
Adoption or Sanctification, are assurance of Gods love, peace of Conscience Joy
in the Holy Ghost Romans 5.1, 2, 5. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ* by whom also we have access by faith into
his grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by
the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.
, increase of Grace Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect day.
, and perseverance therein to the end 1 John 5.13. These things have I written
unto you, that believe on the Name of the son of God* that ye may know that ye
have Eternal Life.
.

Q. What benefits do believers receive from Christ at their death?

A. The souls of believers are at their death made perfect in holiness Heb. 12
23 -- And to the Spirits of just men made perfect.
, and do immediately pass into glory Phil 1.23 ^ Having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ.
, and their bodies being still uni^ed to Christ 1 These 4 14 -- Them also which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
, do rest in their Graves Isa. 57^2. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest
in their beds, each one walking in their uprightness.
, till the Resurrection Job 19.26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
.

Q. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?

A. At the Resurrection believers being raised up in Glory 1 Cor. 1^.43 It is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory.
, shall be openly acknowledged and acquitted in the day of Judgment Mat. 10.32
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in heaven.
, and made perfectly blessed in full enjoying of God 1 John 3.2. When he shall
appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is.
, to all eternity 1 These. 4.17. and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
.

Q. What is the Duty which God requires of man?

A. The Duty which God requires of man, is Obedience to his revealed Will.

Micah 6.8 He has showed thee, O man, what is good and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
God.

40 Q. What did God at first reveal unto man for the rule of his Obedience?

A. The Rule which God at first revealed to man for his Obedience, was the
Moral Law.

Rom 2.14 For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law: these having not the law, are a law unto themselves:
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts.

Q. Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended?

A. The Moral Law is summarily comprehended in the ten Commandments.

Deuteronomy 10.4 And he wrote on the tables according to the first writing, the ten
Commandments. Mat. 10 17. If thou will enter into life keep the commandments.

Q. What is the sum of the ten Commandments?

A. The sum of the ten Commandments is, to Love the Lord our God with all our
Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Strength, and with all our Mind, and
our Neighbor as our selves.

Mat. 22 37, 40 Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great Commandment.
and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On
these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

Q. What is the Preface to the ten Commandments?

A. The Preface to the ten Commandments is, in these Words, I am the Lord thy
God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
bondage, Exodus 20.2.

Q. What does the Preface to the Ten Commandments teach us?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments teaches us, that because God is the
Lord and our God and Redeemer, therefore we are bound to keep all His
Commandments Deuteronomy. 11.1. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge,
and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments always. Luk 1.74, 75
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
.

Q. What is the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other gods before me.

Q What is required in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment requires us to know 1 Chronicles 28 9 And thou Solomon my
son, Know thou the God of thy father.
, and acknowledge God to be the only true God and our God Deuteronomy 26.17. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep
his statutes and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice.
, and to worship an^ glorify him accordingly Mat 4.10 Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment forbids the denying Psalm 14.1 The fool has said
in his heart, There is no God.
, or not worshipping and glorifying the true God as God Rom 1.20, 21, -- So
that they are without excuse, because that when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God.
, and our God Psalm 81.11 But my people would not hearken to my voice: and
Israel would none of me.
, and the giving that Worship and Glory to any other, which is due to Him alone
Romans 1 25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and ^erved
the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever*
.

Q. What are we especially taught by these words [before me] in the first
Commandment?

A. These wo^ds [ before me] in the first Commandment, teach us, that God who
sees all things, takes notice of, and is much displeased with the sin of
having any other god.

Psalm. 44.20, 21 If we have forgotten the Name of ^ur Go^, or stretched out our
hands to a strange god: shall not God search this out?

Q. Which is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is, Thou shall ^ot make unto thee any Graven Image,
or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth
beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth: thou shall not bow down thy
self to them, nor serve them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth
Generation of them that hate me, and showing Mercy unto thousands of them that
love me and keep my Commandments.

50 Q. What is required in the Second Commandment?

A The Second Commandment requires the receiving, ob^erving Deuteronomy. 32 46 -- Set
your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye
shall com^and yo^^ children to observe to do, all the words of this Law. Mat 28
20. Teaching them to observe all things wha^soev^r I have command^d you.
, and keeping pure and entire, all such Religious Wor^hip and Ordinances, as
God has appointed in His Word Deuteronomy. 12.32. What things soever I command you,
observe to do it: Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.
.

Q Wha^ is forbidden in the Second Commandment?

A. The Second Commandment forbids the Worshipping of God by Images Deuteronomy.
4.15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed un^^ your selves (for ye saw no manner of
Similitude on the day tha^ the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst
of the fire) Lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image.
, or any oth^^ way not appointed in His Word Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you
of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of angels, intruding
into those things which ^e has not seen, vainly puff^ up by his fleshly mind.
.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the Seco^^ Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the Second Commandment, are God's Sovereignty over
us Psalm. 95.2, 3. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms. For the Lord is a great God: and a great
King above all gods.
, His Propriety in us Psalm. 45.11 He is thy Lord, and worship thou him.
, and the Zeal He has to His own Worship Exodus 34.14. Thou shall worship no
other god: for the Lord whose name is Jealous, is a Jealous God.
.

Q. Which is the third Commandment?

A. The Third Commandment is, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes His Name in vain.

Q. What is Required in the Third Commandment?

A. The Third Commandment Requires the holy and Reverend use of God's Names
Psalm: 29.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name.
, Titles, Attributes Rev. 1 5 3, 4 Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name
, Ordinances Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God,
and be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools.
, Word Psalm. 138 2. I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy
Name, for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy
Word above all thy Name.
, and Works Job 36.24. Remember that thou magnify his Work which men behold.
.

55 Q. What is forbidden in the Third Commandment?

A. The Third Commandment forbids all Profaning or abusing of any thing
whereby God makes Himself known Mal. 2.2. If you will not hear, and if you
will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name, says the Lord of hosts,
I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your Blessings.
.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the Third Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the Third Commandment is, That however the Breakers
of (...) Commandment may escape punishment from men, yet the Lord our God will
not suffer them to escape his righteous Judgments.

Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law,
that thou may fear the glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD; then the
Lord will make thy plagues wonderful.

Q. Which is the Fourth Commandment?

A. The Fourth Commandment is, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy, six
days shall thou Labor and do all thy work, but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any wor^; thou nor thy Son, nor
thy Daughter, thy Man servant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the
Sranger that is within thy Gates; for in Six Days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the Seventh day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hollowed it.

Q: What is required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God such set times as
he has appointed in his Word, expressly one whole day in seven to be a holy
Sabbath to himself.

Levit. 19*30. Ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my Sanctuary; I am the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 5.1^. Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, as the LORD (...) GOD
has commanded thee.

Q. Which day of the seventh has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath?

A. From the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, God
appointed the seventh day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath Genesis 2.3 And God
blessed the Seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested
from all his work, which God created and made.
, and the first day of the week ever since, to continue to the end of the
World, which is the Christian Sabbath Acts 20.7. And upon the First day of the
week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul Preached unto them.
Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.
.

60. Q. How is the Sabbath to be Sanctified?

A. The Sabbath is to be sanctified by an holy resting all that day, even from
such Worldly employments and recreations as are lawful on other days Levit 23 3
S^x days shall work be done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of Rest, an
holy Convocation; ye shall do no work therein.
, and spending the whole time in public and private exercises of God's
worship, except so much as is to be taken up in works of nece^si^y and mercy
Mat. 1^.11, 12. What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep,
and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and
lift it out? How much then is a man better than a sheep? wherefore it is lawful
to do well on the Sabbath Days.
.

Psalm 92.1, 2 A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day: it is a good thing to give
thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Nam^ O most High: to show
forth thy loving kindness in (...) morning: and thy faithfulness every night.
Q. What is forbidden in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment forbids the Omission or careless performance of
the (...) required Mal. 1.13. Ye said also, behold what a weariness it is? and
ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of hosts, and ye brought that which was
torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept
this of your hands, says the Lord?
, and the Profaning the day by idleness, or doing that which is in it self
sinful Ezekiel 23.38 They have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and profaned
my Sabbaths.
, or by unnecessary thoughts, words, or works, about worldly employments or
recreations Isa 58.13 If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing
thy pleasure upon my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.
.

Q. What are the reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment are, God's allowing us six
days of the week for our own employments Exodus 31.15, 16 Six days may work be
done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, wherefore the children of
Israel shall keep the Sabbath.
, his challenging a special propriety in the seventh Levit 23.3 Ye shall do no
work therein, it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.
, his own example Exodus 31.17 It is a sign between me and the children of Israel
for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and Earth, and on the seventh
day he rested, and was refreshed.
, and his blessing the Sabbath day Gen 2.3 And God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it.
.

Q. Which is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: th^^ thy days
may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. What is required in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment requires the preserving the honor, and performing
the duties belonging to every one in their several places and relations, as
Superio^ Ephesians. 5 21, 22 Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of
God. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands as unto the Lord. c. 6.1,
5. Children obey your parents in the Lord. Servants be obedient to them that
are your Masters according to the flesh.
Inferiors Ro^ 13.1 Let every soul be subject u^^o the higher power: Ephesians. 6.9
and ye masters do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening, knowing
that your Master also is in heaven.
, or Equals Romans 12.10 Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly
love, in honor preferring one another.
.

65 Q. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment forbids the neglecting, or doing any thing against
the honor and duty which belongs to every one in their several places and
relations.

Rom 13.7, 8 Render therefore unto all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is
due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: owe no
man any thing, but to love one another.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment?

A The reason annexed to the fifth Commandment is, a promise of long life and
prosperity (as far as it shall serve for God's glory, and their own good) to
all such as keep this Commandment.

Ephesians. 6.2, 3 Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment
with promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the
earth.

Q. Which is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is, Thou shall ^ot Kill.

Q. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors to preserve our own
life Ephesians 5.28, 29 So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies -- For
no man ever yet hated his own flesh: but nourishes and cherishes it*
, and the life of others Psalm 82.3, 4. Defend the poor and fatherless: Deliver
the poor and needy. Job 29.19 The blessing of him that was ready to perish came
upon me.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment forbids the taking away of our own life Acts
16.28. Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm.
, or the life of our neighbor unjustly Gen 9.6 Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed.
, and whatsoever tends thereunto Prove. 24.11, 12. If thou forbear to deliver
them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain: if thou
say, behold we knew it not: does not he that pondereth the heart consider it?
.

70. Q. Which is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is, Thou shall not Commit Adultery.

Q. What is required in the seventh Commandmen^*

A. The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own 1 These. 4.4.
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification
and honor.
, and our neighbors chastity Ephesians. 5.11, 12. And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. For it is a shame even
to speak of those things which are done of them in secret.
, in heart 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness,
faith, charity.
, speech Col 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt.
, and behavior 1 Pet. 3.^. While they behold your chaste conversation coupled
with fear.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste thoughts Mat 5.28 Whosoever
looks on a Woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already
in his heart.
, words Epb 5.4 Neither filthiness nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are
not convenient.
, and actions verse 3. Fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be once
named among you.
.

Q. Which is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is, Thou shall not Steal.

Q. What is required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment requires the ^^^ful procuring and furthering the
wealth and outward Estate of our selves Romans 12.17 Provide things honest in the
sight of all men. Prove 27.23 be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks,
and look well to thy herds.
, and others Lev. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with
thee, then thou shall relieve him. Phil 2.4. Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others.
.

75 Q. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids whatsoever does, or may unjustly hinder
our own 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and especially of those
of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. Prove
^8.19 He that follows after vain persons, shall have poverty enough*
, or our neighbors wealth and outward estate Prove 21.6. The getting of
treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death. Job 20.19, 20. Because he has oppressed and has forsaken the poor,
because he has violently taken away an house which he builded not: Surely he
shall not feel quietness in his b^lly.
.

Q. Which is the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment is, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
Neighbor.

Q. What is required in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining and promoting of truth
between man and man Zach. 8.16. Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor.
, and of our own 1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak
evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your
good conversation in Christ. Acts 2^.10. Then said Paul, I stand at Caesar's
Judgment Seat where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong
, and our neighbors good name 3 Joh^ 12. Demetrius has a good report of all
m^n, and of the truth it self; yea, and we also bear record.
, especially in witness bearing Prove. ^4.5* 25 A faithful Witness will not lie:
a true witness delivers souls.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids what soever is prejudicial to truth Romans
3.13. With their tongue they have used deceit*
, or injurious to our own Job 27 5. God forbid that I should justify you, till
I die, I will not remove my integrity from me.
, or our neighbors good name Psalm 15.3* He that backbiteth not wi^h his
tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his
neighbor.
.

Q. Which is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is, Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors house, thou
shall not Covet thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Man servant, nor his Maid servant,
nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

80. Q What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment requires full contentment with our own condition
Heb. 13 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness: and be content with
such things as you have.
, with a right and charitable frame of spirit toward our Neighbor, and all
that is his Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that do r^joyce, and we^p with them
that weep. 1 Cor. 13 4, 5, 6 Charity suffers long, and is kind: charity
envieth not: charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it
self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth.
.

Q What is forbidden in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment forbids all coffeehouse with our own estate 1
Cor. 10.10 Neither murmr ye as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed
of the destroyer.
, envying or grieving at the good of our Neighbor Gal 5.26. Let us not be
desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another.
, and all inordinate motions and affections to any thing that is his Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which
is idolatry.
.

Q. Is any man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?

A. No mere man since the fall, is able in this li^e perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God Eccles. 7 20 For (...) is not a just man upon earth, that
does good and sins not.
, but daily does break them in thought Gen 8.21. The imagination of man's heart
is evil from his youth.
, word Jam 3.8. The tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison.
, and deed V. 2. in many things we all offend.
.

Q Are all the transgressions of the Law equally heinous?

A. Some sins in themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are more
heinous in the sight of God than others.

John 19.11. He that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin.

Q. What does every sin deserve?

A. Every sin deserves God's Wrath and Curse, both in this life, and that
which is to come.

Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the law to do them. Mat 25.41. Then shall he say unto
them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

85. Q. What does God require of us, that we may escape his wrath and curse due
unto us for sin?

A. To escape the wrath and curse of God due to us for sin, God requires of us
Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto life Acts 20.21. Testifying both to the
Jews, and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ.
, with the diligent use of all outward means whereby Christ communicates to us
the benefits of Redemption Prove. 2.1, -- 5. My Son, if thou will receive my
words, and hide my Commandments with thee; so that thou incline thy heart unto
wisdom, and apply thy heart to understanding: Yea, if thou criest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding: if thou seek her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures: then shall thou understand
the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God.
.

Q. What is Faith in Jesus Christ?

A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving Grace Heb. 10 39. We are not of them who
draw back unto perdition: but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul.
, whereby we receive Joh. 1.12. as many as received him to them gave he power
to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name
, and rest upon him alone for Salvation Phil. 3 9 and be found in Him, not
having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith.
, as he is offered to us in the Gospel Isa 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the
Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
.

Q. What is Repentance unto life?

A. Repentance unto life is a saving Grace Acts 11.18. Then has God also to
the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.
, whereby a sinner out of the true sense of his sin Acts 2.37. when they had
heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the
rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
, and apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ Joel 2.13. Rent your heart and
not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.
, does with grief and hatred of his sin, turn from it unto God Jer. 31.18, 19
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after
that I was tu^ned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of
my youth
, with full purpose of and endeavors after new Obedience Psa 119 59 I thought
on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
.

Q. What are the outward and ordinary mean^ whereby Christ communicates to us
the benefits of Redemption?

A. The outward and ordinary means, whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption, are his Ordinances, especially the Word Sacraments and
Prayer; all which are made effectual to the Elect for Salvation.

Acts 2*41, 42 Then they that gladly received his word were baptized, and they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers

Q. How is the Word made effectual unto Salvation?

A The Spirit of God makes the Reading, but espe^ially the Preac^ing of the
Word an effectual means o^ convincing and converting Sinners Psa 19.7. The law
of the Lord is perfect converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure
making wise the simple.
, and of building them up in holiness and comfort 1 These 1.6. and ye became
followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the Word in much affliction,
with joy of the holy Ghost.
, through Faith unto Salvation Romans 1.16 I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes.
.

90 Q. How is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual to
Salvation?

A. That the Word may become effectual to Salvation, we must attend thereunto
with diligence u Prove. 8.34 Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily
at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
, preparation 1 Pet 2.1, 2 Wherefore laying aside all mal^c^, and all guile,
and h^pocrisies, and envies, and evil sp^akings, as new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby
, and prayer Psa 119.18 Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things
out of thy law.
; receive it with faith Heb 4*2 The word preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with faith in them that heard it.
, and love 2 These 2 10 They received not the love of the truth: that they might
be saved.
, lay it up in our hearts Psa 119.11 Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee.
, and practice it in our lives Jam. 1.25 but whosoever looks into the perfect law
of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer
of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.
.

Q How do the Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation?

A. The Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation, not from any virtue i^
them or in him that does administer them 1 Cor 3.7 So then neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but God that gives the increase.
; but only by the blessing of Christ, and the working of the Spirit in them
that by Faith receive them 1 Pet 3.21 The like fi^^re whereunto even Baptism
does also now s^ve us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance instituted of Christ, wherein by sensible
signs, Christ and the benefits of the new Covenant are represented Gen 17.10
This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after
thee, every man-child among you shall be circumcised.
, sealed, and applied to believers Rom 4.11 and he received the sign of
circumcision a seal of the righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised.
.

Q. Which are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

A. The Sacraments of the New Testament, are Baptism Mark 16.16 He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be
damned.
, and the Lords Supper 1 Cor 11.23* For I have received of the Lord that which
I also de^ivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread, etc.
.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the washing with water, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Mat 28.19 Go ye therefore and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.
, does signify and seal our ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the
benefits of the covenant of Grace Rom 6.3, 4. Know you not, that so many of us
as were baptiz^d into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore we
are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the Father: even so we also should walk in
newness of life.
, and our engagement to be the Lords Rom 6.3, 4. Know you not, that so many of
us as were baptiz^d into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore
we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the Father: even so we also should walk in
newness of life.
.

95. Q. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible Church,
till they profess their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him Acts 2 41 Then
they that gladly received his word were bap^ized.
, but the Infants of such as are members of the visible Church, are to be
baptized Gen 17.7, 10 and I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee: every man child among you
shall be circumcised.
Acts 2.38, 39 Then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of
you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: for the promise is unto you and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call.
.

Q. What is the Lord's Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherein by giving and receiving Bread and
Wine according to Christ's appointment, his death is showed forth Luk 22 19, 20
And he took bread and gave thanks and brake it, and gave unto them, saying,
this is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me. Likewise
also the Cup after Supper, saying, this Cup is the New Testament in my blood,
which is shed for you.
, and the worthy receivers are not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by
Faith made partakers of his Body and Blood, with all his benefits, to their
spiritual nourishment and growth in Grace 1 Cor. 10.16 The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ.
.

Q. What i^ required in the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper?

A. It is required of them that would worthily pa^take of the Lords Supper,
that they examine themselves of their knowledge to discern the Lords body 1 Cor
11.28, 29 But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup* for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
, of their faith to feed upon him 2 Cor 13 5 Examine your selves whether ye be
in the faith.
, of their Repentance 1 Cor 11.31 if we would judge our selves* we should not
be judged.
, Love v 18, 20 When ye come together in the Church. I hear there be divisions
among you. When you come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat
the Lords Supper*
, and new Obedience 1 Cor 5 8 Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old
(...), neither with the leven of malice, and wickedness: but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
, lest coming unworthily, they eat and drink judgment to themselves 1 Cor.
11.27 Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer is an offering up of our desires to God Psa. 62.8 Trust in him at
all times, ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us,
Se^ah.
, for things agreeable to his will Romans 8.27 and he that searches the hearts,
knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the
saints, according to the will of God.
, in the Name of Christ John 16.23 Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you.
, with confession of our sins Dan 9 4 And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and
made my confession
, and thankful acknowledgment of his mercies Phil. 4*6 Be careful for nothing:
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving; let your
request be made known unto God.
.

Q What Rule has God given us for our direction in Prayer?

A. The whole word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer 1 John 5.14* And
this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will he hears us.
, but the special rule of direction, is that form of Prayer which Christ taught
his Disciples Mat 6.9, 13 after this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father, etc.
, commonly called, The Lords Prayer.

100 Q. What does the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lords Prayer, which is, Our Father which art in Heaven;
teaches us to draw near to God with all holy reverence Isa 64.9 Be not wroth
very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold see, we beseech
thee, we are all thy people.
, and confidence Rom 8.15 For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again
to fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, abba
Father.
, as Children to a Father able and ready to help us Luk ^1.13 If ye then being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children: how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask him?
, and that we should pray with, and for others Ephesians 6.18 Praying always with all
prayer, and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all Saints.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the first Petition?

A. In the first Petition, which is, Hallowed be thy Name; we pray, that God
would enable us and others to glorify him in all that whereby he makes himself
known Psalm 67.1, 2, 3. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his
face to shine upon us. That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health
among all nations. Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise
thee.
, and that he would dispose all things to his own Glory Romans 11.36. For of him
and through him, and to him, are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the second Petition?

A. In the second Petition, which is, Thy Kingdom come; we pray, that Satan's
kingdom may be destroyed Psalm 68.1. Let God arise, let his enemies be
scattered; let them also that hate him flee before him.
, that the kingdom of Grace may be advanced Psalm. 51.18. Do good in thy good
pleasure unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
, our selves and others brought into it, and kept in it 2 These 3.1. Finally
brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified, even as it is with you. Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire, and
prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
, and that the kingdom of Glory may be hastened Rev. 22.20. He which testifies
these things, says, surely I come quickly: Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the third Petition?

A. In the third Petition, which is, Thy will be done in earth as it is in
Heaven; we pray, that God by his Grace would make us able and willing to know,
obey Psalm. 119.34, 35, 36. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law:
yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the path of thy
commandments: for therein do I delight: incline my heart unto thy testimonies.
, and submit to his will in all things Acts 21 14. And when he would not be
persuaded, we ceased, saying, the will of the Lord be done.
, as the Angels do in Heaven Psalm. 103.20, 22. Bless the Lord ye his Angels
that excel in strength, that do his commandments: hearkening unto the voice of
his Word. Bless the Lord all his works, in all places of his dominion: bless
the Lord, O my soul.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition?

A. In the fourth Pe^ition, which is, Give us this day our daily Bread; we
pray, that of Gods free gift we may receive a competent portion of the good
things of this life Prove. 30.8. Remove far from me vanity and lies, give me
neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me.
, and enjoy his blessing with them Psalm. 90.17. And let the beauty of the Lord
our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the
work of our hands establish thou it.
.

105. Q. What do we pray for in the fifth Petition?

A. In the fifth Petition, which is, And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive
our Debtors; we pray, that God for Christ's sake would freely pardon all our
sins Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.
, which we are the rather encouraged to ask, because by his Grace we are
enabled from the heart to forgive others Mat. 6 14 For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the sixth Petition?

A. In the sixth Petition, which is, And lead us not into Temptation, but
deliver us from evil; we pray, that God would either keep us from being tempted
to sin Mat. 26 41. Watch and p^^y that you enter not into temptation. Psalm.
19.^3. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me. --
, or support and deliver us when we are tempted Psalm. 51.10.12. Create in me a
clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me. Restore unto me the joy
of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.
.

107. Q. What does the conclusion of the Lord's Prayer teach us?

A The conclusion of the Lord's Prayer, which is, For thine is the Kingdom, and
the Power, and the Glory, for ever, Amen. Teaches us to take our encouragement
in Prayer from God only Dan. 9.18, 19. We do not present our supplications
before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies, O Lord hear, O
Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do; defer not for thy own sake, O my God.
, and in our Prayers to Praise him, ascribing Kingdom, Power, and Glory to him
1 Chronicles.. 29.11, 13. Thine, O Lord is the greatness and the power, and the
glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven, and in
the earth is thine. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious Name.
; and in testimony of our desire, and assurance to be heard, we say, AMEN Rev.
22.20. Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.
.

FINIS.

