His Excellency, The Earl of BELLOMONT'S SPEECH TO THE Honorable the COUNCIL
and House of Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, at Boston, in His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on Wednesday the
29. of May 1700.
Gentlemen,
WHAT I proposed last May's Session for the advantage of the Province in
relation to the Settlement of the College, and Fortifying this Harbor, was so
coldly entertained by the Assembly, That I am almost discouraged from renewing
my Advice on those heads. Yet my zeal for the Public Service will not suffer
me to pass over in silence those two material points. The Settlement of the
College will best be obtained in my opinion by Addressing the KING for His
Royal Charter of Privileges. And as for Fortifying the Harbor, that is in
your own power to do, and will I am persuaded be pleasing to the KING, who
desires, and delights in, the welfare and security of His people.

I am told many of your Ministers in the remote parts of the Province, have
very narrow Stipends, not enough to maintain 'em Decently; it is reasonable you
should make them easy: with them I recommend to your care the French Minister
of this Town, who is destitute of a Maintenance, because there are so very few
French Families here: Let the present raging persecution of the Protestants in
France, stir up your Zeal and Compassion toward him. I wish for your sakes the
French Protestants had been encouraged among you, they are a good sort of
People, very Ingenious and Industrious, and would have been of great use for
Peopling this Country, and enriching it by Trade.

You know as well as I the Circumstances we are in with the Eastern Indians,
that the French Missionaries have debauched 'em from their former Obedience to
the KING, and that it was at their Instigation they Murdered so many of your
People this last War; and are now at the Devotion of the Jesuits to act over
again such another Tragedy. It seems to me that the Suffering Jesuits or other
Popish Missionaries to live in this Province, and poison the Indians with their
gross Idolatry and Superstition is (...) Laws and Government; I and wish you
(...) delay, make a L^w for Punishing such (...) shall at any time presume to
come (...)

I am sorry to tell you, That I find the French Missionaries are no less
Industrious to debauch our five Nations of Indians in the Province of New York,
taking Indefatigable pains to work on some by fear and menaces, on others by
Enticement and Flattery; and the Messengers I lately sent to Encourage them,
Inform me that several of our forward Fighting Indians that were best affected
to us, have lately been dispatched out of the world by poison. The parting with
Canada to the French, and the Eastern Country called Acadie or Nova Scotia,
with the noble Fishery on that Coast, were a most execrable Treachery to
England, and intended without doubt to serve the ends of Popery. It Is too well
known what Interest that King favored, that parted with Nova Scotia, and of
what Religion he died. I have now in my hands his Original Order to the
Governor of Nova Scotia, to Surrender that Country to the French, and it is
observable the Secretary of State that Counter-sign'd the Order, afterward
died a Papist. Such fatal Misgovernment in the late Reigns, ought to give us
the highest Veneration and value for his Present Majesty, who is in all
respects a true Protestant KING, both in the watchful and Indulgent Care of His
Protestant Subjects, and his great moderation to others.

I am Commanded by the KING to Recommend to you the passing a Law to prevent
the Escape of Pirates and other Offenders out of Prison, and to punish the
Keepers of Prisons within this Province, and all other persons that shall be
consenting to or assisting in such Escapes.

You would do well to make a Law that shall effectually prevent the Clipping
and Debasing the Current Coin* and also the Exportation thereof, both which are
become too universal a practice, and tend very much to the Impoverishment of
the Province.

The Management of the Eastern Indians in such manner as to bring them again
under the Obedience of His Majesty is necessary above all other things, and
worth your thoughts and care to try to effect.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,

It will become you to take Care for the Support of the Government, and to
provide such Supplies as may best suit with the Ease and Convenience of the
people, to you therefore I more particularly Recommend that Service.

BY Virtue of an Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint
Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, to Print His Excellency's Speech.

John Leverett Speaker.


