Good Soldiers A Great Blessing; BEING So represented in A SERMON Preached on
the day for Election of Officers, in the Honorable Artillery Company in
Boston, June 3d. 1700.

By Benjamin Wadsworth, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

1 Samuel 18.17. Be valiant and fight the Lords Battles.

Boston in New England, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips,
at the Brick (...) near the Old Meeting House. 1700.

Good Soldiers A Great BLESSING.
Isaiah III.2. The Mighty man, and the man of War --


THE Prophet Isaiah was employed in delivering God's messages to his professing
people the Jews, when they were chargeable with great degeneracies, with many
and gross sins; some of which are mentioned in the 6, 8, 9 verses of the
preceding Chapter, as well as in sundry other places. For these sins, God by
his Prophet threatens them, with various and terrible Judgments. In the first
verse of this Chapter he threatens them with Famine: he would take away the
Stay, and the staff, the whole stay of Bread, and the whole stay of water. In
the second verse (containing our Text) God threatens to take away their men of
chief Note, that were most Eminent, Useful and Serviceable in their Military,
their Civil, and Ecclesiastical Affairs. Our Text refers to the first of these,
their men that were most Eminent, Useful and Serviceable in Military Affairs,
the Mighty man, and the Man of War; their valiant able Warriors, these God
threatens to take away from them in Judgment. From whence we may observe this
Doctrine.

That Valiant, Able Warriors among Gods People, are justly accounted a great
Blessing to them. This is very plain, otherwise the taking away of such men,
would not be threatened as a Judgment, Curse, or Punishment. War considered
merely and absolutely in it self, is not good, nor should it be desired by any
man. No War was ever begun or carried on, with sufficient reasons and just
grounds on both sides. Either the Assailant or Defendant, surely sins; one
party surely sins, and both commonly suffer. War therefore considered merely in
its self* cannot lawfully be desired; for in desiring of it, we desire the sin
and misery of some or other, neither of which is lawful in it self. Though it is
thus, yet in some cases, War is not only lawful, but also commendable, yea a
necessary duty. Before I speak directly to the Doctrine, I shall endeavor a
brief Answer to these two Inquiries, viz. 1. To whom does it belong to make
War? 2. What are the just causes of War?


Quest. 1. To whom does it belong to make War?

For Answer, It belongs to the Chief Supreme Authority, justly Established over
a people, to make War. For the Supreme Authority, is to defend the Subjects in
their Persons and Privileges, and to revenge the gross wrongs done to them by
Enemies. It seems just and reasonable also, that the Supreme Authority may
delegate or communicate power, to far distant Provinces or Plantations under
them, to make War in such and such cases, under such and such limitations, as
the matter may be circumstanced. Notwithstanding what has been said, it seems
justifyable for the smallest part or handful of any Nation, (though they have no
direct Order or Commission, from the Supreme or Subordinate Authority over
them) to make a defensive War, when they are unjustly and suddenly assaulted by
cruel Enemies; but it is no way allowable for private unauthorized persons to
make an offensive War. If upon Spoils or Robberies done by some of a
Neighboring Nation, private persons should, without Order or Commission from
Authority, go and make War upon that Nation, they would sin greatly. Such a
course as this would be likely, to Embroil Nations in continual Wars, Uproars
and Confusions.

Quest. 2. What are the just causes of making War?

For Answer, I suppose the most of them may be comprehended under these three
general heads. Either,

1. Defense, or self preservation from the unjust assaults of others. A Peoples
fighting for the defense of their Persons, Liberties and Properties, seems
altogether reasonable, having nothing to be said against it. Self-preservation,
is a principle implanted in all men, as well as other Animals, and that by God
himself. It Is also lawful for a people to make, or help in, a defensive War,
when their Allies or Confederates are unjustly assaulted and molested: thus
Joshua and the Israelites, being in League or Confederacy with the Gibeonites,
came to fight for them against their Enemies, Josh. 10.

2. Another just cause of War is, Recovery of great damages. When Ziklag was
taken and ransacked, and the Wives, Children, and (...) of David and his men
were taken away by the Amalekites; David and his men made War upon them, for
the recovery of those damage^, and did recover all. 1 Samuel 30. Chapter When Lot was
taken Captive, and his Goods made a prey, Abraham, his Allie and Friend made
War upon the Aggressors or Assailants for the Recovery of damages, and did
deliver Lot, and rescue his Goods. Genesis 14. I suppose under this Head, may be
comprehended the unjust revolt of Subjects, and falling off of Tributaries; for
the gross default of such, it seems Justifyable to make War upon them, to
reduce them to their former just order, duty and obedience.

3. Another just cause of War may be, the revenging of Injuries. Though the
case may be so circumstanced, that there is no possibility of recovering
damages, or repairing the loss sustained, yet it may be not only lawful, but
also a duty to revenge Injuries. Thus if our Heathen Neighbors should suddenly
burn any of our Frontier Towns, and destroy the Inhabitants thereof, it would
then be our duty, were it in our power, to revenge that Injury in the death of
all the Actors in, and Abettors of, such Murder, although we could not possibly
recover damages, or pay our selves for the Goods unjustly destroyed, or taken
away. Having briefly premised these things concerning War, which possibly are
not wholly foreign to our present occasion, we may now proceed to the Doctrine
it self: That valiant able Warriors among Gods People, are justly accounted a
great Blessing to them.

Here it seems very natural to raise these two Enquiries: viz.

1. Who are to be accounted valiant, able, Warriors? Or when may persons be
justly so termed?

2. How does it appear that such persons among Gods people, are justly to be
accounted a great Blessing to them?

Quest. 1. Who are to be accounted valiant* able Warriors? Or when may persons
be justly so termed? In order to an Answer, we may note, That Soldiers as
such, are Instruments: that the goodness of Instruments is to be judged of bv
their fitness or suitableness to obtain the end, whereunto they are designed.
The Answer to the second of the premised Questions, about the just causes of
War, tells us, that the end of Soldiers as such, or the use they are to be put
to, is, to defend, recover damages, and revenge Injuries. Now the more fit
Soldiers are for these Services, so much the more valiant and able they are to
be accounted. Note also, Soldiers are either Rulers, or Ruled, Commanders, or
Private Soldiers. Now first,

1. As to Private Soldiers, they may be said to be valiant and able, when they
have these following Qualifications. Namely,

1. When they are strong and able of Body to go through hard, difficult
Services. Men are not fit for Soldiers, unless they are sit to endure
hardness, 2 Timothy 2 3. Soldiers are often called to Encounter with Storms and
Tempests, wet and dry, hot and cold, with hunger and thirst: they are sometimes
called to frequent Watchings, long marches, to pass Hills and Dales, craggy
Mountains, and deep Rivers, suddenly to Entrench, to build Forts, to scale
Walls, and other such like Services, which contain more difficulty in them,
than can be easily conceived of. Men had need have strong hardy Bodies, to
undergo such Fatigues. Softness and delicacy does not become Soldiers, it is a
disgrace to a Camp. The Soldiers of Alexander in a fit of discontent,
complained that they were forced to Fight not only against multitudes of
Enemies, but also against Mountains and Rivers. Ateas the Scythian King gave a
great Commend of his Soldiers, when he said to Philip King of Macedon, Your
Soldiers can fight with men, but mine can fight with hunger, thirst, and such
like difficulties. Soldiers therefore should shun all Intemperance. Every man
that striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things. 1 Cor. 9.25. Scipio
wept when he came into the Camp, and saw the Licentiousness, Luxury and
Intemperance there prevailing. When Alexander had Conquered Kingdoms by his
Grecian hardiness, he was himself Conquered by Persian Softness and Debauchery.

2. When they have valorous courageous spirits. When they have hearts big
enough to attempt hazardous things, to give a bold and vigorous (though
dangerous) repulse or onset. A Soldiers strength of body wont signify much,
unless he has courage of mind to manage it: without courage, his strength is
almost useless in War, unless it be like an Horse or a Camel to bear and carry
burdens. When the Israelites were going to War against their enemies, the
Priests were to say unto them, Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not
tremble, neither be ye terrifyed because of them, Deuteronomy. 20.3. And why should
not Gods Priests or Ministers, so encourage Soldiers now? As for faint hearted
Soldiers, they were to be dismissed and sent home, least by their cowardly
example, the hearts of others should faint also, Deuteronomy. 20.8. Men don't deserve
the honorable title of Soldiers, if they have not the resolute Spirit of
Soldiers. If they want courage, a Plough or Spade, becomes them better than a
Shield or Sword.

3 When they are well skilled and accurate in the use of their weapons.
Strength of body and courage of mind, may sometimes prove useless, yea (...),
for want of Military skill. What signifies Shield or Spear, Gun or Sword,
unless men know how to use them? David upon due consideration* chose rather
nakedly to approach his (...), than being furnished with that gallant armor
which he had not proved, 1 Samuel 17.30. For a (...) to wear a Sword, that knows
not how to use it, seems as idle and foolish, as for a Child to boast of a
Book, which he cannot read a word in. Soldiers should also know the words of
Command, that they may readily apprehend the mind of their Commanders in them,
and speedily yield obedience thereunto. So should they understand the beat of
the Drum, and the sound of the Trumpet: otherwise they cannot distinguish
between a Charge and a Retreat, and then what follows, but confusion instead of
order, and overthrow instead of victory? If these things are not understood,
who shall prepare himself for the battle, 1 Cor. 14.7, 8. Those were highly
commended that were expert in War, that had all manner of Instruments of War
for the battle, and were men that could keep rank, 1 Chronicles. 12.33, 37, 38. They
were well trained and disciplined.

4. When they are obedient to their Commander. 'Twas the commendation of those
Soldiers, Matthew. 8.9. That they went and came, at their Commanders bidding.
And truly without this qualification, Soldiers don't deserve to be commended:
it is not their business to dispute and capitulate with, but yield obedience to,
their Officers. When Roman Soldiers were Pressed, each took his Oath, not to
forsake his Captain or Country, which Oath was called, Sacramentum Militare.
Obtemperaturas sum et facturus quicquid mandabitur ab Impreratoribus, juxta
vires; to the utmost of my power, I will obey thy Commander in all things.
Cyrus was wont to say, It Is better for a Soldier to fear his Captain, than his
enemies. Paulus Aemylius would say, a Soldier should take care of three
things, That he has a strong body good arms, and a mind ready to obey. When a
Soldier was once just ready to smite his enemy with his Sword, he forbore upon
the Sounding of a Retreat, and being asked by one, why he suffered his enemy to
escape, he answered, 'Twas better to obey his Emperor, than slay his Enemy.
He Is not a good Soldier, that knows not how to obey his Commander. I suppose
those who have these forementioned qualifications, may well pass for valiant,
able Soldiers.

We may further note, that the more Pious persons be, so much the better
Soldiers they commonly are. Those who will Curse and Swear, as though they
would Damn their enemies into Hell, are sometimes backward enough to look an
enemy in the face, much more to smite him to the ground. Iphicrates spoke like
a brutish Heathen, when he said, A Soldier ought to be coveteous of riches and
pleasures that he may the more boldly encounter dangers for the satisfying of
his lusts: It better becomes Christians to say, Soldiers should be pious and
gracious, that so they may the more boldly encounter dangers for the answer of
a good Conscience. Never were there better, bolder, and more courageous
Soldiers in the world, than some of the holiest of men have been. It Is
mentioned as an eminent commendable effect of Faith in some, That they waxed
valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11.34. As
Prayers and Tears are the weapons of the Church, so men most expert at those
weapons are most commonly the best Soldiers.

Having spoke these few things of private Soldiers, we may now proceed to the
other part of the distribution, viz Officers or Commanders, among whom there
are various orders or degrees one above another: yet excepting the Chief
Supreme Commander, who as such, is not to receive and obey, but to give out
Commands, unto his army; I suppose they are all the more worthy to be accounted
valiant, able Soldiers, by how much the more they have, of all the
forementioned qualifications. If their hardy bodies will endure uncomfortable
lodgings, mean diet, wet and dry, heat and cold, tedious marches, and great
fatigues, this might animate their Soldiers to do so too. Commanders should
have singular Courage also, according to the Station they are in, they should
have enough for themselves, and some to spare to their Soldiers too; that is
by way of Example and Exhortation. We must not look for great Exploits to be
done by that Company that has a cowardly Captain. A faint hearted Leader, will
rather encourage the feet of his Soldiers to flee, than their hearts or hands
to fight. They should have good Skill likewise. It Is to be supposed, that every
Officer according to his place, be it high or low; is able to Instruct all
under him, in their duty, otherwise how can he give proper words of Command, or
punish Offenders for not obeying them? You know what is like to become of blind
guides and their followers. As for the Obedience of Inferior Officers, to
those that are Superior; it is as needful and commendable, as the Obedience of
any Private Soldiers. Besides these Qualifications, it seems very desirable,
that Commanders, especially the chief of them should be,

1. Men of great Prudence and Conduct. Great Prudence and Conduct is needful
for the ordering of Marches, especially through difficult passages, for the
ordering of Scouts to discover Ambushments, and prevent sudden Surprizal, for
Entrenching and Fortifying in commodious places, for securing of Stores, for
choosing time and place for battle, and such like things of great weight.

2. Men well acquainted with their Soldiers, and Under Officers. This is
needful, that so they may choose and order, for such and such Services, men that
are most proper for the same. Joab chose the choice men of Israel for the most
difficult Service, 2 Samuel 10.9. This he could not have done, but that he knew
his Army well.

3. Men of great Sagacity, Circumspection, Watchfulness and Diligence. Men that
will have not only a careful watchful eye, over all the Affairs of their own
Army, but such as will use all proper means to get Intelligence, about the
Number, Skill, Courage, Preparation, Designs, and Motions of the Enemy. The
knowledge of these things, gives great advantage on many accounts.

4. Men of great patience. Soldiers often meet with such hard lodging, hard
fare, with such losses, disappointments and difficulties, that they sometimes
begin to murmur against, and find fault with, their Officers, and all their
managements* though never so prudent. Thus David's men murmured against him, and
talked of stoning him, 1 Samuel 30.6. Possibly good prudence and patience, might
divert such Storms, which if not diverted, would hurry all into confusion.

5. Men of resolution to punish Delinquents. They should forbid all Impiety and
Profaneness, Intemperance and Debauchery, Injustice, and Dishonesty; and if
such Crimes are committed, they should see them punished. The Romans were wont
to punish their delinquent Soldiers, sometimes by Disbanding of them with
disgrace, sometimes by withholding their Wages, sometimes by diminishing their
food, sometimes by beating and cudgelling them* sometimes by banishment, and
sometimes by death. Lamachus said, Non licet in bello bis peccare, error enim
in bello est mors. Men must not offend twice in War, for an Error in War is
death. Soldiers will not be kept in order, without good Laws, and them well
Executed.

6. Men that are Godly and Conscientious. It Is recorded to the endless praise
of Cornelius, Captain of the Italian Band, Acts 10.2. That he was a devout man
that feared God with all his house, and prayed to him always. Surely such men
are sitter for Commanders, than those who by their profaneness and debauchery,
seem to fight more daringly against God in heaven, than against men on earth.
How shall we think those will be faithful to their Country, and the Cause of
it, who will not be faithful to God and his Cause? Constantius, the Father of
Constantine the Great, removed those professed Christians from being his
Courtiers, whom (upon a designed trial) he found more ready to Sacrifice to
Idols, than to disobey his Commands, saying, those who are disloyal to God,
will never be true and trusty to their Prince. How often* have Commanders of
weak, depraved Consciences, received bribes, Sold their Army* Cause, Country
and all, only for their own present personal Preferment, Profit, and Pleasure?
Dr. Hammond said to King Charles the First, to this purpose, while God damn me,
leads the Van, and the Devil take me, brings up the Rear, there is no likelihood
of good success. There Is no reason to expect the success of Armies, unless Gods
presence and blessing be with them: there is no reason to expect his presence
and blessing with them, if he is greatly provoked by them, and so he will be by
Christian Armies, if their Commanders are not conscientious. When Moses the
chief Commander of Israel was praying, then Joshua and the Army did prevail. We
may now proceed to the second Enquiry, viz.

Quest. 2. How does it appear that such Soldiers among Gods People are a great
Blessing to them, and are justly to be accounted so? In order to an Answer, we
need only premise, that a well settled peace, is a great Blessing to Gods
people. When they have such a peace, their Persons, Civil and Religious
Liberties, and also their Estates are safe. They may sleep safely in their
Houses, follow their business without fear or danger, sit quietly under their
Vines and Figtrees, freely make use of their own; and which is more than this,
they may Serve and Worship God, in obeying all his Commands, and attending on
all the Institutions of the Lord Jesus Christ, without disturbance or
molestation. Thus it is with Gods people, who are favored with a well
established Government, and a well settled peace. That such a state of Affairs
is a great Blessing, will be owned by every thinking Christian; especially if
he considers, that Peace is promised as a very comprehensive mercy, in case of
Obedience, and War threatened, as a very comprehensive Judgment, in case of
Disobedience. Lev 26.5, 6, 17, verses.

We may now answer the Enquiry in saying, such Valiant Soldiers as have been
described, are very proper means under God.

1. To continue unto God's People, their Liberties and Properties when quietly
Enjoyed. If Gods people have plenty and prosperity, yet if their envious
Neighbors know them to be well furnished with valiant, able Soldiers, they
will not much care to molest them. When a strong man armed keeps his palace,
his Goods are in peace. David with his experienced Soldiers, did mighty
Exploits in War, and when he dyed, he left the Land full of able Soldiers,
which being known, the Neighboring Nations dare not disturb Solomon his Son,
but he had peace on all sides round about him, and Judah and Israel dwelt
safely; every man under his vine and under his figtree 1 King* 4.24, 25. But if
a people have peace and plenty, without suitable men to defend them, they seem
to be an inviting prey to their covetous Neighbors.

2. Able Soldiers are proper means to recover the Liberties and Properties of
Gods People, when taken away. This was frequently experienced by the
Israelites, as we are often told in the Book of Judges. The Jews experienced
this truth also, as the History of the Maccabees plainly informs us. Many other
instances might be given were it needful.

3. Able Soldiers are very proper means to secure the Liberties and Properties
(as well as the Lives) of Gods people, when they are endangered. Able Soldiers
are very proper means, to prop up, and steady a shaking, tottering State. (...)
was much oppressed and further endangered, when the Philistines did prevail,
win the Victory, Slay Saul and his Sons in Battle; but David and his
experienced Soldiers, did soon give check to their rage, suppress their power,
curb their Insolency, and secure Israel from their Outrages. Many Instances of
this nature might be given, yea, several in our own Nation. England was much
threatened, yea by some looked upon as a devoted Sacrifice, when the Spanish
(vainly called Invincible) Armado came against it an hundred and twelve years
ago, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; yet the brave English Soldiers, by the
Blessing of God, routed their Enemies, destroying many of them* and hunting
others home, as heavy laden with (...) before they were (...) with envy (...)
and to secure them when endangered. Yea, since the first planting of this
Country by the English, our Soldiers have been made a Blessing to God's people
here on all these accounts. This is too well known to need any proof.

Now these things might teach us;

That God's People ought to Train up and encourage, good able Soldiers. It Is
true, those happy days are promised and much hoped for, wherein, Men shall beat
their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall
not lift up a Sword against* Nation, neither shall they learn War any more,
Mic. 4.3. But those days are not yet come, and possibly before they do come,
there will be occasion to urge those other words, Joel 3.9, 10. Prepare war,
wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near, let them come up:
beat your Plowshares into Swords, and your Pruning hooks into Spears, let the
weak say I am strong Those are carnal men, who say, Christians should not use
carnal Weapons: That is, Instruments of War, when the cause of God and his
People require the Warlike employment of them. Christ's Church upon earth is
yet Militant, in a proper and (...), as well as in a Spiritual sense.
Christians have great reason to learn War, and make Warlike preparations. I
suppose all the Lord's Batttels are not yet fought; and we don't know who of us
may be called to engage in some of those that remain. Be Exhorted then to learn
War, to endeavor after Military skill, a martial spirit, an ability to do
Service against Enemies; if the cause of God and his people should call you to
it. To encourage you here unto,

Consider,

1. The necessity of it, in an ordinary course of Providence. The present
condition of the world, and wickedness of men, is such, that we cannot be
secure of any thing we have, unless we have some force and power, as well as
justice on our side. It has been often seen, that under God, Soldiers have
been the defense and protection of what God's People do enjoy* If you have no
Warlike force, your wealth and riches will be but an inviting, easy prey, to
invading Enemies. Entreaties will not do with those whose tender mercies are
cruelty. The force of enemies, must be repel'd with force. Would you have your
Country spoiled, your Houses rifled and burnt, your Goods and Riches taken
away, your Children dashed against the stones, your Wives and Daughters ravished
before your faces, your Women with Child ripped open, your Aged Fathers and
Mothers barbarously dragged about the Streets, your Churches overthrown, your
selves Captived, Inslaved, or contemptuously slain? If you would avoid such
Indignities, Insolences, and out rages as these are (which are frequently
perpetrated by an Invading Enemy) then learn War; endeavor after Military
skill and courage, to repel the pride and power of enemies. A few well
disciplined Soldiers, are commonly of more use and worth, than vast multitudes
of untrained men. Abraham with three hundred and eighteen Trained Servants,
overcame four Kings and their Armies, Genesis 14. Alexander the Great, with
between thirty and forty thousand well disciplined Soldiers, routed the
unskilful untrained multitude of Darius, which consisted, some say of four
hundred, some of six hundred thousand men.

Consider,

2. The eminent examples set before you. Some of the best of men, have been the
best of Soldiers: They have attempted, and done great things in War, for the
cause of God and his people. Such were Abraham, Joshua, David, the Maccabees,
Constantine the great; and Charles the Great, King of France and Emperor of
Germany, who lived about nine hundred years ago. And not to mention any more,
you might be encouraged by the Example of Our Great KING WILLIAM, a great enemy
to Vice and Wickedness, a great and singular friend to, and encourager of,
Virtue and Holiness; and yet generally and most deservedly accounted, as mighty
a man of War, as any the World has seen for many Ages.

3. Great Commendations are given in Scripture, of Warlike accomplishments, and
Warlike actions. It Is spoke to the commendation of some that came to help
David: They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the
left, in hurling stones, and shooting arrows out of a Bow. It Is said of others,
They were men of might, and men of war, fit for the Battle, that could handle
Shield and Buckler, whose faces were like the faces of Lions, and were as swift
as the Roes upon the Mountains, 1 Chronicles. 12.2, 8. The heart of inspired
Deborah, was toward the Governors of Israel who offered themselves willingly
among the People. 'Twas spoke to the praise of Zebulun and Naphtali, That they
Jeoparded their lives to the death, in the high places of the field Judge.
5.9.18.

Consider,

4. God is very angry with those who will not venture their lives in fighting
against his Enemies. As you may see, Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Mer^z, said the Angel
of the Lord, Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not
(...) the (...) of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against (...) mighty.
Here Is a bitter Curse upon the ^^habitants of (...), because they would not
venture their lives, in fighting for God's people, and against their Enemies.
So Jer 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, and
cursed be he that holds back his Sword from Blood. We should not be cowardly
Neuters, or idle Spectators, when the common cause of our Lord Jesus Christ
calls for our assistance. We should love him above our lives, and therefore be
willing to endanger and expose our lives, when his and his peoples Interest
calls for it. We ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. 1 John 3.16. The
Lord Jesus Christ, takes our neglect of, or disregard to his people, as a
neglect of, or disregard unto himself. Mat. 25.45, Surely since he has dyed for
our Salvation, we should be willing (his Providence calling us to it) to die
for his Glory. And great shall be our reward, if we have such a willingness,
and our actions are agreeable thereunto. Titus the Roman General, to encourage
his Soldiers in fighting against Jerusalem, said, The Soul of him that dies in
War, is presently received into the most pure, airy Element, and from thence
carried and placed among the stares of Heaven. He had no reason to say this,
but we have good reason to say, those that sincerely love, fight, and die for,
the true Interest of Jesus Christ, shall immediately at death, have their Souls
taken above the Stars of Heaven, to be with Christ in Glory. Those that suffer
with him, shall reign with him, but if we deny him, he will deny us. 2 Timothy
2.12. Let these few considerations animate you to learn War, to endeavor after
Military Skill, Courage, and other Martial Accomplishments: that if Providence
should call you forth, you may be qualified to do real Service, in defending
the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of Gods people, in recovering their
damages, or revenging unjust Indignities and Outrages committed against them.
In all your Artilleries and Trainings, you should act like Christians. You must
give an account to Christ, of your actions on Training Days, as well as on
other days. On such days therefore you should Conscientiously Serve Christ,
by diligently endeavoring after more knowledge, skill, and accuracy in
Military Matters, that you may employ the same, in real Service for Christ and
his People, if Providence should call for it.

As for you Gentlemen of the Honorable Artillery Company; I wish you may go
on, be encouraged and prosper, in those great and generous qualifications, you
aspire after. I wish your Number, your Skill, your Courage, with all other
desirable Military accomplishments and honors, may be increased. But let none
of us so much aspire after being Soldiers, as to forget that we are
Christians. If we had the greatest and most desirable Warlike accomplishments
and preparations that could be, yet we ought not to trust in them for our
defense or protection. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm, Jer. 17 5. We should make the best preparations, and use the best
means we can, in all affairs; but we must not have our dependence on any of
them, but on God alone. The best means often fail; therefore the Wise man must
not glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength. The race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the strong, Eccles. 9.11. Let us use means, but
not trust in them. Let us take up with Saul's advice, 1 Samuel 18.17. Be valiant,
and fight the Lords Battles. And with that of Joab, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good
courage and let us play the men, for our people and for the Cities of our God:
and the Lord do that which seems him good. An Excellent Speech of a General
it was; to exhort to the doing of our best, and yet trusting in God, and
leaving the event with him. He is a Man of War, Exodus 15.3. He teaches to War,
Psalm. 144.1. He Spirits men to it, Jer. 51.11. He helps in War, 2 Chronicles. 32.8.
The victory is his, he gives it to whom he will; for he can save by many or by
few. We should therefore use the best means we can, and have our whole
dependence upon God.

I shall conclude in saying, There is another Warfare, which every one of us
should be engaged in. We should get ingrafted into CHRIST, listed under his
Banner, resolving by the help of his Grace, to fight against the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil: to fight the good fight of Faith, till we lay hold on
Eternal Life: to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for as much as we know our labor shall not he in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

