To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of His Excellency
Richard Earl of Bellomont, Your Majesty's Governor, and the Council and
Representatives of Your People in Your Majesty's Province of New York, Convened
in General Assembly.
May it Please Your Majesty;
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects convened in General
Assembly, do esteem it Our chiefest Duty to lay at Your Royal Feet our Humble
Thanks and Hearty Congratulations in Your Majesty's Safe Return unto Your
Kingdom of ENGLAND, (...) that your Majesty had Exposed Your Royal Person to
many great Hazards for the Subduing the Enemy of Christendom, which by Your
Auspicious Conduct and the Glorious Success of Your Arms, has been effected to
such a Degree, as to produce the Most Honorable and Most Advantageous PEACE
that ever happened to the Christian Nations in Europe.

And though We, Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects are in one of
the least Dominions Your Majesty Possesses in Your Empire in America, yet We
having more than a common share in the great Satisfaction which all Your
Majesty's Subjects express upon this Joyful Occasion, We cannot but esteem Our
Selves peculiarly Happy in having so Victorious a Prince as Your Majesty, who
by Your Unparralled Valor has brought so great Renown unto the English
Nation, even to an height exceeding the Glory of any of Your Majesty's
Predecessors.

We must also with the greatest of Thankfulness acknowledge Your Majesty to be
the Glorious and Only Instrument in the Delivering of Our Native Kingdom from
Popery and Arbitrary Power, to which they were so much Exposed in the late
Reign. And we are sensible that the Security and Safety of those Kingdoms, and
Your Majesty's Dominions depending thereon, (...) consist in the Long Life and
Happy Reign of Your Majesty over (...). We therefore most Humbly beg Your
Majesty's Gracious Acceptance of ^^ese our Congratulations and Acknowledgments,
which are offered to ^^ur Majesty with the purest of Dutiful Affection, which
calls Us to give ^^ur Majesty Assurance, That, under God, We do acknowledge all
those ^^essings We enjoy to be wholly owing to Your Most Sacred Majesty. (...)
that we shall only improve them to the Increase of Our Duty and A^^^^tion to
Your Majesty, and Incessantly make Our Prayers and Supplications to the King of
Kings for Your Majesty's Long Life and Prosperous and Glorious Reign over Us.


