Advertisements.
A Token for Children: Being an exact Account of the Conve^sion, Holy and
Exemplary Lives and Joyful Deaths of several young-Children. By James Janeway,
Minister of the Gospel To which is Added, A Token for the Children of New
England, or some Examples of Children, (...) whom the Fear of God was
remarkably ^udding before they dyed; in several parts of New England

Conscience the Best Friend upon Earth: Or, the Happy Effects of keeping a Good
Conscience. Very Useful for this Age: By Henry Stubbes, Minister of the Gospel.

The Blessed Hope* and Glorious Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ: Opened and Applied in several Sermons. By Increase Ma^her, Praesident
of Harvard College in Cambridge, and Preacher of the Gospel at B^ston in New
England.

All Sold by Nicholas Boon, at his Shop over against the Old Meeting House, in
Boston, New England.

Military Discipline. THE COMPLETE SOLDIER, OR Expert Artillery-Man.

CONTAINING The several Postures and Exercises of the Musket and Fire-lock;
with various Beats of the Drum, necessary for Young Soldiers.

ALSO Diverse ways of Exercising a Company; very useful for all Officers, and
others that delight in Military Affairs.

To which is added, The Duties of all the Officers, in a Private Company: As
also the Military Law of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, very necessary
for Captains, Clarks etc.

Being a Collection from Col. Elton, Bariff, and others.

Boston, Printed for and Sold by Nicholas Boon, over against the old-Church,
1701

TO THE Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have set forth this small Treatise, principally aiming at the benefit of my
Country, wherein I hope I shall not prove Unserviceable: Books of this nature
are much wanted, but much more the practice. The method of this Book will I
hope be extremely pleasing; the bulk of other Books of this nature being so
large, that they require much time to peruse, and money to purchase; of which
two things, many persons desirous of Experience in Military Affairs, can spare
neither. Though it be Peace in our Land at this day, yet we ought to prepare in
Peace for Times of War. Intervals of time may herein be spent by Youth, and by
the help of this Book may become their own Tutors, and every private Shop
become an Accademy of Arms. I have Considered the Authors of b^st Note, upon
this Subject, as Colonel Richard Elton, Colonel William Barriff and others;
but find them to be most in use among us, having nothing to do, with the
Ancients, as Plutarch, Vegetius, Xenophon, Homer, Justin, Tulley, etc. I know
that some will not be wanting, to disparage this work and the Workman, some may
Carp at it, and say we expected some new thing, not an old heap of stuff: to
such I say, let them mend it, as also lead us in a good new way, and I,
whatever others are, shall be very thankful; it is easier to find faults then to
mend them. I must ingeniously confess, that I am one of the meanest, both for
Skill and Scholarship to have undertaken a work of this nature. To the
Courteous and Skilful, into whose hands this may come, whose better parts will
yield better fruits. I shall request their favorable Censure, and with their
Judgments, mend what I have mist, for which their loves, I shall stand ever
engaged.

Nicholas Boon.

THE Complete Soldier, Or, EXPERT ARTILLERY-MAN.
CHAP. I. By way of Introduction.
THe first Rudiments of Education wherewithal a young Soldier ought to be
conversant in, is first to learn the right use of his Arms, than which nothing
can make a man more complete, nor fit him to bear the Name of a Soldier;
neither can a man whatever attain to the least part of the Art-Military (which
concerns Foot Soldiers) without the Handling and Managing of his Arms. How
delight^ul is it to those that can perform this first Part? And with what Ease,
Courage and Safety, can they both defend themselves, and offend their Enemies?
Whereon the contrary, the chiefest Arms (without Exercise) become not only
toublesome Burdens unto the unskilful Bearers, but oftentimes prove hurtful
and dangerous, both to themselves and others: Therefore this ought to be
considered by all, who intend any proficiency in this part of the Art Military;
that both with Art and Courage (in time of danger) Defend both their King and
Country. It has been the manner of all famous Generals to bring their
Soldiers to perfection by Exercise: Vegetius says vey well, It is not length
of Life or number of Years, that teaches the Art of War, but continual
Discipline, and Exercise of Arms: Let a Soldier Serve never so many years, so
long as he is Unexercised, he shall still be a raw Soldier. No man is born a
Soldier naturally, one may more incline to War than another; but the skill
comes not without industry and pains.

Notable was the saying of Pyrrhus to his Muster-Master; Choose you (says he)
Good Bodies, and I will make them Good Soldiers: A strong Body is most
requisite in a Good Soldier, to undergo the Labors of War; but it is Exer^ise
and desire to handle Weapons that gives the perfect skill. Therefore as
Demosthenes, being demanded what was the first and principal thing in the Art
Oratory: answered Action; what the second, Action; what the third, Action; so
we may truly say, that in the Art Military, Exercise is not only the first,
second and third principal thing to make a Soldier, but also all in all. I
could have given you an account of the Exercise used in Ancient Time, and of
the Victories which have been obtained by a small number of men well Exercised,
against a multitude Unskilful and Untrained: But that not being pertinent to my
intent, and having too much transgressed already, I shall give next a touch
upon the Definition of a Posture.

CAAP. II. The Definition of Posture.
POSTURE is conceived to be a Garb or Figure that a man stands in for the well
handling of his Arms, in which there are Motions attendant unto the same for
the better grace, and becoming of them. Likewise by Motion it carries a neat
Agility of the Body, whereby the right handling of their Arms is achieved, and
so becomes easy; Motion being the working part, Posture the alteration or act,
either in circumstance or matter: as to Rest your Musket being one Posture; to
Shoulder your Musket another; so likewise the rest.

CHAP. III. The Exercise of the Musket
Lay your Right Hand on (...)
TUrn the Barrel (...) Lock uppermost, and (...) Hand (your fingers extend^^^
(...) the Lock, close, the Butt* end (...) Musket to your Shoulder, that the
Muzels may be all of a height.

Poise your Musket.
Grasp your Musket hard, facing to the Right with a quick motion upon your left
heel, keeping your Musket directly before you the height of your Neckloth, your
right Elbow on your side, your feet neither too near, nor at too great a
distance.

Rest your Musket.
Let your Musket sink down to your Left Hand, that arm hanging as low as may be
without stooping with your Body, and receive the Musket into it just where the
Scowrer enters into the stock; be sure your hand touch no part of the Barrel;
the Musket is to be held but a little sloping from perpendicular, half a foot
from your side. Be sure to let your left arm hang down free as low as you can
without stooping, (and not hugg your Musket up above your Waste as was used
formerly) keeping the Right Hand upon your Musket behind the Lock, your fingers
extended.

Cock your Musket.
Place your right Thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers behind the Trigger, and
with the help of closing it to your Thigh, you Cock it, keeping it still rested
with your Thumb on the Cock.

Guard your Musket.
Keeping your Thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers behind the Trigger, you
bring up your Musket with a very quick motion straight before you to the
Recover, your Left Hand as high as your mouth, half a foot from it without
stooping.

Let not your Musket sink, but keep it at the height: Always observing when you
bring up your Musket before, (which is Recovering the Musket) to bring your
Right heel to your left instep; and be sure to have a care of tossing the
Muzzel of your Musket backwards, but keep it straight up right.

Present.
Fall back with your Right foot, so that the left heel be against the middle of
it, raising the Butt-end of your Musket to your Shoulder; That is between your
Breast and right Shoulder, which locks it fast; but little higher than your
Piece, having your fingers ready to pull the Trigger, you must bend your Knee,
and keep the right very stiff, your Piece must be levelled breast high, and no
higher.

Fire.
Be sure to draw your Trigger at one motion, keeping your Body very steady,
taking aim, and your Musket fast to your Shoulder, till you have the word of
Command to recover your Arms.

(...) the Pan, and not on the top, keeping your left Toes directly to the
Front.

Shut your Pan.
With your two first Fingers; at this word casting back your Primer, bring
(...) ^our right heel to your left instep, and your Musket straight up before
you, recovered with the Barrel toward you, your left hand always as high as
your Mouth, and with a very quick motion; your Thumb on the top of the Steel.

Blow off your loose Corns.
Be sure to blow all together at one strong blast, bringing your Pan up to your
Mouth, standing upright, and not putting your Mouth down to your Pan: Cast out
your Arms after your blast, not letting your Musket sink from the Posture it was
in before.

Cast about to Charge.
You advance with your right leg turning your M^sket the barrel down wards, so
bringing it to your le^t side a little backward in your left hand, besure that
none of your Fingers touch the Barrel. The right foot is to have the Toe
directly to the Front, Ballancing your Musket in the left hand, the Muzzel
directly to the proper Front, your right hand joined to the Muzzel of your
Musket, your Thumb extended to the side of the Barrel.

Handle your Charger.
With a full gripe hold it even with the Muzzel of your Musket, about an Inch
from it, underneath your Musket.

Open it with your Teeth.
Bring it up to your Mouth standing upright with your head, bring the Charger
within an Inch of the Muzzel underneath, as before, and cover the mouth of your
charger with the ball of your Thumb.

Charge with Powder.
When you have put the Powder in the Barrel, hold your Charger again
underneath, as before.

Draw forth your Scowrer.
You are to let fall your Charger and turn your hand, your little Finger to be
next the Muzzel, draw it at three motions, being drawn, dart it against your
right eye, your Arm extended.

Shorten it to an inch.
Turn the great end of your Scowrer toward you, and slip your hand till within
an inch of the end, letting it rest against your right Breast.

Charge with Bullet.
Take the Bullet out of your mouth, putting it into the Barrel, as also ^he
great end of the Scowrer.

Ram down Powder and Ball.
With a full grasp, your Thumb and Fore finger from the Muzzel, your Thumb on
the top of the Scowrer.

Withdraw your Scowrer.
Turn the small end of your Scowrer to your Breast, slip your hand till within
a handful.

Return your Scowrer.
Replace it in the stock of your Musket, pressing it down with your Thumb,
keeping your Musket clear from your side half a foot.

Poise your Musket.
As before.

Shoulder your Musket.
As formerly.

Order.
As before.

Lay down your Arms.
Stepping forward quick with your Left Leg, and stooping all together, lay it
down straight only with your Right hand.

Quit your Arms.
Falling back with your Left Leg even to your Right, stand up all together.

Face to the Right about. March.
When clear of your Arms you are to disperse, and upon beat of the Drum, to run
to your Arms with a Huzza, When you draw your Sword take hold of the Scabbard
with your Left Hand.

Return your Swords.
You must do it all at a motion, and stand to your proper Front.

Handle your Arms.

Order your Arms.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

CHAP. IV. Exercise of the Granadiers.
A Great part of the Exercise of the Granadiers is the same with tha^ of the
Musketeers.

Lay your Right hand on your Firelock. Poise your Firelock As the Exercise of
the Musketeers. Rest your Firelock As the Exercise of the Musketeers. Cock your
Firelock As the Exercise of the Musketeers. Guard your Firelock As the Exercise
of the Musketeers. Present As the Exercise of the Musketeers. Fire Recover your
Arms Cast over to the Left Then they are to lay their right hand on their
Daggers* Draw your Dagger Hold it fast before you upright. Screw it into the
Muzzle of your Firelock So that the flat side may be toward you when recovered.
Recover your Arms.
Charge To the Right Four Times To the Right about Chargewith a quick motion
Seizing the Firelock under the lock with the right hand As you were To the Left
Four Times To the Left about Charge As you were
Recover your Arms.
Cast over to the Left They are to Seize their Dagger with their right hand.
Withdraw your Dagger Holding it before you the flat side toward you.
Return your Dagger
Poise your Firelock As the Musketeers Half bend your Firelock As the
Musketeers Clean your Pan As the Musketeers
Open your Cartridge box Handle your Primer Prime As the Exercise of the
Musketeers Return your Primer As the Exercise of the Musketeers Shut your Pan
As the Exercise of the Musketeers Blow off your loose Corns As the Exercise of
the Musketeers Cast about to Charge Handle your Cartridge Open it with your
Teeth Charge with Powder and Ball Draw forth your Scowrer Putting them together
into the Muzzle of the Firelock hold it there. Shorten it to an inch Ram down
powder and ball As the Musketeers Withdraw your Scowrer As the Musketeers
Shorten it to a handful As the Musketeers Return your Scowrer As the
Musketeers Poise your Firelock As the Musketeers Shoulder your Firelock Upon
which word of Command the Ranks are to close forward, to Six foot, the
Sergeants taking care to plant their Halberts at a due distance. Poise your
Firelock Order your Arms Lay down your Arms Quit your Arms Face to the
Right-about March Upon the Beat of the Drum you are to Run to your Arms with a
Huzza Leader
Draw your Dagger Return your Dagger Handle your Arms Order your Arms Poise
your Firelock Shoulder your Firelock.
CHAP. V. The Soldiers place of dignity.
THe noble Soldier being inquisitive after Honor is much desirous to
understand his place of worth and dignity* which he ever conceives to be as due
to him as his Life: which was the reason that caused both the Grecian and Roman
Generals to be so exact and curious in bestowing Rewards upon all Valiant
Soldiers who were deserving of the same, and according to every Man's worth
and Dignity, gave him precedence of place and command over the others, that
they might lead and direct them as occasion shall require there for.

First, Know that a File is a number of men, beginning at one Leader, and
continuing in order of followers to the last man; or from the first, which is
termed a File-leader, to the last which is termed a Bringer-up.

For the number of a File, our present Discipline only allows four, though in
many Towns in this Province, they allow six, so that there needs no further
dispute concerning the number of a File.

Secondly, A Rank is a row of men composed of Files more or less joined
together* as when one File is laid fl^nkwiss to one another, standing shoulder
to shoulder from the right hand to the left.

Therefore the File leader ought to be the worthiest, because he not only
commands his File, but makes the first onset against his enemy.

The Bringer up ought to be the second in place of honor, because he is the
last man in the Field marching in the Rear, which upon all occasions he ought
to defend.

The Half-file leader is the third in honor, because he is the leader of the
Reer-half-files upon their several Motions, as doubling the Front, either
entire, or divisonal.

The last man (or Bringer-up) of the Front-half files, is the last man in
Dignity; but when the Rear half files are commanded off, he has the honor of
defending the Rear.

So by this Geometrical Proportion, the whole Body is equivalent in skill and
worth, and as it were (and indeed ought to be) seconds the one to the other, so
long as life indureth. And then it may be said of them, as Plutarch writes of
the holy Band of the Thebans, that it was never Beaten until the Battle of
Cheraean; after which Battle, Philip the Father of Alexander Surveying the dead
bodies, and coming to the place where these three hundred lay, all close
mingled one with another, and struck through with the Macedonian Pikes, he
wondered greatly; but hearing that it was the Band of Lovers and beloved he
wept, and said, Evilly may they perish, that suspect any filthiness in deed, or
suffering to have been practiced amongst such men.

CHAP. VI. Of the Drum.
IT is requisite in the next place that care be taken, that every Soldier be
rightly instructed in all Military Signs and directions: the Drum is the only
Instrument that the Soldier is to take notice of, and ought well to understand
these several Beats or Points of War. Viz.

1 A Call 2 A Troop 3 A March 4 A Preparative 5 A Battalia 6 A Retreat.
Besides these, there are two other Beats of the Drum, Viz.

7 A Tato 8 A Revally.
The Tato, that is, to shut or make fast your doors, for when this is beaten,
all persons ought to repair to their private rest, whether in Military Watches,
or Garrison. A Revally is beaten in the Morning by break of day (I suppose it
comes from the French word Reviller, to awake from sleep) at which times the
Sub-Officers usually take off their Sentinels.

These two (I suppose) cannot be said to be points of War, but only private
directions for a Watch or Garrison, the one to give notice at what time they
ought to be at Rest, and the other to show the time that the Gates should be
set open, or the Watch break up.

Now as you may learn for what end these six several* Beats of the Drum are
made use of: observe Bariff, page 5.

First, by a Call, you must understand to hear present Proclamation, or to
repair to your Ensign.

Secondly, by a Troop understand to Troop along to the place of Randezvouze or
else where.

Thirdly, by a March you are to understand, to take your Open Order in Rank, to
shoulder your Arms and to direct your March either quicker or slower, according
to the Beat of the Drum.

Fourthly, by a Preparitive you are to understand to close to your due distance
both in Rank and File, for skirmish, that so you may execute upon the first
Command.

Fifthly, by the Battle or Charge, understand the continuation or pressing
forward in order to Battle, boldly ^^e^ping forward in the place of him that
falls dead or wounded before you.

Sixthly, by a Retreat, understand an orderly retiring backward, either for
Relief, advantage of the ground, or for some politic end; as to draw the Enemy
into some Ambushment, or such like: So that for the Drum, it is the Voice of
the Commander, the Spur of the Valiant, and the Heart of the Coward. So far
Bariff.

The Drum is of Ancient Antiquity, and from age to age it has been a fit
Instrument for the Service of the Foot: And not only the Drum was thought a fit
Instrument alone for the Foot, but they were allowed some other pleasing
Instrument to delight and transport the spirits of the Soldiers; as the Flute,
Harp or Pipe.

CHAP. VII. The several Distances.
NOW that our Soldiers have attained some small knowledge in the use of their
Arms, and rightly understand the Beats of the Drum; it will be expedient in the
next place to show them the several distances: which are these four, Viz.

which is both in Rank and File.
Close Order 1 Foot and half Order 3 Foot Open Order 6 Foot Double Distance 12
Foot.
There is several Distances to be performed in, First, March, Secondly, Motion,
Thirdly, Skirmish.

The distance of March between File and File is 3 Foot, and between Rank and
Rank 12 Foot.

The distance of Motion between File and Rank 12 Foot.

The distance of entire Doublings and Skirmishes between Rank and File is 3
Foot.

The distance for preven^ion of Cannon-Shot, is* betw^^n File and File 12 or 24
Foot, which is the Double-Double distance.

For to deliver unto you the opinions of seve^al ancient Commanders c^ncerning
Distances, will be needless, it being sufficiently made plain by several
eminent Authors: but to proceed wi^h all brevi^y possible to the words of
Command, which a^e as follows: Being to their Open Order.

Command.
Ranks close forward To Order Files close inward To Order Ranks close forward
To close Order Files close inward To close Order Ranks open backward To Order
Files open to the Right To Order Ranks open backward To open Order Files open
to the Left To open Order Ranks open backward To Double Distan^e Files open
outward To Double Distan^e Ranks close forward To open Order Files close inward
To open Order
Note, That Close Order is useful for any manner of wheeling; or when the
Commander is to deliver some what of concernment to the Soldiers.

But if any one have a desire to be further satisfied concerning distances, let
them Read Bariff, Ward, Elton, who have sufficiently treated on this subject:
this being intended only as a Pocket book for young Soldiers.

CHAP. VIII. Of Faceings.
BEfore I come to show the variety of Faceings in Action, I think it will not
be amiss to define unto you what is meant by Faceing.

Faceing is a particular turning of the Aspect from one part to another,
whereby the Front proper becomes the Front accidental; and a Front accidental
may be reduced to his proper Front. The words of Command, take as follows.

Command.
Face to the Right As you were Face to the Left As you were Face to the Rear As
you were Face to the Front As you were Face to the Center As you were
Command.
Face to the Front and Rear As you were Face to the Right and Left outward As
you were Face to the Right and Left inward As you were Face to the Midst of
Files As you were Face to the Midst of Ranks As you were
Command.
To the Right As you were To the Right As you were To the Right As you were To
the Right As you were To the Right about As you were To the Left about As you
were
Command.
To the Left As you were To the Left As you were To the Left As you were To the
Left As you were To the Left about As you were To the Right about As you were
Command.
Half Files Face to the Right As you were Half Files Face to the Left As you
were Half Files Face to the Right and Left outward As you were Half Files Face
to the Right about As you were Half Files Face to the Left ahout As you were
Half Files Face to the Right and Left inward As you were
There is also Faceings which causes the Body to Face to the Front, Rear, and
both Flanks, which some call Faceing Square.

Command. Face Square, and March.

Direction. The first Rank Stand, the last Rank Face about, the Center Ranks,
Face to the Right and Left.

Reducement. Face to the Right about. March. Close your Divisions. To your
Leader.

Command. Face Square, and March.

Direction. Flanks ^ace out-ward, Center half Files, face to the Right-about.

Reducement. Face to the Right about: March. To your Leader.

Command. Face to your four Quarters.

Direction. F^ont half Files of half Ranks to the Right, Stand. Front half
Files of half Ranks to the Left, Face to the Left. Rear half Files of half
Ranks to the Right, Face to the Right. Rear half Files of half Ranks to the
Left, Face to the Right about: March. You may March them Faceing to the Right
four times, then Face in Opposition and close your Division. To your Leader.

Angular Faceings.
Face to the Right] Face to the Left] Angle Face to the Outward Angles in the
Front Face to the Inward Angles in the Front Face to the Right] Face to the
Left] Angle in the Rear Face to the Outward] Face to the Inward] Angles in the
Rear Face to the Inward Angles of the R Fl^^k Face to the Inward Angles of the
L. Fla^k Face to the Outward] Angles both of Front and Rear. Face to the
Inward] Face to the Four outward Angles Face to the Four inward Angles.
CHAP. IX. Entire Doublings to the Front.
Note, That the Letter C. stands for command, the Letter D. for Direction, the
Letter R. for Reducement.

C. Ranks, to the Right double.

D. Every even Rank from the Front, move forward with the right-leg, and double
the odd.

R. Files, to the Left double, Or, Ranks as you were.

C. Ranks, to the Left-double.

D. Every even Rank from the Front move forward with the right leg, and double
the odd.

R. Files, to ^he right-double, Or, Ranks as you were.

C. Ranks, to the right and left double outward.

D. Every even Rank from the Front move outward, from the midst, and at three
steps double the odd.

R. Files, to the right and left double inward.

C. Ranks to right and left, double inward.

D. Every even Rank from the Front move inward from the Flanks, and at three
steps double the odd.

R. Files, to the right and left double outward.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right.

D. Half Files, Advance forward to the right into the Front.

R. Files, double your depth to the left.

C. Half-Files, double your Front to the left.

D. Half Files, Advance forward to the left into the Front.

R. Files, double your depth to the right.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right and left outward.

D. Half Files, Advance forwards to the right and left from the midst into the
Front.

R. Files, double your depth to the right and left inward.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right and left inward.

D. Half Files, Move forwards from the Flanks inward into the Front.

R. Files, Double your depth to the right and left outward.

C. Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

D. Bringers-up, advance your Arms and move forward with the right leg into the
Front.

R. Files, double your depth to the left, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left.

D. Bringers up, advance your Arms and move forward to the left into the Front.

R. Files, double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left outward.

D. Bringers up, advance forward to the midst of the Rear, to the right and
left into the Front.

R. Files, double your depth to the right and left inwards every man falling
behind his Bringer up.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left inward.

D. Bringers up* advance forwards from the F^anks inward into the Fron^.

R. Files, double your depth to the right and left outward every man placeing
himself behind his Bringer up*

C. Double your ra^ks to the right entire.

D. Every oven Rank from the Front, Face to the right, March forth and double
the odd.

R. Right Half Ranks double your left Flank

C. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

D. Every even Rank^ from the Front face to the left, March (...) and double
the odd^*

R. Left Half-Files, double your right Flank.

C Double your Ranks inward entire.

D. Every even Rank from the Rear, move outward unt^^ cle^r o^ the standing
part; Every even Rank from the Front, move ^orward and double the o^d.

R. The inmost Files d^uble your Flanks to the righ^ and left outward: after
close.

C D^uble your Ranks to the right entire, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right hand man.

D. Every even Rank from the Front, move to the ^ight, and place your selves on
the ou^side of your right hand men, and double the odd Ranks.

R. Right Half Ranks double your le^t Flank, every man plac^ing himself on the
inside of his right hand man.

C. Dou^le you^ Ranks to the left entire, every man placeing himself on the
outside of his left hand man.

D. Every even Rank from the Front, move to the left, and double the odd Ranks
by placeing your selves on the out side of your left hand men.

R. Left-Half Ranks double your right Flank, every man plac^i^g himself on the
inside o^ his right hand man

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right-entire.

D. Half Files, face to the right, March clear of the standing part, face to
your Leader, make an even Front.

R. Right-Half Ranks, double entire the depth (...) your left Flank.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the left enti^e

D. Half Files, face to the le^t, March clea^ of the standing part: To your
Leader: Move up and double the Front.

R. Left Half Ranks, double entire the depth of your right Flank.

C. Half Files, double your Front inward entire.

D. Front-Half Files, face outward, March clear of the standing part: To your
Leader. Reer-Half Files, Move up and double the Front.

R. The inmost Files, double the depth of your outmost File; Face in
opposition, close your division: To your Leader.

CHAP. X. Divisional Doublings.
C. DOuble you Ranks to the right and left by division.

D. Every even Rank from the Front face outward: March forth, and double the
odd.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved; face inward, and strengthen
the Body.

C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by division, every man placeing
himself on the out side of his right and left hand man.

D. Every even Rank from the Front move forth to the right and left outward,
and double the odd, placeing your selves on the outside of your right and left
hand man.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double the inmost Files to
the right and left inward, every man placeing himself on the inside of his
right and left hand man.

C. Half-Files, double your Front by division.

D. Half Files, face outward, March clear of the standing part: after face to
your Leader, Move up even a breast and double the Front.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double entire the depth of
the inmost Files.

CHAP. XI. Entire Doublings to the Front by Wheeling.
C. WHeel off your Rear Half Files, and double your Front to the right entire.

D. Half-Files, face about, wheel to the left, March up and even the Front.

R. Wheel off your Right Half-Ranks, and double your left Flank entire to the
left.

C. Wheel off your Reer-Half-Files, and double your Front to the left-entire.

D Half Files, face to the Rear. Wheel to the right.

R. Wheel off your Left Half Ranks, and double your right Flank to the right
entire.

C Wheel your Rear half Files inwards into the midst, and double your Front
inward entire.

D. Front half-Files, open from the midst, until you be clear of the standing
part: Face to your Leader; Half-Files face about, and wheel your Rear inward
into the midst; Move forward until you have doubled the Front.

R. The inmost Files that doubled wheel about to the right and left outward,
and double entire the depth of the outmost Files; face to your Leader, and
close your Files to the midst to order.

CHAP. XII. A Divisional Doubling to the Front by Wheeling.
C WHeel off your Rear half-Files, and double your Front by division.

D. Half Files, face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right and left, move
forward and double the Front.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that doubled, wheel about to the right
and left inwards, and double entire the depth of the inmost Files: To your
Leader.

Here end the doubling that properly belong unto the Front. But by the way, no
Leader is tied to do all these doublings at once, but part of them as he shall
think fit.

CHAP. XIII. Of Files Ranking, or Ranks Fileing.
NOte, That what is Commanded to the Right, the same may be performed to the
Le^t.

C. Files, File to the right.

R. Files, File four to the left.

C. Files, File to the right and left by division.

R. Files, File four to the right and left.

C. Files, File to the right entire advancing.

R. File four to the right toward the Front.

C. Files, File inward into the right Flank.

R. Front-half-Files, File two to the left: Reer-half Files, face about and
File two to the right: Face to your Leader, and close your divisions.

C. Files, File to the right by division.

R. Front-half Files, File two to the right, and Reer-half-Files, face about,
and File two to the left: face to your Leader, and close your divisions.

C Files, File inward into the right and left Flank by division.

R. Half files, face about to the right: Front and Rear Half files, File two to
the right and left inwards: face to your Leader, and close your divisions.

[For Fileing inward, the Half files are to face about, and so the left hand
File of the Rear, and right of the Front are to move away, till they become one
File.

Fileing by division is the same, only the right hand Files stands, the rest
move away.

Fileing inward into the right Flank by division, Half files are to face about;
then the Leaders and Bringers up of the right and left, are to lead, and so
successively fall into the Rear of each other.]

Of Ranks Fileing.
Ranks Fileing is sooner performed and reduced than Files Fileing, and will be
more ready to make resistance against any opposition in the Front.

C. Ranks, File to the right, or to the left, placeing your selves behind your
right hand men.

R. Files, Rank as you were.

C. Ranks, File to the right and left by division.

Direction is the same* with the last, differing only (...) this, Half Ranks to
the left, fall behind their left hand men to the left; the Half-Ranks to the
right, behind their several right hand men.

R. Files, Rank to the right and left inward, as you were.

CHAP. XIV. Of Countermarches.
THe next branch of Discipline which offers it self is Countermarches; these
three being most useful.

1. Maintaining ground. 2. Loosing ground. 3. Gaining ground.

The distance for Countermarches is open order in Rank and File.

C. Files, to the right, Countermarch.

Direction. The word of Command being given, all the File Leaders step forward
with their right Legs, and face about to the right, every File-Leader with his
File following him toward the Rear, passing through the enterval on his right
hand, observing to keep even in Rank with his right hand man, and not to turn,
until he come to the ground whereat first his File-Leader began the ^^^ion: the
Command is performed when the Bringers up have attained unto the place where
before their File Leaders stood.

R. Files, to the left, Countermarch.

C. Ranks, to the right, Countermarch.

Direction. Face to the right; then the right hand File is to turn off to the
right, and to March even to the ground of the left hand File.

R. Ranks to the left, Countermarch.

Note, That any entire Countermarch of Files and Ranks will be reduced, by
making another entire Countermarch to what hand soever: but if you desire to
h^ve them not only red^ced to the same Aspect, but also precisely to the same
place, then if the Countermarch be to the right, Countermarch again to the
right, so to the left, without Faceing.

C. Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst.

Direction. Half Files, face about, and turn off to the left, Front-half Files
turn off to the right, and face to your Leader.

R. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst again, will reduce the last
word of Command; or else by any other divisional Countermarch of Files.

C. Front and Rear (...) Files, Countermarch to the ri^^t.

Direction* Front half Files, Countermarch to the right, following your File
Leaders: Rear half Files, Countermarch to the right, following your Half file
Leaders.

R. Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst; then face to the Front proper,
and they are reduced.

C. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst

Direction. Face to the right and left out wards; the Right Flank turn off to
the right; the Left Flank turn off to the left, March, and close your divisions.

R. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst, and they are reduced.

C. Right and left Half-Ranks enterchange ground.

Direction. Face to the right and left inward; March and enterchange ground: To
your Leader.

R. Enterchanging of ground back again will reduce; or divisionally to
Countermarch their Flanks into the midst of the Battle.

Countermarches Loosing ground.
C. Files, to the right hand Countermarch, placeing your selves before your
Bringers up: (...).

Direction. Bringers up, ^ace about to the right; the rest Countermarc^ ^o the
right, every man turning on the ground he stand^ following their Leaders,
placeing themselves before their Bringers up.

R. Bringers up, Stand; the rest pas^ through to the right, and place your
selves before you. Bringers up.

C. Files, to the right Countermarch, every man turning on the ground he stands*

Direction. The File Leaders of each File (...) to step-side-wa^s to the right,
and so March even in Rank together, every man following his Leader, and turning
on the (...) stands.

R. Files, to the left Countermarch, every man turning on the ground he stands.

C. Bringers-up, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the right,
and place your selves before your Bringers up.

D. Face all to the right about; Bringers-up, Stand; the rest of the Body pass
through to the right, and place your selves before your Bringers-up.

Note, This motion is begun by the Rank, next the Bringers-up, and so continued
successively by the rest, till the Command be ended.

R. This (...) may be reduced, by doing (...) same to the con^ra^y hand; or
(...) please.

C. ^^ingers up, S^and; the rest pass th^o^gh to the right, and place your
s^lves behind your (...)

Note, (...) by the Rank, (...) File-Leaders (...) face to the (...) reduced.

D. The last (...) Body face to the (...) the right, placeing (...) Bringers
up; then (...) their proper File-Leaders, and they are reduced.

C. Ranks, to the right Countermarch, every man turning after his right hand
man on the ground he stands.

Direction. Face all to the right: which being performed, the right hand File,
together with all the rest becomes Ranks, and so begin the Countermarch, every
Rank turning after his right hand man on the ground he stands, so Marches
forth right beyond that which was the left Flank.

R. Right Hand File, face to the right; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right hand man.

Countermarches Gaining Ground.
C. File Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the right,
and place your selves behind your Leaders.

Note, This motion begins with that Rank next the File Leaders.

Direction. File Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the
right, and place themselves behind their Leaders, every Rank successively
passing through, and taking their places.

R. File-Leaders, face to the Rear; the rest pass through to the left,
following your Bringers-up, placeing your selves behind your Leaders.

Note, This Countermarch may be reduced as the rest, by doing the same to the
contrary hand, or by an entire Countermarch of Files.

This may suffice to be spoken of all the several sorts of Countermarches, they
being the least usef^l of any part of the Art-Military. Therefore in the next
place I come briefly to treat of Wheelings.

CHAP. XV. Of Wheelings.
BEfore you begin to Wheel, close both Ranks and Files to their order.

Two things are to be observed in all Wheelings. 1. That they keep their due
distan^e, which is in all Wheelings three Foot, both in Rank and File. 2. That
upon all Wheelings you must besure to follow your Leader.

Entire Wheelings.

C. Wheel your Battle to the Right Left Right about Left about


Direction. The right or left hand man in the Front are the Hinges of these
motions, who with a small motion move to the right or left; the rest, the more
their places are remote from the right or left Angle, the more swift must every
man's motion be to bring their Aspects unto the place Commanded: following their
Leaders, and keeping their distance.

R. If (...) wheel to the right about, then Wheel to the right about again. If
to the left, then to the left, this being the nearest both of A^pect and place.

C. Wheel your Battle on the same ground to the (...) Left Right about Left
about.


Direction. Left Half-Ranks move forwards, and Wheel to the right: Right Half
Ranks, face to the left side ways falling backward, move to the place Commanded.

C. Wheel off your Front by division, into the Rear.

Direction. File-Leaders of the right Flank, Wheel about to the right: File
Leaders of the left Flank, Wheel about to the left in the same manner* close
your divisions.

C. Wheel the Body off by division from the Rear, into the Front.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and turn off to the right and left.

C. Wheel the Body inward to the Rear, from the Front.

Direction. Open from the midst of Files and Wheel inward.

C Wheel off the Body by division from the right Flank, into the Left.

Direction. Face to the right.

C. Wheel off the Body by division from the left Flank, into the Right.

Direction. Face to the left.

C. Wheel off your Front and Reer-half-Files by division, into midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half-Files face about; Front and Rear half-Files turn off by
division.

C. Wheel your Front and Rear half-Files inward to the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half Files, face about; Front and Rear half Files, open outward to
convenient distance; then Wheel inward to the midst of Ranks.

C. Wheel off your Front and Rear half-Files by division from the midst of
Ranks, into Front and Rear.

Direction. Front-half-Files, face about; Front and Reer-half-Files, Wheel off
to the right and left by division.

C. Wheel Front and Reer-half Files inward, to Front and Rear from the midst of
Rank^.

Direction. Front-half Files, face about; Front and Rear half Files, open from
the midst to convenient distance, and Wheel inward to Front and Rear.

C. Wheel off your right and left Half-Ranks by division, into Front and Rear.

Direction. Face outward and Wheel off to the right and left by division.

C. Wheel your right and left Half-Ranks inward to the midst of Files.

Direction. Face outward, and open to the right and left; then Wheel inward to
the midst of Files.

C. Wheel off your right and left Half-Ranks by division from the midst of
Files.

Direction. Face inward, then move backwards to a convenient distance, and so
Wheel off by division from the midst of Files.

C. Wheel your right and left Half Ranks inward to both Flanks from the midst
of Files.

Direction. Face inward, and open to the right and le^t to a convenient
distance, and Wheel inward to both Flanks.

As for Reducement of every particular Wheeling, you may observe as before in
Countermarches: unto what hand soever they Wheeled, Command them to Wheel to
the contrary hand, and they will be Reduced: Or what part is Wheeled of
division, Wheel inward again from that place.

CHAP. XVI. Of Fireings.
THe Front being the head of the Body, challenges the first place.

1. By single Ranks, advancing three paces, falling into the Rear of themselves.

2. By way of Introduction after this manner: the first Rank gives Fire and
stands, the rest moving forwards until the next Rank has placed themselves
before the first, then give Fire, the rest moving up and doing the like, and by
Fireing once more the same way, the File Leaders come up again to their proper
places.

3. Fire, four Ranks together, one kneeling, two stooping, and the last
standing*

4. Fire, some Ranks drawn forth to the Right Left.


Of Fireing to the Rear.
1. Face to the Right Left
about, Fire. Falling into the Front of their own divisions.

2. By way of Introduction to the Rear twice over until they come down even
with the Rear.

3. Fire to the right and left about to the Rear, Ranks drawn forth, and in
again.

4. Fire, loosing ground, falling off to the right and left.

Of Fireing to both Flanks.
1. Face to the Right Left


2. By way of Introduction to the right or left.

3. By Flanks doubling, their Right or Left Flank.

CHAP. XVII. A Doubling to make every man a File-Leader by Dignity.
C. HAlf Files, double your Front to the left.

C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing, every man placeing
himself before his Leader.

C. Front Half-Files, double your Rear to the left.

C. Double your Files to the left entire advancing every man placeing himself
before his Leader.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right.

C. Files, double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right.

C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing.

C. Ranks, to the right double.

C. Files, to the right double.

C. Bringers-up, double your Front to the left.

C. Files, double your depth to the left, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Reducement* Ranks, to the left double. Files, to the left double.

Note, Fewer words of Command will perform this, if four in File, but this
intented for Six in File.

CHAP. XVIII. The several duties belonging to a Foot Company.
A Private Soldier ought to be very Active, not slothful and idle, informing
himself of his duty, learning from his Corporal, or other Officers; the true
use and handling of his Arms, always keeping them neat and clean, and well
fixed. Upon Beat of the Drum, he is to repair to his Colors, or Company: upon
the March, he must observe his Leader, and his Right Hand Man, that he may
March straight in File, and even in Rank. In time of Exercise, he must be
Silent, minding the words of Command and Direction, which are given forth by
the Leader. He ought likewise to be well versed in all the ordinary words of
Command; and to mind the place he stands in, that he may the more readier move,
whether it be to Face, Double, Countermarch, or Wheel.

To Conclude, a Private Soldier ought to avoid all Quarreling, Mutinies,
Swearing, Cursing or Lying; also avoiding Drunkenness, and all manner of
Gaming: he ought to be Loving and Cou^^eous to all his Fellow Soldiers

Of a Captain.
HE that is a Captain of a Company, ought in respect he Leads the same, and
is Chief, to appoint unto the Officers their several places, what Divisions
they shall Lead, and where they shall March; and according to the number of
Files to make his Divisions answerable thereto. He is as well to know his own,
as all the several Duties of his Officers, and to be a good Posture-man
himself, that when he sees any of his Soldiers handling of their Arms in an
undecent and slovenly manner, may the better reprove them for the same. And
although many Captains regard them not, but leave them to be instructed by the
Inferior Officers, yet it is a great honor to a Captain when his Soldiers
are taught by himself.

In time of engagement with an Enemy, he must Courageously and wisely behave
himself, and encourage his Soldiers of hopes of Victory, Cheerfully animating
of his Soldiers to fall on. He is to take a Fatherly care of his Soldiers,
timely providing ^or the Maimed, Wounded and Sick, such helps and remedies as
their present conditions requires. His care must be to execute Justice, appease
Quarrels, punish Offenders; by doing whereof, he will main^ain the Honor and
Dignity of his place: and again, he must not be too rigid and ha^sh, Caning or
Beating without just cause, lest he incurr their hatred Moreover he ought to be
Religious, Temperate and discreet, Faithful in his trust, Valiant in the Field
against his Enemy.

Of a Lieutenant.
HE that is a Lieutenant to a Company, ought to be a good and able Soldier,
and well understand the duty of a Captain, in respect he is Captain and
Commander in Chief over them in his absence. In the absence of his Captain, he
is to see all such orders as he has received, duly executed: He is to teach
and instruct the Soldiers in the use of their Arms, and to show them their
Postures. In time of Exercise, he ought to be in the Rear, and to see all
things there truly executed according to the Captains Commands

Briefly, He ought to know how far his power does extend, either in the
presence or absence of his Captain, always demeaning himself so that he may
gain the love of his whole Company, by acting those things amongst them as may
be just and honest.

Of an Ensign.
AN Ensign being a Commission Officer, in the absence of his Captain and
Lieutenant, is Commander in chief of the Company. He ought to be a proper man,
Grave, Valiant and discreet, and to be well skilled in all the lofty Figures of
displaying the Colors above the head; and to make use of them according to
discretion and command; which is not only a heal^hful Exercise to his Body, but
also most becoming him, or any other Gentleman or Commander whatsoever.

Of a Sargeant.
A Sargeant ought to be well skilled in the Postures, and all Military Motions;
whereby he may Correct the Errors of such as handle not their Arms in an
handsome or serviceable way; and also helpful to his Captain, or other
Superior Officers in time o^ Exercise: His duty is to draw forth the Files
according to such depths as shall be appointed him by his Cap^ain, or other
Superior Officer, and to o^der them in drawing up* and joining together the
Soldiers to such places of honor as they shall direct him. He is concerned to
see that the Soldiers March even in their Ranks at their distance of Order in
File, and Open Order in Rank. Also, he must direct the Corporals where to set
out the Sentinels, and how to order his Watch: He must likewise make Rounds;
and if he find a Sentinel asleep, he is to commit him to Justice.

Of a Corporal.
THe Corporals of a Company are not tied to a set number, but to be ordered
according to the several divisions of the same; for their rule of Dignity, I
conceive according to Elton, to make them the Right hand File^Leader in every
division. His Duty is to teach and instruct them in the right use of their
A^ms: he must likewise preserve and keep ^he word constant in his Mem^ry: when
the Captain of the Watch goes the first Round, he shall with his Sword drawn
against his breast give it him; and receive such orders from him as he shall
Command him: but afterward when the Round shall come again, he shall cause the
Rounders (or Gentlemen) with his Sword drawn, to give the word to him before
they pass: He ought never to go alone (being called by the Sentinel) but to
have a Guard of three or four Musketeers with him, selected out of his Corpse of
Guard. He must advice his Sentinels how to demean themselves upon a discovery
of an Enemy, either to give an Alarm, or else to give notice without making a
noise. He is likewise to have an eye to their Lives and Manners, and to take
care his own carriage be Sober, Wise and discret, for the avoiding ill example
unto others.

Of a Clerk.
HIS carriage ought to be very just and honest; his chiefest duty is to keep
the Muster Roll: he is many times entrusted to receive the Companies Money, and
pay such Moneys as shall be ordered him by his Captain, giving a true account
to his Captain of all such Moneys he has either received or paid forth.

Of the Drummers.
EVery Captain ought to have two good Drums and Drummers, that knows how to
Beat all the several Points of War. It is likewise Expedient that they should
be good Linguists, in respect sometimes they may be sent to an Enemy for the
Ransoming of Prisoners.

CHAP. XIX. Of Military Watches.
THE Corporals according to order given them, are to dispose of the several
Sentinels, and to have an especial care that they keep their Muskets Prim'd and
Laden; which must often be observed by visiting of the several Sentinels, to
see that all things be in due order and with silence; to the end that the
Sentinels may always be heard, as often as occasion may offer. The Office of
every Sentinel after he is placed upon his duty, is to enquire of every
Passenger or others that shall but stir, Who Comes there? Yea, though it be the
Captain himself. The Rounds are made with light, so soon as a Sentinel
perceives any, he is to cry with a loud voice, so that he may be heard by the
next Corpse of Guard: Who comes there? He who goes the Round should Answer,

The Round, Or, The Round Major, Or, The Grand Round.

The Sentinels by whom he passes should ^lways rest their Arms, and never
permit any whomsoever to come near them. When they draw near a Corpse of Guard,
the Sentinel shall ask him, Who comes there?

So soon as he Answers, The Round

The Sentinel is to call to him to Stand. And to the Corporal to come forth.

Thereupon the Corporal is to come immediately out of the Corpse of Guard, to
draw his Sword and Ask,

Who comes there?

When he is Answered, The Round

He is to say, Let him who has the word, advance.

Then the Round Advances and gives the Word into the Corporals Ear so low that
he cannot be heard by any body else. But if one should give any other Word than
what is true, he ought to be stopped, and the Officer of the Guard is to be
acquainted wi^h it* who either keeps him all night a Prisoner, or disposes of
him as he thinks proper.

Such as walk the Round, are to take a strict account of all they meet, What,
and who they are, and in case of deficiency, of answering justly on the one
side or suspicion, on the other; they are to secure and guard them to the Corpse
of Guard. A Sentinel, is* to stand in his Place and Posture a full ho^r and no
more, at which time the Corporal is to relieve him.

CHAP. XX. The Ordering of a private Company, on a Funeral Occasion.
WHen any Commander or Soldier of Worth, shall be Deceased, a private Cap^ain
that would show respect and honor, by his Companies attending the Corpse to the
place of Burial, must order his Soldiers after this manner. They being
Summoned by Beat of the Drum to meet at their usual place of Randezvouze, they
may be drawn up acco^ding to the usual manner. The Captain may order them to
March in an orderly manner to the place of him that is Deceased, being in two
Divisions, let them so continue with their Arms Ordered, until such time as the
Corpse be brought into the Street, after which the Captain may Command them to
perform the Funeral Posture; which is,

Bring your Musket under your left Arm, with the Barrel downward, bearing the
But-end upward with your two four Fingers, and your Thumb; holding of the Pan
with the left hand* bringing your right hand backward, taking (...) of the
Musket near the Muzzel.

The Captain and Lieutenant conforming their Half Pikes to the Funeral Posture*
the Ensign either stripping his Colors from the S^a^f, tying them about his
Wast, puti^g a black Ribbon to the end of his S^a^f, or have a black Vail to
come over them after they are ^url'd, con^orming to the Funeral Posture. The
Drums being covered with Black, Beating the Funeral March. When the Body is
laid in the Grave, they upon warning of the Drum (being all ready and
presented) give th^ee Volleyes of Shot altogether; at which time the Ensign
unfurl his Colors, and the Body upon the Mar^^ to the place of lodging the
Colors, where after a Volley of Shot, a Dismission being Beat, every man may
return to his Quarters.

A POEM On the Art Military, AND Complete Soldier.
I Was no Poet born; nor ere could mount
The Muses Sacred Hill; or reach their Fount,
Where it is held a Crime, to talk about
Meriting Works, and not to Rhyme it out.
The Fire Lock Musket's with their Use:
And necessary Motions which conduce
As Media's to attain them: Those Ways best
Most Ready, Safe, Easy, Comeliest.
Ordained so, that all the parts are decked
With men of Equal worth, and like respect.
And to Enbody them; the joining Files
Flank wise (effecting Ranks) the Band compiles.
Due Distances, whereby just PARALLEL,
Rank keeps to Rank, and File to File: as well
When they do Open, Close, Move; as when they stand,
And save their Evening, Straightning, Post-Command.
Faceings no more, nor fewer then you see
The in-ner, and out-ter Sides, and Angels be.
Lengthning or Strengthening, Doubling Files, or Ranks;
Battle, Front, Rear, Both; one, or both the Flanks.
Dance like Counter-marches, Wheelings precise.
Fireings that SERVE to MASTER Enemies*
Duties of all the Private Souldieries,
The Militia Laws: For the Artilleries.
And Officers to Captains. The Charge
Of Military-Watches: and their large
Commission. Then, to order Companies,
And Soldiers at Funeral Obsequies.
Sure, in most Holy-Writ, we find this Art's
Laid-down before us, in the Whole and Parts
Thereof: It Is Taught, and Learned, and Practiced
By Gods own People, and it may be said,
The Postures of the Arms in those times held
(Of Bow and Arrow; Buckler Lau^^^; Spear, Shield.)
Watches and Wards. Armies of Myriads,
Reg'ments of Thousand, Bands of Hundereds,
Fi^ties; Files of tens. Closing Hosts for fight,
And (...) what I have not Room to write.
LET them that undertake to Praise a Book,
Not on the Title, but the matter look.
Of Cock-Brain'd Milit^sters store there are
That are pretenders in the Art of War;
Can Military Discipline express
In words of Art, and windy flourishes;
Big Looks and Language louder than the Drum:
As knowing more than this Compendium;
When Si^^y Vapors, they never read or saw,
More then the Statutes of the Martial Law.
FINIS.
THE Contents.
THE Introduction. Page. 7 The Definition of a Posture. Page. 9 The Exercise of
the Musket. Page. 10 The Exercise of the Granadiers Page. 17 The Soldiers
place of Dignity Page. 20 Of the Drum Page. 23 The several Distances Page. 25
Of Faceings Page. 28 Entire Doublings to the Front Page. 31 Divisional
Doublings Page. 36 Entire doublings to the Front by Wheeling. Page. 37 A
divisional doubling to the Front by Wheeling. Page. 38 Of Files Ranking, or
Files Fileing Page. 39 Of Countermarches Page. 41 Of Wheelings Page. 47 Of
Fireings Page. 51 The several duties belonging to a Foot Company. Page. 54 Of
Military Watches Page. 60 The ordering of a private Company on a Funeral
Occasion. Page. 62
The Military LAWS: Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

I. An Act for Regulating the Militia, begun and held at Boston, November. the 8
th. 1693.

II. An Act in Addition to the Act, for Regulating the Militia, begun and held
at Boston, the 31. day of May, 1699.

III. An Act for putting the Militia of this Province into a readiness for
defense of the same, begun and held at Boston the 31. of May 1699. And
continued by several Prorogations unto the 13. day of March following.

Boston, Printed for Nicholas Boon. 1701.

Military LAW: An Act for Regulating of the Militia.
WHEREAS for the Honor and Service of Their Majesty's, and for the Security of
this Their Province against any Violence or Invasion whatever: It is necessary
that du^ care be taken that the Inhabitants thereof be Armed, Trained, and in a
suitabl^ posture and readiness for the ends aforesaid; and that every Person
may know his duty and be obliged to perform the same.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and it is Ordained and Enacted by
the Authority of the same.

1. THAT all Male Persons from Sixteen years of Age to Sixty, (other than such
as are herein after excepted) shall bear Arms, and duly attend all Musters and
Military Exercises of the respective Troops and Companies where they are listed
or belong, allowing three Months time to every Son next after his coming to
Sixteen years of Age; and every Servant so long after his time is out* to
provide themselves with Arms and Ammunition etc.

2. AND the Clerk of each Troop and Company once a Quarter yearly, shall take
an Exact List of all Persons living within the Precincts of such Troop o^
Company, and present the same to the Captain or Chief Officer, on pain of
forfeiting Forty Shillings for each default, to be paid to the Captain or Chief
Officer to the use of the Company. And in case of non payment, to be levied by
distress and sale of the offenders goods, by virtue of a Warrant from the
Captain or Chief Officer, who is hereby Empowered to grant the same.

3. THAT every Person listed in any Troop or Company shall so continue and
attend all duty in such Troop or Company, or otherwise suffer the penalty by
Law provided, until orderly dismissed or removed out of the Town or Precinct; and
in case of removal into the Precinct of another Company in the same Town, to
produce a Certificate under the hand of the Captain or Chief Officer of the
Precinct whereto he is removed, that he is listed there.

4. IF any Person liable to be listed as aforesaid, do exempt himself by
Shifting from house to house, or place to place, to avoid being so listed; he
shall pay as a Fine for every such offense, to the use of the Company to which
he belongs, Ten Shillings, being Convicted before any Justice of the Peace of
the County.

5. THAT every listed Soldier and other Householder (except Troopers) shall be
always provided with a well fixed Firelock Musket, of Musket or Bastard Musket
bore; the Barrel not less than three foot and a half long, or other good Fire
Arms, to the Satisfaction of the Commission Officers of the Company, a
Snapsack, a Collar with Twelve Bandeleers or Cartouch box, one Pound of good
Powder, twenty Bullets fit for his Gun, and twelve Flints, a good Sword or
Cutlash, a Worm and Priming-wire fit for his Gun; on penalty of Six Shillings
for want of such Arms as is hereby required, and Two Shillings for each other
defect, and the like Sum for every four weeks he shall remain unprovided; the
Fine to be paid by Parents for the Sons under Age, and under their Command; and
by Masters or heads o^ Families, for their Servants, other than Servants upon
Wages.

6 THAT every Trooper shall be always provided with a good serviceable Horse,
of Five Pounds value, and not less than fourteen hands high (the same to be
determined by the two chief Commission Officers) covered with a good Saddle,
Bit, Bridle, Holsters, Pectoral and Crooper; and furnished with a Carbine, the
Barrel not less than two foot and hal^ long, with a Belt and Swivel, a case of
good Pistols; wi^h a Swo^d or Cutlash, a ^la^k or Ca^touch-box; one pound of
good Powder, three pounds of s^zeable Bullets, twenty Flints and a good pair of
Boots and Spurs; on penalty of Twelv^ Shillings ^or want of such Horse as is
hereby ordered, and Three Shillings a piece ^or every other defect* and the
like Sum for every six weeks he shall remain unprovided: and that each Troope^
(...) his Horse, and shall not dispose thereof without the (...) o^ his c^ief
Officer, on the penalty o^ Five Pounds: And for non appearance at the time and
place appointed for Exercise, every listed Trooper for each days neglect shall
pay Ten Shillings Fine.

7. THAT there may be two Troops in a Regiment, each of which Troops shall not
exceed Sixty men with Officers.

8. THAT Regimental Musters shall be but once in three years, (except in
Boston) And every Captain or Chief Officer of any Company or Troop in any
Regiment, shall be obliged on penalty of Five Pounds, to draw forth his Company
or Troop, or cause them to be drawn forth four days Annually, and no more, to
Exercise them in Motions, the use of Arms, and Shooting at Marks, or other
Military Exercises, which every person liable to Train, having been duly
warned, and not appearing and attending the same, shall for each days neglect
pay a Fine of Five Shillings.

9. THAT the Commission Officers of any Company or Troop, or the major part of
them, may order the correcting and punishing disorders and contempt on a
Training Day, or on a Watch, the punishment not being greater than laying Neck
and Heels, Riding the Wooden Horse, or Ten Shillings fine.

10. THAT there be Military Watches appointed and kept in every Town, at such
times, in such places, and in such numbers, and under such Regulations as the
chief Military Officers of each Town shall appoint, or as they may receive
Orders from the Chief Officer of the Regiment: And that all persons able of
Body, or that are of Estate (and not exempted by Law) shall by themselves or
some meet person in their stead, to the acceptance of the Commander of the
Watch, attend the same, on penalty of Five Shillings for each de^ect; there
having been due warning given.

11. EVERY Soldier or other person liable by Law, refusing or neglecting to
attend Military Exercises, on Training days; or Military Watches, that shall
not pay, or have no Estate to be found whereon to levy the fine, it shall be in
the power of the Captain, or Chief Officers of such Company on the next
Training day after such neglect (he not having satisfied the Clerk) to punish
him for such offense, by laying Neck and Heels, or Riding the Wooden Horse, not
exceeding one Hours time: And if such Delinquent shall absent himself the
second Training day, without giveing sufficient reason to the Captain, or Chief
Officer for the same; it shall be in the power of the Chief Officer of the
Company to direct a Warrant to the Constable of the Town, requiring him to
apprehend such Delinquent, and bring him into the Field, that he may be punished
according as by this Law is provided: And all Constables are hereby Required to
Execute such Warrants accordingly.

12. THAT the Persons hereafter named be Exempted from all Trainings; Viz. The
Members of the Council the Representatives, for the time being, the Secretary,
Justices of the Peace, Praes^dent, Fellows, Students, and Servants of Harvard
College, Exempted by College Charter, Masters of Art, Ministers, Elders and
Deacons of Churches, Sheriffs, allowed Phys^cians, or Chyrurg^^ns, and professed
School Masters, all such as have had Commissions, and Served as Field Officers,
or Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns, Coroners, Treasurers, Attorney General,
Deputy Sheriffs, Clerks of Courts, Constables, constant Ferrymen, and one
Miller to each Grist-Mill: Officers employed in and about Their Majesty's
Revenues, all Masters of Vessels of Thirty Tons and upwards, usually employed
beyond Sea, and constant Herdsmen, Lame Persons or otherwise disabled in Body
(producing Certificate thereof from two able Chyrurgeons) Indians and Negroes.

13. THAT the Persons hereafter named be and hereby are Exempted from Military
Watches and Wardings, viz. The Members of the Council, Secretary,
Representatives for the time being, Praesident, Fellows, Students of Harvard
College, and the Gentlemen belonging to the Troop of the Governors Guard,
Ministers and Elders of Churches, allowed Physician^ and Chyrurgeons,
Constables, constant Ferry men, and one Miller to each Grist-Mill.

14. THAT the Captain and Commission Officers of each Company or Troop, shall
and hereby are fully empowered to nominate and appoint meet persons to Serve as
Sergeants and Corporals in the respective Companies or Troops, and displace
them, and appoint others in their room, as they shall see meet.

15. THAT twice every year or oftener if required, every Captain or Chief
Officer of each Company or Troop shall give order for a diligent enquiry into
the state of his Company, and for taking an exact list of the names of his
Soldiers, and Inhabitants within the Limits of his Company, and of the defects
of Arms or otherwise, and names of the defective persons, that they may be
prosecuted as the Law has provided, and such care may be taken as is proper to
remedy the same.

16. THAT if any person who is by Law obliged to provide Arms and Ammunition,
cannot purchase the same by such means as he has, if he bring to the Clerk of
the Company, Corn or other Merchantable Provision, or vendible Goods, so much
as by Apprizement of the Clerk and two other persons mutually chosen, shall be
judged of greater value by one fifth part than such Arms or Ammunition is of:
he thereupon shall be excu^ed from the penalties for want of Arms and
Ammunition, until he can be provided, which said Clerk shall provide as soon as
may be by sale of such goods, and render the overplus to the party, if any be:
But the party shall notwithstanding give his personal a^t^^dance upon all
occasions as other Soldiers, until he be supplied, and at such times shall
perform any proper Service he may be put upon by the Captain of Chief Officer
of the Company he belongs to; but if the person be judged unable to buy Arms,
or to lay down the value proposed, if he be a single man, he shall be put out
to Service by the two next Justices of Peace to earn wherewith to buy Arms and
Ammunition; if such person have a Family and be judged unable* by the Captain
and major part of the Select men to lay down such value for the end aforesaid,
then he shall be provided for out of the Town Stock, or by Arms procured at the
Towns charge, until such time as he be judged able to provide for himself, and
such Arms to be under the care of the chief Military Officer and the Select-men
of the Town.

17. THAT Drums, Drummers, Trumpets, Trumpeters, Colors and Banners be by the
Commission Officers of each Troop or Company provided at the charge of the
respective Companies and Troops where there are not already provided, and the
fines will not reach to procure the same, and that such as have been employed
as Drummers or Trump^ters, or are fit and capable thereof, being appointed unto
such Service by the Chief Officer of any Company or Troop, shall attend the
Service, on penalty of Forty Shillings fine, and every Drummer for a years
Service shall have Twenty Shillings i^ he find his own Drum, and Ten Shillings
if the Captain finds the Drum; and a Trumpeter Forty Shillings a year, if he
find his own Trumpet, and Twenty Shillings, if the Captain finds it.

18. THAT such meet person as by the Commission Officers of any Company or
Troop shall be appointed Clerk, and shall refuse to serve, shall pay Forty
Shillings fine, and another be chosen in his room, and so until one do accept:
which person shall be under Oath for the faithful discharge of his Office, to
be Administered unto him by a Justice of Peace in the same County, in the words
following.

YOu do Swear truly to perform the Office of Clerk of the Military Company
under the Command of A. B. Captain, to the utmost of your skill and power in
all things appertaining to your Office according to Law. So help you God.

And for every distraint made for any fine not exeeeding Forty Shillings, he
shall have one quarter part for his pains and trouble. And for such fines he
may distrain Ex Officio; and in distraining shall observe such Rules as the Law
has provided in other cases; and upon ten days notice shall account with and
pay to the Captain or Chief Officer what fines he has receiv^d, his own part
being deducted.

19. THE Chief Military Officer of each Regiment as often as he shall see
cause, shall require the Captain or Chief Officer of each Company in his
Regiment to meet at such time and place as he shall appoint, and then with them
to confer and give in charge such Orders as shall by them, or major part of
them be judged meet, for the better ordering and settling their several
Companies, and for the better promoting of Military Discipline amongst them.
And the Chief Officer is hereby empowered by his Warrant directed to any Clerk
or Officer of his Regiment to summon or cause to be brought before them any
Offender against the Laws Military, and according to Law to hear and determine
all matters proper for their Cognizance, and to give sentence, and to grant
Mittimus or Warrants for Distraint to the Clerk of the Company where the
Offense is committed, for ex^cu^ing which Warrant, if above Fo^ty Shillings, he
shall have Ten Shillings out of the same for his pains and trouble therein; and
no more.

20. THAT there be a stock of Powder and Ammunition in each Town provided, and
from time to time as there is need, be renewed by the Select-men; which shall
be a barrel of good Powder, two hundred weight of Bullets, and three hundred
Flints for every sixty listed Soldiers, and after that proportion for the
listed Soldiers of each Town, whether more or less: Also that the Select-men
procure such a number of Arms, and so much Ammunition as shall be made appear
by the Chief Commission Officers of each Company in the several Towns to be
needful for the supply of such Poor as by Law they are to provide for: And such
Town as cannot make it appear to the chief Commander of the Regiment that they
are thus provided at or before the first of May next, shall pay Five Pounds
fine, which shall be distrained by Warrant from said Officer directed unto the
Constable upon the Select men of the Town or any of them, and disposed of for
the use of said Town toward the supply of such Stock; and the like Sum for
every three months they shall remain so unprovided.

21. AND the Select-men where there is not a sufficient Stock of Powder, Arms
and Ammunition, and in such Towns where there is need of Watch houses, Firing
and Candl^s for their Watches; in such case the Select men for so much as is
wanting are to procure or satisfy what is required or needed as before, and
shall make provision for the same by a Rate equally and justly laid upon the
Inhabitants and Estate in such Towns, and such Rate signed and committed by
them to the Constables to collect, who shall, and hereby are required and
authorized to collect the same; and for non payment to distrain as for other
Rates, and the money or pay collected to be brought in to the chief Military
Officers and Select-men of the Town, to be by them improved for the ends
aforesaid. And the Select men or so many of them as shall neglect their duty
herein, shall pay Twenty Shillings fine, to be paid to the Captain for the use
of the Company, being convict before two Justices of the Peace, who are hereby
empowered to convent the party, and to hear and determine the same, and if need
be, to appoint other meet persons in such Towns under the like penalties to
perform said Service.

22. THAT no Clerk Ex Offi^io make distraint for any fine until four days after
the Offense committed; that so the party may have opportunity to make excuse,
if any he have, why he should not pay the ^ine; and every Clerk that neglects
or refus^s to account or make payment, as by this Law is provided, he by a
Warrant from the chief Officer of the Company directed to the Constable, may be
distrained on for so much as he has or should have collected or distrained for.

23. THAT all Officers yield Obedience to the Warrants or Commands of their
Superior Officers on penalty of Five Pounds; to be heard and determined at the
next meeting of the chief Officers and Captains of the Regiment; and the fine
to be taken by distress and sale of the Offenders goods, (returning the over
plus if any be) by Warrant from the chief Officer of the Regiment, directed to
the Clerk of the Company to which such offender belongs, and to be improved to
the use and benefit of such Company as the Officers so met shall agree, their
Expenses being first defrayed out of the same.

24. THAT an Alarm at the Castle upon Castle Island near Boston, being made
upon such causes as are agreeable to Instructions to be given by the Governor
to the Captain of the Castle, shall be by putting out two Flaggs, and firing of
two Guns toward the Town; at which time there shall with all possible speed
such numbers be sent down for their relief, as the Governor and Captain
General, or such person as shall be Commander in Chief in his absence, shall
think necessary. At any other place an Alarm may be made by firing three Guns
one after another, or by firing a Beacon, their Drums beating an Alarm, all
persons being called upon to Arm: Upon which all the Tra^ned Soldiers, and
others capable to bear Arms that are then Resident in any Town, shall forthwith
appear complete with their Arms and Ammunition according to Law, at the usual
place of Rendezvous, or where the Chief Officers shall appoint; there to attend
such Commands as shall be given for Their Majesty's Service; and that on the
penalty of Five Pounds fine, or three months Imprisonment: The Members of the
Council, Justices and Sheriffs to attend upon the Governor, if at or near
Boston, and in other places, to appear and advise with the Chief Military
Officers of the Town, and to be assisting in Their Majesty's Service according
to their Quality; and such Alarms shall at all times be carried on from
Neighborhood to Neighborhood, and from Town to Town throughout the Province,
and from such Town where the Alarm is made, there shall be forthwith dispatched
one or more Horse men to signify the occasion thereof to the Justice of Peace,
Chief Military Officer or Constable of the next Town or Towns, which all
persons are to take notice of and attend as is before directed: And if the
Alarm* be made either from a Sea port Town, or other Town that lies a Frontier
to, or in great danger of the Enemy; the Captain or Captains of the Adjacent
Towns shall forthwith go with or send such relief as they shall judge meet for
the offense of the Enemy, or de^ence of themselves and Neighbors, but so as to
be observant to any Commands or Orders they may receive from their Superior
Officers: And if any person shall wilfully make a false Alarm, he shall be
fined to Their Majesty's Twenty Pounds for support of the Government, or suffer
six months Imprisonment.

25. NO Officer Military or Civil, or other person shall Quarter or Billet any
Soldier or Seaman upon any Inhabitant within this Province, without his
consen^ (other than the Public Licen^ed Houses) under the penalty of One
hundred Pounds; to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any
Court of Record; one half to Their Majesty's, for the support of the
Government; the other half part to the party grieved that shall inform and sue
for the same. And every such Inhabitant may refuse to Quarter any (...) or
Seaman notwithstanding any order whatsoever.

26. THAT all persons Exempted by this Law from Trainings, shall
notwithstanding be provided with Arms and Ammunition complete upon the same
penalty as those that are obliged to Train.

27. ALL Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures arising by Virtue of this Act or any
breach thereof (not otherwise disposed of therein) shall be for the use of the
Regiment, Company, or Troop respectively: That is to say, for procuring and
repairing Drums, Trumpets, Colors, Banners, Halberts, paying of Drummers and
Trumpeters, or other charge of said Company; and the over plus (if any be) to
be laid out in Arms and Ammunition for a Town Stock, and be recovered by
Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record.

An Act in Addition to the Act, For Regulating the Militia.
WHEREAS in and by the Act Entitled, An Act, For Regulating the Militia,
amongst other things therein contained: It is Enacted, That Drums, Drummers,
Trumpets, Trumpeters, Colors and Banners be by the Commission Officers of each
Troop or Company, provided at the Charge of the respective Companies and Troops
where they are not already provided, and the Fines will not reach to procure
the same. But no direction being gi^en by the said Law how or in what manner
such Charge shall be Raised and Levied upon such Company or Troop.

Be it therefore Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That when and so often as the ^ines arising in any Military Company or Troop
shall not be sufficient to answer the Charge of providing suitable Drums,
Trumpets, Colors and Banners, and the support of Drummers, or Trumpeters. The
Commission Officers of such Company or Troop respectively are hereby Authorized
and Empowered to Assess so much as shall be wan^ing and necessary for that use
and occasion, upon their Company or Troop; and to proportion the same in the
most equal manner they may, upon all the persons Entered in the Roll of such
Company or Troop, and liable to attend any Military Duty in the same, having
due regard unto persons ability for Estate and other Circumstances. And where
there be Sons and Servants, their Parents or Masters to pay for them if they
cannot do it themselves. And the Assessment so made being Signed by the
Commission Officers, shall be committed unto the Clerk of such Company or
Troop, together with a Warrant from the Chief Officer of the same, requiring
said Clerk to Collect and pay in the same unto himself, to be employed and
disposed to the use aforesaid: And to make distress of all persons that shall
neglect or refuse to pay their proportion thereof. And such Clerk is hereby
Empowered and Required to execute such Warrant accordingly, and to pay in said
Moneys unto his Chief Officer. And if any fail in their betrustment and duty
aforesaid, they shall be liable to give account to their Superior Officers
from time to time.

An Act for putting the Militia of this Province into a readiness for defense
of the same.
WHEREAS by the Law of this Province, it is already Provided, That in case of
Alarms made either from a Seaport Town, or other Town lying Frontier to or in
danger of an Enemy, the Captain or Captains of the adjacent Towns shall
forthwith go or send such relief as they shall judge meet for the Offense of
the Enemy, and Defense of themselves, etc. But Forasmuch as the Occasion may be
such and so sudden, as it may be necessary to call together, Arm, Array and put
into a posture for War the whole Militia and Forces of one or more Regiments
for the Defense of the Province, and His Majesty's Subjects therein, in case of
Invasion or near approach of an Enemy, before the notice thereof can reach the
Captain General or Commander in Chief, to have Directions or Orders from him
for the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by His Excellency the Governor, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Council and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all persons Commissioned by
the Captain General or Commander in Chief of this Province for the time being,
to bear Office in any Military Compa^y or Troop within the same, be, and hereby
are Empowered and Authorized by virtue of such Commission, when and as occasion
shall require, in the cases and to the in^ents and purposes abovesaid, to Arm,
Array and Weapon the Company or Troop respectively under their Command, o^ part
of them; and by force of Arms to Encounter, Repel, Pursue, Kill and Destroy any
that shall appear in hostile manner to att^mpt or enterprise the destruction,
invasion, detriment or annoyance of (...) His Majesty's Subjects, Forts,
Garrisons, Towns or Plantations within this Province* And that such Officer or
Officers so taking to Arms, shall forthwith dispatch notice to his or their
Superior Officer of his or their motion and the occasion thereof, and observe
such Commands and Orders as he or they shall receive from him.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Colonel or
Chief Officer of each Regiment be, and hereby is Empowered and Authorized, as
occasion shall requi^e, in any of the cases and to the intents before menti^ned
from time to time to assemble in Mar^i^l Array, and put into Warlike posture
the whole Militia of the R^giment under his Command, or such part of them as he
shall think needful, upon any Alarm, Invasion, or notice of the appearance of
an Enemy by Sea or Land: And the Regiment, Companies or Troops so Armed,
Arrayed and put into Warlike posture, or part of them, to lead, conduct and
employ, or to appoint some other fit person by writing under his hand, to lead,
conduct and employ them as well within the Regiment and County whereto they
belong, as into any other adjacent County or place within this Province for the
assisting, succouring and relieving any of His Majesty's Subjects, Forts,
Garrisons, Towns or places, that shall be assaulted by an Enemy, or in danger
thereof, and with such Party, Companies or Troops, by force of Arms to
Encounter, Repel, Pursue, Kill and Destroy such Enemy or any of them, by all
fitting ways, enterprises and means whatsoever. And the Colonel or Chief
Officer of such Regiment so taking to Arms, or sending forth any party of men,
shall forthwith post away the intelligence and occasion thereof unto the
Captain General or the Commander in Chief for the time being; and shall attend
and observe such Directions and Orders as he shall receive from him. And in
case it happen the Colonel or Chief Officer of any Regiment be out of the
Limits or Precincts of the Regiment for which he is or shall be Commissioned,
at the time of any Invasion, Attack or appearance of an Enemy, or Alarm given
from any of the Neighboring Towns or Regiments, the next Commission Officer
then within the Regiment shall have, use and exercise the same powers and
authorities herein before granted, until the return of the Colonel or other
Superior Officer. And such Officer so acting shall post away the Intelligence
thereof with the occasion for the same as aforesaid unto the Captain General,
or the Commander in Chief for the time being, and shall attend and observe such
Directions and Orders as he shall receive from the Captain General or Commander
in Chief therein.

And for the better preventing of false Alarms by disorderly Shooting off Guns
in the night.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons
whatsoever in any Town or Garrison, shall, during the time of War, or of
keeping a Military Watch in such Town or Garrison, presume to discharge or
Shoot off any Gun or Guns after the Suns Setting, or before the Sun's Rising,
unless in case of Alarm, approach of an Enemy, or other necessary defense. On
pain that every person so offending and being thereof convicted before one or
more of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace shall forfeit and pay the Sum of
Twenty Shillings for each Gun so discharged, one Moiety thereof to and for the
use of the Poor of the Town where the Offense shall be committed, and the other
Moiety to him or them that shall inform or prosecute for the same. And if such
Offender shall not have wherewith to answer the said Fine, or shall refuse or
neglect to pay the same, then he shall be (...) in the Stocks not exceeding two
hours time.

And in case any person so offending be belonging to any Garrison or Forces in
actual Service, and borne in His Majesty's Pay, he shall be punished at the
descretion of a Court Martial, or the Commission Officers of the Garrison,
Company, or Troop where^o he belongs, by putting into the Bilbo's, laying Neck
and Heels, or Riding of the Wooden Horse.

The END.

