INSTRUCTIOns For RIGHT-SPELLING, and PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR READING AND WRITING
TRUE ENGLISH

With several delightful things very Useful and Necessary, both for Young and
Old, to Read and Learn.

By G. Fox.

Reprinted at Philadelphia by REINIER IANSEN 1702.



THE TABLE.
1. The several sorts of Letters. 2. Letters joined. 3. Words divided into
Syllables. 4. The Child's Less^^. 5. Proper Names in Scripture divided into
Syllables, and the Signification of them in English; together with other
m^^morable P^ss^ges, mentioned in Scripture. 6. The Reason of the Names of the
Books of Moses, and other Books. 7. The Signification of the seven Arts. 8.
Weights, Measures and Coyns, mentioned in Scripture reduced into our English
Valuation. 9. The Marks of a true Christian. 10. The names which the Devil in
Scripture are called by. 11. The Names which the Children of God are called by.
12. What Christ is called. 13. The Catec^ism. 14. Proverbs, and shortwise
Sentences. 15. Directions to Spell and read truly. 16. The seven Points
observed in Reading for keeping the Sense with Directions for Notes. 17. How to
spell such Words which are alike in Sound, yet unlike in Signification. 18.
Hard Words used in our English Tongue, explained. 19. Proper Names in
Scripture, with their Signification in English. 20. The Seven Numeral Letters.
21. How any Number may be expressed by Letters. 22. The Table of Numeration,
whereby any Number may be e^pre^^, (...) Letters or Figures. 23. The Table of
Multiplication. 24. Concerning Weights and Measures. 25. A ready way to reckon,
what ones daily Expenses come unto-in the whole Year. 26. To know the Value of
any Sum, and how to set it down.
A a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z. ct ff ss st

The Roman small Letters.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z etc.

The Roman Capitals.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

The Italick small Letters and Capitals.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z etc.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

Double Letters and Consonants.
ct ff fi ffi fl ffl ll sh si ssi sl ss st, etc.

Vowels.
a e i o u.

Words of one Syllable.
AB ac ad af ag ak al am an ap ar at ax az.

Ba ca da fa ga ha ja ka la ma na pa ra sa ta va qua wa ya xa za.

Bab bac bad baf bag bak bal bam ban bap bar bas bat bay baz.

Ab abs bab gab hab habs jab kab chab lab mab nab rab sab zab shab sheb eb deb
keb reb zeb leb lebs lib lyb ib bid dib gib jib kib mib nib rib phib.

Words of many Syllables Divided.
A
A-bo li shed a-bo mi-na ti-on ab sense ab-sti-nence a-bun-dance ac-cep ta-ti
on ac-com pa ny ac com-plish ed ac-cor-ding ly ac cu sto med ac-know ledge
ac-quaint ed ad mi-ni-stred ad ver-si ty a dull te-ry ad-vo cate ad ver tise af
fright a li e-nate al-migh-ty a-maze meant Am-bas-sage Am bas-sa-dor an-swer e
th ap pre hend eth.

B
Babe ba nish-ment bap tism bap ti zed back-ward bat-tel-ment be-lieve be moan
be wai leth bit-ter-ness blade blas pheme blas-phe-my blas-phe mous blos-som
bo-som bot-tel boun-ti-ful bread-corn break breath breed-ing bring bro^ ther-ly
bur-dem-son burst-ing.

C
Ca-la-mi-ty C^l-dron Can-dle-stick Cap-ti-vi ty Cap-tain Car-ri-er Car-pen-ter
Cart-wheel Case-ment Ca-ter-pil-lar ce-le-sti-al Cen-tu-rion ce-re-mo-nies
cer-tain-ly Chaff chain chal lenge cham-ber chan-nel cha-ri-ta-ble cha-stize
meant check Chro-ni-cles cir-cuits cir-cum-cise col-lec-tion co-lo-ny co-lour
com-mo-di-ous con course com-pas-si-on.

D
Dam-age de-cease deem-ed de-fraud-ed de nounce de-scribe de-vote de-vo-ted
dif-fe-rence dis-ap-point-ed di-scern dis-charge dis-ci-pline dis-dain-ed
dis-ho-nour dis-plea-sure dis-pos-sess dis-solve di-stinct-ly dis-tract-ed
dis-tri-bu-ti-on di-vine do-mi-ni-on dou-ble draught Dro-me da-ry drop-sie
drought drow-si-ness Dwarf.

E
Each Ea-gle ear-nest-ly eight-ly e-di-fi-ca-ti on em-bold-ned Em-rald Em-rods
Em-pire E ne-my er-ror es-chew es-pe-ci-al-ly es-pi-ed es pou-sals e-sta-blish
e-stran-ged e-ven-ing e-ver last-ing e-vil Eu-nuch Ewe ex-cess ex-ce-cra-ti on
Ex-or-cists Ex-tor-ti-o-ners ex-tre-mi-ty.

F
Faith-ful fal-low fal-si-fy-ing fa-shi-on-ed fa-thom fa-vour-a-ble fea-ther-ed
fel-low-ship fer-vent-ly few-el fierce-ness fil-thi-ness fi-nish Fir-ma-ment
flat-ter-eth for-bear-ance for-ci-ble.

G
Gad-dest gar-nish-ed ga-ther-ed gaze-ing ge ne-a-lo-gies ge-ne-ra-ti-on
gli-^^er-ing glo^-^i ness glo-ri-ous go-vern-ment gor-ge-ous Grand mo-ther
grant gree-di-ness grieve griev ous ness, gush ed.

H
Ha by ta ble, have haste hail hand ker chief haugh ti ness, ha vock, Hawk,
hark ned Hea then He brew, Hei ^er height Heirs helve Herb He re ticks, He ri
tage, hew ed, Hymn, Hy sop.

I
I dle ness, I do la try, jea lou sie, jeo par die, Ig no mi ny, il sa vour ed,
il lu mi na ted, i ma gine, im po ve rish ed, in cou rage in con ti nen cy, in
dea vour, in dig na ti on, in dict ing, in ter med dle,

K
Kin dled, Kin dred, Kins man, kned, kneel Knife, knit, Knives, knock, know
ledge, Key, kill, Kit tle, ker chiefs, kik neys, kind ness.

L
La bour ing, lurk ing, lance, lanch ed, lan guage, lan guish, lant horns, la
sci vi ous ness, la tin, lat tells, laugh ed, la vish, leaves league ledges, lea
sure, leo pard, lewd ness, Lieu te nant, li quor, let ters, loath some, lodge,
loss lost.

M
Ma-gi-ci-an Ma-gi-strate Mai-den maim-ed man-ger main-te-nance mar-ri-age
mer-chan-dize mar-ve-lous-ly Mer-chant men-stru-ous mil-li-ons mis-chief
mis-chievous Mar-ri-ners Moon mor-ga-ged Mouls mu-ni-ti-on Myrrh.

N
Nail-ing naught Na-vy ne-ces-sa-ry ne-ces-si-ty near-er neg-lect-ed Neigh-bour
neigh-ing nei-ther Ne-phew Net-tles Noise not-with-stan-ding nou-rish-ed
nur-ture.

O
O-ce-an Oar Oak ob-scure ob-scu-ri-ty ob-ser-va-ti-on ob-sti-nate
off-scour-ing offspring op-por-tu-ni-ty op-pose Or-phans oint-ment.

P
Pa-ci-fi-eth pain-ful-ness pale-ness par-ta-ker par-ti-a-li-ty
par-ti-cu-lar-ly par-ti-ti-on Par-tridge pas-sage Past-or pa-sture pat-tern
pa-ti-ence pa-tri-mo-ny peace-a-bly pe-de-grees penknife pe-nu-ry pe-ril-ous
pe-rished per-ni-ci-ous per-pe-tu-al pe-sti-lent Phy-lo-so-phers Phy-si-ci-an
Pi ge ons, Pil grims, Plague, Plai ster, plea sant ness, Ploug, plow ed,
plunge, po pu lous, pos sess, pos ses sor, po^ sherd, pot tage, pre de sti na
ted, pre he mi nence.

Q
Quails, quan ti ty, quar rel, quar ries, quen ched, quick ned, que sti on ed.

R
Rai meant, Rain bow, rai ny, ra vish ed, rea di ness, rec kon ed, re con ci li
a ti on, re new ing* re noun ced, renown ed, re pair er, re pe ti ti on, re ple
nish, re pro bate, re proof, re qui red, re ward, re ceive, re sem blance, re
veal, re ve nue, re vive, re volt, roof, rough ly.

S
Sab bath, Sa vi our, sa vour est, Scar let, scat ter ed, Scep ter, Schism,
Scho lar, School master, Sci ence, scoff, Scorch, Scorn, Scor pi on, Scourge,
Scour ing, Scrip ture, Scribe, Scur vy, scum, seam, seize, se cure ly, sees
ing, seize, sell vedge, Se pull chre, sew ed, sheaf, sheaves, sheath, She kel,
shield, shi ning, shod, Shoes, siege, sic kle, sieve, sift ed sigh, sight,
sign, sin gle ness, sleep, slight, slaugh ter, slight ly, slug guard, slum ber,
so journ, so lid, so lemn, so lem ni ty, so li ta ri ly, South say er, Sor ce
^er, Soul di er, sprung, spun, square, Sto ma cher, strait way, strai ten ed,
stroke, stur die, sub ject, suc ceed, suc cour ed, suc ked, su ste nance, swol
len, swoon ed.

T
Tack ling, Tail, Tale bear er, Tan ne^, tar ry, tar ry ing, taste, taught, te
di ous, Teeth, temp ta ti on, te nour, ter re stri al, ter ri fie' ter ror,
Thief, Thy stle, th rough out, throw ing tongs, tongues, took est, tooth, torn,
tos sing, traf fick, trans pa rent, trea che rous trea su ry, tri umph ing,
trou ble, trough, troughs, twelfth, twelve.

V
Va lue, Va lour, Va pour, va ri a ble ness, vaunt eth, ve no mous, ven ge
ance, ve ni son, ve n^m, ver tue, ver tu ous, vex a ti on, vic tu al, view ed,
vi gi lant, Un be lief, un change a ble, un cir cum ci sed, Un cle, un cloth
ed, Un cti on, un feign ed.

W
Wa ges, Wag gons, wall low ing, wan ton ness, War ri our, weigh ed, weight,
whore mo^ ger, whore dom, wick ed ness, Willow tree, wu^ now ed, Witch crafts,
with draw, withies, wi there eth, Wolf, Wolves, won de rous, worcester thies, woe ven,
would, wrath, wreath, wrea then, wre stle, wretch ed, wrong full ly, wrong,
wrote, wrought.

Y
Yarn, yield, year ly, ye ster day, yo ked, yon der, young youth.

Z
Zea lous, zea lous ly.

The Child's Lesson.
CHRIST is the Truth. Christ is the Light. Christ is my Way. Christ is my Life.
Christ is my Savior. Christ is my hope of Glory.

Christ is my Redeemer. Christ is my Rock. Christ is the Door. Christ is my
King, and Lord of Lords. Christ is the Cornerstone. Christ is the Lamb of God
that takes away my Sin.

CHRIST is the Power of God. Christ is my Wisdom, Christ is my Righteousness.
Christ is my Sanctification. Christ is my Justification. Christ is the Seed.
Christ is the Resurrection.

Christ destroys the Devil and his Works, which leads Man and Woman from
God; and so Christ is the Way to God again.

SARAH was a good Woman.

JEZEBEL was a bad Woman, who killed the Just, and turned against the Lord's
Prophets, with her attired Head and painted Face, peeping out of the Window.

CHRIST I must feel within me, who is my Life and my Light, and the Truth; and
that is God that shows me my Thoughts and Imaginations of my Heart; and that
is the Lord God that does search my Heart.

It is the Spirit of Truth that does lead into all Truth.

It is the Spirit of Truth that reproves the World of Sin.

And that is the good Spirit which reproves the bad and his Works.

And the Light manifests and reproves; and that which does make manifest and
reprove, is the Light.

And that which gives the Light of the Knowledge of the glory of God, in the
Face of Jesus Christ, is the Light which shines in the Heart.

And that which may be known of God is manifest within, which God has sh^wn
unto you; that is that which shows you Sin and Evil.

The Gospel is the Power of God.

The Cross of Christ is the Power of God, which crucifieth from the State of
ADAM and EVE in the Fall, in that Power is the Glorying, an Everlasting
Glorying, And this is above the Fleshly Glorying of ADAM and EVE in the Fall,
with his Sons and Daughters.

The Church is in God the Father of Christ, and not a Steeple-house; and that
is the Spirit that mortifies from my Sin.

And they that are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; and that is
the Spirit of God, that does instruct me in God's ways, which are good, and
that is the bad Spirit which leads into bad ways.

And if I be a Child of God, I must not grieve him, but must be meek, and
sober, and gentle, and loving and quiet, righteous and humble, and live in the
Fear of God, and live godly, and not Lie, not do any wrong to any one.

So if I be wild, froward, wicked, heady, high-minded, wilful, stubborn, proud,
envious, disdainful, scornful, unrighteous, ungodly, and lie, and do not the
Truth, and forget God, such God turns into Hell, that grieveth him.

In the beginning was the Word.

Since the beginning were the Words; and since the beginning was Babel, which
is the beginning of Tongues, which is the Priests Original, but the Saints
Original is the Word before Babe was, and that is the Original, and make
Divine, and not the Tongues that began at Babel.

And it cost the second Adam his Blood, to purchase me out of the state of Adam
and Eve in the Fall, to set me in the state that he was in before he fell, to
that which is a blessed state, out of the cursed state, and not only to the
blessed state that Adam and Eve were in before they fell; but to Christ that
never fell, to his Stature.

A Child being fallen from the Image of God, he has not Peace.

A Child being in the Image of God he has Peace.

A Child being fallen from the Holiness, he does not see God: but being in the
Holiness he does see God.

And the Image of God is Righteousness and true Holiness.

In six Days the Lord made the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein*
and the sixth Day made Man and Woman, and bad him have Dominion over the Works
of his Hands.

CHRIST is my Foundation.

And Christ is the first and the last.

And Christ is a quickening Spirit.

Abel was a good Man.

Cain was a bad man full of Envy and Wrath, who killed his Brother about
Religion.

Isaac was a good man, and sober.

Ishmael was a wild Mocker and a scorning Archer, and turned into the
Wilderness.

Jacob was a good man; Esau was a profane man (who turned against Jacob) who
bore the Sword.

The Spirit of Truth is my Leader into all Truth, and shows me things to come.

And the Power of God is my Keeper from Sin and Evil

And the Worship of God is in the Spirit and in the Truth.

Proper Names in Scripture divided onto Syllables, and the Significations of
them in English; together with other memorable ^assages mentioned in Scripture,
necessary and delightful for Children to Read and Learn.
ADam signifies, Man Earthly red, The World was created in six days: Adam was
the first Man in the Likeness of God, and according to his Image but he lost
his Image through Disobedience, in eating of the Fruit that God had forbid him
to eat of. And Adam gave a Name to the Woman which was made of his Rib (while
he was asleep) and called her Eve; and he gave names to all other Creatures;
after that Adam and Eve had Transgressed, God drove them out of Paradise (where
they were at first placed) and set a fiery two edged Sword to keep the Way of
the Tree of Life. Adam lived till he was nine hundred and thirty years old, and
beg^t many Sons and Daughters. After Adam's Transgression the Earth was cur^ed,
and brought forth Thistles and Thorns* and man got his Bread by the Sweat of
his Brow. Cain and Abel were Adam's Sons.

Cain was a Husbandman, and being displeased that his Offerings were reproved,
and not his Brother Abel's although he was rebuked of God for his ^^vy) slew
his Brother, and offended seven fold thereby; after that, he was made a
Fugitive, and a Vagabond upon the Earth, for he was accursed of God; his Sin
was sevenfold; for first, He did not rightly divide; secondly, He envied his
Brother; thirdly, He dealt sabtilly; fourthly, He killed him; fifthly, He
stubbornly denied it; sixthly, He despaired; seventhly, Being Condemned, he
Repented not.

This Cain was the first builder of the earthly City, in the which he bestowed
his Children for fear, because he used Violence, ^avine and Spoil.

Abel, he was a Keeper of Sheep, his Offering was accepted of the Lord, because
he was Righteous; he was the first Martyr.

E noch, Ta^gh^ or Dedicate, the Father of Me ^hu sa ^^h lived till he was nine
hundred sixty and nine years Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God took
him.

La mech, Poor, Humbled, or Smitten* after he had lived one hundred eighty and
two years, he begat a Son, and called him Noah, which signifies a C^^sing or
Rest; and Lamech said, This same shall consort us concerning our Work, and Toil
of our Hands, because of the Ground the Lord has cursed. Noah was a just man,
and perfect in his Generation, and walked with God, and was a Preacher of
Righteousness; he was commanded of God to make an Ark, that he and his Family
should enter into it, for their preservation, Genesis 6.

Noah, with two of a sort of every Creature, Male and Female, were shut into
the Ark, and the World was drowned, Genesis 7.

And when the Waters had prevailed on the Earth fifteen Cubits upwards; after
one hundred and fifty days the Waters were abated; Noah opened a Window of the
Ark, and sent forth a Raven and a Dove; the Dove found no rest for the Sole of
her Foot, but returned to the Ark, and Noah took her into the Ark, Gen, 8.

The Rain bow, a Token of the Covenant of God, Genesis 9.

Ba bell signifies, Confusion; at the building of Babel Languages were
confounded, Genesis 11.

A-bram signifies, an high-Father: his name was changed Genesis 17. from Abram to
A-bra-ham, which signifies, a Father of a great Multitude: he was the Son of
Terah; Sarah was his Wife: He went out of his Native Country at God's
Commandment; God promised him and his Seed the Land of Canaan; he traveled
into Egypt, and when he returned from thence he was very Rich; to avoid s^rife
he parted company with Lot, his Nephew; he delivered Lot out of Captivity;
refused to be enriched by the King of Sodom, he instr^cted his Family in
Righteousness; God tried his Faith by willing him to offer up his only Son
Isaac.

Sa-rah, a Lady or D^me* Daughter of (...); the Lord promised her a Child when
she was old, and she had one accordingly: she would not have Ishmael, who was
born of H^g^r ^the bond Woman to be Heir with her Son Isaac, she was called the
^ree Woman. When she died, Abraham bewailed her greatly, and bought a plat of
Ground of the Sons of I^eth to bury her in; after his death he also was buried
in the Cave of M^ch-pelah. God rememb^^d his promise made ^n to Abraham, and
comforted Israel in their Afflictions, God was with Abraham in all that he did*
for he was a Righteous man, and faithful to the Lord.

And for the wickedness in Sodom and Go mor rah the Lord rained upon it
Brimstone and Fire* and Abraham looked toward Sodom and Go mo-rrah, and ^o the
sm^ke of the Country went up as the Smoke of a Furnace, Genesis 19.

As Lot was entering into Zo-ar, his Wife looked back, from behind him, and she
became a Pillar of Salt.

I-saac signifies, Laughter, Abraham's Son by Sarah,

Re-be-kah signifies, fe^* she was Daughter to Be th^-el, was given in Marri^ge
to I sa ac: The Lord blessed I sa-ac, so that when he sowed he received an
hundred fold, Genesis 2^.

Ia cob signifies, a S^pplanter; he was the Son of I sa-ac; he was a plain man,
and dwelt in Tents, he bought E-sau's Birth right for Red Portage: I sa-ac
blessed him, at which E sau was troubled* Jacob fled to H^ran, and as soon as he
saw Rachel the Daughter of Laban, his Mothers Brother, he wept, he served Laban
seven years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a few days, because he
loved her; the years being ended, he asked his Wife of (...), but Leah was
given unto him; he served other seven years for Rachel, he loved her more than
Leah, he came but with a Staff to Laban, but after the Lord blessed him, so
that he became very Rich; the Lord said unto him by an Angel, Thy name shall be
called Jacob no more, but Is-ra el* because thou have had power with God, thou
shall also prevail with men.

E-sau signifies doing or working; he was the Son of I sa-ac, E sau was a
cunning Hunter, he sold his Birth right for a mess of Pottage; against his
Fathers will he took him Wives of the Posterity of Ish-mael which was a grief
to Isaac and Re-be-kah his Mother.

I-sra-el signifies, a Prince of God, or prevailing with God.

Io-seph signifies increasing; one of the Sons of Jacob, he was beloved of his
Father and hated of his Brethren; he was cast into a Pit by his Brethren, and
afterward sold to the Ishmaelites, and afterward to Potiphar, whose house was
blessed for Ioseph's sake; Joseph was made Ruler thereof, he was fair and well
favored, and he interpreted Pharaoh's Dreams, and was made Ruler over all
Egypt under Pharaoh. He sold Corn into all Countries in the Famine-time; he
spoke roughly to his Brethren at first when they came to buy Corn, and put them
in Ward, but after disclosed himself to them, and comforted them, and sent for
his Father into Egypt.

Jacob blessed Ioseph's two Sons, and died, Genesis c. 48. and c. 49.

Joseph died, Genesis 50.

A new King arose over Egypt that knew not Joseph, Ex. 1.

Pharaoh oppressed the Israelites.

Moses, signifies drawn forth; at his Birth he was hid in Bulrushes in a River
and was found by Pharaoh's Daughter Ex. 2.

God appeared unto Moses in a Burning Bush Ex. 2.

Moses and Aaron told Pharaoh, saying Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Let my
People go; and Pharaoh said. Who is the Lord, that I should obey his Voice.

God plagued Pharaoh with 10 Plagues because he would not let the Children of
Israel go free; 1. Of Bloody waters. 2. Of Frogs. 3. Of Lice. 4. Of Flies. 5.
Of Murrain. 6. of Scabs 7. Of Hail. 8. Of Grasshoppers. 9. Of Darkness. 10.
Death of their First born Ex. 7 8 9 10.

The Isralites departed out of Egypt and spoiled the Egyptians Ex. 12.

The Isralites were led by a fiery and cloudy Pillar, Ex. 13.

Pharaoh and his Host pursued after them.

The Sea parted, that the Children of Israel went upon Dry-land in the midst of
the Sea, and the Waters were a Wall unto them on both hands; but Pharaoh's Host
was drowned in the Sea, Ex. 14.

Then Moses and the Children of Israel sung a Song unto the Lord Ex. 15.

Moses made bitter waters sweet Ex. 15.

God sent Quails and Manna in the Wilderness Ex. 16.

Moses brought water out of the Rock. Aa-ron signifies a Teacher; when Aa- ron
went in before the Lord, he was to put on the Breast Plate of Judgment, the
Urim and the Thummim. Urim signifies Light, and Thummim signifies Truth and
Perfection; so Light, Truth, and perfection were to be upon his heart.

Io shu ah signifies, the same with Jesus which is a Savior; he succeeded
Moses* he humbled himself before God Josh. 7. in overcame many Kings and
Countries, he left nothing undone that Moses had commanded, he and all his
House served the Lord.

Samp-son slew a thousand of the Philistines with a Jaw Bone of an Ass; he also
killed a Lion.

Sampson carried away the Gates and Posts and Bars of the City Gaza on his
Shoulders to the top of the Hill Hebron, Judge. 16.

The Philistines put out Sampson's eyes Sampson was avenged on them at once and
pulled down the House upon them Judge. 19.

Ruth signifies, watered or filled: she found favor in the eyes of Bonz and was
marrried to him, and bare him a Son named O-bed, he was the Father of ^esse^,
the Father of David.

Sa-mu-el signifies, heard of God; he was offered to God by his Mother he was
in favor both with the Lord, and also with Men; God called him thrice, and
revealed his Will to him, and made him a Prophet; he Judged Israel with
diligence, all his days the Philistines were brought under; when he died he
was bewailed greatly.

E-li-jah signifies, God the Lord; he was a Prophet, who foretold the Famine to
come among the Israelites; he was fed by Ravens; the Lord sent him to A-hab,
whom he boldly reproved for following Ba-^-lim; by Prayer he obtained Rain, he
was persecuted by Ie-za-bel, he fled from her, and being almost famished, he
was fed by an Angel, in the strength or which Meat he traveled forty days
and forty nights, he afterward to^k courage against Iezebel, and foretold
Aha^s and Iezebels death; at his Prayer Fire came down from Heaven and
destroyed two Captains with their Men; He was an Hairy man, and girded with a
Girdle of Leather; he was taken up into Heaven by a Whirlwind.

E-li sha signifies, My God saves; E-li-jah anointed him Prophet in his room;
he was called to be a Prophet from the Plough-tail, 1 Kings 9.19. he craved of
Elijah to have his Spirit doubled upon him: forty-two Children that mocked him
were devouted by two (...); he healed Na a man of a Leprosy, of whom he would
take no reward, because he would not sell the Gift of God; he raised the
Shunamites dead Son, he healed the deadly Pottage, 2 Kings 4. Elisha weeping
showed unto H^zael the evil that he should do unto Israel.

Da-vid signifies, beloved, he was a ruddy man, and withal of a beautiful
Countenance, and goodly to look to, Samuel anointed him King, yet afterward he
fed his Fathers Sheep, slew the Giant Goliath, and brought two hundred of tire
fore skins of the Philistines to Saul^: God was with David, and therefore Soul
feared him, and commanded that he should be slain; It was said of David, his
Kingdom abides forever; he followed the Lord with all his heart, save only in
the matter of Uriah.

Job signifies, Sorrowful, he was a man Upright and Just, fearing God; he was
bereaved of his Substance and Children, yet he praised God in his Afflictions.

Ie re-mi-ah signifies, my Height or Fearing; he was a Prophet, to whom the
Lord gave his Word to preach; he cried against the Priests that ^ore rule by
their Means, which he said was a horrible and filthy thing committed in the
Land; he was persecuted and mocked for publishing the Truth and Word of God;
and Pasher the Son of Imn^^ the Priest, when he heard what he Prophesied, he
smote Jeremiah, and put him into the Sto^ks; he was at another time taken by
the Priests, and accused before the Governors, and as he was going from
Jerusalem into the Land of Benjamin, he was taken by an Officer, and had before
the Princes, who smote him, and committed him to Prison, where he lay in a
Du^geon a long time, but at last was delivered by Zedekiah the King, out of
that place; and the King commanded they should put him into the Court of the
Prison, and daily to give him a piece of Bread: but the Princes desired the
King that he might be put to death, for that he prophesied, That the City
should f^rely be given into the hands of the King of Babel 's Army: Then the
King said, He is in your hands, for the King can deny you nothing: So they took
Jeremiah and let him down with Cords into a Dungeon, where there was no water
but mi^e, till Jeremiah stuck fast into the mi^e; but in this Dungeon the Lord
preserved him, and at last delivered him out.

E ze ki el signifies, the strength of God, he was a Prophet; he was fed with
the Word of God, and made bold with his Spirit; he cried, Woe to the Shepherds
that sought after the F^eece, and clothed themselves with the Wool, and fed
with the Fat, and made a Prey upon the People; he said, The Lord would gather
his Sheep from their Mouths, and that they should be a Prey unto them no longer.

Ba la-am, signifies, the Antiquity or the Devourer, or Destruction of the
People, he was called a Prophet, Balak King of Moah hired him to curse the
People of God; he was slain among the Midianites, he was one that loved the
Wages of Unrighteousness, and therefore was rebuked of a dumb His; he taught
Balak to lay a stumbling block before the Children of Israel.

Da ni el, signifies, Judgment of God, a Prophets Name; he would not defile
himself with the Kings Meat; he declared to Ne-bu-^^^-ne-zar his Dream;
wherefore he was advanced by the King unto great dignity; he foretold Bel-sha
zer, That he should be deprived of his Kingdom: Daniel was made the third Ruler
of the Kingdom, because the Spirit of the Lord was excellent in him; wherefore
the Rulers and Governors fought occasions against him, but they could find no
fault; for he was faithful to the Lord; so they consulted together, and got
Darius the King to make a Decree, That whosoever should ask a Petition of any
(God or Man) for thirty days, save of the King, he should be cast into the Den
of Lions; but Daniel kneeled on his Knees, and prayed to, and praised his God
in his Chamber, his Window being open, as he used to do aforetime, wherefore
they accused him to the King, for breaking the Decree for which he was cast
into the Lions Den, and a ^^one was laid thereon, and the King sealed it with
his Signet, that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel; then the
King went unto his Palace, and remained ^asting, neither were the Instruments
of Music brought before him, and his sleep went from him: Then the King arose
early, and went in all haste unto the Den of Lions, and when he came to the
Den, he cried with a Lamentable voice unto Daniel; and the King spoke and said
to Daniel, O! Daniel, the Servant of the Living God, Is not thy God (whom thou
always servest) able to deliver thee from the Lions? Then said Daniel unto the
King, O! King, live forever, My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the
Lions Mouths, that they have not hurt me; for my Justice was found out before
him, and unto thee O! King, have I done no hurt: Then was the King exceeding
glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel out of the Den, so
Daniel was brought out of the Den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him,
because he believed in his God: And by the Commandment of the King, those Men
that had accused Daniel, were brought, and were cast into the Den of Lions,
even they, their Children and Wives; and the Lions had the mastery of them, and
brake their Bones in pieces before they came at the ground of the Den. This
Daniel also delivered Susanna from the two wicked Judges; he destroyed Bell and
his Temple, and slew the Dragon which they Worshipped.

Ne-bu chad ne-zar, signifies, the mourning of the Generation, or w^^^ing of
Judgment; he was King of Babel: he conquered Egypt, and destroyed Jerusalem: he
erected an Image of Gold, and commanded it should be honored; and decreed,
That whosoever refased to fall down to the said Image; should be cast into a
hot fiery Furnace he dwelt seven years amongst wild Beasts.

The three Children were cast into the fiery Furnace, for not worshipping the
Image; but God delivered them out of the Furnace.

Jo-si-ah* signifies The Fire or Burning of the Lord, the Son of Zephaniah;
Iddo* prophesi^ed of him, That he should destroy the Idolatry of Jeroboam; he
was made King of Jud^^, and he put down Idols and caused Baals Priests to be
put to death.

I-sai-ah* signifies the Health or Salvation of the Lord, he was a Prophet of
the Lord.

Mat-thew, signifies, Given or a Reward, he was an Apostle called by Christ,

Je-sus, signifies, A Savior, or The Lord a Savior, the Son of God, a Voice
from Heaven said unto him, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
he came of the Seed of David, whose Kingdom endures forever: Christ signifies
Anointed, at the Age of twelve years, Jesus disputed with the Doctors, and th
People were astonished at his Wisdom, yet many would not believe he was the
Christ, because he descended of so low Parentage, and said, Is not this the
Carpenter's Son? Great Multitudes followed him, and he healed many diseases,
his coming and Preaching was in great humility, he was Mocked, Persecuted, and
put to Death by the Jews, the chief priests persuaded the Multitude to ask of
Pilate, that Christ might be put to Death; after his death they persecuted his
Apostles, and imprisoned Peter and John, and commanded they should preach no
more in the Name of Jesus, and also Stoned Stephen to death. And King Herod
persecuted the Christians, Killed James, the Brother of John with the Sword,
and because he saw it pleased the Jews he Imprisoned Peter also.

Paul, signifies, Marvel or marvelously, he was an Apostle of Christ, he was
marvelously converted from being a Persecutor of the Church of Christ to be an
Apostle, and an elect Vessel of God.

Pe-ter, signifies, a Stone, or Rock, an Apostle of Christ.

John signifies The Grace of God, or Gift, or Mercy of the Lord, the Son of
Zebedee, he and his Brother James were called by Christ, as they were mending
their Nets, to be Apostles: John was Banished into the Isle of Pathmos.

Ti-mo-thy signifies, The honor of God, or the honoring of God, or precious
to God.

Titus signifies, Honorable.

Thomas signifies, a Twin.

Philip signfies, a Warrier, or lover of Horses.

Sa-ma ri-tans signifies, Keepers, marvelous hard thorny places, or Dreggs.

The reason of the Names of the Books of Moses, and other Books.
THE Hebrews usually named their Books from some of the first Words in the
beginning of each: As the first they called Be-re-shith, that is, In the
Beginning, the first word of that Book.

The second they called Ve-le-she-meth, which signifies, Now these are the
Names.

The third they called Va ji kra, which signifies, And called, for so it begins
in the Hebrew.

The fourth Bam-mid-bar, which signifies, In the Wilderness: the Lord spoke to
Moses in the Wilderness.

The fifth, El le ha dab ba rim, which signifies, These the Words.

The Greek Interpreters, and others from them, called the first Genesis, that
is, Generation, because it declares the Creation and Generation of the World
and of Men.

The second Exodus, which signifies, A passing out; because in it is declared
the passing out of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, in the beginning of
that Book.

The third Liviticus, because in it is declared the Laws and Order of the
Levites.

The fourth Numbers, because in the beginning thereof is the sum of the
Children of Israel.

The fifth Deuteronomy, which is, Second Law, the Law repeated the second time.

Judges is called from the Declaration of Judges, that judged Israel before the
Kings.

Kings, from the Declaration of the Kings that reigned in Israel after the
Judges. Chronicles signifies, a declaration of the things that were done in
their several times.

Ecclesiastes signifies, the Preacher, because so it begins, The words of the
Preacher.

The rest are named from the names of the Writers, or things easy to be
understood: As.

Colossians signifies, punished

Corinthians signifies, filled.

Ephesus signifies, desirable.

Thessalonica signifies, the other Victory of God.

The Signification of the seven Arts.
THE word Grammar comes of a Word that signifies to write.

Rhetoric, of a Word that signifies, to speak fluently.

Logic, of a Word that signifies, to speak and reason.

Astronomy signifies, the Law or Distribution of the Stars.

Geometry signifies, measuring of the Earth.

Music signifies, the Muses Art, or Authors of Songs, or Poetry.

Atithmetick comes of a Word that signifies, Number.

Weights, Measures, and Coyns mentioned in Scriptures, reduced into our English
valuation.
Of Shekels there were three sorts.
A Common Shekel, which weighed a quarter of an ounce, and was worth fifteen
pence.

The Kings Shekel weighed three Drachms, that is in our Money twenty two pence
Halfpenny.

The Shekel of the Temple weighed directly half an ounce, and was worth two
shillings six pence.

The Jews had three sorts of Talents.
The Common Talent, which weighed three thousand quarters of an ounce, or
common Shekels, amounts to six thousand Drachms, which is one hundred eighty
seven pound ten shillings.

The Kings Talent weighed three thousand of the Kings Shekels, which amounted
to nine thousand Drachms, which is two hundred eighty one pound five shillings.

The Talent of the Temple or Sanctuary, weighed three thousand Shekels of the
Temple, which is precisely so many half ounces, which amounts to three
hundred seventy five pounds.

A Silverling is often in Scripture used for a Shekel, which is half an ounce,
and worth two shillings six pence; for thirty of these Silverlings of the
Sanctuary, Christ was sold, Mat. 26. which amounts to three pound fifteen
shillings English Money.

The common Shekel of Gold weighed two Drachms, and was worth fifteen shillings.

The Talent of Gold of the Temple, weighed twelve thousand Drachms, or
Hungarian Ducats, which is of our Money forty five thousand pounds.

Abimelech King of Gerar, said to Sarah, I have given thy Brother an hundred
Silverlings, which were common Shekels, which amounted to sixty two pounds
sixteen shillings, Genesis 20.

Abraham bought a burying place for his Wife Sarah, for four hundred Shekels of
Silver, which are common Shekels, that is twenty five pounds.

A Shekel of the Sanctuary, which is twenty Gerahs, and a Shekel is twenty
shillings, and a Gerah is twelve pence.

There are four kind of Cubits mentioned in Scripture.
1. The common Cubit, this was the measure from the Elbow to the Fingers end,
it contained a Foot and a half, or half a Yard.

2. A holy Cubit, this was a full Yard: containing two of the common Cubits.

3. The King's Cubit, which is three Fingers longer than the common Cubit.

4. A Geometrical Cubit, it contained si^ common Cubits, which is three Yards:
accord^ing to this Cubit it is thought Noah's Ark was built.

The Reed spoken of in Ezekiel or Exodus was six cubits and a hand breadth,
which were called the King's cubits.

A Furlong is an hundred twenty five paces which is the eighth part of our
mile: A mile contains with us a thousand paces; but in the Hebrew it was
accounted as much as a man could go in half a day, between meal and meal

A Kah is our Quart.

An Omer is a Quart and a half.

A Seah is a Gallon and a half.

An Epha is half a Bushel and a Pottle.

An Homer is so called from Chamer, an Ass because this Measure contains so
much as a^ A^s could well bear, which is five Bushel and five Gallons.

A Log is half a Pint.

A Bath is half a Bushel and a Pottle.

A Mite weighs half a B^rly corn.

A Farthing of the Roman Coin is two Mite

Keshita signifies a Lamb, and was also name the Hebrews gave to a piece of
Mone^ in value one penny half penny.

The Marks of a true Christian.
TO love one another, and to add to your Faith Virtue, to your Virtue
Knowledge, which knowledge is to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
which is Life eternal; and to your know^edge add Temperance, and to your
Temperance add Patience; for that runs the Race, and obtains the Crown of Life;
and unto Patience, Godliness, in that brotherly kindness is known.

The Names which the Devil in Scripture is called by.
The Serpent, and Adversary: An Enemy to Man: The Devil, who is a Destroyer;
the old Dragon: Belial: The God of the World, who rules the World in
wickedness: The Prince of this World, who gives forth his Law of death and Sin,
and rules in wickedness and unrighteousness, which got in to Adam and Eve by
his lies and subtilty, and their disobedience, and rules in the hearts of the
disobedient: the Spirit and Prince of Darkness which fills people with
darkness, and makes them hate the Light of Christ, and blinds all his Subjects,
that they call the Light of Christ natural, and Created, and Conscience: And
the Devil is called ^eelzehub Prince of Devils: the Accuser of the Breihren:
And this Devil, Satan, and Serpent made all his Subjects call the people of
God Bablers, pestilent Fellows, Movers of Sedition, Ring leaders of Sects, Acts
24. Turners of the World upside down, a people that are cursed and unlearned,
ignorant, Schismatics, Heretics, Phanaticks; and these are them that rage so
against the Light within, which does give the Light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, and are so mad against the heavenly
Treasure in the earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. And these be of the same Spirit that
the Jews were in, that said, Christ the Light had a Devil, and by the Prince of
Devils, cast out Devils.

The Names which the Children of God are called by.
The Children of God are called the Children of the Light, and the Seed of
Abraham; and the Lot of God's Inheritance, and his Servants, and Hand maids,
Sons and Daughters, and the Elect of God before the Foundation of the World,
and the Children of God, then Heirs of God, 1 Peter, And they are called the
Saints of God, the Church of God, Temple of God, Sheep and Lambs of Christ,
Brethren of Christ, Spouse and Wife of Christ, a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, offering up spiritual Sacrifices to God, who is a Spirit, a holy
Nation, a peculiar People, the Children of the Light, and of the Day; which
makes all the Children of the Night and of Darkness, to rage against them: They
are called the Light of the World, and the Salt of the Earth, and a City set on
a Hill, that cannot be hid, and against this City does Mystery Babylon the
great City fight, with her Children; but they cannot prevail, for the lamb and
the Saints shall have the Victory.

What Christ is called.
Christ our Lord and Master, crucified in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, is called
The Wonderful Counselor, who does counsel people of the possession of their
Salvation, and of a Kingdom, and of a Life, and of a World that has no end;
and how to walk that they may honor God through him: He is called The mighty
God, and the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, who rules in
Righteousness and Peace amongst his Children, Christ Jesus the Savior, and
Christ the Light of the World, the anointed of God, the Emmanuel, that is God
with us, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Justification and Sanctification, the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, the Word of God, that hammers down and cuts down sin,
and burns it up* who is the Elect and precious laid in Sion, to all the Sons
and Daughters of Sion, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who rends to pieces the
old Dragon, and bruises the Serpent's He^d, and Jesus Christ our Lord; a Lord
is a Ruler, so Christ is a Lord to rule and order, and govern, and dispose his
People, and so he has the reverence and honor: for he rules, and orders, and
governs, in Righteousness, Holiness, Virtue, Purity, and Equity, and Godliness
and Truth, and in Wisdom, Power, light and life.

The CATECHISM.
Scholar. HOw many Offices has Christ in his Church? The Baptists and Teachers
of the World tell as Christ has but three.


Master. Yes Child, he has many more than three.

1. His Priestly Office, when he offered up himself for the People in the whole
World; and sprinkles the hearts and consciences of his People with his Blood,
to cleanse them from dead Works, to serve the living God, and to offer up and
present his Church without spot or wrinkle to God.

2. The King^y Office is to subdue all the Enemies of man, the Devil and his
Works, and to subdue all his Enemies under his Feet, and to give forth the law
of love, law of life, law of Spirit, law of Faith; and he to reign whose right
it is, and to rule in the hearts of his people by Faith; who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

3. His Prophetical Office; Christ is a Prophet raised up like unto Moses, who
is to be heard in all things, who speaks to you by his light, Power, and
Spirit; and opens unto you by his power, spirit and light, things to come.

4. Christ has the Office of a Bishop, to over see thy Soul, Spirit, and Mind,
that thou do not go astray from him, who is light and Salvation.

5. He has the Office of a Shephard, who puts his Sheep forth out of the
Prison and Captivity of old Adam and the Serpent, out of the Jaws of Death and
the Pit, wherein there is no Water, and the Graves of old Adam, and out of his
Briars and Thorns, and Christ goes before them as a Shepherd, and they know his
Voice, and a stranger they will not follow, and he brings them to the Pasture
of life, and to the Waters and Springs of life, where he feeds them and fills
them abundantly; Christ does, who is the life.

6. And he has the Office of a Minister, to minister Grace and Truth unto
thee, and Glory, and Faith, and the Heavenly Riches, and light, and Power, and
Strength.

7 He has the Office of a Teacher, whom God has anointed to preach (the
spirit of the Lord is upon him) to bind up the Broken hearted, to open the eyes
of the Blind, to set the Captive at liberty, and the Prisoner free, and to
teach thee the way of life, Salvation, Holiness, and Godliness, the way of the
Redeemed, and the way of the Lord which is perfect, and the way of the Just,
which is a shining Light, distinct from the way of the Unjust, which is
Darkness.

8. He has the Office of a Physician, to heal thee of thy Sicknesses and
Infirmities, thy Deafness and blindness, who is a Physician of value, Christ
Jesus.

9. He has the Office of a Mediator and Interceder, who mediates and makes
intercession for thee to God, that thou may pass to God through him, who is
able to save to the utmost.

10. He has the Office of a Captain of thy Salvation, who conquers the Devil
and his Works, Hell, Death, and the Grave; who trains up and disciplines his
Soldiers with the heavenly Armor, the Breast plate of Righteousness, and the
Helmet of Salvation, and the Armor of Light, and shoes the Feet with the
preparation of the Gospel; and this Armor is proof being tried; and the Arms
are, the Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God; and Christ
trains up his Soldiers to keep their Ranks in Righteousness, in Godliness, in
Holiness, in Truth, in Life, that they may stand against Death, and stand
against Darkness, Unrighteousness, Unholiness, and the Power and Prince of it,
but does not wrestle nor war with flesh and blood, but with spiritual
wickedness, and Rulers of Darkness in High places, etc. And many more Offices,
as thou read the Scriptures, thou will see Child, as thou growest in Truth,
that Christ has; for Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and the Leader
of people to God, whom old Adam and the Serpent has led from God.


Schol. What is it that gives the knowledge of God? and where is it?


Mast. The Light which shines in the heart, it gives the knowledge of the Glory
of God in the Face of Christ Jesus 2 Cor. 4.


Schol. What brings Salvation?


Mast. The Grace of God which has appeared to all men, brings Salvation, Titus
2.11. which Grace teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, that we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present World.


Schol. What is the true Hope, from the Hypocrites?


Mast. The true hope is Christ, in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.


Sch. Who are them which seek that which comes from above?


Mast. Them that he risen with Christ and dead with him, their affections are
set on things above, and not on things on the Earth.


Sch. What makes a man a Believer? and how comes a man or woman to be a
Be^iever?


Mast Christ Jesus teaches thee how to believe, and what to believe in, I^h^.
12.36. While you have the Light believe in the Light; so there are no true
Believers, but who believe in the Light; so Christ teaches people to believe in
the Light, which Light manifests all things; it manifests Christ to be its
Savior, its way, its Light, and to be its Mediator; for the light comes from
Christ, who is the Light that enlightens every man that comes into the World,
that all through him might believe, John 1.


Sch, What makes a Child of Light, and to come to ha^^e that honorable Name
after God, who is Light?


Mast. By believing in the Light he becomes a Child of Light; and so Children
of the day; and so there are no Children of the light, nor Children of the Day;
but first they believe in the light.


Sch. What is that which shall lead into all Truth?


Mast. It is the Spirit of Truth which must lead into all Truth.


Sch. Where is the Spirit?


Mast. Within.


Sch. What shall reprove the World of sin, of their righteousness, and of their
Judgment?


Mast. It is the Spirit of Truth that leads the Saints into all Truth.


Sch. In what is God worshipped?


Mast. He is worshipped in Spirit and in the Truth.


Sch. Where is the Spirit, and where is this Truth?


Mast. The Spirit is within, and the Truth is within, in the inward parts, by
which Spirit God is known; and by the Truth the God of Truth is known.


Sch. what is God?


Mast. God is a Spirit.


Sch. where is the Church?


Mast. The Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.1.


Sch what is the Church?


Mast. The people of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood.


Sch. was Christ's blood shed for all? and did be taste death for every man?
and was he an offering for the sins of the whole world?


Mast. Yes, his blood was shed for all men, and he tasted Death for every man,
etc. tho some crample the blood of the New covenant under their feet, and deny
the Lord Jesus that bought them.


Sch. who is he that must instruct people?


Mast. Neh. 9. Thou may see how God gave his people his good Spirit to
instruct them in the ways of righteousness and holiness, and in the way of the
Lord, which is perfect.


Sch. what is the just man's Path? and what the unjust man's Path?


Mast. The path of the Just is a shining light, which shines more and more till
the perfect day; but the path of the wicked is Darkness.


Sch. wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways?


Mast. By taking heed to the Word.


Sch. where is the word?


Mast. In the heart and the mouth, to obey it, and do it, Romans 10.


Sch. what is the good old way? and which is the new and living way, and which
of these ways must we walk in?


Mast. The good old way was the way among the outward Jews which they were to
walk in; but the new and living way is Christ Jesus, which thou and all true
Christians must walk in.


Sch. what was that Image of God that Adam was made in? was it from below or
from above?


Mast. It was from above, from God, of his Image and Righteousness, likeness
and holiness; the Image of God was not of the Earth from below.


Sch. what is meant of that Rib Eve was made of?


Mast. A Rib is a beam or a side piece, which was part of the building of the
whole Creation, so she was called Woman because she was taken from man; for Eve
signifies Living; and she was the Mother of all living, Genesis 1.


Sch. How many Faiths are there? and which is the ^r^e one?


Mast. There is one Faith; and the true faith is that which works by love, and
purifies the heart, and justifies thee, and saves thee and gives thee Victory
over that which separates thee from God, through which Faith thou have access
to God, in which Faith thou please God, and have unity with him, and them
that please God.


Sch. How many Baptisms are there?


Mast. One.


Sch. who is the Baptizer?


Mast. Christ; for John is decreased, and Christ is increased that is the one
Baptism that saves: he baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and burns
up the Chaff with unquenchable fire, who comes with his Fan, and thoroughly
purges his Floor, and gathers his Wheat into the Garner.


Sch. what is the Wheat?


Mast. The Wheat is the Seed of God.


Sch. what is the Chaff?


Mast. The body of Death, and the body of the sins of ^he flesh, and the
corruptions that must be all plunged down to the Fire.


Sch. what is that Joedan that John baptized in.


Mast. Ior. is a River, and dan is Judgment; he dipped them in the River of
Judgment.


Sch. what is the ministers of Christ's Works?


Mast. Christ gave Gifts unto men for the Work and Ministry, and their work was
for the perfecting the Saints, an^ for the edifying the body of Christ, till we
be all come to the unity of the Faith, the knowledge of the Son of God, [Mark]
and unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the stature of the Fullness of
Christ.


Sch. And are these Christ's ministers?


Mast. Yes.


Sch. And what are the rest that do not bring People to this stature, such as
tosses People to and fro, and carries them with their c^nning flights and
craftiness of men, and lies to deceive them?


Mast. Yes, they are them that bring people to no stability, Ephesians. 4.


Sch. what is the Scripture? Are they the word of God?


Mast. The Scriptures signifies writings; the Scriptures of Truth are the Words
of God; Christ's Name is called the Word in the Revelations, In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word, John. 1.


Sch. what is the Original of Sin?


Mast. Original is the beginning; the beginning of sin was the Devil.


Sch. And who destroys him?


Mast. Christ Jesus destroys the Devil and his Works, and through Death
destroys Death, and the Devil who has the power of Death; and the Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head.


Sch. what Seed was that?


Mast. Christ Jesus.


Sch. To bruise, how is that?


Mast. It is to break to pieces, to crush, to break into pieces, and into
powder his strength and power.


Sch. Master, the Star g^zers tell me, all Light comes from the S^n.


Mast. Read Genesis 1. there thou will see, there was Light and Day, and there
was three days before the Sun was made.


Sch. What is the Church Fellowship?


Mast. It is the Gospel Fellowship.


Sch. what is the Gospel?


Mast. The Gospel, it is the power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believes; so the Power of God (the Gospel) is everlasting


Sch. what is the Cross of Christ?


Mast. The Cross of Christ is the Power of God, and this is foolishness to them
that perish, and set up a wooden or a stone or iron Cross, or any outward Cross.


Sch. What is the ministration of condemnation, which was glorious? And what is
that a ministration that exceeds it in glory?


Mast. The Ministration of Condemnation was the Law that (...) hold upon the
outward Actions of Men and Women; but the Ministration of Restoration that
exceeds it in Glory is Christ, that takes away the Root of sin, which the
Fruits of sin proceeded from* and the Law took hold upon the outward Action,
which Christ takes away the Root of, and so makes the Root and the Branches
holy* who destroys the Devil and his works, and bruiseth the Serpents head,
Christ does, by whom all things were made and created, who was glorified with
the Father before the World ^egan, and set up from everlasting to everlasting,
the beginning and ending, the first and last.


Sch. Who is the Christian Sabbath or Rest?


Mast. Christ Jesus; he that believes has entered into his Rest, and ceased
from his own Works, as God did from his, and so Christ is the Rest by whom all
things are made and Created, and there is Rest and Peace in him, but not in old
Adam.


Sch. Is the Light sufficient for Salvation?


Mast. Yes, by believing in the Light, thou shall be a Child of Light.


Sch. Who are true Christians?


Mast. Such as believe in the Light of Christ, (...) led and guided by Christ
Jesus.


Sch. Why are the true Christians called Quakers in this Age.


Mast. It is in scorn and derision that they are so called, to render them and
the Truth odious to the People, that so they might not receive the Truth and be
saved: Yet quaking and trembling is no new thing; for thou may read of
Quakers in the Scriptures, as in Heb. 12.21. Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake. And it is said, Son of man, eat thy Bread with Quaking, and drink thy
Water with Trembling. And when Daniel saw a Vision, a great quaking fell upon
the men that were with him: And Habakkuk his Belly trembled, and his Lips
quivered, Hab. 3.16.


Sch. Sure those that scoffingly call the true Christians Quakers, never read
these Scriptures; for they prove very plain, that there were Quakers in the
Primitive times: But why do the people called Quakers say Thee and Thou to a
single person? Is that according to the Scriptures?


Mast. Yes, it is the proper Language to a single person, and according to the
Scripture; God said Thee and Thou to Adam, and Adam said Thou to God; and
people say Thee and Thou in their Prayers; and it is the Pride in peoples
Hearts that cannot take that Language themselves which they give to God; And
God said Thee and Thou to Moses, and Moses said Thee and Thou to God again:
Jacob said Thee and Thou to Laban, and Laban said Thee and Thou to him again;
and Jacob and his Sons said Thee and Thou to each other, Genesis 43. to Chap. 49.

And Ieptha, who was a Judge in Israel, did Thee and Thou his Daughter, and she
did Thee and Thou her Father the Judge again, Judge. 11. And when Daniel and the
3 Children were before the King, upon Examination, they said Thou to the King;
and the ^^ldeans did Thou the King Dan. 3. And Paul did Thou the King Agrippa:
And many other Examples there be in Scriptures; but these are sufficient; And
Thee and Thou is singular Number, and to be spoken to one You or Ye the plural
Number, and to be spoken unto more than one.


Sch. I am very well satisfied that Thee and Thou is the proper Language to a
single Person, and You to more than one; but the People called Quakers will not
put off their Ha^s, nor bow, nor give-flattering Titles to People; what
Scriptures have they for that?


Mast. With God there is no respect of persons; and James said, If you have
respect of persons you commit sin, and are convinced o^ the Law as
transgressors; and in Job Elihu said, Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's
person, neither let me give flattering Titles unto Man; for I know not to give
flattering Titles, in so doing my Maker would soon take me away, Ioh. 32.21* 22.


Sch. They say the people called Quakers deny the Scriptures.


Mast. No, they own the Scriptures more than any people, for they walk in the
Light or Christ Jesus, and by following him do witness the Scriptures fulfilled
in them, and people that live in sin, and that are guided by the evil Spirit,
they are contrary to the Scriptures, and it is a Book sealed to them; and they
who hate to be reformed, have nothing to do to speak of the Saints and holy men
of Gods conditions mentioned in Scripture*


S^h. The People called Quakers do not call their Days and Months as other
Professors do.


Mast. No, Professors and People are so far degenerated from Truth that they
have lost the very form of sound Words used by the Primitive Christians.


Sch. How did the Primitive Saints call their days and months?


Mast. God made the World in six Days and rested the seventh Day, and he called
the Evening and Morning the first Day, and the Evening and the Morning the
second Day, and the third Day, etc. And Christ rose on the first day of the
Week, and they came to the Sepulcher when the Jews Sabbath was ended, on the
first Day of the Week the Disciples met together: And in Ex. 12.2. This month
shall be unto you the beginning of months, it shall be the first month of the
year to you* And in Ex* 16. Moses (...), the fi^teenth day of the second Month,
and the Scriptures say, the third Month, and fourth month etc.


Sch. Who invented these Names of Sunday, Monday, etc. and calling the month
March, April, May, etc.


Mast. The old Pagan Saxons in their Idolatry were the first that brought in
the names of the Days after that manner, and these called Christians, have
retained them to this day. The first Day of the week they worshipped the Idol
of the Sun, from whence came Sunday; The second Day of the Week they worshipped
the Moon, from whence came Moonday or Monday; the third day they worshipped the
Idol of the Planets, which they called Tu^sco* from whence came Tuesday; and
from the Idol Woden came Wednesday; and from the Idol Thor came Thursday; and
from the Idol Friga came Friday; and from the Idol Seater came Saturday. And
the Heathen called Mars the God of Battle, and from thence they called the
first Month March: And Venus they called the Goddess of Love and beauty, and
from thence they called the second Month April; And Maja a heathen Goddess
called Flora; Flora and Cloris were called the Goddesses of Flowers; Unto Maja
the heathen Idolaters used to sacrifice, from thence was the third Month called
May; and upon the first day of the (...) Month they (...) keep Floralia ^ea^^s
to the two Goddesses of Flowers (viz) Flora and Cloris, and Flora was a
Strumpet in Rome, that used on the first Day of that Month, to set up a May
pole before her Door, to entice her Lovers, from whence cam^ May poles to be
first observed: And from the heathens Goddess Juno is the fourth Month called
June: and in honor to Julius Caesar a Roman Emperor, is the fifth Month called
July: and the sixth Month took its Name August, in honor of Augustus Caesar;
and September, October, November and December are called from the Latins: And
one Ianus* a King of Italy, was for his Wisdom pictured with two Faces, whom
they honored as a God: and from this name Ianus was the eleventh Month called
January: and Sa^utnus, Pluto Februs, were called the Gods or Hell, whom the
Heathen said, had the rule of the evil Spirits there, and from Pluto Februs,
was the twelfth Month called February.


Sch. Who have been the Ministers and Instructers of these people that they are
erred so from Scripture Example? Let me have some marks and signs by which I
may know the Deceivers and false Prophets?


Mast. The marks the Schriptures give of Deceivers and false Prophets are
these: I shall set them down in short, that thou may remember them the better.

1. They are such as bear rule by their Means, Ier. 30.31. Mat. 10.19, 20.

2. They are such as seek for their Gain from their Quarters, Isa. 56.

3. They seek for the Fleece, and make a prey upon the People, Ezekiel. 34.1, 2, 3.

4. They are such as preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, Mic. 2.11.

5. They cry Peace so long as People put into their Mouths; but when any come
to see them to be Deceivers, and cannot put into their Mouths; nor give them
gifts then they prepare War against them, Mic. 3.5. Hos. 6.9.

6. They run when the Lord never sent them, and prophecy Lies in his Name,
Ier. 14.4.

7. They stand praying in the Synagogues, they love the uppermost Rooms at
Feasts, and the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and love Greetings in the
Markets, and to be called of men Master, and they make them broad Philacteries
on their Garments, that they may be taken notice of; for they do that they do
to be seen of Men, and are proud and covetous, and they come of Cain's Stock,
for they are full of Envy and are in Balaam's way, who was erred from the
Spirit of God, and received the Wages of Unrighteousness, and so do they, 2
Peter 2. Judge 11.

8. They are such as sprinkle Infants, for which they have no rule in
Scripture; and tell people it is an Ordinance of Christ; when it is but one of
their own Inventions, and so are Liars and Deceivers.

9. They tell people they shall never be free from sin whilst they live here.

10. They are made Ministers by the Will of man, and men uphold them: If thou
meetest with them and see those Fruits brought forth by them, then beware of
them; for they have got on sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves.


Sch. How may I know the true Ministers?


Mast. I may give thee some Marks how to know them.

1. The true Ministers of Christ, as they have received the Gift of God freely,
so they minister freely from the same; as good Stewards of the manifuld Grace
of God, and they do unto all Men as they would have all Men do unto them.

2. They do not strive for Mastership, like the false Prophets; but are gentle
unto all men, and apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.22. that so the Church may be edified.

3. The true Ministers have no man's person in admiration because of advantage,
but are men of sorrows, despised and rejected of men, as Christ was; and they
are not made Ministers by the Will of man but by Christ Jesus, and are
blameless as the Stewards of God, not self-willed, nor soon angry, nor given to
Wine; no Strikers; nor greedy of filthy Lucre, Tit. 1.7.

4. And the true Ministers work was, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ: and the true Ministers were not bred up seven
years at the Colleges, as the Deceivers are now; but the Lord called
Trad^^men, to be Ministers; Moses was a Keeper of Sheep, and Jacob and David
were Keepers o^ Sheep, and Elisha was a Ploughman, and Amos a Herdiman and
Peter and John Fishermen, and Paul a Tent maker.


Sch. The people called Quakers are mocked, hated, persecuted, and imprisoned;
was it so with the people of God in former Ages?


Mast. Yes, the people of God were in all Ages mocked, persecuted, imprisoned
and suffere^s. Elisha the Prophet was mocked, and called Bald-head. And the
Lord sent his Messengers, rising up betimes and sending because he had
compassion on his People; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his Words, and misused his Prophets, where the Wrath of the Lord was against
them, Chron. 36.15. And David was despised of the people, they laughed him to
scorn, they shot out their Lips and shaked their heads at him: And in Psalm.
69.12. David said, Sackcloth is my Garment, and I am become a Proverb to them,
and I am the Song of the Drunkards. And Ier. 20.7. Jeremiah said, I am in
derision daily, every one mocketh me. And thou may read before, how he was
persecuted, and put in the D^ngeon. And David said, The wicked have waited for
me, to destroy me, and they have laid a S^are for me. And Job said, I am (...)
one mocked of his Neighbor: and said, The just and upright man is laughed to
Scorn, Job 12.4. and said, Now I am their Song; yea, I am their Byword; they
abhor me, and spare not to spit in my Face. And in Acts thou may read, how
Herod the King stretched forth his hand to vex some of the Church of Christ; and
how he killed James and imprisoned Peter; and how Paul and Silas had their
Clothes torn off, and after they had received many stripes, they cast them into
Prison, and a strict charge was given to the Jailer to keep them safely, who to
r^st them into the inner Prison; and made their Feet fast in the Stocks: and
above forty of the Jews bound themselves under a Curse, that they would neither
eat not drink till they had killed Paul. And Acts 22. when Paul spoke to the
people, some of them cried, Away with such a Fellow from the Earth; for it as
not fit that he should live. And in Acts 24. ^or we have found this man a
pestilent Fellow, and a mover of Sedition, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the
Nazarens: And Christ himself was derided by the Pharisees, Luke 16. And Paul
said, Whosoever will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution, for
it is through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


Proverbs, which are short wise Sentences, very necessary for children to Read
and Learn.
CHasten thy Son whilst there is hope and let not thy Soul spare for his
crying, Prove. 19.18.

He that spares his Rod hates his Son; but he that loves him chasteneth him
betimes.

Every Child is known by his doing, whether his Work be pure, and whether it be
right, Prove. 20.11.

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the Rod of correction shall
drive it far from him.

Withold not correction from thy Child, for i^ thou beatest him with the Rod
he shall not die.

A Child left to himself brings his Mother to shame.

The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice; and he that begets a
wise Child shall have great joy of him.

Better is a poor and wise Child, than an old and foolish King, who will no
more be admonished.

Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, (...) like a broken tooth,
and a Foot out of joint.

A wife Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the heaviness of his
Mother.

Apply thy Heart to Instruction, and thine Ears to the Words of Knowledge.

Whosoever loves instruction loves Knowledge; but he that hates Reproof it
brutish.

He is in the way of Life that keeps Instruction; but he that refuses
Reproof erreth.

The commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and Reproofs of Instruction
are the ways of Life.

He that re^^seth Instruction, despises his own Soul, but he that hears
Reproof gets Understanding.

A proud Look and a lying Tongue the Lord hates, Prove. 6.17.

Wisdom is the principle thing therefore get Wisdom; and with all thy getting
get Understanding.

Walk in the way of good men, and keep the Paths of the Righteous, Prove. 2.20.

Directions to Read and Spell truly.
OBserve, that the first Letter of all proper Names and beginning of Sentences
are to be greater Letters.

A Dipthong is the sounding of any two or more Vowels together, without any
Consonant between them: they are commonly used in Words of one Syllable, there
are nine Dipthongs.

ai, or ay, as in maid, may

au, or aw, as Laud, Law.

ea, as earth.

ee, as seed.

ei, as heir.

eu, or ew, as feud, grew,

oi, or oy, as coi, boy, joy.

oo, as good.

ou, or ow, as loud, low.

A Consonant is a Letter that makes a sound with a Vowel.

A Syllable is a perfect sound, made sometimes of Vowels only, and sometimes of
Vowels and Consonants; no Syllable has above eight Letters in it, as Strength,
neither has any Word above seven Syllables in the English Tongue, as Re-con-ci
li a ti on.

Observe how many Vowels there are in a Word so many Syllables it has in it,
as in Re con-ci li a ti on, except the Word end in e or es, as in have and
James; or if there be a Dipthong in it, as in may or your: after o is always u
with another Vowel, as in quick.

After true Spelling, these seven Points are to be observed in Reading, for
keeping the Sense.
(,) A Comma is a little stop or breathing; as, Behold O Lord,

(;) A. Semi colon is a longer stop or breathing; as for I am in distress;

(:) A Colon is commonly put in the middle of a Sentence; as, my bowels are
troubled: my Heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled.

(.) A Period is a full stop, and is put after a full Sentence; as, Abroad the
Sword, bereaueth, at home there is a Dearth.

() A Parenthesis is when some Words may be left out, and yet the Sentence
perfect; as, For I know that in me (that is in my Flesh) dwells no good Thing
-- for his Letters (say they) are weighty and powerful, etc.

(?) An Interrogation is put always after a Question asked? as, Is Christ
divided? Was Paul crucified for you? or, Were you baptized in the Name of Paul?

(!) An Admiration is a Note of Wondering or crying out; as, O the depth of the
Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his ways
and his judgment past finding out!

Derections for Notes.
An Asterism * A Section A Paragraph A Note for extraordinary Passages " The
Crotchets []
Hard Words used in our English Tongue explained.
ABba, an Hebrew word, signifying Father. Abreuiate, to make short, to abridge.
Abnegation, a stiff denying. Abortuie, that which is untimely born. Absolve, to
pardon or acquit. Abruptly, by piece meal, out of order, without observing of
due Circumstance. Absolution, Pardon. Accurate, curious, exact, studiously
done. Accent, the raising or letting fall of the Voice in Pronunciation.
Acerbity, sowerness. Atchieue, to perform or bring to pass. Adobt, to choose or
take for his Child. Alienate, to estrange. Alien, a stranger. Allegory, a
Sentence which must be understood otherwise than the literal Interpretation
shows. Alpha, the first Letter in the Greek, wherefore it is sometimes taken
for the first o^ chief in any thing. Amplify, to enlarge. Anathema, cursed.
Animate, to encourage. Affinity, kin by marriage. Antichrist, an adversary to
Christ; it is compounded of the Greek preposition, Anti and Christus, which
signifies, contrary or to against Christ. Antidote, a Medicine against Poison.
Antipathy, a contrariety or great Disagrement of Qualities. Antiquary, one
studious in matters of Antiquity. Aphorism, a short Sentence briefly expressing
the Properties of a thing. Apoealypse, Revelation. Apocrypha, That which is
hidden, and not known, doubtful or not of Authority. Apostasy, a revolting or
falling way from the true Religion. Apostle, one sent in Message, an
Ambassador. Ambassador, a Messenger. Apparent, clear or manifest. Atheist, One
that believes there is no God. Autumn, Harvest time, one of the four Quarters
of the Year.
B
Beelzebub, an Hebrew Word compounded of Bell, which in that Language signifies
an Idol, and Zebub a Fly; so that Beelzebub signifies, the Idol of Flies:
commonly the Devil is called by that Name. Balance, a pair of Scales. Baptism,
dipping or plunging. Blasphemy, Evil speaking. Bishop, Overseer.
C
Calumniate, to slander, to accuse one falsely. Canonical, approved by common or
exact Rule. Chorography, the Description of a Country. Chronologer, one skilful
in Chronicles. Chemist, a Physician following the method of Paracelsus.
Circumcise, to cut off the Fore skin. Circumuent, to compass in, to deceive one
craftily, or to prevent. Commiserate, to take Pity or Compassion upon any.
Concise, brief, short, cut off. Condign, worthy, due, deserved. Captivate, make
subject. Catholic,, universal. Conscience, the testimony or witness of one
mind or knowledge. Center, the midst. Celestial, Heavenly. Circumference, round
circuit. Commodious, profitable. Compendious, short. Confiscate, forfeiture of
goods. Conjunction, joining together. Consecrate, to make holy. Contemplation,
Meditation. Corporal, bodily. Congruity, good agreement. Consanguinity, Kindred
by Blood and Birth Consanguinity, Kindred by Blood and Birth. Consolatory,
comforting. Consolidate, to make firm or strong. Contribute, to give with
others, to allow as others do. Cosmography, an Art touching the Description of
the whole World. Critic or Critical, one that takes upon him to censure other
men's Acts or Works written.
D
Deacon, one overseeing the Poor. Decline, fall away. Deity, the Godhead,
divine Nature. Derivation, taking from another. Delusion, deceiving or mockery.
Desist, leave off. Diabolical, Devilish. Disciple, a Scholar, one that
learneth. Discomfit, put to flight. D^gression, going from the matter.
Derogate, to diminish or disable. Deplore, to bewail. Domestical, a^ home.
Divine, Heavenly. Disconsolate, uncomfortable, sorrowful, comfortless.
E
Ecclesiastical, belongs to the Church. Edict, Commandment. Edify, building
up. Education, bringing up. Effusion, pouring forth. Egress, going forth.
Election, choice. Elevate, lift up. Effigies, an Image. Emnity, hatred.
Essence, substance or being. Evangelist, bringer of good News. Eunuch, gelded.
Exclaim, cry out. Etymology, the true derivation of a Wor^ Exile, banish.
F
Fallacy, Deceit. Fervent, hot. Finally, lastly. Fragility, brittleness.
Fraternity, brotherhood. Function, calling, Future, time to come. Frustrate,
make void. Furious, raging. Fugitive, Runagate.
G
Genitor, a Father or Begetter. Geographer, a Describer of the Earth. Gospel,
glad Tidings, good News. Gradually, by degrees. Gratify, to pleasure. Gratis,
freely.
H
Habitable, able to dwell in. Hallelujah, Praise to the Lord. Helmet, Head
piece. Homage, Worship. Hypocrite, a Dissembler. Hymn, a Song.
I
Jesus, a Savior. Ignominy, Reproach. Illegitimate, unlawful born. Illusion,
Mockery. Immortal, Everlasting. Impediment, let or hinderance. Infinite,
without Number. Institute, appoint. Insolent, Proud. Intermission, ceasing.
Immediate, next or presently following. Interrogation, Question asking.
Instigation, provoking. Introduction, entrance. Invincible, not to be overcome.
Iubile, Year of Joy.
L
Laud, Praises. Latitude, breadth or wideness. Legible, easy to be read.
Lascivious, wanton. Laxative, loose. Longitude, length of a place. Loyal,
Obedient. Luxurious, riotous, excessive.
M
Magician, using Witchcraft. Magnanimity, of a great mind. Magnificence,
Sumptuousness. Maranatha, accursed. Moral, pertaining to Manners or Civility.
Moralize, to give the moral sense and interpretation of any thing. Mortal,
deadly, brings in death. Minister, a Servant. Ministry, Service or Charge in
any Employment. Magnitude, Greatness. Major, the greater. Melody, harmony,
sweet singing. Method, Order. Meritorious, that deserves. Modern, of our
times. Modest, sober. Moment, weight or sudden. Morality, civil behavior.
Morive, cause moving. Mortify, kill. Munition, defense. Mutable, changeable.
Mystical, secret hidden.
N
Narration, declaration. Native, born. Negromancy, black Art. Neuter, of
neither side. Notify, give knowledge. Negative, that denies, or gainsays.
Novice, a young Scholar. Nominal, of or belonging to a Name. Notion, knowledge.
Nutriment, nourishment. Novelty, newness. Numeration, numbering.
O
Oblation, offering. Obscure, dark. Obdurate, harden. Obstruction, stopping.
Oblivious, forgetful. Omnipotent, almighty. Original, beginning. Ostentation,
boasting. Oracle, a speech from God. Overplus, more then needful.
P
Paradise, a place of Pleasure. Paraphrase, Exposition. Parable, similitude.
Patriarch, chief Father. Page, the side of a Leaf. Parabolical, belonging to a
Parable. Perpetuity, Eternity. Pervert, subvert, or destroy. Phanatick, a mad
man. Philosopher, a lover of Wisdom. Premeditate, to muse and think on a thing
before hand. Permission, a sending forth. Predestin^^^^n, fore-appointment.
Procreate, to engender, to beget. Prodigy, a Wonder. Prohibition, a forbidding.
Proposition, a Sentence.
R
Radical, of or belonging to a Root. Rational, reasonable. Regeneration, new
Birth. Reprobate, Wicked, cast out of God's Favor. Repugnant, contrary.
Repute, account. Rudiment, first instruction. Retrograde, to go backward.
Reverential, that does revenge. Rhetoric, the Art of Eloquence. Rupture,
Breach.
S
Sabbath, Rest. Sanctification, holiness. Schism, a breach. Schismatic, one
that makes a Schism. Scholastic, Scholar like. Scripture, Writing. Sovereign,
chief. Subscribe, write under. Substract, take from: Superior, higher:
Superlative, highest degree:
T
Tabernacle, a Pavilion, or Tent: Temporary, for a time: Terrestrial, earthly:
Tenure, hold: Termination, ending: Timorous, fearful: Theology, Divinity:
Tautology, repeating the same things: Transcendent, surpasses:
Transfiguration, a turning into another shape: Typical, mystical:
V
Vacant, empty, void: Verbatim, Word by Word: Vilify, to make of no
Reputation: Vital, lively: Unanimous, of one Mind and Heart: Voluntary, of his
one Accord and Will:
Directions for true spelling and writing English Words, which are alike in
sound, yet unlike in their significations:
A
ASK the Carpenter for his Ax: Since I learned my Accidence, there have been
strange Accidents:

Gi^e your Advice, and advise me for the best:

The Ant is a wise Creature; his Uncle and Aunt:

Who were his Assistants, I crave your Assistance:

Assent not thereto, at the Ascent of the Hill:

A sure Friend, who was a suer for:

Take a Loan for your Money, when you are alone:

The Air was clear, ^^ere his Heir lived:

You are to appear bes^^e a Peer of the Realm:

A Piece to shoot withal, a Piece of Bread, two Loaves apiece:

B
To drink in a Boul; to trundle a Bowl:

A Baron of the Realm; a barren Field:

A Wheel- Barrow; to lend and Borrow:

The Borough of Southwark; a Cony Burrow:

He spent so much upon Barley, he went but Barely:

A Bath to bathe in:

The Child did begin to put of his Biggin:

The Bile brake, the Pot did boli:

A Band of men, he is bound in a Bond:

They both went into a Booth:

It was the best Beast:

He boasted his Book was so well bost:

The Dog did bark, that lay in the Barque:

When he went into Barbary, he left his Maid Barbara.

The Bird which was bill'd like an Hawk, did build her Nest.

A bald Head; his Dog baul'd.

Good and bad; who bade him do it?

By whose means did he buy it?

Bolt the Door before you boult the Meal.

To bow the Knee, the bough of a Tree.

The hole which I did bore; the Sow and the Boar.

He bored a hole in an Oaken board.

The sweat of his Brows the Bullock did browz.

The Wind blew away the blue Cloth.

A brute Beast; a bruit or report.

He was bred up to eat brown bread.

A bare Common, which did bear no Grass:

C
Write thy Copies, and go into the Copice.

If he leave not Coughing, he will soon be put in a Coffin.

When he cough't I caught him by his Coa.

His Chaps were full of Chops.

It was a good Chare, to set him in the Chair, and to give him good Cheer.

Currents to carry away the Water, Raisins and Currants.

Spare no Cost to travel into every coast.

What were the Causes, that the Causeys were no better.

He quoteth a place of Scripture, coateth his Child.

He cooled his Milk, because he could not eat it so hot.

The Butcher did call for the Caul of the Liver.

A Cousin will sometimes Cuzen his near Kindred.

The Kings Council, gave him good Counsel.

A Cruel Master; a Cap wrought with Crowel.

A wicked Crew came in when the Cook crew.

D
The Do was caught; the Pie was Dough baked.

A fallow Deer, a dear Friend.

The dun color was well done.

Bucks and Does, let him take but one Dose.

Such a Device, as none could devise a better.

Before his decease, he wns sick of a dangerous Disease.

It was not without desert that he was robbed in the Desert.

E
In looking toward the East, she spilt her Yest.

She did earn her living by spinning of Yarn, her Bowels did yern.

I eat my bread this day, better than I ate it yesterday.

The most Eminent man was in the most Imminent danger.

F
The Cook had more skill in a Froise than in a Phrase.

The Waterman had a good Fare, when he went to the Fair.

His house in the Fens was without a Fence.

A Gown lined with Fur, a Fir Tree.

A form of Words; a Fourm to sit upon.

A small Fly may flee into a narrow place.

He did feign himself sick; I would fain finish my Work.

The Cattle did feed; his Attorney was fee'd.

I find that they were fined very much.

Put the Sheep into the Fold, when the Mare has foal'd.

To set forth a Man's Praise to the fourth degree.

Heat the Oven with Furz; he furreth his Gown with rich Furs.

The Cloth is foul; Fish and Fowl.

His Son Francis, and his Daughter Frances.

If it freez put on a freese Jerkin.

A sweet smelling Flower, Wheat flour.

G
The Child found his Guardian in the Garden.

I guess that you will have many Guests.

A Ghost or Spirit; thou go but lamely.

Ox Galls, the Gauls upon Horses backs.

A gilt Cup, the guili of sin.

To glister like Gold; the Physician has prescribed a Glyster.

H
A Hare to eat; the Hair of the Head.

Holy men will wholly apply themselves to do good.

A hole in the Ground, a part for the whole.

Thou have made gteat haste.

To hoop a Tubb; to whoop and hollow.

She shall have her Heir, in a higher degree, if she hye her about her Work.

Stand here, that thou may hear.

It is a homely Religion, to read a Homily.

Drive away the Hens from hence.

Holly and Ivy; holy Men and Women.

I Vowel
An Idle Person; an Idol maker.

Thy Eyes may plainly see the Ice.

Let him eye us with his eye, while thou and I are doing it.

In his Ire or Anger, he was an Eyer of it.

To incite or stir up one to be always in sight, and to have an insight in it.

J Consonant.
She loved to jet up and down; a jeat Stone.

A Ioynter, or Tool to work with, a Woman's Ioynture.

The Car man lest not jerking his Horse, in his leather Ierkin.

K
A Kennel for Dogs; sweep the Channel clean.

The Knots are fast tied; the Gnats are very busy in hot weather.

L
I wrote the Lines, with my Loins girded.

The Lane was lain over with Stones.

A man of a low stature, the Ox did low.

He laughed when he went into the Loft:

When the Lead was laid, he led me by the hand:

When the Leases are made, give them to the Leasers:

I did loath to do it, and therefore I was loath to do it:

He was full of Lies, and full of Lice:

Light and see, whether it be light or heavy:

The Latin Tongue; a Lattin Ladle:

The Cow lowed after her Calf very loud:

Take the least, lest he be angry:

Teach him his Lesson well, lest he lessen thy Wages:

Leapers that can leap; Lepers full of Leprosy:

Lo, he is in a low condition:

If he loose not the Knot, he will lose his Labor:

M
To meet and eat Meat; a Yard to mete or measure withal:

He sent a Message concerning the Message.

Things were in a good manner, at the Manor house.

A Mote in the Eye; a Moate or Ditch.

He had no cause to moan, when his Corn was mown.

The Cat will mouse well, among the Corn Mows.

The Widows Mite; we have no might nor power.

The one Mower did more then the other.

The Mantle hangs on the Mantil Tree.

Thousands and Millions; Musk melons.

It was the Day on which Mary did marry*

Moles that cast up the Earth; moulds wherein Metals are cast.

N
His Niece did neese very much.

He did needless work with his Needles.

It is neither thee nor I can lift the nether Mill stone.

Yea and nay; the Horse did neigh.

The Figs were so naught, they were good for naught.

O
Gold Ore; the Watermans Oar; the Ower of a Debt.

Neither ours nor yours will be done in three hours.

I will speak of it, before I cut it off.

He did own but one of them.

You ought to have done it very often.

P
He took great Pains to mend the Panes that were broken.

He had laid a Plot to take away a Plat of Ground.

The Principal man taught the first Principle*

As he sat in his Place he eat Pla^ce.

The time was past before he made the Paste.

He so^d that at a good Price which he had taken as ^ Prize.

To p^re the Pear; a p^ir of Gloves.

The Palate of the Mouth; a ^a^et Bed.

A Parson or Priest; a third Person.

King and Princes; a Princes^.

Praise is not seemly for a Fool; the Preys of Beasts.

Piellars of a House; Cater pi^le^s.

It was his Pride, that he pr^e^ into it.

There is no profit may be ^eceiv'd from a false Prophet.

He has no Power to pour it out.

R
The Rain refreshes the Farth; the Reign of a King; the Rein of a Bridle; my
Reyns were sore.

Raise up my self to behold the Rays of the Sun.

Rancour and Malice, ranker than other.

A red Rose; have thou ^ead it.

To rear it up; the ^^re-ward.

He gave a Reason why a Fig is better than a Raisin.

A Rite or Ceremony* Right or Wrong.

To Write and Rea^; a Wheel- w^ight.

The Rind of a Pomgranate; the River Rhine.

A Roe Buck; a row of Trees.

She rose and took a red Rose.

The Roes of a Fish; the rows of Trees.

A Rower of the Boat head; the Lions roar.

He wrote that there was a rot among the Sheep.

He rapt him on the Head, and wrapped it up

The Roads or Highways; the Isle o^ Rhodes, or Rhode Island.

The highest Room in the House; the City of Rome.

He rung the Mortar; and she wrung her Tiffinie Ruff, and put on her rough
Garment.

A Cheese- rack; Ship- wrack.

A broken ^eed; to read and write.

He wrought hard when he wrote his Copy, and learned by rote*

To raze the Walls; to raise a Siege.

A Barbers Rasour; a raiser of Sedition.

He would not rest, till he did wrest my Words.

S
Savers and Losers; sweet Savours.

The Ocean or Seas; to seize upon his Goods.

Ceasing from Strife; sessing or taxing him.

The Buyer and Seller; a Wine Cellar.

The third Centurie; the Herb Centory.

He did sheer his Sheep in Hampshire.

Cite him to appear; the Sight of the Eye.

The Sole of a Shoe; the Soul and Body.

A s^und Body may ^all into a Swoon.

He was in a strait to make his crooked stick straight.

He made slight of it, having a Slight in doing it.

To Succor a Man from a Blood sucker.

A Sum of Money was paid to some of them.

The Sun and Moon; a Son and Daughter.

He shoots 3 Arrows; he has 3 Suits of Apparel, and 3 Suits in Law.

Seives for Corn; Onions and Sives.

Sythes to mow with; Sighs and Groans.

A Sower of Seeds; sour Grapes.

The weaker S^x, diverse Sects.

The Steed being stolen, stands in no stead.

He went a slow pace, and ^ell in a Slough.

The Seas will not cease from raging.

It is a vain thing to wear our Shoes to see Shows.

The Town of Stanes; Stains in Cloth.

All the Sheep were carried into the Ship.

T
A Tax or Tribute; Iron Tacks*

The Herb Thyme; the Time of the day.

A Tide Table; the Horse is tied.

A Foot and Toe; Flax and Towe.

A Frog and Toad; Stockins toed; he towed his Boar.

It is too much for two men to do.

A small Treatise concerning diverse Treaties.

He had then no more than he could do.

He was thrown from his Throne.

It was through help he came thorouhg.

There was one of their own Kindred.

Fire shovel and Tongs; Neats Tongues.

He did sit on his Tail, and told a Tale.

A Tomb or Sepulcher; the first Tome of a Book.

V
Let the Vein bleed, but not in vain.

The base Viol; to fill a Vial.

In the Vale of Esham, she put a Vail on her Face.

In the long Vacation, he followed his Vocation.

For want of Victuals, the Vitals will faint.

W
To weigh a Wey of Cheese in the high- way.

To wait upon a man; sold by weight.

If he were wise* he would wear warmer Clothes; the Ware in a Shop.

Thou wast unwise to make so much waste.

He did wrest his wrist.

I wist not that he was there, but I wished that he might be there.

Y
The Yew Trees belong to you men.

Put the Basin and Ewer in Ure.

Ye that are wise, use Yea and Nay.

She did earn her Bread with spinning Yarn.

Proper Names in Scripture, with their Signification in English.
AAron, a Teacher. Abda, a Servant. Abdiel, a Servant of God* Abdi, my Servant.
Abdiah, a Servant of the Lord. Abednego, Servant of shining. Abyl, Mourning.
Abagthat, Father of the Wine Press. Abiah, the Will of the Lord. Abijam, Father
of the Sea. Abiasaph, a gathering Father. Abiathar, Father of the Remnant, or
excellent Father. Abida, father of Knowledge Abidan, father of Judgment. Abiel,
my Father is God. Abiezer, the Fathers Help. Abigail, the Fathers Joy, she was
Wife to ungodly Nabal. Abihail, the Father of Strength. Abihu, he is a Father.
Abihud, the Father of Praise. Abilene, lamentable. Abimael, a Father from God.
Abimelech, the Kings Father, or a Father of Counsel. Abinadab, a Father of a
Vow. Abinoam, Father of Beauty. Abiram, an high Father. Abishag, the Fathers
Ignorance. Abishai, the Fathers Reward. Abishalom, the Father of Peace, or the
Peace of the Father. Abishua, the Father of Salvation. Abishur, the Father of a
Song Abital, the Father. of the Dew. Abitob, the Father of Goodness. Abner, the
Fathers Candle. Abshalom, the Fathers Peace, or Reward. Achan, troubling.
Adadezer, beautiful Help. Adaliab, Poverty. Adajah, the Witness of the Lord.
Adiel, the Witness of God. Adonijah* the Lord is the Ruler* Adonizedeck, the
Lords Justice. Agabus, a Gras^hopper. Agar, a Stranger. Ahaz, taking, or
possessing. Ahasuerus, a Prince, or Head. Ahban, a Brother of Understanding.
Ahijah, Brother of the Lord. Ahimaaz, Brother of Counsel. Ahiman, Brother of
the right hand. Ahimelech, a Kings Brother. Ahimoth, a Brother of Death.
Ahinoam, the Brothers Beauty. Ahier, the Brothers Light. Ahilab, a hearty
Brother. Arah, a sweet savouring Meadow. Ahikam, a Brother arising. Ahiezer,
the Brothers help. Aholah, a Mansion, or dwelling in her self. Aholiab, my
Mansion in her. Ahud, praising or confessing. Alian, high. Amaleck, a licking
People. Amaajah, the Lord said, or the Lamb of the Lord. Amasa, sparing the
People. Amashai, the Gift of the People. Amaziah, the Burden of the Lord,
Amatha, a Cloud, or Vapor of Death. Amih^d, People of praise. Aminadab, a free
People. Amitt^i, true or fearing* Ammi, my People. Ammiel, the People of God.
Ammihur, People of Liberty. Ammishaddai, the People of the Almighty. Ammon, a
People- Ammonites, populous, or a Multitude. Amo^, faithful, or true. Amorites,
bitter People, or cruel Rebels. Amos, a Burden. Amoz, strong, or mighty, the
Father of Isaiah the Prophet. Amphibolis, a City compassed. Anab, a Grape.
Anah, answering, or singing. Anaharath, Dryness, or burning, or Wrath. Anak, a
Giant. Anahim, a Fountain, or the Eye of Waters. Ananiah, the Cloud of the
Lord, or the Deliverance of the Lord. Andrew, very strong and manly.
Andr^ni^^s, a victorious Man. Anna, merciful, or taking rest, or gra^ious.
Apollos, leesing, or a Destroyer; a Jew born in Alexandria, who being both
eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, disdained not to be further instructed
in the way of the Lord, by a poor Craftsman, named Aquila, and Priscilla his
Wife. Ariel, the Altar, or Light of God. Arimathea, a Lion, dead unto God.
Arphaxad, healing. Arphad, the light of Redemption. Athaliah, time for the
Lord. Aza, strength. Azariah, Help of the Lord. Azubah, forsaken.

B
Baal, the Idol. Baalgad, the Idol of Fortune. Baalhazer, a possesser of Grace.
Baalhermon, a Possessor of Destruction. Baalperazim, the Idol of Division.
Baalshalisha, the threefold, or principal Idol. Baalzebub, the Idol, or
Possessor of Flies. Babylon, Confusion. Balak, Covering, or Destroying*
Barrabas, the son of Confusion. Barachel, blessing, or speaking well of God, or
bowing the Knee to God. Baruch, blessed, Bathsheba. the seseventh Daughter.
Bathshua, the Daughter of Salvation. Becher, the first begotten, or first
Fruits. Ben, a Son, or Building. Benajath, the Lords Building. Benj^min, the
Son of my right hand; Jacob's youngest Son, called Benoni; that is, the son of
Sorrow; Jacob loved him. Berachiah, speaking well of the Lord* Berasah, the
choosing of the Lord. Besodaiah, the Counsel of the Lord. Bethamath, the House
of affliction. Bethaven, the house of Vanity and Grief. Bethazmaveth, the House
of Deaths Strength. Bethpirei, the house of my Maker. Bethcar, the house of
Knowledge. Betheden, the house of Pleasure. Bethel, the house of God.
Bethemeck, the house of Deepness. Bethesda, the house of Effusion. Bethanan,
the house of Grace, or Mercy. Bethhathshittah, the house of going out of the
way, or the house of Thorns. Bethlehem, the house of Bread, or the house of
War; a City in the Tribe of Zebulon, also a City in the Tribe of Judah, called
Ephrath, near unto which Rachel was buried, and unto which Joseph traveled
with Mary, the Mother of Jesus, where she was delivered of Jesus Christ; where
the wise Men went and honored him. Bathmarcaboth, the house of bitterness
wiped out Bethnimrah, the house of Rebellion. Bethuel, the Measure of God, the
Father of Rebekah. Bethula, the Virgin of the Lord. Bezaleel, in the shadow of
God, he was a man mightily endued with the Spirit of God. Boaz, in strength or
Power. Boochim, the place of weeping. Boanerges, the Sons of Thunder.

C
Caleb, as an heart. Caiaphas, a Searcher* Canaan, a Merchant. Chileab, the
Restraint of the Father, Christ, anointed Clement* Gentle, or Meek Cleophas,
all Glory. Cleopatra, the glory of the Country. Co^aniah, the strength or
stability of the Lord.

D
Dalajah, the Poor of the Lord. Deborah, a Word, or Be; a Prophetess, who
judged Israel. Dina, Judgment. Dositheus, giving to Go

E
Eden, Pleasure. Egypt, anguish, or tribulation. Elchanan, the mercy of God.
Eldaah, the love of God. Eleadah, witness of God. Eleazer, the help of God.
Eliab, my God the Father. Eliakim* God arises. Eliam, the people of God.
Eliasaph, the Lord increases. Eliaship, the Lord returns. Eliatha, thou art
my God. Elihoenai, the Lord mine Eye. Elidad, the Beloved of God. Elihu, he is
my God. Elimelech, my God the King, or the Counsel of God. Eliphal, a Miracle
of God. Eliph^leh, the God of deliverance. Elisha, the Lamb of God. Elishapha^,
my God judges. Elisheba, the Oath of God, or the fullness of God. Elizur, the
strength of God. Elkanah, the Zeal of God. Elmoded; God measures. Eln^than,
God's Gift. Eliphaal, God's Work. Ezriel, the Help of God.

G
Gabriel, a man of God. Gamaliel, God's Reward.

H
Habbakkuk, a Wrestler. Habiah, the hiding of the Lord. Habazzanjah, a hiding
of the Shield of the Lord. Hacaljah, w^nting of the Lord. Hadad, Joy, or
Rejoicing. Hagar, a Stranger. Haggiah, the Lords Feast. Hamul, Godly, or
merciful. Hanan, full of Grace. Hannah, merciful, or taking Rest. Hanameel, the
mercy of God. Hananeel, the grace of God. Hanani, gracious or merciful.
Hananiah, the Grace of the Lord. Hatim, dedicate to God, Hasadiah, the mercy of
the Lord. Hattil, an howling for sin. Hazael, seeing God. Helkiah, the Portion
of the Lord. Hiel, the Lord lives. Hezekiah, Strength of the Lord. Hohab,
beloved.

I
Ja^si^l, the Work of God. Jaasoniah, the hearkening of the Lord. Jabal,
bringing or budding. Jabesh, drought. Jabiz, Sorr^w. Jabin, Understanding.
Jachim, Stability. Jadiah, knowing the Lord. Jahallel, praising God. Jabohel,
waiting for God, or beseeching God, or hope in God, or beginning in God.
Jamuel, God in his day. Jasher, Righteous. Jatter, a remnant, or excellent.
Ichabod, Where is glory? Jeconiah, stability of the Lord. Jedaiah, the hand of
the Lord, or confessing the Lord. Jedidiah, beloved. Jediel, Knowledge of God.
Jehiah, the Lord lives. Jehiel, God lives. Jehoadan, the Lords Pleasure,
Jehoahas, the Possession of the Lord. Jehoash, the fire of the Lord. Jehohanan,
Grace or Mercy of the Lord. Jehoiakim, the rising or avenging of the Lord.
Jehoshaphat, the Lord is the Judge. Jehoshuah, the Lords Salvation. Jehozadak,
the Justice of the Lord. Jekannah, the Lord shall arise, establish or avenge.
Jerameel, the mercy of God. Jeriel, the fear of God. Jerimoth, fearing Death.
Jeroboam, increasing the People. Igdaliah, the greatness of the Lord. Joel,
willing, or beginning. Jonah, a Dove. Jonathan, the gift of the Lord.
Joshabeth, the fullness of the Lord. Ishmael, God has heard.

K
Kabzeel, the Congregation of God. Kain, a Possession. Kelaiah, the voice of
the Lord. Kelita; succor, a gathering together. Kirithaim, a City of Cities.

L
Laadak, to gather, to assemble together. Laban, white, shining, gentle,
Brother to Rebekah. Lazarus, the help of God. Leah, painful or wearied; the
Name of Laban 's eldest Daughter.

M
Maadiah, Pleasantness, or decking of the Lord, or Testimony, or Covenant of
the Lord, Mahseiah, the Protection of the Lord. Maaziah, the strength of the
Lord. Machbanai, my poor Son. Madan, Strife, Magdalen, magnified or exalted.
Magdiel, preaching God. Mahalan, infirmity or weakness. Magog, covering or
melting. Malachi, my Messenger. Mahaleel, praising God, Menahem, a Comforter.
Manoach, Rest. M^on, dwelling place. Martha, bitter or provoking. Mattan, a
gift. Ma^teni, Martaniah, Matthaniah, Mattharah, his gift. Mattathiah, a gift
of the Lord. Malchiel, God is my King. Malchiah, the Lord is my King.
Melchizedeck, King of Righteousness. Malchishuah, my King the Savior.
Mehetabel, how good is God. Mehuman, troubled. Melatiah, Deliverance of the
Lord. Menelaus, Strength of the People. Merajath, Bitterness. Mered,
Rebellious. Mesha, Salvation. Meshelemjah* the Peace of the Lord. Meshullam*
peaceable^ Mephibosheth, Shame of Mo^th. Milchah, a Woman of Counsel. Michah,
poor or smitten. Michajah, who is like the Lord. Mich^el, who is like God.
Michal, who is perfect. Mordecai, bitter Contrition; he brought up Esther, and
bewailed the Jews Destruction.

N
Naam, fair or pleasant. Naamah, fair, beautiful, or comely, or greatly moving.
Naariah, a Child of the Lord. Nabatoth, B^ds, or Fruits, or Prophecies. Nabal,
a Fool. N^both, a Speech, Prophecy, of budding forth; he refused to sell Ahab
his Vineyard, and therefore was stoned by Iezebels wicked practice. Nadab, a
Prince, or liberal. Nahas, a Snake or Serpent. Nahoi, very secret, or hid, my
beloved, or wrestling with me. Najah, Fairness, Beauty, Comeliness. Nathan,
given or rewarded. Naphtali, my wrestling. Nathaniel, the gift of God.
Nazareth, separated, crowned, or sanctified; the City where Christ was brought
up. Nehelamite, a Dreamer. Nehemiah, Comfort, or the Rest of the Lord, or
Direction of the Lord. Netias, the Light, or Candle of the Lord. Nicodemus,
innocent Blood; he was a Ruler among the Jews, and one that came to Christ by
Night to be taught of him. Nicholas, a Victor, or Overcomer. Nineveh, fair,
beautiful, or a dwelling place: the name of a City; the Desolation whereof was
Prophesied, but they repented after Jonas preached to them. Noah, a ceasing or
rest; he was Son to Lamech, he was a Preacher of Righteousness; he was
commanded of God to make an Ark, that he and his Family should enter in to it,
for their Preservation.

O
Obadiah, Servant of the Lord; he was a Prophet. Obed, a Servant or Workman.
Obededom, the Servant of Edom. Obil, born or brought. Onam, Sorrow. Ophel, a
Tower, or Darkness. Othni, my Time. Othoniel, the Time of God. Ozaziah, the
Strength of the Lord. Oziel, the help of God.

P
Pagiel, God has met. Pashur, increasing liberty. Ped^el, the Redemption of
God Pedahzur, a mighty Redeemer. Pedajah, the Lords Redeeming^ Pekajah, the
Lords opening. Pelajah, the Miracle of the Lord. Pelatiah, Deliverance of the
Lord: Peleg, Division. Penuel* seeing God. Pethajah, the Lord opens. Phicol,
the Mouth of all. Phineas, a Countenance,

R
Raamjah, Thunder of the Lord. Rabboni, Master. Raham, Mercy or Compassion.
Rachel, a Sheep; Daughter of Laban; she kept her Fathers Sheep; when she met
with Jacob, he wept; Jacob served twice seven years for her; she hid away her
Fathers Idols: The People at Boaz's marriage prayed to God to make Ruth as
fruitful as Rachel and Leah: Rachel wept for her Children, and would not be
comforted: she died at the birth of Benjamin. Reuben, the Son of Vision, so
named because the Lord did see his Mothers Affliction; he was Jacob's Son by
Leah.

S
Sabbath, Rest. Sabdi, a Dowry. Sarai, my Dame or Mistress; the Name of
Abraham 's Wife before it was changed. Seled, Affliction. Semachiah, cleaving
to the Lord. Shalmon, peaceable. Shamah, Desolation or Destruction. Shelathiel,
asked of God. Shearjah, the gate of the Lord. Sebarim, Hope. Shecanjah, the
Habitation of the Lord. Shechem, a Part, or Portion. Shedur, a Field of Fire,
or the light of the Almighty. Shebarjah, the Morning of ^he Lord. Snelemjah,
Peace of the Lord. Sh^lumi^, the Peace of God. Shemajah, hearing the Lord.
Shemarjah, the keeping of the Lord. Shemuel, appointed of God. Sherajah, a
Prince of the Lord. Sheva, Vanity. Sichiah, the Protection of the Lord.
Shubael, the returning of the Lord.

T
Tanchumeth, Consolation. Taphath, a little one. Tehinuah, merciful or prayer.
Tirhanah, a Searcher of Mercy. Tobiah, the Lord is good. Tog^rmath, strong or
bonny. Tubal, born or worldly. Tubalkain, worldly possession.

V
Vanjah, Nourishment of the Lord. Ure, my Light. Unjah, the light of the Lord.
Uriel, Light or Fire of God. Uzzah, strength. Uzziel, the strength of God.
Urim, Light.

Z
Zaven, Trembling. Zadad, a Dowry. Zabadjay, a Dowry of the Lord. Zachai, pure.
Zachariah, mindful of the Lord. Zebulum, dwelling. Zelophehad, a shadow of
fear. Zephaniah, the hiding of the Lord. Zephi, a Honey comb. Zerah, Clearness,
or rising up. Zerajah, the Lord arising. Zedekiah, the Justice of the Lord.
Zuriel, the Rock of God. Zurishidai, the Rock of the Almighty.

Independency (Latin) a not depending upon another, absoluteness, of ones self:
But it is commonly taken for that Profession, or Sect of men, who manage all
things belonging to Church Discipline, within their own Congregations, and
allow not of a Dependence on a National Church.

Anabaptists, a sort of Professors of Religion, who it is said, first began in
Germany, in the year 1521. Their chief Principle by which they separate from
Independents, and other Professors, is, that they do not hold it lawful to
sprinkle Children, and call it Baptism; but that they ought first to be able to
give an account of their Faith before they are Baptized.

Socinians, a sort of People that deny the Divinity of Christ; first spread by
one Faustus Socinus of Siena.

Presbytery, (Latin) signifies Priesthood, Eldership, or Government of the
Church by Elders; there is a great People in this Nation go under the Name of
Presbyterians, who, when they had power in their hands, were great Persecutors.

Quakers, They are in derision so called by the scorners of this Ages: but
their proper Name is, Children of the Light; and though they are accounted a
Sect of Heretics newly sprung up, by some who have rashly passed Judgmen upon
them, yet upon a serious and diligent search into their Principles and
Examples, they will appear to to be led by a Christian Spirit.

Seven Numeral Letters.
One -- I Five -- V Ten -- X Fifty -- L One hundred -- C Five hundred -- D One
thousand -- M
Numbers expressed by Letters.
M C X I MM CC XX II MMM CCC XXX III CD XL IV D L V DC LX VI DCC LXX VII DCCC
LXXX VIII CM XC IX

Eleven XI. Twelve XII. Thirteen XIII. Fourteen XIV. Fifteen XV. Sixteen XVI.
Seventeen XVII. Eighteen XVIII. Nineteen XIX.

The Table of Numeration, whereby any Number may be expressed.
I One 1 X Ten 10 C an Hundred 100 I Thousand 1000 X Thousand 10000 C Thousand
100000 I Million 1000000 X of Millions 10000000 C of Millions 100000000
CXI Millions CXI Thousand CXI. III. III. III. Mil. Thou. Unites. 222. 222.
222. 333. 333. 333. 444. 444. 444. 555. 555. 555. 666. 666. 666. 777. 777. 777.
888. 888. 888. 999. 999. 999.

999 Millions 999 Thousand 999 Nine.

The Table of Multiplication.
2 times 2 is 4 2 3 6 2 4 8 2 5 10 2 6 12 2 7 14 2 8 16 2 9 18 2 10 20 3 times
3 is 9 3 4 12 3 5 15 3 6 18 3 7 21 3 8 24 3 9 27 3 10 30 4 times 4 is 16 4 5 20
4 6 24 4 7 28 4 8 32 4 9 36 4 10 40 5 times 5 is 25 5 6 30 5 7 35 5 8 40 5 9 45
5 10 50 6 times 6 is 36 6 7 42 6 8 48 6 9 54 6 10 60 7 times 7 is 49 7 8 56 7 9
63 7 10 70 8 times 8 is 64 8 9 72 8 10 80

9 times 9 is 81

10 times 10 is 100

10 times 100 is 1000

Concerning Weights, Measures, etc.
THere are two kinds of Weights used in England, as, Troy and Averdupois; By
Troy Weight, Gold and Silver is weighed; Troy Weight contains in every Pound
twelve Ounces, in every Ounce twenty Penny weight, in every Penny weight twenty
four Grains.

By Averdupois Weight is weighed all Grocery Ware, all Drugs and Iron, Lead and
Tin etc. and it contains sixteen Ounces to the Pound, twenty eight Pounds make
one quarter of a Hundred, fifty six Pounds make two quarters, eighty four
Pounds three quarters, a hundred and twelve Pounds make one Hundred weight, and
twenty Hundreds make one Tun

In dry Measure, sixteen Pints make one Peck, and four Pecks make one Bushel.

In Cloth Measure, four Nails is one quarter of a Yard, and one yard is four
quarters, one Ell Flemish is three quarters of a Yard, one Ell English is five
quarters of a Yard.

In reckoning Time, sixty Minutes make one Hour, twenty four Hours make one
Day, and three hundred sixty five Days make one Year

In measuring Wine, two Pints make one Quart, two Quarts one Pottle; two
Pottles one Gallon, sixty three Gallons one Hogshead, and four Hogsheads one
Tun; one Gallon of Wine contains eight Pound of Troy weight.

In long Measure, three Barley corns make ^ne Inch, twelve Inches a Foot* three
Feet Yard, five Yards and a half a ^earch; forty Pearches in length and four in
breadth make an Acre, four in breadth and ten in length make a Rood, which is a
quarter of an Acre, so that an Acre ^hath forty three thousand five hundred and
sixty square Feet, four thousand eight hundred and forty square Yards. Eight
Furlongs is an English Mile, forty Poles is a Furlong, sixteen Foot and a half
make one Pole, three feet make one Yard^ The compass of the Earth is supposed
to be three hundred and sixty degrees, or one and twenty thousand and seven
hundred Italian Miles.

A ready Way to reckon what ones daily Expenses come unto in a whole Year.
IF thou spendest six pence a day, and would know how much it comes to in the
year; which to know say thus; six pence the Day, is six Pound, six Half Pounds,
six Groats and six Pence; which makes nine Pound two shillings and six Pence.
Again; seven Pence the Day, is seven Pounds, seven hal^ pounds, seven Groats
and seven pence in the Year; which makes ten Pounds* twelve Shillings and
eleven Pence; the like reckon of any other Sum.

To know the Value of any Sum, and how to set it down.
l. s. d. q. For a Farthing wrte 000 00 00 1 For a Half penny 000 00 00 2 For
three Farthings 000 00 00 3 For a Penny 000 00 01 0 For a Groat 000 00 04 0 For
4 Pence Halfpenny 000 00 04 2 For 6 pence half penny 000 00 06 ^ For two
Groats 000 00 08 0 For a Shilling 000 01 00 0 For 13 pence half penny 000 01 01
2 For half a Crown 000 02 06 0 For half a Noble 000 03 04 0 For a Crown 000 05
00 0 For a Noble 000 06 08 0 For an Angel 000 10 00 0 For a Mark 000 13 04 0
For twenty Shillings 001 00 00 0 For four Nobles 001 06 08 0 For five Nobles
001 13 04 0 For four Marks 002 13 04 0 For five Marks 003 06 08 0 For twenty
Nobles 006 13 04 0 For twenty Marks 013 06 08 0 For an hundred Marks 066 13 04
0 For a thousand Marks 666 13 04 0 The whole Sum is 765 11 09 1

Note that l. stands over Pounds, s. over Shillings, d. over Pence, and q. over
Farthings.

The Significations of diverse Words commonly used, but hard to be understood.
BIble, (Greek) containing several Books. Evangelist, (Greek) a bringer of glad
Tidings, a Preacher of the Gospel.

Ephemerides (Greek) Journals, or Books wherein daily Actions are registered,
also Astronomical Calculation.

Epact, A ce^tain number of days, by which the Solary Year exceeds the
Lunary, which number of Excess is eleven, in regard the Lunary consisting but
of 29 days, and one and a half makes but ^^4 days in a year, whereas the
Solary Year has 365 days and a quarter: For the Equation of which Years
differing thus eleven days, certain days are yearly supplied by the Epact,
never exceeding 30 (because the days between change and change of the Moon
never exceed that number) until a thirteen Month be added, whereby every third
year becomes Embolismal, being a Lunary Leap year.

Embolism, (Greek) signifies a casting in of the day which is added to the
Leap year.

To find out the Epact of each year, do thus; To the Epact of the last year add
11^ and the sum of these two make the Epact, if it surmount 30 then take 30
out, and that which rests above 30 is the Epact for that year.

To know the age of the Moon by the Epact without an Almnack; add the days of
the Month wherein thou would know the Ep^ct; and as many days more as are
Months from the first Month called March, to that Month, including both Months,
out of the which substract 30 as often as may be, the age remains; if nothing
remain, the Moon changes that day.

The Golden Number, so called; because it was written in the Calendar with
Letters of Gold, right at the day whereon the Moon changed; and it is the space
of 19 Years in which the Moon returns to the self same day of the Year of the
Sun, and therefore is called the Circle of the Moon, in the which the Solstices
and Equinoctials return to all one point in the Zodiac.

To find it every Year, add one Year to the Year of Christ, then divide the
whole by 19, and that which rests is the Golden Number for that Year, if
there be no Surplusage, it is then 19.

Note, That the Golden Number and Dominical Letter does change every year the
first day of the eleventh Month, and the Epact the first day of the first Month
for ever; and the Year always begins the twenty fifth of the first Month.

A perpetual Almanac.
1 Dom. Letter Years of the Lord 2 7 4 9 6 3 11 5 10 21 8 D 1674 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
C 5 BA 6 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 G 7 F 8 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 E 9 DC 1680 22 23 24
25 26 27 28 B 1 A 2 29 30 31 G 3 FE 4 G F E D C B A D 5 C 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 B 7

THE EXPLANATION.
IN the three upper Columns are the 1^ Months, and under them the Figures for
the days of the Month, from 1 till 31, under them the Dominical Letters; and in
the lower part the figures for the Days of the Week, from the first day to the
seventh, and in the two Columns on the left Hand, the first has the Dominical
Letters, and the other the Year of the Lord.

Now, to know the Day, First find out the Year, next see what Dominical Letter
is against that Year, which Letter Find in the lower part of the Almanac, and
the Figure under that is the Day of the Week, for thy Observation for the whole
Year; only every Leap year has two Dominical Letters; the First gives the
Observation for the eleventh and twelfth Month, and the next for all the Year
after.

In the Year 1^75. C is the Dominical Letter for that Year, which directs to
the Fifth Day being under it; which is the Observation for that Year: So that
the First Fifth Day of the First Month, is the fourth day of the Month; the
First Fifth Day of the second Month, is (...) First Day of the Month, and so
reckon forward

THE END.

