Several Rules, Orders, AND Bylaws Made and Agreed upon By the Freeholders
and Inhabitants of BOSTON OF THE Massachusetts, At their Meeting May, 12. and
September 22. 1701.

And Approved by His Majesty's Justices for the County of Suffo^k, at their
General Quarter Sessions held at Boston, August 5 th. and October 27 th. next
following.

A^^^que Regni Regis Gulielmi Tertij Angliae, etc. Decimo Tertio:

BOSTON: Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, for Benjamin Eliot, and
are to be Sold at his Shop under the West End of the Town House. 1702.

Several Rules, Orders, and Bylaws, made by the Free-Hold^^^ and Inhabitants
of the Town of Boston.
At a Meeting of the Freeholders and Inhabitan^s of the Town of Boston, duly
qualifyed to Act and Vote in Town Affairs, being orderly Warned and Assembled,
the Twelfth Day of May, Anno Domini. 1701.
THE several Rules, Orders and By Laws were then openly and distinctly Read
over, Vot^d, Made and Established by the aforesaid Free^old^rs and Inhabitants
of the said Town, to be Observed and K^pt by all Persons I^^abiting wit hin the
said Town, [for the Year Ensuing, and until the Freeholders and Inhabitants
thereof, shall ^ereafter by their Vote and Order, Declare, Repeal, and make
void the s^m^ or any of them,] under the several and respective Pains and
Penalties to t^^m or any of them annexed and prescribed. And being afterward
p^^sented to His Majesty's Justice in Court of General or Quarte^ Sessions of
^he Peace, holden in said Town of Boston, within the County of Su^folk, August
5th. 1701. Was by them approved.

For keeping Ladders to each House.
Ordered,
THat every Householder shall from time to time be provided with a suffi^ien^
Ladder or Ladders, to reach from the ground to the Ridge of ^uch House, at ^he
charge of the Owner thereof; and in case the Owner o^ Owners of such House or
Houses be not a^ Inhabitant of this Town, then the Occupyers thereof to provide
the some, and deduct the c^arge thereof out of his or their Rent, on pain of
the forfeiture of Six Shillings and Eight pence for every neglect, after thr^e
months notice given by such person or persons as the Select-men for the time
being shall appoint for the inspecting and observance of this Order. And if any
person or persons shall remove or take away (unless by the order of two or more
of the said Select men) any Ladder belonging to the said Town, or Public
Meeting Houses, except for present use in case of Fire, every such person or
persons so offending, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings.

For keeping of Vessels full of Water in Yards, etc.
Ordered,
THat from the tenth day of March, to the first day of November yearly, and
every year hereafter, every Householder (excepting such who have propriety in a
Well, with a sufficiency of water, and convenience of drawing the same) nigh
unto his or their Dwelling House, shall at all times within the limitation
aforesaid, keep in their Houses, Yards or Backsides, a Pipe, Hogshead or Tearce
full of water, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Five Shillings for every such
neglect, and that no person or persons shall be excused therefrom that fetch
their water from the Wells and Conduits that are in the Streets and public
Places.

For preventing danger by persons Riding or driving a-gallop in the Streets,
etc.
Ordered,
THat no person whatsoever shall at any time hereafter ride or drive a gallop
or other extreme pace within any of the Streets, Lanes or Alleys in this Town,
on penalty of forfeiting Three Shillings for every such Offense; And it may be
lawful for any of the Inhabitants of this Town to make stop of such Horse or
Rider, until the name of the Offender be known, in order to prosecution:
Further, That whosoever shall hereafter by themselves or Servants, turn or let
loose to water or otherwise, any Horse into any of the Streets or Lanes of this
Town, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Two Shillings for every such
transgression of this Order

For preventing Dangers by Carts, etc.
Ordered,
THat henceforth no Cart, Dray, Trucks or Sled drawn by either Horse or Horses,
Horse and Oxen, shall be suffered to pass through any of the Streets or Lanes
in this Town, but with a sufficient Driver, who shall during such passage, keep
with his said Cart, Dray, Trucks or Sled, and carefully observe and attend such
methods as may best serve to keep said Horse or Horses or Oxen under Command:
And whatsoever Carter or others undertaking to drive any Cart, Dray, Trucks or
Sled shall during such passing through the Streets or Lanes as aforesaid,
either Ride in the said Cart, Dray, Trucks or Sled, or otherwise neglect to
observe and attend the Rules prescribed in this Order, such Carter, Driver or
Owner of such Cart, Dray, Trucks or Sled, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Two
Shillings for every such Offense.

For Regulating Burials.
Ordered,
THat none shall Bury the Body of any dead person without making the same
public, by causing a first and second Toll of the Bell of one of the public
Meeting Houses, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Twenty Shillings for every
such offense; Nor shall any in Burying of their Dead exceed one hour from the
time of the beginning of the Toll of the second Bell, until the Corpse shall be
carried out of the House from whence such Corpse is to be Buried, and be on
motion toward the Grave, on pain of forfeiting Twenty Shillings for every such
offense: And if any person or persons shall bury their Dead on the Lords Day,
he or they shall not exceed one hour from the beginning of the Toll of the
first Bell, until the Corpse be carried forth out of the House, and on motion
toward the Grave, on pain of forfeiting Twenty Shillings for every such
offense.

For Regulating Burying-Places.
Ordered,
THat none shall break up the ground in any of the public Buryal places, for
the making a Tomb therein, without the approbation of three or more of the
Select men for the time being* under their Hands* On pain of forfeiting the Sum
of Twenty Shillings for every such Offense.

To prevent Riding Horses to Water in the Common, etc. on the Lord's Day.
Ordered,
THat no person shall hereaf^er Ride any Horse, Mare or Gelding, into the
Common, or to Wheelers Pond, or to any usual place of Watering, on the
Lord's Day, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Five Shillings for every such
Offense.

For preventing Annoyances on the Common or Commons.
Ordered,
THat no person whatsoever shall hereaf^er break, dig or carry away any of the
Sord, Turf or Earth of or belonging to the Common or Common Lands (except at
Fo^-hill, or the Ridge hill, between that and Windmill hill) On pain of
forfeiting Twenty Shillings for every breach of this Order. Further, That no
person shall lop, peal, girdle or deface any of the Trees now standing, or th^^
shall hereafter be planted or set by order of the Sele^^-men, or by their
approbation upon any part of, or place on the common ground of this Town, On
pain of forfeiting the Sum of Twenty Shillings for every such Offense. Further,
That no person shall cast or spread any Stones, Carrion or other Trash upon the
Common or Common Lands in this Town, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Twenty
Shillings.

That no Horse, dry Ca^tle or Sheep shall be suffered to go at large, or to
feed on the Common or Common Lands, or any of the Streets or Lanes of this
Town, on pain that the Owner or Owners thereof shall f^rfeit and pay Five
Shillings for each Horse, and Three Shillings per Head for neat dry Cattle, and
One Shilling for every Sheep that shall be found going at large upon the said
Commons, Streets or Lanes. And it ^^all and may be lawful for such persons wh^m
the Select men for the time being, shall appoint thereun^o, to Impound such
Horse, nea^ Cattle or Sheep so found ^ransgressing.

Against Swine going at Large.
Ordered,
THat no Hog or Swine shall be suffered to go at Large within this Neck of
Boston saving in and upon the Land or Enclosed ground of, or in possession of
the Owner or Keeper of such Swine, (except also such Swine that are driving to
Market:) On pain that such Owner or Keeper of such Hog or Swine shall forfeit
and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings, for every Hog or Swine that shall be found
going at Large contrary to this Order; or the full value thereof, if not
exceeding Twenty Shillings: One half to him or them that shall Seize and Secure
the same, the other half to the poor of this Town. Further it is hereby
provided, That if it appear that the Owner or Keeper of such Hog or Swine be
actually in pursuit of it or them, at and before the Seizure, then such Owner
and Keeper shall have his Hog or Swine released to him by such Person, who by
virtue of this Order had Seized and Secured the same, he paying to such Seizer
Two Shillings, for every Hog so Seized by him. And it shall and may be Lawful
for such Person or Persons, that are chosen to the Office of Hogreeves for the
time being, or in their absence for any of the Inhabitants of this Town, to
Seize, Secure or Impound any Hog or Swine going at Large, contrary to this
Order, and upon his or their so doing, shall make application to one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within this Town, to order an Apprizement,
award and give Judgment, according to the true intent and meaning of this Order.

Against unruly Dogs.
Ordered,
THat any Person who shall hereafter have or keep any Cursed or unruly Dog or
Bitch within this Town, so as to harm or do damage to any Person whomsoever, or
to any Horse, Neat Cattle, Sheep or Tame Fowl; and upon Warning or Notice given
by any of the Inhabitants unto such Owner or Keeper of such Cursed or unruly Dog
or Bitch, that the same has been known to Bite, Seize upon, Worry, or do harm
to Man or Beast aforesaid; and the same so appearing. Such Owner or Keeper of
such unruly Dog or Bitch, shall forthwith cause the Town to be Rid and
discharged of the same: On pain that the Owner or Keeper of such unruly Dog or
Bitch, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings, and Five Shillings more
for every day after, that such unruly Dog or Bitch shall be seen to go at large
in this Town

Against Dogs doing damage to Gardens, etc.
Ordered,
THat if any person shall keep or entertain more than one Dog or Bitch, and
suffer the same to go at large within this Neck of Boston, and upon complaint
made unto the Select men for the time being, by any of the Neighborhood, that
such Dogs are offensive to them, doing damage to their Gardens, Orchards,
Pastures or otherwise, and the said Select-men, or any two of them, ordering
and notifying such Owner or Keeper of such Dog or Dogs, to shut up or otherwise
discharge the Town of the same during such time as they shall limit; Every such
Owner, Keeper or Entertainer of such Dogs, neglecting to attend the Order of
said Select-men as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings
for every Dog or Bitch by them so kept or entertained and suffered to go at
large contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Order.

To Limit the Select-men to time in Leasing forth the Towns Lands.
Ordered,
THat from henceforth the Select men for the time being shall have power and
liberty to Lease out to Rent, any of the Towns Lands, or Buildings, that are or
shall be to be Rented for any term of years, not exceeding Seven years, and no
longer, without a special Vote of the Town for longer time.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and Inhabitan^s of the Town of Boston, duly
qualifyed to Act and Vote in Town Affairs, being orderly Warned and Assembled,
the Twenty-second Day of September, Anno Domini. 1701.
THE several Rules, Orders and By Laws were then openly and distinctly Read
over, Voted, Made and Established by the aforesaid Freeholders and Inhabitants
of the said Town, to be Observed and Kept by all Persons Inhabiting within the
said Town, [for the Year Ensuing, and until the Freeholders and Inhabitants
thereof, shall hereafter by their Vote and Order, Declare, Repeal, and make
void the same or any of them,] under the several and respective Pains and
Penalties to them or any of them annexed and prescribed. And being afterward
presented to His Majesty's Justices in Court of General Sessions of the Peace,
holden in said Town of Boston, within the County of Suffolk, October 27th.
1701. Was by them approved.

Against carrying Fire Uncovered.
Ordered,
THat no person or persons, do presume hereafter, to carry Fire from any house
or place within the Neck or Town of Boston, unto any other house or place
within the same, but in a Warming pan, or other safe Vessel well covered, so as
to secure the said Fire from the Wind, and from being scattered by the way, or
in the Streets or Lanes thereof, on pain, that every person therein offending,
shall forfeit and pay for the use of the poor of said Town, the Sum of One
Shilling.

Against defective Chimneys etc.
Ordered,
THat the Select men for the time being, upon complaint to them made, or
otherwise upon their own knowledge, of any defective Chimney or Chimneys within
this Town, do from time to time take effectual care to have the same inspected
and viewed, and order the same to be speedily amended and repaired, (if it may
be done) or taken down; on pai^ of the forfeiture of Ten Shilling^ a month by
the O^ner ^^e^eof that shall negl^ct to obse^ve and pe^fo^m such O^der (...)
the Sele^t men, being de^l^^ed to him or ^h^m, and En^^e^ of R^c^rd, unl^ss the
season o^ the y^ar will no^ admit o^ the amending and ^ep^i^ng of the same: And
^n such case ^he O^cupyer thereof shall fo^^ear to make or keep any Fire
the^ein, ^n penal^y of Tw^nty Shillings for every such off^nce. And if any
Chimney hap^pen to t^ke Fire, so as t^ fl^me out at the Top thereof, the
Occupyer o^ such Chimney shall forthwi^h f^rfeit and pay the Sum o^ Ten
Shillings.

Against making Fires in the Streets etc.
Ordered,
THat whosoever shall kindle or m^ke any Fire open or abroad, within two rods
of any wooden House, Wa^e-house, Woodpi^e or any other combustible matter
subject to take fire (except ^n Ship-Carpenters Building-yards, Set work
Coopers and Rope-makers works, a careful person standing by to watch the same)
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Te^ Shillings, to the use of the poor of the
Town. Provided also that this Order shall not be understood or intended to
debar or hinder any Tradesman or others from kindling Charcole in a pot or pan
out of doors nigh their House or Shop, at any time during the day light, and
provided also that some careful person stand by to watch the same while it
shall be continued in the open air.

Against keeping Fire on board Vessels (lying nigh Wharfs) after Ten of the
Clock ^t Night.
Ordered,
THat every Master of any Vessel lying at o^ near to any Wharf, on B^ard of
which Fire shall be kept burni^g after Ten of the Cl^ck at night, or be k^ndled
before five in the mo^ning, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Six Shillings.

For Providing a Pole and Swabb.
Ordered,
THat every Householder Ratable at Twenty Pounds Estate besides the P^ll, from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall be provided with a S^fficient
Pole o^ Twelve Foot long or more, with a large Swabb ^asten^d at the end
thereof; or with a Sufficient hand-Engine sui^able for the q^enching of Fire;
on pain of fo^feiting the Sum of Five Sh^llings for each neglect, or not
showing forth the same upon demand unto the Officer, which shall be appointed
by the Select men to inspect the same, within two Months after notice given
them to provide the aforesaid Pole, Swabb, or other Sufficient hand-Engine.

For keeping of Gunpowder.
Ordered,
THat from hence forward no Person or Persons shall keep any Gunpowder, o^
greater quantity then Twenty Pounds Weight, in any Warehouse, Dwelling house
or Shop, within this Town, but in such place or places as His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace within this Town, and the Select men for the time being,
shall appoint or approve of for that purpose; on penalty of forfeiting the Sum
of Te^ Shillings for every Week that any Person or Persons shall keep Gunpowder
contrary to this order, after the said Justices and Select men have sig^if^ed
their appointment and assignment of some place or places ^or keeping the same.

For Coopers burning their Cask.
Ordered,
THat no Cooper or Coopers within this Town, shall Fire or Burn their Cask in
any Shop* Ware house or other place, then in a Sufficient Brick or Stone
Chimney, made convenient for that use; on penalty of forfeiting the Sum of Ten
Shillings for every offense contrary to this O^der.

For preventing Selling of Butchers Meat by Steelyards.
Ordered,
THat no Butcher by Himself, Wise or Servant, shall Weigh and Sell, any dead
Meat by Steelyards, but shall within two Months after Publication of this
Order, be provided with good and sufficient Scales and Sealed Weights, and Sell
and Weigh their Meat thereby, and no otherwise; upon pain of forfeiting the Sum
of Ten Groats, for every transgression, and Five Shillings per Week while he or
they continue ^eficient of such Scales and Weights as a^oresaid.

For preventing Nusances and Annoyances to or in the Streets or High Ways etc.
Ordered,
THat no person whatsoever shall carry, or cause or suffer to be carried or
cast any Dirt, Dung, Garbidge, Carrion, Shreds, Shavings, Filth, Soil or
Rubbish, or any thing that may be an annoyance out of their Houses, Shops,
Yards, Backsides or any of the dependencies thereof, and cast or l^y the same
in any of the Streets, High ways, Lanes or Alleys within this Neck of Boston,
On pain of forfeiting the Sum of Two Shillings for every such offense: Nor
shall any person incumber or annoy any Street, Lane or Alley within this Town
by laying any Stones, Earth, Timber, Boar^s, Fi^e Wood or other Lumber ^herei^,
and suffer the same to ly there above the space of forty eight hours, under the
penalty of Five Shillings for every such offense, and Five Shillings more for
each forty eight hours he or they shall suffer the same to ly there: Provided
that t^is Order shall not be understood to debar or hinder any of the
Inhabitants (who in case of Building any Housing, or digging any Cellar or
Well) of the liberty of laying their Rubbish or Materials for such Buildings,
Wells or Cellars such fart^er ^ime, and in such part o^ the Streets and Lanes
as shall be farther granted them by the Select men for the time being, or any
two o^ them.

For preventing Annoyances by Butchers to the Streets, etc.
Ordered,
THat no Butcher shall suffer any Guts, Garbidge or other Filth to be cast or
brought out of his or their Shop, Slaughter house, or other place of killing,
and suffer the same to be laid or ly in any Street, Lane or Alley or near
thereunto, on pain of forfeit^ng the Sum of Five Shillings for every
transgression of this Order.

For preventing Annoyances by Houses of Office and Hogsties.
Ordered,
THat no person whatsoever shall hereafter Erect or Set up any House of Offi^e
or Easem^nt within this Town (or suffer the same to con^inue being already Set
up or standing) within forty foot of any Street, Lane or Highway, or the
Dwelling House, Shop or Well of any Neighbor, unless the same be Vaulted six
foot deep, and sufficiently enclosed or otherwise secured, On pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Twenty Shilli^gs for every transgression of this Order,
and the like Sum of Twenty Shillings for every three months it shall so
continue. Nor shall any person from and after the end of October, A^^o One
thousand seven hundred and One, keep any Hog or Swine in any Hogsty within
twenty foot of any High^way, Street, Lane or Alley within this Neck of Boston,
or of the Dwelling house or Shop of any Neighbor, on penalty of Ten Shillings
for every transgression of this Order, and Ten Shillings for every Month such
Hog or Swine shall be kept and continued in such Sty: Unless in such places
where the dung or filth runs into the Sea or Salt Water.

For ^reventing danger by ^oot balls, Squibs and Snow-balls.
Ordered,
THat whosoever shall at any time hereaf^er use the exercise of playing or
kicking of Foot ball within any of the Streets or Lanes within the Body of this
Town, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of One Shilling for every transgression of
this Order: Nor shall any person hereafter fire or throw any Squib or Squibs,
Rocket or Serp^nt, or other Fireworks in any of the Streets, Lanes or High
ways of this Town, on pain of forfeiting Three Shillings for every such
offenc^: Nor shall any person throw or heave any Snow ball or Stones, at any
person in the Streets, Lanes or Alleys of this Town, or into, or against any
House or Houses or Shop, on pain of forfeiting On^ Shilling for every
transgression of this O^der.

For p^eventing Annoyances and dangers by Lime Kil^s, etc.
Ordered*
THat no person shall henceforth make and Fire any Lime Kiln, or Erect and Burn
any Brick Kiln but in such place or p^aces as the Select men for the time being
shall approve and allow of, on penalty of Twenty Shillings, to be paid by every
person transgressing this Order.

To prevent the breaking up of the Ground in any of the Streets, etc.
Ordered,
THat no person shall henceforth break or dig up the Ground in any of the St
eets, Lanes or High^wayes in this Town, for the laying or repairing any Drain
or any other occasion, without the leave or approbation of two or more of the
Select-men for the time b^ing, on pain of forfeiting ^he S^m of Twenty
Shillings for every such Offense. Further, That whosoever shall dig or cause to
be dug or broken up any Ground in any Street, Lane or High way within this
Town, shall within such time as any two or more of the Select men for the time
being shall grant after the same is broken up, cause the same to be
sufficiently repaired and amended to the satisfaction of the Select-men, on
p^in of forfeiting the Sum of Twenty Shillings, and also the Sum of Twenty
Shillings per Week, until the same be amended and repaired as aforesaid: And
any person who has heretofore at any time dug or broken up any of the
Ground in the Streets or Lanes and not yet sufficiently repaired the same, and
shall neglect so to do for the space of one month after the Select-men
notifying t^em thereof, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings per
w^^k till it be amended and repaired.

For preventing danger by Uncovered Wells or Pitts, etc.
Ordered,
THat no person suffer their Yards, Orchards, Pastures or Tan Yards to ly open,
where there is a Well, Cellar, Tan-pits or other Pits uncovered, on pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings for every such Offense, and Five Shillings
for every week after, till such Fenc^ be sufficiently repaired and amended, or
such Well, Pits or Cellar be filled up, or covered.

To prevent Fore stalling and Engrossing P^ovision before it is brought into
the Town.
Ordered,
THat no person Dwelling or Residing within this Town of Boston, sha^^ by
himself or others buy, contract or bargain for any sort of Grain, Meal, Butter,
Fowls, Mutton, Veal, Pork, Eggs or any-o^her sort of Provision, while it is
bri^gi^g between Roxbur^ Gate and the first turn of the High way or Lane
leading up to the Training Field, except for persons that live between that and
the Gate for their own Family use, before two of the Clock in the Afternoon, on
penalty of Five Shillings for every such off^nce. Further, That no Butcher
shall buy or bargain for any dead Meat brought or bringing into this Town, or
expose such Meat to Sale, on penalty of Ten Shillings for every transgression
of this Order.

For Regulating Town-Meetings.
Ordered,
THat at every General Town Meeting there be a Moderator Chosen, who shall
propound all Affairs to be debated, and put them to Vote when they have been so
debated, and to demand and keep silence and attention in the Assembly: And that
no matter of any weight or moment shall be Voted at any Town Meeting, without
the same ha^h been specially expressed in the Warrant requring such Meeting, or
propounded at the beginning of the Me^ting, that so consideration may be had of
the matter before it be Voted.

That whosoever at any public Town-Meeting shall fall into private Conference,
to the hindering of the public business, shall forfeit One Shilling for every
such offense, to the use of the poor of the Town.

That whosoever at any public Town Meeting shall neglect to observe the
direction or request of the M^derator (for the ^ime being,) to keep silence,
shall forfeit and pay Two Shillings ^or the use of the poor of this Town of
Boston, for every such (...)

The Reader may be informed, That the latter part of the Order Entitled, For
preventing Selling of Butchers Meat by Steelyards, (Page 10.) Was (by a
Mistake) om^tted in its proper plac^, and is therefore here inserted, in the
following Words; Viz.
* And that every Person and Persons who shall carry forth any dead Meat to
Sell, in a Wheel-barrow or otherwise, shall W^igh and Sell such Meat by good
and sufficient Scales, and Sealed Weights; and no otherwise: On pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings, for each Transgression of this Order.

ERRATA.
Page 3 line 4* read Horses, or Horse and Oxen. Pag^ 13. line 1^ read said
Gate, Ibid, lin^ 16* for into, read to this Town.


