The Necessity Of Acknowledgment of OFFENSES, In order to RECONCILIATION. Set
forth in a SERMON, Preached at Boston, July 3rd. 1701. Being the LECTURE DAY.

By SOLOMON STODDARD, Pastor of Northampton.

Boston, in N. E. Printed by T. Green, 1701.

THE Necessity of Acknowledgment of OFFENSES In order to RECONCILIATION.
Hosea V. ver. 15. the former part of it. I will go and return to my place,
till they Acknowledge their Offense.


THE Gracious Presence of GOD with His People is the foundation of their
happiness; it is from thence that they are provided for, that they are
protected, that they are healed, and that they do enjoy liberty: this is that
which makes them multiply, and makes them rich and victorious. And the taking
away of the Presence of God, opens a door to abundance of misery. Hos. 9.12.
And woe also unto them, when I shall depart from them. Deuteronomy. 31.17. Are not
these evils come upon us, because our God is not amongst us? This is that which
God threatens here. Both Judah and Israel were grown very Corrupt, and here God
does denounce His wrath against them.

Where mind;

1. The Evil threatened, I will go and return to my place: there is another
expression of the same importance, ver. 6. He has withdrawn himself from them.
The phrase is figurative; as if He should say, I will shut up my self in
Heaven, and not come near you, to help you: I will absent my self and leave you
destitute of my presence.

2. The continuance of this, Till they acknowledge their Offense. Hebr. Till
they be Guilty. They were guilty already, God charges a great deal of guilt
upon them: but the meaning is, till they own their Guilt. Their Sin here is
called their Offense: sometimes Sin is called Evil; being denominated from the
nature of it. There is no goodness in Sin, it is of an evil nature. Sometimes
it is called Iniquity, because it is contrary to Equity; there is
unrighteousness and inequality in it. Sometimes it is called Transgression,
because contrary to the Law. When men sin, they transgress the bounds that God
has set them. Here it is called Offense, because it is provoking and offensive
to God, this is that which they must acknowledge, they must neither deny their
sins, nor justify, or excuse their sin, but acknowledge them, and make
confession of them.

DOCTRINE.
God will not be Reconciled to His professing People, till they acknowledge
their Offenses. Many times a Corrupt people that have provoked God, are very
backward to ownf their Offenses. Many times instead of acknowledging them, they
are justifying of them, and that under two notions; Either as matter of liberty
or duty. Or, if they do not justify them, yet they excuse them: they find many
considerations to alleviate their Guilt; but God will not be reconciled unto
them, till they acknowledge their Offenses. When they have offended God, it is
very fair and reasonable that they should acknowledge it. and God will make
them do so before he Pardons them. There may be some intermission of wrath and
cessation of judgment, though they don't, but He will not be re^^^^iled till
they do. God is not backward to be reconciled to His People, that have wronged
him, but yet he expects this: Jer. 3.12, 13. Only aknowledge thine offense.

Quest. 1. What offenses must they acknowledge?

Answ. The offenses of the Land. Not all the offenses that are in the Land:
many offenses are secret and they cannot acknowledge them, some offenses only
being personal guilt but the offenses of the Land, that the People and Country
are guilty of, are to be acknowledged by them. So in the Text, they shall
acknowledge Their offense. And there be many sins that the Land are guilty of,
which must be owned.

As;

1. Such prevailing sins as do not fall under the cognizance of Authority. When
ever a people do manifest a Corrupt departed heart, an heart gone away from
God; they break Covenant and are guilty: and this they may do when their
carriages are not Criminal before men, nor Scandalous, as when they do not
savor of a gracious, humble, believing spirit; but they savor much of vanity,
worldliness, pride and unbelief; this is justly offensive to God. Mat. 16.23.
Thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.
The Land becomes Guilty thereby.

2. Such sins that have got such head, that Authority cannot suppress them.
Sometimes sins get such head, that it is quite beyond Authority to suppress
them; the ordinary course of justice is not sufficient to suppress them: people
are got beyond the restraints of Authority, they are so over run with
wickedness, that it is quite beyond the power of Rulers to reduce them; they
rise up against their Rulers. In this case, God imputes Iniquity to the Land,
and takes the case into his own hand, He judges and punishes them himself, as
Hum. 14.10. Number. 16.2, 3.

3. Such sins as are not duly witnessed against. Sometimes there is a great
deal of Iniquity in the Land, and yet there is little testimony born against
it; those that know the thing will not complain: they will talk of it, and
blast the names of others; but don^^ ^^ke care that the thing may be punished.
If they know a thing in a man that they are angry with, they will complain:
but, if he be a Friend, they will not. Sometimes the man is above them, and they
are afraid to do it; sometimes the man knows as much by them, and they dare
not. In this case, the sin becomes the sin of the Land. So if there be
complaint, and Rulers don't bear a testimony; Deuteronomy. 13.5. Rev. 2.20. I have a
few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel.

4. The sins of Rulers. When those that are in Supreme power, carry themselves
corruptly, it is not only their sin, but the sin of the Land. A people is
considered as a Body politic, they are Jointly in Covenant with God; and the
Sins of Rulers makes the Land Guilty. Saul' s slaying of the Gebeonites brought
a Famine upon Israel. 2 Samuel 21. David 's Sin brought the Plague upon Israel. 2 Samuel 24.10. If Rulers do acts of injustice, carry Proudly, or Profanely, it is
imputed to the Land: and the Land suffers on that account. If other men don't
approve of the thing, or connive at it, but in their places witness against it,
yet the Land is Guilty.

Quest. 2. Who must acknowledge the Sins of the Land?

Answ. 1. The Rulers. As long as the Rulers carry Badly, God will not be
reconciled to the Country. God does expect that they should acknowledge their
own iniquities, and the iniquities of the Country; if they do justify or
excuse the sins of the Country, no wonder if others do follow their example.
However, their impenitency will be imputed; though they be great men, yet it is
not beneath them to acknowledge the Sins of the Land: they will not be excused,
because of their state and greatness. Acknowledging of iniquity is not the work
of the common People only, but the work of principal Rulers. David did so, 2 Samuel 24.10. so did the King of Nineve, Jon. 3.6, 7, 8. so did Josiah; and the
contrary carriage in Zedekiah, did greatly provoke God. Jer. 36.24. Yet they
were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the King, nor any of his
Servants, that heard all these words.

2. The Body of the People. It is not expected by God, that every one of the
people should acknowledge there offense; It is a rare case, but that there be
some perverse people, which will not be sensible of the provocations of the
Land; but the body of the people must do it. If the generality of the people be
obstinate, and stand in the justification of themselves, the anger of God will
continue; God expects that there should be a general acknowledgment of their
offense. Commonly there be some mourners that are lamenting and bewailing the
sins of the Land, and they shall procure mercy for themselves. Ezekiel. 9.4. Set a
mark upon the foreheads of the men that Sigh and that Cry for all the
abominations, that are done in the midst thereof. But in order to
reconciliation, there must be a general acknowledgment of the offense. Judge.
10.10. The Children of Israel Cried unto the Lord, saying, we have Sinned, etc.

Quest. 3 How must they acknowledge their Offense?

Answ. 1. They must acknowledge some things in General and some in Particular.
The things that provoke God are of two sorts; sometimes it is a course of
Iniquity: so a way of Pride, Voluptuousness, or Superstition; and then the
things are to be acknowledged in the general; it is impossible to descend to
all particular acts; but it is fit it should be done as particularly, as the
thing will admit. Dan. 9.5, 6. We have Sinned, and committed Iniquity, and have
Rebelled, neither have we hearkened to thy Servants the Prophets, etc. Sometimes
the provocation is some particular evil; as the making of the Golden Calf, the
iniquity of Peor, David's numbering of the people: and in this case, things
should be acknowledged particularly; so did David, 2 Samuel 24.10

2. They must acknowledge them to God, and sometimes to Men. They are to be
acknowledged before God in Prayer; they must come before God, and spread their
iniquities in a way of Confession; they must fall down before God as Guilty.
Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged my Sin unto thee. Public sins should be confessed
Publicly. And many times also they should be Confessed unto men; as there is
occasion; sometimes men do expostulate particularly with others, and tell them
of their sins; and then they should be ready to acknowledge them 2 Samuel 12.13
And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. They may not stand
in their justification, and plead for their sin. So many times, there is
occasion to discourse of such practices, and then men should testify against
them.

3. They must acknowledge them with Grief and Shame. Sometimes though men do
acknowledge their sins, yet they have a stupid Spirit, and are insensible of
their vileness: this is very offensive to God; He will not turn away from his
Anger when it is thus. Jer. 3.3. Thou refusest to be ashamed. Jer. 6.15. Were
they ashamed, when they had committed Abomination? Nay they were not at all
ashamed, neither could they blush. So God expects they should be sorry for
their sin. Psalm. 38.18. I will be sorry for my Sin. But when men don't lay the
thing to heart, are not sensible what they have done, the thing don't lie upon
their hearts; Gods Anger will not be turned away. Their repentance must be at
least visibly sincere repentance: when there is plain apparent mockery in their
repentance and acknowledgments, Gods Anger will not be turned away from them.

Quest. 4. Why must they acknowledge their Offenses, in order to Reconciliation?

Answ. 1. Till they acknowledge their Offenses, they will not justify God in
His Judgments. When people do in their hearts acknowledge their iniquities,
they are under advantages to see the Righteousness of God in His proceedings
against them. Exodus 9.27. The Lord is Righteous, and Land my People are wicked.
But if they do not acknowledge their sins, no wonder if they murmr, and
impute hard dealings to God, and think that God deals very rigidly with them.
Men will be apt to lay the fault of judgments upon God, and not take it to
themselves. Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see us not?
Wherefore have we afflicted our Souls, and thou take no knowledge? They will
wonder at the severity of God, at least they will not see how much cause they have
to justify God. If they see it is righteouss that they should be afflicted upon
the account of some other things, that they do own, vet they don't see what
abundant cause they have given God to be angry with them.

2. Till they do this, there is no hope of their Reformation. Men must reform
their iniquities, before Gods anger do turn away. Isa. 9.12, 13. For all this,
His anger is not turned away, but his Hand is stretched out still: For the
people turns not to Him that smites them. While sin is not reformed, the
cause of judgment does continue: the Breach cannot be made up, while they walk
in ways of provacation; and this they will do, till they do acknowledge their
offense. A particular person may reform, though he does not acknowledge his
sin, he may do it from a spirit of compliance, he is loath to make trouble, and
grieve others, or because his temptation is changed, now he is Married; or
grown Old, and don't desire to do as formerly he did, or because he is
convinced that it is a sin, yet is ashamed to confess it; but ordinarily there
is no hope of bringing a Land to reformation, if they do not acknowledge their
iniquities: acknowledging goes before forsaking. Prove. 28.13. He that
Confesses and Forsakes shall find mercy.

USE I.
See hence, it is a very hard thing for a Corrupt People to be reconciled unto
God. When once there is a breach made between God and his People, it is a
difficult thing to have it made up. Sometimes they suffer abundance, before the
the thing is taken up; they are under frowning dispensations for several
Generations. When once the wrath of God begins to break out, no man knows when
there will be an end. Psalm. 90.9. All our days are passed away in thy wrath.
When one calamity is over, another calamity comes. Isa. 9.12. His anger is not
turned away, but his Hand is stretched out still. Scarce a year passes but
there is wrath. How comes this about, not that people do not desire
reconciliation, they are weary of the wrath of God, and could be glad to be
quiet, and be let alone: neither is it that God does lay any unreasonable terms
upon them; for if they will own their faults and turn to Him, He will pardon
them. But they are very backward to own their faults: sometimes they are
restrained a little, and held in by Civil Authority, but they are not thoroughly
convinced, nor heartily acknowledge their offenses: Sometimes they are
restrained by the Judgments of God, and appearances of Anger; but they don't
acknowledge their offenses: if there be some reformation, it is a forced thing,
as 2 Chronicles. 34 32. They are told of their faults and reproved abundantly, but
they go on and justify themselves, Hos. 5.2. Men will stand mightily upon the
justification of themselves. Mal. 6 3. Mal. 7. Wherein shall we return? And if
they do more readily own some of their offenses, yet there be others, that they
will not be persuaded to acknowledge;

For,

1. They have many Carnal reasonings to justify themselves. They stir up their
wits to plead for their sins: and it is no hard thing to say a pretty deal for
many sinful practices. Sometimes they will say, where is any such thing
forbidden in the Scripture, what Rule do they break, they find no Scripture
that Condemn such a practice? Whereas there be abundance of sins that are not
Totidem ve^bis, Condemned in the Scripture. Sometimes they pervert some
Scripture to prove the lawfulness of their practice; as he, 1 Samuel 24.4
Sometimes they plead Tradition; this has been counted lawful or duty by our
Forefathers. Mat. 15.^ Sometimes they plead there is no harm in such a
practice, it is an innocent thing, it is not contrary to justice or honesty, or
sobriety, or modesty, or any moral rule Sometimes they plead there is
convenience in it, there is advantage and benefit by it. Sometimes they plead
necessity, there is no avoiding of it, without incivility; or without wrong to
their estate, or without making of themselves ridiculous.

2. They are Proud, and don't love to confess. Men are of an haughty Spirit,
and cannot endure to do any thing that will touch their Honor, they cannot abide
shame. M^c. 2.6 It will be a great reflection upon them, if they should own
their offenses, Reproach is a thing that will break the heart, they cannot bear
to be slighted or contemned; this makes them backward to own their offenses: If
they own this to be Pride, or Covetousness, then they must own that they have
been in an Error; they have been Fools these many Years, in judging otherwise:
they cannot abide to own as David did, that they have done foolishly. 2 Samuel
24.10. Men will think that they as subject to mistakes as other men, and will
lay no great weight upon their judgment: if they should speak confidently in
other cases, men will be ready to fling it upon them, that they were confident
formerly, but fain to come back again; it will expose their Profession to
contempt, they use to declaim against the Pride of the Country, and tell men
that they brought down the Judgments of God by their carriages: and if they
acknowledge, men will say the like of them, from their own acknowledgment; they
cannot tell how to bear it that others who have contended with them about it,
should get the victory over them, that they must stoop and put honor upon
them, that have vexed them about that matter many a time.

3. They love their Sins, and are unwilling to reform. If they do acknowledge
their sins, they must reform; it would be madness to acknowledge them, and yet
persist in them: if they should do so, they should expose their Names, and
wound their Consciences too: they will lie under a necessity of reformation,
and this is hard to comply with; they cannot tell how to leave off their ill
practices, they have been wonted to them, and much of their comfort depends on
them; it is as a right Eye to them: it is hard breaking an evil custom. Their
bodies are habituated to some sins, and crave them, they cannot tell how to
leave them off: they have found a great deal of sweetness in that way, and so
hancker after them. Some sins are profitable to their Estates, and they are so
Covetous, they cannot tell how to leave them off; they are afraid they are
afraid they shall come to Poverty. Some sins are for their Honor, and if they
should leave them off, they should be despised: if every Body else would
reform, they would be contented, but if they do and others do not, they shall
be ridiculous. They are very unwilling to reform. Jer. 8.5. They hold fast
deceit, they refuse to return: Hos. 5.4. They will not frame their doings to
turn unto their God.

USE II. OF REPROOF.
To those that are backward to acknowledge their Offenses: God has taken great
Offenses at His People here, and has testified against us by many awful
judgments, and under these dispensations, men run into two extremes: Some out
of an over-timerous spirit, own guile where there is none; when scared they
Condemn this and that practice, and then after a while return to it again: but
the more general fault is, that men are backward to fall down as guilty before
God; but hold up their heads as they, Jer. 2.35. Thou say I have not sinned.
There is a self justifying spirit, they don't fall under reproof. Mal. 2.7. Ye
said, wherein shall we return? They are exceeding backward to acknowledge their
offenses; they shut their eyes against the light; when conviction is set before
them, they are rejecting of it. Joh. 3.20. They come not to the light, lest
their deeds should be reproved. Some men make themselves as blind as Moles:
Sometimes they think there be as wise men, who allow this and that practice, as
any who condemn it. Jer. 44.17. And they suspect, that it is some Corrupt
affection, that makes other men to be so zealous against it. Jer. 43.3. Baruch
the Son of Neriah, sets thee on to say, go not down into Egypt They are
cavilling away the authority of all Convictions; and devising pretenses to bear
out themselves in their evil ways: Besides they harden themselves in their
way, and though they discern some evil in it, yet will not fall flat down before
God, and abase themselves, they say these things are small things, and they
don't think that the wrath of of God goes out against the Land upon the account
of such trifles. So they say that there be abundance in the Country that are
more faulty then they, others are ten times as guilty as they, and so neglect
to humble themselves.

Consider;

1. This is a great hindrance to the Conversion of some men. Some persons
wonder what the matter is, that these are not Converted; yea, it may be, the
men themselves wonder at it: and they think the reason is, because God don't
intend to have Mercy upon them, and so he rejects all Prayers; but it may be
the reason is, because you will not acknowledge your offense So it is with some,
there is some evil way that they seek to smother, they hide some Iniquity under
their tongue, they don't pour out their Soul like water; there is some way of
Pride, or injustice, or voluptuousness that they will not own; if they would
confess them, and forsake them, they might be Converted. Prove. 28.13. He that
confesses and for saketh shall find Mercy.

2. This shows a great deal of Hypocrisy in your Religion. You do perform many
Religious services, and make many Good confessions and prayers, and lament the
sinfulness of the Land if it were all sincere, it would be exceeding
commendable, but so far as you are backward to acknowledge your offenses, so
far you have an Hipocritical heart. You pray, as Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way:
but you are unwilling to learn; you bewail your Ignorance, but you are backward
to receive Conviction; You lament your Sins, but you are loath to part with
them. Then there is much want of Sincerity in the shows that you make; You are
not (...) good as you seem to be, and had need attend that Rule, 1 Pet. 2.1. To
lay aside all Guile and Hypocrisies.

3. This makes your Prayers less prevailing with God. It is a great benifit to
have men's Prayers prevail. Men Pray for many things for themselves, their
Children, their Neighbors and the Church of God; but this is a great hindrance
to the success of their Prayers. Men are careful that they may not hinder the
success of their Trading and Husbandry: so they had need be careful that they
do not hinder the success of their Prayers. But this hinders their success, if
you be backward to hear God, He will be backward to hear, Zech. 7.13. As He
Cried and they would not hear, so they Cried, and I would not hear, says the
Lord of Hosts.

4. This is one reason of the continuance of the wrath of God. The anger of God
is lengthned out wonderfully, we have but little experience of Public
prosperity; there has been a succession of Judgments Year after Year, for a
long time, several means have been used to prevent Gods Judgments, Fasts have
been Proclaimed, Laws have been made, men have renewed Covenant, and yet we are
an afflicted people. This is the reason of it, men do not acknowledge their
Sins, but stand in the justification of them; they will not own this and that to
be a sin, and so the anger of God continues, Hos, 5.15. I will return to my
place, till they acknowledge their offense.

5. This exposes men to such gress sins, as will bring them to shame. Men run
upon the borders of gross sins, and will not own a fault in it; they are in danger
hereby to fall into gross sins: they throw themselves into Temptation, and they
provoke God to leave them. Dinah goes a gadding, and gets a blot. Genesis 34.1, 2.
Some indulge themselves in dalliances, and expose themselves to Fornication.
Some indulge themselves in going to Public Houses, and expose themselves to
Drunkenness thereby. Some indulge themselves in lying in Debt, and so expose
themseves to Falsehood in excusing of it: smaller sins prepare the heart to
commit greater; little wedges make way for greater.

USE III.
Ezamine, whether We in this Country do acknowledge our Offenses? We have our
days of Humiliation, and do pretend to acknowledge our offenses: it is very
well if we do, it is a sign that God has touched our Hearts, and that mercy is
at hand: But if it be otherwise, God will not be reconciled to the Country. I
would take it for granted that there be a number that have a care in this
matter, and though we can do no duty perfectly, yet have an upright and hearty
spirit this way. But is this the general Spirit of the Country?

In order to our discerning of this;

1. Distinguish between acknowledging the offencee of other men, and owning our
offenses. Some People are very zealous in confessing the sins of their
Neighbors, and they bewail the rudeness of Young ones, and the Profane spirit
that is in the Land, and the Licentious courses that do prevail in the
Country, and men's rejecting of the Gospel: but it may be, they do not so much
as in Secret bewail their own iniquities, their Covetous practices, their
breaking their word with men, and other iniquities; they Cry out against the
Pride of the Land, but are not sensible of their Sins, in suffering Pride in
their own Children: they confess the Sins of Rulers, but not their own
murmuring, Spirit, they confess Profaneness, but are not sensible of their own
froward, stubborn Spirit, whereby they dishonor their Profession: This is not
right, 1 King 8.38. Which shall know every man the Plague of his own Heart.
Psalm. 18.23. I kept my self from mine iniquity.

2. Distinguish between acknowledging the common infirmities of mankind, and
owning our own iniquities. There is no man in the world, but has cause to
acknowledge himself guilty of all depraved dispositions; the best man in the
world is Guilty of Pride, Covetousness, Envy, want of Love to God and Man: And
men can bear to have Ministers reprove them for such things and not be angry;
but many times if they come to particulars, they are touched and vexed; so men
can bewail, in the general, the Corruption of their own Hearts, but there be
many particular actions, wherein they manifest a spirit of Unbelief,
Covetousness, Envy, Discontent and Carnal Affection, that they stand up in the
justification of: and when they are before God, they say not one word of those
things, and in their discourses with Men, they justify those actions. Jon. 4.9
I do well to be angry to the very Death.

3. Distinguish between owning some particular gross act of Sin, and those
ways of sin, that we are carried away with. Sometimes a man in earnest
discourse, speaks something that is false, and he is much troubled and
afflicted with it, or he has been dreadfully transported with passion, or he
has neglected secret Prayer, and he is very sorry for it; but there be many
ways of Sin that he is addicted unto, his Carriage is generally too light and
vain, does not become a man of his Profession: or he is commonly of a pinching
Spirit, or he carries Frowardly in his house, or he spends his Time
unprofitably, or he don't Govern his Family as he should, or he is much tainted
with a proud Behavior, and don't go Mourning upon these accounts. 2 Chronicles
15.17. The high places were not taken away.

4. Distinguish between owning of Offenses, and owning them with an excuse.
Some men say, it is to be lamented that there are such things; such and such
practices are not right; but they cannot tell well how to prevent them: they
think such dresses are Pride, but they are under a necessity to suffer them;
their Children will be ridiculous, and they shall have no quietness if they
donot connive at them. So they think such Liberties are too much: For Maids and
others to be abroad in the Night, it is not a fitting thing, but they say, it
is the way of the Town, and so they must comply. So they think every man should
have his own, but they are Poor and behind hand, and have many necessaries to
provide, they must tarry another Year: And so they hope that God will not
impute it to them; if the case were with them as with some others, they would
do it; but they have their Excuses. Exodus 21.22. Thou know this People that
they are set on mischief.

5. Distinguish between owning Old Sins, and such as present Temptations lead
to. When the Man is Married, he much Condems the ways of Young People, their
running out in the Night, and their wanton dalliances. And when he is Old, he
much Condemns the Prodigality of Young ones, and their vain Courses; but there
be other things that his present condition does expose him unto: Now he is so
Covetous, that he can hardly find time to Pray; he carries himself impatiently,
and is not sensible of his present Sin. 2 Chronicles. 28.10. Are there not with you,
even with you, Sins against the Lord your God?

USE IV. Of EXHORTATION.
To acknowledge your Offenses. I have no reason to urge you to acknowledge any
thing for offenses that are not offenses, but what is indeed Sin should be
acknowledged whether it be little or great, whether it be personal or Public:
whatever estimation others have of it, there is no reason that you should bear
up your up your selves in any thing that is offensive to God: the want of this
has been the great Wound of the Country. Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine
Offense. This is that which prolongs our sorrows, let men reason never so long,
and find out never so many presences, that which is Sin, will be Sin, they
cannot change the Nature of it, neither can men blind God, with their carnal
reasonings; it is abundantly better to fall flat down and acknowledge our
Offenses. This must be in order to Reconciliation Hos. 5.15

Consider here a few things, that may be useful in order to the owning of your
Offenses.

1. It is a poor way to defend your selves that such things as you do are not
in their own Nature Evils. Men say, they cannot see that such and such Practices
are utterly Unlawful: they don't believe that Periwig are unlawful, they are a
comely means to supply the defects of Nature. And they don't believe that going
to a Tavern is unlawful, if it be, why are they allowed by Authority? And they
don't believe that this and that Dress can be proved to be unlawful; but
suppose it be so, this is no defense. A great part of the Sin of this Land,
lies in the abusing of lawful Liberties, and doing that which is in it self
lawful, under such circumstances as render it utterly unlawful. Herein lies
their sin, that to them that do it, and as it is done, it is unlawful. It may
be lawful in one case, and very sinful in another. So David's numbering of the
People. 2 Samuel 24.1.

2. It is of great advantage toget Holy dispositions, and an Heart willing to
do your Duty. Many times men say, that such and such things don't seem to them
to be unlawful, they see no hurt in them: a man may have Charity to believe
them, though the things be very bad; for they are under the power of strong
Corruption. A Covetous man thinks his Covetous actions to be good Husbandry:
and a Proud man thinks his Pride to be suitable to his place; their lusts blind
their Eyes. Isa. 5.20. They call good evil, and evil good. Their Consciences
are darkened: they have sinned away a great deal of the light of Nature; Sin has
got power not only over their Affections, but their Judgments. Yea, many of
them (...) themselves, whether the things be ^^ns or no: They would do them if
they knew they were sins. The way for such men is to get Holy dispositions, and
a Tender Conscience, then they wonld more easily discern what is amiss: as
David, when his heart smote him for cutting off the skirt of Saul's Garment. 1 Samuel 24.5.

3. It is good to consider whether you could like the thing in other persons.
Some persons stand upon their justification, and yet they would utterly dislike
the thing in others: They reproach others, and are not sensible of any
Irregularity in it; but if others serve them so, they Cry out of it. They will
do damage themselves but they cannot bear it in others: They lie in other men's
debts, and find great fault that others lie in theirs; They wonder what other
men do with their Consciences, they think they cannot answer it. This shows that
whatever these men do pretend, yet their Consciences do Condemn their Practices
Romans 2.1. Thou art inexcusable O Man, whosoever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou Judge another, thou Condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same things.

4. It is a sign that you know your are Guilty, when you don't like it that men
should say those things of you, that you do. You cannot endure that men should
say of you, that you are a shuffling man in your dealings, and that you love
strong Drink; that you are a Pot Companion, or a bad Play Master: You are vexed
and angry with them that say so: though you know the thing to be true, the
reason is because your heart tells you that it is not right, you know in your
Conscience that it is no commendation, but a discommendation. The Thief is
ashamed when he is taken. Jer. 2.26. So it is hero.

5. It is a poor way to justify your selves from such arguments, as you despise
in other cases. Men justify themselves because some Good people do allow it,
and because some Ministers think there is no hurt in it; or because those that
charge them with sin, are very faulty themselves in some other things; or
because those men were mistaken in some other cases: but if men should argue
thus with you, you would count it a ridiculous way of arguing; You would say,
such arguments conclude nothing: You would say, how often are Good Men and
Ministers mistaken. Barnabas was carried away with the (...) ^^^ulation Gal.
2.13.

6. It is good to mind what your Heart saves in the most solemn times. Many
times men are not in a frame to judge, they are carried away with impetuous
affections, and have a violence upon their Spirit, they are in their Career and
there is no stopping of them: as it was with Joab, 2 Samuel 18.14. But there be
other times, when men are afraid of going to Hell, when they have a Terror on
their Spirits, and are apprehensive of Judgment and Damnation; and then they
judge after another manner. So there be times of Afflictions, when Relations
Die, and the hand of God goes out against th^^, and then they have another
sense of things: So Joseph's Brethren say, We are verily Guilty concerning our
Brother. Genesis 42.21 So they are cast upon a Bed of Sickness, and then they
judge quite otherwise of their Carriages.

FINIS.

