The Christians (...)

OR, A short Treatise, divided into two parts. The First whereof, Contains Te
TRIAL of a Saving Interest in CHRIST.

The Second, Points forth plainly Te way how to attain it: Wherein somewhat
is likewise spoken to the manner of express Covenanting with GOD.

By WILLIAM GUTHRIE, Minister of the Gospel, at New-Kilmarnoch.

The Third Impression, Corrected and Amended.

2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, etc.

2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, (...) be in the Faith; Prove your own (...)
Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates?

Cant. 6.3. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, etc.

Boston, N. E. Printed by T. Green (...) Nicholas Boon. 1701

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
WHile the Generality of Men, especially in these Days, by their eager pursuit
after low and ^se Interests, have Proc^med, as upon ^he House-tops, how much
they have frgotten to make choice of that better ^art, which (if chosen) shall
never be taken from them. It have made an Essay, ^ch as it is, in the following
Treatise, to ^ake thee off from this unprofitable, th^gh painful pursuit, by
proposing the chi^est of Interests, even The Christians Great Interest, to be
seriously pondered and constantly pursued by thee: Thou ma^est think it strange
to see any thing in ^rint from my Pen, (as it is indeed a surprise to my self)
but necessity has made me for this once to offer so much violence to my own
inclination, in regard that some, without my knowledge have lately Publish^d
some unperfect Notes of a few of my Sermons, most confusedly cast together,
prefixing with, this vain Title (as displeasing to my self, as the Publishing
of the thing) A Clear Attractive Warming-beam, etc. Upon this occasion was I
prevailed with to Publish this late Piece, wherein I have purposely used a most
homely and plain ^le lest otherwise (though when I have stretched my self to
the utmost, I am below the Judicious and more Understanding) I should be above
the reach of the rude and ignorant, whose advantage I have mainly, if not only
consulted. I have likewise studied Brevity in every thing* so far as I
conceived it to be consistent with Plainness and Perspecuity; knowing that the
persons to whom I address my self herein, have neither much Money to spend upon
Books, nor much Time to spare upon Reading. If thou be a rigid Critic, I know
thou may meet with several things to carp at, yet assure thy self that I had
no design to offend thee, neither will thy simple approbation satisfy me; it is
thy Edification I intend, together with the i^ment of some other more expert
and experienced in this Excellent Subject, to handle the same at great length,
which I have more brie^y hinted at:

Who am Thy Servant in the work of the Gospel, William Guthrie

The Trial of a Saving Interest in CHRIST.
SINCE there be so many People living under the Ordinances, pretending without
ground, to a special Interest in Christ, and to His Favor and Salvation, as is
clear, Mat. 7 22, 23. Mat. 25.11, 12. Luke 13 24. And since many who have good
ground of Claim to Christ, are not established in the confidence of His Favor,
but remain in the Dark without comfort, hesitating concerning the reality of
Godliness in themselves, and speaking little to the Commendation of Religion to
others, especially in the time of their straits. I shall speak a little to two
things of the greatest Concernment.

The one is, How a person shall know (...) he has a true and special interest
in Christ; and whether he does lay lust Claim to Gods Favor and Salvation?

The other is, In case a person fall short in the aforesaid Trial, what course
he shall take for making sure God; Friendship and Salvation to himself?

Quest. 1. How shall a Man know if he has a true and special interest in
Christ, and whether he has or may lay claim justly to Gods Favor and
Salvation?

Answ. Before we speak directly to the Question, we shall premise some things
to make way for the Answer:

As,

1. That a man's Interest in Christ, or Gracious State may be known, and that
with more certainty than People do conjecture; yea, and the knowledge of it may
be more easily attained unto, than many do imagine. For, not only has the Lord
commanded men to know their interest in Him, as a thing attainable, 2 Cor.
13.5. 2 Pet. 1.10. but many of the Saints have attained unto the clear
persuasion of their Interest in Christ* and in God, as their own God: How often
do they call him their God, and their Portion? And how persuaded is Paul that
nothing can separate him from the Love of God? Romans 8.38, 39. Therefore the
knowledge of a man's Gracious state is attainable; and this knowledge of it,
which may be attained, is no fancy and bear conceit, but it is most sure;
Doubtless thou art our Father, says the Prophet in name of the Church, Isa,
63.16. It is clear thus:

1. That can be no fancy, but a very sure knowledge, which does yield to a
rational man comfort in most real straits: But so does this. 1 Samuel 30.6. When
the People spoke of stoning David, he encouraged himself in the Lord, Psalm. 3^
6. He says there, he will not be afraid of ten Thousands that rise against
him. Compare these words with ver. 3^ of that Psalm, Psalm 27.1.3. Although as
Host encamp against him, he is c^ in this.

2. That is a sure knowledge of a thing which makes a wise Merchant (...) he
has that he may keep it sure; that makes a man fore go Chri^tian, Lands,
Life, and suffer the spoiling of all ^oyfully* (...) so does this, Mat. ^3.^^
Man 10.28, 29. Heb. 10.34. Romans ^.3. (...)

3. That must be a sure and certain knowledge, and no fancy, whereupon a man
voluntarily and freely does adventure his Soul, when he is stepping in into
Eternity with this word in his mouth, This is all my desire: But such a
knowledge is this, 2 Samuel 23.5. And again, Not only may a Godly man come to the
sure knowledge of his Gracious state, but it is more easily attainable than
many do apprehend: For (supposing what shall be afterward proved, that a man
may know the gracious work of God^ Spirit in himself) if he will but argue
rationally from thence, he shall be forced to conclude his interest in Christ,
unless he deny clear Scripture truths. I shall only make use of one here,
because we are to speak more directly to this afterward. A Godly man may argue
thus* Whosoever receives Christ, are justly reputed the Children of God, Joh.
1.12. But I have received Christ all the ways which the Word there can import*
For, I please the device of Salvation by Christ; I agree to the terms, I
welcome the offer of Christ in all His offices, as a King to rule over me; a
Priest to offer and interced^ for me; a Prophet to teach me; I lay out my heart
for Him, and toward Him, resting on Him as I am able; what else can be meant
by the word Receiving? Therefore may I say, and conclude plainly and
warrantably, I am justly to reckon my self Gods Child, according to the
foresaid Scripture which cannot fail.

The Second thing to be premised, is, That a man be savingly in Covenant with
God, is matter of highest importance. It is his Life, Deuteronomy. 3^.47. And yet very
few have or seek after a Saving interest in the Covenant; and many foolishly
think, they have such a thing without any solid ground, Mat. ^.14. Few find, or
walk in, the narrow way. This should allarum people to be serious about the
matter, since it is of so great, Consequence to be in Christ, And since there
be but few that may lay just clai^ to him, and yet many do foolishly fa^y an
Interest in him, who are d^i^ed by a false confidence, as the foolish Virgin
do, Mat. 25.

The Third thing to be ^se^, (...) Men must resolve to be de^ined by Scripture
in this matter of their interest in Christ. The Spirit speaking in the
Scripture, is judge of all Controversies; ( Isa. 8.20. To the Law and the
Prophets; and if it. speak not according to these, there is no truth in it) and
of this also, whether a man be savingly in Covenant with God or not. Therefore
do not mock God while you seem to search after such a thing. If we prove from
Scripture (which is the Uncontroverted rule) that you are Gracious, and have
stricken Covenant savingly with God, then resolve to grant so much, and to
acqueise in it: and if the contray appear, let there be a determination of the
Controversy, else you do but mock the Lord, and so your bonds shall be made
strong Isa. 28.22. For a jot of His Word cannot fail, Mat. 5.18. Therefore seek
Eye Salve from Christ to judge of things according as the Word of God shall
discover them to be.

The Fourth thing to be premised, is, Although the matter of a man's Interest in
Christ be of so great importance, and the way to attain to the knowledge of it,
so plai^ held forth in the Scriptures, yet there (...) but few who reach the
distinct knowledge of it.

And that this may not discourage any Person from attempting it, I shall hint
some few Reasons, why so few come to the clear knowledge of it, which will also
prepare the way for what is to be spoken afterward.

The First thing which does hinder many from the Knowledge of their interest in
Christ, is, Their Ignorance of some special Principles of Religion:

As,

1. That it was free love in Gods bosom, and nothing in Man that moved him to
^end a Savior to perfect the work of Re^ion. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the
wo^ld, that he sent, etc. Men are still seeking some ground for that business
in themselves, which leads away from suitable and high apprehensions of the
first spring and rise of Gods Covenant-favour to his People, which has no
reason, cause, or motive in us; and so they cannot come to the Knowledge of
their interest.

2. They are Ignorant how that Love d^ effectually discover it self to a man's
heart, so as he has ground to lay Claim to it, viz. That ordinarily it dot^
first discover his broken state in himself because of Sin and Corruption,
defiling the whole man, and any thing in him that may be called a
Righteousness: All these things are Loss and Dung Phil. 3.6.7.

Secondly, It discovers Christ as the full and satisfying Treasure above all
things. The man finds a treasure for which with joy, he sells all, etc. Mat.
13.44, 46.

Thirdly, It determines the heart, and causes it to approach unto a Living
God in the Ordinances, Psalm. 65.4. And causes the Heart to lay weight upon
Him, and Him alone, Psalm. 62.5. My Soul wait thou only upon God. Thus, having
dropped in the Seed of God in the heart, and formed Christ there, Gal. 4.19.
the Heart is changed and made new in the foresaid work, Ezekiel. 36.26. And Gods
Law is so ^amped upon the Heart in that change, Je^ 31.^3. that the whole yoke
of Christ is commended to the man without exception, Romans 7.12, 16. The Law is
acknowledged Good, Holy, Just and Spiritual: Upon all which, from that New
Principle of Life, there flow out acts of a New Life, ^ Gal. 5.6. Faith works
by Love. Romans 6.18.22. And the man becomes a Servant of Righteousness and unto
God;) which does especially appear in the Spirituality of Worship, ( Joh. 4.24.
Romans 7.6. -- Men then serve God in Spirit and Truth, and in the Newness of the
Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter,) and tenderness in all manner of
Conversation: The man then exercises himself how to keep a Conscience void of
offense, etc. Act. 24.16. Now, this way does the love of God discover it self
unto man, and acts on him so as he has ground of laying some good claim to
it; so as he may justly think, that the love which sent a Savior, had respect
to such a man as has found these things made out unto him. Surely, Ignorance
in this does hinder man from the knowledge of their interest in Christ: For if
a man know not how God works with a person, so as he may justly lay claim to
His love, which was from Eternity, he will wander in the Dark, and not come to
the knowledge of an Interest in Him.

3. Many are also Ignorant of this, that God alone is the Hope of His people.
He is called, The Hope of Israel, Jer. 14.8. Although inherent qualifications
are evidences of it, yet the staying of the Heart upon Him, as a full blessing
and satisfying portion, is FAITH, (1 Pet. 1.21. the Faith and Hope must be in
God) and the only proper condition which gives right to the saving Blessings
of the Covenant, Rom, 4.5. To him that works not, but believes -- Faith is
imputed for Righteousness. Indeed if any person take liberty here, and turn
Grace into wantonness, there is without doubt in so far, a Delusion; since
there is mercy with Him upon Condition, that it conciliat Fear to him, Psalm.
130.4. Yea, hardly can any man, who has the foresaid expressions of Gods Love
made out upon him, make a Cloak of the Covenant for sinful Liberty, without
some measure of a spiritual Conflict: In this respect, he that is born of God
does not sin; and he who does so sin, has not seen God, 1 John 3.6.9. I say,
God is the Hope of His People, and not their own Holiness. If they intend
honesty, and long seriously to be like unto Him, many failings should not
weaken their Hope and Confidence: For, it is in Him who changes not, Mal. 3.6.
And if any man sins, he has an advocate, 1 John: 2.1. Now, when ^en place
their hope in any other thing beside the Lord, it is no wonder they be kept in
a staggering Condition, according to the changes of the thing which they make
the ground of their hope, since they give not to God the Glory due to His Name,
and which He will not give unto another. Compare, Psalm. 9.10. ( They who know
thy Name, will put their trust in thee,) with Isa. 42.8. My Glory I will not
give unto another: I am the Lord, that is my Name.

4. Many are ignorant of the different ways and decrees of Gods working with
His People, and it does much darken their knowledge and reflex acts of their
interest in Him. This ignorance does run mainly on three Heads.

1. They are ignorant of the different degrees and ways of that Law work which
ordinarily deals with men, and of the different way how the Lord brings
home people at first to Christ. They consider not that the Jailer is not kept
an hour in Bondage. Acts 16. Pa^ is kept in suspense three days, Act. 9.
Zacc^us not one moment, Luke 19.

2. They are ignorant of, or at least do not consider, how indifferent the
degrees of San^fication are in the Saints, and the honorable appearings
thereof before men in some, and the sad blemishing thereof in others. Some are
very blameless, and more free of gross out-breakings, adorning their profession
much; as Job did, in Job 1. and Zechariah, in Luke 1. These are said to be
perfect, walking in all the Commandments of God. Others were subject to very
gross and sad Evils, as Solomon, Asa, etc.

3. They are ignorant of the different Communications of Gods face, and
expressions of His presence. Some do walk much in the light of Gods
Countenance, and are much in sensible Fellowship with Him, as David was; others
are all their days kept in Bondage through fear of Death, Heb. 2.25. Surely
the ignorance of the different ways of Gods working and dealing with His
People, does very much darken the knowledge of their interest in Him, whilst
they usually stint the Lord to one way of working, which he does not keep, as
we have showed in the former Examples.

The Second thing which does darken men about their interest in Christ, is.
There is one thing or other, wherein their Hea^ in some respect does Condemn
them, as dealing deceitful and guilefully with God. It is not to be expected,
that these can come to clearness about their interest, whose Heart does Condemn
them for keeping up some known Transgression against the Lord, which they will
not let go, neither are using the means which they know to be appointed by God
for delivering them from it; neither can these come to clearness, who know some
positive Duty, Commanded them in their stations, which they deceitfully shift
and shun, not closing cheerfully with it, or not willing to be led into it.
These are also in some respects, Condemned of their own hearts, as the former
sort; and in that case it is difficult to come to a distinct knowledge of their
State, 1 John 3.21. It is supposed there, that a Self-condemning Heart makes
void a man's Confidence proportionally beforo God. I do not deny but that men
may, on good grounds, plead an Interest in Christ, in the case of prevailing
iniquity, Psalm. 65.3. Romans 7.23, 25. But it is hard to be attained, if at all
attainable, when the Heart is dealing deceitfully, and entertaining known guile
in a particular: Therefore let people clear themselves of the particular which
they know too well. It is the thing which does meet them, m^ing their
confidence and access in all the^ approaches unto God: See Jud. 10.10, 13. The
idolatries o^ the people are cast up to them by the Lord, and their suit
rejected there^pon. That which draws away the Hea^ first in the Morning and
last at Nig^ like an Oven hea^ed at Night, and (...) burns as a flaming fire
in the Morning, Hos. 7.6. And takes up their thoughts often on their beds as
it is said of some. Psalm. 36.4. That which does lead aw^ the Heart in time of
religious Duty or^narily, and the remembrance of whi^ has power to en^ve and
^ke (...) Spirits, more than the ^emembrance of God, so as their Heart is after
the ^eart of some detestable thing, Ezekiel. (...) That which withstandeth men wh^
they would grip the Promise, as God ^aste^ up men's Sins, to them who are
meddling with his Covenant: Ps^. 50.1^, ^^ That is the thing which does man the
knowledge of a Gracious state; Let it go, and it will be more easy to reach
the Knowledge of an Interest in Christ.

The Third thing which hinders the knowledge of an Interest in Christ, is, A
Spirit of sloth, and careless negl^gence in many. They complain that they know
not whether they be in CHRIST or not: but, as few take pains to be in Him, so
few take pains to try if they be in Him. It is a work and business which cannot
be done sleeping, 2 Cor^ 13.5. the several words used there, viz. Examine,
Prove, Know -- say, that there is a labor in it; Diligence must be used to
make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. It is a business above Flesh
and Blood; The holy Anointing, which teaches all things, must make us know the
things freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. Shall the Lord impart a business of
so great concernment, and not so much as be enquired after to do it for men?
Ezekiel. 36.37. Be ashamed you who spend so much time in reading of Romances, in
adorning your Persons, in Hawking and Hunting, in consulting the Law about your
outward estate in the world; and it may be in worse things than these: Be
ashamed that you spend so little time in the search of this, Whether you be a^
Heir of Glory or not; whether you be in the way that leads to Heaven, or that
which will land you in Darkness forever? You who judge this be-low you, and
unworthy of your pains any part or minute of your time; it is like in Gods
account, you have judged your selves unworthy of everlasting Life, so as you
have no lot with Gods People in this matter.

The Fourth thing that does darken the knowledge of an Interest in Christ, is,
Men do not condescend upon what would satisfy them. They complain that God
will not show unto them what He is about to do with them; but cannot yet say,
they know what would satisfy about His purpose. This is a sad thing* Shall we
think those are serious, who have never as yet, pitched on what would satisfy
them, nor are making earnest enquiry after what should satisfy? If the Lord
had left us in the dark in that matter* we were less inexcusable: But since the
grounds of satisfaction, and the true marks of an interest in Christ, are so
clear and frequent in Scripture, and so many things written that our joy may be
full, 1 John 1.4. And that those who Believe may know, that they have Eternal
Life, 1 John 5.13. And since he that Believes has a witness of it in himself,
1 John 5.10. None can pretend excuse here. We may not here insist to show what
may and should satisfy about our Interest, since we are to speak directly to
it afterward.

The Fifth thing that helps much to keep men in the dark about their interest
in Christ, is, They pitch upon some mutable grounds which are not so opposite
proofs of the Truths of an interest in Christ. As of the comfortable state of a
triumphing Soul sailing before the wind, and marks, which I grant are precious
in themselves, and do make out an interest clearly where they are. Yet there
are such, as without an Interest in Christ may be, and be known also in a good
measure. We shall touch a few of them.

1. Some think that all who have a true interest in Him, are above the
prevailing power of every Sin. But this is contrary to that of Psalm. 65.3.
where we find that holy Man, laying just claim to Pardon in the case of
prevailing in iniquity: and that of Romans 7.23, 24, 25. where Paul thanketh God
through Christ, as freed from the Condemnation of the Law; even whil^st a Law
in his Members leads Captive unto Sin.

2. Some th^nk that all the true Saints have constantly access unto God in
Prayer, and sensible returns of Prayer at all time. But this is contrary to the
many sad exercises of His People, complaining often that they are not heard nor
regarded of God, ^sal. 13.1. Psalm. 22.1, 2.

3. Some think that all who have any true interest in Him, have God witnessing
the same unto them, by a high operation of that witnessing Spirit of His, Romans
8.16. (whereof afterward) and so they still suspect their own interest in
Christ, because of the want of this. But they do not remember that they must
first believe, and give Credit to that record, which God has given to the Son,
That there is Life enough in Him for men, 1 John 5.10, 11. and then look for
the Seal and Witness of the Spirit. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom after ye Believed, ye
were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, etc. As long as people hold fast
these Principles, and the like, they can hardly come to the knowledge of their
gracious state, which God has warranted People to prove and clear up to
themselves, other ways than by these foresaid things.

The Fifth thing to be premis^d, is, The removal of some mistakes whereunto
people may readily run themselves, when we a^e about to prove their inte^est in
Christ.

As;

1. It is a mistake to think, that every one who is in Christ, does know that
he is in Him. For many are truly Gracious, and have a good title to Eternal
Life, who do not know so much, until it be made out afterward, 1 John 5.13.
These things are written to Believers, that they may know they have a true
title to Eternal Life; that is, that they may know they are Believers: and so
it is supposed they knew it not before.

2. It is a mistake to think, that all who come to the knowledge of their
interest in Christ, do attain an equal certainty about the same. One may say,
he is persuaded, nothing present or to come, can separate him from the love of
God, Romans 8.38. Another comes but this length, I believe, help my Unbelief,
Mark 9.24.

3. It is a mistake to think, that every one who attaineth a strong persuasion
of his interest, does always hold there. For, he who to day may say of the
Lord, He is is his refuge, Psalm. 91.2. and, his Po^t^on, Psalm. 119.57. will at
another time say, he is cut off, Psalm. 37.22. and will ask, if the truth of
Gods Promise does fail forevermore? Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.

4. It is also a mistake to think, that every one who does attain a good
knowledge of their Gr^ious state, can formally answer all Objections ^ade to
the contrary. But yet they may hold fast the conclusion, and say, I know whom I
have believed, 2 E^. 1.12. There be few grounds of Cl^n Religion, whereof many
people are so persuaded, as that they are able to maintain them formally
against all arguments brought to the contrary, and yet they may and will hold
the conclusion steadfastly and justly: So it is in this case in hand.

5. It is no less a mistake to imagine, that the vain, groundless Confidence
which many profane, ignorant Athiests do maintain, is this knowledge of an
interest in Christ which we plead for. Many do falsely avow Him to be their
Father. Joh. 8.41. And many look for Heaven, who will be beguiled with those
Foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.12 Yet we must not think because of this, that all
knowledge of Interest, is a Delusion and Fancy, although these Fools be
Deceived: for whilst thousands are deluded, some can say on good and solid
grounds, We know that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in
wickedness. 1 John 5.19.

Having premised these things, it now follows that we give some Marks, by
which a man may know if he be Savingly in Covenant with God, and has a Special
Interest in Christ, so as he may warrantably lay claim to Gods Favor and
Salvation. We shall only pitch upon two great and principal marks, not willing
to trouble people with many. And before we fall upon these, we will speak of a
preparatory work of the Law, whereof the Lord does ordinarily make use, to
prepare His own way in men's Souls. This may have its own weight, as a mark with
some persons. It is called, the work of the Law, or, the work of Humiliation.
It has some proportion to that Spirit of Bondage, Romans 8.15. and does now
under the New Testament answer unto it, and usually leads on to the Spirit of
Adoption. Only here let it be remembered;

1. That we are not to speak of this preparatory work of the Law, as a N^gative
mark of a true interest in Christ. As if none might lay claim to Gods favor,
who has not had this preparatory work in the several steps of it, as we are to
speak of it; for, as we shall hear, the Lord does not always keep that path
with men.

2. The great reason why we speak of it is, Because the Lord deals with many
( whom He does effectally Call) by some such preparatory work. And to those,
who have been so dealt with, it may prove strengthening; and will confirm them
in laying the more weight on the marks which follow.

3. It may help to encourage others, who are under such bondage of spirit, as a
good prognostic of a gracious work to follow: for as we shall circumstanciate
it, it will be rarely found to miscarry and fail of a gracious issue.

4. Where God uses such a preparatory work, He does not keep one way or
measure in it, as we shall hear.

For the more distinct handling of this preparatory work, we shall shortly hint
the more ordinary ways, by which the Lord leads people in into the Covenant
Savingly, and draws them unto Christ.

First, There are some called from the Womb, as John the Ba^t^st was, Luke
1.41.44. Or, in their very Young years, before they can be deeply engaged
actively in Satan's waves, 2 Timothy 3.15. It cannot be supposed, that those have
such a preparatory work as we are to speak of. And, because some persons may
pretend to this way of Effectual Calling, we offer these marks of it, whereby
those who have been so called may be confirmed.

1. Such use from their Childhood to be kept free of ordinary Pollutions,
wherewith Children usually are defiled; as Swearing, Lying, Mocking of Religion
and Religious persons, etc. Those whom God Calls Effectually, He Sanctifies
them from the time of that Effectual Calling. Sin cannot have Dominion over
them as over others, because they are under Grace Romans 6.14.

2. Religion is, as it were Natural to them. I mean, they need not be much
pressed to Religious Duties, even when they are but Children; They run
willingly that way, because there is an inward principle of Love constraining
them, 2 Cor. 5 14 so as they yield themselves Servants of Righteousness,
without outward constraint, Romans 6.16.

3. Although such know not when they were first acquainted with God, yet they
have afterward such exercises of spirit befalling, as the Saints in Scripture
(of whose first Conversion we hear not) do speak of. They are shut out from
God, upon some occasion now and then, and are admitted to come nearer again,
(to their apprehension.) Their heart is also further broken up, by the
Ordinances, as is said of Lyd^a, Act. 16.14. and ordinarily they do remember,
when some special bit of Religion and Duty, or when some Sin, of which they
were not taking notice before, was discovered to them. They who can apply these
things to themselves, have much to say for their effectual Calling from their
Youth.

Secondly, Some are brought in to Christ in a Sovereign Gospel-way. When the
Lord by some few words of love swallowing up any Law-work, quickly tak^h a
person Prisoner at the first, as He did Zaccheus, Luke 19. and others; who upon
a word spoken by Christ, did leave all and follow Him: and we hear no noise of
a Law-work dealing with them before they closed with Christ Jesus. And because
some may pretend to this way of Calling, we shall touch some things most
remarkable in that transaction with Zaccheus, for their clearing and
confirmation.

First, He had some desire to see Christ, and such a desire, as made him wave
that which some would have judged prudence and discretion, whilst he climbeth
up upon a Tree that he might see Him.

Secondly, Christ spoke to his Heart, and that word took such hold upon him,
that presently with Joy he did accept of Christ 's offer, and closes with
Christ as Lord, whilst few of any Note were following Him.

Thirdly, Upon this his Heart does open to the poor, although it seems, he was
a Covetous man before.

Fourthly, He has a due impression of his former ways, evidencing his respect
to Moses's Law, and this he does signify before all the Company then present,
not caring to shame himself in such things as (probably) were notour to the
world.

Fifthly, Upon all these things, Christ confirms and ratifieth the bargain by
His Word recommending to him that oneness of interest, which behoved to be
between him and the Saints, and the thoughts of his own lost Condition, if
Christ had not come and sought him and found him: All which are clear, Luke 19
3, -- 10. We grant the Lord calls some so, and if any can lay claim to the
special things we have now hinted, they have a good confirmation of Gods
dealing with them, from that Scripture: Neither are they to vex themselves
because of the want of a distinct preparatory Law-work, if their Heart have
yielded unto Christ. For, a Law-work is not desirable, except for this end.
Therefore Christ does offer Himself directly in the Scripture, and People are
invited to Him: and although many will not come to Him who is the Cautioner,
until the Spirit of bondage distress them for their debt; yet if any upon the
knowledge of their lost estate, would flee and yield to Christ, none might
warrantably ^ress a Law-work upon them. As for others, whom Christ persuaded by
a word to follow Him: whatsoever He did, or ^o^soever He spoke to them at His
first meeting with them, we must rationally suppose, that then He discovered so
much of their own necessity, and His own ful^ss and excellency to them as made
them quit all and run after Him. And if He do so to any, we crave no more,
since their is room enough there for the Physician. So that from all this, as
some may be confirmed and strengthened, with whom God has so dealt; So there is
no ground nor occasion for deluding Souls to flatter themselves in their
condition, who remain Ignorant and Senseless of their own Miseries and Christ's
Alsufficiency, and hold fast deceit.

Thirdly, There are some brought in to Christ, in a way ^e^ more declarative of
His F^ee Grace, and this ^s, when He Effectually calls men at the hour of
Death. We find somewhat recorded of this way, in that pregnant Example of the
Thief on the Cross, Luke 23.39, -- 45. Although this seems not very pertinent
for the purpose in hand; yet we shall speak a little of it, that on the one
hand, men may be sparing to judge and pass Sentence upon either themselves or
others, before the last gasp. And we shall so circumstantiate it, that, on the
other hand, none may dare to delay so great a business to the last hour of
their Life. We find these things remarkable in that business between Christ and
the Thief;

First, The man falls at odds with his former Companion.

Secondly, He dares not speak a wrong word of God, whose hand is on him, but
Justifies Him in all that is befallen him.

Thirdly, He now sees Jesus Christ persecuted by the world, without a cause,
and most injuriously.

Fourthly He discovers Christ to be a Lord and a King, whilst Enemies seem
to have Him at under.

Fifthly. He believes a being of Glory after Death so really, that he
prefers a portion of it to the present safety of his bodily Life, which he
knew Christ was able to grant to him at that time, and he might have chosen
that with the other Thief.

Sixthly, Although he was much abased in himself, and so humbled, that he
pleaded, but that Christ would remember him; yet he was nobly daring to throw
himself upon the Covenant, on Life and Death: and he had so much Faith of
Christ's Al-sufficiency, that he judged a simple remembrance from Christ, would
satisfyingly do his business.

Seventhly. He acquiesed sweetly in the Word which Christ spoke to him, for the
ground of his Comfort. All which are very clear in the case of that poor dying
Man, and do prove a very real work of God upon his Heart. As this example may
encourage some to wait for good from God, who cannot as yet lay clear claim to
any Gracious work of His Spirit: So we obtest all, as they love their Souls,
not to delay their Soul-business, hoping for such a cast of Christ's hand in
end, as too many do: This being a rare miracle of Mercy, with the Glory whereof
Christ did honorably triumph over the ignominy of His cross, a parallel of
which we shall hardly find in all the Scripture beside. Yea, as there be but
few at all saved, Mat. 20.16. and most saved this way: so the Lord has
peremptorily threatened to laugh at the Calamity, and not to hear the Cry of
such as mocked formerly at His reproof, and would not hear when He called to
them: Prove. 1.24, 26. which Scripture, although it does not shut Mercies door
upon any who at the hour of Death do sincerely judge themselves and flee to
Christ, as this penitent Thief did: yet it is certain, it implies that very
few who sit the offer until then, are honored with Repentance as he was. And
so their Cry as not being sincere and of the right stamp, shall not be heard.

The Fourth and most Ordinary way, by which many are brought in to Christ' is,
By a clear and discernable work of the Law and Humiliation, which we ordinarily
call, The Spirit of Bondage, as was h^nted before. We do not mean, that every
one whose Conscience is awakened with Sin and fear of Wrath, does really close
with Christ, the contrary does appear in Cain, Saul, Judas etc. but there is a
convicti-of Sin, awakening of Conscience, and work of Humiliation, which, as we
shall circumstantiate it, does rarely miscarry or fail of a gracious issue, but
ordinarily does resolve into the Spirit of Adoption, and a Gracious work of
Gods Spirit. And because the Lord deals with many Sinners this way, and we
find that many are much puzzled about the giving judgment of this Law-work.

This work is either more violent and suddenly expede, or it is more sober and
lent, protracted through a greater length of time, and so as the steps of it
are very discernable. It is more violent in some, as in the Jailer, Paul, and
some other Con^erts in the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, on whom Christ did
break in at an instant, and fell on them as with fire and sword and led them
Captive terribly. And because some great legal shakings are deceitful and turn
to nothing, if not worse, we shall point at some things remarkable in these
Converts, spoken of before, which did prove the work of the Law on them to have
had a gracious issue and result.

First, Some word of truth or dispensation, puts the person to a dreadful
stand, with a great stir in the Soul: Some are pricked in heart, Act. 2.37.
some fell on trembling, Act. 16.29. and this is such a stir, that the person is
brought to his wits end; What will thou have me to do, faith Paul? Act. 9. What
shall I do, faith the Jailer? Act. 16.30.

Secondly The person is content to have Salvation and Gods Friend-ship on any
terms; as the Questions do import, What shall I do? As if he had said, What
would I not do? What would I not forego? What would I not undergo?

Thirdly, The person accepts the condition offered by Christ and His
Servants, as is clear in the forecited Scriptures.

Fourthly, The person presently becomes of one interest with the Saints,
joining himself with that persecuted society, putting respect on those, whom he
had formerly persecuted, joining and continuing with them in the profession of
Christ on all hazards. Those with whom the Lord has so dealt, have much to say
for a gracious work of Gods spirit in them: and it is like, many of them can
date their work from such a particular time and word, or dispensation, and can
give some account of what, past between God and them, and of a sensible Change
following in them from that time forward, as Paul gives a good account of the
work and way of God with him afterward, Act. 22.

Again, the Lord sometimes carries on this work more calmly, softly and
lently, protracting it so as the several steps of men's exercise under it are
very discernable. It would draw a great length to enlarge every step of it, we
shall touch the most observable things in it.

1 The Lord lays siege to me^, (who it may be, have often refused to yield to
Him offering Himself in the Ordinances) and by some word Preached, Read, or
born on the mind, or by some Providence loading in unto the Word, he does also
assault the house kept peaceably by the strong man the Devil. And thus, Christ
who is the Stronger Man, comes upon him, Luke 11.22. and by the Spirit of
Truth, does fasten the Word on the man, in which, Gods Curse is denounced
against such and such Sinners, whereof the man knows himself Guilty. The
Spirit convinces the man, and binds it upon him, that he is the same person
against whom the Word of God does speak, because he is guilty of such Sins; and
from some sins the man is led on to see more, until (ordinarily) he come to see
the sins of his Youth, sins of Omission, etc. yea, he is led on until he see
himself Guilty almost of the breach of the whole Law; he sees innumerable
Evils compassing him, as David speaks in a fit of Exercise, Psalm. 40.12. A
man sometimes will see ugly sights of Sin in this case, and is sharp-sighted to
reckon a sibness to every sin almost. Thus the Spirit convinces of Sin, Joh.
16.8.

2. The Lord shakes a special strong hold in the Garrison, a refuge of Lies,
to which the man betaketh himself when his sins are thus discovered to him. The
Poor man pretends to Faith in Christ, whereby he thinks his burden is taken
off him, as the Pharis^ said, Joh. 8.41. We have one Father, even God. They
pretend to a special Relation to God as a common Lord. The Spirit of God beats
the men from this by the truth of the Scriptures, proving that he has no true
Faith, and so no interest in Christ, nor any true saving Grace; showing clear
differences between True Grace, and the Counterfeat Fancies which the man has
in him; and between him, and the truly Godly, as Christ labors to do those,
Joh. 8.42, 44. If God were your Father, ye would love me. Ye are of the Devil,
for ye do the Lusts of such a Father. So, Fear (...), Isa. 3.14, (...) when the
Lord discovers to (...) conditions in many of these Pro^ (wherein he trusted
must) not (...) attainable, he now sees Grace and (...) another thing then
once he judged (...) to be. We may in some respect apply that word here, The
Spirit convinces him of Sin, because he has not believed on the Son: He is
particularly convinced of Unbelief, Joh. 16.19. He sees now a huge distance
between himself and the Godly, who he thought before, ou^stripped him only in
some U^cessary, Proud, Hateful Preciseness; he now sees himself deluded, and
in the broad way with the perishing Multitude: and so in this sight of his
misery, coucheth down under his own burden* which before this time, he thought
Christ did bear for him; he now begins to scar at the Promises, because of
that and such other words, What have thou to do to take in Covenant on thy
mouth, (...) 16.

(...) becomes careful, about his (...) and begins to take it to (...)
Necessarypunc; He is brought (...) Act. 16. Wh^ (...) Salvation beco^ the
leading thing with him: It was least in his thoughts before, but now it
prevails, and other things are much misregarded by him. Sin^e his Soul is
ready to perish, what shall it profit him to gain the World if he lose his
Soul? Mat. 16.26. Some here are much puzzled with the thoughts of an
irrecoverable Decree to their prejudice, and with the fears of uncertain Death,
which may attach them before they get matters put to a point; and some are
vexed with apprehensions, that they are guilty of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, which is unpardonable, and so are driven a dangerous length, Satan still
casting up to them many sad Examples of people, who have dolefully put an end
to their own exercise: but they are ^n the hand of one, who knows how to
succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.1^.

4. When a man is thus in hazard of miscarrying, the Lord uses a work of
preventing Mercy toward him, quietly and underhand supporting him. And this is
by bearing upon his mind the possibility of his Salvation, leading the man to
the remembrance of pregnant proofs of Gods free and rich Grace, Pardoning gross
(...) such as Manasseh, who (...) bloody idolatrous Man, and had ^spondence
with the Devil, and yet ^ed Mercy, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 1.^^ (...) other Scriptures
bearing offers of (...) and Favor indifferently to all who (...) yield to
Christ, whatsoever they ^ve been formerly. So as the man is brought again to
this, What shall I do to (...)? Which does suppose, that he (...) ends a
possibility of being Saved, (...) would not propound the Question. (...)
^pplieth that, or the like word to (...); It may be, ye shall be hid, Zep^.
2.^. He finds nothing excluding him from mercy now, if he have a heart for
the thing. Although here, it may be the man does not perceive that it is the
Lord who upholdeth, yet afterward he can tell, that when his Foot was
slipping, Gods Mercy held him up, as Psalm. 94.1^.1^. the Psalmist speaks in
another (...) and he will afterward say, wh^ (...) a (...) and a Fool in man^
(...) God hold him by the hand, Psalm. 73.2^.

(...) this discovery of a possibility to (...) it a work of desire (...) which
is clear in that ^pression, What shall I do to be Saved? But sometimes this
desire is airted amiss, whilst it goes out thus, What shall I do that I may
work the works of God? Joh. 6.28. In which case, the man formerly perplexed
with fear and care about his Salvation, would be at some work of his own to
extricate himself; and here he suddenly resolves to do all that is commanded,
and to fore-go every evil way, (yet much miskenning Christ Jesus) and so
begins to take some courage to himself again; establishing his own
Righteousness, but not submitting unto the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
Whereupon, the Lord makes a new assault on him, intending the discovery of his
absolutely broken state in himself, that so room may be made for the Cautioner;
As Joshua did to the People, when he found them so bold in their undertakings,
Josh. 24.18, 19. You cannot serve the Lord, (says he) for He is a Holy God, a
Jealous God, etc. In this new assault the Lord, (1.) Bends up against the man,
the Spirituallity of the Law. The Commandment comes with a new Charge in the
Spiritual meaning of it, Rom 7.6. The Law came, (says Paul) viz. in the
Spiritual meaning of it. Paul had never seen such a sight of the Law before.
(2.) God most Holily does lose the restraining bonds, which He had laid upon
the man's Corruption, and suffers it not only to hoyl and swell within, but to
threaten, to break out in all the outward members. Thus sin grows bold, and
kicketh at the Law, becoming exceeding sinful, Romans 7.8, 9, 13. (3) The Lord
does discover to the man, more now than ever before, the Uncleanness of his
Righteousness, and what spots are in his best things. These things kill the
man, and he dies in his own conceit, Romans 7.9. and despaireth of relief in
himself, if it come not from another airth.

6. After many ups and downs here, ordinarily the man resolves some
retirement. He desires to be alone, he cannot keep Company as he did before;
like those in a besieged City, when they see they cannot hold out, and would be
glad of any good condition from the besieged Enemy, they go to a Council, that
they may resolve somewhat. So the man here retireth, that he may speak with
himself. This is like that communing with or own heart, Psalm. 4.4. Thus God
leads to the wilderness, that He may speak to the heart, Hos. 2.14. When the
person is retired, the thoughs of heart which were scattered in former steps of
the exercise, do more observably throng in here. We shall reduce them into this
method.

1. The man thinks of his unhappy F^lly, in bearing arms against God. And here,
there be large thoughts of former waves, with a blushing countenance and
self-loathing, Ezekiel. 36.31. like that of Psalm. 51.3. his sin is before him.

2. Then he remembers how fair opportunities of yielding to God he has basely
lost. His spirit is like to faint when he remembers that, as is said in
another case Psalm. 42.4.5.

3. He now thinks of many Christians, whom he mocked and despised in his heart,
persuading himself now that they are happy, as having chosen the better part.
He thinks of the condition of those who wait on Christ, as the Queen of Sheba
did of Solomon's Servants: Happy are thy Servants (says she) who stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom, 1 King. 10.8. Blessed are
they that dwell in thy House, ^c. Psalm. 84.4. He wishes to be one of the
meanest who have any near relation to God; As the Prodigal Son does speak, he
would be as one of the Fathers hired Servans, Luke 15.17.19

4. Then he calls to mind the good report that is gone abroad of God,
according to that Testimony, Jonah 4.2 The Prophet knew that God was a Gracious
God, and Merciful, slow to Anger, and of great kindness, etc. The free and
large Promises and offers of Grace come in here; and the Glorious practices
which have past upon sinners of all sorts, according to the fame of God in
Scripture.

5. He thinks with himself, why has God spared me so long, and why have I got
such a sight of my Sin? and why has He kept me from breaking Prison at my own
have (...) choosing some unhappy out-gate? Why (...) He made this strange
change on me? It may be it is in His heart to do me good, O that it may be so!
-- Although all these thoughts be not in the preparatory work of every one, yet
they are with many, and very promising where the are.

7. Upon all these thoughts and meditations, the man more seriously then ever
before, resolves to Pray, and to make ^om Essay with GOD, upon Life and Death.
He concludes, it can be no worse with him: for if he sit still he perishes,
as the I epers speak, 2 King. 7.3, 4. He considers with the pinched Prodigal
Son, that there is Bread enough in the Fathers house and to spare, whilst he
perishes for want: so he goes to God, for he knows not what else to make of
his condition, as the prodigal Son does, Luke 15.17, 18. and, it may be, here
he resolves what to speak; but readily things do vary when he is sisted before
God, as the Prodigal Son forgot some of his premeditated Prayers, Luke 15.18,
19, 21. And now, when he comes before God more observabby than ever before, (
First,) He begins with the Publican afar off, Luke 18.13. with many through
confessions and self condemnings, whereof he is very prodigal; as Luke 15 21. I
have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy, etc. (
Secondly,) Now begin his thoughts about the hearing of his Prayer, which he was
not wont to question much, he now knows what those expressions of the Saints
about the hearing of their ^ayers, do import. ( Thirdly,) It is observable in
this address that there are many broken sentences, like that of Psalm. 6.3. (
But thou, O Lord, how long?) supplied with sighs and groans, Romans 8.26. and
greedy looking upward, thereby speaking more then can be expressed by word. (
Fourthly,) There be ordinarily some interruptions, and (as it were) diversions,
the man speaking sometimes to the Enemy, sometimes to his own Heart, sometimes
to the Multitude in the world, as David in other cases, Psalm 9.6. Psalm. 42.5.
Psalm. 4.2. ( Fifthly,) It is observable here, that sometimes the man will halt
and be silent to hear some indistinct whispering of a joyful Sound glancing on
the mind, or some news in some broken word of Scripture, which it may be, the
man scarcely knows to be Scripture, or whether it is come from God or Satan
to delude him: yet this he has resolved, only to hear what God the Lord will
speak, as upon another occasion, Psalm. 85.8. ( Sixthly,) More distinct Promises
come into the man's mind, whereupon he essayeth to lay hold, but is beaten off
with Objections as in another ^se the Psalmist is, Psalm 2.3, 6. But ^lou art
Holy, but I am a Wo^. Now^ is about the dawning of the Day with the man, and
Faith will stir as soon as the Lord imparteth the Joyful Sound, Psalm. 89.15.
This is the substance of the Covenant, which may be shortly summed up in these
words, Christ Jesus is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; Hear ye Him.
We can speak no further of the man's Exercise, as a preparatory work: for what
follows is more than preparatory. Yet that the exercise may appear complete
and full, we shall add here, That after all these things, the Lord (it may be
after many answers of diverse sorts) mightily conveyeth the Sound of His
Covenant to the Heart, and determines the Heart to close with it, and God now
draws so to Christ, Joh. 6.44. and so shapeth out the Heart for him, that the
Conception cannot miscarry; for now the Heart is so in breadth and length for
Him, as that less cannot satisfy, and more is not desired, like that of Psalm.
73 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Or, whom have I desired on Earth besides
thee? The Soul now resolves to Dye (if He command so) yet at His Doo^, and
facing to Himwards.

We have drawn this preparatory work to some length, not tying any man to such
a work so circumstantiate, only we say, the Lord deals so with some; and
where He so convinces of Sin, Corruption and Self-emptiness, and makes a man
take Salvation to Heart, as the one thing necessary, and sets him on work in
the use of the means, which God has appointed for relief; I say, such a work
rarely shall be found to fail of a good issue and gracious result.

Object.
Hypocrites and Reprobates have great stirrings of Conscience, and deep
Convictions about Sin, setting them on work sometimes, and I do suspect any
preparatory work of the Law I ever had, to be but such as they have?

Answ.
It will be hard to give sure Essential differences between the preparatory
work in those, in whom afterward Christ is formed, and those legal stirrings,
which are sometimes in Reprobates: If there were not some gracious result of
these Convictions and Awakenings of Conscience in the Lords People, and other
marks, (...) ^ich we shall speak afterward (...) we^ hard to adventure upon
any difference that is clear in these legal stirrings. Yet for Answer to the
Objection, I shall offer some things, which rarely will be found in the
stirrings of Reprobates, and which are ordinarily found in that Law-work, which
has a gracious issue.

1. The Convictions of Hypocrites and Reprobates, are usually confined to some
few very gross Transgressions. Saul grants no more but the Persecuting of
David, 1 Samuel 26.21. Judas grants only the betraying of innocent Blood, Mat.
27.4. But ^sually those Convictions, by which the Lord prepares His own way in
the Soul, although they may begin at one or more particular Transgressions, yet
they sist not, but the man is led on to see many breaches of the Law, and
innumerable Evils compassing him as David speaks in the sight of his sin,
Psalm. 40.12. And withal, that universal Conviction (if I may call it so) is not
general, as usually we hear senseless Men saying, that in all things they Sin:
But is particular and condescending, as Paul afterward make of himself; he not
only is the chief of Sinners, but particularly, he was a Blasphemer, a
Persecuter, 1. Tim. 1.13.

2 The Convictions which Hypocrites have do seldom reach their Corruption, and
that Body of Death, which breeds an averseness from what is good, and strongly
inclines to what is evil. Ordinarily where we find Hypocrites speaking of
themselves in Scripture, they speak loftily and with some self-conceit, both as
to their freedom from Corruption. Joh. 9.34. The Pharisees say to the Poor man,
Thou wast altogether born in sins, and do thou teach us? (As if they
themselves were not as Corrupt by Nature as he.) They speak of great sins
Hazael did, 2 King, 8.13. Am I a Dog that I should do this great thing? And
also in their undertakings of Duty, as that man spoke, Mat. 8.19. I will follow
thee whithersoever thou go. See how the people do speak, Jer. 42.2, 3, 4, 5,
6. They undertake to do all that God will command them. So that they still go
about in any case to establish their own Righteousness, not submitting unto the
Righteousness of God. But I may say, That convictions and exercise about
Corruption, and that body of Death, in^ing to evil, and disenabling for good is
not the least part of the work, where the Lord is preparing his own way. They
use to judge themselves very wretched because of a Body of Sin, and are at
their wits end how to be delivered, as Paul speaks when he is under the
exercise of it afterward, Romans 17.19.

3. It will ordinarily be found, that the Convictions which are in Hypocrites,
either are not so serious, as that some other business will not put them out of
head before any satisfaction be gotten. As in Cain, who went and built a City,
and we hear no more of his Convictions, Genesis 4. Felix went away until a more
convenient time, and we hear no more of his Trembling, Act. 24.25. Or, if that
work become very serious, then it runs to the other extremity and despair of
relief, leaving no room for any out-gate. So we find Ju^as very serious in his
Convictions, yet he grew desperate and hanged himself, Mat. 27.4, 5. But where
the Lord prepares His own way, the work is both so serious, as the person
cannot be put off it, (until he find some satisfaction) and yet under that very
seriousness (...) ^e^h open for relief! both which are ^lear in the ^aylors
we^s, (...) to be Saved? Act. 16.30. This serious Enquiry after relief, is a
very observable thing in the preparatory work which leads on to Christ. Yet
we desire none to lay too much weight on these things, since God has allowed
clearer differences between the Precious and the Vile.

Object.
I still fear I have not so through a sight of my Sin and Misery, as the Lord
gives to many whom He effectually Calls, especially to great Transgressors
such as I am?

Answ.
It is true, the Lord discovers to some, great sights of their Sin and
Misery, and they are thereby put under great legal Terrors. But as all are not
brought in by that sensible preparatory Law-work, (as we show before) so even
those who are dealt with after that way, are very differently and variously
exercised in regard of degrees of Terror, and of continuance of that work; The
Jailer has a violent work of a very short continuance* Paul has a work
continuing three days. Some persons are in bondage through fear of Death all
their days, Heb. 2 So that we must not limit the Lord to one way of working
here. The main thing we are to look unto in these legal awakenings and
convictions of Sin and Misery, is, If the Lord reach those ends in us, for
which usually these stirrings and convictions are sent into the Soul; and if
those ends be reached, it is well; we are not to vex our selves about any
preparatory work further. Now, those ends which God drives ordinarily with
Sinners by these legal terrors and awakenings of Conscience, are Four;

First, The Lord discovers sights of men's Sin and Miser^ (...) them, to chase
them out of themselves and to put them out of conceit of their own
Righteousness. Men Naturally have great thoughts of themselves, and do incline
much to the Covenant of Works. The Lord therefore does discover to them so much
of their Sin and Corruption, even in their best things, that they are made to
loath themselves, and to despair of relief in themselves; and so they are
forced to flee out of themselves, and from the Covenant of works, to seek
refuge elsewhere, Heb. 6.18. They become Dead to themselves and the Law, as to
the point of Justification. Romans 7.4. Then have they no more confidence in the
flesh, Phil. 3.3. This is supposed in the offers of Christ coming to seek and
save that which is lost, Luke 19.10. and to be a Physician to those who are
Sick, Mat 9.12.

The Second great end, is, To commend CHRIST JESUS to men's Hearts above all
things: That so they might fall in Love with Him, and betake themselves to that
Treasure and Jewel, which only enricheth, Mat. 13.44. and by so doing may serve
the Lords design in the contrivement of the Gospel, which was the manifestation
of His Free Grace through Christ Jesus, in the Salvation of men. The sight of a
man's own misery and Damnable estate by Nature, is a ready way to make him prize
Christ highly, who alone can set such a wretch at liberty. Yea, it not only
leads a man to an high esteem of Christ, but also of all things that relate
to that way of Salvation, as Grace, New Covenant, Faith, etc. and makes him
carefully to gather and treasure up his Michtams or Golden Scriptures, for the
confirmation if his interest in these things.

The Third great end, is, To deter and scare people from Sin, and to make them
cast-out with it, and consent to put their neck under all His yoke. God
kindles some sparks of Hell in men's bosoms by the discovery of their sin, as
a ready means to make them henceforth stand in awe, knowing how bitter a thing
it is to depart from the Lord. Jer. 2.19. So we find rest offered to the weary,
upon condition they will allow no peaceable abode to Belial, 2 Cor. 14.17, 18.

The Fourth great end, is, To work up men to a patient and thankful submission
to all the Masters pleasure. This is a singular piece of work, Ezekiel. 16.63.
then shall thou not open thy mouth any more. The sight of a man's own vileness
and deservings, makes him silent, and lo lay his hand on his mouth whatever
God does unto him: Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. Ezra 9.13. God has punished us less then our iniquities. Mic.
7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned. The man
cares not what God does to him, or how He deal with him, if He save him from
the Wrath to come. Also, any Mercy is a large mercy to him, who has seen such
a sight of himself, Genesis 32.10. he is less than the least of mercies: any crumb
falling from the Masters Table is welcome, Mat. 15.2^. He thinks it rich mercy
that he is not consumed, Lam. 3.22^ This is the thing that marvellously makes
His poor crossed People so silent under and satisfied with their lot; Nay they
think he deserves Hell who opens his mouth at any thing God does to him,
since He has Pardoned his Transgressions. So then, for satisfying the
Objection, I say, If the Lord has driven thee out of thy self, and commended
Christ to thy heart above all things, and made thee resolve on His strength to
wage war with every known Transgression, and thou art, in some measure, as a
weaned Child, acquiesing in what He does unto thee, desiring to lay thy hand on
thy mouth thankfully: Then thy Convictions of sin and misery, and whatsoever
thou do plead as a preparatory work, is sufficient, and thou art to debate no
more about it; only be advised to study new discoveries of the sense of thy
lost condition every day, because of thy old and new Sins, and also to see
fresh help in Christ, who is a Prie^ forever to make intercession, and to have
the work of Sanctification and Patience with Thankfulness renewed and quickened
often, for somewhat of that work, which abaseth thee, exalts Christ, and
conformeth to His Will, must convey thee throughout all thy Life Time in this
world.

We come now to speak of some more (...) and sure marks, by which men may take
up their Gracious state and Interest in Christ.

The First thing whereby men may know it, is, Their cl^s^ng with Christ in the
Gospel, wherein He is held forth. This is Believing, or Faith, which is the
condition of the Covenant, Romans 4.16. It is of Faith, etc. Act. 16.31. Believe
-- and thou shall be Saved. Now, although in propriety of Speech, it is hard to
prove an Interest by Faith, it being our very Interest in Him; yet the hearts
closing with Christ Jesus, is so discernable in it self, that it may well place
it amongst the marks of a Gracious state: And if a man can make out this, that
he believes on, and in Christ Jesus, he thereby does prove a very true
interest in Him. Many do scare at this, is a mark upon one of these three
grounds ordinarily.

1 Some conceive Faith to be a diffi^u^ mysterious thing, hardly attainable. To
these I say, Do not mistake: Faith is not so difficult as many do apprehend it
to be. I grant, True Faith in the meanest degree, is the gift of God, and above
the power of Flesh and Blood: For, God must draw men to Christ, Phil. 1.29.
Job. 6.44. Yet it were a reflection upon Christ, and all He has done, to say,
It were a matter of insuperable difficulty, as is clear, Romans 10.6, -- 11. It
were according to that Scripture, as much upon the matter, as to say, Christ
came not from Heaven, (...) not Risen from the Dead, or Ascended victorious to
Heaven. I say, He has made the way to Heaven most easy; and Faith, which is
the condition required on our part, more easy then men do imagine.

For the better understanding of this, Consider, That justifying Faith, is not
to believe that I am Elected, or, to believe that God loves me, or that Christ
dyed for me, or the like. These things are indeed very difficult and almost
impossible at the first hand to be wo^ a^ by those who are Serious; whilst
Natural Athiests, and deluded Hypocrites, find no difficulty in asserting all
those things. I say, True justifying Faith is not any of the foresaid things;
neither is it simply the Believing of any sentence that is written, or that can
be thought upon. I grant, he that believes or Christ Jesus, believes what God
has said about man's Sinful Miserable condition by Nature, and he believes
that to be true, that there is Life in the Son, who was Slain, and is Risen
again from the Dead, etc. But none of these, nor the believing of many such
Truths, do speak out justifying Faith, or that Believing on the Son of God
spoken of in Scripture: for, then it were simply an act of the Understanding.
But true Justifying Faith, which we now seek after, as a good mark of an
Interest in Christ, is chiefly and principally an act or work of the heart and
will, having presupposed sundry things about Truth in the understanding, with
the Heart it is believed unto Salvation, Romans 10.10. And although it seem (
ver. 9. of that Chapter) that a man is Saved upon condition that he believe
this truth, GOD Raised CHRIST from the Dead; yet we must understand another
thing there, (and ver. 10.) than the believing the truth of that Proposition:
For, besides that, all Devils have that Faith whereby they believe that God
Raised Christ from the Dead. So the Scripture has clearly resolved Justifying
Faith (...) a receiving of Christ, Joh. 1.12. The receiving of Christ is there
explained to be the believing on his Name. It is still called a staying on the
Lord, Isa. 26.3. A trusting in God, often mentioned in the Psalms; and the word
is a leaning on him. It is a believing on Christ, Joh 1.12. and often so
expressed in the New Testament. When God makes men believe Savingly, He is said
to draw them unto Christ; and when the Lord inviteth them to believe, He
calls them to come to Him, Joh. 6* 37, 44. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a
man finding a Jewel, wherewith he falls in Love, Mat. 13.^4, -- 46. Now, I
say, this acting of the Heart on Christ Jesus, is not so difficult a thing, as
is conceived. Shall that be judged a mysterious difficult thing, which does
consist much in desire? If men have but an appetite, they have it; for, they
are blessed that Hunger after Righteou^ness, Mat. 5.6. If you will, you are
welcome, Rev. 22.17. It is a matter of such intricacy, and insuperable
difficulty, greedily to look to that exalted Savior. Isa. 45.22. and to
receive a thing that is offered, held forth and declared to be mine, if I will
but accept and take it, and in a manner open my mouth and give way to it: Such
a thing is Faith, Psalm. 81 10. if not less. Oh if I could persuade people what
is Justifying Faith, which impropriateth Christ to me! We often scare people
from their just rest and quiet, by making them apprehend Faith to be some deep
mysterious thing, and by moving unnecessary doubts about it, whereby it is
needlessly darkened.

3 Some make no use of this mark, as Judging (...) a high presumptuous Crime,
to pretend (...) so excellent a thing as is the very condition of the
New Covenant. To these, I say, You need not startle so much at it, as if it
were high Pride to pretend unto it: For, whatsoever true Faith be, men must
resolve to have it, or nothing at all; all other marks are in vain without it;
a thousand things besides, will not (...) the ^ness: Unless a man believe, he
abides in the state of Condemnation, Joh. 3.18.36.

3. Others do not meddle with this noble mark of Faith, because they judge it a
work of greatest difficulty, to find out Faith where it is. To these, I say, It
is not so difficult to find it out, since he that believes, has the witness
in himself, 1. Joh. 5.10 It is a thing which by some serious search may be
known. Not only may do much to find it out by the preparatory work going before
it in many; as the apprehending and believing of a man's lost estate, and that
he cannot do his own business, and that there is satisfying fullness in Christ,
very desirable, if he could overtake it. A serious minding of this, with a
Heart laid open for relief: As also, by the ordinary companions and
concomitants of it, viz. the liking of Christ's Dominion, His Kingly and
Prophetical Office, a desire to resign my self wholly up to Him, to be at His
disposing. As also, by the native Consequences of it, viz. the assoyling of the
Word, the assoyling of my own Conscience according to the Word, a
Heart-purifying work, a working by Love, etc. I say, not only may we know Faith
by these things, but it is discernable by it self, and of its own Nature;
although I deny not, but there must be some help of Gods Spirit, by which we
know what is freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. As also, that God has
allowed many evidences and marks, as precious helps whereby men may clear up
Faith more fully to themselves, 1 John 5.13. Yet I still say, that Faith, or
Believing, which is some acting of the Heart upon Christ in the Gospel, and the
transacting with him there, is discernable of it self, and by it self, to a
judicious understanding person, with an ordinary influence of the Spirit;
unless the Lord, for reasons known to Himself, do overcloud a man's reflex
light, by which he should take up and perceive what is in him.

This Justifying Faith which we assert to be so discernable, is, in the Lords
deep wisdom and Gracious condescendency, variously expressed in Scripture,
according to the different actings of it upon God, and outgoings after Him; so
as every one who has it, may find and take it up in his own mould. It
sometimes acts by a desire of Union with him in Christ. This is that Looking
^o Him, Isa. 45.22. This seems to be a we^ct of Faith, and far below other
actings of it at other ti^es, perhaps in that same person. Men will look to
what they dare not approach (to their apprehension) which they dare not touch
or embrace* They may look to one, to whom t^y dare not speak. Yet God has made
the Promise to Faith in that acting, as the fore^ited Scripture does show; and
this He has done mercifully and wisely, for this is the only discernable way
of the acting of Faith of some persons sometimes: Such are the actings or
outgoings of Faith expressed in Scripture, by Hungring and Thirsting after
Righteousness, Mat. 5.6. and that expressed by Willing, Rev. 22.17.

Again, This Faith goes out sometimes in the act of recumbenc^ or leaning on
the Lord, the Soul taking ^p Christ then as a resting sto^; and God has so
held HIM out, although HE be a stumbling stone to others, Romans 9.^3. This
acting of it, is hinted in the expressions of Trusting and Staying on God, so
often mentioned in Scripture; and ^racious Promises are made to this acting
(...) Faith: as Isa. 26.3, 4. God will keep (...) imperfect peace whose minds
are stayed on Him; because such do trust in Him. Trust in the Lord; for with
Him is everlasting strength. So, Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall
be as Mount Zion, which abides forever. I say, the Lord has made Promises to
this way of Faiths acting, as knowing it will often go out after Him in this
way with many persons, and this way of its acting will be most discernable to
them. It goes out after God sometimes by an act of waiting when the Soul has
somewhat depending before God, and has not got out his mind satisfyingly about
that thing; then Faith does wait, and so it has the Promise, Isa, 49.23.
Sometimes it acts in a wilful way upon the Lord, when the Soul apprehends
God thrusting it away, and threatening its ruin; So J^b 13.15 Though He slay
me, yet will I trust in Him. The Faith of that poor woman, Mat. 15.22.28. so
highly commended by Christ, did go out in this way of wilful acting over
difficulties; and the Lord speaks much good of it, and to it; because some
will be put to it, to exercise Faith that way sometimes, and so they have that
for their encouragement. It were tedious to instance all the several ways of
the acting of Faith upon, and its exercise about, and outgoings after Christ. I
may say, according to the various conditions and pressures of the Soul of man,
the Lord has variously held out Himself, and His Fullness in Christ under
diverse notions, as might most fitly meet the distress or condition of Man; and
accordingly Faith which God has appointed to traffic and travel between
Christ and Man, as the Instrument of conveyance of His fullness unto man, and of
maintaining Union and Communion, with Him, acts variously and differently
upon God in Christ: For, Faith is the very shaping out of a man's Heart
according to Gods device of Salvation by Christ Jesus, in whom it pleased the
Father that Fullness should dwell. So that let Christ turn what way He will,
Faith airteth and points that way. Now, He turns all ways in which He can
be useful to poor man, and therefore Faith acts accordingly on Him for
drawing out of that fullness, according to a man's case and condition.

As for Example, The Soul is naked, destitute of a covering to keep it from the
storm of Gods Wrath; Christ is fine Raiment, Rev. 3.17, 18. Then accordingly,
Faith's work here is to put on the Lord Jesus, Gal. 3.27. The Soul is hungry
and thirsty after somewhat that may Everlastingly satisfy; Christ Jesus is
Milk, Wine, Water, the Bread of Life, and the true Manna, Isa. 55.1, 2. Joh. 6
48, 51. He is the Feast of fat things, and of wine refined, Isa. 25.6. Then the
work and exercise of Faith, is, to go buy, eat and drink abundantly, Isa. 55.1
Joh. 6.53, 57. The Soul is pursued for Guilt more or less and is not
Law-biding: Christ Jesus is the City of Refuge and the High Priest there,
during whose Lifetime (that is forever) the poor man, who wins thither, is
safe. Then the work and exercise of Faith is, to flee thither for Refuge, to
lay hold on the Hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. In a word, whatsoever way He may
benefit poor man, so He speaks of Himself; and as He holds out Himself in
the Scripture, so Faith does point toward Him. If He be a Bridegroom, Faith
will go out in a Marriage Relation* If He be a Father, Faith pleads the man
to be a Child; If He be a Shepherd, Faith pleads the man may be one of His
Sheep: If He be a Lord, Faith calls Him so, which none can do but by the
Spirit of Jesus: If He be Dead and Risen again for our Justification, Faith
believes God has raised Him on that account, Romans 10.9. Wheresoever He be,
there would Faith be; and whatsoever He is, Faith would be somewhat
proportionally. For, by Faith the heart is shapen out in breadth and length for
Him: Yea, when the fame and report of Him goes abroad in His Truth, although
Faith see not much, yet it believes on His Name, upon the very fame He has
sent abroad of Himself, Joh. 1.12.

But here for avoiding of mistakes, Consider,

First; That although Justifying Faith acts so variously, yet every Reliever,
who has a good Title to Jesus Christ, has not all these various actings and
exercises of Faith; for, his condition craveth them not: and also the Master is
pleased not to lead our the Faith of some persons at sometimes in some of these
ways, (for reasons known to Himself) even when their necessity (to their
apprehension) calls for such acting of Faith. Surely every one dare not say,
Though He kill me, yet will I trust in Him Many would not have gone up with
that woman I spoke of, Mat. 15. but would have been discouraged and quit the
pursuit. It is on this account that Christ does highly commend the faith of
some beyond the faith of others, Mat 8.10. Mat 15.28. Many good people are much
disquieted about their Faith, because it goes not out in all those ways we
find recorded in Scripture: But there is hardly any man will be found, whose
faith acts all these ways.

Secondly; Many of these actings of Faith are much intended and remitted. They
are sometimes Strong and Vigorous, and discernable, and sometimes they fail,
and misbelief does prevail; so as it were an uncertain thing to judge of a man's
state by these. We find the Saints very different from themselves in regard of
the actings of Faith sometimes, as we showed before.

Thirdly; Each one of these actings of Faith, s^keth good to the person in whom
it is and has Promises annexed unto it, as we have said.

Yet,

Fourthly; Although these actings of Faith ^ave Promises annexed unto them,
they are not for that, the condition of the New Covenant: for then every one
behoved to have each one of them, which is not true as we said before. A
Promise is made to him who overcomes, but perseverence is not the condition of
the New Covenant, but does suppose it. There are Promises made to the exercise
of all Graces in Scripture; but only Faith is the condition of the Covenant. I
say then, these Promises are made to these actings of Faith, not as such, but
as they do suppose Justifying Faith, which is the Covenant. All these are
actings of Faith, but not as it is Justifying.

Therefore,

Fifthly; There is somewhat common to all Gracious persons, which may be
supposed by all the foresaid actings of Faith, wherein the nature and essense
of Justifying Faith stands; and this is the hearts satisfaction about Gods
device of Salvation by Christ; when man pleases Gods invention of satisfaction
to Justice through Jesus Christ, in whom all fullness does dwell now by the
Fathers pleasure; when the Soul and Heart of man acquiese^^ in that, then it
Believes unto Salvation. As at first the Lord made man suitable unto the
Covenant of Works, by Creating him perfect, and so putting him in a capacity to
perform His Will in that Covenant. So under the New Covenant, when God gives
the New Heart to man, He sets the Idea and Stamp of all His device in the
New Covenant upon the man, so as there is a consonancy to Gods will there: Thus
he bears the Image of the Second Adam, CHRIST JESUS on him. This is a great
part of the new heart, and is most opposed to works. Since now the man
absolutely falls off works, becoming Dead to the Law (as to the point of
Justification) by the Body of Christ, Romans 7.4. Many perceiving that God has
devised a way of satisfying Divine justice, and recovering lost man by the
Incarnation of Christ, he thinks this so good and sure a way, that he
absolutely gives up with the Law, as I said before, and closes with this
device: and this is Believing or Faith, very opposite to works and all resting
thereupon. This cannot fail to be in all Gracious persons, in whom many of the
actings of Faith are not to be found. This does clearly suppose known distress
in a man, without all relief in himself; this supposes known fullness in
Christ, as the alone sufficient relief; this imports a sort of impropriation:
for the heart pleasing that device, in so far swayeth toward it. This is a
thing clearly supposed in all the actings of faith, spoken of before. He that
greedily hungereth, has this; and he that leans, has this, etc. This is to
esteem Christ the Wisdom and the Power of God to Salvation; so is He said to be
to all that believe, 1 Cor. 1, 24 they esteem that device wise and sure,
beseeming God, and that is to believe. On this account, Christ who is the
rejected stone to many, is Precious to them who believe; a fit stone to
recover, fortify and beautify the tottering building and fabric of lost man,
1 Pet. 1. The Kingdom of God is like a man finding a treasure, which with joy
he sells all; Mat. 13.44. These words hold out the very way of believing,
viz. Salvation is discovered in the Gospel to be by Christ; the heart valueth
that invention as satisfying. This is to believe on the Son of God lifted up,
which is compared with the looking to the Brazen Serpent, Joh. 3.14. It was
man's approbation of that device which made it effectual for his healing. So it
is here; he that believet^ sets to his Seal that God is true. True, wherein?
In that record He has born, that God has provided Life for men, and placed it
all in Christ 1 John 5.10, 11. He that believes not, makes God a L^ar.
Wherein? In His saying that Christ is a safe and sure way to Heaven. This is
the pleasing and acquiesing in that device, and it is consonant to all, I know
spoken of, ^ustifying Faith in Scripture. This is the believing on Christ and
on His Name, the receiving of Him and resting on him for Salvation, in our
Catechism. The believing that Jesus is the CHRIST, that is, the Anointed One,
whom the Father has Sealed, and set apart, and qualified for the work of
Reconciling Man unto God; and, he that believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God, 1 John 5.1. This is to believe with the Heart, that God has raised
Christ from the Dead. The man believes Christ Died, and is Raised on the
account of satisfaction for man's Transgression; Devils may believe that. Nay,
but the man I speak of, believes it with his Heart, (which no Natural man
does, until a new heart be given to him) that is, he cordially pleases, is
satisfied ^ith, and acquieseth in this noble invention. And this Faith laveth
out it self now and then in its actings, outgoings and exercises, according to
all the Covenant relations, under which Christ is held forth in the Scripture.

Now, I say, this Faith is discernable, not only in these actings many times; a
man may know if his heart does hunger after Christ, and flee for refuge to him
when pursued, and if he does commit himself unto God, etc. But also in its very
Nature; as it is justifying it is discernable and may be known. A man may
clearly know, if from known distress in himself upon the report and fame of
Christ's fullness, his heart does please Gods device in the New Covenant, if if
goes out after Christ in that invention, and pleases Him as Lord of the Life
of men, terminating and resting there, and no where else, acquiesing in that
contrivement with desire and complacency. This is a discernable thing.
Therefore I obtest men impartially to examine themselves, and if they find that
their heart is closed so with that device of Salvation, and is gone out after
Him as precious, that thereupon they conclude a sure and true interest in
Christ Jesus, and a go^ claim and title to the Crown, since he that believes
shall never Pe^tsh, but have everlasting Life, Joh, 3, 16, 36.

Object.
Hypocrites and Reprobates have a sort of Faith, and are said to believe, Joh.
2.23. Acts 8.13. and cannot choose but go out after Christ and that device of
Salvation, when they hear of it; and they profess they do so, yet are deluded,
and so may I be?

Answ.
To say nothing of that thought of your heart, [whereby you wonder that any man
should not please the device of Salvation by Christ, and lead out toward him]
as a very promising thing, and speaking out justifying Faith to be in your
bosom; and to say nothing in contradiction to that which you think, that a
Natural man, whilst such, and before he get a New Heart, can please that
device, and believe with his heart, and affectionately, that which perfectly
overthrows the Covenant of works, and abaseth man in the point of
Self-righteousness already attained, or that can be won at (...) him, which is
inconsistent with many Scriptural truths. I offer these differences between the
Faith of all Hypocrites or Reprobates, and that true saving justifying Faith,
whereof we have spoken.

1. They never close with Jesus Christ (in that device) and Him alone as a
sufficient covering of the eyes, as is said of Abraham to Sarah, Genesis 20.16.
They still hold fast somewhat of their own, at least to help to procure Gods
favor and salvation: Their heart does still speak, as that Young man's speech,
Luke 18.18, 21. does insinuate, what want I that I may inherit Life? Besies
that, they do still retain their former Lovers, and will not break their
Covenants with Hell and Death, imagining they may have Christ with these things
equally sharing in their heart; contrary to that, A man cannot serve two
Masters, Mat. 6.24. Either Christ must be judged absolute Lord, and worthy to
be so, or nothing at all. And so it is clear, their heart is not shapen out for
that device of Salvation by Christ, whom God has alone made Lord here, in whom
all fullness shall dwell. But where justifying Faith is, the Soul of a man and
his Heart does close with Christ, and him alone, having (...) confidence in the
flesh, Ph^l. 3.3 Psalm. 62.5. he trusts only in God. As also the man here
gives up with other Lovers, as they compete with Christ, they resolve not to
be for another, Hos. 3.3. They call him Lord, which a man can only do by the
Spirit of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.3.

2. As Hypocrites and Reprobates do never close with Christ Alone; so they do
never close with Full Christ, as He is anointed to be a King to rule over man
in all things; a Priest, to procure Pardon and to make peace for man upon all
occasions; a Prophet to be Wisdom, and a Teacher and Counselor in all cases to
man. So they do not receive Christ, especially in the first and third Office.
But where true justifying faith is, a man closes with whole Christ in all his
Offices, judging all his will, Good, Holy, Just and Spiritual, Romans 7.12 and
right concerning all things, Psalm, 119.128. making mention of His Righteousness
only, Psalm. 71.16. The man also gives up himself to be taught of him, Mat.
11.29. So that Christ is made to the true Believer with his own consent,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and complete ^demption, 1 Cor. 1.30 And
although he has not all these things formally in exercise when his heart goes
out after Christ, yet, upon search and trial, it will be found with him, as I
have said.

3, Hypocrites and Reprobates do never close with Christ, and all the
inconvenience; may follow him. They stick at that with that man, Mat. 8.19, 20.
But where true justifying Faith is, a man does close with him on all hazards;
he resolves to forego all rather then to forego Christ, Mark 10.28. he
reckons all to be loss and dung for the excellency of Christ Jesus, as his
Lord, and to be found in him, Phil. 3.8. We might give other differrences also,
As that true faith is operative, purifying the heart, Act. 15.9. working by
love, Gal. 5.9^ whilst hypocrites do only cleanse the outside of the platter,
Mat. 23.25. and do all to be seen of men, Mat. 6.5. not seeking the honor of
God only, and so cannot believe, Joh, 5.44. We might also show that true Faith
is never alone in a man, but attended with other saving Graces: But because
these things will co-incide with what follows, and here we are showing that a
man may take up his gracious State by his Faith, and the actin^ thereof on
Christ. We pass these things.

The Second great mark of a Gracious state and true Saving interest in Jesus
Christ is, The New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a New
Creature. This New Creation or Renovation of that man, is a very sensible
change, although not in those who are effectually called from the womb or in
their Younger years, because those have had this New Creature from that time in
them, so as this change in after period of time is not discernable; yet in
those who have regenerated and brought into Christ after they were come to
greater age, and so have been more palbably under the power of Darkness before
they were translated into the Kingdom of Christ: Col. 1.13. But in all who do
warrantably pretend to Christ, this New Creature must be, although some do not
know experimentally the contraries of every part of it, so as others do because
they have not been equally in regard of practice, under the power of Darkness.
This New Creature is called the New Man, Gal. 3.10. which does hold out the
ex^nt of it. It is not simply a new Tongue or new Hand, but a New Man. There is
a principle of new life and motion put in the man, which is the New Heart:
which new principle of Life sends for acts of Life, or of conformity to the
Image of Him who Created it, Col. 3.10 So as the party is renewed in some
measure every way. This renovation of the man who is in Christ, may be reduced
in these two great heads.

First; There is a renovation of the man's person, Soul and Body, in some
measure.

1. His Understanding is renewed, so as he judges Christ Preached in the
Gospel to be the Wisdom and Power of God, a wise strong device beseeming God. 1
Cor. 1.23, 24. He knows the things of God really and solidly, not to be Yea
and Nay, and uncertain fancies, but also to be Yea and Amen solid, certain
substantial things, having a desirable accomplishment in Christ, and resolving
much in Him, 1 Cor. 2.15.2 Cor. ^ 18. Natural men cou^ under Gospel Ordinances,
although they have some national knowledge of God, Christ, Promises, the
motions of the Holy Spirit, etc. so a^ they may Confer, Preach and Dispute of
these things; yet they look on them as common received maxims of Christianity,
from which to recede were a singularity and disgrace; but not as real, solid,
substantial truths, so as to adventure their Souls and everlasting being on
them. The Understanding is renewed also to take up somewhat of God in the
Creatures, as be aring sparks of His Glorious Attributes, Psalm. 19.1. They see
the Heavens declaring His glory and Power, and somewhat of God in Providence
and Dispensations that fall out* H^ wondrous works declare that His Name is
near. Psalm. 75.1. The Understanding also takes up the conditions and cases of
the Soul other ways than it was wont to do; as we find the Saints usually
speaking in Scripture, O my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, etc. Psalm.
16.2. My Soul said, thy face will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. Why art thou cast down O
my Soul? Psalm. 42.5 Psalm. 43.5. Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, Psalm. 167.

2 The Heart and Affections are renewed. The heart is made a new heart, (...)
heart of flesh, capable of impressions, having a copy of His Law stamped on
it, and fear of God put into it, whereby the ^ans Duty becomes in a manner
native and kindly to the man, Jer. 32.39, 40. E^ 36.26. It was before a heart
of stone, void of the fear of God. The Affections are renewed now. The Love is
renewed in some good measure. It goes out after God, I will love the Lord,
Psalm. 18.1. After his Law, O how I love the Law, Psalm. 119.97. after those who
have Gods image in them, Joh. 13.35.1 Joh. 3.14. This love to Gods People is
upon a pure account, as they are the Children of God and do keep His Statutes,
1 Pet. 1.22. It is with a pure heart, Psalm. 119.83. and therefore it goes
toward a^ such, whom the man knows or apprehends to be such, Psalm. 119.63.
I am (...) Companion to all them, etc. In all cases and conditions, even where
there is nothing to beautify or comm^nd, but the Image of God. And this love
is so fervent many times, 1 Pet. 1.22. that it ^tteth i^ self out in all
relations, so as a man seeks a Godly Wife, a Godly Master, a Godly Servant, a
Godly Coun^, if he have to choose upon, Psalm. ^1.6. and it is not quenched by
many ^ers, Cant. 8.7. Many imperfections and infirmities, difference in
opinion* (...) received, will not altogeth^ quench Love. Also it is
communicative of good according to its measure, and as the case of the poor
Godly requires, Psalm. 16.2.1 Joh. 3.17.18, 19. The man's Hatred is also
renewed, and is now bended against sin, Psalm. 119.113. I hate van thoughts:
against Gods Enemies, as such, Psalm. 139.21. Do not I hate them that hate thee?
etc. The joy or delight is renewed, for it runs toward God, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? etc. Toward his Law and Will, Psalm. 1.2. His
delight is in the Law of the Lord. And toward the Godly and their Fellowship,
Psalm. 16.3 -- In whom is all my delight. The sorrow is turned against sin which
has wronged Christ, Zec. 12.10. Looking to Him whom they have Pierced, they
Mourn. 2 Cor. 7.11 The sorrow is Godly there, and against what encroacheth upon
Gods honor; they are sorrowful for the -- Assemblies, and the reproach of that
is their burden, Zeph. 3.18. There is some renovation in all the affections, as
in every other part of the Soul, pointing now toward God.

3. The very outward members of the man are renewed. As the Scripture speaks,
The Tongue, the Eye, the Ear, the Hand, the Foot, etc. So that those members
which on^ were improved as weapons of Unrighteousness unto sin, are now
improved as weapons of Righteousness unto Holiness, Romans 6.19.

Secondly; A man who is in Christ, is renewed in some measure in all his ways.
Behold all things are new, 2 Cor. 5.17. The man becomes new;

1. In the way of his Interest. He was upon any good before, though but
apparent and at best but External. Psalm. 4.6. But now his interest and business
is, How to be found in Christ in that day? Phil. 3.9 or, How to be forth coming
to Him, and walk before Him in the land of the Living? Psalm. 56.31. which he
would choose among all the mercies that fill this Earth, Psalm 119.64. The
interest of Christ also becomes the Man's interest, as appears in the Song of
Hannah, 1 Samuel 2 and in the Song of Mary, Luke 1. It is strange to see people
newly Converted, and having teached but the beginnings of knowledge, concern
and interest themselves in the Public matters of Christ's Kingdom, so desirous
to have Him riding prosperously and subduing the people under Him.

2. The man that is in Christ, is renewed in the way of his Worship. He was
wont to serve God in the Oldness of the Letter, for the fashion, answering the
Letter of the command in the outside of Duty, which one in whom the Old man
has absolute dominion can do: But now he worshippeth God in the newness of the
Spirit, Romans 7.6. in a new way, wherein he is helped by the Spirit of God, Romans
8. beyond the reach of flesh and blood. He serves now the true and living God,
1 These. 1 in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4.24. having spiritual apprehensions of
God, and engaged in his very Soul in that work, doing and saying truly and not
feignedly when he worshippeth, still desiring to approach unto Him as a living
God, who hears and sees him and can accept his service, Psalm. 42. I grant,
he fails of this many times; yet I may say, such worship he intends, and
sometimes overtaketh, and does not much reckon worship, which is not so
performed unto God; And the iniquity of his holy things is not the least part
of his burden and exercise: Such a worship Natural men are strangers unto,
whilst the babble out their Vainglorious boastings, Luke 18.11. to an unknown
God, Act. 17.23

3. The man that is in Christ, is renewed in the way of his outward calling and
employment in the world, he now resolves to be about it, because God has
commanded so: Romans 12.11. And to eye God in it as the last end, doing it to His
Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. and studieth to keep some intercourse with God in the
exercise of his outward employments, as Jacob does in his latter Will, Genesis
49.18. and Nehemiah did, Neb. 2.4. So as the man resolves to walk with God,
and set Him always before him, Psalm. 16.8. wherein I deny not he falls often.

4. He becomes new in the way of his Relations: He becomes a more Dutiful
Husband, Father, Brother, Master, Servant, Neighbor, etc. herein does he
exercise himself to keep a Conscience void of offense toward Men as well as
toward God, Act. 24.16.1 Cor. 9.22. becoming all things to all men.

5. He becomes new in the way of his lawful Liberties. He studieth to make use
of Meat, Drink, Sleep, Recreations, Apparel with an eye to God, laboring not
to come under the power of any lawful thing, 1 Cor. 6.13. nor to give offense
to others in the use of these things, Romans 14.21. Romans 15 2. nor using liberty
as an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. Yea, he labors to use all these things
as a stranger on earth, so as his moderation may appear, Phil. 4, 5. and some
way he does eye God as the last end in these thing, 1 Cor. 10, 31. doing all to
the glory of God: So as we may say of that man, Old things are much passed
away, All things are in some measure become New, 2 Cor. 5.15. He that is so a
New Creature, is undoubtedly in Christ.

This Renovation of a man in all manner of Conversation, and this being under
Law to God in all things, is that Holiness, without which no man shall see God,
Heb. 12.14. Men may fancy things to themselves, but unless they study to
approve themselves unto God in all well-pleasing, and reach some inward
testimony of sincerity that way, they shall not assure their hearts before him.
The testimony of men's Conscience is their rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12 By this we
know that we know Him, if we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2.1 Joh. 3. No
confidence if the heart condemn. This is the New Creature, having a principle
of new spiritual Life infused by God into the heart, whereby it becomes new,
and puts forth acts of new Life throughout the whole man, as we have said,
so as he is poluted toward the whole Law, both these Commands which forbid
Sin; so he resolves to set against secret Sins, not to lay a stumbling block
before the blind, Lev. 19.14, Little sins, which are judged so by many, the
least things of the Law, Mat. 5.19. Spiritual sins, filthiness of the spirit, 2
Cor. 7, sins of Omission as well as of Commission, since men are to be judged
by these, Mat 25. -- yea, sins that are winded in into his Natural humor and
constitution, and so as are a right eye or hand to him, Mat 5.29. This new
principle of Life, by the good hand of God, makes the man set against every
known sin, so far as not to allow peaceable abode to any known darkness, 2 Cor.
6.14 As also he is pointed toward those Commands which relate to Duty, and the
quickening of Grace in man. It makes a man respect all known Commands, Psalm.
110.6* to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly, Tit. 2.12 yea, and to study a
right and sincere way and manner of doing things, resolving not to give over
this study of conformity to Gods Will whilst he lives on earth, but still to
bend forward toward the prize of the high calling of God, Phil. 3.14. This is
true Holiness, very becoming all those who pretend to be heirs of that holy
habitation in the immediate company and fellowship of a holy God, 1 John 3.

Some may think these things high seize and very hard to be won at: I
grant it is true.

But;

First; Remember, that there is a very large allowance in the Covenant promised
to His people, which makes things more easy. The Lord has engaged to take
away the stony heart, to give a heart of flesh, a new heart, an heart to fear
him for ever; He has engaged to put his Law in men's heart, to put his Fear in
their heart, to make them keep that Law; to put his Spirit in them to cause
them to keep it. He has promised to satisfy the Priests with satness, that
the Souls of the people may be satiated with goodness, and to keep and water
them continually every moment. Ezekiel, 36.26. Jer. 32.40. Jer. 31. Ezekiel.
36.27. Jer 34 14 Jer. 31.12 Isa. 27.3 and if he must be enquired to do all
these things unto men, he engages to pour out the Spirit of grace and
supplication on them, and so to learn them how to seek these things, and how to
put him to it, to do all for them, Zech. 12.

Secondly, For the satisfaction of the weaker, I grant this new Creature, as we
have circumscribed and enlarged, it will not be found in all the degrees of it,
in every Gracious person. But it is well; if

1. There be a New Man, we cannot grant less: If any man be in Christ, there
must be a New Creature, and that is the New Man, Ephesians. 4.21, -- which all must
put on who we savingly taught of Christ. There must be some renewing after the
Image of God in a man's Soul and Body; there must be somewhat of every part of
the man pointing toward God: although I grant, every one cannot instruct this
to others, neither discern it in himself, because many know not the distinct
parts of the soul, nor pieces of reformation competent to every part of soul
and body. Yet it will be found there is some such thing in them, yea, they have
a witness of it within in them, if you make the thing plain, and clear to them
what it is.

2. There must be such a respect unto Gods known Commands, that a man does not
allow peaceably any known iniquity to dwell in him: For, what concord is
between light and darkness? 2 Cor 6, -- Psalm. 119.6. Psalm. 66.18 he must not
regard iniquity. I grant men may be ignorant of many Commands, and many Sins,
and may imagine in some cases, that some sins are not hateful unto God. But
supponing that they are instructed in these things, there can be no agreement
between Righteousness and Unrighteousness.

3. Men must point toward all the Law of God, in their honest resolutions:
For, this is nothing else, then to give up the heart unto God, to put his Law
in it without exception, which is a part of the Covenant we are to make with
God, Heb 8.10 I grant many know not how to point toward Gods Law in all their
ways, but if it be made manifest unto them how that should be done, they will
point at it. And it is true, they will many times fail of their resolution in
their practice; yet when they have failed, they can say, they did resolve
otherwise, and will yet honestly and without guile resolve to do otherwise,
and it will prove their affliction to have failed of their resolution, when the
Lord discovers it to them, which He will do in due time.

4 When we are to judge of our state by the New Creature, we must do it at a
new convenient time, when we are in good case, at least, not when we are in
worst case: for the flesh and spirit do lust and fight against other, Gal. 5 17
and sometimes the one, and sometimes the other does prevail. Now I say, we must
choose a convenient time, when the Spiritual part is not by some temp^ation
worsted and overpowred by the flesh: for in that case the new creature is
recoyled back in its streams, and much returned to the fountain and the habits,
except in some small things not easily discernable, whereby it makes
opposition to the flesh, according to the foresaid Scripture: for now it is the
time of winter in the soul, and we may not expect Fruit, yea, nor Leaves, as in
some other season; only here, lest profane Athiests should make advantage of
this, we will say, That the spirit does often prevail over the flesh in a Godly
man, and the scope, aim, tenor and main dr^ of his way is in the Law of the
Lord, that is his walk, Psalm. 119. whereas the pathway and ordinary course of
the Wicked is sin, as is often hinted in the Book of the Proverbs of Solomon.
And if it happen that a Godly man be over-mastered by any transgression,
ordinarily it his sad exercise; and we suppose he keeps it still in dependency
before God, to have it rectified, as David speaks, Psalm. 56.13 Will thou not
deliver my feet from falling?

Object.
Athiests and Hypocrites may have great changes and renovation wrought upon
them, and in them, and I fear mine be such?

Answ.
I grant that Athiests and Hypocrites have many things in them, which do look
like the New Creature;

First, In regard of the parts of the man.

1 They may come to much knowledge; as Heb. 6.4 they are enlightened.

2 There may be a real amongst their affections; as they receive the Word with
joy, Matthew 13 20.

3 They may reach a great deal of outward reformation in the outward man; both
about freedom from sin, and engagement to positive duty, as that Pharisee did,
Luk 18. -- 12 Yea,

4. In regard of their practical understanding, they may judge some things of
God to be excellent. The people said, that never man spoke as Christ. Joh. 7.46

Secondly; Hypocrites may have a great deal of profession:

1 They may talk of the Law and Gospel, and of the Covenant, as the Wicked do,
Psalm 50.16

2 They may confess sin openly to their own shame, as King Saul did, 1 Samuel 26
21.

3 They humble themselves in Sackcloth as Ahab, 1 King 21.17

4 They may enquire busily after Duty, and come cheerfully to receive it, Isa.
58 ^

5 They may join with Gods interest in a hard and difficult time; as Demas and
other Hypocrites, in the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, who afterward fell
off.

6 They may give much of their Goods to God and the Saints, as Acts 5. if not
all their Goods, 1 Cor. etc. Yea,

7. It is not impossible for some such being stra^tly engaged in their Credit,
to give their Bodies to be Burnt; as in the forecited place.

Thirdly, Hypocrites may advance far in the common and ordinary steps of a
Christian work; such as the Elect have when God leads them Captive.

As;

1 They may be under great conviction of Sin; As Judas was, Mat. 27.4, -- so
was King Saul often.

2. They may tremble at the Word of God, and be under much terror as Felix was,
Acts 24.25.

3 They may rejoice in receiving of the truth, as Mat. 13 etc.

4 They may be in some peace, and quiet in expectation of Salvation by Christ,
as the Foolish Virgins were, Mat. 24

5 All this may be backed and followed with some good measure of Reformation.
The Unclean Spirit may go out of them, Mat 12 43

6 This Work may seem to be confirmed by some special experiences and tastings
of the good Word of God, Heb 6.4

Fourthly, Hypocrites may have some things very like the saving Graces of the
Spirit;

As:

1 They may have a sort of Faith, as Simon Magus, Act. 8 13.

2. A sort of Repentance, and walk Mourn^* Mal. 3.14

3 A great fear of God; such as Balaam had, who for a house full of Gold would
not go with the messengers of Bala^, without leave asked of God, and given,
Number. 22.18

4 They have a sort of Hope, Job 1.3.13

5 They have some Love: So had Herod to John, Mark 6.26. I need not to insist
it; it is out of all question they have Counterfeits of all saving Graces.

6 They have somewhat like the special communications of God and the witnessing
of His Spirit; as somewhat like the powers of the World to come, powerfully on
them, with some flashes of joy arising thence, as Heb. 6.4 Notwithstanding of
all which they are but almost persuaded with Agrippa, to be Christians, Act.
26.28. It were tedious to speak particularly to each of these things, and to
clear it up, that they are all but rotten ware: I shall condescend upon some
few things, wherein a truly ^newed man, who is in Christ, does differ from
Hypocrites and Reprobates.

1. Whatsoever change be in Hypocr^tes (...) the^ H^arts is not changed and
made ^w. (...) heart is only given to the Elect when they are Converted and
brought under the bond of the Covenant, Jer. 31 39 Ezek^ 36.26. Hypocrites did
never apprehend Christ as the only satisfying Good in all the world, for which
with joy they would quit all, for then the Kingdom of God were entered in them,
Mat, 13.44. The truly ^newed man dare and can upon good ground say, and has a
testimony of it from an high, that his heart has been changed in taking up of
Christ, and has been led out after Him, as the only enriching treasure, in
whom to be found, he counts all else loss and dung, Phil. 3 8, 9

2, Whatsoever Reformation or Profession Hypocrites do attain unto, as it
comes not from a new heart, and pure Principle of zeal for God, so it is
always for some wicked and by-end; as to be seen of men, Mat. 6.5. or to evite
and shun some outward strait to be free of Gods wrath and the trouble of their
own Conscience, Isa. 59.3. Man. 3.14. In testimony of this, they never have
respect to all known Commands, else they should never be ashamed, Psalm. 119.6.
nor do they without approven Guile in their own heart, resolve against every
known iniquity, else they were freed of Heart-condemnings, and so might justly
have confidence before God, 1 John 3, 20. If in never so mean a case, they did
from a principle of love unto, and of zeal for Christ, and for a right end,
confess and profess Him, Christ were obliged by His own word to confess them
before His Father, Mat. 10.30

3. Whatsoever length Hypocrites advance in that work, by which people are led
in unto Christ, yet they never seek first the Kingdom of God and the
Righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33 the One thing that is necessary, viz. Christ's
Fri^d-ship and Fellow-ship, is never their One Thing and Heart-satisfying
Choice, else that better part would never be taken from them, Luke 10.42.

4. Whatsoever counterfeits of Grace are in Hypocrites, yet they are all bred
there, without any saving work of the Spirit of Christ: and it is enough to
exclude them from the benefit of this mark, that they are never denied to these
things, nor emptied of them, but still do rest on them as their Savior, so
that they submit not unto the Righteousness of God, Romans 10 3. and that is
enough to keep them at a distance from Christ, who will never clout that old
garment of Hypocrites, with His fine new linen, nor put His new Wine in these
old bottles, Mat. 9.16, 17.

5. We may say, Let Hypocrites, Reprobates, or Athiests have what they can,
they want the three great Essentials of Religion and true Christianity: First,
They are not broken in themselves, and emptied even of their righteousness, the
length of self-loathing, ye^ lying open for relief. Such lost ones Christ came
to seek and save, Luke 19.10 Secondly, They never took up Christ Jesus as the
only treasure and jewel that can only enrich, and should satisfy, and
therefore have never cordially agreed unto Gods device in the Covenant, and so
are not worthy of Him; neither has the Kingdom of God savingly entered into
their heart, Mat. 13 (...) Thirdly, They never in earnest do close with Christ's
whole yoke without exception, judging all his Will just and good, holy and
spiritual, as Romans 7 12. And therefore no rest allowed on the by Christ, Mat.
11 2^ Therefore whosoever thou art who can lay clear and just claim to these
three foresaid things thou art beyond the reach of all Athei^s, Hypocrites and
Reprobates in the world, as having answered the great ends and intents of Law
and Gospel.

Object.
I am clear sometimes, I think, to lay claim to that mark of the New Creature,
yet at other times sin does so prevail over me, that I am made to question all
the work within me?

Answ.
It is much te be lamented, that people professing His Name, should be so
slaited and enslaved by transgression as many are. Yet in answer to the
Objection, if it be seriously proposed, we say, the Saints are found in
Scripture justly laying claim unto God and His Covenant, when iniquity did
prevail over them, as we find, Psalm. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me; as
for our transgressions, thou will do them away. Romans 7.25 Paul thanks God
through Christ, when a law in his members leads him Captive unto sin: But for
the better understanding and safe application of such Truths, we must
difference between gross out-breakings and ordinary infirmities or heart ills,
or sins that come unawares upon a man, without forethought or deliberation. As
for the former fort, it is hard for a man whilst he is under the power of
them, to see his gracious change, although it be in him, and very hard to draw
any comfort from it, until the man be in some measure recovered, and begin
seriously to resent such sins, and to resolve against them. We find David
calling himself Gods servant, quickly after his numbering of Gods People, but
he was then under the serious resentment of his sin, 2 Samuel 24.10, Jonab lays
claim to God as his Master under his rebellion, but he is then ^ueing it, and
in a spirit of revenge against himself for his sin, Jonah 1.9, -- 12 M^, As for
these sins of infirmity, and daily incursion and heart ills, such a^ those
whereof Paul does complain (it is (...)) were. We shall draw out some things
from that seventh Chapter to the Romans, whereupon Paul maintains his interest
in Christ, and if you can apply them, it is well. (1) When Paul finds that he
does much fail, and cannot reach conformity to Gods Law, he does not blame the
Law as being too strict so as men cannot keep it, as hypocrites use to speak;
but he does blame himself as being cannot and he faith of the Law, that it is
good, holy and spiritual, Romans 7.12, 14

2. He can say, he failed of a good which he intended, and did out-shoot
himself, and he had often honestly resolved against the evil which he fell
into, Romans 7.15, 18, 19. (3) He says that the prevailing of sin over him is
his exercise, so as he judges himself wretched because of such a body of
Death, from which he longs to be delivered, Romans 7.24. (4) He says, that
whilst he is under the power and law of Sin, there is somewhat in the bottom
of his heart opposing it, although overmastered by it, which would be another
way, and when that gets the upper hand, it is a delightsome thing, Romans 7.22,
25. Upon these things he thanks God in Christ that there is no Condemnation,
Romans 7.25. Now, then look if ye can lay claim to these things.

First, If you do blame your self, and approve the Law, whilst you fail.

Secondly, If you can say that you do often resolve against sin honestly, and
without known guile, and do so resolve the contrary good before the evil break
in upon you.

Thirdly, If you can say, that you are so far exercised with your failings, as
to (...) your self wretched because of such things, and a body of death, which
is the root and fountain of such things?

Fourthly. If you can say, that there is a party within you opposing these
evils, which would be at the right way, and, as it were, is in its element,
when it is in Gods way, it is well; only be advised not to take rest until in
some measure, you be rid of the ground of this objection, or at least, until
you can very clearly say, you are waging War with these things: Now a good help
against the prevailing power of Sin, is to cleave close to Christ Jesus by
Faith, which as it is a desirable part of Sanctification, and a notable piece
of Conformity to Gods will, and most subservient unto His design in the Gospel,
Gal. 2.20, 21. and so should be much endeavored by People, as a work pleasing
unto God, Joh. 6.29. So it is the ready way to draw life and sap from Christ,
the blessed root for fruitfulness in all cases, as Joh. 15.4, 5

Object.
I do not partake of these special communications of God, mentioned in the
Scripture, and actings and outgoings of His Spirit, whereof gracious people
often are speaking, and whereunto they attain; the want of these things makes
me much suspect my state?

^sw.
I shall shortly hint some of these excellent Communications, and I hope upon a
right discovery of them there will be but small ground found for the jealous
complaints of many Gracious people.

First, (Beside these Convictions of the Spirit of God, which use to usher
Christ's way unto the Souls of men, and these also which afterward do
ordinarily attend them) There is a Seal of the Spirit of God spoken of in
Scripture; the principal thing whereof is the Sanctifying work of the holy
Ghost, imprinting the draughts and lineaments of Gods Image and Revealed will
upon a man, as a seal or signet does leave an impression and stamp of its
likeness upon the thing Sealed, so it is, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God --
having this Seal; the Lord knows them who are His. And let every one that
names the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity. And thus I conceive the seal
to be called a witness, 1 John 5 10. He that believes has the witness in
himself; that is, the grounds upon which an interest in Christ is to be made
out, and proved, are in every Believer; for he has somewhat of the sanctifying
work of Gods Spirit in him, which is a sure (although not always a clear and
manifest) witness.

Secondly, There is Communion with God much talked of among Christians, whereby
they understand the sensible presense of God refreshing the Soul exceedingly.
But if we speak properly, Communion with God is a mutual interest between God
and a man, who has closed with him in Christ. It is a common-ness or a common
interest between God and a Man; not only is a man interested in God Himself,
but in all that is the Lords: so the Lord has a special interest in the man,
and also all that belongs to him. There is a Communion between Husband and
Wife, whereby they have a special interest in others, persons, goods, gear and
concernments, so it is here; there is such a Communion with God. He is our God,
and all things are ours, because He is ours: this Communion with God all true
Believers have at all times, as we shall show afterward: I grant there is an
actual improvement of that Communion, whereby men do boldly meddle with any
thing that belongs unto God, and do meddle with Himself as their own, with much
homeliness and familiarity, especially in Worship, when the Soul does converse
with a living God, partaking of the Divine Nature, growing like unto Him, and
sweetly traveling through his Attributes, and with some confidence of
interest, viewing these things as the man's own goods and gear: this we call
Communion with God in Ordinances: This indeed is not so ordinarily nor
frequently made out to men, and all Gods People do not equally partake of it;
and it is true, that what is in God, goes not out for the behove of the man,
to his apprehension equally at all times, yet certainly Communion with God,
properly so called, viz. that common-ness of Interest between God and a Man who
is savingly in Covenant with Him, does always stand firm and sure; and so much
of Communion with God in Ordinances have all Believers, as that their heart
converseth with a living God there now and then, and is in some measure changed
into that same image, and there needs be no doubt about any further in it.

Thirdly, There is a thing which is called Fell^wship with God, often mistaken
also amongst Believers. If by fellowship be meant the walking in our duty as in
the sight of a living God, who sees and hears us, and is witness to all our
carriage. It is a thing common unto all gracious men, they all have it
habitually, and in design, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me;
yea, and often they have it actually in exercise, when their spirit is in any
good frame; they walk as if they saw God standing by them, and have some
thoughts of His favor through Christ; Truly our fellowship is with the Father
and with His Son, 1 John 1.3. If we by Fellowship, do mean a sweet, refreshing,
familiar, sensible conversing with God, which does delight and refresh the
Soul, (beside what the Conscience of Duty does) it is then a walking in the
light of His Countenance, and a good part of sensible presence; and although it
seems Enoch had much of it, whilst it is said, He walked with God, Genesis
5.24. yet it is not so ordinary as the former, nor so common to all Christians,
for here the Soul is filled as with marrow and fatness, following hard after
its guide, and s^gularly upheld by his right hand, Psalm. 63.5, 8.

Fourthly, There is a thing which is called Access unto God: and this I take to
be the removing of obstructions out of the way between a man and God, so as the
man is admitted to come near. We are said to have access to a great person,
when doors are cast open, guards removed from about him, and we admitted to
close at him; so it is here. Now this Access in Scripture, is sometimes taken
for Christ's preparing of the way, the removing of enmity between God and
sinners; so as men now have a patent way to come unto God through Christ, Ephesians,
2.18. Sometimes it is taken for the actual improvement of that Ac^ess purchased
by Christ, when a man finds all obstructions and differences, which do
ordinarily fall in between him and God, removed; God is not uncouth to him, nor
as a stranger, keeping up himself from him, or frowning on him, but the man is
admitted to come even to his seat, as Job 23.3. Of the want of this does Job
complain, Job 23.8, 9 whilst he says, I go forward, backward, to the right and
left hand, and I find him not. The first sort of Access is common to all
Believers, they are brought near by the Blood of the Covenant, and are no more
far off, as the deadly enmity between God and them is removed. But Access, in
the other sense, is dispensed more, according to the Lords absolute sovereignty
and pleasure, and it is left in the power of Believers to obstruct it unto
themselves, until it please the Lord mercifully and freely to grant unto them
again, so it is up and down, and there needs be no question, as to a man's
state) about it.

Fifthly, There is a thing called Liberty before God, and this properly is
freedom, or free speaking unto God. Many do much question their state, because
of the want of this now and then, since the Scripture has said, Where the
Spirit is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. but they do justly confine that
liberty spoken of there, unto this free speaking before God. I grant where the
spirit of the Lord does savingly discover Gods will in the Scriptures to a man,
there is liberty from any obligation to the Ceremonial-Law, and from the
Condemning power of the Moral-Law, and from much of that gross Darkness and
Ignorance, which is on Natural hearts as a vail hiding Christ in the Gospel
from them. I grant also, that sometimes, even this liberty which is a free
communing with God, and ordering of our cause before him, and filling of our
mouths with arguments, Job 23.4. is granted to the Godly, but not as liberty
taken in the former senses. Although the Lord has obliged Himself to pour out
the Spirit of Prayer upon all the house of David in some measure, Zech. 12.10.
yet this Communication of the Spirit, which we call liberty or free speaking
unto God, depends much on the Lords absolute pleasure, when, and in what
measure to allow it. This liberty which we call freedom, or free speaking with
God in Prayer, is sometimes much abstracted from any great confidence in the
time of Prayer, ( at least until it draw toward the close of it) it stands
much in a vivacity of the understanding to take up the case which a man is to
speak before God, so as he can order his cause; and next, there be words, or
verbal expressions, elegant, suitable, and very emphatical or powerful, or
pithy; there is also joined a fervency of Spirit in Prayer whereof the
Scripture speaks; The Soul is hot and bended and very intent: there is also
ordinarily in this liberty a spec^al melting of the heart ( often joined with a
great measure of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Zech. 11.10) so the Soul
is poured out before God as for a Firstborn: such is the liberty which many
Saints get before God, whilst in much brokenness of Heart and fervency of
spirit they are admitted to speak their mind fully to God, as a living God,
noticing ( at least) their Prayer. Sometimes this liberty is joined with
Confidence, and then it is not only a free, but also a bold speaking before
God: It is that Boldness with Confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. This is more rarely
imparted unto men then the former, yet it is ordinarily. It has in it, beside
what we spoke before, some influence of the Spirit upon Faith, making it put
out some vigorous acting in Prayer; there is a sweet mournful frame of Spirit,
by which a man pours out his heart in Gods bosom, and with some confidence
of His favor and good will, pleads his cause before him, as a Living God;
and this is all the sensible presence that many Sains do attain unto: There is
no ground of doubt about a man's state in the point of Liberty before God in
this last sense, because there is nothing essential to the making up of a
Gracious state here: some have it, some want it, some have it at some times and
not at other times, so that it is much up and down; yet I may say, Gracious men
may do much (by a very ordinary influence) contributing toward the attaining
and retaining, or keeping of such a frame of Spirit.

Sixthly, There is a thing called, Influence or Breathing of the Spirit. This
gracious influence (for of such only do I now speak) (...) either ordinary, and
this is the operation of the Holy Spirit on the Soul and the habits of Grace
there, whereby they are still kept alive and in some exercise and acting,
although not very discernable. This influence ( I conceive) does always attend
Believers, and is that Keeping and Watering night and day, and every moment,
promised. Isa. 27.3. Or, this influence is more singular and special, and is
that same to a gracious (although a withered) Soul, as the wind and breath to
the dry Bones, putting them in good case, Ezekiel. 37.9, 10. and as the dew or
rain to the Grass, or newly mowen field and parched ground, Psalm. 72.6 Such
influence is meant, Cant. 4.16 By the blowing of the South wind, making the
spices to flow out. When the Spirit moves thus, there is an edge put upon the
Graces of God in the Soul, and they are made to act more vigorously. This is
the enlarging of the heart, by which a man does run in the ways of God, Psalm.
119.32. This influence is more discernable than the former, and not so
ordinarily communicated. Also here, sometimes the wind blows more upon one
Grace, and sometimes more discernable upon another; and often upon many of the
Graces together, and according to the lesser or greater measure of this
influence, the Soul acts more or less vigorously toward God: and since faith
is a Created Grace in the Soul this Influence of the Spirit is upon it,
sometimes less, sometimes more, and accordingly is the assurance of Faith small
or great.

Seventhly, There is the hearing of Prayer, often spoken of in Scripture; and
many vex themselves about it, alleging that they know nothing of it
experimentally. I grant there is a favorable hearing of Prayer: But we must
remember it is twofold.

Either;

1. It is such as a man is simply to believe by way of Argument on Scriptural
grounds. As if I be fled unto Christ, and do approach unto God in him, pray
according to His Will, not regarding iniquity in my heart, exercising Faith
about the thing I pray for, absolutely or conditionally, according to the
nature of the thing and promises about it. I am obliged to believe that God
hears my Prayer and will give what is good, according to these Scriptures,
Joh. 14.13, 14. Whatsoever you ask in my Name, I will do it, 1 John 5.14. This
is our confidence that whatsoever we ask according to His Will, He hears us,
Mark, 11.24. Believe that you receive and you shall have what you do desire,
Psalm. 66.18. If I regard Iniquity, He will not hear. Then if I regard not
Iniquity, I may believe that He does hear me. Or;

2. A man does sensibly perceive that God hea^eth his Prayer. It is made out to
his heart, without any Sylogistical deduction. Such a hearing got Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18 Her countenance was no more sad. Surely the Lord did breath upon her
Faith, and made her believe that she was heard, and she could not make it out
by any argument; for she had not grounds whereupon to build the premises of the
argument according to Scripture in that particular. God did stamp in some way
upon her heart sensibly, and so made her believe it. This is but rarely
granted, especially in cases clearly deducible in Scripture. And therefore
people are much to be satisfied in exercising their Faith about the other, and
let God give of this latter what He pleases. A man's gracious state should not
be brought upon debate, upon the account of such hearing of Prayer.

Eighthly, There is Assurance of Gods Favor by the witnessing of our own
Spirits: which Assurance, is deduced by way of argument Sylogistically; Thus,
whosoever Believes on Christ shall never Perish; But I do Believe on Christ:
Therefore I shall never Perish. Whosoever has respect unto all Gods Commandments
shall never be ashamed; But I have respect unto all ^is Commandments: Therefore
I shall never be ashamed. I say, by reasoning thus, and comparing spiritual
things with spiritual things, a man may attain unto a good certainty of his
gracious sta^e. It is supposed, 1 John 3.18, 19. that by loving the Brethren in
deed and in truth, we may assure our hearts before God; and that a man may
rejoice upon the testimony of a good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12 A man may have
confidence if his heart do not Condemn him, 1 John 3.21 We may then attain unto
some Assurance (although not full Assurance) by the witness of our own spirits.
I do not deny, that in this witnessing of our spirits toward Assurance, there
is some concurrence of the Spirit of God: But I conceive, there needs but a
very ordinary influence, without which we can do nothing. Now, this Assurance,
such as it is, may be reached by intelligent Believers, who keep a good
Conscience in their walk. So, I hope, there needs be no debate about it, as to
a man's gracious state (...) for if a man will clear himself of
Heart-condemnings, he will speedily reach this Assurance.

Ninthly, There is a witnessing of Gods spirit, mentioned, Romans 8.16. A bearing
witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. This operation of
the Spirit, is best understood,, if we produce any syllogism by which our
spirit do witness our Sonship: As for example, Whosoever loves the Brethren,
is past from Death to Life, and consequently is in Christ; But I love the
Brethren: Therefore I am past from Death to Life. Here there is a threefold
operation of the Spirit, or three operations rather. The First is a beam of
Divine light upon the first proposition, persuading the Divine authority of it,
as the Word of God: The Spirit of the Lord must witness the Divinity of the
Scripture; and that is the infallible Word of God, far beyond all other
arguments can be used. The Second operation is, a Glorious beam of light from
the Spirit, shining upon the second proposition, and so upon his own graces in
the Soul, discovering them to be true Graces, and such as the Scripture calls
so. Thus we are said to know by His Spirit the things freely given unto us of
God, 1 Cor. 2.13. The Third operation is in order to the third proposition of
the argument, or the conclusion; and this I conceive to be nothing else but an
influence upon Faith, strengthening it to draw a conclusion of full assurance
upon the foresaid premises. Now (with submission unto others, who have greater
light in the Scripture, and more experience of these communications) I do
conceive the witness of the Spirit, or witnessing of it, which is mentioned,
Romans 8.16. is not that first operation upon the first proposition; for, that
operation is that testimony of the Spirit, by which He bears witness to the
Divinity of the whole Scripture, and asserteth the Divine authority of it unto
the souls of Gracious men, and such an operation may be upon a truth of
Scripture, which does not relate to a man's Sonship or Interest in Christ at
all. The Spirit may so shine upon any truth, relating to Duty, or any other
fundamental truth persuading the Divinity of it, upon and unto the soul, and
speak nothing relating to a man's interest in Christ. Neither is the third
operation of the Spirit, by which He makes Faith boldly draw the conclusion.
This witnessing of the Spirit for that operation, is nothing else but influence
upon Faith, bringing it out to full assurance; but that whereupon this full
assurance is drawn or put out, is somewhat deposed and witnessed already.
Therefore I conceive the second operation of the Spirit upon the second
proposition, and so upon the Graces in the man, is that witness of Gods Spirit,
that beam of Divine light, shining upon those Graces, whereby they are made
very conspicuous to the understanding: That is the witness; the shining so on
them is His witnessing: for, only here in this proposition and in this
operation, does the Spirit of God prove a co-witness with our spirit: for, the
main thing wherein the witness of our spirit lies, is in the second
proposition, and so the Spirit of God, witnessing with our spirits, is also in
that same proposition. So these two witnesses, having deposed and witnessed one
and the same thing, viz. the truth and reality of such and such Graces in the
man, which our own spirit or conscience does depose, according to its
knowledge; and the Spirit of the Lord does certainly affirm and witness to be
so. There is a sentence drawn forth, and a conclusion of the man's Sonship by
the man's Faith, breathed upon by the Spirit for that effect, and this
conclusion bears the full assurance of a man's Sonship. It may be presumed,
that some true Saints do not partake of this all their days, as Heb^. 2.15.

Tenthly, I speak with the experience of many Saints, and I hope, according to
Scripture, if I say, there is a communication of the Spirit of God which is let
out to some of His People; sometimes it is somewhat beside, if not beyond, that
witnessing of a Sonship spoken of before: It is a Glorious Divine manifestation
of God unto the Soul, shedding abroad Gods love in the Heart; it is a thing
better felt then spoken of; it is no audible voice, but it is a waffe of Glory
filling the Soul with God, as He is Life, Light, Love and Liberty,
countervasting that audible voice; O Man, greatly Beloved, Dan. 9.22. putting a
man in a transport with this in his heart, It is good to be here, as Mat. 17, 4
It is that which went out from Christ to Mary, when He but mentioned her name,
Joh. 10.16 He had spoken some words to her before, and she understood not that
it was He: But when He uttered this one word MARY, there was some admirable
conveyance and manifestation made out unto her heart, by which she was so
satisfyingly filled, that there was no place for arguing and disputing, whether
or not that was Christ, and if she had a^ interest in Him. That manifestation
made Faith to it self, and did purchase credit and trust to it self, and was
equivalent with, Thus says the Lord. This is such a glanse of Glory, that it
may in the highest sense be called, the earnest or first fruits of the
inheritance: for, it is a felt armful of the Holy GOD, almost wholly conforming
the man unto His likeness, so swallowing him up, that He forgets all things
except the present manifestation. Oh, How Glorious is this manifestation of the
Spirit! Faith here rises to so full an assurance, that it resolves wholly
into sensible embracements of God. This is the thing which does best deserve
the title of sensible presence. And, it is like, is not given unto all
Believers, some whereof, are all their Days under bondage, and in fear, Heb.
2.15 But here love, almost perfect, casts out fear. This is so absolutely let
out upon the Masters pleasure, and so transient and passing or quickly gone
when it is, that no man may bring his Gracious state upon debate for want of it.

Eleventhly, There is a thing we call Peace, about which many do vex
themselves. This Peace is either about a man's state, that he is reconciled unto
God by Jesus Christ, or it is about his present case and condition, thas he is
walking so, as approven of God, at least so far, as there is no quarrel or
controversy between God and him threatening a stroke: both of these are either
such in the court of Scripture, and consequently in Gods account, or in the
court of a man's Conscience. Peace about a man's state, as being in Christ, is
sure in the Court of Scripture and of Heaven, when a man does by Faith close
with Christ and New Covenant, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace
with God; it being sure and solid in the Court of Scripture, it should hold
sure in the Court of a man's Conscience, it being rightly informed, for in that
case, it still speaks according to Scripture: but because often the Conscience
is misinformed and in the dark, therefore there is often Peace about a man's
state according to Scripture, whilst his Conscience does threaten the
contrary, and does still Condemn, and refuses to assoil the man, as being
reconciled unto God through Christ. In this case, the Conscience must be
informed, and the man's Gracious state made out by the marks of Grace, as we
show before; and here the witness of my own spirit, will do much to allay the
Cry of the Conscience, and if the Spirit of the Lord join His witness and
testimony, the Conscience is perfectly satisfied, and proclameth Peace to the
man. The other Peace, about a man's present case or condition, viz. that it is
approven of God in a Gospel sense, it may be wanting, and justly wanting,
although the other Peace about a man's state be sure. This Peace about a man's
case and condition, it is either such in the Court of Scripture, and this is
when a man is not regarding iniquity, and respecting the Commands of God
without exception; then the Scripture says, he stands in an even place, and he
needs fear no stated quarrel between God and him, in order to a temporary
stroke; and when it is thus, his Conscience should also assoil him that same
way; and would do so, if it were rightly informed; but because the Conscience
is often in the dark, therefore a man may be alarmed with evil in the Court of
Conscience, as if he were justly to expect a stroke from God because of his
sin, and some quarrel God has at him, although He intend salvation for him;
this is enough to keep a man in disquiet, and to inhibit him the rejoicing
allowed upon him, whilst he is walking in his integrity: therefore a man must
here also inform his Conscience, and receive no accusations nor condemnings
from it, unless it make them clear by Scripture: at that bar, let every man
stand, both about his state and his condition or case; and let him appeal from
all other Courts to that, and not receive any indictment but conform to the
truth of God, by which the Conscience is to proceed in all things; and if this
were well looked unto, there would not be so many groundless suspicions amongst
the Lords People, either about their state or their condition upon every
thought which entertain their mind.

Twelfthly, There is the joy of the Holy Ghost, and this is when the Spirit
does breath upon our rejoicing in God ( which is a Grace very little in
exercise with many) and makes it set out sensibly and vigorously; and He
exciteth and stirs the passion of joy and of delight in the Soul, so as
there is an unspeakable and glorious joy in the Soul, in the apprehension of
Gods friendship and nearness unto him. 1 Pet. 1.8. This joy follows upon
peace and peace follows righteousness, Romans 14.17. This joy readily will not
fail to be according to the measure of the assurance of Faith, as 1 Pet. 1.8 In
whom believing, ye rejoice, etc. so that the removal of mistakes about other
things, will allay doubts about this.

Now, because some of these excellent communications of the Spirit, after they
are gone, are brought in question as delusions of Satan, for vindicating of
them we say, that the special operations of Gods Spirit in any high degree,
usually are communicated to people after such brokenness of spirit, Psalm. 51.8.
after so singular pains in religious Duty, Dan. 9.3, 21 or in time of such
suffering for Righteousness, 1 Pet. 5.14. or if they break in as the rain that
waits not for man, then they do so humble and abase the person, Isa. 6.5. and
there are found so many evidences of Grace in the man, Romans 8.16. or these
things do so provoke unto Holiness, and to have every thing answerable and
conform unto these manifestations of God, 2 Timothy 2.19. the person under them
does so loath all things beside Gods friendship and fellowship, Mat. 17.4. and
these things do carry on them and with them so much authority, and Divine
superscription, whilst they are in the soul; that afterward they may appear
sufficiently to be special communications of God, and singular, gracious
operations of His Spirit, and no delusions of Satan transforming himself into
an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11 14. nor such common flashes of the Spirit as may
admit afterward irrecoverable Apostasy from God, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Now then to
conclude this part of the work that relates unto trial; I say to all these who
complain of the want of the precious out-lettings of the Spirit.

1. Bless God if you want nothing essential for making out of a saving interest
in Christ. God has given unto you Christ Jesus, the greatest gift He had, and
since your heart is shapen out for Him, He will with Him, give you all things
that are good for you in their season.

2. I do believe, upon a right search and trial, after you have understood the
communications of the Spirit, you are not so great a stranger to many things as
you did suspect your self to be. But;

3. Remember the Promises of Life, and of Peace with God, are no where in
Scripture made unto these special things whereof you allege the want: The
Promises are made unto Faith, followed with Holiness! and it may be presumed,
that many Heirs of Glory do not in this life partake of some of these things,
but are in Bondage all their days through fear of Death, Heb. 2.15. so that
there should be no mistake about these things: we may seek after them, but God
is free to give or withold them.

4. Many do seek after such manifestations before they give credit by Faith
unto Gods Word. He has born record that there is Life enough for men in CHRIST
JESUS, and if men would by Believing set to their seal that GOD is true, they
should partake of more of these excellent things.

5. I may say, many have not honorable apprehensions and thoughts of the
Spirit of God, whose proper work it is to put out the foresaid noble
operations: they do not adore Him as God, but vex, grieve, quench and resist
Him, and many people complaining of the want of their things, are not at the
pains to seek the Spirit in His outgoings* and few do set themselves apart for
such precious receipts: Therefore be at more pains in Religion, give more
credit to His Word, and esteem more highly of the Spirit of God, and so you may
find more of these Excellent things.

The End of the First Part.
How to attain unto A Saving INTEREST IN CHRIST.
HAVING in the former part of this Treatise, put every man state to Trial, it
now remains, that in this following part, we give advice to those, who neither
can nor dare lay claim to the marks formerly mentioned.

Quest. 2. What shall they do who want the marks of a True and Saving Interest
in CHRIST, already spoken of, and neither can nor dare pretend unto them?

Answ. If men miss in themselves the marks of a Saving Interest in CHRIST,
spoken of before, then it is their duty, and of all that hear this Gospel,
Personally and Heartily to close with Gods device of Saving Sinner ^b^ Jesus
Christ; and this shall secure their state

For the better understanding of this, we shall premise something for
information of these who are more ignorant, and then speak more directly to the
thing.

As for the things to be premised.

1. The Lord did at the beginning, a^ of his bounty, make a Covenant wi^ Man
(...) Adam, Genesis 2.17. and did enable (...) to abide in that Covenant, Eccl.
7.29. But man by eating of that forbidden Fruit, Genesis 3. did break that
Covenant, Hos. 6 7. and made it void forever, Romans 3.20 and involved himself
into all misery thereby, Romans 5.12

2. The Lord did most freely, from everlasting, purpose and intend to Save men
another way, viz. by Christ Jesus, and the Covenant of Grace, in which He
intended Reconcilement with the Elect, through Christ Jesus (God and Man, born
of a Woman in due time, to make this agree^ (...)) And this device of
satisfying His own justice, and saving of the Elect by Christ, He did at first
intimate to our Parents in Paradise: Ge^. 3.15. where he says, that the Seed
of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head: and the Lord has in all
Generations, made this known to His Church.

3. The Lord has in all Ages Covenanted to be the reconciled God of all these,
who by their subjection to His Ordinances, did prefess their satisfaction with
this device; and oblige themselves to acquiese in the same, and to, seek
Salvation by Christ Jesus, as God does offer Him in the Gospel: So all the
People of Israel, are called the Lords People, and are are said to avouch him
to be their God, and he does avouch them to be His People. Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy.
26.17. Yet, the Lord does also engage Himself to be the God of the Seed and
Children of these who do so subject to His Ordinances. The Covenant is said to
be made between God and all the People, Young and Old, Present and not Present
that day, Deuteronomy. 29.10. -- And all are appointed to come under some Seal of that
Covenant, as was enjoined to Abraham Genesis 17.10. Not only was it so in the Old
Testament, but it is so in the New Testament also. The Lord makes offer of
Himself to be our God in Christ Jesus, and the People professing their
satisfaction in that offer, and in testimony thereof, subjecting themselves
unto the Ordinances, they are reckoned a Covenanted People, and a^e joined unto
His Church i^ Thousands, receiving a Seal of the Covenant, without any further
particular previous trial. Act. 3.38.

4. Many do deal treacherously with God in this Covenant, Psalm. 78.36. And
although they profess their estimation of Christ the Savior, and their
heart-satisfaction with that device of saving Sinners by Him, and having the
Image of God restored by Him in them; yet their heart is not right with God,
and they do content themselves with an empty title, of being in a Se^led
Covenant with God. Joh. 8.39 Abr^ham is our Father; ( say they) for although the
Lord obliges every man, who professes his satisfaction with Christ Jesus, the
devised ransom, to be cordial and sincere herein, and only to these who are
so, does he make out the Spiritual promises of the Covenant, (they only being
privileged to be the Sons of God, who do really receive Christ) Joh. 1.12 yet
the Lord does permit many to profess their closing with Him in Christ, both in
the Old and New Testaments, whilst their heart is not engaged; and He does
admit them to be Members of his Church, granting unto them the use of
Ordinances, and many other external Mercies and Privileges, denied to the
heathen, who are not in Covenant with Him.

5 Although the great part of People do fo^shly f^nc^, that they have closed
wi^h God in Christ Jesus sincerely and heartily, or at least, they do without
any ground or ^rant, promise a new heart to themselve before they depart this
Life, yet there be but very few, who do really and cordialy c^ose with God in
Christ Jesus, as He is offered in the Gospel; and so there be but very few
Saved, as is clear, Mat. 7.14 Strait is the ga^e, and narrow is the way which
leads unto Life, and few there be who find i^, Mat. 20.16. Many are called,
but few are chosen. If People would believe this, it might help to alarm them.

6. Although none at all do cordially close with God in Christ Jesus, and
acquiese in that ransom found out by God, except only such as a^e Elected,
Romans 11.7. and whose hea^ts the Lord does soveraignly determine to that blessed
Choice, Joh. 6.44 yet the Lord has left it as a duty upon People who ^ar this
Gospel, to close with His offer of Salvation through Christ Jesus, as if it
were in their power to do it. And the Lord, through these commands and
exhortations (wherein He obliges men to the thing) does convey life and
st^ength to the Elect, and does therein convey the new heart unto them which
points kindly toward this new device of saving sinners, and toward Christ
i^ his Covenant relations; or, it is the Lords mind in these Commands and
Invitations to put people on some duty, with which He uses to concur for
accomplishing that business between Him and them, so then, it is a coming on
our part, and (...) a drawing on His part, ^h. 6 44. it is a drawing on His
part, and a running on our part, Cant. 1.4. it is an approaching on our part,
and yet a choosing and causing to approach on His part, Psalm. 65.4. it is a
believing or receiving on our part, Joh. 1.12 and yet it is given us to
believe, Phil. 1 29.

Having premised these things, I say, if men miss i^ themselves the marks of a
Saving Interest in Christ, spoken of in the former part of the Treatise; then
for securing their state, they are obliged with all diligence, personally and
heartily to accept of, and close with Gods device of saving Sinners by Jesus
Christ, held out in the Gospel. In handling of this;

1. We shall show what it is to accept of and close with that noble invention

2. We shall show, that it is the necessary duty of those who would be in
favor with God and secure their Souls.

3. What is previously required of those who perform this duty.

4. What are the qualifications and properties of this duty, if rightly managed.

5. What be the native consequents of it, U^ it ^e performed aright.

As for the First, What is to close with Gods device of saving Sinners by
Christ Jesus, held out in the Gospel? Here we must remember (as we show before)
that at first God willed man to abide in His favor, by holding fast his first
integrity in which he was Created; but man by his transgression lost Gods
favor, made void that Covenant of Works, and put himself in an utter
incapacity to regain the Lords friendship which he had lost by his Sin, and to
rescue himself from the Curse and wrath now due to him for the same; or any way
to procure his own Salvation: but the Lord freely has manife^ed another way of
repairing man's lost estate, viz. by sending His Son Christ Jesus in the Flesh
to satisfy his Justice for the sins of the Elect, and to restore in them his
image now defaced, and to bring them unto Glory* and he has made open
Proclamation in the Church that whosoever will lay aside all thoughts of saving
themselves by the Covenant of Works, or inherent Righteousness, and will agree
heartily to be saved by Jesus Christ, they shall be restored to a better
condition then formerly man was into, and shall be saved: So then, to close
with Gods device of saving sinners by Christ Jesus, is to quitt and forego all
thoughts of help or salvation by our own righteousness, and to agree unto this
way which God has found out. It is to no value and highly esteem of Christ
Jesus as the treasure sufficient to enrich poor man, and with the heart to
believe this record, that there is Life enough in him for men. It is to please
this invention, and to acquiese in it as the only way to true happiness. It is
to point toward this Mediator, as God holds Him our in the Gospel, with
desire to lay the stress of our whole state on him. This is that which is
called faith or believing, the receiving of Christ, or believing on His Name,
Jo^. 1 12. This is that believing on the Name of the Lord Jesus, commanded unto
the Jailer for his safety, Act. 16.31 This agrees to all the description of
justifying Faith in the Scripture. This does answer the type of looking to the
brazen Serpent lifted up in the Wilderness, Joh. 3.14. And this is supposed in
all these ordinary actings of Faith, to which promises are annexed in the
Scripture, and will be found in all who have got the new heart from God, and it
will be found in none else.

As to the Second thing, viz. That this is the necessa^y duty of all such who
would be in favor with God and secure their Souls.

It appears thus;

1. This closing with Gods device, or believing in Christ, is commanded every
where in Scripture by the Lord, as the condition of the New Covenant, giving
title and right unto all the Spiritual blessings of the same; for, it is upon
the matter, the receiving of Christ: this is commanded, whilst God bids men
come and buy, that is, impropriate all, by closing with that device. Isa. 55.1
The weary are commanded to come unto him thus for their rest, Mat. 11.28. This
is His Commandment, that we believe on the Name of His Son, 1 John 3.23. This
is enough to prove it a duty incumbent. But further, it is such a duty as only
gives title and right to a Sonship; for only they who receive Him, are
privileged to be Sons, Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the Sons of God, even to such as believed on his Name.

2 It appears to be the necessary duty of all, thus; No less than this does
give a meeting unto God, offering Himself to be our God in Christ; and no less
than this does answer our profession, as we are in Covenant with Him, as
members of his visible Church. The Lord offers to be our God in Christ; if we
do not close with the offer, laying aside all thoughts of otherwise, by which
we may attain to happiness, we give no meeting to him: He says, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him, ^at. 17.5. If we close not
with the offer, we give no answer unto God. Moreover, we are all Baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, A^. 2.38. Now,
unless we close with Christ as said is, we (...) that Pro^ion: Therefore, since
this (...) the thing which does answer Gods offer in the Gospel, and make good
o^ Profession, as Members of His Church, it is a necessary duty lying upon us.

3. Whatsoever a man has else, if he do not thus close with Gods device about
Christ Jesus, and do not receive Him, i^ does not avail, either as to the
accepting of his Person or of his Performances, or as to the saving of His
Soul. Men are accepted only in Christ the Beloved, Ephesians 1.6. A^l and his
offering are accepted by Faith, Heb. ^ 4. Without Faith, it is impossible to
please God, ver. 6* And he that believes not, is Condemned already and shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Joh 3.18. -- for want of
this, no external title does avail: The Children of the Kingdom are cast out*
if this be wanting, Mat. 8.10. -- the people of Israel are like other Heathens,
in regard of a graceless state, lying open to the wrath of God, Jer. ^ 25, etc.
If men do not believe that He who was slain at Jerusalem, who was called CHRIST
JESUS, and witnessed unto by the Prophets, and declared to be the Son of God by
many mighty works; I say, if men do not believe that he is the way, and close
not with Him as the only way, they shall die in their sins, Joh. 8.24.

We say then, it is a most necessary Duty thus to close with Christ Jesus as
the blessed relief appointed for sinners: every one who is come to years of
understanding, and hears this Gospel, is obliged to take to heart his own
lost condition, and Gods gracious offer of Peace and Salvation through Christ
Jesus, and speedily to fly from the wrath to come, by accepting and closing
with this offer, heartily acquiesing therein as a satisfying way for saving of
poor sinners: and, that all may be the more encouraged to set about this duty,
when they hear him praying them to be reconciled unto Him, let them remember
that peace and salvation is offered to the people in universal terms; to all
without exception: if any man will he shall be welcome, Rev. 22.17. if any
thirst (although after that which will never profit, yet) they shall be welcome
here, on the condition foresaid, Isa. 55.2. all are commanded to believe, 1 John 3.23. The Promises are to all who are externally called by the Gospel; God
excludes none, if they do not exclude themselves, Act. 2.39 so that if any have
a mind for the thing, they may come forward, He will in no wise cast them out,
Joh. 6.37. being able to save to the utmost them who come to God through Him,
Heb. 7.25. And these who have long delayed, to take this matter to heart, had
now the more need to look to it, lest what belongs to their peace, be hid from
their eyes* But all these words will not take effect with people, until God
pour out his Spirit from on high, Isa. 32.15. to cause men to approach unto God
in Christ; yet we must still press men's duty upon them, and obtest and charge
them by the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, and their reckoning to Him in
that day, that they give the Lord no rest, until He send out that spirit (which
He will give to them who ask it, Luke 11.13.) and cause them to know what
belongs unto their Peace, and bring them up to their Duty.

We come now to speak of the Third thing, viz. What is previously required of
these who are to perform this duty? Men must not rashly, inconsiderately and
ignorantly, rush in upon this matter, saying, they please that device of saving
Sinners by Christ, and will acquiese and rest on Him for safety: often men do
deceive themselves here, and do imagine that they have done the thing. We shall
therefore hold out some things pre-required in a person who is to close with
Christ Jesus; which although we offer not as positive qualifications, fitting a
man for Christ that way, Isa. 55.1. yet they are such things as without them a
man cannot knowingly and cordially perform the duty of believing on Christ
Jesus. Beside, the common principles which are t^ be supposed in these who live
under Gospel Ordinances; As the knowledge that men have immortal Souls, Soul
and Body will be united again at the last Day; there is a Heaven and Hell, one
of which will be the everlasting lot of all men: the Old and New Testament is
the true Word of God, and the rule of Faith and Manners, every man is by Nature
void of the Grace of God, and is an Enemy unto God, and an Heir of
Condemnation; Reconciliation is only by the Mediator Christ Jesus; Faith unites
unto Him, and is the condition of the New Covenant; Holiness is the fruit of
true Faith, and is to be studied as that without which no man shall see God: I
say beside these things, the knowledge of which is necessary;

1. It is required of him who would believe on Christ Jesus, That he take to
heart his Natural condition. And here he must know somethings, and also be very
serious about them: I say, he must know some things; As,

1. That as he was born a Rebel and Outlaw unto God, so he has by many actual
Transgressions disobliged God, and ratified the forfeiture of his Favor, yea,
a man should know many particular instances of his Rebellion on all hands; As
that he is a Liar, Sabbath-breaker, Blasphemer, or the like; as Paul speaks
very particularly of himself afterward, 1 Timothy 1.15.

2. The man must know, that the Wrath of God denounced in Scripture, is
standing in force against these very Sins whereof he is guilty, and so
consequently he is the party undoubtedly against whom God (who cannot lie) has
denounced War. A man must know, that when the Scripture says, Cursed is he
that offers a corrupt thing unto God, Mal. 1.14. it speaks against him for
his superficial service performed unto God with the outward man, when his heart
was far off. When the Word says, God will not hold him guiltless, that takes
his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7 the man must know it speaks against himself, who
has often carelessly profaned that dreadful Name, before which all knees
should bow, Phil. 2.10. and which his Enemies do take in vain. Psalm. 139.20.
When the Word says, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently
Jer. 48.10. the man must know that it speaks against himself, who has
irreverently with much wandering of heart, and drowsiness heard the Word
Preached; and without sense, faith or understanding has often Prayed before
Him. When the Word says, Woe be unto him who gives his Neighbor drink; and
puts his bottle to him, to make him drunk also, that he may look upon his
nakedness, Hab. 2 15, 16. the man must know that it is spoken against himself,
who has gloried in making his Neighbor Drunk, and that dreadful Wrath is
determined by the Lord against him, according to that Scripture. When the Word
says, God will judge Unclean persons, Heb. ^3.4. and will close them out of
the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.8. the man must know that the Scripture speaks
these very words against him, he being an Unclean person, so that he is the
Person against whom the Curses of the Law does directly strike.

3. A man must know that he has nothing of his own to procure his Peace, and
to set him free of the hazard under which he lies; because all his
Righteousness is as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. his Prayers, his other service
done to God, his Almsdeeds, etc are not pass-guilt before God, since they
came not from a right principle in his heart, and were not performed in a right
way, nor upon a right account, nor for a right end; his Sacrifices have been an
abomination unto God, Prove. 21.27.

4. He must know that as he is void of all the saving Graces of the Spirit, as
the true Love of God, the true Fear of His Name, Godly sorrow for Sin, etc. so
particularly, that he wants F^i^h in Christ, who takes burden for all ^em who
believe on Him: until a man know this, he will still leave all his debt and
burden, without care or regard at the door of Christ the common cautioner.

Now not only must a man know those things, as I said before, but must also
very seriously take them to heart, that is to say, he must be affected with
these things, and be in sad earnest about them, as he uses to be in other
cases, because it is of greater concernment unto him.

1. This seriousness produces, a taking of Salvation to heart, more than any
thing else. Shall men be obliged to see^t first the Kingdom? Mar 6.33. Is there
but one thing necessary? Luke 10.42. Shall Paul count all things loss and dung
for this matter? Phil. 3.8. Is a man a loser, gaining all the World, if he lose
his Soul, Mark 8.36? Shall this be the only ground of joy, that men's Names are
written in the Book of Life? Luke 10.20. And shall not men (who would be
reckoned serious) take their Soul and Salvation more to heart, then any thing
else; Surely it cannot fail. Let none deceive themselves. If the hazard of
their Soul and the Salvation thereof, and how to be in favor with God, has
not got nearer to their heart than any thing in the world beside, it cannot be
presumed, upon just grounds, that they ever knew Sin, or God, or the
Everlastingness of his wrath aright.

2. This seriousness breaks the man's heart, (...) faints the stoutness of
it, and leads it out to sorrow, as one does for a Firstborn, Zech. 12.10. I
grant, their sorrow will better suit that Scripture afterward, when they
apprehend Christ pierced by their sins.

3. It leads the man to a self-loathing. A man taking up himself so, cannot
but loath himself for his abominations, whereby he has destroyed himself.
There is somewhat of that Spirit of revenge, which is mentioned as a fruit of
true repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11.

4. This seriousness does make the man peremptory to find relief: since it is
not in himself, he dare not put off and delay his business, as before: and this
is indeed required, that he find himself so pursued and put to it, that he flee
for refuge somewhere. I grant some have a higher and some a lesser degree of
this seriousness, as we show in the former part of this Treatise. But if we
speak of the Lords ordinary way of working with those who are come to age, we
say, they must very seriously take their Souls estate to heart, despairing of
help in themselves: since the whole need no Physician, but those who are sick,
Mat. 9.12. As for the measure, we plead only that which does probably suppose,
that a man will be induced thereby to transact cordially with Christ, on any
terms he does offer Himself to be closed with.

The second thing pre-required of him who would believe on Christ Jesus, is, he
must know and take to heart the way of escape from Gods wrath: the Spirit must
convince him of that righteousness. Here a man must understand somewhat
distinctly, that God has devised a way to save poor lost man by Jesus Christ,
whose perfect Righteousness has satisfied offended Justice, and procured
Pardon and everlasting favor to all those whom he persuades by this Gospel,
to accept of Gods offer, Act. 1^* 38, -- Joh. 1.12 So that no person is
excluded of whatsoever ^nk or condition, whatsoever has from his former way,
(unless he be Gu^ of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which (...) a malicious
hatred and rejection of the (...) appointed for sinners, as we shall (...) for,
all manner of Sin is forgiv^ (...) those who accept of the offer (...) Gods way
Mat. 12.31. He is able to save to the uttermost, those that come unto God
through Him, Hebrews 7.25

The third thing pre-required, is, a man must know that as God has not
excluded him from the relief appointed, so he is willing to be reconciled unto
men through Christ, and has obliged men to close with Him through Christ
Jesus, and so to impropriate that Salvation to themselves. He not only invites
all to come, Isa. 35.1, and welcometh all that come, as we find in the Gospel,
and commends those who come, Mat. 8.10. Mat. 15.28. and chideth for not
coming and closing with him, Joh. 5.40. and condemns for not closing so with
him, Joh. 3.18. But also he commands all to believe on Christ, 1 John 3.23.
So as a man is not to question the Lords willingness to receive men, who go to
Christ honestly; for God has abundantly cleared that in Scripture: unless that
a man know so much, he will scarcely dare to lay his heart open for that noble
device of saving sinners, or adventure his own weight and stress upon Christ
Jesus.

The fourth thing pre-required, is, The man who would close with Christ Jesus,
must resolve to break all Covenants with Hell and Death: Isa. 28.15. Whatsoever
known evil men are engaged into, they must resolve to forego it: for there is
no concord between Christ and Belial. 2 Cor. 6.14, -- The Lord requires that
they who would expect Him to be for them, should not be for another, Hos. 3.3
This is far from Evangelick repentance, which I grant does not precede a man's
closing with CHRIST by Faith; there is little here beyond a misregard of these
things unto which a man was formerly devoted, and a slighting what he was mad
upon, because he sees himself destroyed thereby, and relief now offered,
whereupon his heart begins to be more intent than formerly it was. After
this, when Christ is looked upon alone, His worth and beauty does appear, so as
among all the gods there is none like unto HIM, and he looks out as a
sufficient covering of the Eyes to all who get him. Upon which the heart loves
Gods device in the New Covenant, and loves to lay its weight upon Christ
rather than any other way, bending toward him, and so the man becomes a
Believer. Now, I will not say that all these things whereof we have spoken, are
formally, orderly and distinctly found in every person before he close with God
in Christ; for the way of the heart with Christ, may be added to the four
wonderful things, Prove. 18.19. It is hard to trace the heart in its relelation
from Darkness to Light; yet we hold out the most ordinary and likely way, to
him who does ask the way, debarring thereby ignorant and senseless persons from
meddling; and discharging them to pretend to any interest in Him whilst they
remain such.

The Fourth thing we proposed to speak to, is, The properties of this Duty when
rightly gone about. I shall only hint a few.

1. Believing on Christ must be Personal. A man himself, and in his own proper
person must close with Christ Jesus. The Just shall live by His Faith, Ha^.
2.4. This says, that it will no suffice for a man's safety and relief, that he
is in Covenant with God, as a born Member of the visible Church, by virtue of
the Parents subjection to Gods Ordinances. Neither will it suffice that the
Person had the initiating S^l of baptism added, and that he then virtually
engaged to seek Salvation by Christ's blood, as all infants do Neither does it
suffice, that men are come of believing Parents; their Faith will not instate
their Children into a right to the Spiritual blessings of the Covenant. Neither
will it suffice that Parents did in some respect engage for their Children, and
give them away unto God: all these things do not avail. The Children of the
Kingdom and of Godly Predecessors are cast out; unless a man in his own person
put out Faith in Christ Jesus, and with his own heart please and acquiese in
that device of saving Sinners, he cannot be Saved. I grant this Faith is given
unto him by Christ, but certain it is, that it must be Personal.

2. This Duty must be Cordial and Hearty. With the heart man believes unto
Righteousness. Romans 10.10. A man must be sincere and without guile in closing
with Christ, judging Him the only covering of the Eyes, not hanckering after
another way. The matter must not swim only in the head, or understanding; but
it must be in the heart: the man not only must be persuaded that CHRIST is the
way, but affectionately persuaded of it, loving and liking the thing, having
complacency in it; so that it is a man's desire, as David speaks of the
Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5. If a man be cordial and affectionate in any thing,
surely he must be so here in this one thing that is necessary. It must not be
simply a fancy in the head, but it must be Heart-business, a Soul-business;
yea, not a business in the outer court of affections, but in the flower of
affections, and in the innermost cabinet of the soul, where Christ is formed.
Shall a man be cordial in any thing, and not in this, which does comprize all
his chief interests, and his everlasting state within it? Shall the Lord be
said to rejoice over a man, as a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, Isa. 62.
and to rest in his love with joy, Zeph. 3.17. and shall not the heart of man go
out and meet Him here? The Heart or nothing; Love or nothing; Marriage-love
which goes from heart to heart; Love of Espousals or nothing, Prove. 23.26. 1
Cor. 13.2. I will not say, that there is in all, as soon as they believe, a
prevailing sensible love, which makes sick; but there must be in believing a
rational and kindly love, so well grounded, and deeply engaging that many
waters cannot quench it: It is strong as Death, and Jealousy in it burns as
fire, Cant. 8 6, 7.

The third property or qualification of believing as it goes out after Christ,
It must be Rational. Hereby I mean that the man should move toward God in
Christ, in knowledge and understanding, taking up Gods device of saving Sinners
by Christ, as the Scripture does hold it out, not phansying a CHRIST to himself
other ways than the Gospel speaks of Him, nor any other way of relief by him
than the Word of God holds out. Therefore we find knowledge joined to the
Covenant between God and Man as a requisite, Jer. 24.7. Jer 31.34. I mean here
also, that a man be in calmness of Spirit, and as it were in his cold blood in
closing with Christ Jesus, not in a simple fit of affection which soon
vanishes Mat. 13.20. Nor in a distemper through some outward distress, as the
People were Psalm. 78.34 and proved not steadfast in the Covenant; nor under a
temptation of some outward temporary interest, as S^mon Magus was when he
believed, Act. 8. A man must act here rationally, as being Master of himself,
in some measure able to judge of the Good or Evil of the thing as it stands
before him.

The fourth is, Faith as it it goes out Rationally, so it goes out
Resolutely. The poor distressed people in the Gospel, did most resolutely cast
themselves upon Christ. This resoluteness of Spirit, is in order to all
difficulties that lie in the way. Violence is offered to these. The man whose
heart is a shaping-out for Christ Jesus, cannot say, There is a Lion in the
street. Prove. 26.13. If he cannot have access by the door, he will break
through the roof of the house, with that man, Luke 5.19. He often does not
regard that which the world calls discretion or prudence, like Zacheus
climbing upon a Tree to see Christ, when Faith was breeding in his bosom, Luke
19 This resoluteness of Spirit looks toward what inconveniences may follow,
and waveth all these, at least resolving over all these, like a wise builder
who reckons the expense beforehand, Luke 14.28. This resoluteness is also in
order to all a man's Idols, and such weights as would easily beset him, if he
did not bend after CHRIST over them all, like that blind man who did cast his
Garment from him when Christ called him, Mark 10.50. This resoluteness in the
Soul, proceeds from desperate self necessity within the man, Act. 16.30. and
from the sovereign command of God, obliging the man to move toward Christ, 1 John 3.23 and from the good report gone abroad of God, that He puts none
away that come unto Him through Christ, Joh. 6.37. but does commend such as do
adventure over the greatest difficulties, Mat. 15.18. But above all, this
resoluteness does proceed from tde Arm of JEHOVAH, secretly and strongly
drawing the Sinner toward CHRIST, Joh. 6 44. I will not say that every one,
closing with Christ in the offers of the Gospel, has all the foresaid thoughts
formally in his mind; yet upon search, it will be found, if he be put to it, or
put in mind of these things, they are then aloft in the Soul.

By what is said, it does manifestly appear that many in the visible Church had
need to do somewhat further for securing of their Soul, when they come to years
of discretion, then is found to have been done by them before, in the Covenant
between God and the Church, sealed to them in Baptism. By what is said also,
there is a competent guard upon the free Grace of God in the Gospel, held out
through Christ Jesus: so as ignorant, senseless, profane men cannot with any
shadow of reason pretend to an interest in it. It is true, believing in Christ
and closing with Him as a perfect Savior, seems easy, and every Godless man
says, that he believes on Him: But they deceive themselves, since their Soul
has never cordially, rationally, and resolutely gone out after Christ Jesus,
as we have said. It may be some wicked men have been enlightened, Heb. 6.4 and
have found some reel in their fear, Act. 24.25. or in their joy, Mat. 13.20.
Mark 6.20. But not having engaged their heart in approaching to God, Jer.
30.20. have either sitten down in that common work, as their sanctuary, until
the trial came, Mat. 13.20. or they return back with the Dog to their vomit,
from which they had in some measure escaped by the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior, 2 Pet 2.20. or they utterly fall away to the hatred and malicious
despising and persecuting of Christ and His interests; from whence hardly they
can be recovered, Heb. 6.4, -- Heb. 10.26, -- which things should provoke men
to be serious in this great business.

We come now to speak to the fifth thing proposed, and that is, What be the
native consequents of true believing? I shall reduce what I will speak of them
to these two, viz. Union with God, and Communion.

First then, I say, when a sinner closes with Christ Jesus, (as said is) there
is presently an admirable Union, a strange Oneness between God and the Man; as
the Husband and Wife, Head and Body, Root and Branches are not to be reckoned
two but one. So Christ, or God in Christ, and the sinner closing with him by
Faith, are one, Ephesians. 5.30, (...) He that is so joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17. As the Father is in the Son, and Christ in the Father; so
Believers are one in the Father and the Son. They are one, as the Father and
the Son are one: The Father in Christ, and Christ in Believers, that they may
be made perfect in one. O! what a strange interweaving and indissoluble knot
there, Joh. 17.20, --

1. Because of this Union between God and the Believer, they can never hate one
another. Henceforth the Lord will never hate the Believer. As no man hates his
own flesh, at any time, but cherishes it and nourishes it; so does Christ His
People, Ephesians. 5.29. He may be angry so as to correct and chastise the man that
is a Believer; but all He does to him, is for his good and advantage: All the
Lords paths must be Mercy and Truth to him, Psalm. 25.10. All things must work
together for Good to him, Romans 8.28. On the other side, the Believer can never
hate God maliciously; for, He that is Born of God sins not. So 1 John 3 9.
For the Lord has resolved and ordained things so, that His hand shall
undoubtedly so be upon all Believers for good, that they shall never get leave
to hate Him, and be so plucked out of His hand.

2. Because of this (...), there is a strange simpathy and fellow-feeling
between God and the Believer. The Lord is afflicted with the man's affliction,
He does tenderly, carefully and seasonably resent it, as if He were afflicted
with it, Isa. 63.9. He who touches the Believer, touches the apple of the
Lords Eye, Zech. 2.8. He is touched with the feeling of their infirmities, Heb.
4.15. and precious in His sight is their Blood, Psalm. 116.15 In a word, what is
done to them, is done unto Him; and what is not done to them, is not done unto
Him, Mat. 10.45. Mat. 25.40. -- On the other part, the zeal of His house
sits in the heart of the Believer, Psalm. 69.9. The Lords reproach lights
on the Believer: If it go well with his affairs, that is the business of His
People. So there is a strange sympathy between God and Believers; all by virtue
of the Union between them. Because of which, men should hate every thing which
would compete with Him in their Love or Affections, and should disdain to be
slaves to the Creatures, since these are the servants of their Lord and
Husband, and their servants through Him. What a hateful thing for a Queen to
Whose with the servants of her Prince and Husband? It is also a shame for a
Believer to be afraid of Evil tidings, su^e the Lord, with whom he is one,
alone rules all things, and does whatsoever pleases Him in Heaven and Earth,
1 Corinthians 3.21, 23. Psalm. 112.6, Psalm. ^^ ^3.

The other great consequent of Believing, is, An unparalled Communion.

1. By virtue whereof, the parties themselves do belong each to other. The Lord
is the God of His People, He Himself, FATHER, SON, and HOLYGHOST, is their God,
in all his Glorious Attributes, his Justice as well as his Mercy, his Wisdom,
Power, Holiness, etc. For, He becomes the God of his Peole, as he often
speaks in the Covenant. On the other part, The Believers are His People, in
their very persons they are his, as the Covenant does speak: They shall be his
People, their head, their heart, then hand, etc. whatsoever they are, they are
His.

2. By virtue of this Communion they have a mutual interest into one another
whole goods and gear, in as far as can be useful. All the Lords Word does
belong to the Believer* Threatenings as well as Promises for their good, all his
Ways, all his Works of all sorts, special Communications, Death, Devils even
all things, in so far as can be useful, 1 Cor. 2.21, (...) On the other side,
all which belongs to the Believer is the Lords; Heritage, Children, Life,
Wife, Credit, etc. all is at his disposing; if any of these can be useful to
Him, the Believer is to forego them, else he falsyfieth that Communion, and
declares himself in so far, unworthy of Christ, Luke 14.26.

3. By virtue of this Communion them should be much homeliness and familiarity
between God and the Believer. The Lord may meddle with any thing which does
belong to the Believer, and do unto him what seems good to Him, and the man
is not to mistake, or say unto God, What do thou? (but in so far as
concerns his duty) Yea, he is still to say in every case, Good is the Word;
and Will^ the Lord, Isa. 38.8. 2 King ^^ 28. On the other part, the Believer
(...) humble way, be homely and (...) with God in Christ; he may com^ ^ith
^ness to the Throne of Grace, and (...) use a number of Complements in his
addresses unto God, Heb. 4.16. for he is no more a stranger unto God, Ephesians. 2.19
so that he needs not speak unto God, as one who has acquaintance to make every
hour, as many professors do; and it makes a huge inconsistency in their
Religion. The Believer also may lay open all his heart unto God, 1 Samuel 1.15.
and impart all his secrets unto him, and all his temptations, without fear of a
mistake. The Believer also may enquire into what God does, in so far as may
concern his own duty, or in so far as may ward of mistakes of the Lords way,
and reconcile it with his Word; so Joh. 13.15. The Believer is a Friend in this
respect, as knowing what the Master does. See Genesis 18.2^. etc. J^ ^2.1. Isa.
63.17. The Believer also may be homely with God, to go in daily with his
failings, and seek Repentance, Pardon and Peace through Christ's Advocateship,
Act. 5.31. 1 John 2.1. Oh! how often in one day may the believer plead Pardon,
if he intend not to mock God, or to turn Grace into wantonness? The LORD has
Commanded Men to forgive Seventy times Seven in one day, and has hinted there
in a Parable, how much more the Master will forgive, Mat. 18.23 -- The Believer
also may be homely to entrust God with all his outward concernments, for he
does care for these things Mat. 6 30. 1 Pet. 5.7. Yea, the Believer may humbly
put God to it, to make him forth coming for him in all cases, as beseems, and
to help him to suitable fruit in every season, even Grace in time of need, Heb.
4.16. Yea, how great things may Believers seek from Him in Christ Jesus, both
for themselves and others, 1 Job. 5.14, -- Job. 14.13. Isa. 45.11. It is the
shame and great ^ejudice of his People, that they do not aprove that Communion
with God more man they do: Christ may justly upon them, that they ask nothing
in His Name, Joh. 16.24.

By what is said, it does appear of how ^reat consequence this Duty of
Believing (...), by which a man closes with Christ Jesus, whom the Father has
sealed, and ^iven for a Covenant to the People: It (...) so honorable for God,
answering His ^very design, and serving his interest i^ ^e whole contrivement
and manifestati^n of the Gospel. And it is so advantageous to men, that Satan
and an evil heart of Unbelief, do mightily oppose it, by moving objections
against it. I shall hint some most ordinary.

Object. I.
I am so base, worthless and feckless of my self, that I think it were high
presumption for me to meddle with Christ Jesus* or the Salvation purchased at
the rate of His Blood.

Answ.
It is true, all the Children of Adam are base and naughty before Him, tho
charteth His Angels with Folly, Job 4.18. All Nations are less then nothing and
vani^y before him, Isa. 40.17. There is such a disproportion between God and
Men, that unless HE himself had devised than Covenant, and of his own Freewill
had offered so to transact with men, ^t had been high Treason for Men o^ Angels
to have imagined that God should have humbled himself and become a Servant, and
have taken on our Nature, and have united it by a personal ^nion to the Blessed
Godhead; and that he should have subjected himself to the shameful Death of the
Cross; and all this, that men who were Rebels, should be reconciled unto God,
and be made Eternal happy, by being In His holy Company forever. But I say all
that, was his own device and free choice. Yea, moreover, if God had not
soveraignly commanded men to close with Him in and through Christ, Isa. 55.1,
2, 3. Matthew. 11.28. 1 John 3.23. 2 Cor. 5.20. no man ^urst have made use of
that device of His. (...) then, although with Abigail I may say, let me be but
a Servant, to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, 1 Samuel 25.41. Yet since
he has in his holy wisdom deviced that way, and ^weth how to be richly
glorified in it, Ephesians. 1.18. Joh. 17.10. and has commanded me, as I shall be
answerable in the great day, to close with him in Christ, as said is I dare not
disobey, nor enquire into the reasons of his contrivements and commands, but
must adventure on the business, is I would not be found to frustrate the Grace
of God, and in a manner disappoint the Gospel, Gal. 2 21. and falsify the
Record which God has born of His Son, that there is Life enough in Him for
men, 1 John 5.10, and so make God a Liar, and add that rebellion to all my
former transgressions.

Object. II.
I am a person singularly Sinful, beyond any I know; therefore I dare not
presume to go near unto Christ Jesus, or look after that Salvation which is
through His Righteousness.

Answ.
Is your Sin beyond the Drunkenness and Incest of Lot; Adultery covered with
Murder, in David; Idolatry and horrid Apostasy in Solomon; Idolatry, Murder and
Witchcraft in Manasseh; Anger against God and his way in Jonah: Forswearing of
Christ in Peter, after he was forewarned, and had vowed the contrary; bloody
Persecution in Paul, making the Saints to Blaspheme etc.? (Now woe to him who is
imboldned to Sin by these instances, recorded in Scripture, and adduced here,
to the commendation of the Free and Rich Grace of God, and to encourage poor
penitent Sinners to fly unto Christ;) I say, are your sins beyond these? Yet
all these obtained Pardon through Christ, as the Scripture does show. Know
therefore, that all sins do^ly alike level before the ^ree Grace of God, who
loves freely, Hos. 14.4. and looks not to less or more sin: If the person
have a heart to come unto him through Christ, then He is able to save to the
utmost, Heb. 7.25 Yea, it is more provoking before God, not to close with
Christ when the offer comes to a man, than all the rest of his transgressions
are: For, he that believes not, has made God a Liar, in that record He has
born of life in the Son: and he who does not believe, shall be Condemned for
not believing on the Son of God: that shall be the main thing in his ditty,
Joh. 3.18. So that much sin cannot excuse a man, if he scar at Christ and shift
his offer, since God has openly declared, that this is a faithful saying and
worthy of all acceptance, Christ came to save Sinners, whereof I am chief:
Even he who is Chief of sinners in his own apprehension, is bound to believe
and accept this saying, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Object. III.
My Sins have some aggravating circumstances, beyond the same Sins in other
persons, which does much terrify me.

Answ.
What can the aggravations of thy sins be which are not paralleled in the
forecited examples? Is thy against great light? So ^hoved many of these we
spoke of before. Was it against singular mercies and deliverances? So was that
of Lot, and Noah his Drunkenness. Was thy sin done with much deliberation? So
was David's whilst he wrote the Letter against Vriah. Was it against or after
any singular manifestation of God? So was Solomon's. Was it by a small and
despe^able temptation? So was that of Jonah and of Peter, if we consider the
heinous^ess of their transgression. Have thou reiterated the Sin, and committed
it over again? So did Lot, so did Peter, so did J^boshaphat in joining with
Ahab and Jehoram, 1 King. 22.2 King. 3. A^e there many gross sins concurring
together in thee? So were there in Manasseh. Have thou stood long out in
rebellion? (that, as all the former is thy shame) So did the Thief on the
Cross, he stood it out to the last gasp, Luke 23.4^.43. If yet thou have an ear
to hear, thou art commanded to hear, Mat. 1^.19. Although thou have long spent
thy Money for that which is not Bread, Isa. 55.1, 2 thou have the greater need
now to make have and to slay for refuge, and if thou do so, He shall welcome
thee, and in no ways cast thee ou^* Jo^. 6.37 especially since he has used no
prescription of time in Scripture* So that all those aggravations of thy sin
will not excuse thy shifting of the Lords offer.

Object. IV.
In all these instances given, you have not named the particulars whereof I am
guilty; Nor know I any who ever obtained mercy before God, being guilty of such
things as are in me.

Answ.
It is hard to condescend upon every particular transgression which may vex the
Conscience; yea, lesser sins then some of those I have mentioned, may hugely
disquiet, if the Lord blow the fire. But for thy satisfaction, I shall
condescend upon some truths of Scripture, which do reach sins and cases more
universally, then any man can do particularly See Exodus 34.7. God pardons
Iniquiety, Transgression and Sin: that is all manner of sin, Ezekiel. 18.21, -- If
a man turn from all his wickedness, it shall no more be remembered, or prove his
ruin. Joh^ 6 37 Him that comes, He will in no way c^st out: that is,
whatsoever be his sins, or the aggravations of them. Joh. 3.16. Whosoever
believes shall be saved; that is, without exception of any sin, or any case,
Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the utmost, those who come to God through Him.
No man can sufficiently declare what is Gods Uttermost, Mat. 12.31. All manner
of Sin and Blasphemy shall be Forgiven unto men: that is, there is no sort of
Sin, whereof one instance shall not be forgiven in one person or other, except
the Sin against the Holy Ghost. These and the like Scriptures, do carry all
sorts of Sin before them; so that, let thy sins be what they will, or can be,
they may be sunk in one of these two truths: so as thy sin can be no excuse to
thee for shifting the offer of Peace and Salvation through Christ, since any
man who Will, is allowed to come and take, Rev. 22.17 We will not multiply
words. The Great God of Heaven and Earth, has soveraignly commanded all who
see their need of relief to betake themselves unto Christ Jesus, and to close
cordially with Gods device of saving sinners by Him, laying aside all
objections and excuses, as they shall be answerable unto Him in the day He
shall Judge the quick and the dead, and shall drive away out of his Presence
all these who would dare to say, their sins and condition were such, as that
they durst not adventure upon Christ's perfect Righteousness for their relief,
notwithstanding of the Lords own command often interposed, and in a manner his
credit engaged.

Object. V.
I suspect I am guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and so am incapable
of Pardon and therefore I need not think of believing on Christ Jesus for
saving of my Soul.

Answ.
Although none should charge this Sin on themselves, or on others, unless they
can prove and instruct the charge according to Christ's example, Mat. 12.5. 26,
-- 32. yet for satisfying of the doubt;

1. I shall show what is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, properly so
called; because there be some gross sins which people do unwarrantably judge to
be this Unpardonable Sin.

2. I shall show what is the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

3. I shall d^aw some conclusions in answer directly to the Objection.

As for the First, There be many gross sins, which although (as all other sins)
they be sins against the Holy Ghost, who is God equal and one with the Father
and the Son, and are done against some of His operations and motions, yet are
they not The Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is the Unpardonable Sin.

As;

1. Blaspheming of God, under bodily Tortures, is not that Sin for, some Saints
fell into this, Act. 26.11. much less, Blaspheming of God in a fit of
Distraction, or Frenzy; for a man is not a free rational agent at that time,
and He that spares his People, as a Father does the Son that serves him, and
does pity, so Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 103.13. does He spare and pity in these rovings;
for, so would our Fathers according to the flesh do, if we Blasphemed them in a
fit of Distraction; much less are horrid blasphemies against God, darted in
upon the Soul, and not allowed there, this Unpardonable Sin; for such things
were offered to Christ, Mat. 4. and are often cast in upon the Saints.

2. The hating of good in others, whilst I am not convinced that it is good,
but in my light do judge it to be evil; yea, the speaking against it, yea, the
persecuting of it in that case, is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost; for, all
these will be found in Paul before he was Converted, and he obtained mercy,
because he did these ignorantly^

3. Heart-rising at the thriving of others in the work and way of God, whiles^
I love it in my self; yea, the rising of heart against Providence, which often
expresses it self against the Creatures nearest our hand; yea, this rising of
heart entertained and maintained, (although they be horrid things leading
toward that Unpardonable Sin, yet) are not that Sin; for these may be in the
Saints, proceeding from self love, which cannot endure to be darkened by
another, and proceeding from some cross in their Idol, under a fit of
Temptation: the most part of all this was in Jonah, Jon. 4.

4. Not only are not decays in what once was in the man, and falling into
gross sins against light, after the receiving of the truth, this Unpardonable
Sin; (for then many of all the Saints in Scripture were undone) But further,
Apostasy from much of the truth, is not that Sin: for that was in Solomon, and
in the Church of Corinth and Galatia; yea, Denying, yea, Foreswearing of the
most fundamental Truth, under a great temptation, is not this sin; for then
Peter had been then undone.

5. As resisting, quenching, grieving and vexing of the Spirit of God by many
sinful ways, are not this Unpardonable sin, for they are charged with these,
who are called to Repentance in Scripture, and not shut out, as guilty of this
sin. So neither reiterating sin against light, is the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, although it leads toward it; for such was Peter's sin in denying
Christ; so was Jehoshaphat's sin in joining with Ahab and Jehoram.

6. Purposes and Essays of Self-murder, and even purposes of murdering Godly
men, (the party being under a sad fit of temptation) yea, actual Self-murder,
(although probaby it often joyneth in the issue with this Unpardonabe sin,
which ought to make every soul look upon the very temptation to it with horror
and abhorrency, yet) is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost. The Tailor intended
to kill himself upon a worse accoun^ than many poor people do in the sight and
sense of Gods wrath, and of their own sin and corruption; yet that ^lor
obtained pardon, Act. 16 2^, 34. And ^a^ before his Effectual Ca^ag, was
accessory unto the murder of many Sa^ats, and intended to kill more, as himself
grants, Act. 26.9, -- Although all these are dreadful Sins, each of them
deserving wrath Everlasting, and not being re^e^ed of, brings Endless
vergeance, e^pecially the last cuts off hope of relief, for ought can be
expected (...) ordinary way; yet none of these is the Unpardonable Sin against
the Holy Ghost; and so under any of these, there is hope to him that has an
ear to hear the Joyful Sound of the Covenant: All manner of such Sin and
Blasphemy may be forgiven, as is ^ear in the Scripture, where these things ^e
mentioned.

As for the Second thing; Let us see, that the Sin against the Holy Ghost is?
It is ^t a simple act of transgression, but ^complex of many mischievous
things, involving Soul and Body ordinarily in Guilt. We thus describe it; It is
a Rejecting and Opposing of the chief Gospel Truth and way of Salvation, made
out singularly to a man, by the Spirit of God, in the truth and good thereof,
and that Avowedly, Freely, Wilfully,, Maliciously and Despightfully, breeding
hopeless Fear. There be three places of Scripture, which do speak most of this
Sin, and thence we will prove every part of this description, in so far as may
be useful to our present purpose, by which it will appear that none who have a
mind for Christ, need stumble at what is spoken of this sin in Scripture. See
Mat. 12. 24, -- 32. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Heb. 10.25, -- 29.

First then, Let us consider the Object about which this Sin, or sinful acting
of the man guilty thereof, is conversant, and that is, The chief Gospel Truth
and way of Salvation: both which run to one thing. It is the way which God has
contrived for saving of Sinners by Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah and
Savior by whose Death and Righteousness men are to be saved, as he has held
forth in the Ordinances; confirming the same by many mighty works in Scripture
tending there-a-way. This way of Salvation is the Object. The Pharisees oppose
this, that Christ was the Messiah, Mat. 12. 23, 24. The wrong is done against
the Son of God, Heb. 6.6. and the Blood of the Covenant, and the Spirit
graciously offering to apply these things, Heb. 10.29.

Secondly, In the description, consider the qualification of this Object; It
(...) ^gularly made out to the party, by the Sp^it of God, both in the truth
and good thereof* This says, (1.) That there must be knowledge of the truth
and way of Salvation. The Pharisees knew that Christ was the Heir, Mat. 21.38.
The party has knowledge, Heb. 10.26. (2.) That knowledge of the thing, must
not swim only in the head, but there must be some half-heart persuasion of it.
Christ knew the Pharisees thoughts, and so did judge them, Mat. 12.25. and that
the contrary of what they spoke was made out upon their heart. The^e is a
tasting, Heb. 6.4, 5. which is beyond simple enlightening; yea, there is such a
persuasion ordina^ ^s leads to a deal of outward ^ancti^tion, Heb. 10.29.
(2.) This per^asion must not only be of the verity of the thing but of the good
of it. The party tastes the good word of God, and he apprehends the thing as
eligible, Heb. 6.5 (4.) This persuasion is not made o^t only by strength of
argument, but also by an enlightening work of Gods Spirit, shining on the truth,
and making (...) conspicuous. Therefore is that Sin called, The Sin against the
Holy Ghost, Man 1^ Mark 3. The persons are said to have received the Holy
Ghost, Heb. 6 4. and to do despite unto the Spirit of G^ce, who was in the
nearest step of a gracious opera^ion with them, Heb. 10.29.

Thirdly, In this description, consider the acting of the party against the
Object so qualified; it is a rejecting and opposing of it: which imports,

1. That men have once some way at least, been in hands with it, or had the
offer of it, as is true of the Pharisees.

2. That they do reject, even with contempt what they had of it, or in their
offer* The Pharisees deny it, and speak disdainfully of Christ, Mat. 12.24.
They fall away, intending to shame Christ, Heb 6.5, 6

3. The men set themselves against it by the spirit of Persecution, as the
Pharisees did still. They rail against it: therefore it is called, Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12.24.31. They would Crucify CHRIST again, if
they could, Heb. 6 6. They are adversaries, Heb. 10.27.

Fourthly, Consider the properties of this acting.

1. It is Avowed: that is, not seeking to shelter or hide it self. The
Pharisees spoke against Christ publicly, Mat 12.24. They would have Christ
brought to an Open shame, Heb. 6.6. They forsake the Ordinances which savor
that way, Heb. 10.25 and despise the danger: for, looking for indignation, they
trample that blood still, Heb. 27, 29.

2. The party acts Freely: It is not from unadvisedness, nor from force or
constraint, but an acting of free choice; Nothing does force the Pharisees to
speak against and persecute Christ. They Crucify to Themselves, they re-act
the Murder of their own free accord, and in their own bosom, none constraining
them, Heb. 6.6. They sin of free choice; as the word is, Spontaneously, Heb.
10.27.

3. It is acted Wilfully. They are so resolute, they will not be dissuaded by
any offer, or the most precious means, as is clear in the foresaid Scriptures.

4. It is done Maliciously; so as it proceeds not so much, if at all, from a
temptation to pleasure, profit, or honor; It proceeds not from fear, or
force, or from any good end proposed; but out of heart-malice against God and
Christ, and the advancement of His Glory and Kingdom. So that it is of the very
nature of Satan's sin, who has an irreconcilable hatred against God, and the
remedy of Sin, because his Glory is thereby advanced: This is a special
ingredient in this Sin. The Pharisees are found guilty of heart-malice against
Christ, since they speak so against Him, and not against their own Children
casting out Devils; and this is the force of Christ's argument, Mat. 12.27. They
do their utmost to Crucify Christ again, and to bring Him to an open shame,
Heb 6.6, They are adversaries like the Devil, Heb. 10.27.

5. It is done Despightfully. The malice must bewray it self. The Pharisees
must proclaim that Christ has correspondence with Devils, Mat. 12. He must be
put to an open shame, and Crucified again, Heb. 6. They must tread under foot
that Blood, and do despite to the Spirit, Heb 10.29. So that the party had
rather perish a thousand times, than be in Christ's debt for Salvation. The last
thing in the description, is, the ordinary attendant or consequence of this
sin: It breeds desperate and hopeless Fear. They fear Him, whom they hate
with a slavish hopeless fear, such as Devils have Heb. 10.27. They know that
God will put out His power against them: they tremble in the rememmbrance of
it; And if they could be above Him, and destroy Him, they covet it; and since
they cannot reach that, they hate with the utmost of heart-malice, and do
persecute Him and all that is His, with despite.

As for the Third thing proposed, viz. The Conclusions to be drawn from what is
said, whereby we will speak directly to the Objection.

1. As I hinted before, since the Sin against the Holy Ghost is so remarkable,
and may be well known where it is, none should charge themselves with it,
unless they can prove and instruct the charge: for it it is a great wrong done
unto God, to labor to persuade my Soul that He will never Pardon me: it is the
very way to make me desperate, and to load me to the Unpardonable Sin.
Therefore, unless thou can, and dare say that thou do hate the way which God
has devised for saving of Sinners, and do resolve to oppose the thriving of
His Kingdom, both with thy self and others, out of malice and despite against
God, thou ought not to suspect thy self guilty of this sin.

2. Whatsoever thou have done against God, if thou do ^ue it, and w^sh it
were undone, thou cannot be guilty of this Sin: For in it, heart-malice and
despite against God do still prevail.

3. If thou art content to be his Debtor for Pardon, and would be infinitely
obliged unto Him for it, then thou cannot in that case be guilty of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost; for, as we show before, they who are guilty of it, do
so despite God that they would not be his Debtors for Salvation.

4. Whatsoever thou have done, ^f thou have a desire after Jesus Christ, and
do look with a sore heart after Him, and cannot think of parting with his
blessed Company for ever; or if thou must shed with Him, yet do wish well to
him, and all his, thou neede^t not suspect thy self to be guilty of this
Unpardonable Sin; for there can be no such hatred of Him in thy bosom, as is
necessarily required to make up that sin.

5. If thou w^ld be above the reach of that (...) and se^re against it for
ever, then go work up thy ^eat to please Salvation by Christ Jesus, and to
close with God in Him, acquiesing in Him as the sufficient ransom and rest, as
we have been pressing before, and yield to Him to be saved in his way. Do this
in good earnest, and thou shall be forever put out of the reach of that ugly
thing wherewith Satan does affright so many poor seekers of God.

Object. VI.
Although I be not excluded from the benefit of the New Covenant, yet it is not
in my power to believe upon Christ, Faith is the gift of God and above the
strength of Flesh and Blood.

Answ.
It is true, that saving Faith by which alone a man can heartily close with God
in Christ, is above our power, and is the gift of God, as we said before in the
Premisees:

Yet remember;

1. The Lord has left it as a duty upon all who hear this Gospel cordially by
Faith to close with his offer of Salvation through Christ, as is clear in the
Scripture: and you must know, that although it be not in our power to perform
that duty of our selves, yet the Lord may justly Condemn for not performing of
it, and we are inexcusable, becaue at first He made man perfectly able to do
whatsoever He should command.

2. The Lord commanding this thing which is above our power, wills us to be
sensible of our inability to do the thing, and would have us putting it on Him
to work it in us: He has promised to give the new Heart, and He has not
excluded any from the benefit of that promise.

3. The Lord uses by these commands and invitations, and men's meditation on
the same, and their supplication about the thing, to convey power unto the Soul
to perform the duty. Therefore, for answer to the Objection, I do obtest thee
in the Lords Name, to lay to heart these His Commandments and Promise, and
meditate on them, and upon that blessed business of the New Covenant, and pray
unto God as you can, over them, (for He will be enquired to do these things,
Ezekiel. 36.37.) and lay thy cold heart to that device of God, expressed in the
Scriptures, and unto Christ Jesus who is given for a Covenant to the People,
and look to Him for life and quickening; go and essay to please that Salvation,
in the way God does offer it, and to close with, and rest on Christ for it, as
if all were in thy power, yet looking to Him for the thing, as knowing that it
must come from Him; and if thou do so, He who meets these who remember Him in
his ways, Isa. 65.4^ will not be wanting on His part, and thou shall not have
ground to say, that thou moved toward the thing until thou could do no more
for want of strength, and so left it at Gods door: It shall not fail on His
part, if thou have a mind for the business; yea, I may say, if by all thou have
ever heard of that matter, thy heart loves it, and desires to be in hands
with it, thou have it already performed within thee, so that difficulty is
past, before thou was aware of it.

Object. VII.
Many who have closed with Christ Jesus, as (...), are still complaining of
their ^e^ness and ^ruitle^ness, which ma^th my heart lay the less weight on
that duty of Believing.

Answ.
If you be convinced that it is a duty to believe on Christ, as said is, you
may not shift it under any pretense. As for these complaints of some who have
looked after Him, not admitting every one to be judge of his own fruit. I say;

1. Many by their jealousies of Gods love, and by their misbelief (after they
have so closed with God) do obstruct many precious communications, which
otherwise would be let out to them, Matthew 13.58.

2. It cannot be that any whose heart is gone out after Christ have found Him a
wilderness, Jer. 2.31. Surely they find somewhat in their spirit swaying them
toward God in these two great things, viz. how to be found in Him in that day,
Phil. 3.8, 9. and how to be forth coming to his praise in the land of the
living, Psalm. 119.17. Psalm. 56.13. They find these two things aloft in the
Soul, and that is much. Moreover, they shall after search, if they judge a
right, find ever since an emptiness in the Creatures, which abundance of the
Creature cannot fill up: All is vanity; only God can fill the empty room in
their heart, and when He but breaths a little, there is no room for
additional comfort from Creatures: this says, that God has captivate the man,
and has fixed that saving principle in the understanding and heart; who is God
but the Lord? Worship HIM all ye gods; Psalm. 97.7. Yea, further, these whose
heart has closed with God in Christ, as said is, will not deny that there have
been seasonable preventings and quicknings now and then, when the Soul was like
to fail, Psalm. 21.3. Psalm. 94.18, 19. Therefore, let none say, that there is no
fruit following, and let none shift their duty upon the unjust and groundless
complaints of others.

Object. VIII.
Although I judge it my duty to close with Gods device in the Covenant, I am in
the dark how to manage that duty, for sometimes God does offer to be our God
without any mention of Christ, and sometimes says, that He will betroth us
unto Him; and in other places of Scripture, we are called to come to Christ,
and He is the Bridegroom. Again, God sometimes speaks of Himself as a Father
to men, sometimes as a Husband: Christ is sometimes called the Husband, and
sometimes a Brother, which Relations seem inconsistent, and do much put me in
the dark how to apprehend God when my heart would agree with him, and close
with him.

Answ.
It may be very well said, that men do come to God, or close with Him, and yet
they come to Christ and close with Him. They may be said to come under a
Marriage-relation unto God, and unto Christ also, who is Husband, Father,
Brother, etc. to them, and there is no such mystery here, as some do conceive.
For the better understanding of it, consider these few things.

1. Although God made man perfect at the beginning, and put him in some
capacity of transacting with Him immediately, Eccl. 7 29. Genesis 2.16, 17 yet man
by his Fall, did put himself at a perfect distance with God, and in a utter
incapacity to bargain or deal any more with Him immediately.

2. The Lord did, after Adam's fall, make manifest the New Covenant, in which
he did signify that he was content to transact with man again, in and through
a Mediator; and so did appoint men to come to Him through Chr^t, Heb 7.25. and
to look for acceptance only in him, Ephesians. 1.6. Ordaining men to hear Christ, He
being the only party, in whom God was well pleased, Mat. 17.5.

3. This matter is so clear, and supposed to be so not our in the Scripture,
and so manifest to all who are under the Ordinances, that the Lord does often
speak of transacting with Himself, not making mention of the Mediator; because
it is supposed, that every one in the Church knows that now there is no
dealing with God, except by and through Christ Jesus the Mediator.

4. Consider that Christ Jesus, God-man is not only a sit trysting place for
God and Men to meet into, and a fit spokesman to treat between the parties now
at variance, 2 Cor. 5.10. but we may say also, He is immediate Bridegroom, and
so our closing or transacting with God, may be justly called, The Marriage of
the Kings Son; and the Elect may be called, The Lambs Wi^e: Christ Jesus being
as it were, the hand which God holds out unto men, and on which they lay hold
when they deal with God. And so through and by Christ, we close with God as our
God, on whom our Soul does terminate, lastly and ultimately through Christ, 1
Pet. 1.21.

5. Consider, that the diverse relations mentioned in Scripture, are set down
to signify the sure and indissoluble Union and Communion between God and His
People: whatsoever nearness is between Head and Members, Root and Branches,
King and Subjects, Shepherd and Flock, Father and Children, Brother and
Brother, Husband and Wife, etc. all is here, Joh. (...), 22, 23, 26. So that
whatsoever be spoken in Scripture, People may be clear that God calls them to
be reconciled unto Him through Christ, and does offer Himself to be their God
and Husband in Him alone; and men are to accept God to be their God in Christ,
pleasing that way of relief for poor man, and to give up themselves unto God in
Christ, in whom alone they can be accepted. And they who close with Christ,
they do close with God in Him, who is in Christ reconciled the world to
himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. Joh. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. And we are not to dip further into
the diverse relations mentioned in Scripture, between God or Christ, and Men,
then as they may point out Union and Communion, or nearness with God through
Christ Jesus, and our advantage thereby.

These things being clear, we will not multiply words. But, since to believe on
Christ is the great duty, required of all that hear this Gospel, we obtest
every one, in the Lords Name, to whom the report of this shall come, that
without delay they take to heart their lost condition in themselves, and that
they lay to heart the relief which God has provided by Jesus Christ, whereof
he has made a free offer unto all who will be content of the same, and to be
saved that way. And that they lay to heart, that there is no other way of
escape from the Wrath that is to come (because of which men would be glad at
the last Day, to run into a Lake of melted lead, to be hid from the face of the
Lamb, whom they do here despise) We say we obtest all in the consideration of
these things, to work op their heart to this business, and to lay themselves
open for God, and ^o receive Him through Christ in the offers of the Gospel,
acquiescing in him, as the only desirable and satisfying good, that so they may
secure themselves: go speedily and search for his offers of Peace and Salvation
in the Scripture, and work up your Heart and Soul to close with them, and with
Christ in them, and with God in Christ, and do it so, as you may have this to
say, that you were serious, and in earnest, and cordial here, as ever you were
in any thing to your apprehension; and for ought you know, Christ is the choice
of your heart: at least, you neither know nor allow any thing to the contrary.
Whereupon your heart does appeal unto God, to search and try (...) there be
ought amiss to rectify it, and lead unto the right way Now this cleaving of
the heart unto Him, and casting it self upon him to be Saved in hi^ way, is
believing, which does indeed secure a man from the wrath that is to come
because now he has received Christ, and believes on Him, and so shall not
enter into Condemnation, as says the Scripture.

Object. IX.
When I hear what it is to believe on Christ Jesus, I think sometimes I have
Faith; for I dare say, to my apprehension, I please the invention of saving
Sinners by Christ Jesus, my heart goes out after Him, and does terminate upon
Him as a satisfying treasure; and I am glad to accept God to be my God in Him.
But I often do question if ever I have done so, and so I am, for most part,
kept hesitating and doubting if I do believe, or be Savingly in Covenant with
God.

Answ.
It is ordinary for many whose ^ea^ are gone out after Christ in the Gospel,
and have received Him, to (...) the same in question again Therefore I shall
advise one thing as a notable help to fix the Soul, ^pr^ss (...) with ^od.
in the maintaining Faith and an Interest in God; and t^ is, that men not only
close heartily with God in Christ, (...) said is, but also that they Expressly,
Expli^ly, by word of mouth, and vive voice, and formally close with Christ
Jesus, and accept Gods offer of Salvation through Him, and so make a Covenant
with God. And this by Gods blessing may contribute not a little for
establishing them about their saving Interest in God.

Before I speak directly to this express Covenanting with God, I promise these
few things;

1. I do not here intend a Covenanting with God, essentially differing from the
Covenant between God and the visible Church, as the Lord does hold it out in
His revealed Will. Neither do I intend a Covenant, differing essentially from
that transacting of the heart with God in Christ, formerly spoken unto: It is
that same Covenant, only it differs by a singular circumstance, viz. the
formal expression of the thing which the heart did before practice.

2. I grant this express Covenanting and Transacting with God, is not
absolutely necessary for a man's Salvation: For, if any person close heartily
and sincerely with God, offering himself in Christ, in the Gospel, his soul and
state is thereby secured, according to the Scripture, although ^e utter not
words with his mouth. But this express verbal Covenanting with God, is very
expedient, for the better being of a man's state, and his more comfortable
maintaining of an interest in Christ Jesus.

3. This express Covenanting with God by word of Mouth, is of no worth, without
sincere heart-closing with God in Christ joined with it: For without that, it
is but a profaning of the Lords Name, and a mocking of Him to his face, so to
draw near unto him with the lips, whilst the heart is far away from him.

4. I grant, both Cordial and Verbal transacting with God, will not make out a
man's gracious estate unto him, so as to put and keep it above controversy,
without the joynt-witness of the Spirit, by which we know what is freely given
unto us of God; yet this explicit way of transacting with God, joined with the
heart closing with Him in Christ, contributes much for clearing up unto a man,
that there is a fixed bargain between God and him, and will do much to ward off
him many groundless jealousies and objections of an unstable mind and heart,
which uses affrontedly to deny this hour, what it did really act and perform
the former hour. This explicit Covenanting, is as an instrument taken of what
past between God and the Soul, and so has its own advantage for strengthening
of Faith.

As for this express Covenanting, we shall (1.) Show that it a very
warrantatable practice. (2.) We shall show shortly what is preparatorily
required of those who do so transact with God. (3.) How men shall go about that
duty. (4.) What should follow thereupon.

As to the First, I say, it is a warrantable practice and an incumbent duty,
expressly and by word to Covenant with God. Which appears thus:

1. In many places of Scripture (if we look to what they may bear according to
their scope and the analogy of Faith) God has commanded it, and left it on
people as a duty, Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, Isa, 45 24. Surely
shall one say in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Jer. 3.4. Will thou cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my Youth. Zec. 13.9. They
shall say, the Lord is my God, Hos. 2.16. Thou shall call me Ishi; and in many
places elsewhere. Now since God has so clearly left i^ on men in the Letter of
the Word, they may be persuaded, that it ^a practice warranted and allowed by
Him, and well pleasing unto Him.

Arg. 2. It is the approven practice of the Saints in Scripture, thus expressly
to Covenant with God, and they have found much quiet in that duty afterward.
David did often expressly say unto God, that he was his God, his Portion, and
that himself was his Servant Thomas will put his interest out of question with
it, Joh. 20.28 Yea, I say, the Saints are much quieted in remembrance of what
has past that way between God and them, Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 142.5. We find it
often in the Book of the Canticles. Now shall the chief worthies of God be so
much in Duty, breeding so much quiet and satisfaction to them in many cases,
and shall we be under the New Testament, unto whom access is ministered
abundantly, and who partake of the sap of the Olive; shall we (I say) ly behind
in this approven piece of homeliness with God? Since we study to imitate that
Cloud of witnesses in other things, (as Faith, Zeal, Patience, etc.) let us
also imitate them in this.

Arg. 3. The thing about which we move here, is a matter of the greate^
concernment in (...) ^he world: It is the Life of our (...). 32.47. Oh! shall
men study to be Express Explicit, Plain and Peremptory in all their other
great businesses, because they are such, and shall they not much more be
peremptory and express in this, which does most concern them? I wonder that
many not only do not speak it with their mouth, but that they do not Swear and
subscribe it with their hand, and do not every thing for securing of God to
themselves in Christ, and themselves unto God, which the Scripture does
warrant, Isa. 44.5.

This also may have its own weight, as an argument to press this way of
Covenanting with God. The business of interest in Christ, and of real and
honest transacting with him, is a thing, which in the experience of Saints, is
most freque^tly brought upon debate and in question. Therefore men had need,
all the ways they can, even by Thought, Word and Deed, to put it to a point.

This also may have place here for pressing this as a duty, That God is so
formal, express, distinct and legal, (to say so) in all the bu^iness of man's
Salvation, viz. Christ must be a near kinsman to whom the right of Redemption
does belong. He must be Chosen, Called, Authorized and Sent; Covenants formally
drawn between the Father and Him, the Father accepting payment and
satisfaction, giving formal discharges, all done clearly and expressly. Shall
the Lord be so express, plain and peremptory in every part of the business, and
shall our part of it rest in a confused Thought, and we be as dumb Beasts
before him? If it were a Marriage between Man and Wife, it would not be j^d
enough, although there were con^ in heart given by the Woman, and k^ to the
Man, if she did never express so much by word, being in a capacity to do so.
Now this Covenant between God and Man, is held out in Scripture, as a Marriage
between man and wife, Hos. 2.19, 20. 2 Cor. 11 2. The whole Song of Solomon
speaks it. The Lord uses similitudes, to signify unto us what he intends;
and surely this is a special requisite in Marriage, that the Wife give an
express and explicit consent unto the business: the Man says so, I take thee
to be my lawful Wife, and do oblige my self to be a dutiful Husband: The Woman
is obliged on the other part, to express her consent, and to say, Even so I
take thee to be my lawful Husband and do promise Duty and Subjections. It i^ so
here; the Lord says, I do betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou s^alt
call me Ishi, my Husband, Hos. 2. I will be for thee as a Head and Husband, if
thou will not be for another, Hos. 3. The man ought to answer, and say, Amen,
So be it, Thou shall be my God, my Head and Lord, and I shall and will be
thine, and not for another, Cant. 6.3. And so this making of the Covenant with
God, is called, a giving of the hand to Him, as the word is, 2 Chronicles. 30 8.
which does hint a very express, formal, explicit and positive bargaining with
God. So then, we conclude it to be an incumbent duty, and a very approven
practice, necessary for the quieting of a man's mind, and his more comfortable
being in Covenant with God, and more fully answering Gods condescendency and
offer in that great and primary Promise, I will be your God, and you shall be
my People.

Not only, may and should people thus expre^ly close with God in Christ for
^ing their heart; but they may, upon ^me occassions re^e^ this verbal
transaction with God* especia^ when the temptations they are made to question
if ever the^ have ^ly and sincerely closed Covenant with God, as they are then
to put out new acts of Faith, embracing Christ as the desirable portion and
tre^sure, and also upon other occasions: So were it expedient especially if
there remain any doubt about the thing, that by vi^e voice and express word,
they determine that controversy, and say of the Lord, and to Him, that he is
their refuge and portion, Psalm. 91.2. Psalm. 1^2 We find the Saints doing so;
and we may imitate them especially;

1. In the time of great backsliding, people were wont to renew the Covenant
with God, and we should do so also: our heart should go out after Christ, in
the Promises of reconciliation with God, for He is our Peace upon all
occasions, and our Advocate, and we are bound to apprehend him so, when we
transgress, 1 John 2.1 and to express so much by word as the Saints did in
their formal renewing of the Covenant.

2. When people are in hazard, and difficulties are present or foreseen, then
it were good that they should se^d out their heart after him, and express their
adhering unto him, for securing their own heart: We find Joshua doing so, when
he was to settle in the Land of Canaan, in the midst of snares, Josh. 24. So
David does in his straits. Psalm. 57.1.

3 When men apprehend God to be at a distance from them, and their Soul to be
under withering and decay, then it is safest heartily to close with Christ, and
embrace him by Faith for securing of the Soul, and it were good to put it out
of question, by the expression of the thing: This is the ready way to draw sap
from Christ the root, for recovering of the Soul, and for establishing the
heart before Him. The Spouse in the Song of Sol^on does so, thus asserting her
interest in Him when in such a condition; professing and avowing Him to be her
beloved, Cant. 5

4. At the celebration of the Lords Supper, men should thus cordially close
with God in Christ, and speak and express so much: For, that is a Feast of
Love, and then and there we come under a solemn profession of closing with God
in Christ personally and openly, and do r^ceive the Seal of it: it is therefore
beseeming, at that time, to bring up both heart and tongue to second and answer
our profe^ion, apprehending God to be our God, and resigning over our selves to
be his, and at his disposing. We shall not confine the Lords People to times
and seasons of this duty: the Lord may bind it upon them at his pleasure; only
there is h^zard, that by too frequent express Covenanting with God, men turn
too formal in it, therefore, it is not so fit that people should cordially at
full length renew that explicit transaction with God, but rather to declare
unto God, that they adhere unto the Covenant made with Him, and that they do
maintain and never will revoke nor recall the same; and withal, they may hint
the sum of it, in laying claim unto God in Christ, as their own God; and this
they may do often, even in all their addresses to God, and probably this is the
thing designed by the Saints in their so ordinary practice in Scripture, whilst
they assert their interest in God, as their God and Portion; and it is fit that
men in all their walk, hold their heart at the business, by heart-cleaving to
God in Christ; The life w^ live in the Flesh, should be by Faith in the Son of
God, Gal. 2.20.

As to the Second thing, viz. What is preparatorily required of him who is
expressly to transact with God here; besides what we spoke before, as previous
to a man's closing with Christ Jesus? We only add;

1. That he who would explicitly bargain with God, must know, that to do so, is
warranted and allowed by God, as we show before if this be wanting, a man
cannot do it in Faith, and so it will be sin unto him, Romans 14.23.

2. The man must labor to bring up his heart to the thing, that it do not
belie the tongue; It will be a great mocking of God, so to draw near Him with
the lips, whilst the heart is far off from Him, Isa. 25.13.

The Third thing to be considered in this express verbal Covenanting with God,
is, The way how it is to be performed and managed. And beside what was said
before in heart-closing with Christ; I add here,

1. The man should do it Confidently, not only believing that he is about his
duty when he does it, but also that God in Christ Jesus will accept his poor
imperfect way of doing this duty, He does acc^pt a man according to what he
has, if there be a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12. A M^e is accepted, since it is
all the Poor woman's substance, Mark. 12.44. Yea, if it can be attained, the man
should bel^e^e that the issue and consequence of this transacting shall prove
comfortable, and all shall be well, and that God, who engages for all in the
Covenant, (since he has determined the man to this happy choice) will in some
measure make him forthcoming, and will perfect what concerns him; Faithful is
He who has promised, who will also do it, 1 These. 5^ ^4. If this confidence be
wanting, the matter will be done with much fear and jealousy, if not worse,
and will still prove a disquieting business to the man.

2. It should be done Holily. It is called, The Holy Covenant, Luke 1.72. The
holy things of David, Act. 13.34. Here it were fitting, that what is done in
this express transacting with God, should not be done passingly, and on the by,
but in some special address unto God; the thing should be spoken unto the Lord,
Psalm. 142.5. It is beseeming in so great a business, that a piece of time were
set apart for Confession and Supplication before God: yea, also the person so
transacting with God, should labor to have high apprehensions of Gods
greatness and sovereignty, 2 Samuel 7.22. Although He thus humble Himself to
behold things in Heaven and Earth, and these high and holy thoughts of Him,
will and should be attended with debasing and humbling thoughts of self,
although admitted to this high dignity, 2 Samuel 7.18. It is no small thing to be
allied unto, and with the Great GOD of Heaven, and His Son CHRIST; as David
speaks, when King Saul did offer his Daughter unto him, 1 Samuel 18.22. Yea
further, there should be special guarding and watching, that the heart keep
Spiritual in transacting with God; there is great reason for this holy way of
performing the duty; for, men are ready to mistake themselves, and to shape the
Lord according to their own fancy, and to turn carnal in the business; since it
is a Marriage transaction held out in all the ordinary Expressions of Love, as
in the Song of Solomon, Isa. 62.5. Zeph. 3.17.

The Fourth thing we shall speak a word unto, is, What should f^llow upon this
express verbal Covenanting with God: I say, beside that Union and Communion
with God in Christ, following upon believing, if a man explicitly by word
transact with God;

1. He should thenceforth be singularly careful to abide close by God in all
manner of Conversation: For, if a man thenceforth do any thing unsuitable, he
does falsify his word before God, which will stick much in his Conscience, and
prove a snare: if a man henceforth mistake God, and take on him to dispose of
himself, since he is not his own, and has opened his Mouth unto the Lord, he
makes enquiry after vows, and devoureth that which is holy, Prove. 20.25.

2. He who so transacteth with God, should hold steadfast that determination and
conclusion. It is a shame for a man, whose heart has closed with God, and
whose mouth has ratified and confirmed it solemnly before Him, to contradict
himself again, and to admit any thing to the contrary, he ought boldly to
maintain the thing against all deadly.

Then let me obtest you who desire to be established in the matter of your
interest in God, that with all conveni^cy you set apart a piece of time for
Prayer before God, and laboring to work up your heart to Seriousness,
Affection, and the Faith of the duty, to make a Covenant, and to transact with
God by express word after this manner.

O Lord, I am a lost and broken Creature by Nature, and by innumerable actual
transgressions which I do confess particularly before thee this day; and
although, being born within the visible Church, I was from the Womb in Covenant
with thee, and had the same Sc^d unto me in Baptism, yet for a long time, I
have lived without God in the world, senseless and ignorant of my Obligation,
by virtue of that Covenant. Thou have (at length) discovered unto me, and bound
upon my heart, my miserable state in my self, and have made manifest unto my
heart, the satisfying relief thou have provided by Christ Jesus, offering the
same freely unto me, upon condition that I would accept of the same, and would
close with the^ as my God in Christ, warranting and commanding me upon my
utmost Peril, to accept of this offer, and to flee unto Christ Jesus: yea, to
my apprehension, now thou have sovernighly determined my heart, and shaped it
for Christ Jesus, leading it out after him in the offer of the Gospel, causing
me to approach unto the living God, to close so with Him, and to acquiese in
his offer, without any known guile. And that I may come up to that
establishment of Spirit in this matter, which should be t^ my comfort, and the
praise of thy Glorious Grace, therefore I am here this day to put this matter
out of question, by express words before thee, according to thy will. And now,
(...) unworthy as I am, do declare, That I (...) that CHRIST JESUS, who was s^
(...) Jerusalem, was the Son of GOD, and the Savior of the world; I do believe
that record, That there is Life Eternal for men in Him, and in Him only: I do
this day in my heart, please and ^quiese in that device of saving Sinners by
Him, and do entrust my Soul unto Him: I (...) accept of Reconciliation with God
through (...), and do close with thee as my God in H^: I choose Him in all that
he (...), and all that may follow Him, and do resign up my sel^, (...) I am, or
have, unto thee, desiring it (...) divorced from every thing have (...) and
that without exception (...) of any thing, (consistent with (...) ^dge) or
^ended ^ersion; (...) the hand to thee, and do take all things about me
witnesses, that I, whatever I be, or have hitherto been, do accept of Gods
offer of peace through Christ, and do make a sure Covenant with thee this day,
never to be ranversed, hoping that thou will make all things forth coming, both
on thy part and mine, seriously begging (as I desire to be saved) that my
Corruptions may be subdued, and my neck brought under thy sweet yoke in all
things, and my heart made cheerfully to acquiese in whatsoever thou do unto
me, or with me, in order to these ends. Now, Glory be unto thee, O Father, who
devised such a Salvation, and gave the Son to accomplish it: Glory be to Christ
Jesus, who at so dear a ^ate, did purchase the outletting of that love from the
Father's bosom, and through whom alone this access is granted, and in whom I
am reconciled unto God, and honorably united unto Him, and am no more an enemy
or stranger: Glory to the Holy Ghost, who did alarm me when I was destroying my
self; and who did not only convince me of my hazard, but did also open my eyes
to behold the relief provided in Christ; yea, and did persuade and determine my
wild heart to fall in Love with Christ, as the enriching treasure, and this day
does teach me how to Covenant with God, and how to impropriate to my self all
the sure mercies of David, and blessing of Abraham, and to secure to my self
the favor and friendship of God for ever. Now with my Soul, Heart, Head, and
whole man, as I can, do acquiese in my choice this day, henceforth resolving
not to be my own, but thine^; and that the care of whatsoever concerns me shall
be on thee as my Head and Lord, protesting humbly that failings on my part,
(against which I resolve, thou know) shall not make void this Covenant, for
so thou have said, which I intend not to abuse, but so much the more to cleave
close unto thee, and I must have liberty to renew, ratify, and draw extracts
of this transaction as often as shall be found needful. Now I know thy consent
to this bargain stands recorded in Scripture, so as I need no new signification
of it; and I, having accepted of thy offer upon thy own terms, will henceforth
wait for what is good, and for thy Salvation in end: as thou are Faithful,
pardon what is amiss in my way of doing the thing, and accept me in my sweet
Lord JESUS, in whom I only des^re Pardon; and in Testimony hereof, I set to my
Seal that GOD is true, in declaring Him a Competent Savior.

Let People Covenant with God in fewer or more words, as the Lord shall dispose
them: for we intend no Platform of words for any person; only it were fitting
that men should before the Lord, acknowledge their lost state in themselves,
and the relief that is by Christ, and that they do declare that they accept of
the same as it is offered in the Gospel, and do thankfully rest satisfied with
it, intrusting themselves henceforth wholly unto God to be saved in His way,
for which they wait according to His Faithfulness. If men would heartily and
sincerely do this, it might heartily through the Lords blessing, help to
establish them against many fears and jealousies; and they might date some good
thing from this day and hour, which might prove comfortable unto them when they
fall in the dark afterward, and even when many failings do stare them in the
face perhaps at the hour of Death, 2 Samuel 23.5. It is much if a man can appeal
unto God and say, Thou know there was a Day and an Hour, when in such a
place I did accept of Peace through Christ, and did deliver up my heart to
thee, to write on it thy whole Law without exception, Heaven and Earth are
witnesses of it: remember the word unto thy Servant, on which thou causedst me
to hope.

Object. X.
I dare not adventure to speak such words unto God, because I find not my heart
coming up full length in affection and seriousness: so, I should but lie unto
God, in transacting so with Him.

Answ.
It is to be regrated that men's heart does not, with much bensail of desire and
affection, embrace and welcome that blessed offer and portion: Yet for answer
to the objection, remember; (1.) That those to whom the Lord gives the new
heart, forming Christ in them, the whole heart is not renewed, there is flesh
and spirit, lusting against other, the one contrary unto the other; so as a man
can neither do the good or evil he would do, with fall be^sail, Gal. 5.17. It
is well if there be a good part of the heart going out after Christ, desiring
to close with Him on his own terms. (2.) That there is often rational love in
the heart unto Christ Jesus, expressing it self by a respect to his
Commandments, 1 John 5.5. when there is not a sensible prevailing love which
makes the Soul sick, Cant. 2.5. Men must not always expect to find this. I
say then, although somewhat in your heart draw back, yet if you can say, you
are convinced of your broken state without Him, you want a Righteousness to
cover your guilt, and you want strength to stand out against Sin, or to what is
pleasing before God: you also see fullness in Him in both these respects; you
dare say, somewhat within your heart, would be fain at him upon his own terms,
and would have both Righteousness for justification, and Strengh in order to
sanctification: and what is within you contradicting this, is your burden, in
some measure, and your bondage. If it be so, your heart is brought a tolerable
length; go on to the business and determine the matter by Covenanting with God,
and say with your mouth, that you have both righteousness and strength in God,
as He has sworn your shall do, Isa. 45.24. It is approven Divinity to say unto
God, I believe, when much mis-belief is in me, and the heart divided in the
case, Mark 9.24. Withal, show unto God how matters are in your heart, that so
you may be without guile before Him, concealing nothing from Him* and put your
heart, as it is in his hand, to write his Law on it according to the Covenant:
for that is the thing he seeks of men, that they deliver up their heart to
him, that He may stamp it with his whole Will, without exception: and if you
can heartily consent unto that j^dging Christ's blood a sufficient ransom and
satisfaction for man's transgression, you may go and expressly strike Covenant
with God, for your heart and affection is already engaged.

Object. XI.
I dare not so Covenant with God, lest I break to Him; yea, I persuade my self,
that if such a temptation did offer so and so circumstant^e, I would fall
before it, and succumb. The^e^ore to transact so with God, whilst I foresee
such a thing, were but to aggredge my Condemnation.

Answ.
1. You have already entered Covenant with God, as you are a Member of His
visible Church, and what is now pressed upon you, is, but that you more heartily,
sincerely, particularly, and more expressly Covenant and Transact with Him; you
are already obliged heartily to close with God in Christ, and if you do it in
heart, I hope the hazard is no greater by saying that you do so, or have done
so.

2. What will you do if you shift hearty transacting with God in Christ, and do
not accept His peace as it is offered? You have not a Second of it in the
world; either you must ^o this or perish forever: and if you do it with your
Heart, you may also with your Tongue.

3. If people may scar at Covenanting with God because they will afterward
transgress; Then not one man should Covenant with God: for surely every one
will transgress afterward, if they live any length of time after the
transaction; and we know no way like this to secure men from falling: for if
you Covenant honestly with Him, he engages, beside the new heart, to put His
Fear and Law therein, to give his Spirit to cause you to walk in His way: And
when you Covenant with God, you deliver up your self unto Him to be sanctified,
and made conform to His will. It is rather a giving up of your self to be led
in his way in all things, and kept from every evil way, than any formal
engagement on your part, to keep His way, and to hold off from evil. So that
you need not f^ar at the Covenant, the Language whereof is, W^l^ thou not be
made clean^ Jer 13.27. And all that shun to strike Covenant with God, do
thereby declare, that they do not desire to be made clean.

4. As it is hard for any to say confidently they will transgress, if such a
temptation did offer, so and so circumstantiate, because men men may think that
either God will keep a temptation out of their way, or not suffer them to be
tempted above what they are able to bear, or give to them a way of escape, Psalm
46.1 1 Cor. 10.13. So the question is not, what I may do afterward, but, what
I now resolve to do. If my heart charge me presently with any deceit or
resolution to transgress, I must lay aside that deceit before I transact with
God. But if my heart charge me with no such purpose, yea, I dare say I resolve
against every transgression: and although I think will fall before such and
such a temptation, yet that thought flows not from any allowed and approven
resolution to do so, but from knowledge of my own Corruption, and of what I
have done to provoke God to desert me. But the Lord knows I resolve not to
transgress, nor do I approve any secret inclination of my heart to ^ch a sin,
but would reckon it my singular mercy to be kept from sin in such a case; and I
judge my self a wretched man, because of such a body of Death within me, which
does threaten to make me transgress. In that case, I say my heart does not
Condemn me, therefore I may and ought to have confidence before God, 1 Joh^
3.21. If this then be the case, I say to thee, although thou should afterward
fail many ways, and so perhaps draw upon thy self sad temporal strokes
thereby, and lose for a season many expressions of His love: Yet there is an
Advocate with the Father to plead thy Pardon, 1 John 2.1. who has satisfied
for our breaches, Isa. 53.5, 6. And for His sake, God resolves to hold fast
the Covenant with men after their transgression, Psalm. 89.30, -- 37. Else how
could He be said to betroth us to Himself forever? Hos. 2.19, 29. and how could
the Covenant be called Everlasting, ordered in all things and sure, if there
were not ground of c^mfort in it, even when our ^rt is not so^nd so with God? 2 Samuel 22.23. Yea, it were no better than the Covenant of Works, if these who
enter it with God, could so depart from Him again, as to make it void unto
themselves and to put themselves into a worse condition, then they were into
before they made it, J^ 32.4^. compared with, Heb ^.6. The Lord hates putting
away Mal. 2.16. No honest heart will stumble on this, but will rather be
strengthened thereby in Duty, H^ 14.9. For other ties and bonds, beside divorce
and punishment by Death, do oblige the ingenuous Wife unto Duty. So here, men
will Fear the Lord and His Goodness, Hos. 3.5.

Object. XII.
I have at the Celebration of the Lords Supper, and at some other occasion,
Covenanted expressly* ver^ with God; but my fruitlesness in His ways, and the
renewed jealousies of my Gracious state, makes me question if ever I
transacted with God in Sincerity, and I think I can do it in no other ways
then I have done it.

Answ.
1. Men are not to expect fruitfulness according to their desire, nor full
assurance of Gods favor, immediately after they have fled unto Christ, and
expressly transacted with God in Him These things will keep a man on work all
his days. The Saints had their failings and short comings, yea, and
backslidings, with many fits of dangerous mis-belief, after they had very
seriously and expressly closed with God, as their God in Christ.

2. Many do look for fruitfulness in their walk and establishment of Faith,
from their own Sincerity in transacting with God, rather than from the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus. They heft their heart in their own honesty and resolutions,
and not in the blessed root Christ Jesus, without whom we can do nothing, and
are vanity in our best estate. Men should remember, that one piece ^f Grace
cannot produce any degree of Grace; further, nothing can work Grace, but the
Arm of Jehovah: and if men would lean unto Christ, and Govenant with Him as
their duty absolutely, whatsoever may be the consequence, at least, looking
only to Him for the suitable fruit, it should fare better with them: God
pleases not, that men should betake themselves unto Christ, and Covenant with
Him for a season, until they see if such and such fruit and establishment shall
follow, purposing to disclaim their interest in Him and the Covenant, if such
and such fruit does not appear within such a length of time. This is to put the
ways of God to a trial, and is very displeasing unto Him: men must absolutely
close with CHRIST and Covenant with HIM, resolving to maintain these things as
their duty, and a ready way to reach fruit, whatsoever should follow thereupon,
they having a Testimony within them, that they seriously design conformity to
His revealed Will in all things; and that they have closed Covenant with Him
for the same end, as well as to be saved thereby.

3. Men should be sparing to bring in question their sincerity in transacting
with God, unless they can instruct the same, or have great presumptions for it.
If you can instruct any deceit or guile in your transacting with Him, you are
obliged to disclaim and rectisie it, and to transact with God honestly, and
without Guile: But if you know nothing of your deceit, or guile, in the day you
did transact with him; Yea, you can say, that you did appeal unto God in that
day, that you dealt honestly with him, and intended not to deceive; and did
obtest Him according to His Faithfulness, to Search and Try if there was any
crookedness in your way, and to discover it unto you, and heal it, Psalm.
139.23, 24. and afterward you came to the light, that your deeds might be made
manifest, Joh. 3.20, 21. And you can say, that Gods answer from His Word to
you, in so far as you could understand, were answers of Peace, and
confirmations of your Sincerity. Yea further, You dare say, that if upon Life
and Death, you were again to transact with Him, you can do it no other way, nor
intending more sincerity and seriousness then before: Then I dare say unto
thee, in the Lords Name, thou ought not to question thy Sincerity in
transacting with God, but to have confidence before God, since thy heart does
not Condemn thee, 1 John 3.21. And thou art bound to believe, that God deals
Uprightly with the Upright man, and with the Pure does show himself Pure, Psalm.
18.25, 26. If a man intend Honesty, God will not suffer him to beguile himself,
Yea, the Lord suffers no man to deceive himself, unless the man intend to
deceive both God and Men.

4. Therefore, impute your unfruitfulness to your unwatchfulness and your
misbelief, and impute your want of full assurance, unto an evil heart of
unbelief, helped by Satan to act against the glorious free Grace of God, and
charge not these things upon want of sincerity in your closing with Christ. And
resolve henceforth to abide close by the root, and you shall bring forth more
fruit; and by much fruit you lay your self open to the witness of Gods Spirit,
which will testify with your spirit, that you have sincerely and honestly
closed with God, and that the rest of your works are wrought in God and
approven of Him; and so the witness of the Spirit and the Water, joining with
Blood, whereupon you are to lay the weight of your Soul and Conscience; and
where alone you are to sink the Curses of the Law due unto you for all your
sins, and failings in your best things. These three do agree in one, viz. that
this is the way of Life and Peace, and that you have interest therein, and so
you come to quietness and full assurance, Joh. 15.4, Joh. 14 21, -- Romans 8.16.
1 John 5.8.

O Blessed bargain of the New Covenant, and thrice Blessed Mediator of the
same! Let Him ride prosperously, and subdue Nations and Languages, and gather
in all His Jewels, that honorable Company of the Firstborn, and stately troup
of Kings and Priests, whose Glory it shall be to have washed their Garments in
the Blood of that spotless Lamb, and whose happiness shall continually flourish
in following Him whithersoever He goes, and in being in the immediate Company
of the Ancient of days; one sight of whose Face, shall make them in a manner,
forget that ever they were in the Earth. Oh, if I could persuade men to believe
that these things are not Yea and Nay, and to make have toward Him, who
hastes to judge the world, and to call men to an account, especially about the
improvement of this Gospel. Even so, Come Lord JESUS.

The End of the Second Part.
The whole TREATISE resumed in a few Questions and Answers.
Quest. 1. WHAT is the great business a man has to do in the world?

Answer. To make sure a Saving Interest in Christ Jesus, and to walk suitably
thereunto.

Quest^ 2. Have not all the Members of the visible Church a Saving Interest in
Christ?

Answ. No verily; yea, but a very few of them have it.

Quest 3. How shall I know if I have a Saving interest ^n Him?

Answ. Ordinarily the Lord prepares His own way in the Soul, by a work of
Humiliation, and discovers a man's sin and misery to him, and exercises him
so therewith, that he longs for the Physician Christ Jesus.

Quest. 4. How shall I know if I have got a competent discovery of my sin and
misery?

Answ. A competent sight of it, makes a man take Salvation to heart above any
thing in this world: It makes him disclaim all relief in himself, even in his
best things: It makes Christ, who is the Redeemer, very precious to the Soul:
It makes a man stand in awe to sin afterward, makes him content to be saved
upon any terms God pleases.

Quest. 5. What other way may I discern a Saving interest in Him?

Answ. By the going out of my heart seriously and affectionately toward Him,
as He is held out in the Gospel, and this is Faith or Believing.

Quest. 6. How shall I know if my heart goes out after Him aright, and that my
Faith is true Saving Faith?

Answ. Where the heart goes out aright after Him, in true and saving Faith,
the Soul pleases Christ alone above all things, and pleases Him in all His
three Offices, to rule and instruct as well as to save; and is content to
cleave unto Him, whatsoever inconvenience may follow.

Quest. 7. What other marks of a Saving interest in Christ can you give to me?

Answ. He that is in Christ savingly, is a New Creature, he is graciously
changed and renewed in some measure in the whole man, and in all his ways;
pointing toward all the known Commands of God.

Quest. 8. What if I find sin now and then prevail over me?

Answ. Although every Sin deserves everlasting vengeance, yet if thou be
afflicted for your failings, confess them with shame of face unto God,
resolving to strive against them honestly henceforth, and flee unto Christ for
Pardon, you obtain mercy, and interest stands sure.

Quest. 9. What shall the man do who cannot lay claim to Christ Jesus, nor any
of those marks spoken of?

Answ. Let him not take rest, until he make sure unto himself a Saving interest
in Christ.

Quest 10. What way can a man make sure an interest in Christ, who never had a
Saving interest in Him hitherto?

Answ. He must take his Sins to heart, and his great hazard thereby, and he
must take to heart Gods offer of Pardon and Peace through Christ Jesus, and
heartily close with Gods offer, by betaking himself unto Christ, the blessed
refuge.

Quest. 11. What if my sins be singularly heinous and great beyond ordinary?

Answ. Whatsoever thy sins be, if thou will close with Christ Jesus by Faith,
thou shall never enter into Condemnation.

Quest. 12. Is Faith in Christ only required of me?

Answ. Faith is the only condition, upon which God does offer Peace and Pardon
unto men: But be assured, Faith, i^ i^ a true and saving, will not be alone in
the Soul, but will be attended wit^ true repentance, and a thankful study of
conformity to Gods Image.

Quest. 13. How shall I be sure that my heart does accept of Gods offer, and
does close with Christ Jesus?

Answ. ^o make a Covenant expressly, and by word speak the thing unto God.

Quest 14. What may shall I do that?

Answ. Set apart same bit of time, and having considered your own lost estate,
and the relief offered by Christ Jesus, work up your heart to please and close
with that offer, and say unto God expressly, that you do accept of that offer,
and of Him to be your God in Christ; and do give up your self to be saved in
His way, without reservation or exception in any case; and that you henceforth
will wait for Salvation in the way He has appointed.

Quest. 15. What if I break unto God afterward?

Answ. You must resolve on His strength not to break, and watch over your own
way, and put your heart in His hand to keep it: And if you break, you must
confess it unto God, and judge your self for it, and flee to the Advocate for
Pardon, and resolve to do no more so: and this you must do as often as you fail.

Quest. 16. How shall I come to full assurance of my interest in Christ, so as
it may be above controversy?

Answ. Learn to lay your weight upon the Blood of Christ, and study Purity and
Holiness in all manner of Conversation, and Pray for the witness of Gods
Spirit, to join with the Blood and the Water; and His Testimony added unto
these, will establish you in the Faith of an interest in CHRIST.

Quest. 17. What is the Consequence of such closing with God in Christ, by
Heart and Mouth?

Answ. Union and Communion with God, all good here, and His Blessed fellowship
in Heaven for ever afterward.

Quest. 18. What if I slight all these things, and not lay them to Heart, to
put them in Practice?

Answ. The Lord comes with His Angels in flaming Fire, to render Vengeance to
them who obey not this Gospel; and thy Judgment shall be greater then the
Judgment of Sodom and Gomorrha; and so much the greater that thou have Read
this Treatise: For, it shall be a Witness against thee in that Day.

FINIS.

