Christianus per Ignem.

Or, A Disciple WARMING of himself AND OWNING of his Lord: With Devout and
Useful MEDITATIONS, Fetched out of the FIRE, By a Christian in a Cold Season,
Sitting before it.

A Work though never out of Season, yet more Particularly, designed for the
Seasonable and Profitable Entertainment, of them that would well Employ their
Liesure by the Fireside.

Ig^eus esse debes, hoc est, Fervidus, in Colendo Deo ^^o, ut ne ille immittat
in te ignem a Coelo, et ^andem te adjudicet igni infernali! Alsted. Theol.
Nature. Boston: Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Benjamin Eliot at his
Shop. 1702.

A Praefatory POEM To the Little Book, Entitled, Christianus per Ignem.
THe Fire of Meditation burns
What Sense into the Fancy turns.
And all is G^ist that comes to Mill
Where thinking is with grace and skill
For all men know the busy mind
I to one Object not confined.
The touch, the taste, Eye, Ear and Smell,
Matter provide for musing well.
Invention, Judgment, Memory,
And Conscience have a faculty,
To make all praise him that made all:
The Sanctified thus bless Him shall.
There is a Stone (as I am told)
That turns all Metals into Gold:
But I believe, that there is none,
Save pious Meditation.
Yet if there be, sure this excels,
That (...) them Gold, and all things else.
The Brass, the Iron Dogs, and Tongs,
And Bellows that have leather Lungs
Fire, Wood, Brands, Ashes, Coal* and Smoke,
Do all to Godliness provoke:
The flame, the sparks, light, heat, and motion,
Are Metamorphosed to Devotion.
If Godliness be greatest gain,
And does when Gold is dross, remain;
Conclude then this Caelestial Stone,
Out does the Philosophic One.
The thoughts are like a swarm of Bees,
That fly both when and where they please;
Those little folks both work and play,
About a thousand flowers a day.
Yet in their lawless range contrive,
To bring in Honey to their Hive.
Who look for method in their march,
At Honey making are not arch.
The Sally's of our Authors Soul
So fly about without control:
Sometimes they clamber Heavens steep,
And sometimes into Hell do peep.
Good meditation both improve,
For both to Godly living move,
Methinks I see him climb the Sky,
Viewing the Flaming Fires on High,
And how the will of God, they do,
That we on Earth may do so too.
And then to Hell he does descend,
To know the Sinners woeful end:
He stands aloof, and hears the cry
Of Guilty worm; that cannot die,
But live in Lakes of flaming Fire,
That never! Never! shall Expire.
Then fired with zeal, like Lion bold.
Roars out, and tells what cannot be told;
Warns men to fly from Wrath to come,
Before the Judge pronounce their doom.
So snatching brands from Fire and Death.
He may his Fingers burn therewith;
Yet better so, than burn our Souls,
By vexing God, and pleasing ^ools.
Our Author judged such thoughts as these
Would profit men, and God would please:
If so, he gets his Souls desire,
And spent his time well by the Fire.
Who live nigh to the Frigid Zone,
In Paenitentials may bemoan,
The loss of many precious hours,
The Fire side day and night devours:
For of all loss the Fire does bring
The loss of time's the saddest thing.
We have no cause to grudge at him,
Who fills his time up to the brim,
And works for God, himself, and friends,
Even whilst he warms his fingers ends.
Come Reader if thou do aspire
To warm thy self by Holy Fire,
Come set by this, or take a Coal,
Which will both light and heat thy Soul:
And will perfume, and purify
Thy mind, and make it heavenly.
It will not scorch thine eyes nor skin,
Nor will it Carbonade thy Shin:
Yet Bones and Marrow penetrates,
And like to like it generates.
Thine Hearth to make an Altar tries,
Thy self a Living Sacrifice;
And turns the use of common things
To Ince^se and Burnt offerings.
It will digest thy Crudityes,
And save from slander, chat, and Ives.
And will redeem the time thou have
By other Fire been wont to wast.
It teaches the Refining trade,
And of what metal thou art made;
It takes away the dross and tin,
Makes Gold without, and Gold within;
It makes a New man of the Old,
And cast's him in another mould.
Now if thy musing burn not thus,
Thy Fire's an Ignis fatuus.
Fear lest the Founder melt in vain,
With but his labor for his pain:
Lest thou prove Silver reprobate,
Which God and man reject, and ^^te,
And when the Great Refiner come,
Thou prove a Caput mortuum.
Excuse me, Reader, I have done,
But thou have scarcely yet begun:
Come, read the Book, and by and by,
Thou will commend it, what need I?
And if the Authors Fire but burn,
Praise or dispraise will serve his turn.
But if these thoughts to thee seem vile,
Produce thine own, thou had the while;
If thine burn purer, I design,
To leave his Fire, and set by thine:
For I am cold, and need the best,
Mean while what warms me I have bless.
Nicholas Noyes
THE INTRODUCTION.
ONE of the Best Things, that can be done for other men, by any man, who would
make it his Business to Do Good unto all, is to suggest and supply Good
Thoughts unto them. Tho it may be disputed, whether this be the First
Proposition, whereof any man can be certain, as a New Philosophy has taught us,
I think, therefore I am; yet it is no New Divinity to teach, that As Men Think,
so they are. That Noble Faculty of Thinking, wherewith a man is enabled, and
enobled above the Beasts of the Field, being well or ill employed, will either
turn men into Fellows for Angels, or make men worse than the Beasts that
perish. The Infinite Perfections of God, the Wonderful Mysteries of the Lord
Jesus Christ, the amazing Circumstances of the Future State, the various
Preparations of men in this world, and other Circumstances referring to that
State; the Illustrious Operations of the Almighty both in Creation, and in
Government; and His various Dispensations toward our Selves in particular;
such things as these, are most proper, and worthy, and useful for a Rational
and a Renewed Soul to Think upon. And a man full of Good, and Wise, and Right
Thoughts upon these Great Themes, will be a Good man, and furnished for the
Doing of much Good unto many others.

Meditation is therefore a Duty of so much Evidence and Consequence in
Christianity, that they can be no Christians, nor acquainted in the least
measure with the Divine Oracles, who do not confess their Obligations unto it:
And yet it must be confessed, That one grand cause why Christianity so much
Languishes, is because that so few Christains duly practice it. Our Bible very
frequently commends unto us, Consideration, and a Meditating on God, and on His
Laws: And through the want of this Meditation it is that all the Ordinances and
all the Providence of God, are so ineffectual unto the most of men, and they
continue so much without Life, and Light, and Peace all their days, and at
last perish among those who do not Consider their Latter End.

One main Objection, which the Slothful Hearts of men make (though indeed their
Sloth fullness be the main Objection!) against the Exercise of Meditation, is,
their Ignorance of a good Method, for the Exercise. Now for a more Fired
meditation, there is room in Truth for a vast variety of Method. For a
Rumination on the Word of God, after the Reading or the Hearing of it, (which
if we use not, what sort of Creatures are we?) there needs no other Method, but
only that of the Word it self, which we have Read or Heard. But then there is a
further Meditation, for which a Christian should now and then Retire, that he
may therein Enjoy a glorious Conversation with the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh: and there is one General Rule, to be offered about our proceeding in it.
That is This; Let the Meditation be sure to consist of Two Parts: Let the first
part be, to Inform our selves, and let the second part be to Affect our selves.
In the first part, of our Meditation, we may either Handle a ^ert, or we may
Answer a Case, in both of which, the Method is only, to speak unto it as well
as we can; or else we may Discourse on a thing, whereon if we would manage our
Discourse to purpose, we may observe, In the first place. The nature, (or
Definition) of the Thing; and the Titles which the Scripture puts upon it: Next
the Destribution of the Thing; Thirdly, the Causes of it; Fourthly, the effects
of it; Fifthly, the Subjects of it; Sixthly, the Adjuncts of it; Seventhly, the
Opposites of it; and Eighthly, the Comparisons of it. In the Second Part of our
Meditation, Let there be always these three Steps First, An Examination, of our
own Hearts, and Lives, relating to what we are upon: Secondly, An Expostulation
with our selves to Quicken our Better Conduct; Thirdly, A Resolution of a
Better Conduct in certain special Instances of Obedience. Let numberless
Ejaculations be intermixed throughout the whole Exercise; and then let all
Expire in a more Set Prayer, for such Graces of Heaven, as may be most
agreeable to our Meditation.

A Christian, that would conscientiously maintain a course of such Meditation,
[Suppose, for the most part, a Quarter of an Hour, or more, every Evening,]
would find incredible Advantages arising from it. The Advantages would be such,
that from a sense of them, I remember with what a Pathos, the famous Dr. Hall
concludes his Exhortation of his Reader to the cheerful practice of it; Let him
Curse me upon his Death Bed (says he) if looking back from thence, to the
bestowing of his former times, he acknowledge not these Hours, placed the most
happily in his whole Life; if he then wish not, he had worn out more Days in
so profitable and Heavenly a work.

But then there is another sort of more Transient Meditation, wherein the
Christian that shall accustom himself unto it, will find a Lasting
Satisfaction. All the Creatures of God about us, are so many Preachers from God
unto us: and there is no Speech nor Language, where their voice might not be
heard, if men who have Ears to bear, would but hear it. As there are Footsteps
of the Divine Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, to be seen upon all the
Creatures, Praesentemque docet quaelibet Herb^ Deum; so there are also
Numberless Lessons of Morality, which by the Help of the Analogy between the
Natural and Spiritual World, (that, if we may use a Jewish phrase, are both
Sealed with the same Seal,) we may learn from them. That passage of the
Psalmist. Psalm.119. 99. I have more understanding than all my Teachers, for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation: I remember, in the Pirke Avoth, one Ben Zoma so
reads it, I learn understanding from all my Teachers. Truly, we have a world of
Teachers about us; and if we were duly disposed unto Meditation on the
Testimonies of God, it would be a Delight unto us, to be Learning understanding
from them all. To fetch excellent, and enriching Instructions out of the
Creatures, that surround us, is most certainly one of the Highest Uses that we
can put them unto; Yea, we are in a inexpressible manner, the Candidates of the
World to come, when we put the Creatures unto such Blessed Uses: And we have
this Liberty of the Sons of God, that whoever be the Possessors of the
Creatures, we may even without asking the Owners leave, or breaking the Eighth
Commandment, thus use all that we see, and make it perhaps a thousand times
more serviceable unto us, than it is unto him that possesses it. It cannot but
be a great Sign, and Cause, and Fruit of Spiritual Mindedness in a Christian,
to have a mind set upon Spiritualizing the most Earthly Objects that are before
him: And if it Require not, yet it will Produce, not only Spirituality, but
also Ingenuity, more than a little, thus to set all the Creatures of God on
speaking unto us. Truly the Light is sweet; but usually a Ray of Light is much
the Sweeter, for descending from Heaven unto us, in some Earthly Garments of
Similitude. And if also we may be Foolishly Impatient at the Reproofs of our
Neighbors, and by that Impatience perhaps may discourage them from doing us
the kindness of their wise Reproofs, we may now obtain those to Reprove us,
that cannot Offend us. What an admirable, what a profitable Chemistry, Syrs,
have we now before us! A Chemistry, by which we may turn the meannest Objects
whatsoever, into what is far better than Gold, than much fine Gold! And for
this Chemistry, we have indeed one singular Advantage; That no Employment, no
Company, no Place, need hinder us from it. We may any where, every where, Apply
our selves unto it; and especially in the little Fragments of Time, that
intervene between our more Stated Businesses. There will also be this very
notable of it. That whenever we have been at the pains to make any Occasional
Reflections on any thing, there are not only Good Thoughts for the present
raised in us, but the Sight of those Things upon any occasion afterward, will
be ready to raise the same Good Thoughts again, and make our mind, for the
continual Feast of it, as that of the Righteous is: For, Anima Justi Caelum
est. Let no man be so vainly Impertinent, as to deride the Art, (and Heart,) of
making these Occasional Reflections. We have not only the Writings of the
Incomparable Robert Boil, of Sr. William Waller, of Dr. Spurstow, and other
persons of the finest Heart strings, recommending this Art unto us; but we have
above all the most unexceptionable Example of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, to
recommend it. Our Glorious Lord Jesus Christ; when He saw a Vine, or a Field,
or the Bread on the Table, or a stately House, or but an Hen and Chickens, His
Holy Soul presently Sallied forth to some Occasional Reflections thereupon,
which had much of Admonition in them. To abound in these works of the Lord,
will be no small Conformity to our most Exemplary Savior: and it will
therewithal most gloriously transfer this World, from the First, unto that
Second Adam.

The Method of proceeding in our Occasional Reflections, needs not be tied up
unto many strict Rules about it. I remember, Hugo de Sancto Victore tells us,
That there is a Three fold Voice of all the Creatures unto us, Accipe, Read,
Fuge. All Creatures may put us, in mind, first of something that we do Receive
of God, in them; next, of something that we should Return to God for them; and
thirdly, of something that we should Avoid, both of Transgression in them, and
so of Punishment from them. And it were a very sutiable Method of Thinking, to
touch upon each of those Three Heads in our Occasional Reflections Or at lest,
we may do well to oblige our selves unto the forming of a certain Triangle in
them, with first, Going (...) to observe the properties of the Creatures
themselves; then Coming back to Advise our selves, with Instructions brought
from them; and Lastly, Darting up to Him that Si^teth in the Heavens, our
Petitions, for such Compassion and Assistance, so we now see we need.

Behold, Reader, a Book of Occasional Reflections, all made upon one of those
Creatures, that we have daily before us: And if one of them, could afford so
many Good Thoughts, unto one of so dull, and so vain a mind, as that which the
Author of this Book, has to complain of (and yet he himself now finds, it might
have easily afforded him as many more!) What an Immense Treasure of Good
Thoughts might we find in all the rest? The Reason, why the Author singled out
the fire, for his Chemistry to Work upon, (the very thing that other Chemistry
does principally Work withal,) was, partly, because one day persuading some of
his Intimate Friends, to try their skill at Occasional Reflections, he
accidentally let fall this Encouragement; He would give them a Demonstration,
that as dry a Subject, as for instance, that of the Fire then before us, would
yield a Christian a whole Book full of Meditations; And he was obliged then to
give the Demonstrations: [making some good progress in it, as long ago as the
year, 1683.] And partly, because he was not insensible, That we all spend very
much of our Time at the Fire: Every body is concerned with it, and Relieved by
it: and he imagined, That by the way of Occasional Reflections thereupon, he
might convey those Good Thoughts unto his Friends, which would so more
beneficial to their Inward, than the Fire is to their Outward man. Go then, my
Little Book. If thou do any Hurt unto the Interests of Religion, or bring any
Strange Fire to the Altars of God, I am willing thou should have the Fate of
those vile Books, which being thrown into the Fire, made a witty Spectator say,
Nunquam vidi Clariorem Ignem, I never saw a brighter Fire! But certainly, It Is
Good, and not Hurt, for Christians to be warmed (even by the Fire,) into a
Fervency of Spirit, serving the Lord. And God can make this Little Book, of the
Fire, to be helpful, (as once a Pillar of Fire was) to Lead some of His People
unto their Everlasting Rest. This Little Book may help, like them whose Office
it was, to preserve the Sacred Fire, even to keep the Fire of zeal for Piety
and Charity in some or other from going out. Though Reading by Fire light is not
good for the Eyes, yet it will do their neither the Eyes, nor the Hearts of the
Readers any Damage, I hope, to Read of the Fire and see many Good Thoughts by
the Fire light. A Philosohus per Ignem, is counted a man of some Seize:
And he will attain something too, that shall be, Christianus per Ignem, Try,
Syrs, whether this Little Book will do any thing to make you such. The Law of
God was not the worse for being once uttered in the Fire, and for being on that
score, A Fiery Law. Christianity, though drawn but with a Coal, is altogether
Lovely.

Christianus per Ignem. Or, A Disciple WARMING himself And OWNING his Lord.
JOHN XVIII.18. They made a Fire of Coals (for it was cold,) and they warmed
themselves; and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.
THERE is now before us to be seen, A Disciple at the Fireside; but it is a
very Terrible and Amazing thing, that we may see in this Disciple. It will be
seasonable to Entertain you, with such a Sight, on so Cold a Day as this, when
the Season drives us all so much unto the Fire side. You shall all Return, if
you please, within this Hour, to your own Fire side; and that every Minute of
your own being in the mean Time here, may not seem an Hour, I Will keep you all
this Time, at the Fireside, where our Lord Jesus Christ was Den^'d by a
Disciple of His own; but with a Design thereby a preserve you, from the Danger
of doing like this Disciple

The Time of our Lords being Arraigned, and Condemned, for us, had this Remark
upon it; It was Cold. May that Circumstance add some warmth unto our
Meditations on the Sufferings of our Lord. When we Remember, that the Agonies
which our Lord in a Cold Night Endured for us, were such as notwithstanding His
then Lying on the Cold Ground, threw Him into a bloody Sweat, it may well make
us cry out, Lord, what means the Heat of this Anger? And beholding the Love of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto us, in these His direful Agonies, we must
acknowledge, The Coals of this Love, were Coals of Fire, having a most vehement
Flame. What a deplorable Thing is it, that a Disciple, who had newly seen these
Agonies of his Lords Love unto Him, should when Warming himself by a Fire of
Coals, in that very Night, find his own Love unto his Lord so Cold, as to Deny
Him!

That this Time should be so Cold, may be perhaps by some a little wondered at,
because the Spring was now advancing; the month of March was now begun* the
Harvest in that warm Climate was at hand. Our Biddulph, a famous English
Traveller being in Jerusalem, at this very Time of the year, found the Day so
hot, that he wondered how Peter could now be so Cold, as to creep unto the Fire
side; but when the Night arrived, he found such misty, damp and chill Dews
fall, as resolved his Doubt; for it was very Cold indeed. And the Jewish
Rabbi's, in some of their Canons, do suppose Frost and Snow sometimes
happening, at the ^oming in of N^san, a little before the Passover. It Is true,
the Greek word here used for Cold, is used in profane Authors, to signify the
Intensest cold of the Winter; but here, if it signify no other than the wet
cold of the AEquinoctial Nights, that was cold enough, to call for a Fire among
men that valued their Health; And Austin therefore gives this Account of it,
Non Hyems erat, et tamen Frigus erat, quale solet etiam aequinoctio verno
aliquan^o contingere.

It was one pungent Article, in the Sufferings of our Lord, That He was Denied
and Reproached by one of His own Disciples; even by a Peter, one of the most
considerable among all His Disciples. The First Adam Sinned, by Denying of God;
the Second Adam Suffered, by being Denied of man. And it seems, one
circumstance which led Peter unto this Transgression, of Denying his Lord, was
the occasion, which the Cold gave him, to warm himself among those that were no
Friends unto his Lord.

We have accordingly, Two Things before us; and when the Cold is driving us, to
warm our selves at the Fire, (...) may be very profitable for us, to warm our
Souls with the Thoughts of such Things. First, We have a wonderful and horrible
Transgression of the Apostle Peter* And Next, We have one little Occasion among
many others leading him thereunto. Accordingly, it shall be

Our First Observation.
An Eminent Professor, may, and, if Left unto himself he will, become a
Scandalous Denyer, of the Lord JESUS CHRIST.
We know, What has been, may be. Upon Peter's Fall, we may read that
Admonition, Admonetur omnis aetas, id fieri posse, quo^ aliquando factum est.
It may set our Souls even on Fire with Astonishment, for us to Read what has
been, in the Instance of Peter; whereto, I pray, give now your Attention.

The Denial of the Lord JESUS CHRIST by Peter, is Reported by all the Four
Evangelists, among the Sufferings of our Lord. For indeed the Sufferings of our
Lord thereby, were not a little aggravated: That one, who should have appeared
as a witness to the Innocence of his Lord, should now so Desert Him, and so
Deny Him, and so Adjure Him. No doubt, it made the Enemies of our Lord, the
more to insult over Him, and flout, See how bravely this Doctor has instructed
his Disciples! This doubtless hardened those Enemies in what they were about:
And our Lord over hearing the speeches of Peter, therefore looked back with
inexpressible Grief upon him. In the mean Time, sit still with admiration at
the Flaming Love of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was now Suffering for them that
were at this Time Sinning. Though our Lord were sensible, that Peter were now
Denying of Him, yet He would not give over the work of Dying for Peter, to save
Peter from the Sin of his Denial, that Peter might not be Denied by the
merciful God of Heaven, that the plagues which Peter was wickedly wishing to
himself might not come upon him, according to his wicked wishes. Behold, Syrs,
Behold, a Love the Flames whereof are more ardent, than those at which you
would now warm your selves. But I am very prone to suspect, that there was a
further special Design of all the Evangelists, in reporting Peter's Denial of
the Lord; and I believe Peter himself did, for that among other causes, desire
every one of them, and Mark above the rest, that they would particularly tell
the Story of his miscarriage in their Gospels. It Is This; Peter's Denying of our
Lord, gives an irrefragable and ungainsayable Demonstration, to the Truth of
what he asserted afterward in witnessing for our Lord. By Peter's Denying our
Lord' before He Dyed, there is produced an irresistible proof of the Truth in
his Testimony that our Lord Rose from the Dead. Had our Lord continued in the
State of Death, you may be sure, Peter would have persisted in his Denial of
Him. If our Lord had been found an Impostor, by His remaining under the Bands
of Death, Peter having thus Denied Him, would have gone on to Deny Him, and
Revile Him all his days. But now, instead of This; you have this very Peter
afterward writing two Epistles, and Preaching more than two thousand Sermons,
and Exposing himself to more than ten thousand Torments, that he might assure
the world, of his Lords Resurrection from the Dead. When Peter went about every
where commending and proclaiming, and adoring his Dearest JESUS, as the Messiah
of God, it was a mighty Confirmation to the Truth of his Testimony, to
Remember, This is the man, who once Denied and Foreswore that JESUS, whom he
now so magnifies! Thus our Incontestable Religion, like the Fire before you,
will fetch Fuel and Support from every thing. Oh! Be amazed at the deep
Counsils of God; Peter's Denial of Christ, is one thing that helps to render the
Christian Religion for ever undeniable!

The Narrative of this unhappy Business, the Denial of our Lord, by Peter, is
given us by the Four Evangelists, with some variety. They all reckon up Three
several Times of Peter's Denying the Lord; and the first of the Three which was
on the challenge of a Damosel, is very variously described. The Reconcilation
is easy: Several Speeches were uttered by the Damosel unto Peter, and about
him; and Peter made several Answers, whereof one of the Gospels does Relate
one, and Another, another. The Damosel first says to the Standers by, (as Luke
has it,) This man also was with Him; And then turning to Peter, she says (as
John has it,) Art not thou one of this man's Disciples? Whereupon she
peremptorily affirms, that she had seen Peter with Him, saying, (as Matthew and
Mark have it,) Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. This drew out the several
Answers of Peter, which the Evangelists have severally Recorded; All which
together make up the First Action of Peter in Denying his Lord; and That where
with our Discourse is now more immediately concerned. All this occurred, at
Peter's first coming to the Fire side.

Now, though we should be by the Fire side, where the Cold would not make us to
shake, yet it might make us even Shake, to consider the Horror of the Fact by
Peter there committed. There were horrible Aggravations of it!

For a Peter, to Deny his Lord! A Peter, Who was a Disciple, yea, an Apostle,
yea, a principal one! A Peter, who had lately made an Eminent Confession of the
Blessed Jesus, as being, The Christ, the Son of the Living God! A Peter, who
had seen the Caelestial Transfiguration of the Blessed Jesus in the Mount, and
heard a voice from the Excellent Glory proclaiming Him, The Beloved Son of God!
A Peter, who had been a famous Preacher of the Blessed Jesus, and from Him
Received a power to work Miracles in His Name! For such a Peter to Deny His
Lord! O most amazing! And for him to Deny such a Lord! still worse; to Deny the
Lord, of whom he had a little before, upon thorough Conviction said, Lord, Thou
have the words of Eternal Life; we believe, and are sure, that thou art that
Christ, the Son of the Living God! To Deny the Lord, that was now undergoing
all sorts of Sufferings and Miseries for him; yea, to Deny Him, with a
complication of Impiety? To cast off all Dependence upon God, and upon His
Providence and Faithfulness, and look on all our Lords Praedictions, as
Impostures! To be run down by a sorry, silly, little Door Keeper, and be more
afraid of a little Maid, than of the God, who Made the World, and of the Lord,
who shall Judge the World! To give unto the Lord, a positive Promise of Dying
for Him, and in a few Hours to break this promise, and not so much as venture
on Speaking for Him! To go on impaenitently, from one Denial to another, and
this, although the Lord had a few Hours before expressly F^re-warned him of
doing so; and he had at least an Hours Time to Recollect himself, and consider
what he was doing! Finally, To Lie against his Conscience, and Appeal to the
God of Truth, for the confirmation of the Lie; and Swear, and Curse, an Damn,
and with direful Imprecations, to wish all the Curses of Heaven upon him^l^, if
this Lie were not the Truth. I am amazed! I am amazed. Lord, What a thing is
this! Christians, I believe you begin to grow into some Heat of Indignation, at
so vile an Action. But let us rather make our more profitable Reflections upon
it.

Upon the Fall of Peter, the general Reflection to be made, is That which the
Ancients made upon the Fall of David; Non Cadendi, sed Resurgendi Exemplum, in
illo nobis est propositum: audiant qui non ceciderunt, ne cadant; audiant qui
ceciderunt, ut surg^nt: non sint delect atio minorum, Lapsus majorum; sed sit
Tremor minorum Lapsus majorum. Let the Fall of such a man, teach them that are
not Fallen, how to prevent Falling and them that are Fallen, how to Rise out of
their Falls. The Fall of so great a man, is a matter, not of Pleasure, but of
Terror, to them that are Less than he.

But let us descend unto a few more particular Admonitions.

Reflection I.
A very grievous Apostasy, though not a Total Apostasy, not a Final Apostasy, may
befall a man of Real Christianity. The Christianity of Peter, was not utterly
extinct, nor utterly did his Faith fail, when he fell into the Action of
Denying the Lord that bought him. It was by the Fireside, that Peter was
guil^y of this Action; and by the Fire side sometimes we may see an Emblem of
his Condition in it. You may think, there is no Fire left, when yet you will find
raked up in the Embers, a Coal, that will be afterward improved into a mighty
Flame. The Faith of Peter was a Coal covered in the Embers; he still had a
principle of Christianity in him, which was ready, when the present Sifting was
over, to have asserted, as once he did, his Jesus, to be, The Christ, the Son
of the Living God. Nevertheless, it was a terrible Swoon of Apostasy, which
this famous Christian was fallen into. The Perseverance of the Faithful, is an
Illustrious and Important Article of, The Faith once deliverd unto the Saints.
To Deny the Perseverance of the Faithful, or, to affirm, That every Believer
shall not certainly persevere in the Faith, is a very dangerous H^resy, of men
that are not found in the Faith. It must be granted, That Hypocrites may prove
Apostates. There is a Show of Grace, that may be Lost; a Seeming that may be
taken away. A Temporary Faith will prove no more than Temporary. [See Heb.6.4]
Yea, it must be granted, That if the Saints were Left unto themselves, they
would fall away Totally and Finally. Angels themselves did so. The Dragon would
sweep down Stars from Heaven, if they were not kept there, by the mighty power
of God. But for all this, The Perseverance of the Saints, is infallibly
secured. The Great God of Truth, has both Declared, and Promised, the
Perseverance of the Faithful in their Faith. It is declared, in 1 John.3.9.
Whatsoever is Born of God, his seed remains in him. It is promised, in
Joh.10.28. My Sheep shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my
Hand. Again, The Eternal Election of God, assures the Eternal Perseverance of
the Faithful. All the Faithful are Ordained unto Eternal Life, [Act.13.48.] Now
if any that are Ordained unto Eternal Life, should fall short of it, or lose
their Faith, it would be a Disappointment unto the Decree of God; The Decree of
God would be Defeated; yea, the very Knowledge of God, would be Deceived. This
were impossible: 'Twere Blasphemy to imagine it. [See 2 Timothy.2.19] Once more;
The Faithful are purchased by the Lord Jesus Christ, and United to Him. Should
they not persevere, the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, would be of none effect
unto some, for whom it is Designed of God; the price paid for some would be
Lost; yea, the Lord Jesus Christ would lose one of His Members. This, This also
is impossible.

Nevertheless, It Is very sadly true, That Believers may in some degree, and a
sad one, become Apostates. Grace may decline and wither grievously, in a true
Child of God. Some that have a Saving Faith in their Hearts may yet grievously
fall away from some ancient and vigorous efforts of that Faith.

Wherefore Syrs, Examine your selves, and if you find, That you are overtaken
with any Apostasy, Oh, don't ly in this condition. Recover, ye Backslding
Souls, Recover; and hear your Savior calling after you, Will ye also go away?

But that you may never be overtaken with any Total and Final Apostasy, Behold,
What you have now to do. Get beyond the utmost essays of Hypocrisy, and you
will get beyond the Hazards of the utmost Apostasy. You know who said,
Soundness and Integrity will preserve me. Make sure of a Real Change in your
Hearts, and give a real and hearty consent unto the New Covenant in all the
Articles of it: So you will have this one among the precious Articles of that
Covenant fulfilled unto you; Jer.32.40. I will put my Fear into their Hearts,
and they shall not De^art from me. Let it herewithal be Remembered, Though Faith
make you sure of perseverance, and preservation, yet you must not count your
selves excused from the means of your preservation. As in Act.27.24, 31. Though
it had been said unto Paul, God has given thee all them that Sail with thee,
yet Paul said unto the Centurion, Except such and such abide in the Ship, ye
cannot be Saved. The Doctrine of perseverance is no Enemy to Holiness; we are
not under the less obligation, but under the more Encouragement, for to Work
out our own Salvation Wherefore having first Exhorted you, to Beware of being
Scandalized at any thing that may seem to bear an ill Aspect on Christianity,
whether the Frowning Providence of God, or the foolish Behaviors of men, I
only add these two words. Let the best of us be Fearful. If an Apostle, and a
Pillar may fall, say, Why may not I? If we Fear, we shall not Fall: In Te Stas,
et non Stas* It Is presumption that is followed and punished with Apostasy; [See
1 Cor.10.12.] And let all of us be prayerful. Especially keep alive Secret
Prayer, if we would not have some open Fall. Apostasy usually begins at the
Closet door. Pray with David, Lord, Hold up my Goings in thy paths, that my
Footsteps may not Slip. And pray with Beza, Domine, quod Caepisti, perfice, ne
in portu naufragium accid^^. The Threefold Advice, thus given us, will be
notably confirmed by interweaving here some Reflection upon some occasion of
Peter's Apostasy.

First, It is plain, That Peter had been too Confident, and Arrogant. What
Confidence was it in him, to say, Luk.22.23. Lord, I am ready to go with thee,
both into Prison, and unto Death! What Arrogance, to say, Matthew.26 33. Though all
men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended! The
Ancients Descant with much Ingenuity, on Peter's pride, as the cause of Peter's
fall. And at last Bernard concludes with this Instruction, Sibi ipsi fiders,
non Fidei sed perfidiae est, nec-confidentiae sed Diffidentiae magis in seipso
habere Fiduciam.

Secondly, I^ is also plain, That our Lord Jesus Christ had given this
Admonition unto Peter; Mat.26 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
Temptation. But Peter shamefully neglected the Duty of Praying with Watching,
whereto he had been Admonished. This Negligence exposed him: and it will expose
all that are guilty of it: He that keeps not much on his Knees, is not far from
a Fall.

Thirdly, I^ is likewise plain, That Peter, though he had promised, I will never
be offended, was now offended, at the Disasters befalling our Lord Jesus
Christ. When Peter saw the Enemies of our Lord falling backward, at His Voice,
Now, who so mettlesome as he! But when Peter saw our Lord fall into the hands
of His Enemies, and Led away by them to all sorts of Miseries, Then he has no
more to say, but, I know Him not! It is a grievous thing to take up any
prejudices against the Lord Jesus Christ, and His Truths, and Ways, from the
Afflictions that we see attending of them. Our Lord therefore said, Mat.26.31.
All ye will be offended because of me.

Reflection II.
To choose Evil Company, is a Folly, that will be Accompanied with a world of
Evil. What was it that betrayed Peter? It was his falling into Evil Company. He
who does That, knows not into what he shall Fall. We read, Luk.22.55. When they
had kindled a Fire, and were sat down together, Peter sat down among them, And
by Sitting down among those, who Blasphemed and Reviled the Lord Jesus Christ,
where he durst not Reprove them, he came at length to do like the rest of the
Company. It was a Note long ago made upon this matter; Vide quam noxia sint
prav^rum Colloquia, quae cogunt Petrum, ut neget Christum, quem inter
Discipulos Confessus erat Dei Filium. Alas, The Devil has not a stronger
Enchantment for the Children of men, than Evil Company. Syrs, If you would be
preserved from Denying of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and from Destroying your own
SOULS, be very cautious of your Company; under the awe of that awful word Prove.
13.20. A Companion of Fools shall be Destroyed.

Reflection III.
Sin is a Fruitful, as well as a Fearful Evil, and one Sin, seldom goes alone.
When Peter had begun to gratify the Tempter, where did he stop? The beginning
of his miscarriage, was that, Mat 26.58. He followed the Lord Jesus Christ afar
off; and held back from sticking so close unto Him, as he should have done. But
whither did that slavish Fear carry him on? It carried him on, to the
Renouncing and Forswearing of the Lord, and this with a prodigious Reiteratton
of it. Sin does harden the Heart. If a man be once prevailed withal to Sin a
little, he will shortly Sin a great deal. A Sinner is, as we read, 2 Timothy.2.26.
In the snare of the Devil. Syrs, If you come into that Snare, you cannot
imagine how you will find your selves more and more Entangled in it: Oh, Beware
of the very first and least Entanglements!

Reflection IV.
Though a man's Fall from God, may be very Criminal, very Tragical, yet he may
Arise by Repentance, and when he does Repent, he shall arrive to Forgiveness.
We all hear the Fall of Peter, as one of the Terriblest Things, that ever we
heard. But what a wonderful Thing is This! Fallen Peter is recovered by
Repentance. Our Lord Jesus Christ Looked on him, [ Lord, Bestow such an Heart
melting Look, on these backsliding Hearts of our!] and what was the effect of
it? We read, Mat.26.75. He wept bitterly: The Ancients add, until his Tears had
worn Furrows in his Cheeks. Oh! the astonishment, and indignation of Soul,
wherewith he now cried out of himself, What have I done! What have I done! The
Cock, that watchful Creature, no sooner Crow^d, but the Soul of Peter was
awaked out of the desperate Sleep, which had been upon him. And Lyre reports
from elder Antiquity, that Peter ever after this, would Rise at the Cock
crowing, and continue, Weeping, and Mourning, and Praying, till Sun rise. Well,
but more wonderful yet! The Repenting Peter is made a most amazing Example of
that Forgiveness, which the God of all Grace has to bestow upon the Returning
Sinner. Oh! The Sovereign Grace of Heaven! Judas is Damned, but Peter Saved.
When our Lord, was Risen from the Dead, one of the Angels, with whom there is
Joy over a Returning Sinner, sends a Message of it unto all the Disciples, but
by Name unto Peter. Peter accordingly found his Risen Lord, Reconciled unto
him; and as a Token and Effect of it, the Lord gave him opportunity with
Disposition, to Repeat his Affection to Him, [yea, and this by the Fire side
also! See Joh.21.9] as often as his Denial of Him had been Repeated. Yea, This
very Peter was afterward made a worker of glorious Miracles; He who might
admire that the Lord had not struck him Dead, for sinning so atrociously
against Him, was used by the Lord for to Strike other Sinners Dead; yea, and
for to Raise others from the Dead. And he who had by Sin given Scandal both to
Jews and Gentiles, was used, first as a most successful Preacher of the Gospel
to the Jews, and afterward, he was the first that Preached the Gospel of
Salvation from Sin, unto the Gentiles. Yea, that very Peter, who with his
Tongue, had horribly denied the Lord Jesus Christ, and obeyed the Evil Spirit,
by the Fire side. (and that he might be quietly by the Fire!) had the Holy
Spirit by the Lord Jesus Christ, within a little while bestowed upon him, with
a Symbol of a Fiery Tongue, enabling him to speak in many an Unknown Tongue,
the Magnalia Dei, before thousands of Witnesses! Oh! What Glorious Things, will
the God of all Grace do for a Returning Sinner! Let the Sinner sincerely Return
unto the Lord, and He will have mercy, unto our God, and He will abundantly
pardon.

All of this Discourse, and much more, might we have with Peter, if we could
now meet him at the Fire side. But we may be sure, That Peter would lay no
change upon us more powerful than this; Above all, take heed, O Christians,
take heed of Denying the Lord Jesus Christ. Now that this change may the more
closely affect us, we must Remember a Remark of Austin upon Peter's Denial of
his Lord: Petrus negavit Christum, cum se negaret ejus esse Discipulum; Sic non
solum ab eo negatur Christus, qui dicit eum non esse Christum sed etiam ab eo
qui cum sit, negat-se esse Christianum. When Peter denied himself to be a
Disciple of the Lord, he denied the Lord Himself. Syrs, we Deny the Lord Jesus
Christ, if we Deny to make Profession of Him, or to yield Obedience to Him. If
we don't Behave our selves, as it become the Disciples of the Lord Jesus
Christ, or if we Deny to follow His Directions, we Deny the Lord Himself. Yea,
if we Deny not our selves, we Deny our Lord.

But then there is one special season for our Watchfulness, in this matter: And
that shall be specified in

Our Second Observation.
Sometimes the Cold of the Weather, and the Winter, proves to men an Occasion,
of their Denying the Lord, who made the Cold, and all our Succors against the
Cold.
Quid prosuit Petro Exterius manus pidesq^^ad Ignem Calefeciffe, animo interim
interius obriguisse! Says one upon it. What Good got Peter by the Fire, when he
did so much Ill at the Fire! and what signified his warming o^ his Hands and
his Feet, while the zeal of his Heart for his Lord, had such a Cold upon it.
Alas, The Cold of the Weather, and the Winter, often betrays us into a Moral
Cold, which is infinitely worse than the Natural; and our want of being at the
Fire, puts out the Fire of Religion in us. The Psalmist could say, Psalm.147.18.
Who can stand before Gods Cold! Even the Constancy of our Souls, in the Service
of God, is often impaired and impeded by His Cold; though methinks, its being His
Cold, should rather pinch us to the doing of our Duty in some respects, than
chill; us from it.

We will briefly, and as the Cold now upon us, will allow us, Enquire,

First, How do men sometimes Deny the Lord on the Occasion of the Cold?

Know it, Syrs, That when Duty to the Lord, is omitted, by reason of the Cold,
then the Lord is Denied for the Cold. The Neglect of Christian Duties, is
called, A Denial of the only Lord God, even of our Lord Jesus Christ. We read
of some, who, In works Deny Him. When the Cold puts us by the Doing of such
Good Works, as might be done by us notwithstanding the Cold, we practically,
Deny the Lord, because it is Cold. We Deny that our Lord Jesus Christ is our
Savior, we Deny that He is our Sovereign, we Deny, that He is our Example,
when we Deny to keep the Precepts which He has commanded us to keep with
Diligence. Impiety is called, 1 Timothy.5.8. A Denying of the Faith. If we are
Impious, we are Denyers of the Lord.

Now the Cold is often made an unjust, and an undue pretense for men's omitting
of their Duty. Many a man is that Sluggard, who, (Prove.20.4) will not plough
(nor do many another Duty) by reason of the Cold. Sometimes, by reason of the
cold, we omit the Duties of Piety. Our Supplications are Frozen, when the Frost
has taken every thing else: Our Meditations are sapless, when the Sap is gone
from all the Fields about us; we needlessly absent our selves from the House of
God, when we can be warmer in our own Houses; and object the Snow, or the Wet,
as a Lion, in the way: We lay aside Working about our own Salvation, when our
Hands are Sealed up from doing our other work: We lay aside the Wars of the
Lord, or our combat with our interior Adversaries, when Retired into our
Winter Quarters. Piety cools, with every thing else.

Again, Sometimes by reason of the cold, we omit the Duties of Charity, Our
Charity is often as cold, as the Time, and because of the Time. When we are
Eating and Drinking at our Winter Tables, we are not grieved for those that
want Meat or Drink: Nor are we grieved for the poor, who have no Covering,
while we are well Covered, and are Shivering over a Brands End or two, (the
Widows Fire,) while we are more than sufficiently Warmed, Our own
circumstances, that should rather Excite us, to do all the Good we can, unto
those that are not so well circumstanced, congeal us rather into an
Insensibility of other peoples; and the Love of many waxes cold.

Once more; Don't we often mispend our Hours, by reason of the cold? Is not
advantage taken, when our Clocks will not go, for such a mispence of Time, as if
we dream the Time also Stood still! What Gaming, what Superstition, what
Profanity, and (which is to say All the rest, and All the worst!) What Evil
Company, is the Winter often made an occasion for? Truly, Our Lord Jesus
Christ, is in some degree Denied, by a such miscarriages.

We will then Enquire,

Secondly. How men may come rather to confess, than to deny the Lord, on the
occasion of the Cold?

A Crowd will do best in the Cold, I will crowd close together a few
Instructions.

First, Consider, O Christians, That the more Self denial you undergo, for the
Serving of the Lord Jesus Christ, under the Obstructions of the Cold, the
greater will be the Recompense which the Lord Jesus Christ will bestow upon
you, at the Spring of Heavenly and Eternal Glory, The more that our Devotions
do cost us, the greater is the comfort and sweetness of them, even in this
world* and the greater the Reward that is to come, in the World to come. The
Martyrs, that were Frozen to Death, went unto the pleasant Climate of Paradise.
Even those Bodies, that have suffered the Hardships of Cold, in the Service of
the Lord, shall one day be made Chariots of Fire, for the Spirits of the
Faithful. Syrs, I say unto you, 1 Cor.15.58. Your labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord.

Consider also, That there is a worse cold, than that of the Winter, against
which we are to be fortified and cautioned. There is the Cold of our Formality,
against which our wish must be, Oh! That I may be servant in Spirit, serving
the Lord! And, there is the Cold of our Unregeneracy, against which, our wish
must be, Oh! That this dark time of my Inactivity for serving the Lord, were
over with me! But, Let us nextly, Beware of perverting and abusing the
Dispensation which God gives us, because of the Cold. Because our Lord has
said, Mar.9.13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice; Let us not upon the Excuse
of showing mercy to our selves, defraud the Lord of that Sacrifice, which we
may be able to bring unto Him. Deal fairly with Heaven; And let us not be so
unmerciful unto our selves, [for in the issue, we prove so!] as to withhold
from the Lord, what we may, without any bearing against the Sixth Commandment,
bear to do f or Him, left we Sacrifice our selves unto His terrible Justice,
who will not be mocked!

Finally; When we are Warming our selves by the Fire, like Peter, because of
the Cold, Let us be warming our selves, with suitable Reflections. The Psalmist
could say, Psalm.39.3. While I was musing, the Fire burned. Syrs, While we have
the Fire burning on the Hearth before us, let us be musing, on such things, as
may cause another Fire to Burn within us; even a Fire of Zeal for the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the concerns of the Caelestial Kingdom. Even the Fire it self
may be made a notable matter, for abundance of Holy, and Useful, and Ingenious
Reflections. When we behold the Fire before us, there are very many points of
Christianity, which we may fetch out of it. I call to mind, That there is a
call given, Psalm. 148 8. Praise the Lord, o fire. I now say, Praise the Lord, O
Christian; and let the Fire cause thee to Praise the Lord, and make thee a
better Christian. I have met with a Note in the Incomparable Alsted; That as
the Lion fears nothing so much as the Fire, so the Devil fears nothing so much
as our Godliness, which is the true Fire of the Soul. Well, but now I may tell
you, That the Fire on the Hearth, may be made very subservient unto that Fire
of the Soul, and help to keep alive our Godliness. The Spirit of our Lord Jesus
Christ, carries us along through (...) Godliness, by being a Spirit of Burning
within us. Oh! Beware of Quenching that Spirit, by Disobedience or Sensuality,
more than you would beware of leaving your selves utterly without Fire, in the
sharpest Winter. But be sensible, That very particularly, by the Good Thoughts
extracted out of the Fire it self, the Spirit of the Lord, may do very much of
the Office, of a Spirit of Burning upon us.

The Approach to the Fire.
IT is related in the Journal of the Apostle Paul's Voyage to Rome, That being
Shipwrecked upon Malta, [Act.28.2.] The barbarous people showed no little
kindness, for they kindled a Fire. If I should now only kindle a Fire for my
Friends; though they might count it no little kindness, yet it were no more, than
what might be shown by a barbarous Maltese. I will therefore essay to do my
Friends a greater kindness, while indeed I shall therein do my self the
greatest kindness, of all, by making the Fire which we have kindled, yield a
Diviner sort of warmth unto us, than what is ordinarily ^est by the most of
them that approach the Fire. Let us address our selves unto it.

It is a passage in Lev. 26. 30. I will cut down your Images. But what if I
should read it, I will cut off your Fire places? The Original word used here
would invite us to Read it so: and when we consider the Sun Images mentioned in
the Prophets, [Isa.17. and and Ezekiel 6.4.] we shall be yet more invited so to
Read it. The Idolaters had places where in they kept Sacred Fires; called,
(...), by Strabo, and (...) by others. There are who derive both Name and Thing
from Ammon, who is the same with Cham, which is the Root of the Hebrew word now
under consideration. R. Bechai tells us, That those Fires were not at first
altogether of such an Idolatrous Character and Intention; but they were
intended as expressions of Thanksgiving to God for the Benefits of the Sun. We
have in Procopius, a Description of a (...). Chosraes (he says) went from the
Assyrians, to the Land of the Ardabiganians, which lies to the Northward. Here
is a great (...) or, FireHouse, which the Persians worship above all other
Gods; where the Magicians, keeping a perpetual Fire, perform their chief Rites,
with greatest exactness, and on the greatest occasions make use of it, as an
Oracle. We have another Description of such a (...) in Benjamin, when he comes
to Chenagam, and he says, That the Fire there is called, A Divinity. Others do
speak of them. Teixer a lays, That even to his Time, they were continued among
the Persians. They were in short, huge Furnaces kept with Superstitious Rites
in Honor of the Sun.

We have not so learned Christ, as to have our Idolatrous, Fire places. But we
shall Serve Christ if our Ordinary Fire places become Serviceable to us, on
Religious Accounts, as well as Natural Ones. The Fire places, at which we daily
warm our selves, may do as Good as dispense unto us, many an useful Oracle, if
we will Receive the Lessons, which may from thence arrive unto us. Let the Fire
places on our Hearth be as much without any Superstitious Respect from us, as
any place within or about our House. Yet let our Devotions to God, be, inflamed
by the Thoughts which th^se our Fire places may Raise in our minds. This, This
will be a Laudable Christianity. And we will proceed to the Christian Attempt.

Meditation I.
On the Fire proving it self to be indeed the Fire.
I See the Fire before me; But how do I know, that it is the Fire? The
Philosopher long ago answered, Qui tam Stulte quaerunt, Ignem tangant. Truly,
the proof of it, is better Felt, than Spoke. I feel that it is (...) Fire; I
have a Sense of it, that I cannot easily describe in words, unto another man; I
need no Arguments to convince me of it; and if there were Arguments to the
contrary, shaped with never such unanswerable Sophistry, I should think it
Answer enough unto them, I know it is otherwise!

This Meditation carries me to consider, How do I know the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament to be the Word of God! And that which makes the
consideration more agreeable, is, That this Word, is called, Jer.20 9. A
Burning Fire. It is a Thing of more than ordinary consequence unto every
Christian, to be well established in this point, How may a Christian indeed
know, That our Bible is the Word of God, or, a Book of Truth, and a Rule of
Life, given by Inspiration from Heaven? For, the influence of the Bible, on our
whole Behavior here, and Blessedness hereafter, depends on our Faith of this
point; and our grand Enemy labors nothing more, than to keep our Faith hereof
as Feeble as ever he can To confirm our Faith of our Bibles being the Word of
God, we are, not unfurnished with moral Arguments enough to silence the
contradiction of Sinners. It is infinitely reasonable to Believe, That the most
High God has committed unto Writing, some where or other, what He would have us
Think, and to Do, in order to our Glorifying of Him. Now, if our Bible, be not
the Writing, where in the Will of God is to be found, it is no where to be
found at all; for there is none that can stand in competition with i^ there is
no where else to be met withal, any Scheme of the way for our coming to the
Enjoyment of God, that can give any tolerable (...) is action to a Reasonable
mind And who else but God, could be the Author of it? (...) men, and Ill
Angels, would never have conceived a System of such an Holy and Heavenly
Tenor, and so opposite, yea so Torturous, unto their own vicious Inclinations.
Good men, and Good Angels would not have Lied for God, and have imposed their
own Inventions upon their Maker. And indeed, the Remarkable Providence of God,
in preserving our Bible, so incorrupt for so many Ages, notwithstanding the
horrible plots of Earth and Hell, to have utterly extinguished it, (which cannot
be said of any other Composure) This proclaims, That it is dear to God, yea,
that God Himself espouses it, as being the Author of it. The Bible testifies
very many other Things, and at the same time testifies to its own Divine
Original: It Is found infallibly True in all its other Testimonies; it is a Tried
Word, and it never fails: Why should it not then be owned as True in this one
Article also, when it asserts its own Divinity? But after all, the main proof
which a Christian has, for his Bibles being the Word of God, is of that sort,
that assures him, The Fire is indeed the Fire; even a Selfevidencing, and
scarce utterable Demonstration. The Sacred Writings, carry with them, and in
them, a Demonstration of their Divine Original and Authority, unto the Souls of
the Faithful, wherein it appears to them, with no less clearness than the Light
and the Heat of the Fire before them The Holy Spirit of God, working on the
Hearts of the Faithful, causes them to see (or, I should rather say, to feel,)
such a Majesty in the Bible, such a glorious Constellation of Noble and
Charming Mysteries, and such a Directing, such a Sanctifying, such a
Strengthening and Comforting Efficacy, that they are certain, it could proceed
(...) none but the Holy Spirit of God. Their Hearts are accordingly, so struck,
and warmed, and moved, and changed by the Holy Spirit of God, breathing in and
from the Bible, upon them, that though perhaps they cannot always put their
Arguments for it into Form, yet they are sure, (Fire is Fire) it can be no
other than the Word of God; and whatever Arguments may be produced unto the
contrary, they will keep to their conclusion, and rather Die, than give up the
Cause.

But as the Fire passes from one Billet unto another, so let my Thoughts here,
in passing along, at least glance upon one Subject more.

There are certain Enjoyments with which the Spirit of God favors the Souls of
His Faithful People; and especially the persuasions of a particular Faith,
which they sometimes Enjoy, in their Prayers, for this or that particular Smile
of God on their Affayrs. This particular Faith, is not so much the Duty, as the
Dignity, and Privilege, of the Faithful, and not granted unto all, but here
and there, according to the Sovereign pleasure of Heaven, gloriously
irradiating their minds, and with a certain powerful, Heart mel^ing, Heavenly
Afflatus, assuring of them, That God has granted the Thing, which they have
asked of Him. Well, though this particular Faith, has a counterfeit, wherein many
have been deceived; yet such a Thing there is, that is a special Operation of
the Spirit of God, and perhaps of His Holy Angels, on the minds of His Holy
Children. The Question is, How do I know this Operation from a counterfeit? My
Answer is, That no words of mine can answer the Question; I know it, as I know
the Fire to be the Fire; I feel it, but no words of mine can express, how it
feels.

Meditation II.
On the Benefits of the Fire.
I AM going to Discourse with and on my Fire; and fetch from it many Lessons of
no little Importance. But the very Season in which I do this doe^ first Arrest
me, to pay; Debt of Thankfulness unto the Bountiful God for my Fire, before I
can go any further. It Is a Winter morning; and the Cold of the Winter so
assaults and pinches me, that were it n^^ for the warmth of my Fire, I suppose
(...) benumbed Hand, instead of Writing a Reflect on, would be Folded with the
Arms of the Sluggard, How proper is it for my Opened an Quickened Hand, now to
write the praises o^ my Almighty Benefactor, among whose Numberless Benefits,
those of the Fire are to b^ Numbered, with a particular Accent upon them!

Should I Pen a voluminous Oration, (...) Laudem Ignis, it would be upon a
Subject (...) worthy, and so noble, that it would be (...) from deserving to be
put among the, Disserttiones Ludicrae, where some witty men have tried their
wi^^ in the praises of Objects, to contemptible to be spoken of, Indeed unto
P^^tarch will I leave the Decision of the Question, Whether be the more
profitable of the two the Fire or the Water? But instead of composing the
Praises of my Fire; let me rather Touch (for it can be but a Touch) on the
Praises due to God for my Fire.

In the Accommodation, which my Fire gives to very many of my circumstances, I
enjoy great Blessings of God. Though my Fire has not immediately come down from
Heaven, to me, like that upon the Israelitish Altars: Yet I can, by ascending
but a very few Steps of contemplation, see the God of Heaven bestowing my Fire
upon me. Those Igneous particles, which when more loosely Diffused, make Heat,
and when more closely collected and compacted, make Flame, are a creature of
God, and no inconsiderable part of His Creation. The Fuel, which gathers these
Igneous particles together, and puts them, and feeds them, in their motion, for
my present Comfort, is bestowed upon me, by the Kindness of God: nor should I
be able to subsist, if He had not been ^o Kind unto me.

I could but pi^ty the poor Indians in the Marian Islands, when I found Le
Go^ten in his late History of those Islands, reporting, That before the Arrival
of the Spaniards there, they had never seen any Fire; and the First Fire that
Magellan kindled, they looked on, as a terrible Animal, which devoured the
wood, and kept at an huge Distance from it for fear it should Hurt them. If
those Islands, had been of the same Latitude, and a Climate of the same Cold,
and Frost and Snow, with our Country, the condition of those Indians must have
been altogether Insupportable. The supports that we receive by our Fire, are so
Convenient, yea, so Necessary, that if we never make our Fire, an Article of
our Thankgsiving to God, it is because our Sou^s are Frozen into a very Vile
Insensibility. While there are Pagans who worship the Fire as their God, it
becomes us Christians to worship our God, with a due Thanksgiving for the Fire.

And now, I cannot but observe; There is utterly a Fault among us. This is,
That the more Common, and Customary, Obvious and Ordinary Mercies of our Lives,
are least of all Acknowledged. If a Religious Man. were Admitted unto a Fire,
but once or Twice in a year, how thankfully would he take Notice of it, and
say, O my good God, I thank thee, for this Relief^! But because we come to the
Fire every Day, and every Hour of the Day, our good God, has few or no
particular Thanks for His Goodness in it. O Stupid Ingratitude! Why should a
Succor in certain peculiar and unusual Exigencies, produce our Thanksgiving to
God; and yet God be Honored with no Thanksgiving for those Enjoyments, wherein
we are continually Succored against all the Danger of those Exigencies! Oh,
That my Fire might now Warm this dull Heart of mine, to Resolve upon more
Explicit Praises of God, as well for my Fire, as for those other Mercies which
have nothing in them to Lessen them, except what indeed should rather Heighten
them unto me; namely, Their being Daily Mercies.

The Salvages of these Regions, have thought, the Fire, must needs be a God,
because when a poor man is ready to perish with Cold in the Winter, one Spark
of it, will in a few Minutes blaze out so Serviceably, as to Save his Life.
Instead of so rude a Fancy, Let me rather say, There is much of God in the
Fire; and let me particularly see the Bounty of God Sparkling there. But let my
Thanksgiving for the Fire, pass^on, to celebrate the Bounty of God, in those
Blessings, which men See Every Day, and yet therefore See not, merely because
they are to be Seen Every Day.

Mantissa.
WHile I am thus Writing on the Benefits of the Fire in General, Methinks, I am
called upon thereby, not only to be Thankful for the Fire, but also to be
Useful like (...). No Trade, nay, no Man, can subsist well without the Fire;
which was therefore called, (...) by the Philosopher. It Is a very Serviceable, a
very Profitable, Creature. And, O my God, shall not thy poor Servant be so too!

There is no man Sincerely Converted unto God in the Lord Jesus Christ, by the
Holy Spirit, coming like an Heavenly Fire upon his Heart, but he becomes, as we
read of the Converted Onesimus, A Profitable man; though before he were
otherwise. Nevertheless, to be Ultimus Bonorum, or to do no more good than the
least of Good men, should not be the Highest Aim of every man. While others
aspire to be Richer and Greater, why should it not be my Ambition, to be more
Serviceable? I will say with him, Divitijs abundet per me licet, qui^anque
voluerit: In operibus mea sit Abundantia.

It was justly asked, Can a man be profitable unto God? No, That he cannot; And
when he has done all that he can do, (were it a Million times more than it is,)
he must own, Lord, I am an unprofitable Servant. The most glorious Use, that I
can be put unto, is, To be made a Subject of those Graces, and a Doer of those
Gracious Actions, which the ever blessed God, who makes me so, shall Behold
with Delight, and which may Excite all other Beholders to magnify Him for ever.

But there are many ways, wherein I wish I may be Useful unto my Neighbors.
May I be such a Child of Abraham, as to be made a Blessing, which is indeed a
Peerless Blessing?

I wish, That I may be of so ingenuous a Temper, as to reckon the conferring of
Benefits and Kindnesses, the Sweetest pleasure upon Earth.

I wish, That in all the Relations which I Sustain, I may with all ingenuity
contrive, How to make all my Relatives the better for me.

I wish, That all my Talents, my Learning, my Estate, and my Interests of all
Sorts, may be Employed in doing all sorts of Good, for all sorts of men.

I wish, That I may frequen^ly have my Meditations on that Question What Good
is there, that I may do, in my several Capacities?

I wish, That whatever Company I fall at any time into, I may seriously ponder,
Whether I may do no Good in the Company before I leave it.

I wish, That I may be one of those who come under the character, under which
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, are described by Grotius, Homines
demerendis hominibus nati, qui omnem Benefecij Coliocandi occasionem, Ponebant
in Lucro.

And, when I do no more Good, or am no longer Useful, I wish, I may Die!

Lord, Let me not out live my Usefulness.

Meditation III
On the Light cast by the Fire upon the Objects about it.
ALL the Objects here capable of having direct Rays from the Fire shot upon
them, how Lightsome are they? All clothed with Garments of Light! The side of
the Chimney, the Wall of the Chamber, the Iron Back, the Brazen Tongs, and
their Fellow Servants, are now distinguished, with an agreeable Brightness.
They entertain the Beams of Light, which the Fire darts upon them, and by
entertaining thereof, they have a particular Brightness, and Beauty upon them.

When I see the Reflection of the Light, on the Objects about the Fire,
methinks, I am furnished with Light enough, to make a Reflection of my own upon
it. This Light leads me unto that Glory, that shall be Enjoyed by the Saints in
the Heavenly World; and unto the very Fountain of all their Glory. If unto the
Fire, I should Resemble the Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST, who shall one day
appear in Flaming Fire, the Resemblance, might with many Good Thoughts be
prosecuted. It is enough, that our Lord, the Sun of Righteousness, is compared
unto the Sun, which is an Ocean of Fire; and that Caelestial and Wonderful Fire
ball, corresponding with the little Flashes on my Hearth, in the property of
Luminositie, the comparison that is now to be made, will be sufficiently
vindicated. Nor will it be unserviceable unto this purpose, to remark, that in
some Languages (particularly the Syriac and Chaldee) the same word that is used
for Fire, is used also for Light. The Splendour of my Fire, though so sparkling
and so dazzling, that the most lively Limner cannot paint it out unto the Life,
is but a black Shadow, of the Glory which the Disciples in the Holy Mountain,
saw resting on the Transfigured Lord of Glory. One of them that saw it, has
reported unto us. That it was a Majesty attended with an Excellent Glory;
Another of them has reported, That it was the Glory, as of the only Begotten of
the Father. Now, that which I would assert is, That unto Communications and
Irradiations, from the Glory of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, all the Saved shall be
everlastingly beholden, for all the Glorious Excellencies, which they shall
ever Enjoy in their Spirits, or in their Bodies. The Church is that Moon, that
borrows all her Light from the Messiah. The Lord JESUS CHRIST, by Shining on
the Children of God, and of the Resurrection, conveys to them the
Accomplishment of His promise, That they shall Shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament, that is to say, as the Stars for ever and ever. The Beams of the
Lord JESUS CHRIST shall fall upon His people Admitted unto the Sight of Him;
and His Amiableness beheld by His people, will be both the Cause and the Copy
of whatever Amiable Thing shall ever be beheld in Them. The Glory of God in the
Face of JESUS CHRIST. Exhibited unto our Faith here, and unto our Sight
hereafter, is that which produces, all our Grace, our Joy, our Crown. And if
ever there be any Thing Admirable in them that Believe, it is the JESUS CHRIST
on whom they have Believed, that shall be Admired in them. In this world, They
that behold the Glory of the Lord, in His Glorious Gospel, and in the
Institutions of His Gospel, where they Learn what He is, and what He does, are
Changed into His Image from Glory to Glory. Christians that Express and Advance
their Christianity, by conversing much with the Lord JESUS CHRIST, contract
that Likeness to Him, that is the Glory of all that are adorned therewithal.
Would I be a Bright Christian? Let me abound in Meditation on the Lord JESUS
CHRIST; By Him therein Shining on me, I may arrive to such a Glory. There is no
Glory nor Honor, but what Lies in Conformity to the Lord JESUS CHRIST. This,
as I take it, will be found the most adaequate Notion of Honor: Now by our
Contemplation, we obtain a Conformity to Him. The more a man does Look upon the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, the more is the Image of His Healing Lord, Revived in him,
and the Image of the Old Serpent that has destroyed him, Destroyed. Let a man
Acquaint Himself much with the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and there will thereby this
Good come unto him; That he will be Endued with those virtues, which will not
only render him one of the Saints that are the Excellent in the Earth, but also
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. If Moses by Sojourning a while
among the Angels in the Mount of God, obtained such a Shine upon his Face, that
his Countrymen were not able steadily to gaze upon it, certainly a man by
being much in Communion with the Lord of Angels, will obtain much of that
Wisdom, that shall make his Face to shine. But, Oh, to what a Glory shall we
then come, in the World to come! The Second Person in the Adorable Trinity,
having assumed an Humane Creature to subsist in the same person with Himself,
has poured into that capacious Vessel, as much of the Divine Glory, as any
Creature is capable of Receiving, yea, or of Discerning. Now, Lord, in that
Light of thine, we shall see Light! God through Him Shining on the Inhabitants of
the Heavenly Mansions causes them to Shine with an Immortal Glory; Their Taking
in, and Striking back, the Glory of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, will be the Thing
that shall render them glorious, throughout Eternal Ages: It Is by This, that
they shall Shine in the Kingdom of their Father. The Spirits of the Faithful in
the Heavenly World, will be rendered all glorious within, by the Graces that
they shall be Endued withal, But their Union and Fellowship with the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, will help them to those Graces; of His Fullness they shall Receive them.
The Bodies of the Faithful will be Raised in Glory; there will be a strange
Luster thereupon. But from the Glorious Body of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, they
shall acquire all their Beauties. They are the words of the Apostle, in I Joh.
3. 2. We shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is; in which few words,
there is as exact an Account of the Blessedness in the Future State, as any I
can hope to meet withal on this side of it.

This then will I choose for my Heaven. The Heaven that most men propound, is
nothing but a Deliverance from Hell; and their Notions about that Hell too, are
gross enough. The Heaven propounded by some Good men, even in Books professedly
written thereupon, is chiefly made up of Negatives, or a Rest from Evils on
Earth. Let my Heaven be in a Near Approach to my Lord JESUS CHRIST: It shall be
my Glory, to be with my Lord JESUS CHRIST, beholding of His Glory. My Lord
JESUS CHRIST is the Tree of Life, in the midst of Heaven, from whence I expect
that I shall gather all my Heaven. This let me labor for, and pray for, and
wait for, until my Change do come!

Some Right Thoughts, not unfit for a Child of Jacob, take hold on the Heel of
those that have hitherto Entertained me: and my Fire has Enkindled in me some
further Desires, and Wishes. I see, that when there Intervenes any thing
between the glowing Coals in my Fire, and the Brightned Walls of my Room, a
Darkness arises then so far thereupon. The Fire shines not upon an adjacent
Object, if there be any thing between That and the Object. And am I not now
informed, what is the Reason of the Darkness upon the Minds of men? Whatsoever
does Interrupt the Communion between the Lord JESUS CHRIST and my Soul, brings
thereby a Darkness upon me. In the Light of Life Enjoyed by the Saints above,
there is no Darkness; Why? because there is nothing to intercept the most
Intimate Communion between the Lamb, who is the Light of the City of God, and
the Saints who Walk in the Light of that City. But in the Darkness of this
World, a Christian has frequent occasions, with the Philosopher, to ingeminate
his cry of, Darkness, Darkness; and the occasions will continue, till he arrive
where the Dark Shadows flee away. Alas, The Darkness, which attends me, is like
that on Egypt; it may be Felt: I feel it in a woeful Ignorance, and grievous
Disorder, and lamentable Confusion and Sottishness, and Horror of Guilt upon my
Spirit. And now, by Fire-light I see the Cause of it! I would I could say, I
have half a Cure, now I know the Cause It lies here* something there lies
between me, and my Lord JESUS CHRIST, who would Enlighten me. The Truth is, The
very drawing of the Curtains of my Earthly Tabernacle about me, has this
Influence upon me, That I am experimentally taught the meaning of those words,
Present in the Body, and Absent from the Lord: The Flesh is between Him and me:
Oh, Why do I no more say, I desire to be dissolved, that I may be with my Lord.
But that which is yet worse is, That my Corruption^ do send up that ugly Smoke,
which hinders the Shine of my Lord JESUS CHRIST from comforting of me; And
sometimes I lay too many Logs on the Fire, verifying the old Observation, In
multitudine Negotiorum periclitatur pietas. I take too many Diverting
Businesses upon me, by which I Restrain those Emanations from the Fountain of
Light, wherewith I might otherwise, be Irradiated. Be advised, O my Soul; be
well advised!

Meditation IV.
On the Mending of the Fire.
THE Fire in a little while I see falls into circumstances, that call upon the
Company, Will some body please to mend the Fire? The Materials that supply the
Fire with Fuel, are in a little while so wasted, that the Remainders of those
Materials fall into Disorder; if the Fire be not mended, it will soon be ended;
and if things be not quickly restored, and repaired into a better Order about
the Fire, it will not be long, before none will be the better for it.

But when I see some body going to Mend the Fire, I think we that Sit by it,
want mending much more than the Fire it self. That Call, Mend the Fire, is not
of a millionth part of so much importance, as that call, Jer. 7 3, 5. Amend
your Ways and your Doings; and again, Thoroughly Amend your Ways and your
Doings. I am sensible, [My God, make me more Sensible!] That there is very much
Amiss in my Heart, and in my Life, much that wants to be mended. I have heard a
great and a just cry made, for, A Reformation The method of obtaining a general
Reformation, would be for every one, to mend one. A whole Army is presently
Turned about, when every man in the Army Turns himself.

Wherefore, What shall I do? The first thing to be done, in answer to that
Question, is for every man to put another Question; even that, What have I
done? It would be an agreeable thing, for a man to take a well expressed
Catalogue of Things Required and of Things Forbidden, in the Ten Commandments
of God. Beholding himself in that Glass, a man may come to see his own criminal
Omissions, and Commissions, and know what there is to be mended in him. When a
man has gone thus far toward the mending of himself, let not his next work be,
according to the preposterous Divinity of our Days, to make Vows, That he will
do no more Amiss. Those ill timed Vows will be broken on the next Opportunity,
or Temptation to break them. No, the Next work is to Confess and Bewayl, all
that we find Amiss before the Lord, and therewithal to Impl^^e, and Adore, and
Accept the Pardoning Mercy of God through the Lord JESUS CHRIST; and by Faith to
entreat and expect a Pardon from God, through the Blood of Jesus Christ His Son,
which cleanses from all Sin. Un^i^ a man do by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,
for Atonement and Righteousness, come into the Covenant of Grace, it is very
certain that Sin will have Dominion over him. And until God be Reconciled unto
a man, through the Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ applied unto him, he will
remain a Slave to the Lusts, into the dreadful Hands whereof, he is put over by
the spotless Justice of Heaven. While a Sinner is in this unpardoned, and
unhappy State, all hi^ Resolutions to Amend what is Amiss with him, will
signify no more, than the Green Wythes, which once bound the Champion: without
passing from the Fire, to come at a similitude for them, They will be as a
Thread of Tow is broken, when it touches the Fire. But having sought the
Pardon of what we find Amiss with us, Then it is time to proceed, and purpose,
and resolve against our miscarriages, We must humbly ask of God, the Help of
His Grace, to Amend what is Amiss with us, under this encouragement, That our
Lord Jesus Christ has purchased this Grace for us, and His New Covenant has
promised it. Encouraged and Fortified with this consideration, a man may do
well considerately to Draw up, the several Points of Amendment, that he would
propound unto himself. Let a man distinctly Contrive, what points he will
desire to Amend, in his Thoughts, in his Words, in his Calling, in his Family,
in his Company, and in the several Relations that are stained by him: Let him
think, How would I be, or do better in each of these points? and have Written
Memorials of them, to be afterward Reflected upon.

There are many Seasons very proper to be taken, for this our Self=Amendment.
It is especially seasonable, when a Christian has heard a good Sermon, then to
Retire, and Ponder, What am I called upon to Amend, by the Sermon that I have
heard? One being asked, What can you Remember of the last Sermon? Replied, I
cannot Remember so much as I would; but I do not Forget, that I was told of a
Fault, which I hope, 'twill be my care to Amend Excellently well Remembered! And
it would be a thing further seasonable, and very serviceable, for a Christian
sometimes to set apart a whole Day for Devotions in secret places; and make it
not only a Day of Humiliations for what is Amiss in us, but also a Day of
Reformations. A Christian does never keep such a Day, but the Fire is mended
with him; every thing lies abundantly more to Rights, and his Love, and Zeal is
in a more flaming ardour. Nevertheless, As our Fire must be often mended; after
the first mending of it, there will soon be occasion to mend it over and over
again; so a Christian will assuredly find, that when he has rectifyed himself
into the best Self Amendment that he can he will soon grow out of frame; it
won^ be long before he must over and over again, be at pains to Reform what is
Amiss.

In fine, I cannot see the Fire mended, without that wish, which is more
Charitable than Censorious; Lord mend us all! But I must add, Lord, no man
wants it more than my self!

Meditation V.
On the Burning of the World.
WHen I see what Havoc the Fire makes of the Fuel, whereof it has taken Hold,
it becomes me to give Thanks unto the Great Keeper of Israel, that my House,
with all the valuable Treasures in it, is not by any unhappy Accident made the
Fuel of devouring Flames. The Fire we say, is a Good Servant; but a Bad Master:
and I am the most ungrateful Wretch in the world, if I don't particularly and
explicitly Give Thanks unto God, that while the Fire is the Servant of my
Comfort, my Estate falls not into the devouring Jaws of such a Master. Great
Cities have sometimes been horribly Destroyed by Fire, as well as little
Cottages; And the Multiplication of such Disasters and Destructions, in our
Age, (especially by the Arms, of a certain, OG, or, Burner,) has been thought
by some, to be somewhat praesagious of that Conflagration, which the Oracles of
Heaven foretell to our Sinful Earth. Whether such Desolations by Fire, be any
Proesage of this Grand one, I am sure, those little ones that are on my Hearth,
will serve as a Figure of it, and lead a Devout mind unto the Contemplation of
an Universal Conflagration.

May the cry of Fire! now Awaken my Soul, unto some serious Thoughts on the
Flaming Fire, wherein our Lord is e're long to be Revealed from Heaven! There
is, in the Creation of God, a Creature called, ^ire; which is a certain Fluid,
consisting of parts extremely small, and light and very su^^ile, active and
susceptive of motion. An Aggregate of these parts, in such a Number, as to be
visible unto the Eye, is what we call, Fire, and Flame; a lesser, thinner, and
more dispersed Collection of them, is Heat, and Warmth. Fire and Heat, only
differ in that circumstance. The Fire on the Hearth, is but an Assembly of
these Igneous particles, which, as by a sor^ of magnetism, naturally come
together, where they have once begun to assemble, and put on the Figure that we
see, when they operate upon combustible matter, to separate the parts of it.
Now, there is a nearly uniform, and perpetual Fire, disseminated through the Body
of the Earth, and especially the interior parts of it; and unto this Fire are
to be ascribed, not a few of those Phoenomena, which our Terraqueous Globe has
within it, or upon it. Among other things, done by this Fire, one is, that it
bears up the Water of the Abyss, every where toward the Surface of the Globe,
as near as possible in right Lines, unless where the Denser Strata thereof do
more intercept the (...), and there it passes through but very slowly, and the
rest gl^d^s along, till it find Apertures convenient for it. When this Fire,
being diverted from is ordinary course, is Assembled in a greater quantity than
is usual, it causes an unusual Intumescence in the Water of the Abyss, which
pu^s it into very great Commotions: and making at the same time, the like
Effort upon the Earth, which is expanded upon the Face of the Abyss; it
occasions that Agitation of it, that we call, An Earthquake; whereby the
superincumbent Strata, are horribly shockt, and rent, and the very Foundations
of them are undermined, and perhaps whole Cities, and Mountains, and Countries
do sink down to rights into the Abyss underneath, and the Rising Water, makes a
Lake, where those Countries were Formerly Inhabited. Yea, huge Floods are
vomited up, from the Abyss, o^ the other Water that had communication with it,
and the Sea it self, without the least Breath of Wind stirring, undergoes the
greatest preturbation imaginable, and swells perhaps to make whole miles of
Desolation. The Fire in this hideous Disturbance now makes its own way (...)
also, by Volcano's and by Springs, and Baths, and the cracks of the opened
Earth, and, qua data porta -- wherever it can. Countries much subject unto
Earthquakes, have commonly some of those Fiery Vents, which we call, Volcano's;
by means whereof, the Earthquakes do less mischief, than otherwise they would.
And such Countries having also much Sulphur and Nitre in them, hence Ensue the
dreadful Thundrings and Lightnings, that use to be at the Explosion of those
Minerals, when they are Fired; and those with other Minerals then Fired, may
cause the Mortalities that Earthquakes use to be succeeded withal.

But that which I hasten to observe is, That there is a Terrible, and an
Amazing Use, which the God of Heaven, will make of the Subterraneous Fire, to
bring a Conflagration upon Earth, when the Time for the Restitution of all
things, is arrived. It is entered among the Divine Oracles, 2 Pet. 3. 6. 7. The
World which then was, being over flowed with water perished: But the Heavens
and the Earth which are now^punc; are kept in store, reserved unto Fire,
against the Day of Judgment, and the perdition of Ungodly men. The World was
once Drowned in a Watery Flood; but the Almighty has given us assurance, that
such a Flood shall never happen any more. The Rainbow is now consecrated by God
as a Token, for the assuring of that Covenant. But still there is another
tremendous Desolation to come upon the World, by a Fiery Flood, celebrated
under the Name of, Diluvium Ignis, in the Writings of the Ancients. The Pagans
themselves were not without prospects, of this Formidable Revolution upon the
World. Hence the Poets tell of, Pyrrba, (that has Fire in the signification of
it) the Wife of their Deucalion; and the Philosophers often speak of an (...) a
Conflagration, with which the World is to be devoured Josephus relates, That
our Father Adam left Praedictions of it: But in the Sacred Scripture, it is
praedicted with a very frequent Inculcation. About this Conflagration, 'twere
easy to start many curious Questions: but I would be more afraid of coming too
near this Fire, with a faulty curiosity, than the old Gentleman was of prying
into the Top of AEtna (a continual Monitor of the Conflagration) whereby the
foolishly lost his Life. So much however, one may venture to Enquire and
Answer. If we Enquire, How far the Conflagration will reach? We may Answer, It
will probably reach no further, than this Lower World: these Heavens, with all
the Hosts of Birds or of Devils in them; and this Earth, with all the Works of
Art or of Nature in it, shall be concerned in the Devouring Fire; we have no
cause to think, that it shall rage beyond our Atmosphoere, Yea. There are broad
Intimations, in the Prophecies [consider, Dan. 7. 11, 12. and Isa. 66 24. and
Ezekiel. 39. 9, 10. and Rev. 14. 20.] that the Conflagration will be at first
partial, and liesurely and progressive: And that the first Efforts and Effects
or it, are like to be felt by Italy, whose horrendous Volcano's, together with
the (...) Shakings and Breakings of the Earth, in the Bowels of it, would
suggest further suspicions of such a Catastrophe impending over that Seat of
the Beast. Rome is the Sodom of the New Testament; and the Fate of old Sodom is
impending over it, which was a Conflagration, intended for a Type of that which
is to come. At, and with the first Essay of the Conflagration, our Lord JESUS
CHRIST is to come; now we are sure, The Antichrist is to be destroyed [2 These.
2. 8] With the Brightness of His Coming. And, since the period set for the
Duration of Antichrist, is now so near Expired, what cause have we to suspect
that the Conflagration may Begin even in our Days; and what manner of persons
in all Holy Conversation and Godliness, ought we to be, that look for such
things! But then, whether the Consummation of the Conflagration will be, before
the End of the Thousand years, which are thus to Begin with a Conflagration?
And, what will be the Difference between the Inhabitants of the New-Heavens,
and of the New Earth, during the Blessed Thousand years? And how the
Inhabitants of the New Earth, Enjoying the Soil Refined by the prodigious
Fires, will, according to the promise, Build Houses and Inhabit them, and Plant
Vineyards and eat the Fruit of them, and have an Off spring that shall be the
Blessed of the Lord; These are, Things hard to be understood!

I therefore Dismiss them; and I will instead thereof lay this Charge upon my
Soul. O my Soul, when I have the Fire before me, Let thy Thoughts run sometimes
upon that Great, and Last, and Horrible Fire that shall purify the World at the
Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Day of the Lord that shall Burn
like an Oven. Realize, and Antedate the Time, When our God shall come, and a
Fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about Him:
The Time, when a Fire shall go before the Lord, that shall Burn up His Enemies
round about, and Lightnings will Enlighten the World, and the Earth shall
Tremble, and the Hills melt like Wax, at the presence of the Lord: The Time,
when the Lord shall come with Fire, to render His Anger with Fury, and His
Rebukes with Flames of Fire: For, By Fire will the Lord plead with all Flesh,
and the Slain of the Lord shall be many. Let me Blow up this dismal Fire in my
frequent Meditations on it; and Warm a Cold, and a Dull Heart, at this Fire of
the Lord. But then let this Fire cool my Love, to the Things of this World; and
let me not Lay up for my self Treasures on Earth, where the Fire will consume
all before it. Since this world shall, as one Expresses it, be one Day burnt
for a Witch, be thou, O my Soul, no longer Bewitched with it.

Meditation VI.
On the Fire of Hell.
Descendamus viventes, et non descendamus morientes. Chrysostom.
IN some Countries it is a Custom, when a Light is brought into the Room, to
wish [Deus det vobis Lucem AEternam,] God grant you Everlasting Light: But when
I come to a Fire in a Room, it shall be my wish, God save me from Everlasting
Fire! I find my self unable to bear the Fire: if the Fire on my Hearth were to
touch my Flesh, I should soon cry out of it; the Torture of being scorched in
the Fire would be intolerable; perhaps there is no other Torment more
intolerable, than that which the Fire gives to our Nerves, when it se^zes on
them. And yet I am led now to think, of something that is more intolerable than
the Fire, and that on the score of its being so, is called the Fire. I
remember, Bernard advises us to Meditation on Hell, saying, you must often go
down into Hell by your Meditation while you Live, and you shall be sure not to
go down to Hell when you die. And another Pathetically says; Whether you think
of it or no, Hell fire burns, and your not thinking of it, will bring you
thither That there is a punishment reserved for wicked men, in the Future
State, there are few men sunk down into such Bruitishness in their wickedness
as to Deny, Though ungodly men don't livelily Believe it, and for the support of
their Ungodliness, are at pains to make themselves Question it, yet they have
their Waking Hours, wherein their Guilty Souls, are terrified with
Apprehensions of, A strange punishment for the Workers of Inquity, in another
world. It is asserted in Scripture, it is affirmed by Reason; the
Demonstrations of it are Irrefragable, That there is another World, wherein a
due punishment is reserved by the Wrath of God, for all His Enemies. This
punishment, as it is called, Hell, so it is called, Fire, and from the Temper
of the Fire now before me, I may Learn, that the Fire of Hell, will be
intolerable. If there were nothing else to prove it, but This, here would be
proof enough. There are Impious men, who have taken Innocent men, yea, very
Virtuous ones, and have Roasted them to Death in the Fire, with lingering and
horrid Agonies, and Exercised a thousand other exquisite Cruelties upon them.
Now these Monsters of Impiety, never did receive any Recompense of their
Cruelties in this World, any more than Alva, or Bonner. It follows then, that
in another World, there must be Miseries intended for these Humane Devils, at
least, as Exquisite, as being Roasted ^o Death in the Fire. This must follow, if
you confess a God, and confess the Justice of God. But which yet more evidently
proclaims the punishment of the Damned in the Fire of Hell to be intolerable,
is, the Nature, and Author, of the punishment. Now the principal punishment in
the Fire of Hell, is the Wrath of the Infinite GOD, immediately smiting of the
Soul. The Conscience of a Sinner, which is a Faculty by his Creator put into
him, to be a special Instrument of Him that Created it, This being set on Fire,
by immediate Impressions, from the Wrath of God upon it, will fill the Sinner
with terrible Dolor, and Horror, and Anguish throughout Eternal Ages. We read,
That a Fire of Indignation shall devour the Adversaries; but we also read, That
our God Himself is a consuming Fire. For, as a Sinner does Deserve more, so he
can suffer more than any Creature can inflict; and therefore, the Omnipotent
God Himself, will with inconceivable Expressions, and Impressions of His Wrath,
like Flashes of hot Lightning, smite the Souls of the Criminals, that are to be
a Sacrifice of Infini^e Vengeance; and God shall make them as a fiery Oven in
the Time of His Anger; the Lord shall swallow them up in His Wrath, and the
Fire shall devour them Now that the Wrath of the Lord God Almighty immediately
striking and scalding and vexing a Rational Soul, by Sin rendered the Fuel for
an Everlasting Sacrifice, will be as intolerable as any Fire, certainly no man
can question O Lord, who knows the power of thine Anger! Even according to thy
Fear, so is thy Wrath. But that there is no Fire so intolerable, as this Wrath,
is more particularly evident, from the sad case of some who have in this Life
had a Wounded Spirit, and felt only a few sparkles of Hell fire, shot into
their Conscience. These Wretches have upon a doleful experience proved it, That
a wounded Spirit none can bear; but they have, as with Cains ghastly mark upon
them cried out, My punishment is greater than I can bear. The Trouble of a
Guilty Conscience, when the breath of God has begun to kindle that stream of
Brimstone, in many a Sinner upon Earth, has been intolerable so much beyond the
Fire, that here in our own Land, a man that had been much given to Gaming, and
by consequence to other Lewdness, falling into a wounded Conscience, kept
roaring out, Oh! I am all on Fire under the Wrath of God! I am all on a Light
fire under the Wrath of God! And then actually made choice of strangling rather
than life. Nor are many months past since here was a Lying, Thievish, Wicked
Fellow, that of a Tailor, started up a Preacher; but God soon visited him with
a wounded Conscience, in which he kept roaring out, That he was Damned; and he
would fain have thrust his Hands or Feet, into the Fire, that so (he said) he
might feel something of what he was going to suffer through all Eternity. I
have also read of one Rogers, who under a wounded Conscience, declared, That he
wish d but for this mitigation of his miseries. To ly for ever as the Back log,
behind the Fire on the Hearth. Most significant were the words of another,
Lying under the Terrors of a wounded Conscience: who hearing some Talk about
the Fire, and other most cruciating ways of Dying, horribly cried out, Oh! All
of this, is but a Metaphor, to what I do feel! Now, if in the Suburbs of Hell,
we have seen Sinners under more intolerable circumstances, than those of
Burning in the Fire, what shall we think of Hell, it self? Thou, even thou, O
God, art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art angry?

But it is Enquired, Whether there may be any Material Fire, felt by the
Damned, in the World to come? We know, That our Lord Jesus Christ shall be
Revealed from Heaven, in Flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on them that know not
God, and obey not His Gospel: and the Armies that fill this Earth and Sea, and
the Air about it, shall in this Fire undergo an amazing Dissolution and
Desolation. When the Territories of Antichrist first of all have perished in
this Fire, and it has proceeded in the Execution of its Office, to burn up the
Chaff, that so there may be none but Pure Grain left for the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, it shall retire to that Receptacle which God has intended
for it. But the ungodly being Raised from the Dead, and Fitted with proper
Bodies to receive the punishment of their Ungodliness, our Lord Jesus Christ by
His last Sentence upon them, will banish them into that Fiery Receptacle, of
Everlasting Fire with the Devil and his Angels. We find by incontestable
Experiment, That there is a certain matter in the World, which burns of it
self, and will burn for ever, and needs no Fuel to Support it: It is Natural
and Essential Flame, able for ever to maintain it self, without any foreign
Aliment. God will amass a dreadful Portion of this matter, and make it the
Troublesome Element of the Damned, from whence the Smoke of their Torment shall
ascend for ever and ever.

And here it will not be amiss, to bestow an Illustration, upon that obscure
Text, Mark 9. 49. Every one shall be Salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice
shall be Salted with salt. Every One, must not be understood of Every man, but
Every one whose worm dies not, and whose Fire is not quenched, whereof we read
in the words immediately preceding The Import of this passage, will be better
perceived, if we consider, That our Lord Jesus Christ here uses the last words
in Isaiahs Prophecies. It is there said; they shall go forth, and look upon the
carcases of the men that have Transgressed against me; For their worm shall not
Die, neither shall their Fire be quenched; and they shall be an Abborring to all
Flesh. Upon these words, the Jews write thus; Is not the Finger of a man, If it
be put into the Fire, immediately burnt? But God gives power [or, Being] unto
wicked men, to Receive Torments. And Kimchi particularly does write thus. T hey
shall see the Carcases of them full of Worms, and Fire burning in them, and yet
the Worms die not. The words of our Savior have Respect hereunto; Their Worm
dies not, and the Fire is not quenched; for Every one of them shall be
Seasoned with Fire it self, to become unconsumeable. As Salt preserves from
corruption, here the Fire it self shall be of such an operation, as to render
the objects of it capable of being for ever tormented in it. Whereas it is added,
And (...) Sacrifice shall be Salted with Salt; we may remember, it is said, Lev.
2. 13 With all thine Offerings thou shall offer Salt In the former clause, the
Allusion was to the Fire of Gehinnom, where Dead carcases, with other Filthy
things, were consumed: a Fire for that use constantly preserved and maintained.
The Dead carcases in this Prophecy, crawl with Worms, and instead of Salt, that
secures against Worms, they shall be cast into a Fire that shall (...) them,
and yet even in that Fire, the Worms die not. But in this latter clause, there
is an Allusion to the Fire of the Altar. He that is a true Sacrifice to God
shall be seasoned with the Salt of Grace, to Incorruptible Glory. This refers
to what the Prophet had said: They shall bring their Brethren out of all the
Nations, for a Gift unto the Lord, as the Children of Israel, bring an Offering
in a clean Vessel, into the House of the Lord. The Holy Persons, who are to be
treated with that Honor, after the coming of our Lord, shall be Seasoned with
the Salt of the Grace of God.

Upon the whole now, with what Praises, Oh! with what Raptures of Praises,
ought I to adore the Goodness and Mercy of God, in providing for me, and
Revealing to me, and Inviting and Uniting me to, that Blessed Savior, whole
Blood has Quenched that Fire of Hell, which was Burning against me! And since I
have no other way to be delivered from the Fire of Hell, but by Believing on
the Lord Jesus Christ, who delivers from the wrath to come, Lord, I commit my
self into thy Saving Hands; I humbly and gladly accept thy Offered
Righteousness; and I plead with God, thy Obedience to Him, as the only
Righteousness which can deliver my Soul from Death. I do here withal submit
unto all thy Offices and entreat that in the Execution thereof on my behalf, my
Deliverance from the Fire of Hell, may be fully accomplished.

But if the Fire or Hell, be so Intolerable, what an unaccountable Madness will
it be, for a man by Sin, to throw himself into that Fire? It is a proverb for
the greatest Aversation imaginable; I have no more mind unto such a thing, than
to run my Hand into the Fire. Alas, If any Sin, be so dear unto me, that I can
part with it no more than my Right Hand, not my Hand only, but my whole Body
will be cast into the Fire of Hell. One that was Tempted unto Leadness, o^d
thus very significantly resist and repel the Tempter, Hold your Hand one
Quarter of an Hour in the Fire on the Hearth before you, or else don't Expect,
that I will for your sake burn in the Fire of Hell for ever. Truly, To Sin is
to run into the most Formidable Fire: Sin is therefore worse than a Brutish
Folly; in Sin a man does worse than play the Bruit. O my Soul, when I am
solicited unto any Sin, Let me set the Fire of Hell before my Eyes, and
realize the hideous Condition of them that are burning in that Intolerable
Fire; and Resolve, like one who had no Faith of this Fire in him, and yet
having a price of Unchastity proposed unto him, said, No, I will not buy
Repentance at so dear a rate!

Utinam ubique de Gebenna dissereretur; Non enim sinit in Gehennam incidere:
Gehennoe meminisse. Chrysostom. hom. 13. ad Romans

Meditation VII.
On the And-Irons.
P. Henry.

THere was once a Prince in the English Nation, concerning whom it was thought
by some, that some words which he spoke, hastened upon him the Fate that made
him Speechless. Among the memorable words of that Prince, I have read, that
being invited unto a Merchants House, where he saw a great pair of Brass And
Irons, he had this Reflection thereupon. These gaudy Appearances of shining
Brass, are not the Pillars that h^ld up the Fire; (as your Bishops and your
Doctors are not:) but they are the little Creepers of Iron which bear up the
Fire. So, it is not your Prelates which uphold the Church, but it is your
inferior Ministers, which take pains in their places, that uphold it; and not
General Councils, nor the Dignified Clergy. If any be offended at this
Reflection of Prince Henry about the Fire, their Offense will signify little to
his Ashes.

All the Remark that I shall make upon it, is This. Those And-Irons that are
most Serviceable, are most Honorable; not those that are most Gaudy, and
fini^ied with various Ornaments, for nothing but an useless Ostentation. It is
not unlikely, That the most Useful men in the Church of our Lord, may not be
those that are brightened and burnished with fine Titles, and have most of Pomp
to set them off. It may be, they have rather been such as have said, Odi istos
Titulos. Let my Temper, and my Station be such as may do most of Service, though
I should have less Notice taken of me; Let me choose the circumstances wherein I
may do the best Service, though they should be those which may have most of
Meanness otherwise attending of them: yea, though I must also therein have an
heavy Burden lying on me; as on the Brand-Irons. It is possible, the Work which
I have to do for the Church of God, may oblige me to a very Hot place: Lord,
strengthen me to bear the Heat of all my Temptations, till the Times of Cooling
do come! It is possible also, That the Name of Dogs may be thought good enough
to be bestowed upon those, who are to do this work. It Is no matter, if we do so
much Good, that men cannot easily do well without us.

Meditation VIII.
On the Lighting of a Candle at the Fire.
GOing this Evening, to write a short Reflection upon my Fire, it was necessary
my Candle should first be Lighted, and it being at the Fire it self that it was
Lighted, this very circumstance affords me something to Reflect upon.

If I compare Contention unto the Fire, I shall have Scripture and Reason
enough, to justify the comparison. And now, though I hope, I shall not be a man
of Contention my self, yet I would fain fetch Light from the Contention wherein
I see other men engaged. Let the Heat of Contentious people afford Light unto
me, and let me Learn many Instructions of Wisdom, out of their Foolish
Contentions.

Whatever Contentions do happen, they may soon Teach me, What a strange
Efficacy Satan has, upon Humane Spirits and Affayrs, when God shall permit a
perverse Spirit for to be mingled in a Neighborhood, or in a Nation: And, How
Selfish men are, how Absurd, how Froward, how deaf unto Reason, and how little
sense they have of their own Mortality, when once Passion has got the Upper
hand of them in their little Quarrels, wherein they strive to get the Upper
hand of one another. Some Light in these Evil points may do me some Good. But
then there are Numberless other points, wherein I may come to be Enlightened,
from the Contentions that fall out, among the Writers of Controversies. It Is a
very raging sort of a Fire that appears in the Controversal Writings that fill
the World. Now in perusing of Polemical Writings, I would have no other concern
with them, except only to Light my Candle. The Adversaries, have by their being
so, a sharp edge set upon the Wits, to find out, and set forth, even the whole
strength of their cause. In Reading the Fiery Discourses of these Adversaries,
I would critically, and accurately Examine, where lies the very nicety of the
Difference between 'em, and what are their strongest Arguments, by which either
side is maintained. Abundance of Light, may be gained, by an Indifferent
Reader, of Books written ^o manage a Difference. And I cannot but adore the
Wisdom of Heaven, in ordering it. That so much Light is diffused through the
Church of God, by the Contentions of eager and angry Disputers. God from the
Corruptions of men contending about His Truth, has caused the Light of His
Truth, to Irradiate His Church in the World.

Meditation IX.
On the Warmth received from the Fire.
FOR what is my Fire Enkindled and Maintained? It is that I, with my Friends
may be cherished with a Warmth from hence conveyed unto us. And actually
finding the Fire to warm those that are about it, I find my Heart hereupon
warmed in an agreeable Meditation and Resolution.

By Religious Conference, a Christian becomes like a Fire to warm those that
are about him; he is herein, as 'twas said concerning one of the Ancients,
(...). One great Reason, of the strange Cold upon Christianity among us, is,
the Indisposition to Religious Conference, among the Professors of it; and that
Cold Reciprocally becomes a Reason of this Indisposition. When we come
together, we are sufficiently free in our Discourses upon any Trifl^s
whatsoever; and it is well if they don't proce^d unto Censures and Slanders of
the Absent: But if any man let fall'a word of Christ, and Grace, and Heaven,
and the Exercises, or, the Temp^a^ions of Experimental Christianity, the silent
Company seem astonished, as at a man of a strange Language. Alas, If Good men,
when they come together, would modestly, seriously, prudently employ more of
their Discourses oil the Grand Affairs of powerful and practical Christianity,
they would be able to give a better Account unto the Lord Jesus Christ, if He
should suddenly demand, What manner of Communications have you? When we are
Speaking one to another, it is certain, The Lord hearkens and hears: and it was
a significant Action of an Holy Young man, who being in the Company of some
Christians, that managed their Discourses very Impertinently, he ^^^observed
wrote their words down in Short hand, and then reading the same over to them,
said, Would you be willing to have such poor Talk as this, Entered in the Book
of Gods Remembrance? Oh! That Christians would more endeavor those Gracious
and Savoury Discourses, which would render them like the primitive Saints, of
whom it was said, It a fa^ulantur, ut qui Sciant Dominum audire: and which
would warm all that are about them into a more lively sense of Religion.

Lord, give me such a warmth of Piety in my own Heart, that with Words fitly
spoken; wheresoever it may be fit for me to speak, I may give the Hea^ers
occasion to say, like those Disciples, Did not our Heart burn within us while
he talked with us? It was noted of the Blessed Ursin, That no man came ^near
him, without going away, Aut Doctio^, aut Melior, either the Wiser, or the
Better, for him. I would watch against Formality, watch against Hypocrisy,
watch against all Indecency and Indiscretion in my Discourses; and yet I would
aspire after this Usefulness, and such an useful Warmth in them, that I would
at last be able to say; I could ordinarily be content, for to be Reproached by
that man, who is half an Hour in my Company, before I have thought, whether I
may speak nothing, that may be useful unto him.

Christians may be now Sitting together by the Fire side: But I have, this
proposition to make unto them; Christians, Let not Religion freeze among you by
the Fire side:

Meditation X.
On Green Wood in the Fire.
OBserving a Stick of Green Wood laid on the Fire, I thought on those words of
our Lord, Luke 23. 31. If they do these things in a Green Tree, what shall be
done in the Dry? And I took the Gloss of the Blessed Old Theophylact upon it:
If the Romans may do such things to me, that am a Tree full of Sap, and Fruit,
what shall not they do to you, that are a people destitute of both: If you had
any Good in you, you might have been spared: but now you are (...), As a Dry
Tree, fit for nothing but Fire and Perdition.

The Jews called Good men, Green Wood, and Ill men, Dry Wood: [compare, Ezekiel.
20. 47.] By the same Token, they have an Old Adage among them, Two Dry Sticks
will soon burn up one Green Stick: Meaning, That Good men which are few, will
soon find many Ill men too hard for them. I see Green Wood cast into the Fire,
as often as I see Gracious, and Watchful and Fruitful Christians in Affliction:
which is a Sight of daily Observation. But what is the use that I should make
of such a Sight? It was a Saving of R. Solelomen, Cum Deus Judicium facit in
Justis, timetur et Laudatur; nam fi in illis hoe facit, quanto magis in Impiis?
Let me with an Humbling and Trembling Heart, confess before the Lord; Lord, Thy
Fiery Rebukes are dispensed unto far more Holy and Useful men than I am; I
adore thy Sovereignty, that such a Dry Stick as I, be not presently consumed in
the Fire of thy Wrath: And I would walk in Fear before thee: my Flesh trembles
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

When I see any thing of a Green Tree laid on the Fire, I would call to mind
those words of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 18 If the Righteous scarcely are saved,
where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear? The sinful Wretches that Sin has
made so combu^tible. And I would call to mind those words of the Wise man,
which the Apostle had in his mind; Prove. 11. 31. Behold, the Righteous shall be
Recompensed in the Earth; much more the Wicked and the Sinner.

Meditation XI.
On throwing a piece of Leather into the Fire.
ONE casting into the Fire, a bit of Leather, its moving, its wriggling, its
twisting one way and another, carried some show of Sense with it: It seemed as
if it had the same sense in it, which there would have been in the Creature to
which it once belonged: One is ready to expect a Cry from it. A thing wholly
Insensible, does in the Fire I see, put on a Semblance of mighty Sensibility.

An Hypocrite is one without a principle of Life: He is one altogether
destitute of that Life, wherein God is Known, and Served, and Glorified. He has
no Living Sense of Spiritual and Eternal Objects. But when an Hypocrite is cast
into the Fire of some Affliction, he seems as if he had some Life in him: his
Prayers, and his Vows, and his Devout Resolutions, and various Devotions, look
very Sensibly, when some Grief or Fear is Afflicting of him. One would think,
who but a Child of God, could be so serious, and so Sensible, as we see this
Afflicted Hypocrite? Oh, There Is no Relying on the Shows, that men make in
their Affliction. I will mention but one Observation to confirm it. I have
often been concerned with Criminals under the Sentence of Death, having their
Souls in a Fire of Agony. In this Fire, and Fright, Oh, the sorrow for Sin, and
hatred of it, Oh, the hope in Christ, and love to God, and resolutions never to
Sin on any Terms any more, which these Wretches have now Showed unto me. I
could scarce imagine it possible for any but Regenerate Souls to speak so
sensibly well; many of these have been Reprieved, and Pardoned by the
Government; but of them all I never knew two, but what proved afterward mere
Devils Incarnate. All I will add is This; If men be not Religious in
Prosperity, as well as in Adversity, there is no true Life of Religion in them.
They that never stir, but in the Fire, let them then stir never so promisingly,
are yet alienated from the Life of God. O my Soul, Read, Psalm. 78. 34, 36.

Meditation XII.
On the Fate of the Wood successively Laid on the Fire.
I Call to mind a Remarkable thing prophesied and promised, Zech. 12 6 I will
make the Governors of Judah, like an Hearth of Fire among the Wood, and they
shall devour all the people round about. Many Sticks and Logs of Wood, cast on
an Hearth of Fire, seem to threaten the Suppression and Extinction of the Fire.
But the Fire is not so to be suppressed; no, the Wood it self shall be
consumed; and let never so many parcels of it be brought one after another,
they shall all be in like manner consumed.

The Enemies of the Church, are cast by Satan, upon it, with an Intention to
suppress it, cover it, bury it, and smother it for ever. But all the Enemies,
whether Seducers, or Oppressors, that are by Satan cast upon it, shall be but
like Sticks and Logs of Wood, thrown upon an Hearth of Fire; instead of putting
out the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, they shall be destroyed every one of
them. The Experience of all Ages, has notably demonstrated, and Illustrated
this Observation; That the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, has been like an
Hearth of Fire, unto all its Adversaries; They that have Adversaried the
Church, have but cast themselves like Wood upon an Hearth of Fire: At the long
run, they have put out nothing; but been themselves Devoured.

If my Friends now Sitting by the Fire side, will pursue this observation, by
falling into a Discourse upon the History, that will verify it, they will fall
upon a Noble Subject, and Employ themselves a thousand times more profitably
then if they should make Slanders or Satyrs upon their absent Neighbors to be
their Entertainment.

I will only add; That Governors (or persons in Authority) appearing for the
Evangelical Interests, have a very particular Encouragement, in this Oracle of
God. They, above others, must expect, That many pieces of Wood will fall upon
them. Yet let them not be discouraged, for, They who fight against them, shall
not prevail against them. Reforming Magistrates, and all Eminent Reformers,
will, through the wonderful Providence of God, prove like an Hearth of Fire, to
the Wood that goes to keep them under.

Meditation XIII.
On the Miracle of the Son of God appearing in the Fiery Furnace.
Quanta est credentum Gloria Flammis,
Ardentis Fidei restincta est flamma camini!
Sedul.
WHen I Sit by a very Strong Fire, and see and feel the Terrible Glowing of it,
I call to mind the most memorable Story of the Three Worthies, who, because
they would not worship Nebuchadnezzars Golden Image, (perhaps a remembrance of
the Image, by which the Four Monarchies has been in his Dream represented unto
him) were cast into a Fiery Furnace, made seven times more Fiery than ordinary:
But, behold! The astonished Emperor, observing the effect of his own cruel
Edict, cried out, Lo, I see Four men loose, walking in the midst of the Fire,
and they have no Hurt; and the Form of the Fourth, is like the Son of God. If
any ask, where was Daniel himself at this time, that he should bear no part in
the Miracle? I find this Question asked in the Jewish Talmuds, and one Answer
there given, is, That he was then sent into Egypt, upon a public Negotiation.
But now, while I behold the Fierceness of the Fire on my Hearth, [or in the
Stove] Heated beyond what is use to be, and how Unhabitable, and Intolerable a
place, the midst of that Fire is, I will a little Divert my self with a
Meditation, on the Miracle thus wrought in that Fiery Furnace, where the Three
Martyrs, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. 34. Quenched the violence of Fire. And
here in the first place, I cannot but Enquire, Whom did the Chaldean Emperor
understand by, The Son of God, when he so called the Illustrious person, that
he saw in the midst of the Fire? Now, for the satisfaction of this Enquiry, I
am informed, That the Learned Gentiles of old, illuminated with such a
Tradition from the Jews, had some Apprehensions, not only of One Supreme Deity,
but also of a Trinity in this Deity. The Chaldeans particularly had some rude
Apprehensions of this Mystery, and their King was doubtless well versed in
their Mysterious Doctrine. Pythagoras that Lived among them, owns it: and the
Oracles of the Chaldoeans, the (...) mentioned by Hierocles, Damascius,
Porphyrie, and other professed Pagans assert. That the World was made by Three,
and that a Trinity, whose Head was an Unity Shines through all things. The Names
by which they distinguished the Three, in this Trinity, were, Oromasdes, (whom
they expressly called, The Father, which implies, A Son,) and Mithras, (which
they sometimes called, Mether, and Mather,) and Arimanes, (which they also
called Armianius,) on each of which they looked, as on God Almighty, and the
Creator of the World. Antiquity assures us, That from the Mithras, (whom they
styled, The Second Mind) the Persians did use to call any Mediator by that very
Name. I will not recite here, what notable hints we find in Plutarch
particularly, concerning these things. I hasten to add, They often understood
the Sun by Mithras; but then they had yet an higher Notion of him, as, The
Maker of all things, and therefore of the Sun it self. They distinguished
between, The Intellectual Sun, and, The Visible Sun; as it is evident from the
Orations of Julian, who calls the Second in their Trinity, by the Name of, The
Sun. Compare Mal 4. 2.] They fancied the Sun to be the Representation of that
Second, as the Fire to be the Representation of the Sun. It Is probable, That
Nebuchadnezzar in his Image did represent the Sun, the usual Idol of the
Babylonians; and that the Representation might be the more complete, the Fire
of an horrible Furnace (devoted unto the Service of that Idol) was added
hereunto. Those that would not worship the Sun, the Idolaters of those Ages,
did use to cast into the Fire: and the Jews tell us, that Abraham's coming out
of Ur, was his being delivered out of this Fiery Trial. Such a Fire was now
near unto the Image Erected by Nebuchadnezzar; and probably the Idolaters,
would have them to be worshipped Both together: for which cause the Three
Confessors here answered, We will not Serve thy Gods, in the plural Number. Now
Nebuchadnezzar seeing in the Furnace, a Fourth, who was of a glorious
Appearance, a Transcendent Majesty, a Countenance more than Humane, he might
imagine, That this was most likely to be the Intellectual Sun, the Second
Principle of their Trinity; whom his Country men, as Porphyrie in the Life of
Pythagoras tells us, held for to be like Light without, and like Truth within;
and the Mediator between Spirit and Matter. Hence, 'twas very Natural for him
to cry out, The Form of the Fourth, is like the Son of God. But lest it be
thought, that the glare of that Fire has dazzled me, I will now pass on to
observe, what it is that preserves, and supports, and upholds the people of
God, when they are cast into the most Heated Fire of Affliction: It is the
Special Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, by His Holy Spirit, wonderfully visits the Hearts of His Children, when
they are in the Hottest Fire of Affliction, and especially when their
Affliction is that of Persecution for their Fidelity to their Lord. It is one
of His promises, Isai. 43. 2. I will be with thee; when thou walk through the
Fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee. Our
Lord Jesus Christ being thus present with His Faithful Ones, by His Holy
Spirit, applying His Promises to them, and injecting of Divine Consolations
into their minds, they don't feel the force of the Fire, they are as if nothing
ailed them, and they Enjoy more of true Liberty, than if they were out of the
Furnace. The Divine Consolations of the Martyrs, are the wonder and the proverb
of Christianity: The Martyr Books are filled with amazing Instances. We find
some of them, Triumphing in the midst of horrid Flames; and I have had the
pleasure to be acquainted with a French Protestant, who from the midst of a
thousand inexpressible miseries, at the bottom of a doleful and a dismal
Dungeon, in France, wrote this among very many charming passages to his Wife,
then in this Country, My Soul is swallowed up in a River of chaste Delight, in
the midst of all the Evil they make me to suffer; the thought of the Divine
Goodness, is so much the more sweet, in that God causes it to be frequent, and
sensible, to the forcing of my very Flesh to Glorify Him with Joy. This is what
cannot be comprehended unless experienced. This my Excellent Friend, being
Encountered by the French Priests, told them, Syrs, I would not change the
pleasures of my Dungeon, for all the Glories of the Louvre. Get me burnt at a
Stake as soon as you can, and you shall see me in the midst of the Flames die
Singing the praises of God. Being strangely delivered by means of the English
Ambassador, he after wards lamented unto me, That he wanted the Joys of his
Dungeon, and he longed now to Die, that he might go to the Joys of Heaven.
This, This it is, O my Soul, to have a Christ with us in a Furnace.

Meditation XIV.
On things not consumed in the Fire.
THE most of those Things, that be Arrested by the Fire, I see Consumed in it.
But I see some Things, as Alumen Plumosum, and especially Metals, and most of
all, that King of all Metals, Gold, outlive the Force of the Fire. Some of my
Gold Rings fallen into the Fire, were after long lying there, taken out
unwasted. This leads me, to a Meditation, and Illustration of a passage in, 1
Cor. 2. 12, 15. If a man build upon this Foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious
Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble; every man's work shall be made manifest: For the Day
shall declare it, because it shall be Revealed by Fire; and the Fire shall try
every man's work, of what sort it is. If any man's work abide, which he has
built thereon, be shall receive a Reward. If any man's work shall be Burnt, he
shall suffer loss.

We are to suppose a stately Edifice; the Walls whereof are of Marble and
precious Stones; the Pillars are partly of Gold, and partly of Silver; the
Boards are of choice Wood. Though the Roof of such an Edifice, do not use to be
Thatched with Hay and Stubble, yet such may be the Fault of the Teachers in the
Churches, as to make it so.

Now the Work, that men have thus been doing about the Doctrine of
Christianity. The Day shall declare it.

Tempus cuncta docet, quo non est certior Ignis.

And, It shall be Revealed by Fire. Houses in length of Time, use to be seized
by Fire, either through Chance, or War, or Lightning from Heaven. And then the
Gold that is about such Houses, is utterly incombustible; the other Materials
do more or less Resist the Fire; but the Hay and Stubble is presently burnt up.
A Fire shall come upon the Doctrine of Christianity, that has been taught in
the Churches. What Fire? It Is a gloss of Grotius upon it; Incendio respondet
Lux quoe ab Ecclesiis omnibus uni Ecclesioe Laberanti allucet. God will One Day
stir up His Churches, to Examine the Doctrine of Christianity that has been
taught among them. Where Teachers have taught things agreeable to the Lord
Jesus Christ, they shall Receive a Reward, and be Honored in all the Churches
of the Lord. Where Teachers have taught such Ill and False Things as they did
at Corinth, they shall be Censured in the Churches of the Lord, and it will be
with Difficulty (as out of a Fire!) if ever they arrive unto the Eternal
Salvation of their Souls.

And now, O my Lord Jesus Christ, I make it my earnest Prayer unto Thee, That
if thou Accept me, and Employ me, to write Books for the Service of thy
Churches, Thou would mercifully preserve me from writing any thing, that will
not Endure the Fire. Let me never Advance any thing as a Doctrine of
Christianity, that shall be Hay and Stubble; but what shall remain Eternal
Gold, after the most Critical, Accurate, Exquisite, and Fiery Examination of it.

Meditation XV.
On the Torment of the fire.
I Do not Approach to the Fire, so near as to meddle with it, without being
made sensible, That the Torment of being Burnt in the Fire, is very Terrible;
perhaps no Torment so very Terrible! Being sensible hereof, I cannot but give
Thanks to God, for preserving me and mine, from the painful Affliction of being
scorched in the Fire; which is an Affliction, that from one Disaster or
another, men do often fall into. But then, I do also with Astonishment call to
mind, the Courage of those Martyrs, who have courageously and cheerfully
undergone the Torment of Burning, for their Faithfulness to the Truths and
Ways of our Lord Jesus Christ. It was of old said, Isa. 24. 15. Glorify ye
the Lord in the Fires, even the Name of the Lord God of Israel in the Isles of
the Sea. Truly, in the British Isles of the Sea, more than on any part of the
Earth beside, there have been called forth Martyrs, in the strictest sense, to
Glorify the Lord in the Fires. The popish and monstrous Figment of
Transsubstantiation, and the Abominable Doctrines depending on it, was formerly
endeavored there to be thrust down the Throats of Good men with Burning Five
brands. That Sham Law, De H^eretico Comburendo, tied many Hundreds of Godly
persons, of both Sexes, of diverse Qualities, and of all Ages, to the Stake. And
I would now Glorify the Lord, for the Grace and Strength with which His Holy
Spirit inspired those Blessed Champions. It was a wonderful Operation of the
Holy Spirit, on the minds of those brave Christians, That rather than they
would pollute their Souls, by Denying the Evangelical Truths, wherewith Heaven
had illuminated them, or by practicing the Antichristian Ways of Idolatry,
they would Expose their Flesh to all the horrible Torment of Burning to Death.
Certainly, these Heroic Souls had a very powerful Fear of the Divine Anger, to
avoid which they were not Afraid of the cruel Flames; and certainly, they had a
very powerful Faith of their own Resurrection from the Ashes, and of a State of
Heavenly Blessedness both before and after the Resurrection, or they would not
so cheerfully have gone to the Flames that made Ashes of them. The Martyr
Bilney, the Night before his Burning, thrust his Finger into the Fire, to try
whether it could be born or no. Now I am Sitting before my Fire, I am Trying,
whether I should be able to bear Burning for the Cause of God. Lord, I cannot,
I cannot! except thy Spirit strengthen me: But, O Omnipotent Spirit, through thee
strengthening of me, I can do all Things, And I do also think, It Is Better to
Burn for the Sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, than to incur the Fate of that
Apostate, who gave that as the Reason for his Apostasy, I cannot Burn, I cannot
Burn! and behold he was quickly Burnt unto Death in his own House casually
Fired over his Head. Nor may I forget the words of the Martyr Hooper the Night
before be dyed: When I think of the Fire. I begin to be afraid, for I fear how
the Fire will burn; but when I think of the Fire of Hell; the Fear of Eternal
Fire, makes me willing to Endure a Temporary Fire! While I adore the Almighty
Spirit, Which possessing of the Martyrs, carried them forth unto this Elevated
pitch of Christianity, I cannot but make some Reflection upon another Wonder,
which is also to be ascribed unto a Possession of the same Spirit of God, and
of Glory When the Martyr Hawks gave to his Distressed Friends, a sign that he
found the Flames to be Tolerable enough, it presently turned their Distress,
into a Rapture of Admiration and Satisfaction. But then, with what surprise
must one have heard the Martyr Baynham in the Flames cry out, I feel no more
pain, than if you strow'd Roses under my feet! Indeed some of the Martyrs,
especially Hooper and Ridley, (who had once been too Fiery in their treating
one another,) felt Anguish enough in the Fire. But some of them it seems had
such an Efficacy from Heaven upon them, as to render them almost insensible of
any Anguish there. This was the Lords Doing, and it should be mavelous in our
Eyes!

Nil crus Sentit in Nerve, cum Animus est in Coelo. Tert.

Meditation XVI.
On the Burning Bush,
WHile I Sit by a Fire, where I see one piece of Wood after another Consumed, I
call to mind a memorable point of History, which the Renowned Moses, that
Firstborn of all Historians, whom even the Pagan Writers of After-Ages, do
celebrate for A man of a great Soul, has left upon Eternal Record; and whereof
Moses was an Eyewitness, himself. If I should see the Wood on my Fire, one
Hour after another not consumed, I should with Astonishment call it, A Great
Sight. But the Church of Israel, was to receive a famous Deliverance under the
Conduct of Moses, one of the first things that Entertained that Eminent person
was This; Exodus 3. 2. The Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a Flame of
Fire, out of the midst of a Bush; and be Looked, and, Behold, the Bush burned
with fire and the Bush was not consum^d.

Our Moses was now on a Mountain, which had Bushes naturally growing on it; and
one of those Bushes Exhibited unto him, in those amazing circumstances, did
represent the State of the Church, which was then a Bush in the Fire of sore
Distresses, but was to out live all the Flames of this Distressing Fire.

Indeed the Ancients considered an Higher Mystery in this Burning Bush; They
considered it, as a Figure of the Messiah, wherein the Bush of His Humanity, is
possessed, and yet not consumed, by His Divinity, which is, A Consuming Fire.
Thus it is Gregory's gloss upon it, Per Succensum Rubum ostensum est, quod ex
illo populo exiret, qui Igne Deitatis carnis nostroe Naturam, quasi Rubi
Spinam, acciperet; et inconsumptam Humanitatis substantiam, in ip^^ Divinitatis
Flamma servaret.

But we will at present, rather take this Burning Bush, to be the Church of the
Messiah; and we will now say with Moses, I will now turn aside, and see this
Great Sight. The Thing which is to be seen, is This; That although the Church
of our Lord Jesus Christ, be like a Bush all on Fire, yet this Glorious Bush
will never be consumed, but be gloriously Preserved, Rescued, and Enlarged.

The Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, is on a diverse account fitly compared
unto a Bush. Particularly, There is much Lowness, much Meanness, much Contempt,
Commonly attending the Church of our Lord. It is called, A Low Tree. Though the
Church have no less a Luster than that of the Moon in Heaven, belonging to it;
yet in outward Appearance, and in vulgar, Opinion, the Church is a poor Bush;
yea, the All wise Dispensations of Heaven, toward the Church on Earth, have
usually been such, that there has been room for that Complaint, We are brought
very Low. The Church is therefore in the Visions of Zechariah styled, A Myrtle
grove; a Myrtle is but a low and a mean sort of a Shrub. As the Church has but
low and mean thoughts of it self, and the Members thereof do not aspire to be
in Worldly Grandeur, like the proud Oaks of Bashan, so Worldly people have but
low and mean thoughts of the Church, and look upon it, like the proud King,
upon, The Thistle in Lebanon.

Again, It Is a Dangerous thing, for any to fall foul on the Church of our Lord.
The Bush wherein there was given a picture of the Church, was one, as the
Hebrew word intimates, that had prickles on it: And we are told by Travelers,
the Bushes thereabouts, are so prickly, that if a Bird Light on one of them, he
can hardly escape without a Deplumation. This we may be sure of; They that go to
wrong the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, will find it a prickly, tearing and
wounding thing. Indeed, it is not the Disposition of them that are the genuine
Children of the Church, to do Hurt for Harm; and much less to be, as Thorns,
which the man that shall touch, must be fenced with Iron, and the Staff of a
Spear. But it is the happiness and privilege of the Church, that through the
jealous Care of God concerning it, its Adversaries do not find it safe to
meddle with it; its Motto is, Nemo me impune Lacessit. A certain little
Benjamite, was once Ravening like a Wolf on the Church of our Lord; but he was
told from Heaven, That he was kicking against the pricks. Many a man sets
himself to molest the Church of God; he thinks, He Will handle them without
Mittens! But those fool hardy creatures procure miserable Scratches to
themselves, by what they do. All that have hitherto gone to damnify this Bush,
though as big men, as Pharaoh, or a Senacherib, the Bush has scratched them to
Death; yea, the Almighty God has taken this Bush and scourged its Adversaries
to Death, with its Tribulations. Vain men! Lay Hands on this Bush, if you Dare:
Consider what you do; 'Twill tear you to pieces, and there shall be none to
deliver you.

But we past on to observe, That the Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, is a Bush
on Fire: Lord, preserve me from ever adding Oil unto the Flame! For, first,
there is the Fire of Affliction, which the Church of our Lord must Encounter
withal all Affliction is compared unto Fire; but especially, an Affliction by
the Judgments of God rendered Epidemical: which sets people on Fire round about
and burns them: And most of all, Persecution; wherein men are Scorched, and
Fall by Flame. Now, the Name of the Church all along has been, O Thou
Afflicted: And there never was a Time, wherein they that would Live Godlily,
did not in some respect or other, Suffer P ersecution. The Church must not,
think strange of a Fiery Trial. If I am never so little a Twig of the Burning
Bush, I must have the Sanctifying Fire of Affliction on my Enjoyments; I must
at last Fly into Heaven out of such a Fire, if ever I would Enter into Life.
There is also the Fire of Contention, wherein the Church of our Lord is too
often Embroiled. When a Strife arises any where, there is a Fire in that
Strife. There is a certain Heat of Spirit, and an Heart-burn, enkindled among
those that Quarrel with one another; and in their Lips, there is as Burning
Fire. Alas, for the Flames, that have all along Raged in the Church of God! The
scandalous Contention, that has set the Church on Fire in every period! We
cannot all see with the same eyes; and God for Holy Ends, has left His people
to buffet one another in the dark. I am sorry to say it, but it is too
notorious to be denied, (and the Jews themselves have taken so much Notice of
it, as to pretend, that this is one thing that prejudices them against
Christianity) the Church has generally been under the Reproach of that
wretchedness, Through the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts, the Land is darkened, and
the people shall be as the Fuel of the Fire. Old Adams World must have Thorns
in it: and that we may remember, we are not arrived unto the Second Adams
World, the Church must have its Thorns, in the Treats, which we rashly give to
one another. Yea, the Bush of the Lord has been, in its Days of Temptation,
too like a Bramble bush, from whence a Fire has gone forth to devour the Cedars
of Lebanon. In the Primitive Church of the New Testament, how early did the
Apostles complain, I hear there are Divisions among you! It was not long before
they fell to Haereticating and Excommunicating one another; and the Schisms
arose, that Burn, like the unquenchable Fire of Hell, to this very day. Even in
the Church of the Reformation, how many Divisions have arisen, which have been
managed with so much Fire, that as the Jesuit writes, concerning the Books of
the Lutherans against the Calvinists, You would think you saw, not men, but so
many Devils engaging one another! Lord, make me a man of a cool Spirit, and,
Libera me ab implacabilibus Theologorum Odijs.

And now, Let me behold the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Bush not
consumed, but gloriously preserved in the midst of the Fire, and give to the
Churches Lord, the Glory of its preservation. It is de facto, sensible unto us,
That our Lord has at this day a Church on Earth, yea, this Church has been in
some degree always visible. I would, behold this great sight, with raptures and
wonders, and thousands of Praises to that Lord, of whom having obtained Help
the Church continues to this day. But why is not the Bush consumed? When the
Bush was once all on a Light Fire, it gave this Account of it, It is of the
Lords mercies, that we are not consumed. The presence of the Lord Jesus Christ,
with His Church, is the Churches grand preservative. When the Burning Bush was
not consumed, we read, there was, The Angel of the Lord, in that Flame of Fire.
It seems to have been, that Angel, who is, The Lord; even our Lord Messiah
Himself; an Angel, whose Name is, Jehovah, and, I am that I am, There is no
Fear, the Church will be Consumed. so long as it has the presence of the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the Safeguard of it. We read, of, The Good will of Him that
dwelt in the Bush. I would sing of that Good Will, as the First Cause, why the
Bush is not consumed. This Bush we have an order to Sing unto it, as unto that
Vine, I the Lord keep it! I will keep it night and day. The Church is no other
than that Number of men. Whom God the Father has given unto the Messiah, to be
the Spectators, and Partakers of His Glory. The Spirit of the Messiah is
therefore, always at Work, to maintain this Church of His; and can it be lost?
No; All the High Trees in the World, have been and shall be consumed, but, O
Bush of the Lord, Thou shall Endure, and thy years shall have no End. Why,
Because thy Lord Himself Endures: The Name of the Bush is Jehovah Shammah. And,
Si nos ruimus, ruit et Christ us.

But then the Angels of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, are the Guardians of the Church,
and the Instruments of preserving it. They were on Mount Sinai, and are on
Mount Sion! Tho the Angels are Seraphims, or Burners, they help to keep the
Bush, that it shall not be Burnt. A notable piece of the Bush, namely, Daniel,
had been Consumed; if it had not been for Angels. Though the Bush be among
Lions, that would pull it up by the Roots, and may say, I ly among them that
are set on Fire, yet the Angels defend it. The Burning Bush is not consumed,
because the Angels of the Lord Jesus Christ, are a Wall of Fire about it:
Hezekiah saw once, what one Angel was able to do: One Angel gave Daniel to see
him do great Things for the Bush. Did not an Angel once hew down an huge Tree,
that hurt the B ush! And what cannot the vast Legions, and Armies of those
bright Spirits do?

I would no more then, be discouraged; but Hopefully and Joyfully Believe, That
the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ shall be still preserved. Uzziahs unbelief
about the Ark I would not admit about the Bush. No, I expect, That the B urning
B ush will very quickly become a Tree, the Height whereof will reach to
Heaven, and the sight thereof to the End of all the Earth. Most certainly, The
Day is at Hand, where the Bush of God, will take deep Root, and fill the Earth;
Hills will be covered with the Shadow of it, and the Boughs thereof will be
like the Goodly Cedars But then it is also to be expected. That the Implacable
Adversaries of the B urning B ush, will be them* selves consumed, by the B
urning Wrath of God. That incombustible thing, The Church of the Lord shall be
taken out of the Fire; but let some in the World be assured, there will remain
for them a fearful expectation of (...) fiery Indignation that shall devour the
Adversiries.

Meditation XVII.
On the Kindling of a Fire in the Lords Day.
If Works of Necessity and of Compassion, may be done on the Sabbath, which is
a Day set apart for the Services of Religion, and not allowing Servile Offices
to be done upon it; the Kindling of my Fire this Day, which is our Christian
Sabbath, although it were done for the Relict of my Flesh, is not to be Numbered
among the Works of the F lesh: If there were a Necessity of my Attending the
Services of Religion this Day, there was a Necessity of my defending my self by
a Fire against the Cold, that would else have crampt those Holy Services: And
while I am Engaged herein, such is the Compassion of the Lord, who will have
Mercy rather than Sacrifice, that He permits my Interior to treat my Exterior,
with the Compassion of a Fire provided, without which my Sacrifice had been
that of a F ool. But if it were proper to Kindle a F ire, on the Sabbath, I am
sure, it will not be less proper to Employ and Apply my F ire unto the Sacred
purposes, which are most of all proper to the Sabbath; and let the F ire kindle
in my Soul, those Thoughts, by which the Sabbath will be Sanctified.

Now the first Entertainment, offered unto my Thoughts on this occasion, is,
that prohibition, which the Lord gave, in Exodus 35. 3. ye shall kindle no F
ire, throughout your Habitations upon the Sabbath Day. I might have known, though
Munster had not informed me, that the Jews take this precept in the Letter, and
therefore Hire Christians to kindle their F ire on the Sabbath. But I remember,
That the Priests were to Burn the Sacrifice of the Sabbath, which could not be
done without the kindling of a F ire; for though the F ire which came down from
Heaven was constantly upon the Altar, where it continued until it was Renewed
in the Temple, which they called, The House of Eternity; yet by a daily supply
of NewF uel, was that F ire maintained. The Priests were to Lay Wood every
morning on it, and so soon as the Old F ire had scattered the particles which
it preyed upon, a New F ire must needs be kindled. The Remembrance hereof
inclines me to the Judgment of some Learned men; That the Text under
consideration must not be taken in that Latitude, which at the first view it
seems to have. And if it must have some limitation, it cannot better be
Restrained than to what is Expressed in the Context. The Thing treated of, is,
The Work of the Tabernacle. Though many Cautions had been given, concerning the
Forbearance of Servile Work on the Sabbath upon any private Account, yet some
would be ready to think, that work tending to the preparing of Materials for
the composing of that Sacred Thing, the Tabernacle, might be lawful. For the
prevention of such Thoughts, before the Description of what was Requisite, in
Entered upon, this precept is laid down, That in order to any such Work, whether
the melting of Silver, Gold, or any other Metal, which might be necessary about
the Sanctuary, not to much as a F ire should be kindled.

But be this prohibition understood, one way or the other, as the different
Inclination of men's Understanding may carry them; It Is evident from it, That a
Sabbath is to be Sanctified. We are assured, Genesis 2 3. That from the Creation
of the World, God Sanctified the Seventh Day, or commanded that it should be
Separated, and Dedicated, unto Sacred Services, How? Surely not merely be
ordering that it should be kept Holy by the little Nation of Israel, twenty
four hundred years afterward. No, the Patriarchs long before Israel. did use
to keep an Holy Sabbath, Even, [Heb. 4. 11.] from the Foundations of the World.
And some think, that Noah in the Ark, [Gen.8. 8, 10, 12.] had respect unto such
an Holy Sabbath. Very Positive is the Fourth Commandment in the Law of our God,
Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy; But how often must a Sabbath Day
Recur? It follows; Six Days thou shall labor, and do all thy work, but the
Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. It must be One Day in Seven;
but the Specification of which Day, must be Left unto the Lord our God: the
Commandment refers no more to the Saturday Sabbath, than to the Sunday Sabbath.
There is cause to suspect, That the Weekly Sabbath was utterly lost, among the
Israelites, in the Time of their Egyptian Captivity and Idolatry; and by
consequence, that the true Seventh Day from the Creation, could not easily be
Recovered, for do but Read the Stromes of Clemens Alexandrinus, and you will be
satisfied, That no Nation but Israel, for many Ages after the Days of Moses,
had any such measure of Time, as that of Weeks, among them, When the Great Lord
of Time, Revived among His People, the observation of an Holy Time unto
Himself, in a Weekly Sabbath, it was the Seventh Day, from the Falling of Man^^
in the Desert; and from thence forward, the Seventh Day as often as it
recurred, was to be the Weekly Sabbath, in the Church of God; until the Coming
of Him, in whom the Man^^ has its Antitype. The Sovereign Lord, who has
Honored the Number Seven, with Great Mysteries and Periods running upon it,
has required a Seventh part of our Time to be kept Holy unto Himself. But our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is the Lord of the Sabbath, and of that Grand Millennial
Sabbatism, whereof our Weekly Sabbath, is a praefiguration, has directed us,
now to keep for our Weekly Sabbath, another Day, even the Day following that
which the Israelites were directed unto: and we are not sure, that those
Learned men are mistaken, who think, that this our Christian Sabbath, is the
true Seventh Day from the Creation. Our Lord Jesus Christ lay in His Grave, all
the Day of the Jewish Sabbath, and in that Grave it was Buried for ever; His
Rising out of His Grave, on the Ensuing Day, gave us another Day for our
Christian Sabbath, which is a Figure of that Millennial Sabbatism, that is to
arrive at the Resurrection (...) the Just. (...), (which name signified (...)
Beggar,) and his Disciples, would have ^ept the Primitive Christians, in
Bondage to the Observation of Days, besides Months and Times and Years; which
Days can be interpreted of none but the Sature days, which were the Choicest
of all Days among the Jews, and as Phil^ calls it. The Queen of Days: And
which above any Days held them in a Degree of Servitude unto infinite
Niceties: Now our Apostle most agreeable tells the Galatians, [ Ch.4. 10.] That
this war to Turn again unto Beggarly Elements. The Jewish Treatise, Of the
Sabbath, Enjoined the keeping of Saturdayes but our Apostle says to the
Colossians, [Ch. 2. 16.] Let no man judge you from that Section, or condemn
you, for doing amiss in your not keeping the Jewish Sabbath Days, as well as
their other Holidayes. But what? Are we then at Liberty to observe no Sabbath
Holy at all? An Holy Soul, would count that Liberty, a cursed Slavery, though all
the Seneca's in the world, should scoff at him for it. No; There is a Day of
the Week, which the Holy Spirit has expressly called, [Rev. 1. 10.] The Lords
Day. That by the LORDS DAY, is meant no other than the same Day of the Week,
which we now call so, we have as much Evidence, as that HMEPA KYPIAKH
signifies, The Lords Day; the Evidence of Incontestable Tradition. (...).
therefore in his Epistle to the Magn^^^^^ which was written within Eight or Ten
Years, after John's Writing his Revelation, has these memorable words, That
instead of the Jewish Sabbaths, we should keep the LORDS DAY, on which our Life
Ros^ from the Dead. And this Day, can be called, The Lords Day, for no other
cause but because it is to be kept Holy unto the Lord,

Well then; If it were no Fault in me, to kindle my Fire on the Lord's Day,
certainly 'twill be no Fault in me, if my zeal to keep the Lords Day, be now
enkindled into a vehement Flame. If the Question were put unto a Christian in
the Primitive Times, Dominisum Servasts? Do you keep the Lords Day? His Answer
would be, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum, I am a Christian, and
therefore I dare do no other. Truly our Christianity obliges us to keep the
Lord's Day; and our Christianity will either Flourish or Wither, according to
our keeping of it. While I have my Fire now before me, to preserve me from
chilling in the Devotions of the Lords Day, I will venture to say, The Lords
Day, is as a Fire unto all our other Devotions. It is a sad Remark, to be made
upon too many Churches of the Reformation, which in this point want still very
much to be Reformed. They indulge themselves in loose Principles, and in loose
Practices, about the Lords Day; and it is to be observed, That the Holy
Religion of our Lord, which is this Day, most of all to be Inculcated as well
as Exemplified, has by this looseness of theirs been exceedingly damnified;
There is too little of the Power of Godliness to be seen in those Churches,
though the Doctrine of Godliness be still held and preached among them. They have
called, The strict Celebration of the Lords; Day, Figmentum Anglicanum, an
English Fiction. But it is no Fiction, that England and Scotland where the
Lords Day is kept better than in the other Nations of Europe, have had more of
the Power of Godliness, than all the other Nations. And those other Nations, as
they have broken Gods Rest, so God has broken Theirs; astonishing plagues have
been disresting, and distressing of them. A Worthy Divine, as many years ago as
the Days of my Grandfather, seeing in Print, an humble Confession of the Sins,
that had brought upon Germany the Troubles then harassing of it, said, I see
the Troubles of Germany are not over yet, I see no Confession of their Sabbath
breaking! And the Event has confirmed it. If we would Thrive on Temporal
Accounts, we shall find the due Celebration of the Lords Day very much
contribute unto it. It is said, If thou call the Sabbath a Delight, and the
Holy of the Lord, I will cause thee to Ride upon the Migh places of the Earth.
It has been the Remark of some Judicious Observers, That their Success usually
is as their Sabbath is, and from their keeping of the Lords Day, they can form
a probable conjecture, how it will fare with them all the Ensuing Week. But
much more, if we would Thrive on Spiritual Accounts, Let us be in the Spirit on
the Lords Day, and our Spirits will reap an incredible advantage from it. We
shall be made Joyful in the House of Prayer, by vast accessions of Light, and
Life, and Joy, unto our Souls, if we duly improve the Market for such Good
Things, which is on the Lord's Day held among us. What shall I say more? May I
believe that word of God, Isa.56. 2. Blessed is the man who keeps my Sabbath,
from polluting of it. The Sin of Sabbath breaking should be terrible to me,
since I hear that Thunder once uttered from Heaven, by the God of Heaven, Ye
bring fierce wrath, by profaning the Sabbath. I am now sitting by the Fire
kindled on the Sabbath; but I am led now to think on a Fire to be kindled
against them, who break the Sabbath: I find it threatened, Jer. 17. 22. If you
will not hearken unto me, to Sanctify the Sabbath day, Then will I kindle a
Fire, and it shall devour, and it shall not be quenched.

May I then have my Heart Inflamed with an Holy Zeal, to keep the Lord's Day
with an Exemplary Holiness. Let me on this High Day not allow my self in Low
Employments; but let me Employ my self in Heavenly Exercises and Meditations;
and as far as I can, let me be in the Spirit on the Lord's Day.

But one of the Meditations wherewith especially I would Entertain my self on,
The Lords Day, shall be, That Sabbatism, whereof our Weekly Sabbath is a
Figure, and a Symbol: Even that Sabbatism, whereof one of the glorious
Characters will be, That no Fire shall be kindled on it: all War shall then
cease; and there will be an uninterrupted, and interminable peace, among the
people of God. Until the arrival of that Blessed Sabbatism, there will always
be much Fire in the world; yea, and in the Church; Even that worst Fire of
Contention. But in that Sabbatism, they Learn War no more; The Holy Spirit of
the Messiah, will then marvellously possess, and instruct, and unite, His
people: Yea, the Prince of Peace Himself, will visibly appear, at the Beginning
of that Sabbatism, and the Sign of the Son of Man appearing, all Nations will
with one accord, yield Subjection to the Father of that World to come. It is an
Incomparable, and a most agreeable Sabbath Work, to be swallowed up with
Contemplations of that great Sabbatism: the Approach of it, the Nature of it.
And inasmuch as it seems to Commence at the Ruin of, The Antichrist, whose
period of Twelve Hundred and sixty years, is doubtless very near Expired,
Behold, how much Fire may this Thought add, not only unto my Contemplations,
but also unto my Expectations of it?

Meditation XVIII.
On the Coals.
I Know not, whether there are more Coals at this Time, in my Fire, than there
are Thoughts, in my mind, which may take Fire from them. Lord, Graciously and
Mercifully Touch my Pen with a Coal from thine Altar, that so it may in an Holy
strain write some of those Things, which a polluted Sinner, that yet serves at
thine Altar, is now for that Service Meditating.

And now, first, Methinks, I should be as loath to commit a Sin, as to handle a
Coal. If I should go to take up a Coal in my Hand, it would both Smutt me, and
Scorchme. I am certain, a Sin taken into my Heart, would have the like, and
worse effects upon me. Every Sin is of a Filthy consequence, and by it, even
the Conscience is defiled. And Sin admitted, and allowed, will scald the
Conscience, at last into as much anguish, as ever the bloody hand of Ravilliac,
burning with his Knife in it, suffered at his Execution. Oh, that I were now as
much afraid of every Sin, and all the Works of the Flesh, as of a Coal to be
clapped upon my Flesh. The Purest Nazarites, once contaminated with Sins against
the Holy Laws of God, may have that Lamentation made upon them, Lam. 4 8. Their
Visage is now blacker than a Coal. Wherefore, Let me take heed, lest I Blacken
my self by the Coals, and not Abhorring that which is Evil, It is the Wise man's
Disswasive, relating to the particular Sins of Unchastity, Prove. 6. 27, 28. Can
a man take Fire in his Bosom, and his Clothes not be burnt? Can one go upon hot
Coals, and his Feet not be burnt? So, -- Now let me by this Consideration, be
Dissuaded and Affrighted from all other Sins. They are so many Coals; why
should I meddle with them! I remember Old Mela, in his Book, De Situ Orbis,
tells of a silly people, who had not known Fire, and when they first saw it,
they were so taken with it, as to Embrace it, until it horribly burnt 'em. O my
Soul, Thou know, that Sin is a Coal; it will infalliby do thee a Damage; be
not then like that silly people; keep at a due distance from such a Dangerous
Evil. What a Frozen Creature am I? A principle, as cold, as the Venomous Juice,
with which the Salamander does Extinguish the ardent Coals on which it is cast,
[whence the Vulgar Error, of its Living in the Fire] surely has possession of
me, or else I should esteem every Sin, too dangerous a Thing for me to be free
withal. It surprises the Spectators, to see Jugglers, put ardent Coals into
their Mouths: But is it not more surprising, that men's mouths are filled with
Offenses against the Holy God! There are Contrivances, which the Writers of
such Curiosies do suggest; How men may without Harm take up ardent Coals into
their Hands: But I never could see it contrived, how men may Work Wickedness
with their Hands and not bring upon themselves a mischief,

While I am in this Meditation, I call to mind, the parable, by which the Sins
of Dishonesty, have been sometimes painted out unto us. To carry Burning Coals
into his Nest, was in the issue, no Advantage to the Thievish Bird of Prey.
Should I convey an Handful of these Burning Coals, into the Boxes, wherely my
Papers, and the best of my other Treasures, what mad work should I make! Truly,
those men, that add unto their Estates, by Fraudulence, by Oppression, by any
Dishonesty, do but convey Burning Coals among all their Treasures; and what,
may we foresee, will be the Issue? He gets Riches, and not by Right, He shall
leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End shall be a Fool.

And yet, there is a sort of Coals, that we may become free withal. It Is
required, Prove. 25. 21, 22, [And repeated, Romans 12. 20.] If thine Enemy be
Hungry, give him Bread to eat; and if he be Thirsty, give him Water to Drink;
for thou shall heap Coals of Fire on his Head, and the Lord shall Reward thee.
The Lord help his poor Servant, ever to avoid all Revenge upon Personal
Enemies; but rather to Wish them, and Do them, all the Good that is possible
for their Evil It were a very lamentable Thing, for a Christian who has
suffered any Injuries, and Reproaches, to manifest his Forgiving of his
Personal Enemies, by making those very Injuries, to be the occasions of his
Praying by Name for them, for whom it may be, he never so prayed before. And
Christianity will be further Exemplified, if we don't Shun, but rather Watch,
all opportunities to show Kindnesses unto them, that have been most Unkind unto
us. But how will this, Heap Coals of Fire on the Heads of of my Adversaries? If
I should Answer, That then the Righteous God, will take my Adversaries into His
Hand, and Revenge the wrongs done to me, with Judgments that shall fall as
Burning Coals upon them that have wronged me, the Answer would be true; but I
must have a care of having this Intention, in my silence, my patience, my
forbearing to Retaliate. Wherefore, I will rather put a sweeter sense upon it.
My Gentleness toward my Adversaries, will perhaps melt their Hearts, as much
as if Coals of Fire were thrown upon them; and the Envy and Maliee, (...) which
(...) treat me, will become as uneasy to themselves as if Coals of Fire were
Lying on their Heads, and the Torment which a Reflection on their own past
Baseness toward me, will give unto them, will be as bad as if Coals of Fire
were vexing of them. All I shall add, is, That it is an hard Lesson, which is
now prescribed unto me; and therefore, even with the ardour of Coals of Fire, I
would pray, as the Disciples of our Lord once did, on the Hearing of this
Lesson, Lord, Increase my Faith.

Meditation. XIX.
Upon some Dead Coals.
THough the Dead Coals on the Hearth, will not Warm ones Exterior, I will try
whether my Interior cannot fetch as much Warmth from them, as from the Living
ones. I am therefore from these Dead Coals, to receive some Living Admonitions.

A Dead Coal, would first most naturally put one in mind, of a Dead man. The
Extinction of a Coal, does (at least as with a Coal) draw a Picture of
Mortality. And she that had but one Son, being afraid of his Death, Expressed
her Fear, 2 Samuel 14. 7. of Quenching the Coal that was left. Now, when I see
how much longer some Coals do last, than others, it invites me to think, how
Long Lived some, in comparison of others, are. Since the unaccountable
Abbreviation of Humane Life, unto the Term, at which it has stood for near
Four Thousand years, we see, That while some Coals are put out by thousands of
Accidents, before their Time, there are men who not only Live to the Term of
Threescore years and Ten, but also keep some Light and Heat, unto a much
Greater Age; yea, and this although they never took such a Temperate and
Accurate way of Living, as did the famous Cornaro, to prolong their Lives.
Though the Countries where they Live most meanly and hardly, are the Countries
where they generally live the longest; and hence the Gentleman, who this
present year [1700.] Published, An Account of the Islands of Orkney, mentions
it as no rare thing for People there to live unto a very great Age; and that
among other Instances which are no Rarities, a Gentleman is yet living at
Strousa there, whose Father begat him, when he was One hundred years old, and
lived until he saw this man's Children: Yet all Countries have afforded some
Exemples of Long^^vity. To Recite the Exemples, would be to transcribe and
pillage, whole Chapters, from those who have written Curiosities. I will only
make just so much Improvement of this Reflection, as to say, That for the
Duration of my Life, I entirely Refer it, and Submit it, unto the God of my
Life, the God, who is the Author and Giver of my Life. So far as the Fear of
God will prolong my Life, and so far as Abstinence, and Patience, will (as
beyond all Elixirs they will!) contribute unto it, I am desirous to make use
thereof. But, I am far from Desirous, to be so long from the Lord Jesus Christ,
(where to be is by far the best of all, 7128) as I see some of my pious
Neighbors are; And I am very Desirous that my Life may not last any longer
than my Work. Whereas also my Broken Health Exceedingly forbids me the least
Expectation of being a Macrobius, and, Non Annis sed Factis vivunt mortales,
it is my earnest Prayer, Lord, let me live long in a little Time! and if I am to
Die quickly, I wish I may be worthy of that Epitaph, Diu vixit, licet non diu
fuit.

But seeing a Dead Coal, I enquire, what made it so? And this Enkindles another
Thought. If the Dead Coal were lying among the Living ones, it would be no
longer so Dead. Lively Christians in like manner (say I) keep one another
Alive, by being Together. The Company and the Conference of Lively Christians,
has a mighty Tendency to keep Christianity Alive among them. A Dead, Stupid,
Formal Frame of Spirit, is the usual Effect of keeping at a Distance from the
Society of Lively Christians. It has been particularly found, that Religious
Meetings wisely managed, have had a more than ordinary tendency to preserve the
Life of Religion among a People. Wherefore, let those Pastors, that would
approve themselves Faithful unto the Interests of Religion in their Flocks,
Countenance and Encourage Religious Meetings, for Prayers, and Repeting of
Sermons, and for Discoursing on the Things of God. And let them very peculiarly
direct and Excite their Young People, to the maintaining of such Meetings. It
will be found that the Life and Power of Godliness will be marvellously
maintained by such Things, And it will be found, That where persons withdraw
from the Fellowship of Lively Christians, and Forsake the Assembling of
themselves together, it will not be long before the Coals go out. May I value and
enjoy the Fellowship of Lively Christians; and may I, by Serious and Modest,
and Fruitful Speeches in their Fellowship, both have and give those things,
upon which it shall be said, While we spoke, did not our Hearts burn within us!

Meditation XX.
On the Blowing of the Fire.
MY Fire not burning to my mind, the Bellows (whose Name I suppose, comes from
the (...) Saxon Bilig, which was perhaps from the Latin, Rulga, a Satchel) are
taken in hand, for the Blowing of it, Without Blowing, it seems, the Fire will
not Burn. I suppose it will be allowed me, That the Fire shall be a lively
Metaphor of Prayer, because it is a Divine One. In allusion to the Fire on the
Altars, it was said, The Smoke of the Incense, which came with the Prayers of
the Saints, ascended up before God: And alluding to that Morning a (...)!
Evening Fire, it is Enjoined on the Masters of Families, Continue in Prayer.
The Warmth requisite unto Prayer, and the Heaven ward motion of it, [For, What
is Prayer, but, (...);] are enough to Embolden the Metaphor. But alas, what ado
must there be, to make this Fire burn? There must be a deal of Blowing upon me,
as by the Providence of God, so by His Holy Spirit, before by Prayer will be
inflamed into a proper Ardor. This Thought falls in well enough. The Spirit of
God, is by the Son of God, from whom He does proceed, compared unto the Wind,
and there are many Elegancies, to favor the Comparison. There must now be a
work of that Holy Spirit on a man, before it can be said of the man, Behold he
prays! And He is, for that Reason styled, The Spirit of Prayer; and it is
assigned, as His Office, to Help our Infirmities in that eminent Act of
Religion. I am sure, There is need enough, of such a work: For I shall not see
the Excellency and Necessity of the Good Things, for which I am to Pray, except
the Holy Spirit Convince me thereof; nor shall I Exert those Graces, wherewith
God in the Lord Jesus Christ is to be acknowledged when I Pray, except the Holy
Spirit both Infuse those Graces, and Excite them and Assist them. We are
commanded expr^^^, To pray by the Holy Spirit; which if it had been a Gift
Miraculous or Extraordinary, or to cease after the Apostolical Age, the Apostle
would never have Exhorted All Christians to Exercise it. For any to Deride,
Praying by the Holy Spirit; cannot but be very dangerously to Blaspheme one of
His peculiar Operations. I wish, that my Prayers then may be such, as Nazi^nzen
relates the Prayers of his Father made at the Eucharist, were; Made by the Holy
Spirit of God And, Lord, keep me from grieving, and vexing thy Holy Spirit, by
indulging my self in Sin, le^t He withdrawing from me, leave me under all the
Calamities of a Prayerless and a Frozen Soul! But, Oh, Thou Holy Spirit, Blow
thou upon this Dead Heart of mine: and, Quicken me, that I may call upon thy
Name.

The Blast of this Meditation is no soener over, but another succeeds. Having
only a little Coal, and indeed scarce a Coal, but a Spark, before me, to Blow,
I find, That if I Blow it with Fury and Fierceness, I shall utterly Lose it.
But I must therefore Blow it very Gently; and with a little Gentleness in my
thus managing of it, I shall anon bring it into a Flame, that will be very
serviceable to me.

Nutritur vento, vento resting uttur Ignis;
Lenis alit (...) Grandier Aura necat.
In this Thing I have an Admonition given me, How Reproofs are often to be
managed: Even like the Bellows, with a Gentle Blast. When our Neighbors do
amiss, it is our Duty to Advise them, caution them, and Reprove them. If the
Reproofs be given with Fury and Fierceness, they will probably be lost; the
Offender will Stand upon his Guard against all that we say, and be under an
Insuperable Prejudica against us, as being his Enemies in all that we say. But
let the Reproof be Dispensed with words of a Gentle (...); Confess and Comm^nd
what is Laudable in the Delinquent, use none but Living (...), and let him feel
that whatever we speak, proceeds from Love, Now Perhaps, We lave gained our
Brother.

I (...) a Good Saying of Seneca, ((...) I may quote, without coming into the
Plot of these Treacherous and Impious Christians, who make Seneca's Morals, the
highest Measures and greatest Lessons of their Christianity.) Ut Corporum it a
Animorum (...) sun^; soepe quod Explicavit (...), pertinacia trahentis
abrup^u^^ est.

Meditation XXI.
On the Flame.
To Look much on the Flame, is perhaps not Good for the Eyes; but it will be
Good for my Soul, when Looking on the Flame, to think on that Glorious Lord, in
the Description of whom, it is one Article, Rev.1. 14 His Eyes are as a Flame of
Fire. Indeed, our Lord JESUS CHRIST is represented, as Clothed with Fire. For
when we read, in the Vision which the Prophet Ezekiel had of Him, From the
Appearance of His Loins even upward, and from the Appearance of His Loins even
downward, I saw as it were the Appearance of Fire; I do with Vitringa
understand it, of the Flammeous Color and Aspect, of the Toga Talaris, or long
Priestly Garment, wherein our Lord appeared. And, Omnia Dei sunt Flammea.
Accordingly, as it would put out my Eyes, if I pore too near the Fire with
them, so it would be as perilous as Criminal a Curiosity in me, to approach
too near unto the Divine Majesty of the Son of God; with presumptuous Enquiri^s
after what is not Revealed: And, Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria. But
that the Eyes of our Illustrious Lord are more peculiarly compared unto a Flame
of Fire, This is a Thing that affords peculiar Instructions unto us. And there
are especially two Things wherein I am here instructed. First, I am to
Remember, That the Eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ, penetrate into the most
secret Recesses imaginable. The Eyes of that Omniscient Lord, penetrate like
Lightning, which is a Flame of Fire, into the most Remote and Hidden Corners in
the World. He needs no other Light, but that of His own Eyes which are a Flame
of Fire, to discover the darkest matters. Oh, let me Study to Approve my Heart,
with all Sincerity, unto that Lord, who because He has Eyes like a Flame of
Fire, will make all the Churches to know, that He Searches the Reins and the
Hearts of the Children of men. I am also to Remember, That there will be no
Standing for Wicked men or Things, before the Eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ.
The Eyes of that Omnipotent Lord, will dart forth Judgments, like a Flame of F
ire, upon those that shall oppose His Interests. Great Wrath will, as both
Homer and Virgil take notice of it, produce a F lame of Fire in the Eyes. Let
me take he^d of provoking the Lord Jesus Christ, lest He that has Eyes like a
Flame of Fire, do Revenge the provocations, by shooting forth Fiery Emanations
of His Displeasure.

Teach me, O L ord, always to behave my self as before the Eyes of a Lord, that
has Eyes like a Flame of Fire

But I may, without any Difficulty in the Transition, pass over from hence to a
Contemplation of those Blessed Spirits, the ANGELS, of whom it is said, Heb.
17. They are a F lame of Fire: And this the rather, because it is also said, of
Them, Zech. 4. 10. They are the Eyes of the Lord. The Angels of God, even those
Wonderful and Excellent Spirits, which compose the Heavenly Host, are very
fitly called, Seraphim, or, Burners, for their F laming Zeal, as well as upon
other accounts. And he that would approve himself an Angelical man, (which the
Pastors of Churches, who are called Angels, are concerned above others to do)
must be a man of a F laming Zeal for God, and for His Truths, and for His
Ways, and against the Sin that is Offensive to Him. It Is very certain, That
there are Good Angels, even Rational Substances, which are Spirits, that were
made by God, in the Beginning of Time, for His own more special Service and
Honor. This is doubted by none, but men under an horrible possession of the
Evil Ones. That there are Evil Angels, we have had among our selves more than
Mathematical Demonstration; and this is an Irrefragable Demonstration, That
there are Good Ones too. Though Moses do not expressly mention the Angels, in his
History of the Creation. yet the Repetition of that History in the Hundred and
Fourth Psalm seems to make an Express mention of them. Indeed, the Nature, the
Office, the Degrees of Angels, do come on to our observation, by slow Degrees
in the Book of God. The Story of the Bible is carried on Two Thousand years,
even as far down as the Days of Abraham, e're we find any Angels visibly
Exhibiting themselves unto the World. The Coming of the Messiah, the Lord of
Angels, is in the Sacred Story, made somewhat plain, before the Angels
themselves are much Exhibited in these Oracles. And possibly, toward the End
of the World, the Truths concerning Angels, will be marvellously recovered, out
of the Darkness as yet upon them, and more Discovered unto the People of God,
than ever since the World began. However the Angels are now mentioned above two
Hundred and sixty times in the Bible of God; and it becomes all that Enjoy the
Bible, not only to Believe, but also to Study, with a due Modesty, the Ministry
of Angels for the Chosen of God, under the Conduct of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now, in the Scriptures of Truth, it is abundantly intimated, That the Good
Angels do compose an Heavenly Army, and there is a most Heavenly Order in that
Army. Possibly the Order wherein the Army of Israel in the Wilderness, was
disposed, might be a little imitation of it; and the Almighty God might be
called, The Lord of Hosts, with relation unto both. The Traditional and
Platenical Spec^^ations o^ the Ancients, and the Vanity of the Schoolmen, who
are vainly puffed up in their fleshly mind, in their Determinations, about the
Angels, afford a poor Direction to our Thoughts upon them. If we Speak not
according to the Testimony of the Scripture, when we Speak about the Angels of
Light, it is because there is no L ight in us Now the Scripture does assure us,
That there is atleast one Archangel, and the Name of that Archangel, is
Michael, a Confession of the matchless Majesty in God. But some apprehend, no
less than Seven Archangels, [From Rev 3. 1.] and I do my self incline to that
Apprehension. There are Angels also that seem to be under the more Influences
of these Leaders, who with their Leaders, are all under the Command of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, the Lord of Glory. Yea, there are Multitudes, vast Myriads and
Millions of them: An Innumerable Company. If the Saints of God, who are to fill
up the Room left in Heaven, by the Fallen Angels, be a Great multitude, which
no man can number, what may we ^ustly suppose the Number of the Good Angels?
The Bad Angels are so many, that sometimes a Numerous Crew, have been at
Liesure to vex one miserable man How Numberless then may we suppose the Good
Angels, from whom these are but a Crew of Deserters and Revolters? When our
Lord spoke of His Father sending Twelve L egions of Angels, it was not because
His Father had no more; but only because there was none but Himself, and His
Eleven Disciples, to be then protected, and a Legion a piece, every one would
own, was Protection enough. Now a Legion according to Vegetius, did consist of
6100 Footmen, and 726 Horsemen, Here then are supposed more than Fourscore
Thousand Angels. But indeed, There are Thousands of Thousands! And so many,
that without making any Breach, upon that vast Congregation of Angels, which
are Day and Night about the Lord in His Temple, every Elect person may have at
least One Angel, (whether always the same, or no, is questionable) by the
special Deputation of Heaven, to be with him, Defend him, Direct him all the
Days of his Pilgrimage. The Scripture is plain, for their having Their Angels;
and the Church of God in the First Ages, were fully of this Opinion. Well then,
If I give Thanks to God, for the Benefits which I receive in the Flames on my
Hearth, what Thanks do I owe unto God, for these Heavenly Flames of Fire, which
are the Ministers, from whom His Faithful Servants do receive inestimable
Benefits? The Good Angels, consider, That their Everlasting Lord is a Man, yea,
that it is a Man United unto the Second Person in God, and Lying in the Bosom
of the Infinite God for ever: and that the Welfare of man, is a thing full of
Satisfaction to that man, who is God as well as man, Accordingly, at the
Command of the Lord Jesus Christ, they Fly swiftly, like Flames of rapid Fire,
to do for His people, those Good Offices, About which they will more fully
inform us, when we shortly a^tive among them. There are many Evil Disasters,
^^en as many as Jobs of old, whereto we should be Exposed, if there were not
the Angels of the Lord Encamping about us. How comes the Church in general to
be Preserved? The Lord of old promised, A Wall of Fire; The meaning of That is,
A Guard of Angels. They put many Good Notions, and Good Motions into our Minds,
dissolving therewithal the Enchantments of the Wicked One, that else would be
too hard for us. They prevent our Sinning against their and our Good God; and
rate off the Lions that would else make a prey of us. They comfort us in our
Dying Hours, and at our Death, carry off our Souls unto Paradise, in spite of
the Efforts of the Prince of the power of the Air to imprison us; and at the
Resurrection, they will be in yet more inconceivable ways comfortable and
serviceable to us. The stupid Mortals, who are insensible of such Good Offices,
to be done by the Angels of God, for His Children, do Err, not knowing the
Scriptures, Now the Angels do not expect our Thanks, unto Them, for these Good
Offices, but unto the Lord Jesus Christ for them. Oh, that my Heart were more
Inflamed with Gratitude unto the Lord, whose Goodness has favored us, with
such Flames of Fire, to be Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them.
Who shall be Heirs of Salvation.

But then, how much concerned ought I to be, lest I provoke the Good Angels,
and render my self obnexious to terrible strokes from these Flames of Fire. To
forfeit their Assistance, is calamity enough; What will it be then, to Incur
their Displeasure? They are Mighty Angels, and one of them, has before now,
made Mighty Armies, and Mighty Monarchs, to fall before him; and it has been
thereat cried out, Who among us shall dwell with the Devouring Fire? Who among
us shall dwell with Everlasting Burnings?

Wherefore, Let me avoid all Unholiness, lest the Holy Angel; be offended at
me, It is a good Note of Chemnitius, Caveamus ^e vit^^ lmpuritate, hosce
Sanctos Custodes a nob^s abigamus. And now, Let behave my self as under the Eye
of Angels; putting this unto my Conscience when I am tempted unto any vile
Thing; Would I venture to do this, if an Angel clothed with a Flame of Fire,
were visibly before me. Let me also labor to be Like the Angels, wholly
Dedicated unto God, always at work for God, and like a Flame of Fire, in my
Nimble Readiness to Do His Commandments Finally, Let me beware of doing any
injury unto any man, that may be dear unto the Angels; lest the Angels, (and
his Angel) gain Commission to Revenge it.

We read of an Angel with a Flaming Sword. It is particularly said, Gen.3. 24.
There were Cherubims, and a Flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the
way of the Tree of Life. That which is commonly rendered Flaming Sword, is the
Flame of Cutting; or a Dividing Flame. This Dividing Flame, or Fiery Division
may be answerable to the Wall of Fire, which God promised by the Prophet
Zechariah, to make about Jerusalem. Some Learned men of late, conjecture, That
it was the Accension of some inflammable matter, about the Garden of Eden,
which excluded all corners to it, until such Time as the Beauty of the place,
was defaced. Now, we know, that even to this day the Countries thereabouts,
have abundance of Naphtha and Bitumen; yea, ancient Histories tell us, that in
Alexanders Time, there were Volcano's there; and still the Fields there, even
yet, at some Times of the year, seem all on F ire. But this matter was uncer
Angelick management.

Remember, O my Soul; Through the Lord Jesus Christ, get and keep in good Terms
with the Angels of the Lord, lest a Flaming Sword be turned upon thee.

Meditation. XXII.
On the Nimbleness of the Flame.
I am looking after some Qualities of the Flame, to consider, with such
Reflections, as may have a Tendency to encourage Good Qualities in us that are
about it. And methinks, the Nimbleness of it, gets before its other Qualities,
and first offers it self to be considered. How Nimbly it moves? How Swiftly it
proceeds! How Swiftly it Ascends! and gets beyond its Pyramidical Bounds, into
the Invisible World! The Swiftness required unto the Pronunciation of that
Verse, in the Dactyls whereof an Ingenious Person, did Poetically Limn out,
(or, Sound out) the Nimble Flame, ^erne Levem Stipulam ^repitantibus urere
flammis,

Is not equal to the Swiftness of that which it endeavors to decipher.

Delay not, O my Soul, to Reflect agreeably, My Work is to move and mount
Upwards, until I am carried at length, into the Upper World, where the Eyes of
Flesh that have seen me, shall see me no more; and the Ru^e of these motions,
is to be found in the Commandments of God, Let me now be Nimble in my Obedience
to those Divine Commandments, and obey them with a Velocity, like that of
Abraham of whom it was said, me rose Early to comply with the calls of Heaven,
and of David, by whom it was said, I made Have, and did not Delay, It has been
the Observation of some Eminent Preachers, That they rarely Preach with more
Success, than when they Preach about the Danger and ^^lly, of men's Delay to
Turn unto God. Lord, I mourn, that I have been so slow, and made it so long
^^re may Soul began to move upwara^ I must with shame con^ess Nimis Sero Te
amav^. But since I am now, by the Grace of God, what I am, let me by the most
Lively Sermons and Visits, labor to Quicken my Neighbors, unto the Activity
of a Flame, in their Conversion to the Lord Jesus Christ. Let me Livelily set
before them, the madness of their Procrastinating, with a Pretense of
Expecting, A more convenient Season.

But then, there are many Actions of Piety and Charity, which I have to do, and
many, Provisions which I have to make for the Future State. Now, in all these
points, I wish, that I may, with the Swiftness of the Flame set about them, and
when I have set about them, with the like Swiftness, Dispatch them. For all
such points, usually, Qui non est bodis, cras minus aptus erit. The Pagan
Deities themselves. did not count the Snail, or the Ass, to be fit Sacrifices
for them. Let me always Abhor to Defer a Duty; Behold, Now is the Acceptable
Time! Remember, O my Soul, There are very many points, about which, the Flame
now before thee, utters a Cry, like that of Jonathan to his Lad, Make Speed,
Hast^ stay not.

Meditation. XXIII.
On the Purity of the Flame.
I must not yet lay aside my Conference, with the Flame. Its Purity, which
admits nothing Heterogeneous, to lodge in it, would Stir up a pure mind, unto
the Remembrance, of something that is much to be Desired. So Pure indeed is the
Flame, that our English word Pure, seems derived from the Greek word of the
same sound, (...), which signifies, Fire; and possibly the old Saxon word,
Fire, may be of that Original. The Flame is Pure; and, Oh, that I were so too!
The Purity of the Ascending Flame, does put one in mind, of a passage, in the
famous Catechisim of David;

Q. Who shall Ascend into the H^ll of the Lord?

A. He that has a Pure Heart.

A Pure Heart, like a Pure Flame, will admit nothing to be lodged in it, but
what shall be of an Heavenly Tendency, and pleasing to the God of Heaven. And
when I Learn from the Oracles of God, of what consequence it is to have, A pure
Heart; particularly, That it shall be Blessed with the Sight of God; I will no
longer count it a Disgrace, to be, A Puritan.

I have within me a Conscience, whereof, if I make, the Flame to be a Picture,
I draw it by the Light of a Proverb, that fell from the Pen of Solomon, The
Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord. But then I read of some, Whose
Conscience is Defiled. Every Sin is a discomposing of that Flame, with some
Vile Pollution cast into it: And if Sin be not pardoned, and Removed, with the
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ cast into the Flame, the Polluted Conscience,
will but Burn the more fiercely for it, throughout Eternal Ages. Oh, That I
might preserve all Purity of Soul; and Cleansing my self from all Filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, O let me keep alive a Pure Flame of Love to God, in my Heart,
Purified by F aith, continually. There is a promise, which I am to plead with
God, that I may obtain this Favor from Him, I will Purify the Sons of Levi.

Meditation XXIV.
On the Ascending of the Flame.
ONe of the most visible Things about the F ire, is the F lame; and one of the
most sensible Things about the F lame, is the Motion and Ascent of it. But our
Hissing F lame, does not move upward, without calling upon us, as the Primitive
Christians, when they were beginning their Acts of public Worship, did use to
be called upon, Sursum Corda! or, Let your Hearts move upward! If naturally the
F lat side of my Heart Ly toward Heaven, and the Sharp side of it Ly toward
Earth, I wish my Heart may be turned, even turned into the contrary posture of
the F lame, which I am now thinking on. An Heavenly Tendency is the property of
every Godly man; His Conversation is in Heaven May I now express it, in my own
Desire and purpose to labor after that property.

The motion of the Heart, is in its Thoughts, its Loves, its Hopes an its
Joys. May mine always be upward, and Heavenward Lord; Inflame this miserable
Heart of mine, with thy Love, and it will be so!

But a Christian that would keep a constant F lame of Devotion in his Heart,
always Ascending toward God and Christ and Heaven, cannot more effectually do
so, than by filling every day of his Life, with that sort of Prayers, which we
call Ejacul^^to^^. By the Daily and Hourly Use of Ejaculatory Prayers, a
Christian may have his Heart, like a F lame, continually mounting upward, unto
the Heavens, and Our Father which is in the Heavens.

Now, It is impossible for me to mention all the Numerous, and indeed
Numberless, Occasions, for Ejaculatory Prayers; but if a Christian will
Watchfully improve such Occasions, as are now to be mentioned, he will be
Taught of God, how to improve the rest.

A Christian has abundant Occasions for Ejaculatory Petitions, both on the
behalf of himself and of others.

The Favors of God, for our Inward man, may on many Occasions be supplicated
with our Ejaculations. As now; we may take Occasions for such Ejaculations and
Supplications, from the Ordinances of God. Before we set upon any signal
Exercise of Religion, there is Occasion for some such Ejaculations, as That; O
Lord, Assist me to draw water out of this Well of Salvation; or, Let the words
of my mouth. and the thoughts of heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord. And
all the while, we are in the Exercise, there is Occasion for multiplied
Ejaculations. While we are joining with another in Social Praying, we may fix
our wandering hearts, by annexing such a pertinent Ejaculation unto all that he
utters, as, Lord, I own it! or, Lord, I ask it! When the Congregation that sat
under our Lords Ministry, heard Him, (who was It) speaking about the Bread of
Life, they presently made an Ejaculation upon it; Lord, give us this Bread for
ever. Thus in the Hearing of a Good Sermon, a Studious Head, and a Gracious
Heart, may tack a serious Ejaculation upon every thing that shall be offered.
The Preacher it may be, while he is getting his own Sermon (I say not, by Head,
but) by Heart; before he comes abroad, makes many scores of Ejaculations,
thereupon, Why may not the Hearer digest the Sermon into as many Ejaculations,
when it shall be publicly p^onou^^ed^? Possibly, not one Head, and (...) Text,
in all the Sermon may pais without some Ejaculation from the Soul of such a
labor us Heater, Echoing back to the words of God. And when the Sermon is over
is there no Occasion for us to go out of the (...), with such an Ejaculation as
that; Lord keep these things, in the imagination of the Thoughts of my Heart
for ever! How shall we worthily Approach to the Lords Table? Do it Prayerfully.
Oh! what plentiful and wonderful Occasions for Ejaculations there! Our
Meditations; it will be most convenient for us, to inte^ mix multitudes of
Ejaculations in them; In the Singing of a Psalm, yea, and in the Reading of and
Chapter, would we do to purpose what we do? We may Try, whether we cannot form
some Ejaculation out of every Verse, as we go along.

Moreover, From all the Works of God, we may take (...) Occasions for such
Ejaculations. The Works of Creation; we should (...) now and then be creating
of Instructions (...) our selves out of them. A Fruitful Heart will make the
whole Creation Fruitful, and fetch fine Lectures and Lessons from all the
Creatures of God. But now, Dismiss not any of those Reflections, without some
Ejaculations from thence unto the Lord. The Works of Providence: and especially
those which more immediately sall upon our selves; as they come from God, so
they should make us go to Him. When we see any Comfort conferred on us, here is
a Room for an Ejaculation, Lord. Help me to Employ this Talent for thy Glory,
When we feel any Trouble inflicted on us, here is a Room for an Ejaculation,
Lord, Help me to Bear and Hear thy Rod.

Furthermore, We may Supplicate the Favors of God, for our Outward man, by our
Ejaculations on many Occasions. Every new matter of Care brings with it a new
matter of Prayer. What shall we do, but by a short E jaculation carry it unto
the Lord? It would be a glorious Thing if we could Resign all our New Concerns
every Hour, unto the Disposal of our God, Who performs all things for us But
it cannot explicitly and comfortably be done, without Ejaculations. And thus
the Smile of God may be asked on all that we have to do. When a Servant of
Abraham had some Affairs of his Masters, to look after, he had this Ejaculation
upon it, Lord, send me good Speed! A weighty Question should not be answered
without the pause of a preceding Ejaculation unto that Lord, from whom is, The
Answer of the Tongue The Occasions of such Ejaculations are exceedingly
multiplied, and multifarious. Yea, how often in a Day, have we Occasion to
wish, Lord, Let thy Good Angels, have the charge ever me! or, Lord, my Help is
in Thee, who did make Heaven and Earth!

To proceed; It is not seldom, that we have Occasions of Ejaculations for the
Whole Church of God; That Ejaculation Lord, Save thy People; or, Lord, Let
thine Enemies be scattered! how often is it called for? Elder persons may ve^^
fi^ly Bless the Younger, with Ejaculations over them. It was no improper
Ejaculation, that Joseph had ever Benjamin, The Lord be gracious to thee, my
Son. And methinks, a Parent may find it almost an hard thing, to behold his
Children without some such Ejaculation over them, Lord. Make, and Save, and Use
this Child, as thy own for ever! And have those that are more Equals, no
Benedictions for one another, to be conveyed in charitable Ejaculations? Yes,
The Ejaculations that passed between Boaz and his Reapers, The Lord be with
you! and, The Lord bless you! are calculated to the Lips of us all toward one
another. It was the Ruse, which one prescribed unto himself, When I think of my
Friend, let it be with a praying thought! Be sure; whenever we are informed of
any Neighbor in any Affliction, then our charitable Ejaculations are be spoke
upon it: God pity them! and, God strengthen them! and, God succor them! these
Ejaculations for the Afflicted, are not Impertinent Yea, while we walk in the
Street, or Sit in a Room, with our minds, otherwise wholly unemploy'd, it is
pity to lose this Time. Is it not possible for us, now, to use our Wit as well
as our Grace, in contriving of some Suitable Blessing, for such and such
persons as are them before us, and then shape it into some Ejaculation for
them, which we will never discover un'o any, but unto that God, who knows our
thoughts afar off.

A Christian has abundant Occasions for Ejaculatory Thanksgivings too. May we
lay hold on all Occasions, for those E jaculations, The Lord be magnified! and,
Bless the Lord, O my Soul! All the Occasions which may occur, for our Prayers,
do solicit sometimes for our Praises too. And every Dispensation of God, may
be an Occasion of some Ejaculation to Him from us. The Primitive Believers,
when they talked of their Sufferings, they did it with such an Ejaculation
thereupon, as, Deo Gratias, or, The Lord be thanked! And shall not we then talk
of our Enjoyments in such a Strain! When any conspicuous Mercy is bestowed upon
us, then certainly we may discover our gratitude by some grateful Ejaculation
immediately upon it, saying, Lord, Thou art Good, and thou do Good! Yea,
whenever any Attribute of God, is by an Effect, manifested unto us, we may by
Some adapted Ejaculation celebrate that Attribute. Straitways then direct such
an Ejaculation, as, Lord, How great is thy Power, thy Wisdom, thy Justice, thy
Sovereignty, and thy Bounty!

And this is one Remarkable Expedient, whereby, whether we E at or Drink, or
whatever we Do, we may Do all to the glory of God. We may string every distinct
Action of our Lives, upon a Thread of Holiness, by such an Ejaculation over it,
Lord, may this be done for thy Glory.

Thus have I described a method of become a Flame, continually Shooting up
toward Heaven, in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long. I must conclude it,
with an E jaculation, Lord, make me thus Angelical!

Meditation XXV.
On the Uniting of the Flame.
I See Flames ascend from several parts of the (...) near one another; yea, I
see Flames (...) from the several sorts of the Fuel But I se^ the as they
Ascend, they all unite. Flames do (...) and (...) Incorporate, and one can
(...) Difference.

I would to God, There were as much Union among all the true Servants of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The Devotions of Good men, are like Flames ascending before
the Lord Oh, Oh, that they were now United. I never much admired, the violent
pressing of Uniformity; but there may be Unity without Uniformity. Indeed, I
have read of two persons, who much maligned one another while they Lived, that
when they Dyed, being together Burned in the same Funeral Pile, the Flames that
ascended from each of them, sensibly divided. But I am sure, the minds of Godly
men (those pure F lames!) will be perfectly United after Death, Ubi Luthero cum
Zuinglio optime jam convenit. But why should they not be better United in their
minds, while they are Alive? Our Prayers, are to be Flames, going up to Heaven:
Union is advised in all Relations and Societies, That our prayers be not
hindered. If the Great Hearer of Prayer, see His Praying Saints, Agreeing
together, and, Of one Accord, in their asking of His Blessings, and all their
Prayers, combining into one Flame, There He will command the Blessing. Lord,
Let there be a concurrence in the Prayers of thy Faithful people; and Let my
prayers be heartily and readily joined unto Theirs.

Yea, I will conclude, with this Consolation, That the Flames are more United
than is commonly Believed. It was a comfortable Note of Mr. Philip Henry.
Notwithstanding the sad Divisions in the Church, yet all the Saints, as far as
they are Sanctified, are One; One in Relation, One by Representation; Of One
Inclination. One in their Aims, One in their Askings, One in their Interests,
and One in their Inheritance. Yea, they are One in Judgment and Opinion; though
in some things they differ, yet those things wherein they are Agreed, are many
more, and much more considerable, than those things wherein they differ.

Meditation XXVI.
On Passing through the Fire.
SItting by the Fire, I call to mind frequent passages in the Divine Oracles
about, Passing through the Fire: and I call to mind especially that
prohibition, Lev. 18. 21. Thou shall not let any of thy Seed pass through the
Fire, to Moloch. It would now by the Fire side, be Edifying and Entertaining,
to Enquire after the meaning of this matter.

And in the first place, we may Enquire, Who was Moloch? Now, I will not with
Seldom, and Grot^us, and others, urge, that Moloch was the same with Saturn,
the Demon whom the Phoenicians chiefly served with their horrible
Technothysies. I will not with K^^cher say, that Moloch was the same with Mars,
though he might have a Coptical Commentary, where the Names of all the Planets
being recited in order, in the place of Mars there is Moloch. I will not say
with Arias Montanus, That Moloch was the same with Mercury; though Malach do
signify, what they made Mercury, a Messenger. Nor will I say with Cyril, that
Venus was by the Ancients worshipped under the Name of Moloch; nor with
Sanctius, that Moloch was an Idol peculiar to the Ammonites; nor with some
others, That some certain King, by way of Eminency called so, (which Moloch
signifies) though the particular Name of the Gentleman be now forgotten, were
intended. I will rather concur with the Learned Spencer (however in the main
Design for which he has Employed his Learning, I differ from him;) That Moloch
was a Name common to all the Gods, (especially, The Sun) worshipped in the
Images of the ancient Pagans. And therefore Baal, which was also a Name common
for all False Gods, is promiscuously used for Moloch. [Compare, Jer. 19. 5.
with Jer. 32 35.] Indeed, there is extant at this day, an ancient Inscription,
which in the word, (...), brings both Names into One. Moloch signifies a King,
and it imports Government, and Majesty: whereof, it is no wonder, if the Devil
is ambitious. But it is also likely, that Malach, the root of his Name,
signifies, to Worship, to Adore, to reckon as a God; for though the Lexicons take
no notice of such a sense, yet the Ethiopic Language countenances it. Thus the
Kings of Hamath and Arphad, are called, The Gods of Hamath and Arphad; [Isa 37.
13, with Isa 36. 19.] And Hercules, when called, (...), or Melicertoe, by the
Sidonians, was originally, Melech Kirtha, or, The Tutelar God of the City.

But we will in the next place, Enquire, What was passing through the Fire to
this Molech? Now, it is very certain, That some of the Pagans, especially when
certain Distresses were upon them, did use an Immolation of their Children unto
Moloch. [Ponder, Ezekiel. 16 20, 21. with Jer. 7 31. and Jer. 32. 35. There I
shall see the signification of Passing through the Fire.] As we read of the
Sepharvites, [2 King. 17. 31.] That they Burnt their Children unto Adramelech,
[or, Deus potens:] and Anamelech, [or Deus respondens.] Thus, other Historians,
and particularly Josephus, relate such horrid practices to have been usual
among the Canaanites; whom therefore the Book of Wisdom, calls, Unmerciful
Murderers of their Children. The Ambiguity of the Diabolical Oracle requiring
this Rite, may have been one thing that betrayed the woeful people into it. As
when Apollo demanded of the Pelasgians, (...), which might signify, either, A
man, or, A Torch: So very ambiguous was the phrase of, passing through the Fire.
And therefore, the Hard Word, which the Elder Ages had understood in the Harder
Sense of Combustion, the Later Ages, found out a Softer Sense of Purgation, for
it; and they began to think, that Moloch would be content, as Tertullian
speaks, Traducto Corpore F lamma. For this Februation of the Children to
Moloch, two pyles were kindled, and persons were carried through them, in token
of their consecration to Moloch. And thus though it is said of Ahaz, 2 King. 16. 3.
He caused his Son to pass through the Fire; yet it seems, we find the Son
surviving this Traduction; it being that very ^ezekiah, who afterward proved [
O the Sovereign Grace of Heaven!] Such a notable Destroyer of these Idolatries.
Theodoret is of this Opinion; who adds, I my self have seen it in some Cities,
that once in a year they kindle Bonfires in the Streets, and not only Boys,
but Men, do Leap through those Fires, and Children are by their Mothers carried
through them; and it appeared a sort of Expiation. Perhaps, this Remark by the
way, might raise in ones mind, some Thoughts upon the Rites of Bonfires in our
Days; especially, when we find them so condemned by the primitive Christians;
and we find the Pagans confessing with Varro, Ignem magnum transiliunt, his
pal^libus se expiari credentes; and Ovid.

Mo^^que per ardentes stipuloe crepitantis acervos,
Trajicias celeri strenua membra pede.
Now as the Inhumane Cruelty, and Criminal Sacrilege, of the Israelites, in
Burning their Children, was abominable unto God; so He forbad their Dragging of
their Children through the Fire to Moloch; which they did, that they might not
be obnoxious to the Strokes of any Doemon, or any Ill Eye, by their native
Impurities, or to Dedicate them, and Initiate them unto the Service of the
Idol; and express their Worship, first of the Fire, and then of the Sun, as a
God.

But could the Idolaters offer up their Children to Moloch in the Fire? O my
Lord Jesus Christ; If thou ever bestow Children upon me, I will offer them up
unto thee, in a Flame of Love. They shall be thine; And, I pray, that thy
Spirit, as a S pirit of Burning, may purify them for thy self.

Meditation. XXVII.
On the Sparks issuing from the Fire.
BEholding the Sparks to ascend in such Number, and with such Briskness, from
the Fire, what can I so readily think upon, as those words of Eliphaz, Job 5.
7. Man is born unto Trouble, as the Sparks fly upward! The first Thought, which
at the first View, now naturally rises like a Spark from the Fire, in the mind
of a Devout Reader, would be This; That it is not more Natural for the Sons of
the Burning Coal (as the Sparks are called here) to fly upward, than it is for
the Sons of Sinful man to run into Trouble. It becomes me therefore to live to
the continual Expectation of Troubles; yea, as many Sparks do arise together
from the Fire, and these do no sooner disappear, but as many more Sparks do
succeed, so I must Expect a Succession of Troubles: And it will not be
unprofitable for me, to consider Sin, as the Fire at the Bottom, from which all
these Troubles are produced. We need not quote any Pagan Authority to prove,
Natum in curas hominum genus. General Experience gives us proof Enough.
Christians are Forewarned by the Lord, who was Himself a Man of sorrows and
acquainted with griefs, That in the World we shall have Trouble. The Disciples
of the Lord, who Dyed upon a Cross, must all be Cross bearers, no less than
that famous Prince who was called, Crouch back, from his wearing an image of
the Cross on his Back. Being thus Forewarned, let me be Forearmed, and not be
Surprised, when Troubles of all kinds come upon me; but be prepared with Faith,
and Patience to encounter them.

Nevertheless, there may be some further Glosses made upon this matter. And
among the rest, methinks, that of Coccejus is a little Elegant. Sicut
Scintilloe natura eff^runtur, sed statim resolvuntur, et in cinerem descendunt,
it a ho^o ^alore quidem innato ad Tempus tollitur, ut scintilla igne suo, sed
eo ipso resolvitur. Man coming into the World, flies and grows apace up to man's
Estate; his Native Heat carries him up thereunto: and the Older and further he
goes, the more Trouble he meets withal; but that Heat suddenly leaves him, and
he falls down Lifeless Ashes, buried in the Heap of Incinerated Mortals. This
Mortality is the Trouble, which of all other, is the most certain, that Man is
Born unto. This Trouble of man's falling down into the Ground, from his greatest
Beauty, is ordered by the Just and Wise Decree of God, it comes not forth of
the Dust, (...) does it spring out of the Ground. That I may improve this point
a little further; Alas, How Troublesome a Meditation are we fallen upon! Man
shoots forth into the World, like a Spark; There he shines, and glows, and
mounts as high as he can: Some show Brighter, and some reach Higher, and some
last Longer than others; But all of them, are no sooner come to be of some
Significancy, than they go out, and sink down, into the common Heap of Ashes.
This Trouble is man Born unto; And, Lord, I submit unto it. Yea, and I have
this unspeakable Encouragement so to do; There is an Invisible Spark of
Immortality in the Servants of God, which at the same Time, will Fly upward,
until it arrive at the Empyroean Heaven; and it never shall go out, but be
turned into a Star, in the Kingdom of our Father, throughout Eternal Ages.

Indeed such is the Troublesome Vanity and Levity of Man's best Estate, in this
World, that some (as De Dieu) thus read the Text before us; Man is born unto
Trouble, and the very Sparks (not only the Fire, which, Levia Sursum secum
r^pit, but even the Sparks themselves, are enough to) carry him up.

Nor is this all the Remark that is to be made, upon this Noted Sentence in the
Book of God: For I find some to take it after this manner; Man is born to
(commit) Iniquity; but among men, there are some Sons of Light, that Fly
upward, and are illustrious for their Eminent virtues, and are of Heavenly
Dispositions and Inclinations. Lord, Let the meanest of thy Servants obtain
such a Character.

Meditation. XXVIII.
On the Fire, Endangering the Clothes of One in the Company.
A Spark from the Fire before us, had insensibly flown and fallen, on the
Garments of one in our Company; but I was, more sensible of the Danger
attending his, Garments, than he was himself; and presently advising him of it,
I received his Thanks for the Advice.

I called now to mind, that charge of God, Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hat^e
thy Brother in thy Heart; Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
suffer Sin upon him: or, as it may be read, That thou hear not Sin (...) him.
When I see any Sin upon my Neighbor, I see what is infinitely worse than a
Spark of Fire upon his Garments. I am sure, it is said, Isa. 9 18 Wickedness
burns as the Fire. Now, it is (...) a Loving and Faithful Reproof, that I am
to save my Neighbor, from the mischief, which this Fire threatens to do unto
him. If the person to whom I direct such a Reproof, be no^ very far gone in
Wickedness, he will take it kindly from me; and, He that Rebukes a man, shall
afterward find more favor, than he that f^attereth with the Tongue. And if by
my Reproof any person, be brought unto a sight and sense of a sinful Error, it
will be a Reproof of Life; the Life of his never dying Soul will be thereby
promoted, and God will be glorified. But if I forbear to give a Reproof, when
there is a Cause and a Time for it, I shall by my silence, make the sinful
Error of another man my own; and I have a Fellowship with the unfruitful works
of Darkness, if I do not Reprove them. Now, the Lord help me to discharge the
Duty of a Wise Reprover, when there is a just occasion for it; yea, though in the
Gate, they Hate him that Reproves, yet let me have the courage to do my Duty.
In administering a Reproof, let my Language be winning; le^ ^y Address be
cunning; let me manage all with plain Scripture, and let me Employ hearty
Prayer to God for the success of it. If I see Fire on my Neighbors Clothes,
Let me not say, Am I my Brothers Keeper? And if my Neighbor give me a Reproof,
let me have the wisdom to call it, A Kindness, and, An Excellent Oil. By no
means would I be, like a Dog with a Thorn in his Foot, snapping and (...) at
those, who would go to take it out: for, as, He that hates Reproof is
brutish, (...), He that hates Reproof, shall Dye.

Meditation XXIX.
On the Sap of the Wood, forced out by the Fire.
WHen I see the Sap forced out of the Wood, by the Fire, I sometimes think on
(...) Tears of a Forced Repentance. The Sacred Scriptures report unto us, the
Instances both of Persons and Peoples, from whom the Every Judgments of God
have sometimes fetched Expressions of Sorrow and Remorse for their Sins against
Him. And we see it in our daily experience, That Sinners under grievous
Affliction, have seemed very penitent, and with Tears have professed their
penitence. But the Liquor which drops out at the end of the Consuming Wood, is
not more loathsome, or De^^is'd by any of us, that look upon it, than the Tears
of a Repentance, produced by the mere Torture of the Divine Judgments upon us,
are to the God who Weighs our Spirits. The Tears of Wretches under punishment,
shed only because they feel themselves punished, are none of them any more in
the Bottel of God, than that wretched Water which runs from our Brands Ends, is
thought worthy to be preserved by us, in any of our Vials. One Tear proceeding
from a genuine, and gracious principle, of Trouble and Anger at our selves for
having offended the Holy God, and of Admiration at His Goodness, in providing
for us, revealing to us, and Inviting us into the Methods of Reconciliation to
himself, is of more account, than a River of those that are the Fruit of mere
Vexation at our own uneasy circumstances.

Meditation XXX.
On Laboring in the Fire.
SOmetimes I see a Writing, or some other curious, and perhaps tedious, Effect
of Labor, thrown into the Fire; and then what becomes of all the Labor? This
however shall come of it! It shall engage me in a short Meditation, on those
words of the Prophet, Hab. 2 13 Behold, is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that
the people shall Labor in the very Fire, and the people shall weary themselves
for very vanity?

The Spirit of Prophecy here foretells the Downfall of Babylon: but it looks
thorough and beyond the Downfall of the Literal Babylon, down as far as that of
the Mystical; the Town built with Blood, the City established by Iniquity, the
Sorceress that makes the Neighbors Drunk, and Entices them into the
Fornication of her Idolatries. The Oracle now before us, reports one special
and signal character of the Time, when this Blessed Revolution is at the Door*
And the general Importance of the Oracle, is, That an extraordinary, and an
Astonishing Disappointment, shall attend the expectations of people in all
their Affairs. The wrath of God, like a Fire, shall so devour the Effects of
all their Labor, that when men have never so much wearied themselves, to bring
about their purposes, they shall find nothing but Vanity frustrating all that
they have purposed. People shall be strangely unprosperous in their most
Hopeful, and most Likely Affairs, and have all their Hopes from very promising
Objects evaporated into nothing.

Indeed, all the Labor wherein we do not Serve our Lord Jesus Christ, is
Labor in the Fire: It Is but lost Labor all of it. But now even in my Labor
for the Lord Jesus Christ, there are two Unhappinesses of Labor in the Fire,
which I would very warmly deprecate.

First, I wish, that I may not Labor in the Fire, in regard of
Unsuccessfulness attending my Labor, and so sad a Fate of the Souls under my
Ministry, that they shall perish in the Endless and Easeless Fire, of the
Divine Indignation, from whence the Smoke of the Torment ascends for ever and
ever. Oh! Let not this be the upshot of all my Labor to Teach, and Charge, and
Warn the Souls under my Charge; that they shall be thrown into that Fire, where
they shall cry out, with him, Luke 16. 24. I am Tormented in this Flame!

Secondly, I wish that I may not Labor in the Fire, in regard of the
Unusefulness of the Things done by my Labor, and their being ^it for nothing
but the Fire We read, 1 Cor. 3 ^5. If any man's wor^^ shall be Burnt, he shall
suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved yet so as (...) Fire Bel^armine
himself confesses, a Difficulty, through an Al legory, in these words, though this
Allegory is the main Foundation on which the Papists build such Hay and
Stubble, as their Figment of Purgatory. The Apostle would have Pastors careful,
how they Built up their Churches; whether with such Good Persons, and such pure
Doctrines, as would Endure the Fire of Tribulation and Persecution, and the
Examen of the Holy Spirit of God. If they do not, their Salvation, will at best
be, but so as by Fire; which is a proverbial phrase, used not only in Sacred,
but in Profane Authors, ^o signify, A narrow Escape out of an extreme Danger:
As the Roman Orator says of one, Ex Judicio velut ex Incendio, ^udus effugit:
And thus Chrystostom glosseth upon this place; As One, who when his House at
midnight, is set on Fire, wakes and L eaps out of his Bed, and runs naked out
of Doors, taking nothing that is within, along with him.

Meditation XXXI
On the Wood Lying too close.
WE know, That Air is necessary to Flame. And our knowledge of it, is notably
confirmed, by the Experiment of the Air ^ump, where Gunpowder it self, cast
upon Hot Iron, will only melt and not flash in the Exhausted Receiver. And
possibly to this may be owing the Experiment mentioned by my Lord Bacon, That
if you hold an Arrow in the Flame for ten pulses, you shall find those parts of
the Arrow which were on the Out side of the Flame far more burned and blacked,
when that in the midst (...) the Flame, will be as if the Fire had hardly
touched it. Yea, the Divine Oracles, [for such is the Fullness of them!] do seem
to take notice of this Experiment, in Ezekiel. 15: 4 Where, first, Both Ends of
the Vine stalk are devoured and then the midst of it is burnt. But without
those Experiments, we have enough of it every day, when our Fire will not burn,
because the Wood lies too close The Fire will be smothered and obstructed, if
the Air have not Access unto it.

This thought invites me, in the first place, to consider the Necessity of Air
to Life in our selves: For, though I am not such a Psychopyrist as to call the
Soul, a Fire, yet, I see not why Life may not be called so; and without Air, we
see (howbeit there have been some rare Instances of persons that have Lived
Breathless for many days together; it may be, Sal Ar^^oniack has revived the
Flame;) that it will be soon extinguished. I would therefore give Thanks to the
Good God, who by His Air does uphold my Soul in Life; and I would look upon it,
as a very signal point of Health for me to be cautious, what Air I choose to be
much conversant in; and not look to survive any long while, because none of my
caution can secure me from the unseen Miasmata of the Air, which will damp all
before them.

Dismissing of this Thought, I presently fall into another; Namely, That S
mothered Griefs, are worse things than S mothered Fires, and not so likely to
go out. If a man have any Griefs, or Fears, or Cares upon his mind, let them
have Air, and they will the sooner evaporate. All will be the more Lightsome
with us, if we don't let them L y too close upon our mind. He that has any
Remarkable Guilt, lying with distress upon his Conscience, let him single out
some Faithful Pastor, to whom what he confesses will be as it were but
confessed unto the Lord. The Reveling of the matter, and his ensuing Prayers,
and Counsils, and Cordials, will be of a blessed consequence unto an Heart that
will be Hot, through a Fire burning in it, until it has spoken with the Tongue.
And let him that has any other Anguish, afford Vent and Air unto it, by some
Agreeable Expressions of it: The Air will be a kindness to the Fire in the
Soul; and all things will be the Better, and the Brighter for an Anguish not
Lying too close upon it.

Meditation XXXII.
On the Smoke.
SEeing the Smoke ascend from the Fire, I conclude from the Smoke that there is
the Fire. But yet I must except against an Uncharitable Proverb, There is no
Smoke but there is some F ire; by which we often encourage our selves from
little Whispers of these and those private miscarriages in our Neighbors, to
presume that something would not have been so Whispered, if nothing had not
been committed: For there has often been a Smoke of Reports, raised from a pure
malice in the first Reporters of the Lies, where there has not been the least F
ire, nor Spark of any real occasion for it, in the persons Belied. Many may
complain of themselves, with the Psalmist, Psalm 119 83. I am become like a
Bottel in the Smoke; blackened with smoaky and sooty Reproaches; though they have
never so F orgotten the Statutes of God, as to give any real occasion for the
Reproachful to pursue them, with their Calumnies. But leaving this Reflection,
and finding the S moke to be very troubles me and vexations when it strikes
into the Room, I call to mind those words of the Wise man, Prove. 10 26 As Smoke
to the Eyes, so is the sluggard unto them that send him: that is to say, It Is a
very great vexation. But then think I; L ord, How much may thou be offended
at me, who am the worst Sluggard in the world, about the Errand upon which thou
did send me into the world! Thou have sent me hither, to Glorify thee, and
to Testify unto all the Truths and Ways of thy Holy Religion: But like a vile
Sluggard, I have used shameful Delays about it. While I thus charge my self
with such Wickedness, I behold in the Smoke, an Emblem of the Condition that is
threatened unto the Wicked: For we read, As the Smoke is driven away, so shall
they be; and, Into Smoke they shall consume away; yea, The Smoke of their
Torment shall ascend for ever and ever. That I may be Saved, from this
confusion, which I have deserved, I desire to repai^ unto the Sacrifice of my
Lord Jesus Christ; who in the Sufferings which he underwent for me, speaks of
Himself, as, Dried in the Smoke.

I remember a condition of much Affliction, is thus painted out. Isa. 14. 31;
There shall come a Smoke. And when I see, the solid Wood on the F ire,
evaporating into Smoke, which Mounts up toward Heaven, I see the Vanity of all
worldly Enjoyments, livelily described unto me. May I take off my Heart from
Enjoyments, that are so easily Evaporated, and not set my Heart on the Things
that will flee away toward Heaven, but on the Things of Heaven it self.

Methinks, in the Smoke I see likewise the picture of Pride: For it so bad, and
ba^e, and black a thing as the Smoke proceed from the brightest Fire, so does
Pride from our brightest and bravest Excellencies: but when a man through his
Pride is got unto the highest, all presently vanishes into Nothing Reader,
Which is it, Smoke or Pride, that is intended in this Description? Sese Erigit,
sed mox deficiens, quasi n^n fuerit, evanescit, et cum e rerum opulentia
intuneseat, in altum elata, quasi Exhalans, Evaporata ac dispersa, in Nihilum
convertitur.

God preserve me, that I may not be Smoaked and Smutted, with that odious Vice.

Thus, though the Smoke be bad for the Eyes, I have now seen something by the
Help of the Smoke!

I suppose, the Smoke of this Riddle, will not now be so Thick, but that any
one may see through it.

Sunt mihi sunt Lachrymoe sed non est causa doloris;
Est iter ad Coelum, sed me gravis impedit Aer,
Et qui me genuit, sine me non nascitur ipse.
But let the Ingenious carry on Reflection: upon each of those Articles, if
they please, a their further Liesure.

Meditation XXXIII.
On the Tongs.
AMong the Instruments that are useful and needful about my Fire, the Tongs are
very often taken into the Hands of them that see occasion for them; and I will
now take them into mine. Our name, Tongs, and the Ancient Saxon, Tongue, I
suppose comes from the Italian T^ngo, to Hold. I will now by my Tongs, Lay Hold
on a Thought or two, not improper for a Minister of the Gospel: For, It the
Employment, and Benefit of the Tongs methinks I see several points, whereof
every Minister of the Gospel should be ambitious.

First, If by the Tongs, things are Laid in Order about the Fire, I also find
an Eminent Minister of the Gospel, professing to Set things in Order, where he
comes And I wish, that I may be so happy as to put things in Order, and keep
them so, in every Society, whereto I may be Related. And again; If by the
Tongs, those things that are in the Fire, are pulled out of it, I find this
also directed unto a Minister of the Gospel, To pull Sinners out of the Fire. I
wish accordingly, That by my Counsils, and Warnings, and Prayers, many Sinners
may be pulled out of those Everlasting Burnings, wherein they are in danger to
perish under the dreadful Wrath of God for ever. But then I remember, the Metal
of the Tongs, and I must thence advise my self to look for Hot work, and become
Strong, and Hard, (the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, can make me so) for the
doing of it.

Meditation XXXIV.
On the quick passage of the Fire, from one Object unto another.
THE Fire, I see, nimbly passes, from one Stick to another: Yea, there are
several sorts of combustible Materials lying together; but the Fire swiftly
takes hold, first on one, then on another, and uses no great formality in the
Transition. This puts me in mind of a Thing very observable in the Prophetical
Writings, and which being well observed, would be a good Key to the meaning of
them; and that is the sudden and obscure Transition of the Prophets from one
Subject unto another. The Holy Spirit suggested unto their minds, first the
Thoughts of Writing on such or such a Subject, and then assisted them as far as
was requisi^e in the composition. But then at once the Holy Spirit carries
them, like a Spreading Flame, into now, and rare, and rich thoughts, and
surprising Idea's, of the Messiah and His Kingdom; and what began in a ^ort of
Inspired Reasoning proceeds unaccountably to an Extatic Revelation. The First
Subject is in a manner Deserted, and upon a New Hint, the Prophets perhaps
without fully understanding, or comprehending the Transition themselves, are
transported into predictions or the Messiah, and characters of His Person, and
Office, and Actions. Many parts of the Bible will be the better Interpreted, if
we do behold them, in the Fire Light of the Observation.

Meditation XXXV.
On the Progress of the Fire.
MY Fire is now grown and spread into a large Extent; All the Wood on my Hearth
is arrested with it; and if it were not carefully continued where it is, it
would within a few Hours pass on to Lay my whole House, yea, the whole ^own in
Ashes. A few minutes ago, there was but one little Coal, which has given Rise
to all of This Fire

Scintilla e minima quantus tibi nascitur Ign^^!

And now, I cannot but call to mind, those words of the Apostle; Jam. 3 5.
Behold, how great a matter, a little fire kindles!

The Thing which the Apostle calls us more immediately to observe, is. That
though an Evil Tongue seems but a little thing, yet vast Contentions and
Confusions are produced by this little Thing. An Evil Tongue is very (...)
compared unto F ire; and it is therefore said of an Evil man, In his Lips there
is a Burning Fire. The provocation given by the Reproaches and Outrages of an
Evil Tongue, does greatly inflame the Spirits of men; yea, for the continuance
thereo', it is resembled Psalm. 120 4 to Coals of Juniper, which as (...) the
Hottest. so they (...) the Longest of any,(they may be kept, they, (...) a
(...) ^ear together) We read of a Coven Tongue, that came as a Fire, from
Heaven; but o^ this Evil Tongue, we are advised that it is a Fire kindled from
Hell; and we may conclude, that, as one sales, A Tongue set on F ire from Hell,
shall be set on F ire in Hell Truly, by one rash and raging and railing word of
an Evil Tongue a man may be in Danger of Hell fir^^ The Hot words of such an
Evil Tongue, will set on F ire the whole course of Nature, or Diffuse mischiefs
into every condition of Life. In all the Changes, through which we roll along, in
our whole Conversation here, an Evil Tongue will Embroil our Affairs with all
sorts of mischiefs; There is no Calling, there is no Action, there is no
person, wi^h whom we can be concerned, but an Evil Tongue, would involve all in
most incredible mischiefs. I will therefore make this my earnest (...) God
Psalm. 141. 3 O Lord, keep the door of my Lips I pray, That I may never (...)
wrathful quarrelsome, or offensive words, do the mischiefs that use to be done
by an Evil Tongue; or enkindle that F ire, of wrath, which (...) produce any
Disturbance in my Neighborhood. I know, That Great Contentions do often arise
from small Beginnings: and Maxima odia ac Bella ex L^vissimts causis. Wherefore
I would exceedingly watch against those things, which the Wise man calls, The
beginning of Strife; and with watchful wisdom avoid the Least Occasions of
Divisions Oh! let me never come under that character, A man given to Strife is
as F ire to the Coals!

But then, there is another Observation, of a more Extensive Importance, to be
made upon the Quick and Large Extent of my Fire: And that is, the wonderful
Extent and Progress of many things in the World, which at first seemed some of
the smallest Things in the World. If we Reflect upon Things o^ a more Civil
Aspect: was not the Load stone, and so the Compass, (invented by Flavio Goia, a
Neapoli^an, about the year 1470.) a Little Thing? But behold, how great a
matter that Little Fire has kindled! Navigation is now Improved at an
astonishing rate; and the Waters (as the Bible calls, the Sailors upon the
Waters) Cover the Sea. But let us carry on the Reflection, unto the cause of
Religion. It were enough to awaken the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ, unto
a Timely Suppression of Hoeresies and Impostures, and (as the Scripture
directs) not giving place no not for an Hour, unto them, when one sees, how
great a matter, a little Fire has Kindled. Ari^^ was a little Priest of
Alexandria; yet that little Alexandrian Spark soon set the whole Christian
World, on a Flame: Or, as Jerome expressed it, In Alexandria una Scintilla fuit,
sed quia non statim Oppressa est totum orbem ejus flamma populata est. When
Mahomet, that Filthy Whore master, who could not Write, nor indeed Read, first
patched together his Non-sensical Alcoran, and this in so illiterate a City,
that instead of Paper, they were forced first of all to write it on the
Spadebones of Shoulders of Mutton, who would have dreamed, that it would flame
out into an Empire, which in Eighty years time took in more Kingdoms and
Countries, than ever the Romans could in Eight hundred: and that when it came to
decline within four hundred years, there should spring out of i^s Ashes, many
other Empires, whereof three are at this day, the most Potent on the face of
the Earth? But then, let the Churches of the Lord, on the other hand encourage
themselves when they see but, A Day of Small things, in regard of the
Evangelical Interests. We read, Dan 2 35. A stone becoming a great Mountain,
and Filling the whole Earth. The Christian Religion Preached upon the
Resurrection of our Lord, prevailed so far, that within a year or two, it was
an Object for Persecution, an hundred and fifty Miles from Jerusalem. And in
Thirty years, it was traveled from the most Southern part of Syria, as far as
Rome, above two thousand Miles, and a, Multitud^ Ingen^, an huge Multitude of
Christians, as the Pagan Historian tells us, did undergo wonderful Tortures for
it: And in Seventy years, a Pagan Governor could own, concerning Bithynia, Non
civitates tantum, sed vi^os etiam atque ag^os Superstitionis illius contagio
pervasit. When the Time for the Reformation came on, a Monk at Wittenberg,
takes offense at the Cheats he saw committed by some Sellers of Indulgences:
But in less than Forty years time, hal^ Europe was filled with Churches, which
from their Protestation against the Decrees of a Popish Diet, have been called
Protestants; and Protestantism so far prevailed, That Be^la^mine cried out of
Hae^^sy possessing twice seven famous Countries and Nations. It was the letting
fall of one word, that gave the Original to that admirable Work of God, The
English Reformation But, behold how great a matter, one Thought may lead a man
into! A Bulky Book might be written on this one Observation But instead of
That, I will set my self to write as many Books as I can, that may be agreeable
to those glorious Revolutions which I believe, the Lord is quickly going to
bring upon the world: because, who can tell, what may issue from one poor
little Coal; How great a matter, a little F ire may kindle! Who can tell, what
may come of One Sheet, in the Spanish Tongue particularly!

Meditation XXXVI.
On Trials by the Fire.
M Etals are not the only Things that are Tried by the Fire; All Bodies have
their Trials in it: The Fire will discover the Nature, the Texture, and the
Temper of what is put into it. And I too must come into the Fire; Grant, O my
God. That when I am Tried, I may come forth as Gold.

It becomes me, in the first place, to put my self as into the F ire, by a
serious, frequent, exact Self-Examination. It is very certain, That I am fully
known unto that God, whose Eyes behold, and whose Eye lids try, the Children of
men, and of whom it is an Assertion, perhaps more than seven times repeated in
His Oracles That He Tries the Hearts and the Reins. But it is of unspeakable
consequence unto me, That I know my self; and that I may do so, (...) as much
consequence, That I Try my self. To be very sollicitous, in Self Examination,
would be both a Sign, and a Cause, of Sincerity. Hence, as when I have the Word
of God before me, I would Examine, Whether my Heart be molded into it or no!
So there are many other seasons especially, That of my Approaching to the Table
of the Lord, wherein I would Examine, What I am! The Rules for Self-Examination
are often set before us in Discourses O^ Practical Divinity; but the first
Epistle of John, is to be prese^^'d unto all Humane Discourses, that give the
Marks of a penitent and a sanctified Believer. I will not so far enlarge on
this point in this place, as to recite the many Schemes for Self Examination,
which I have seen composed. But instead of all the rest, I will only relate,
that once I have seen the Fire thus made for this purpose.

Question. I.

What is the greatest and only ^^leif of my Soul?

Answer.

I have beheld the glorious and perfect Righteousness of my Lord Jesus Christ,
provided by the Grace of God, for my Justification before Him; and He has by
His Grace helped me to Accept that Righteousness, upon the offer of it.

Question. II.

'What is the chief Desire of my Soul?

Answer.

If I know any thing of my self, It Is, To Glorify my Lord Jesus Christ.

Question. III.

'What is the chief Delight of my Soul?

Answer.

I am certain, It Is. To find that I do Glorify my Lord Jesus Christ.

Question. IV.

'What is the chief Trouble of my S oul?

Answer

I feel none, like That of the S in remaining in me, which indisposes me to
Glorify my Lord Jesus Christ; and which Grieves His Holy Spirit.

He that can truly say these things, can Endure the Fire, and shall never be
moved.

But then, in the next place, I am to Remember, That the Blessed God, by the
Affliction, which He sends upon me, does cast me into the Fire, to manifest
what I am. Affliction is a Trial; Yea, I can find, where the Book which
miscalls nothing, has called it, A Fiery Trial. And thus we read, 1 Pet. 1. 6,
7. Ye are in Heaviness, through many Temptations, that the Trial of your Faith,
being much more precious than that of Gold which perishes, though it be tried
with fire, may be found unto praise A Sickness is a Fire, a Reproach is a Fire,
a Loss is a Fire, (and the uneasiness thereby given to our Spirit makes the
comparison too sensible;) in which a Trial is made of us, whether we have the
Spirit, not of Bastards, but of Children in us. Let this consideration mightily
Inflame the zeal of my Soul, to be very watchful over my self, when I am in any
Affliction. Let me now Remember, be the Affliction what it will, That the Heart
searching Lord, is now Trying what is in my Heart; and let me therefore by
Repentance, by Patience, by Humility, and Resignation, and by the Exercise of a
Lively Faith, approve my Heart unto Him. Let it be my prayer and care, that
under Affliction my conduct may be such, as that it may be said, Now I know,
that thou Fear God!

But likening my Affliction to Fire, for its probatory Virtue, I hope, I shall
also find it like Fire, for its purifying Virtue. Ovid Sings, Omnia purga^^^dax
Ignis. And the F ire was, for its purifying virtue, used in the Lustrations of
the Pagans. Now, If the Fire do consume the Filth of those things that are cast
into it, and purge them, and cleanse them, Affliction will do so too: It Is a
mighty purifyer: We read, Dan. 11. 35. It is to purge, and make white; we read,
Isa. 27 9 By this Iniquity is purged. Indeed, it is not in the power of
Affliction it self to purify them that are in it: We see That, in a sad
Experience. But the Grace of God, cooperating in and with an Affliction, will
have this Effect upon His Chosen: [ Lord, may it have so, upon my Defiled
Soul!] To purify us from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect our
Holiness in the Fear of God. I wish that Affliction may serve only, to make me
more pure in Heart, and more full of, and set for, Whatsoever things are pure.
It Is a deplorable thing, to be cast into a F ire of Affliction, and not gain
much Purity, and Sanctity, by being there. I would therefore lay it as a charge
upon my self, That whatever Affliction befalls me, I must seriously Consider, [
In the Day of Adversity consider!] O my Soul, In what point of Holiness, must
thou be more purified and advanced by means of this Affliction!

But I will a little shift the comparison, and compare Grace if self unto the
Fire. Without reading of Plutarch, who takes notice of that circumstance, it is
noted by every body, That the Fire burns clearest and hottest, in the sharpest
cold of the Winter. Adversity is a sort of a Winter; and the sharper the Winter
of Adversity may be upon me, I wish, That Grace may burn in me, with the more
sensible and powerful Operation.

Meditation. XXXVII.
On the Ashes.
MY Hearth has now an heap of Ashes upon it. But can my Heart Read nothing
there? Methinks, I can Read several Admonitions written in the Ashes, though no
one has formed any distinct characters on them. To find Salt in the Ashes,
would be no difficulty: to fetch Grace from the Ashes, ( that Heavenly Salt!)
would be a greater and a better Action.

Out of the Ashes, it is well known, we make the S oap wherewith our Clothes are
cleansed. On that passage in Luke 14. 34, 35. The Salt is Good; but if the S
alt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is neither fit for
the Land, nor for the Dunghill, but men cast it out. I remember, Monsieur Le
Cler^, thinks it is not Salt properly so called, that is there spoken of. He
says, That Salt loses not its Savor; and that Salt which keeps its S avour is
neither fit for the Land, nor for the Dunghill; and that if it keeps not its S
avour, yet it is not cast out. He therefore supposes, That the Husbandmen
called Ashes for Lie (which have the Salt of the Wood therein) by the Name of
Salt. The Ashes it is very sure, lose their Savor, when they are diluted with
Washing, and they did so, when of old they washed their Linen in them. And
being thus diluted, they are not fit either to manure the Ground alone, or
mixed with Dung; for they have lost the S alt with which they were impregnated.
Then indeed they are fit for nothing, but for to be cast out into the High way.
However, Monsieur Le Clear, submits his conjecture unto the Judgment of the
Learned, (and so do I) for he has no precedent for his conjecture, and the
Critick^ of that Gentleman are not always infallible. All I will say upon it,
is this. Whether they washed their Clothes with Ashes of old, or no, we will see
whether we cannot wash our Hearts with 'em. They shall then do us more good,
than a Washing with Nitre, and with much S oap.

And first, I remember, the famous Quercetanus, together with other Laborers
in the Fire, have told us, That they can take a plant in its more vigorous
consistence, and after a due Maceration, Fermentation, and S eparation, Extract
the S alt of that plant, which, as it were, in a Chaos, invisibly reserves the
Form of the whole, with its vital principle; and that keeping the S alt in a
glass Hermetically Sealed, they can, by applying a S often Fire to the glass,
make the Vegetable rise by little and little out of its Ashes, to surprise the
Spectators. I am not sure, That this Report is to be Relied upon, and much less
am I sure, of what they further tell us, That the Essential S alt of Animals
being thus prepared and preserved, an ingenious (...) might raise the shape of
them, at his pleasure. What I would Remark, is This. If Plants could be Revived
out of their Ashes, or if the Oak, and Ash, and Walnut, would grow, from the
Scattered Ashes, which I have now before me, it would unavoidably Le^d our
Meditations to the Resurrection of the Dead. Yea, Whatever may be done by
Nature, on and from the Ashes of my Wood, I am very sure, That I shall one day
Rise out of my own Ashes. Resurrectio mortuorum Fiducia Ch^^stiaro^um. He that
is, The Life, and, The Resurrection to Life, has assured me, That after I am
Dead, He will give my Incinerated Body a Resurrection to Life. We see a parcel
of Quick silver may put off its Form, and put on that of a Vapor; and from a
Vapor be transformed into an insipid Water; and from a Water be transmuted
into a White, or a Red, or a Yellow Powder; and from this Powder be made a S
alt; and from that S alt a malleable Metal; and yet a skilful Chemist, will
reduce it, out of all those various Contextures, into its old Natural Form, of
plain, shining, running Mercury. How much more, can an Omnipresent, Omnipotent,
Omniscient God, bring back the Ashes of my Dead Body, into the Figure that it
shall receive at the Resurrection of the Dead?

But now dismissing that Thought, the Ashes of my Fire, cause me to think, on
the Terms wherein the Father of the Faithful addressed the God of Heaven, Genesis
18 27. Behold now I have taken upon me, to speak unto the Lord who am but Dust
and Ashes. Well may Sinful man appear as Dust and Ashes, when he appears before
that Infinite Majesty, which (...) a Consuming Fire. The Holy God had not (...)
from Abraham, that He was going to Lay the Wicked Cities in Dust and Ashes, by
F ire from Heaven. And now says Abraham, Lord, I deserve my self to be by Fire
from Heaven, struck into Dust and Ashes! Truly, When I see the Ashes before me,
I must confess, that I am worthy my self to be made Ashes immediately by the
Fire of the Divine Indignation. Lord, If Sin can render any thing soon
incinerable, I may wonder that I am yet any thing but a little Heap of Ashes.
Yea, the best of men, when making their Prayers to God for the Worst of men,
must confess, That the Fate and Fire of the worst of men, might justly be
dispensed unto them.

Another thing observable to me in the Ashes, is, That though the Wood was of
several sorts, distinguishable one from another, yea, preferrible one to
another, yet now they are all in Ashes, there is no sensible Distinction of
them, they ly together undistinguished. Behold, O my Soul, Behold the Effect of
Mortality. Death is the grand Leve^ler. One Tree must be made Ashes as well as
another: and when once we are made Ashes, What will be the Difference between
Solomon and Diglus Petargus, between Croesus and Irus, between the Richest
Emperor, and the Poorest Beggar! All Skulls are of equal Dignity in the
Charnel house; and as Herbert Elegantly, The Brags of Life are but a nine da^s
wonder;
And after Death, the Fumes that spring
From private Bodies make as big a Thunder,
As those which rise from a huge King.


Indeed, I have Read concerning a Difference in Dust; namely, the powder of
Diamonds, or princely Dust: Gold Dust, or the Remains of Noblemen; Pin Dust, or
the Remains of Trades men; Saw Dust; or the Remains of Mechanics; and Common
Dust, or the Remains of the more unobserved sort of people. Yet even here it is
confessed, All is Dust. But in Ashes there is not so much Difference to be
discerned. All that we can allow, is, That our Lord Jesus Christ, at the
Resurrection of the Just, will distinguish the Ashes of the Saints, which are
United unto Himself, from those of other men; more Effectually, than a Load
stone would any Filings of Steel, mixed with the common Ashes. Were I all this
while seeking satisfaction, in Creatures, I should be doing what the Oracles of
God most expressively call, Feeding on Ashes. But while we are thu s Thinking
on Ashes, and learning the Instructions of Piety from them, I hope we are not
Feeding on Ashes.

Nay, there is a notable Encouragement I now call to mind, afforded by the
Ashes themselves, for that very Undertaking wherein we are now Engaged. But I
will choose to recite it (which indeed may add unto the Encouragement) in the
words of the Excellent Boil; who invites Good men, unto this Exercise of making
Occasional Reflections full of Devotion and Morality, upon the meanest Objects,
from this consideration;

Though Grains of Sand and Ashes be but of a despicable smallness, ^et the
skilful Artificer brings Numbers of these, to afford him that noble Substance,
Glass; by whose Help, we may see our selves, as in Looking Glasses, and discern
Caelestial Objects, as with Telescopes; and with the Sun beams kindle disposed
Materials, as with Burning Glasses.

While we have been bringing of Lessons from the Ashes, we have been as good as
making of Glasses from them, for all those Uses. My Ashes undergo an happy and
useful Vitrification, when they yield these Lessons unto us.

But I will, in one word, give the sum of all the Lessons: It happens. (and it
is a mere Hap,) to be a Wednesday, wherein I write these things. I have before
I am aware, made it, an Ash wednesday. And though I don't keep the day, yet I Will
write the word for the Day, Memento, Homo, quod Cinis es.

Addition.

I call to mind a little Riddle, that Heidfield has in the Sphinx Theological
Phylosophica.

Quoe res mortua vivam sepelit, ut in ipso etiam S epulchro maneat viva et
vivis mortuos cibos m^lliat, esuique aptos reddat, unde vita conservatur!

But I leave the ingenious Reader sitting by the Fire side now to unridle it,
and give him no further Help, than what is in my taking this place to mention
it.

I call to mind also, the Rebuke bestowed by Job, upon his Friends, Job 13. 12.
Your Remembrances are like unto Ashes, your Bodies to Bodies of Clay.

But I shall bestow no other Illustration upon it, than what I find given by
that best of Poets, the Incomparable Sir Richard Blackmore, in his paraphrase
thereupon; I all your Counsils vain and Fruitless find,
Like Dust which flies before the driving Wind,
Your high discourses weak and tottering stand,
Like heaps of Clay, or Uncemented S and.


I wish our Meditations then may not be like unto Ashes.

Meditation XXXVIII.
On the Fire brands.
REtiring to my Rest, I am very particularly careful, That the Fire brands do
no mischiefs. How carefully do I separate these F ire brands, and Lodge them in
several places and postures, and perhaps cover some of them with A shes, through
a Fear lest before I return, they lay all in A shes.

Of all the Things in the world, I do most heartily wish, That I may not be a
Fire brand. Indeed, when the Grace of God saved me from the Errors and the
Dangers of my Unregenerate State, it might be said of me, as of Joshua, when
saved from those of Babylon; Zech. 3 2. Is not this a Brand plucked out of the F
ire? And it is my Happiness to be such a Fire brand. But a Fire brand, is in
our common Dialect, become a phrase for a Contentious man; one that bree^s
Quarrels where he comes. Such a Fire brand is the Talebearer; yea, and such is
every mischievous person. Hecuba dreaming, that she brought forth a Firebrand,
the Augur told her, That her S on would be, (as he was) the Ruin of his
Country. Now rather than leave me to be such a Fire brand, let the Lord Lay me
aside, and even do what He please with me. Lord, make me, and keep me, of a
peaceable Temper. Yea, let me Deny my self of a thousand satisfactions, rather
than disturb the peace of my Neighbors and of the Churches. My Name shall be
Irenoeus, if I can by any methods of Goodness and Patience, without evident
unfaithfulness to the Evangelical Interests, obtain it. May I study exceedingly
to he one of those Blessed Peace- makers, who shall be called, The Children of
God; and may I never be a S ower of Discord, nor one of the Contentious, to
whom God will render Indignation and Wrath.

Meditation XXXIX.
On the Fire's going out.
THE Wood on my Fire, was in a mighty Blaze, that seemed as if it would have
been a lasting one, at its first Blowing up: Nevertheless, the Bellows giving
over to Blow, the Fire gave over to Burn immediately. Methoughts, I now saw an
Emblem of that Apostasy, which often attends Good Beginnings in Religion, where
the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ (that Heavenly F ire) never took yet an
Effectual Hold upon the Soul. Many Beginners, in Religion, and Professors of
it, seem very forward for the Services of Christianity, and make a mighty Blaze
of Profession; but it is not a Lasting one: It goes away. May the God of all
Grace, make all our Young People, exceedingly apprehensive of, The A postates
Doom, and afraid of Turning aside unto crooked ways, through the Influences of
Evil Company, or any other Temptation, after they have made Good Beginnings in
Religion, lest they have that awful word fulfilled upon them, If any man draw
back, my S oul shall have no pleasure in him.

Hereupon Resuming the Bellows for a Second Blast, I Reserve and Revived the
Fire, until it so arrested the Wood, as to carry all before it. And this put me
in mind of an Astonishing Favor, which I had my self Received from Heaven, and
which many more of the Elect have likewise Received. It is very commonly so,
That the Elect of God, which enjoy a Religious Education, have by the Spirit of
God excited in them, very Fervent Inclinations to piety, while they are in
their Childhood: But when they advance into more of Youth, Temptation so
prevails upon them, that for a while, all seems to be Gone out, and their
former Inclinations are hardly to be discerned: Nevertheless the Spirit of God
will not let their Youth proceed very far, before He, who had been Grieved and
Quenched by their Vanities, [L ord, can I write this, and not mingle my Tears
with my Ink!] does again Bl^w upon their Souls. A Fire is then Recovered, that
shall never be extinguished!

Once indeed, Sitting by a F ire, where a Pot boiled over, I observed, That the
Boiling over of the Pot put out the Fire, and left the Pot without likelihood
of Boiling over any more: But therewithal I could not miss Reflecting, That
there is a very wonderful Providence of God, often doing a thing of this
Importance. God (...) permits the Fiery Lusts of men (whether of A nger, or of
Ambition, or of Unchastity) to Boil over, in some Scandalous Excesses, and
Actions. But God improves this B oiling over of their Lusts, to mortify the
Lusts themselves, and put out the Fires of Sin and Hell in their Souls. Many a
man's Boiling over and Breaking forth into Scandals, proves the occasion of his
being a more mortified man, even in those very points all the rest of his
Days. Austins Exemplary Chastity was the fruit of his having once Boiled over.

At last, While I was minding other matters, the F ire on my Hearth, was upon
the point of Expiring, merely because the Fuel was all spent, that should have
supported it. I have been told, that Vulcan was of old feigned Lame for this
reason; The Wood on the Fire, is the Staff which he is always calling for. I
now Thought of several Things, that Need Recruits, if we would keep them from
Expiration; But I thought of one among the rest, which I wished might never be
Recruited. Sinful Contention is a sort of a Fire; and it is said of a
Contentious man, (which, L ord, Let me neither Be, or Bear!) He is an Ungodly
man who diggeth up Evil and in his Lips there is, as a burning Fire And it is
said, As Coals are to Burning Coals, so is a Contentious man to kindle Strife.
Now it is among the Observations of Wisdom, in Prove. 26. 20, 21. Where no Wood
is, there the Fire goes out; So where there is no Tale bearer, the Strife
cease. Wherefore, as coming at length to hear the Cou^refeu Bell, if any
Contention do arise, where I am concerned, I would use all the care imaginable,
That (while I may Contend earnestly for the Faith, or Order, Delivered unto the
Saints,) I may avoid bringing any Sinful Fuel to the Contention, by any Tale
bearing, any Whispering, any Slandering, or any Railing Accusations Let me
rather cast such things, even where Constantine cast the Contentious Papers;
That is, Into the Fire.

If a Quarrelsome Disposition be mischievous any where, it is in the Married
Life, in the Conjugal-State. And upon the mention of This, I call to mind a
Rabbinical Fancy: Isch signifies, A Man; Ischah signifies, A Woman; Hence they
Note, In the Name of the Man, there is Jod, which is not in the Name of the
Woman; In the Name of the Woman, is He, which is not in the Name of the Man:
These two Letters make Jab, which is the Name of God; and these being taken
away, there is nothing but Esch, in both Names; and that signifies Fire; This
is to show (they say) that as long as Man and Wife agree, God is with them;
when God is not with them, and when they disagree, there is nothing but Fire in
the House. But surely, the Coldest Wig^^am were better than such an House!

But my Fire being thus gone out, I Will only mention the Description that
Herodotus gives of the Fire; Bellua avidissima et inexplebilis, quoe quanto
plura consumit, tanto foecundius se parit, et postquam devor^ndo suerit
expleta, una cum re ipfa devorata emoritur.

Meditation. XL.
On throwing my Pen into the Fire. Dec. 31. 1700.
THus at length, in the Thirty Eighth year of my Age, I have Resumed and
Finished the Reflections which I had begun, (and written many of them,) and
then thrown by, many years ago. And having made an End of Writing my
Reflections on the Fire, the old and worn Pen, with which I wrote the last of
them, shall be thrown into the Fire. But before it goes, it shall enter for me
a very Solemn Admonition.

There are Men, (as well as Pens,) who have written man, Good Things and
thereby done considerable Service for the Churches of the Lord; but have been
cast into the Fire after all: God has cast them into the Fire that never shall
be Quenched. Many Learned, yea, many Devout, Writers have been Cast aways:
because they have contented themselves with a mere Pen-and-Paper Piety: and
going down to the Unquenchable and Everlasting Fire have had cause to say,
Surgunt ind^cti e^ rapiunt coelum; n^s, cum (...) Doctrina, mergimur in
Infernum. Some writers have the Fancy to place their Pictures before the Title
page of their Books; but they that write of Piety, should have their Books
themselves to be their Pictures: They have no other way to prevent being thrown
into the Fire.

I do therefore, with an Humble and a Trembling Supplication, beseech of thee,
O my God, in my Lord Jesus Christ! That I may not only Write Good Things, but
also Do what I Write, lest my Writings be made but the Fuel of the Fire that
would be the just punishment of my Hypocrisy. Lord, Help me to Transcribe my
Writings into my Life, lest I be all this while writing my own Condemnation to
Death: and let thy Grace Help me not only to Write well, but also to Live well;
that so instead of being thrown into the Fire, I may have a place in the Wings
of the Heavenly Armies.

APPENDIX.
Upon a Stove.
GOing out of my Study, to take some Notice of my Little Folks in a Room
accommodated with that great convenience for a Family of Little Folks, A Stove,
I saw occasion to take another Pen in hand, for some Reflection. A Stove has no
little Advantages of Cheapness, and Neatness and Safety, and Uniform warmth, in
any part of the Room, at any time of the year, for to Recommend it; nor is
there any thing, that I know of, in the Objection of its being Unwholesome (if
it be not overheated,) for to Discommend it. But as my Stove has done me many
another Service, it shall now Serve me with a Reflection, and Instruction of
Christianity.

The Fire in my Stove does abundance of Service, to all about it, yea, (as it
is placed,) in two Rooms at once. My House is not now a Bethzenun, or place of
Cold, (as the Jews called the Country that lay near the Snows of Lebanon:) but
I have an April, or September there, in the midst of January: and yet the Fire
which does all that Service, keeps out of Sight; no body Sees it; People feel
the Effect, while they see not the Cause.

Methinks, It advises me, to Do Good, and yet Ly Hid, as much as ever I can.
There are certain points of Religion, wherein the Religion will be very much
lost, if the circumstances of Secrecy and Concealment, be not observed. Our
Savior says, Let thine Alms be in Secret; and again, Pray to thy Father in
Secret; and once more, When thou Fastest appear not unto men to Fast An
Affectation to have our doing such Duties divulged, will be a Dead Fly, to
spoil the Savor of the Duties, And very particularly, To give no Alms, but
what shall be Seen, Savours of too much Hypocrisy. It Is true, That Good ( quod
fit ^^videtu^,) which is Seen to be done, is not always to blame; our Light
should shine before men: But, ( quod fit ut videatur) what is done to be Seen,
is indeed thrown away. The Hypocritical Jews, themselves, who labored under an
Invincible Itch, to have all their Alms as public as they could, yet had their
Conscience calling them, to more of Concealment. Hence, The Treasury of the
Silent, where some good men, silently and privately conveyed their Charity for
maintaining the Children of the Poor, was a Treasury of the most famous Account
in the Temple. And hence it was a Proverb among them, He that does Alms in
Secret, is greater than our master Moses himself. Briefly, An Humble Christian,
will watch opportunities, to Do Good; but he cares not, whether there ever be
in this world the least Notice taken of it. He will Pray for many and many a
man by Name and yet the obliged man himself shall never know of it. He will
convey Reliefs to the Needy, and yet the Needy themselves perhaps will never
know from whence they came. He will a thousand other ways it may be, seek to be
a Blessing unto his Neighbors, but never seek for them to Bless him, or know
his Influences.

And now, to have done, Sirs, Let my Stove afford an Apology for my Nameless
Writing. I am in hopes, That this little Book, may like a Stove, dispense a
little Warmth of Religion unto them, that shall allow it near enough. Luther
complained of the Religion in his Time, Deest Ignis, Deest Ignis! It wants more
Heat! May not we make the same complaint of ours? It may be, this Essay, may
Revive something of our Languishing Heat! We read Job 28. 5. Of, A Land, out of
which comes Bread; and under it is turned up as it were Fire. (Perhaps,
Paradise, with the Volcano's which vomited out Fire near it, may be referred
unto!) I have been endeavoring a Book, out of which there may come Food, for
the minds of the Faithful; and under it, all turns upon Fire. But I do for many
Reasons, now (as well as often heretofore,) choose to write Anonymously. And
hereby, it will come to pass, that though the Author will be unavoidably known
unto many in the next Vicinity, (which also he could be glad, he were not!) yet
he will be preserved from the knowledge of the most in places that are further
off. The Author most sincerely wishes that with as much Usefulness (according
to his mean capacity,) as may be, he may enjoy the Satisfaction of one, Been
qui latuit; and be as Remote from View, as the Fire in the Stove. If any Good
be done, I beseech you, Sirs; Let Man be Nothing; Let GOD, and CHRIST, and
GRACE, have all the Glory.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 29. r. fa^ r. fit. p. 80. l 19. r. Handiro^s p 81. l. 4. r.
End-iro^s. p. 83. l. 12. r. the r their. p. 102. l. 19 r. But when the -- p.
157. l. 3. f. to r. in. p. 167. l. 20. Blot out, Not.

The CONTENTS.
WE read, Isa. 6. 6. Of, A Live-Coal taken with the Tongs from off the Altar.
The Incomparable Bochart asserts, That the word, which we render, A Coal,
signifies, A Stone; and he confirms it with incontestable Authority from
Antiquity. He says, That Red-hot stones were much improved in the Fires of the
Ancients, to forward the various Designs upon which the Fires were kindled; and
that there were such Red-hot stones upon the Altar, to help forward the
Consumption of the Sacrifices.

Perhaps our Meditations may lie like Red hot-Stones in the Readers Fire And
now, to lay the Red-hot Stones together in an Heap, that the Reader may take
out which of them he please, at any time, (...) Touch his own Heart withal.
Behold, the Contents.

The INTRODUCTION. P.7 A Winter-SERMON, on Peter by the Fire. 17 The Approach
to the Fire. 41
Meditations.
1. On the Fire proving it self to be indeed the Fire. 43 2. On the Benefits of
the Fire. 47 3. On the Light cast by the Fire upon the Objects about it. 53 4.
On the Mending of the Fire. 60 5. On the Burning of the World. 64 6 On the Fire
of Hell. 71 7 On the And Irons. 80 8 On the Lighting of a Candle at the Fire.
82 9 On the Warmth received from the Fire. 84 10 On Green Wood in the Fire. 86
11 On throwing a pice of Leather into the Fire. 88 12. On the Fate of the Wood
successively laid on the Fire, 89 13 On the Miracle of the Son of God appearing
in the Fiery Furnace 91 14 On things not consumed in the Fire. 96 15 On the
Torment of the Fire. 99 16 On the Burning Bush. 102 17. On the Kindling of a
Fire on the Lord's Day. 110 18 On the Coals. 120 19. Upon some Dead Coals. 124
20. On the Blowing of the Fire. 127 21. On the Flame. 131 22. On the Nimbleness
of the Flame. 140 23 On the Purity of the Flame. 142 24 On the Ascending of the
Flame, 143 25 On the Uniting of the Flame. 150 26. On Passing through the Fire.
152 27. On the Sparks issuing from the Fire. 156 28. On the Fire, Endangering
the Clothes of One in the Company. 159 29. On the Sap of the Wood, forced cut
by the Fire. 161 30 On Laboring in the Fire. 162 31 On the Wood Lying too
close. 165 32. On the Smoke. 167 33. On the Tongs. 170 34 On the quick passage
of the Fire, from one Object unto another. 171 35. On the Progress of the Fire.
172 36. On Trials by the Fire. 177 37 On the Ashes. 181 38 On the Firebrarnds.
188 39 On the Fire's going out: 190 40 On throwing my Pen into the Fire. 194
Appendix. Upon a Stove. 195

