Eur^ka. The VIRTUOUS WOMAN found.

A Short Essay ON The Memory OF Mrs. MARY BROWN, Late Consort of Benjamin Brown
Esquire. in Salem.

Ruth III.11. All the City of my People does know, that thou art a Virtuous
Woman.

BOSTON: Printed by Bartholomew Green. 1704.

TO Benjamin Brown Esquire. in Salem.
SIR,
I Know with what Eyes, You have Looked after the Desire of your Eyes, upon her
taking her Flight from you, unto the Upper and the Truer Salem. And if your
Tears upon the Funeral of so Charming a Virtue, have left them able to Read any
thing, there can be nothing more acceptable to them, than the Revived Image of
that Virtue, to Survive the Funeral.

Her Sex will not need Cornelius Agrippa, and an hundred more Authors of his
Form, to be their Advocates, while such Excellent and Exemplary Persons, as
your late Consort, arise in a Practical Advocateship to demand our Estimation.

Though you must lose the Satisfaction of being Enriched with her Natural
Offspring (by a Shipwreck on the very Stocks,) Yet let it now satisfy you, that
the Gentlewomen, that will imitate her, shall be her Daughters, and will call
her Blessed.

Some Eminent Persons, have left it as a Dying charge unto their Friends, That
they should allow no Mean Verses to be made upon them. Had Madam done so, this
Essay had also been Stifled in the Birth; for the Author is not more a Stranger
to You, than he is unto Versifications: Neither a Poet, nor the Son of a Poet.

What Poetry, unto which he does not in the least measure pretend, could not
help him to Accomplish, Affection to you and yours has moved him to Endeavor.
He Prays you, not so much as to enquire, Who it is; All that he will Tell you,
is, That he is one who Prays for you, That by a Profound Resignation to the
Will of God, and Mortification to a World which (now at least) you find
remarkably Embittered, you may be prepared for the best of Consolations.

Let none blame him for Embalming the Memory of a Religious Gentlewoman: It Is
what Jerome, and above a Thousand more, have done before him.

An ELEGY Upon the DEATH of Mrs. MARY BROWN; Who Dyed in Travail, (with her
Unborn Child;) On Dec. 26. 1703. Aetatis Suae 35.
MOnopolizing He Is, pretend no more
Of Wit and Worth, to hoard up all the store.
The Females too grow Wise and Good and Great;
Some such in happy Salem find a Seat.
Beware, my Sex, lest Females Win the Day,
And Shame Us with revived Hybristica.
Plutarch, Return to Life, and Write again,
Of Women's Virtues, to Upbraid the Men.
When Virtuous Women are in Books Enrolled,
Let our bright MARY's Name and Fate be told.
Of Glorious Women, O Great Hottinger,
In thy brave Catalogue, make Room for her.
America thanks Europe, and does boast
Her sending such a Gem unto our Coast.
Come hither, You that the fair Sex reproach;
Confuted now, no more your Scandals broach.
ONE rescues here the Fame of all the Sex;
And will your Contradicted Envy Vex.
With no Sett-Offs, but Truth in every Line,
We do Delineate our Heroine.
Grammar makes TRUTH, a SHE; we shall with care
Nothing but very Truth of Her declare.
TRUTH, Thou shall be my Muse, and first relate
How MARY Shone first in her Virgin-State.
To Learn or Do some Good thing every Day
Was the Prime Study of this Agatha.
Ambitious Early to Enjoy a Mind,
From Earth, and Foggy Ignorance refined.
A Bible, not Romance, her Eyes before,
Then daily helped her Heaven to implore.
Tutors one never more obedient saw;
Their Word, their very Look, She made her Law.
To fill her Soul with high Seize, She
Gladly Out-Labour'd the Industrious Be.
No Hind Let Loose; but Guarded well, and grave;
Most Goodly Words, yet our Eulalia gave.
Not Confident; Like Damsels which their Chin
Contrive more than their Tongue, to Bridle in.
Not of the Gadding Tribe; nor could She bear,
So Chaste! the least Indecent Thing to hear.
With still a Silent Blush, her Rising Blood
Spoke in her Face, Care to be very Good.
Pale with the Fear of doing ill, and Red
With Modesty, was all the Paint She had.
Go on, dear TRUTH, charge once Truth-Speaking Fame
To Tell whose Wife, and What She then became.
BROWN to the Lottery of Worth drew near;
He drew a Prize, a matchless Prize, in Her.
Not Wealth, but Solid Worth, in her he sees;
He see's Rich Virtues, and is charmed with these.
O Parents, Pity the fond Sons of Men,
And your fair Daughters well adorn for them.
With Useful Knowledge freight their Tender Souls;
Why should they Empty be, but Noisy Fools?
Teach them the Skill an House to Guide and Feed,
And with Kind Mates an Easy Life to Lead.
Goodness to them, and all Good Humor Show;
The Pious Parents Shaped their MARY so.
The Wretch that is alone to Mammon Wed,
May chance to find a Satan in the Bed.
She Is Rich! That Is all they say on her behalf:
Her Gold you Worship, and a Golden Calf.
Wink hard and Wed; a Bag and Baggage too,
In Markets often do together go.
Who by mere Hundreds and by Thousands choose,
A Thousand it is to One, themselves they loose.
The Rigging of the Ship; the Tear and Wear,
Will soon cost more than all She brought with her.
Why should her Dress Ensnare? It Is dearly bought:
Poor Woodcocks that are in a Ribbon caught.
Or why her Dance bewitch? Upon an head
Not like John Baptists, her Light Feet shall tread.
BROWN Steered not so; He asked, A Virtuous Wife,
The Soul, and Salt, and Joy of Humane Life.
A Virtuous Wife, Heaven did on BROWN bestow;
So Heaven Rewards its Favorites below.
A Wife indeed! Which now so few attain,
Some are so; and thou MARY in the Van.
Happy the Women were, and Happy too
The Husbands, if the Sex were more like YOU.
Oh! Would they Carriage from your Conduct learn;
Be Neat; but make their Soul, their main concern.
Her BROWN, how did She Love, and please and prize;
And Saw none but that Covering of her Eyes!
The Persian Law, She would not Alter too,
That Wives give to their Husbands Honor due.
Blame not the Rabbi's now for what they Write,
How Heaven did Adam and Eve, at first Unite.
Two Bodies then if Heaven in One did frame,
Two Souls here met in One united Flame.
Sir, Though you Clothed her as you Loved her, well;
She would of You, more than her Clothing tell.
So Philo's Wife, with mean Array Content,
Her Husbands Worth, called Her best Ornament.
Had you been Lame, She Would been the Herpine, who
In Arms a Thousand Miles had carried You.
Or had it been your Hap to first Expire,
She had felt more than Portia's Coals of Fire.
When did She ever once your Patience try,
Or make an Head-Ake in the Family!
Yes, Once at Last; She did your Love offend;
It Was by her Daath; but never, Sir, till then!
Martyr of Love to You, Loved Rachel Dyed;
And what must now dear BENJAMIN betide?
How many means black Death at once to kill?
She felt Two Death's, and YOU a Thousand feel.
BROWN and his Bride with Virtuous Love display
How Christ does Love, and how his Church obey.
Why did thou Father Jerome, say, That Strife
Must be Essential to the Married Life?
Here was a pair, the only Strife of whom
Was who should in their Goodness overcome.
Oh come, Tertullian; Teach me to declare,
The Happiness of such an Happy Pair!
Ye Popish Dogs, At Marriage bark no more;
Unclean so Devils burn, and Single Roar.
Marriage, That Honorable Chastity,
Let none but Filthy Antichrist decry.
But tell, fair TRUTH; for thou have more to tell:
What MARY was; Not, where is a Parallel!
Her Beauty let Agrippa's Pen define;
Call it, A Lovely Ray of Light Divine;
A Soul of Heavenly Luster Shining through
An Earthly Lanthorn of a Glorious hue.
A Body of a Frame so fine and Rare,
When was there Matter seen to Thought so near?
(So Fair; but not Enslaved unto the Smoke
Pip'd by the Dames under the Indian Yoke!)
But NOYES, except Thou do a Pencil find,
None can Paint out the Beauty of her Mind.
Embodied Virtue She; The Spangled Sphere
Looked for her, and such Luster must be there.
A Patched Face could not suit so sound an Heart,
Spotts to the Skin clear Souls do not impart.
Sincere; She Paint abhorred; A Jezabel
May Paint, but Meat unto the Dogs she fell.
Prudence the Mother of all Virtues here,
Before She was a Mother came to Her.
The Harmless Dove nothing of Serpent had,
But Prudence for to serve and help her Head.
By the Polestar of Piety She Steered;
And no mishaps but those of Sin She feared.
When JESUS called, His Mary came to Him,
Clasping the Feet that came her to Redeem.
With Tears to Channels of Repentance turned,
Faults known to none but Heaven, and Her, She mourned.
And yet these Lovely Pearls, her Tears, She thought
Must to her Saviors Cleansing Blood be brought.
The Worlds base Idols, her brave Soul despised
And what the World Adores She Sacrificed.
CHRIST asked the Heart of Her for whom He died;
Great LORD, I Am thine! Her conquered Heart replied.
His Righteousness alone She chose for that
Wherein to Stand before His Judgment Seat:
To that Kind Shepherd, gladly She Resigned
To Lead and Rule by Grace her Lamb-like Mind.
Her Hands to God often Lift in fervent Prayer,
(Hands in Redeeming Blood well Whit'ned) were.
When the rare Pastors had their Sermons done,
Her Doing was, the Repetition.
Banquets not in the Hall, but at the Door
She still preferred, there for to feed the Poor.
Her old Clothes, on the Poor, a Neater Show
She judged, they made than on her Self her New*
Ye Writers on the Decalogue, Stand by;
Durham and all the rest, shall Needless ly:
The Life we saw our pious MARY Live,
A Commentary to the Life, did give.
But, Oh! the Fourth! -- Tell, How She Sabbatiz'd;
And how the Rapturous Day She spent and prized.
The Day of God, which all our other Days
As worth Ten Thousand of them all, do praise;
The Day which all Enlightened minds confess,
The Daybreak of Eternal Blessedness;
The Day; Incomparable Day; so fair
None among all Times flying Children are:
The Map of Heaven, the Light of Earth, or which
God from Deep Treasures does our Souls Enrich.
She Loved the Day, She Loved the LORD, of whom
The Day proclaimed his Rising from the Tomb.
MARY this Day knew what it was to have
Joy in a JESUS Rising from the Grave.
Bright Day, Thou Soul of Piety; we see
All True Religion Lives or Dies with thee.
My Heroine saw this, and kept the Day;
This was, or None, She saw, to Heaven the way
Vain Things Lay by; but with a Zealous Heart,
Now MARY chose and sought the Better part.
So on THIS DAY at last She must Expire,
And to a Sacred Rest with CHRIST Retire.
The Seventh and the Sacred Day, the Dove
Takes for her Flight unto the Ark above.
O Chrysostom, Revoke thy gross Abuse;
How could a Golden Mouth such Dross produce?
A WOMAN, as True Friendships Enemy,
True Evil but Good painted, to decry?
What Mother had the Father opening thus?
Or was he but a Terrae Filius?
An Admirable MARY does refute
The Clamor, and strike Every Satyr mute.
But stay; Bold Quill; Touch not that String too Long
Lest Length may do at Length her Virtue wrong.
Who knew her need no Verse of mine; for they
Know more than my Imperfect Verse can say.
Who knew her not, will vainly think that none
Can say beyond that which by me was known.
My Pen so Silenced will by Silence speak
It self to Celebrate her Praise too weak.
Tell only What Is her Fate, or, That She Is Dead;
Twill be impossible then to proceed.
A BIRTH of One, to Both a Death becomes;
A Breathless Mother the Dead Child Entomb's.
Sad Fate! But for another BIRTH we wait:
She and her Infant, will be Twins in That.
With Tears that cannot stop, till then we must
Behold a Diamond Lying in the Dust.
A POEM On the DEATH of the Pious and Virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs. MARY BROWN,
Wife of BENJAMIN BROWN Esquire. Who (having Lived just Five and Thirty Years) with
her Child, Dyed in Childbed. December 26 th. Anno Domini, 1703.
Written in Commemoration of the Dead, and Consolation of the Living.
NO Wonder, Sir, if You be Sorely grieved,
Husband and Father, both at once Bereaved!
Bereaved of her, should in your Bosom be!
And of what should be Dandled on your Knee!
Ship, Cargoe, Root and Branch; both Fruit and Tree
All Swallowed up in one sad Ruin be!
And the Sole Owner Mourning left alone,
But one of Three, when One, is next to none!
Sense says, Your Case is desperately sad:
Faith says, The Tempest was not half so bad.
The Ship and Cargoe's Saved, The fruitful Tree,
Both Root and Branch, to Heaven Transplanted be.
The Dam and Lamb were in one COVENANT:
Both had that Shepherd would not let them want.
When the blessed Virgin had our Lord Conceived,
A Mother and her Child in Him believed,
Such Correspondence Then was held between
Two Little Infants that no Eye had seen,
As Joy'd Two Mothers, Made an Unborn Boy
Within his Mothers Womb to Leap for Joy.
Sure Job had never Cursed his Birth Day
Had not there been to Heaven an other Way.
Nor did Hilkiah's Son wish to have died,
Too Soon for to be Saved, and Sanctified.
The Mother and her Child could not be Severed,
Yet Neither of them Dyed Undeliver'd:
Whose Souls find Heaven, and Bodies find a Grave,
Christians Believe a good deliverance have.
Her Groaning's Over, and She has assigned
Her Groans and Moan's, to those, She left behind.
Although her Lying Inn will not be done
Until the Glorious Resurrection.
Then Eve's Curse will be off, and then no doubt,
Such Mothers will bring forth, and not Cry Out.
Their Babes Unmidwiv'd will be (past Objection)
Children of God, and of the Resurrection.
And this, I hope, will Satisfaction give
The Mother and the Child will Then Both Live.
SIR, Take it for a Consolation Cup,
It will be Then a Joyful Sitting up.
O Blessed Day! when Joy shall be Increased,
Ten Thousand Times above the Gossip-Feast.
Mean while the Husband does bewail his Crown,
And we, an Ornament of Church and Town.
One of the best of Women, Wives, and Friends,
One of the best of Saints, her Life thus Ends.
When Shrieking Mothers fly with Child in Arms,
It is to hide Them from Approaching Harms.
I dread the Omen much, when such as She,
Foresee what They had Rather Dye then See.
Nicholas Noyes.

