A Plea for the Righteousness OF GOD.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, the
Honorable COUNCIL, and the Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England. On May 31. 1704. being the day of the
Anniversary Election there.

By Jonathan Russel, Pastor of the Church at Barnstable.

Zeph. 3. 5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof: -- Boston: Printed by
Bartholomew Green, for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of the
Townhouse. 1704.

Published at the desire of the House of Representatives,

James Converse, Speaker.

A Plea for the Righteousness of GOD.
Nehemiah IX. 33. Howbeit, thou art Just in all that is brought upon us: for
thou have done right, but we have done wickedly:
THAT there is a certain and most exact Providence of God, over all the Affairs
of Mankind in this World, from the highest unto the meanest and most minute,
inconsiderable things, and all the circumstances of them; is a truth so great,
so plain and obvious, that it is agreed upon both in Reason and Religion; as
may be gathered from the Apostles quotation, Act. 17. 28. For in him we live
and move and have our being --: It is true also that the Mysteries of Common,
but especially of special Providence, are so great, so deep, so wonderful and
sometimes so amazeing, that men are fain to stand still, and say as in Job 11.
8. It is as high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper then hell, what can
thou know? And it is at no time more so than in the way of God's Judgments, and
most of all when his own People are the Subjects of those Judgments; then often
times there is occasion to Repeat and Ruminate upon that Exclamation, Romans 11.
33. How unsearchable are his Judgments and his Ways past finding out! But, be
the Premises of this kind what they will, we must always obstinately hold fast
that sure Conclusion, Psalm. 36. 6. Thy Righteousness is like the great
mountains; thy Judgments are a great deep: or else we shall make Shipwreck of
Faith and a good Conscience in these great deeps. And in this Chapter wherein
our Text is; We may observe the method and pains which Nehemiah, and the Godly
Jews with him, take for the clearing up, and establishing of this Conclusion,
as it is laid down in our Text. This Nehemiah did unto that poor afflicted
People answer his name; the Comfort or the Rest of the Lord: For in that
critical and troublesome Juncture, much of their Comfort and Rest from the
Lord, was conveyed unto them by his instrumentality: he was the Instrument of
procuring for, and settling among them, the revival of their former precious
and pleasant things in a great degree, after the Babylonish Captivity.

He was by birth a Jew; by quality a Courtier belonging to the Emperor of
Pers^^, the ^reatest Monarch in the World; by office the Governor of the Jews
his Brethren; by Precession and Practice ^n holy ^^d zealous* Servant of the
true God; he was a man of most Excellent Spirit, retaining and maintaining* a
firm and steadfast integrity, an inviolate, unstrain'd and exemplary fidelity to
his God, his Religion and his Country; all temptations, entanglements, and
enchantments of the Court, he had been so long Conversant in notwithstanding;
and served and was accepted of his Prince in serving his God and his Country,
settling and strengthening of them in Church and State, managing with a prudent,
pious, gracious and successful Conduct, for more than fifty years. And herein
joined in a most sweet, happy and satisfactory unanimity with them, with the
Rulers, with the Priests, with the Levites, and the Rest of his Brethren.

In Prosecution of which in this Nineth Chapter, he and they do solemnly and
publicly take notice of the Scheme of Gods ways unto that People, and their
ways unto him; and do Alternately touch upon some of the main points of both,
from their beginning unto that time: Until at length in this 33. v. the words
of our Text, they come unto and fix upon, a very* solemn Vindication of the
Name of God; by asserting his Justice in all his Judicial proceedings against
and dealings with them, together with a close Animadversion upon themselves.

The Words may be looked upon under a threefold Consideration.

1. Either as a brief, summary, but sad and sorrowful Recapitulation, and
Representation of their own Lamentable Estate, and the ill terms they were in
with the Lord their God, -- In all that is brought upon us -- God had brought
many and dreadful things upon them, which they had now the fresh and lively
sense of.

2. Or as an humble and penitential Confession of their own Sins, against the
Lord their God; an holy, and just, and good, and gracious God; they do with
shame of face and grief of heart confess; That though God had been very sharp and
severe with them, yet they were themselves the only Culpable and procuring
Causes of all. -- For we have done Wickedly.

3. Or as a testimonial Vindication given in, and to be left upon Record for
God; to clear him and his Cause, in the whole Controversy between him and them.
-- Howbeit thou art Just. -- There are then two Branches of the Text.

1. A Justification of God, with respect unto his Judgments inflicted upon his
own and only People, the People of Israel: And this argued from his Works, and
in particular from his Works of Judgment, which they had been the Subjects of.
Howbeit thou art Just in all that is brought upon us; for thou have done right:
q. d. Be the Case how it will with us, and indeed it is bad enough, sad enough,
and dreadful enough, as to things past and present, and dismal presages there
are for the future; yet we must and do, freely and openly Justify the Lord our
God, in and under all*

2. A Condemnation of themselves; with respect unto their own Sins; their
Condemnation is argued from their Works, and their Works of Iniquity. -- But we
have done wickedly; it is in plain, full, downright terms, without any
extenuation, or mincing the matter. So that the Doctrine which results from
hence is this.

Doct. That although the Judgments which God brings upon his own Sinning
People, are very many, and exceeding great; yet He is most Just in all of them.

They do in our Text make a plump and full acknowledgment of this Truth: when
the Case between God and themselves comes to be considered, they do before the
whole World, Heaven and Earth, give in clear and full evidence to this Truth,
however it does reflect upon themselves; that God is most Just in all his
Judgments upon them; and by parity of reason, the like testimony must be given
for him, with respect to his proceedings against any other such people of his
own, whom he shall visit with his Judgments as he did them: And indeed this is
a ruled and settled Case: The Prophet is express and ample in his attestation
hereto. Dan. 9. 14. -- For the Lord our God is Righteous, (or Just) in all his
Works; i. e. in his works of Judgment upon his own People; for these are the
works which the scope of the Text is directed unto. Also that is very pertinent
and pregnant for the Confirmation of this Truth which is given in and recorded,
Ezra 9. 18. -- O Lord God of Israel thou art Righteous. Speaking of his
Judgments which had overtaken, and taken hold of that Sinning People of the
Lord. This Doctrine consists of four single Propositions.

PROPOSITION I. That God's own People may be a very Sinful People. This People
of the Jews were God's own and only People; they were so by common Estimation,
by Profession, and by solemn Covenant-Transaction, they had Avouched the Lord
for their God, and God had Avouched them for his People; and yet they were a
very Sinful People: So it may be with any other People of God in this World:
they may be so really, not rightfully; there is no allowance for them to be so,
but there is certain experience that they are so. It was observed by the Wise
man of old, That there is not a Just man upon the Earth that (...) not: And this
is a very forcible way of proving this Position which he had then undertaken
the demonstration of. 1 King. 8. 46. There are always Sins of Infirmity in the
best persons, and in the best people in this World; but they are Sins of
Enormity and gross Iniquity which are here spoken of: for they must be such, to
bring a People of God under the just denomination of a Sinful People; and they
are truly and properly a Sinful People, when they are a Degenerate People,
fallen off from God, from what they profess and pretend to be; sometimes have
been or by Covenant are bound to be; When they are turned into the degenerate
plant of a strange Vine unto God, Jer. 2. 21. When they have lost their piety
toward God, their equity, honesty, charity and morality toward men; and the
contrary, impiety, prophanity, immorality and vitiosity take place instead
thereof; and this becomes their common and epidemical case: As it is said to be,
Isa. 1. 5, 6. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint; and they
make a trade of Sin, and are accustomed unto Sin, Jer. 13. 23. they commit Sin
as if it were their business, Hos. 10. 13. Ye have plowed wickedness. When it is
so with a People of God, they are then a very sinful people: And that God's own
People may become such is evident, not only from what the Holy Scriptures tell
us others have been, but from what experience tells us we our selves are. A
lively and graphical Exemplification of this awful truth, we have this day in
our selves.

PROP. II. That manifold and dreadful Judgments are the Proper, and will be the
certain portion of God's People when they are become a very Sinful People. If
God's People become a depraved, deformed, degenerate sinful people, they must
fall under the Severities of God's Judgments. Judgment must begin at the House
of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. and they are severe Judgments, Jer. 7. 19, 20. Do they
provoke me to anger, faith the Lord? do they not provoke themselves to the
confusion of their own faces? Therefore thus faith the Lord God, Behold mine
anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon
beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground, and
it shall burn, and shall not be quenched. These Judgments of God, are all those
penal evils which are inflicted by God in a way of judicial proceeding; and
whatever others do, God's own Sinning People besure shall not escape; Ames 3.
2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities. And there is an unparalled Severity in
the Judgments of God upon his own Sinning People; there is no Severity in this
World like it, unless it be that of the Sword of the Lord against the Man that
is his fellow: thus much is employed in our Saviors words, Mat. 24. 21. For
then shall be great tribulation, such as was not (...) the beginning of the
world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.

PROP. III. That these manifold and severe Judgments, they are God's Judgments.
All penal evil is from God, as the supreme, principal efficient cause of it,
Amos 3. 6. -- Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?
Deuteronomy. 32. 39. See now, that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me; I
kill, and I make alive: I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can
deliver out of my hand, Isa. 48. 7. -- I make peace and create evil: -- Be the
Instruments and Second Causes who and what they will, God does plainly and
peremptorily ascribe and appropriate Judgment unto himself as his: Isa. 37. 26.
Have thou not heard long ago, how I have done it, and of ancient times that I
have formed it? now have I brought it to pass: -- God is the Author who does
appoint and inflict these Judgments; and he is the orderer and manager of them
in the measures, steps and progress thereof, from first to last, even to the
least circumstance and accident thereof: Mat. 10. 30. But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered. The Judgment of all persons is from the Lord, Prove.
29. 26. But every man's judgment comes from the Lord. The Judgment of all
Nations is from the Lord, Hab. 3. 6. He stood and measured the earth: he beheld
and drove asunder the nations: And therefore it must needs be true concerning
the Judgments which come upon his own People. This might be made illustriously
evident, by a particular consideration of the Judgments which were inflicted
upon the Jews in their Captivity; they were all of them the Lords Judgment, as
to kind, time, degree, instruments, extent, duration, issue, effects and
consequents thereof; this is fully though briefly expressed and asserted, 2 King.
21. 12, 13. Therefore thus faith the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I am bringing
such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever hears of it, both his ears
shall tingle. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the
plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem, as a man wipeth a
dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.

PROP. IV. That God is most just in all these Judgments of His. Though they are
upon his own People, and are very many, and very great, yet God is most just or
righteous in all of them: He is truly and superlatively just, or which is the
same thing, Righteous in them all; in appointing and inflicting, ordering,
continuing and issuing them, in all the parts, articles, circumstances and
punctilio's of them, from first to last, from beginning to end; He is
absolutely, perfectly, inviolably and infinitely just and righteous. What Is
said of the Judgments of his mouth, Psalm. 19. 9. That they are righteous
altogether; does suit and quadrate well with the Judgments of his hands. The
Heavens make known this, Psalm. 50. 6. The heavens shall declare his
righteousness. The Angels proclaim his Righteousness, Rev. 16. 5. He is fixed
unchangeable and immovable, as a Rock in regard of his Righteousness, Deuteronomy.
32. 4. He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a
God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he. He is universally and
everlastingly so, Psalm. 89. 14. -- Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of
thy Throne. This is a sure uncontrollable conclusion, though men cannot always see
how to draw it out of the premises. This made the holy Prophet say, Jer. 12. 1.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee yet let me talk with thee of
thy Judgments: Wherefore does the way of the Wicked prosper? Wherefore are all
they happy that deal very treacherously?

This Justice of God it is not his Essential but his Relative Justice; whereby
he gives unto all his Creatures that which does belong unto them. For as he is
just in himself, in his own Nature, Isa. 45. 21. -- A just God. -- Altogether
just, and most just, even Justice it self; so he is just in all his works and
doings to his Creatures, and therefore in his Works of Judgments to his People:
He renders to them those Judgments which do of right belong unto them,
according to a Rule of Justice; and the Rule of Relative Justice, it is the
Will of God. God originally owes nothing to his Creatures, therefore that only
is their due which he Wills unto them, that Will of his therefore is the Rule
of moral Justice. The Will of purpose it is the Secret and Everlasting Rule of
this Justice; His Will of Precept it is the Written Rule of this Justice: And
his Law considered as a Covenant, as it is under the Sanction of Promises and
Threatenings, is the Rule according to which his own People may expect he will
dispense Justice unto them, in the way of his Judgments. Against this Rule
there is no exception to be made by us; no not against his Judgment of eternal
Condemnation upon the Reprobate who perish, being Reprobated according to the
Will of God; for their eternal Reprobation, and so their Condemnation it is
according to this righteous Rule of Justice between God and man* therefore the
blessed Apostle does with a disdainful detestation reject the very thoughts of
impeaching the Justice of God, in the Reprobation of them that are according to
Scripture Phrase, hated of God; as it is Written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. The Argument to prove it follows: For he faith to Moses, I will have
mercy on whom I will have Mercy, and I will have Compassion on whom I will have
Compassion, Romans 9. 13, 14, 15. And it is added to close all, -- and whom he
will he hardneth, 18. v. However impudently and unreasonably, and in defiance
of the whole Scope of the Argumentation, some would understand the Apostle of
Temporal Judgments of this Life, thereby to Enervate the Decree of Reprobation.
And if this Judgment of God be so uncontrolably Just, because it is according
to, and the product of his Will; much more may we, and must we conclude that
all those Judgments spoken of in our Text and Doctrine; even the Judgments of
God upon his own People, are most Just: for they are the accomplishment of his
Decree, which is altogether Just; The Execution of his Law which is most holy,
just and good: And the fulfilling of his Covenant in the just threatenings
thereof, which are put thereinto; if his Children forsake my Law, and walk not
in my Judgments; if they break my statutes and keep not my Commandments: Then
will I visit their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquity with
stripes: And these are the Judgments of God upon his own People, in which He is
most just.

USE I. Hence we may infer, that there is an absolute necessity of the
Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, to make Peace with God for us. When the
Justice of God is offended and provoked to proceed in a way of Vengeance, which
is the work of provoked Justice, inflicting Judgment upon the Sinner, there is
nothing to be justly expected, but the just ruin and utter confusion of those,
who by their Sins have drawn it forth, unless there be an Atonement made: So
God speaks. A fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest
hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the
foundations of the mountains. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend
mine arrows upon them. They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with
burning heat, and with bitter destruction: Deuteronomy. 32, 22, 23, 24. And this
Vengeance will not be recalled, unless the Anger of God cease; and this Anger
will not cease, unless provoked Justice be atoned; and Justice will be atoned
only by the Satisfaction and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ. If there be
no Satisfaction, and so no atonement made, the Justice of God will take
satisfaction by distraint upon the Sinner, which way of satisfaction we are
forewarned to take heed of. When thou go with thine adversary to the
Magistrate: as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou may be delivered
from him, lest he hale thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
officer, and the officer cast thee into prison. I tell thee, thou shall not
depart thence, till thou have paid the very last mite. Luke 12. 58, 59. There Is
a way of reconciliation made known in the Gospel by Jesus Christ. God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, -- 2 Cor. 5. 19. And as this is the
way of atonement for persons, so it is for peoples also. God of old directed
his people to this way. Gather your selves together, O Nation not desired:
before the decree bring forth: -- Seek ye the Lord. -- Seek righteousness, etc.
Zeph. 2. 1, 2, 3. The Lord Jesus Christ is the only hiding place for a people
from the Storms of God's Anger. Isa. 32. 2. And a man shall be as an hiding
place from the wind, and a cover^ from the tempest: This was the Sacrifice
which of old was for the Congregation; which we read of, Numb. 15. 25. -- for
all the Congregation. Mr. Ainsworth reads it, for every Congregregation, for
every Tribe, and for every City, and for every Synagogue in the Land. We have
need of an Atonement for every Congregation, for our Rulers in their
Congregation, for our Courts in their Congregation; for our Ministers and for
our Churches in their Congregations; for our Towns, for our College and
Schools in their Congregations; and for our Soldiers and Military Forces in
their Congregations. And there is no other Sacrifice of atonement, for every,
or for any Congregation, but only the Lord Jesus Christ. So that there is
necessity of him for our Atonement.

There Is a necessity of the Lord Jesus Christ to appear and stand before God
for us; for we have sinned in every Congregation, and Sinners cannot stand: If
th^^ Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand, Psalm. 130. 3.
There is no person, nor Congregation of persons among us, but would be afraid,
and dread to appear before this holy, just and righteous God in their sins;
they would cry out, as we read, in Psalm. 76. 7. Thou, even thou art to be
feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? There is no
standing for us before God. He is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab.
1. 13. If we should offer to stand before him, whether it were in a way of
opposition or supplication, it could come to no other than what the Lord speaks
of, Isa. 27. 4. Of setting briers and thorns, etc. which he would go through
and burn up together. But our Lord Jesus Christ he can stand for any, and for
every Congregation of us. Therefore,

There is a necessity also that he should stand for us, to speak on our behalf
as an Advocate; He is the only Advocate whom we can rely upon, 1 John 2. 1. --
And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. We have a necessity of a Friend in the Court of Heaven, to speak for
us before the just and holy God, or there will be no hopes of an Atonement.

And there is a necessity for the Lord Jesus Christ to offer up to God an
acceptable Sacrifice for us; without a Sacrifice there is no Atonement; and
there is no other Sacrifice but Blood, which will atone any unto God, and it is
only the Blood of Jesus Christ that is of any value in this case: And this is
of an alsufficient and infinite value; it is the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. And
this will cleanse from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.

USE II. Hence we may make this deduction; That it is our great present and
indispensable duty to justify the Lord our God in all his proceedings against
us. We read in Isa. 26. 8. of the way of God's Judgments toward his People. As
it is with a Body natural, crazy ill-habited Bodies, are fain to be put into a
way of Physic, or there is no hopes of them: A single dose will only irritate
their Maladies, and so make them worse. So it is with a Sinful People of God, as
they are a Body Politic; the Great and All-wise Physician rather than lose
them, he will put them into a way of Physic: God has long been in a Way and
Course of Judgments with us; these are his Physic: under the prescriptions and
directions of his Word, many a bitter and dreadful Dose has he exhibited unto
us; many a Cup of trembling has He mixed for us: And is, like a wise and
considerate Artist proceeding from those Medicines which are more gentle and
easy, unto those that are more strong and potent; as if He would at length come
to the use of such as will certainly kill or cure; mend us, or end us. Thus He
i^ in the Way of His Judgments: now we should remember He is most Just, and
accordingly Justify him in this Course and Way of his Judgments. There are many
left alive and now among us, who can remember the beginning of this Way of Gods
Judgments, which He has settled us under, and which we should Justify him in. We
are Gods own People, and I suppose, it may truly and not improperly be said, in
some great respects, that we are the only People of God in this quarter of the
World. That has been in some remarkable manner accomplished upon us, which was
spoker, of Israel of old, Lo, the People shall dwell alone, they shall not be
reckoned among the Nations, Numb. 23. 9. And that also, Chap. 24. 9. Blessed is
be that blesses thee, and cursed is be that curses thee: they generally have
made broken undertakings of it, in the end at least, who have attempted any
thing against Gods Israel in this Wilderness; this lonely corner of the Earth.
We have many a broken Leviathans Head by us to show. But yet we are become and
are a very sinful People. The Lord may say justly of us, The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; but Israel does not know, and my People
does not consider. Ah Sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity, a seed of
evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they
have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they have gone away backward,
Isa. 1. 3, 4. We are become an ignorant, inconsiderate, corrupted, corrupting,
backsliding, provoking People. This we have many a time had full and undeniable
Conviction of, diverse Ways, and especially on such occasions, as the present
is; the Servants of the Lord, whom he has sent to us to speak in his Name, in
this Place, by an induction of particulars, they have caused us to see the Word
of the Lord. That we may say, as for our Sins, we know them. And we are a very
afflicted People, our whole Land is so from one end of it to the other; though
some places and parts of it more than others, at present: but it may soon be as
bad in all places as it is in any; for God has done by us, as he speaks, Ezekiel.
7. 24. Wherefore I will bring the worst of the Heathen upon them: -- God has
brought the very worst of the Heathen, the Antichristian Heathen upon us; a
People whose Consciences are debauched with Popery. It may even be said of our
Land as we read in H^b. 3. 7. I saw the Tents of Cushan in great affliction,
and the Curtains of the Land of Midian did tremble. It is a very trembling and
dreadful consideration to think, What God has done, and in the way of his
Judgments is doing against his own, his only People, his acknowledged and dear
People; his People between whom and Himself there has been so much Love, so
great kindness, such intimate acquaintance, and sweet communion for so long
time; yet we must justify him in all, and say as the Jews here do, Howbeit thou
art Just in all that is brought upon us: in the whole Scheme of Judgments which
we are under: This is our great present and universal duty; it is the Work and
Duty of the whole Representative body of the Country, in all orders and degrees
of Persons, in Church and State. And to do it this day, even this day; which
though it has been wont to be a Great Day, a Festival Day, a Day of Joy and
Gladness; and though we do enjoy those good things to this Day, which do afford
us matter of Joy and thankfulness: yet upon account of the just Judgments of
God, and his heavy hand upon us, his near and dear People, who have been to him
as the Apple of his Eye: upon account of the, I fear, irreparable breach,
between him and us, We have just cause to make it a day of Lamentation and
Mourning; and to justify God in all. I would not under-value the Mercies of our
great and good, and long suffering GOD; nor the favors of the Queen our
Sovereign, which though undeserving, we yet enjoy. But I fear the Talent of
Lead, is hastening to be shut down upon the Ephah of our Wickedness, as the
expression is, Zach. 5. 7. I mean that our Sins are hastening to their full
measure: and when the Vessel is full the Cover is shut down upon it; and when
the measure of our iniquity* is filled up, we shall be concluded under the
Wrath of God: yet let us Justify God, for we must either justify or
recriminate, and condemn him; and to charge and rise up against him, would be
to add Rebellion to our Sin; as he was taxed for doing, Job 34. 7. Which would
be an unanswerable affront to the Majesty of Heaven, an arrogance in the
Exaltation of it, Job 40. 1, 3, 4, 17. But rather, Let us give glory unto God,
even the glory due to his Name, Psalm. 29. 2. And this will be done by giving
him the glory of his Justice, or Righteousness, viz. by getting and possessing
our selves with real, clear and deep apprehensions, and sense of this Justice
or Righteousness of God. And by making an open, free, ingenuous, pathetical,
emphatical Confession of it to the Glory of God: And thus of late His
EXCELLENCY, the COUNCIL and General Assembly, have expressly, solemnly,
publicly and seasonably, in their Printed Declaration, Given Glory unto God.
And in our Public Days of Humiliation, we have professed, to join in the same
thing; and wherein we have professed to take Shame to our selves, and thereby
to justify God. So we have done in all FASTS and HUMILIATIONS, or else we have
not observed them unto the Lord, but been guilty of their Sin, Zach. 7. 5. Thus
we should still Justify him.

In Particular,

1. Justify Him in all the Evils and Errors which we have fallen into. It is
the property of man to err; now however Sinful, Shameful or Miserable our
Errors have been, or our selves by reason of them, yet God is to be Justified
in all of them. Though it is the guise of Sinful and Evil men, and too much
ours, to take notice of the Errors and Evils of others, so as only to blame,
and shame, and reproach, and vilify them for the same, so as to be alienated
from, despisers, and haters of those that fall into Errors; and too little to
remember and regard the hand of God in it: and to say at least practically, as
the Enemy does, The Lords hand has not done all this, Deuteronomy. 32. 27. As if
there were no Judgment of God in all of it. Whereas it is indeed a most severe
and sore Judgment of God, especially when the Chief among a People fall into
Sins and Follies; the Heathen observed this, Delirant Reges plec^untur Achivi.
And the Scriptures testify to it. God is angry with Israel and then David must
be left unto, and be obstinate and unmovable in, the folly and sin of numbering
the People, as 2 Samuel 24. 1. God was angry with Israel and Zedekiah both; and
then he is left to refuse and reject the Counsel of the Prophet, though most
faithful and agreeable. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord -- for through
the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast
them out of his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon, 2
King. 24. 19, 20. These were the sore Judgments of God upon them. And we have
had our Errors and Evils; our Sins and Follies, both Personal and Public: yet
we may say with respect unto them, as David of himself, Psalm. 19. 12. Who can
understand his Errors? And whatever these have been; though men are not without
blame, yet there is the Judgment of God in them, so far as they are penal or
afflictive to us. And the more public these are in Church or State, the more
grievous is the Judgment of God upon us. So that, if there be some of those in
the foremost Ranks among us, who fall into the Evils and Errors of
Immoralities, in Conversation; So that the box of precious Ointment send forth
an evil Savor, as the expression is, Eccl. 10. 1. Or if there be some, who
should be like Mount Sion, which cannot be moved, who fall from their own
stedfastness, and are tossed to and fro like Children, and forget the Errand
into this Wilderness, to Plant pure Churches, and to uphold pure Worship and
Ordinances. Or if there be some who ought to Hold fast the form of sound Words,
2 Timothy 1. 13. But yet don't walk with a right foot according to the Truth of the
Gospel, as the Word signifies, Gal. 2. 14. But do entertain and endeavor to
maintain with obstinacy of mind, such things for truth, as have a direct
tendency to destroy Holiness to subvert our Churches, to dissolve our
Constitution, and to raze our Foundations, and so wound JESUS CHRIST in the
House of his friends; if I may allude to Zach. 1^. 6. Or if there be a spirit
of Contention and Opposition, a Perverse Spirit mingled among us, which refuses
healing, and a Spirit of Malignity and Persecution, Secretly breathing among
us; and there be sad effects of these things, so that we cry out, Hinc illae
Lachrymae! Hence iniquity abounds, and hence Love waxes cold, Charity faints;
hence offenses, fears, disgusts, jealousies, evil surmizings, animosities,
great and mutual prejudices, incureable and yet insupportable Alienations,
Oppositions and Litigations; and it may be grievous and violent Paroxysms, and
Convulsions, which endanger and threaten the Confusion of the whole. Such flaws
and cracks in the Foundation, make grievous fractures in the Superstructure,
and make all shake and tremble: Hence if our Civil State shake, if our Churches
shake, if our College shakes, if our Hearts and Faith shake; if these things
blast our hopes, frustrate our expectations, grieve our Souls, dishonor God,
and destroy us; so that hereby God accomplishes upon us the threatening
denounced, Isa. 3. 1, 2 3. For behold the Lord the Lord of Hosts does take away
from Jerusalem and Judah, the Stay and the Staff -- the mighty man, and the man
of War, the Judge, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, the
Captain of Fifty, and the Honorable, and the C^un^el^^r: Such Political Deaths
are the sore and very grievous Judgments of God, and the expressions of his hot
and sore displeasure: Howbeit we must justify him and say, He is just in all
that is brought upon us, by our own Sins and Follies.

2. Justify God in all the Penal Evils that have been upon us. There have been
Evils upon us in a way of very observable and successive course; for those not
only of the First and Second, but also of the Third Generation have experienced
it. So that we may even say with Moses; All our days are passed away in thine
anger, Psalm. 90. 7. -- 9. And the latter evils have been greater than the
former. We have been striving and st^ugling mightily with the Evils which God
has caused to take hold of us, and all-sorts and degrees of men among us; and
He has held us so fast under the same, that though we have tried as it were by
force to shake our selves, and by flattery of God to obtain help from him; yet
we may even say, that the tale of our bricks have been doubled. In the Evils
which have been upon our Persons, our Liberties, our Estates, our Peace, and
almost all our Good Things; from Heaven, from Hell, from Earth, from Fire, from
Water, from Enemies on every hand. So that there has often been occasion to
say, as Psalm. 46. 8. Came see the Desolations which the Lord has made. Howbeit
he is most just herein; For he has exacted of us far less than our iniquities
have deserved, Job 11. 6.

3. Justify God in all the Evils that are upon us. Though our Evils are
changed, yet our Evil State is not changed (...) we are hedged in. As for the
hedge of Protection, that has been broken down, and the wild Boar of the
Wilderness has been and is upon us, Psalm. 80. 40. and the hedge of malediction
spoken of, H^s^. 2. 6. has compassed us about. God has put a yoke upon us, and
we must bear it, Jer. 28. 13, 14. And however unjust, unrighteous, deceitful,
treacherous and devilish men have been; though their throat has been as an open
sepulcher, and with their tongues they have used deceit, etc. as Romans 3. 13, --
18. Yet God is most just.

4. Justify God in all the Evils which do impend over us. They need be no great
Physiogmonists in the face of times, who shall tell us, that our Sky looks Red
and Lowering. I shall not undertake to predict our future portion: yet there are
some Prognostics so apparent upon us, that without vanity, or intruding into
things not seen, there is reason to look upon our case as brought to this sad
dilemma, That either we must be put into some hotter furnace than we have yet
known, for the purging away our dross* or expect to undergo a Divine but woeful
dereliction, as they did whom God gave up to their own hearts lust, Psalm. 81.
12. Or they that after all were found Reprobate Silver, in Jer. 6. 28, 29.
Unless the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord should first dawn
upon us, and cure all.

5. Justify God in all the Evils that shall come upon us. Though threatened and
present evils should be removed or diverted, and the gathered Clouds
dissipated; yet other evils unforeseen and unsuspected may break forth upon us
suddenly, like that spoken of, Isa. 30. 13, 14. -- Whole breaking comes
suddenly at an instant. God may heap mischiefs, and spend his Arrows upon us,
as Deuteronomy. 32. 23. -- 26. Nay, if he should write us the Inhabitant of Maroth; so
us that when we look for good, evil should come down from the Lord upon us, as,
Mic. 1. 12. Yet He would be most just.

6. Whatever becomes of us, God is to be Justified. Whether we do sink or swim,
whether we live or dye, be established or confounded; for truly with reverence
to his Holy Name be it spoken, God seems to be at a loss what to do with us;
and is often saying of us? How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I
deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah, and set thee as Zeboim?
Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together: It goes to
the very heart of God to destroy his New England People; and yet if he should
blot out our name from under these heavens; as he speaks, Deuteronomy. 9. 14. If as
the once famous Churches of Asia, we should be reduced to Rubbish and Dust. And
if it should be so, what then shall become of our Country, of our Towns and
Plantations, our Churches and Estates, and our Children? And doubtless many
trembling Souls are saying, and have many a time said: And Lord, what will thou
do to thy Great Name, as, Josh. 7. 9. Yet we must put our mouths in the dust,
and confess plainly, that God is and will be most just.

7. Justify God whatever comes from us. Whatever God do expect from us, though he
expects we should be Children that will not lie, Isa. 63. 8. Though there should
be some Reformations and Amendments; for there is little hope of a better
Reformation than that in Josiah's time, Jer. 3. 11. And it may be, the Case may
come at last to that pass spoken of in old time. But they mocked the Messengers
of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of
the Lord arose against his People, and there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
And if it does, God is most just and righteous: As He truly is in all that is
brought upon us.

USE II. EXHORTATION. And it is twofold.

1. Let us be Exhorted to lament and amend our own Sins, Unrighteousness and
Injustice before and toward God. God is truly and superlatively just and
righteous, without any manner of unrighteousness; and this upon the utmost
trial and experiment that can be made of him. We must say, There Is no
unrighteousness in him, Psalm. 92. 15. But there is unrighteousness and
injustice in us; we have done wickedly. Righteousness in God it is his Nature
and Essence; in man, Unrighteousness is his nature. Romans 8. 7. And
Righteousness it is of Grace, and it is the Image of God in him, and his
acceptableness unto God: Unrighteousness it is the Image of the Devil, and
displeasing and contrary unto God; and for this God is displeased with us. The
Servants and Messengers of God in this place, upon like Occasions, have with
one mouth faithfully born witness against our Sins and Unrighteousnesses; and
if men should be silent, these Walls and these Pillars would testify against
us, that we have been Convicted for offending against the Rules, both of
Commutative and Distributive Justice: We have not given unto God the Glory due
to his Name, to his Nature, to our own Bonds and Obligations to him; nor have
we rendered unto him according to the benefits, means, privileges and Blessings
bestowed upon us. Hezekiah's Sin has been too common among us. We have not
Glorified God as God, nor been thankful: this is to be lamented and amended;
and we should labor to deal truly herein, and not flatter and lie as they did,
Psalm. 78. 36, 37. And if we do so, God will be merciful to our Unrighteousness,
and he will remember our Sins no more, Heb. 8. 12. If otherwise, the Case is
determined, the Written doom will come; -- The Lord knows to reserve the Unjust
unto the day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

2. Let us be Exhorted, to dread and avoid the further provoking the Justice of
the Just and Righteous God against us. For God is a Just and Righteous God
still; and he is in the way of his Judgments: His Hand is stretched out still;
and may be provoked unto still greater degrees of Just displeasure against us.
He is an Holy and Jealous God, Josh. 24. 19, 20. A terrible God: -- Neh. 1. 5.
None can be so foolish and Atheistical as to think, that God has sent all his
Judgments, and spent all his Arrows upon us. The Anger of God yet to come, is
as heavy and dreadful as we can fear it to be: According to thy fear so is thy
wrath, Psalm. 90. 11. Taking the fear of God objectively, it refers unto that
Article of the History of Isreal's travels in the Wilderness, which we have in
Numb. 14. Where when the People had Committed that great and critical Sin of
refusing to enter into the Land; and Moses told them how ill God resented their
evil carriage, they had awful and dreadful apprehensions of the Anger of God;
and he tells them it was every way as great as they could conceive of.
Therefore let us all in general take heed of irritating and exasperating this
Just Anger, or this injured and provoked Justice of God against us; Why should
we provoke him, Are we stronger than He? And therefore in General,

1. Let us look to our Religion. This is man's glorifying of God and enjoying of
him, and as it is the chief end of man; so this was the main and principal end
of our Forefathers, those men of Renown, who first stretched forth these
Heavens, and laid the foundations of this Earth; Settled a Christian Religious
State and Churches in this Country. And they have Committed their work and
enterprise to us, and left us to parsue and prosecute the same to effect: and
whatever we do without this we do but trifle and Serio nihil Agere; and deserve
to be reproved for our neglect of Jesus Christ, as Luke 10. 41. If our Religion
be neglected or perverted, Gods offended Justice will be further provoked and
incensed, and we shall be more exposed. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower
whereunto the Righteous flee and are safe, as Prove. 18. 10. Our Religion is our
greatest and best bulwark: If this be neglected our defense departs from us,
and we shall be as bread to our enemies, as they said, Numb. 14. 9. If we lose
our Religion we lose All; and if we are cheated of our Religion we are cheated
of All: for, according to the word of our Lord CHRIST, All came with our
Religion: Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these
things shall be added. And according to the Word of God, all will go with our
Religion. Nos. 2. 9. Therefore will I return and take my Corn in the time
thereof. Look well to Religion and we look well to All; Look well to the
Soundness and Purity of Religion, in Heart, and Life, in Doctrine, and
Practice, in Worship and Discipline; or Christ will say as to Sardis, -- I have
not found thy ways perfect before God, Rev. 3. 2. Look well to the Love of our
Religion, that so we be not given up to strong delusions, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. --
Because they received not the Love of the truth, that they might be Saved: for
this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a Lie:
Even the great Antichristian Lie. Look well to the Life and Power of Religion;
or Jesus Christ will nauseate and spue us out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 16. So then
because thou art Lukewarm and neither hot not cold, I will spue thee out of my
mouth. Look at those as the worst Sins, that Hurt our Religion most; as
impenitence, unbelief, error, heresy, superstition, hypocrisy, formality, and
all manner of Apostasy. And look at those as our poorest friends, that are not
friends to our Religion; and those as our worst Enemies who are Enemies to our
Religion, who strike at and hurt our Religion; the case between such and us is
much as it was sometimes between the Syrian King, and Israel, 1 King. 22. 31.
Our Religion it is our Life, -- And as he said, so may we, Set your hearts to
all the words which I testify to you this day, -- for it is not a vain thing
for you, for it is your life, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. They that would take away our
Religion would take away our Lives: they would commit the worst Murder upon us.
What that great Reformer Luther said of the Doctrine of Justification; it is
Articulus stantis et Cadentis Ecclesiae; may we much more say of our Religion,
it is, Articulus stantis et Cadentis Populi. If you don't look well to your
Religion, Jesus Christ will say as to them, Luke 13. 34, 35. Your House is left
unto you desolate.

2. Let us Labor to acquit our selves well with respect unto Civil Government.
Government it is Gods Ordinance: therefore as we should Fear God, so should we
Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. And the Powers that are among us, they are of
God, Romans 13. 1. It is a great mercy of God to us, all our difficulties and
uneasinesses which we labor under notwithstanding: our Government is a great
Mercy of God to us, and that which we ought to be truly thankful to him for. If
it should degenerate into Tyranny, Anarchy, or such hardships as we hear some
others groan under, we should soon find the difference. Therefore let us labor
to acquit our selves well, and approve our selves as good Christians: as Paul
did, Exercise our selves herein to have a Conscience void of offense toward
God and toward man, Act. 16. 24. Real, true Christians are the best Subjects
in the Civil State, for they are Subject out of Conscience; they will, and we
should honor Civil Government, as we are required in the Fifth Command. We
should pray for Civil Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1. For God turns the hearts of
Kings as the Rivers of waters are turned, and they cannot withstand him. We
should submit and be in subjection to Civil Authority. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. And we
should uphold and support Civil Government; that it may not decay, languish and
sink; it is true, it is not a time for us to seek great things to our selves, God
faith, seek them not, Jer. 45. 5. But we must endeavor that our Government be
not mean, sordid and contemptible. Thus in general.

More particularly.

I. Let this Exhortation be Presented and Recommended unto those among us who
are betrusted with the Civil Government. The betrustment of the Government,
whether it be the Legislative or the Executive part of it, or both, is great;
God and his people have committed much unto You, and reposed great Assurances
in You: Therefore to You the Exhortation is, that You would consider and dread,
and avoid any other further provoking the offended Justice of God against us.
And SIR, Let this Counsel be acceptable to Your EXCELLENCY, to the Honorable
COUNCIL, and to the worthy Gentlemen the REPRESENTATIVES of the Province, to
labor that the offended Justice of God, may neither by Omission of Duty, nor
by Commission of Evil, nor by any means be any farther exasperated and incensed
against us. Be Exhorted in Your respective Stations to do Your part faithfully
in this matter; accordingly approve your selves in the work of this day, in
Re-establishing of us: this day is to us an omen and index of the ensuing Year.
And if God be with You this day, we shall take it for a token for good to us
for this Year also, and it is a great thing for the Barren Fig Tree to be
spared one year. Therefore labor that the Election of this day may be so made
and managed as may not further incense the already provoked Justice of God
against us: Remember that Apostolical Precept. Let nothing be done through strife
or vain glory, -- Phil. 2. 3. Let all contention, animosity, faction, private,
base, sinister private ends and interests be banished from the Public
management. Remember it has been wont to be said; next to the Glory of God,
Salus Populi suprema Lex, the Public Good is the main thing. And so in all
after and smaller Elections be faithful Stewards for God and his People; you
are betrusted by and for Jesus Christ: who says, By me Kings Reign, and
Princes decree Justice, Prove. 8. 15. Take heed of betraying Jesus Christ in his
interest and work; Choose such into the Government as you Judge to be true
Lovers of, and Loyal unto Jesus Christ; such as will stand by and for his
interest in a day of trial, at a pinch; this will be pleasing to him. And this
will best and most truly Secure Her Majesty's Interest, as well as our own. The
Throne shall be established by righteousness, Prove. 25. ^5. And this will make
the People rejoice, and cheerful in their duty, Prove. 29. 2. When the righteous
are in Authority the People Rejoice. There Is a necessity that those who Rule,
especially among a People of God, should be Godly, this is their first
qualification; we have Royal and Divine Authority for this, and it is worthy
your serious Consideration. The Spirit of the Lord sp^ke by me, and his word
was in my tongue. The God of Israel said, the Rock (...) Israel spoke to me. A
Solemn Preface unto this Position, He that Rules over men must be Just, Ruling
in the Fear or God. And if all Elections be such, it shall be as the light of
the Morning, when the Sun rises* even a Morning without Clouds; As the tender
grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain, 2 Samuel 23. 2. --
4. Moreover give me leave to propound unto, and leave under your serious
Consideration these particulars.

1. Consider whether there ought not to be some stronger and stricter guard set
upon God's Holy Sabbath, to prevent the Profanation of it. Gods Holy Sabbath*
the Lords Day is very dear unto God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; it is His Day
and therefore is greater than any man's day whatsoever. We ought not to set it
at a low rate. It has been an old and true Observation, that it fares with all
instituted Worship, and the whole interest of Religion among a People, as it
does with the Sabbath: therefore it is worthy of your serious Consideration.

2. Consider what is to be done for the promoting of Liberal Education among
us. That we may have not only the Name of Learning, but the Thing; that we may
have Polished Stones for the Public Buildings in Church and State; if we so
serve the Providence of God as to obtain the common gifts and graces of his
Spirit, we may depend upon and hope in him, for his special and sanctified
Grace also, and then we shall have that promise fulfilled; I will give you
Pastors after my own heart, which shall fe^d you with knowledge and
understanding, Jer. 3. 15. Let the College be effectually cared for; if that
precious fountain, be either dried up, or perverted it will be of dreadful
consequence. And let not inferior Schools escape your Consideration, that if
it be possible they may be Settled upon an easy and lasting Basis.

3. Consider if there might not some mark of favor and encouragement be put
upon the Sober, Industrious, Laborious, Profitable part of the People; and some
discountenance upon the contrary, even such as mostly serve their own and
others Lusts.

4. Consider how the Public Faith may be kept Sacred and Inviolate; the
Credit, honor and honesty, and so the comfort and safety of the Public does
very much depend hereupon. Let Public Promises be as good security as private
bonds. That none may be forced; or may ^ustly make complaint that they are, by
the Public denied or delayed their own. Many can bear the burden, though
heavy, better than one or a few.

5. Consider how you may be, not only Just but also Good, to those that
faithfully Serve the Public; such as spend their time and themselves in the
Public Service, should not be forgotten; there should be a proportion between
their burden and their benefit. There are some Serve the Public in the
Magistracy, and there is a tribute in Prudence and Conscience due unto them.
For this Cause pay you tribust also; for they are Gods Ministers attending
continually upon this very thing. Romans ^^. 6. There are some Serve the Public
in the Ministry; and God has ordained that those who Preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. And there are some that Serve the Public in
our Warfare; And who goes a warfare at his own Charges? 1 Cor. 9. 7. They that
venture their Lives for us in the High Places of the Field should not be
shortened in, and pinched out of their just and righteous encouragments, which
have been proposed and offered unto them; let none say, they serve hard and
penurious Masters. I know our low Estate, Poverty and great burdens are great
Temptations; but it was a sound and sure maxim laid down by a Master of
Politics under the direction of the Spirit of God: There is that scatters
and yet increases: there is that witholdeth more than is meet and it tends
unto Poverty, Prove. 11. 24. Remember and practice that great Rule, Mat. 7. 12.
What things ye would that others should do unto you, do the some things.

6. And if I may at this time of day propound it: Consider to put the Eastern
Parts under some better Regulations, both for C^^ility and Religion, if God
shall ever betrust us again with that Talent: The anger of God against that
neglect has been written in dreadful Characters of blood and fire.

7. Consider what you may do for Unity and Unanimity; and Sacrifice all but a
good Conscience thereunto: and then may we hope that no foot of Pride will come
against us, nor wicked hand move us; if you shall aright Consider of and attend
unto these things.

II. Let this Exhortation be presented and recommended to the Reverend
Ministers of the Gospel; That they would dread and avoid further provoking and
incensing of the Anger of God, of this just and righteous God. You know the
terror of the Lord: it greatly concerns Ministers to step into the breach, and
stand in the gap, between the Living and the Dead; so did Aaron, Phineas,
Samuel, and the Levites in Nehemiah's and Ezra's time. Therefore be Exhorted
for this end*

1. To labor to walk close with God in your places. Those that are Leaders,
guides and ensamples unto others, should labor to walk Wisely, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
For the People, will and should follow them, only with that Caution, as they
follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2. Not with a blind devotion and foolish
Credulity: its a Noble thing to do as the well bred Bereans did, Act. 17. 11.
Ministers are to be Copies not only in Doctrine but in Conversation: and what
can be hoped for if they are Vain, Loose, Luxurious, Extravagant or Unsavory;
they are the Salt of the Earth, and if the Salt have lost its Savor, and is
become foolish, wherewith shall it be Salted, Mat. 5. 13. Take heed to your
selves -- that you may save your selves, and them that hear you, 1 Timothy 4. 16.

2. Use utmost endeavor to bring back your People unto the Lord God of our
Fathers; this is the way to prevent any further provoking of the offended
Justice of God against our Land. It is true there has been much striving of the
Ministry herein; many have spent themselves in this labor and expired, and
breathed forth their Souls into the bosom of Jesus Christ in their Agonies of
this undertaking. And what can those do that are left, whose strength is so
much weakened in the way? And yet we must labor, and strive and be faithful
unto the death, Rev. 2. 10. the Levites did so in Jehosophat's time, and there
came good of it; as in 2 Chronicles. 19. 4. and 8. And there is the late Declaration
of the Authority among us, which is a good testimony for them, that their hands
shall be with us; And if they are not, will be a most pungent testimony against
(...); for it is laid up in the Records of Heaven, in perpetu^m Re^^memori^m.
Let it be like the sound of going in the tops of the Mulberry Trees to
encourage us to bestir our selves; as 2 Samuel 5. 24. for it may properly be said
unto us, as was said unto him, Arise, for this (...) belongs unto thee, Ezra
10. 4. Thus the Gospel was at first introduced, and this is the way to
propagate and perpetuate it: And He shall go before him in the Spirit and power
of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and of the
disobedient, to the wisdom of the Just, to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord. This is the way to keep off the Curse from our I and. -- And He shall
turn the heart of the Children to the fathers, lest I come and smite the earth
with a Curse, Mal. 4. 6. And this will Restore to us prosperity, Jer. 22. 15,
16. So it did to Jehoshaphat and to his People, 2 Chronicles. 17. 3. And the Lord
was with Jehosaphat because He walked in the first ways of David his father.
David's first ways were his best ways. And so doubtless, New-England's first
were their best ways: It is true they were but men at first, and had their
imperfections and infirmities: But they were Excellent men, men of Renown, a
chosen and picked Generation, the very flower of the R^^or^^ation, sifted out by
God's own hand, and outstretched Arm: They were a generation of great wisdom,
of great Learning, of great grace and experience and acquaintance with God; of
great trials, afflictions and persecutions, how little soever some account of
them, and their work and way now, and do industriously, forsake and reproach
it, and condemn them for transgressors; they that destroy the things that are
built up, make those builders transgressors, Gal. 2. 18. But they were truly
their best ways, their ways of Faith and Repentance, their ways of Piety,
Sincerity and Purity; their ways of Love to, zeal for, delight in God and
Christ, and Gospel, and Gospel Ministers and Ordinances; their ways of pure and
holy Churches, and Worship, and Saints which they were built of; for they that
build up their Churches of mud Walls, and think to keep them clean with the
besom of Discipline, are like to have an hard task of it, and but little
blessing upon it. All the Sons of Sion should be like the fine Gold, and this
is like our first golden Candlesticks; thus should our people be brought back.

In particular,

1. Let us labor to bring them back in regard of Principles, unto the first
Principles of our Fathers in New England, after that they were settled, and had
cleared up things; so that they did clearly, distinctly and professedly declare
their principles and publish them; these principles owned and avowed by them,
and skreened from those misinterpretations which some would reproach them with,
should we return unto: It Is a sad consideration, that there has been so great,
sinful and very grievous bandying and beating about principles, That the Enemy,
who loves to fish in troubled waters, has almost fished away all, or at least
all our good and first principles from us: And left us a drift in an unsettled
fluctuant posture, to our shame and humiliation.

With respect to principles, let me propound three things.

1. Let our Principles be Scriptural. The Holy Scripture is that Golden Rule
which we should measure the Sanctuary with, Rev. 11. 1. Ezekiel. 40. 3. This is
the true and only Standard of the Sanctuary; if this be not attended unto, all
in the Sanctuary will be marred and corrupted; Churches will be corrupted,
Ordinances will be corrupted; and visible Saints will be corrupted: Ministers
they will not be as Gods mouth, as they ought to be, Jer. 15. 19. They will not
be able to keep the charge of the holy things of God, and then he will be
displeased with them as He was, Ezekiel. 44. 8, 9. -- 11. v. however they may be
continued to be Ministers still. There are no other measures of men or Angels
will quadrate with Gods Sanctuary, but only this Golden Rule. Ministers must
teach only what Jesus Christ has commanded them, Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I command you. -- And the Commands of Jesus
Christ are in the Holy Scriptures, therefore unto Scriptural Principles should
we labor to bring them back. Mr. (...) Election Sermon.
A very able comprehensive head and holy heart, near thirty years ago, did in
this Place lay down this Rule, and it is a good one. Let Truth be Truth how
contrary soever it be to any, to their apprehensions, interests and
inclinations. Scripture Truth is Truth indeed.

2. Let our principles be Rational, those that are not Rational, are not
Scriptural: here it holds true, Si collidimur frangimur. Principles should not
be like Ropes of Sand, mere (...), they should carry a certain
demonstrativeness of Reason with them, Tit. 1. 9. as the word there imports.

3. Let Principles be as much as is possible according to the Good Old way.
It Is true, we should not take principles on trust, or the Authority of men;
because that these or those men were so opinionated: And it is as true, we
should not reject them upon trust; not reject them, because these and those men
dislike of, and are prejudiced against them. To leave old Principles proved and
approved by the most Eminent Servants of God, and Societies of God's People,
and by God himself, and take up with new ones in their stead, is no better than
setting up of new Gods; Gods newly brought up, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. This was their
sin; and if we do so, it will be our sin and shame: Therefore let us adhere,
and bring back all to the good old Principles, which have been thus proved and
approved; and walk in the way of good men, as the advice of Wisdom, even of
Jesus Christ is, Prove. 2. 20. And it was Christ's way to reduce things to what
they were at the beginning, and so to regulate them, so in the case of
Marriage; and so he directs them: Do the first works, Rev. 2. 5. And those that
do indeed know the good of the first, will adhere unto them, Luke 5. 39. No man
having drunk old wine, straightway desires new; for he says the old is
better. And thus we should endeavor to bring back all to the first Principles
of our Fathers, and so to their first Ways.

3. Let us endeavor not only to engage the Hearts of our People to us, but
their Prayers for us It Is a good thing for Ministers to have the hearts of
their People; the Word of the Gospel is more like to have its free course, and
run from the heart to the heart. But they should also endeavor to have their
Prayers, and this will engage and dispose them to profit by them; this
therefore is a most desirable, pleasant and precious thing: As an ear-ring of
gold, and an ornament of fine gold; so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear,
Prove. 25. 12.

The third branch of the EXHORTATION follows,

III. The Exhortation speaks to the People of All Sorts, Old and Young, High,
and Low, Rich and Poor, in their several Stations; that they would very
earnestly endeavor and do their utmost, That the Justice of God may not be
further provoked against us. God is angry with us; his Justice is offended; or
else we must say as the Enemy of God and his People says, That the Lord's Hand
has not done all this, Deuteronomy. 32. 27. For all that has come upon us is either
from the Lord or it is some Chance that has happened unto us: Therefore let us
not halt between two opinions. And if we do indeed acknowledge God; we have
cause to say as Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments. Therefore don't put more fuel into this devouring fire,
nor oil into this consuming flame.

Here are three things to be attended.

1. Take heed of and avoid Gospel Sins. Where the Gospel comes there are the
greatest Sins in the World; such Sins are more heinous than the Sins of Sodom,
Matt. 11. 20 -- 24. Gospel neglecting, Gospel refusing, and Gospel despising;
Impenitence, Unbelief, hardness of Heart; Ignorance of, unthankfulness for, and
barrenness under Jesus Christ in his Gospel; loathing the Heavenly Manna;
Lukewarmness, Hypocrisy, and taking up with a show and appearance instead of
substance, Luke 8. 18. And falling off from and forsaking Jesus Christ for this
present evil World: These are Sins to be avoided, if we would not have God
provoked yet more.

2. Walk before God in your Houses in a perfect way. God has raised us up
Families like Flocks, and filled our Land with People; Families are Societies
which nature institutes; and the Heads of them by a natural right govern them;
and Religious Heads should govern them for God. We say, that We and our
Families are Abraham's Children, Abraham's Children are of the Faith of Abraham,
Gal. 3. 6, 7, 9. And should do the works of Abraham, Jo^. 8. 39, 40. Now
Abraham commanded his House to Serve the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. If we would shine
as lights in an evil Generation: if we would be of another Spirit, than the
World are of, we must do as Joshua did: Resolve every one, As for me and mine
House, We will Serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. Mend Families and mend all, ruin
Families and ruin all. It is a sad Omen to Consider how many of the most noted
Families in this Country are utterly extinct or worse: Fond Indulgence and
Remisness in Family Government destroys Families: it brings Belialism into our
Land, which does diffuse it self abroad, and passes like oil into our bones.
And if Eli's Sins be found among us, we must expect Eli's Judgments, and have
had a severe taste of them already: our Children have been brought forth for
the Murderer; they have been numbered from year to year these many years to the
Sword, to Famine, to Captivity, to Sickness, to Shipwreck and to Death, by
Scor^^ and by hundreds of them.

3. Be much in Prayer. Prayer is the very breath and vital Air of a Child of
God, it is their guise to be much in Prayer, they are Spirited for it. There Is
the Spirit of Adoption, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ in them, Gal. 4. 6. And
this Spirit helps them to Pray, Romans 8. 26. And gives them boldness with God,
Heb. 4. 16. Pray therefore for the Effusions of this Spirit: Pray for the
Kingdom and Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ: Pray for the Churches that they may
be kept Pure and Entire: Pray for the Children of the Lords People, that He
would Circumcise their Hearts to fear him, and that He would help his Servants
aright, clearly to discern, and faithfully and successfully to do their Duty to
them; that they may not become a Generation of his Wrath: And this Prayer of
Faith is the best way to prevent the increase, and extinguish the flames which
are kindled upon us round about, by which we have been set on Fire, and are
still burning: for this will engage the intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is the most precious and acceptable incense of Atonement, Rev. 8. 3, 4.

To enforce this whole APPLICATION, there are these four Considerations.

1. It is a most Just and Righteous thing that we should do so. That we should
Seek Atonement through Jesus Christ; and that we should Justify God, in all the
Evils and Judgments of God against us; and that we should Lament and Amend our
own Sins and Unrighteousness before the Lord, and endeavor all to do our
utmost that this Offended Justice of God may not be more provoked against us:
These are Just and Right things, such as we owe to our own Souls, to one
another, and also to the Lord our God.

2. This is the truest accepting of the punishment of our Sins; when God
punishes Sin, i. e. does inflict evil upon his People or Chastise them for
their Sins: He expects they should be humble under his hand; Exalt him, kiss
the Rod, and lie in the dust, if there be hope, Lam. 3. 29. -- 31. And this is
one of his great ends which God aims at, and it is acceptable to him to see it
attained; therefore when he saw it in Ephraim, his bowels were moved for him,
Jer. 31. 18. And if this end be attained upon us, his bowels will yet be moved
for New England, and his repentings will be enkindled together. Of old time God
has encouraged his People, that in this way they should hope for his gracious
and effectual remembering of them. If they confess their iniquity; -- if then
their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then accept the punishment of
their iniquity: Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my
Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham, will I remember, and I
will remember the Land, Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. God has been in Covenant with
three Generations in this Land; and if we now accept the punishment of our
sins, surely he will remember his people, his Covenant and his Land.

3. It is the most proper and only course to Cure all our Maladies. Our
Maladies are great; the symptoms grievous, inveterate if not desperate; the
whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint, Isa. 1. 5. And we have our
healers, blessed be God for it; Isa. 3. 7. But there is no method, there is no
application will be so effectual and so successful as this; it would cure our
Moral and our Political, our Ecclesiastical and our Civil, our Personal and
Public Maladies; it would heal our guilt of Sin which makes sick. The
Inhabitants shall not say I am sick, for the people that dwell therein, shall
be forgiven their iniquity, Isa. 33. 24. It would heal our deviations and
declensions, our murmurings, evil jealousies, our perverse Spirits,
distractions and all our breaches; and confirm our hopes and our faith.

4. This will be the only way to extract Good out of all our Evils, either come
or coming. Extracts are excellent noble Remedies; when the malignity of the
evil is corrected, then it is reconciled, and the virtue of it may be enjoyed;
our worst evils will be Salubrious, as far as it is possible they should be. And
all those that will try the experiment, shall at least be sure to save their
own Souls. -- They should deliver but their own Souls by their Righteousness,
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 14. 14. And there is as much hope for the whole in this
way as any: That yet there may come good out of evil to us; light out of
darkness, and life out of death, at least in the utmost issue and event of
them: That God will acknowledge us as he did the good figs; And though a basket
of them should be carried into Babylon, it shall be for their good; -- because
he will set his eyes upon them for good. -- And will give them an heart to know
him, that he is the Lord, and they shall be his people, and he will be their
God, as Jer. 24. 5, 6, 7. Then he will arise for us, and render a reward to our
neighbors, seven fold into their bosom, their reproach wherewith they have
reproached, etc. Psalm. 79. 12. And we may justly make the same conclusion which
the man after Gods own heart did, Psalm. 41. 12, 13. As for us he will uphold us
in our integrity, and set us before his face for ever. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, from Everlasting to Everlasting. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

