Some Remarks (...) Pamphlet signed part by John Talbot, and part by Daniel
Leeds, called The Great Mystery of Fox-Craft.
Since the foregoing book was writ, I have met with the above mentioned
Pamphlet, and notwithstanding I am satisfied there is sufficient in the said
Book to detect D: L's abuses toward us; yet I find freedom to say something
further in relation to what they have said in the said Pamphlet, not only
against some of our friends of Jersey-side, and of D: L*s repeating old
answer^^ matter against us, as also his poor shuffling remarks he has made on
my remarks on his this years Almanac; but also as to what they say by way of
vilifying and reproaching our ancient friend G: F: by publishing two Letters
under his name, which (without the least pretense of finding any thing in
either of them inconsistent with a Gospel-Minister; yet because there may be
shortness in spelling, Orthography, or the like) they have published in order
to reproach both him and the way of Truth professed by us. But as it was no
discredit to the Christian Religion in the primitive times before the Church's
degeneracy, that the Promulgators and Witnesses thereof were generally
Tradesmen ignorant of the Learning then in vogue, and were called Cobblers,
Weavers, Combers of wool, or the like, as hinted in the Preface; so no more is
it now any Argument in truth against us, that some of the first Instruments in
the work of Restoration in this day should be such. The Apostle, ^ Cor: 1, ^^ 2^
in his time, said, Not ^any wise men after the flesh were called, but God has
^hosen the foolish things o^ this world to confound the wise. ^o which also
well agrees the saying of " Franciscus Lambertus who says, The sheep of Christ
seeks nothing but the voice of Christ, Barclay's Apol. (...) 304.
which he knows by the Holy Spirit wherewith he is filled, he regards not
learning tongues or any outward thing, so as therefore to believe this or that
to be the voice of Christ his true shepherd, he knows that there is need of
no other thing but the testimony of the Spirit of God.

Now, Admit our ancient friend George Fox had been altogether as poor a
Speller, as these men would render him, which I greatly question, yet I have
often considered that the meanness of his Schollarship or humane learning will
more and more have a contrary effect upon the minds of people, as they come to
favor and discern the things of the Spirit, rather than any ways answer the
end for which these men have so industriously published these things against
him; for I believe it will rather turn to the honor of the Truth we profess,
than otherwise, that such a mean Instrument in the world's esteem, as he was,
should be enabled to discover and shake the very foundation of the Great
Mystery, (...) which had been so many hundred years ^r^ctting; and which many
worthy Valiants, in the beginning of the Reformation, had struck at and
battered much down: As also that he should with so small acquired parts, and
without the help of humane Aid* which many others had, be made such an
Instrument as to bring so many thousands out of her; and so as to buy of her
merchandise no more, but bearing testimony against that and ^aying aside her
Univers^^ty and men-made Ministry, her humane Traditions, John 4, 23.
and the many invented ways of Worship that are in the world are brought in
measure to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth meeting often together and
draw^^^^ (...) in the spirits of their minds, and in the nothing^^^ of (...)
diligently upon the (...) waiting unto pray^ (...) supplication in the Spirit,
(...).
in order to receive strength fron him to resist the enemy of their souls, and
to perform their duty unto him; being made sensible of our Savinur's words that
though the Spirit be willing, Matthew 2^.^.
yet the flesh is weak: and here as they sit truly in his fear, waiting, in
deep humility, at wisdom's gate, and in true silence before him, in order to
renew their strength, according to the Prophet, who says, Isaiah 41, 1.
Keep silence before me O Islands' and let the people renew their strength: let
them draw near, then let them speak: for there is a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak: and as they are thus waiting in his fear, the Lord's refreshing
presence is oftentimes witnessed among them, and the sweet Communion Table of
the Lord is known, at which, to the comfort of their souls, they eat of the
bread of Life, and drink of the wine of the kingdom together; for as they open
to him that stands at the door, Rev 3, 20.
and knocks, according to his gracious promise, he comes in, and supps with
them, and they with him; and here they sit down under the free teaching, -- 22,
1^.
he being the High Priest of their profession, invites all. Whosoever will to
come and take of the water of life freely, even without money, and without
price: And here as the good steward^ of the manifest Grace of God, as they come
freely to receive the ministerial Gift, so they minister freely one to another,
not according to the ability received from the Colleges, Universities, or
Ordination from a Bishop, but according to the Apostles directions it is as of
the ability that God gives; that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ. 1 Pet: 4, 11
And thus was this traduced, but worthy and painful Labourer in the vineyard of
the Lord, who had little of humane learning, one of the chief instruments in
the hand of the Lord to reclaim people in this day.

And I believe G: F's books were not impudently (as D: L: vilely asserts) but
honestly and sincerely published in his Name for the good of mankind, and
wherein he was short as a speller, it was but a shortness as to humane
learning, which defect in him was easily supplied by another in transcribing
for the press; the two holy Apostles Peter and John, even after the Holy Ghost
was come upon them, whereby they spoke in other tongues the wonderful works of
God, Acts 2: 11. -- 4: 13
were said to be ignorant and unlearned men: yet we see what two precious
Epistles are in the Holy Bible, under Peter's Name. They say G: F: could not
write the date of the year; and yet by what themselves have published, in that
they say his last Will was written with his own hand; as also in one of his two
Letters now under consideration, it appears he could and did both write the
date of the month and of the year too; for in the second Letter they bring him
in to date it thus, the 11: month 1679: As also twi^ in that called his will
thus the 11: month 1688. And for writing the word Sox instead of Fox for his
name as they say, we know many ordinary scribes write the Letter [F] pretty
near like as others do an [S] which they have been very ready to take by the
wrong handle in that and in other (...) to render G: F: ridiculous. And can D:
L: say or think in his conscience that G: F: never writ and published one Book
Paper or Epistle, allowing for shortness in spelling etc: which was easily
helped by another; and then if one book why not many? as he speaks of, and as
(without doubt he did write; but if they will not allow him to have writ any,
why then do they as in this very book of theirs, charge him for false Doctrine,
and perverting the Scripture in his books?

I never saw the Book he speaks of, Page 5.
called a Primer etc: but surely his there proposing questions to the Doctors
and Scholars (who were but men) proves not in the least (...) he was there set
up as head and Tutor to all Europe; no^ that it was done to make the world
think him to be a learned person. No, the bent of his mind was on better
matter, and the questions he might ask in that book migut be of good service in
it is time, for any thing D: L: has proved to the contrary, and we never
understood, nor were we made to believe that G: F: ever so much as pretended
that he had the gift of tongues by inspiration, though he might understand by
the help of humane interpreters what his name in the Battle-Door was set to,
even as such english men that understand neither hebrew nor greek, in which
languages it is said the bible was writ; yet by the help of interpreters they
come both to learn, and often subscribe to citations out of what had therein
been written by those holy men in those languages though withoutt he help of
interpreters they understand it no more than D: L: or my self, who so often
cite them, nor no more than G: F: might have done what his name was subscribed
to: But this matter being further spoken to by our friend Joseph Wyeth in his
Switch etc: Page 148
who living at London might be better fitted to speak to the matter by having
converse with ancient brethren who might better know the compiling of that book
than any here can pretend to. I shall recite some of his words relating to it,
as where, speaking of the Battle-Door, and having said there was a collection
of scripture examples therein, he says thus, This compound work is subscribed
by G: F: John Stubbs and Benjamin Furley: for scripture examples, it needed no
greater learning than English to collect them, and that G: F: had; for the
other Languages the other Subscribers were qualified; but the Snake is angry
that G: F: is subscribed to this Polyglot. But if he had not been blinded by
envy, he might have observed that these words in the handle of the Battle-Door
The Light which Christ has enlightened you withal believe in, that the
Anointing within you you may know to teach you, which words are subscribed G:
F: in the first page, and are of the same signification in the other Languages
throughout all the Battle-Door's pages. "So that the words in the first page
being G: F's, his fellow laborers in that work, to do him justice, did, in
their translating his words [mark his words] into other languages, still set
his name to them. Here we see it was G: F's words, though translated, that (not
himself but) his fellow laborers, to do him justice, set his name to; and that
G: F: did not assume to himself the compiling of that book, but rather honestly
attributed it to his other two fellow laborers in it (who well understood the
languages, and both whose names were subscribed, in the very title page of it,
as well as G: Fs) appears by what he has left behind in his Journal, Page 245
where he says thus, whilst I was Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, the book
called the Battle-Door came forth which was written to show that in all
languages thou and thee is the proper and usual form of speech to a single
person and you to more than one; this was set forth in examples or instances
taken out of the scriptures, and out of books of teaching in about thirty
languages, John Stubbs and Benjamin Furley took great pains in compiling of it,
which I put them upon; and some things I added to it: when it was finished,
some of them were presented to the King and his Council, to the bishops of
Canterbury and London, and to the two Universities one apiece, and many bought
of them and the King said it was the proper language of all nations. It did so
inform and convince people that few afterward were so rigid toward us: Who
though they would say it to God and Christ, would not endure to have it said to
themselves etc: Where observe that as it was G: F: that put those two friends,
being linguists, upon that work; so there being examples and instances taken
out of the scriptures, G: F: might well enough do tha^ part; but we see G: F:
speaks very diminitively of what he did himself, saying (...) [some things I
added to it.]

As for D: L's story of a Jew being hired to do the greatest part of it, (...).
as Joseph Wyeth says, there was no occasion for a Jew to do that which John
Stubbs and Benjamin Furley could and did do themselves: but as great an
imitator of other men's words as D: L: is (of which I shall have occasion to
speak anon) I cannot think who he has imitated in this, for to the best of my
remembrance I have seen from some of their books that a Jew had eighty pounds
for such service; however the Snake says sixty and D: L: thirty, so that
another such a jump, it is very probable, may bring it to it is own center, which
is just to nothing at all.

As for his charging G: F: with wronging his Opponents books. And that he
declared himsef to be equal with God. As to the first, we having not seen these
books have sufficient reason not to trust his bare say-foes; howevever since D:
L: has so often pleaded an allowance for typographical errors in those few
books he has writ. How knows he, but G: F: who was so often in prisons, or in
traveling the country, when his books were printing might have much more
cause, through the multitudes of books which he published to make such plea as
well as that there might be a failure in transcribers; however I never heard
of, nor read that the persons concerned, as Authors of such books, did complain
of such a thing: but if any did. How knows D: L: but that such mistakes were
rectified long before G: F: died? however, when D: L: etc: who are yet living,
and capable, shall have cleared themselves from abundance of particular charges
of falsifying, perverting and abusing our friends, their words and writings as
in this book (...): is shown, or else honestly to confess they have wronged us.
It will surely then be time enough to accuse those who have been so long dead;
and indeed till then they may be rather justly esteemed accusers of the dead
than such as are doing the reasonable part and duty of the living

And as for the second, I never saw that book yet, nor I believe, D: L:
neither, wherein G: F: testified he was equal with God: but I have read that
when G: F: was at Lancaster Assizes charged with saying he was equal with God,
his answer was, that was not spoken by me; but he that sanctifies and (...) 2,
11,
he that is sanctified is all of one etc; which are plain ^cripture words, the
three witnesses against him being so confounded that one said the other can say
it: and so many substantial people of the country being there, and positively
declaring that he neither spoke those nor other words then charged against him,
he was ^l^ated in open Sessions.

And those words in page 8 of Saul's Errand so often cited and answered, admit
it was printed true, which friends cannot own, G: F: speaks no more of himself
than of all the saints of God throughout all ages of the world. It Is true the
words, as in that place printed* Import that he that has the Spirit of God, is
equal with God, now [he that hath] should be out, as (...) of the same book
where it reads thus, where the same spirit is, it is equal with God: this
further appears in the same page, in answer to the said accusation, to wit,
that he said he was equal with God: said he, that was not so spoken, that G: F:
was equal with God, but that the Father and the Son are one; and that Christ
and the Holy Spirit are one: This is clear, was G: F s and our friends sense;
and the above, as printed, has been denied upon all occasions.

And as for that called the Supper, and sprinkling of Infant ^ with Godfathers
and Godmothers etc: to be called Christ's or^inances is but begging the
question, they having not been so proved to us: nor that all Christians since
the Apostles days practiced as they do. We read that Doctor Tailor says, It Is
against the Analogy of the Doctrine of Christ, ^^ Lawsons Treatise of ^^ptisms
p^ 71 73.
to baptize Infants; and that Christ gave no command for the same; neither did
he or his Apostles baptize any of them: and that the necessity of it was not
determined in the Church till the Canon made by the Milevitan Council. And that
Mede in his Diatribe on Tithes, says that there was no such thing as
sprinkling or Rantism used in the Apostles days, nor many ages after them [mark
that] To sprinkle young or old, says he, and call it baptism, is very
incongruous, yea as improper as to call a horse a cow. Again, that in
Augustines time they were become so dark as to conclude that children born, or
unborn if quickened in the womb, Ibid: Lawson Page 62.
were damned if they died without baptism; from whence they agreed, if a
quickened child in the mother's womb should be in danger to dye through the
weakness of the mother or child, or hard labor, let them bless or pray for the
child and strengthen the mother, and commend the child to God, with desire to
baptize it, and can protest saying the fault is not in them why that child is
not baptized: And that this is equivalent to baptism.

And that about the year 816. -- 55.
the Council under Wo^^ride ordained that they should not pour water on the
heads of infants, but dip them in the font: Here it seems they were dipping
again; though at this day again for sprinkling. Again, we read that in one Canon
it was decreed that such Bishops or Priests as did not dip them three times, --
74.
should be deposed. And that another Council taught that once dipping should
suffice. Note, here was dipping again; and great contradicting one another
there was about it. Again, that some baptized themselves once a year. And from
those words in Matthew 3.11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with
fire, -- 64.
some therefore ^^^ned their children, -- 62.
some in their arms, and some in the face with the sign of the Cross with a^
hot iron: -- 63.
And that some baptized the dead and some the living for the dead.

Much more might be said, but by what is said, I am very apt to think it would
much puzzle D: L: to prove their practices of sprinkling Infants on the face to
have been the practice of all Christians from the Apostles time to the time of
G: F:, as he speaks of; the like may be said of that called the Supper; for as
the same Author says, It may be seen by such as trace the steps of
Ecclesiastical writers, -- 78.
that for about six hundred years together, the Bread and Wine was given to
Infants; some have ministered it to dead people: some give Bread only; some give
Bread and Wine; some were for Wine mixed with water; some ^or taking it every
day; some on all Sundays (so called); some once a year, some thrice a year:
some say Bread and Wine are figures of Christ; some say they are, after
consecration, the same Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary. Now they give
it about dinner time, and yet they call it a Supper. Abundance more differences
about it, has the said Author taken out of History; but this is enough to show
that their practice is not what has been practiced by all Christians from the
Apostles days: and although it is very probable that after some manner or
another there has been something of it practiced; so, we read, has laying on
of hands, washing of feet, and anointing with Oil; which yet the Protestants do
not call Sacraments nor Ordinances of the Gospel: yet washing of feet and
anointing with Oil especially the first was as expressly commanded at that time
as the other.

D: L only says, Page 6.
but proves not That our Women's meetings are set up instead of Christ's
Ordinances, they were agreed upon, and are kept up for real service in the
Church; which service is so obvious that D: L: himself says in his Trumpet,
Page 66.
that they are of real service in deeds of Charity and Hospitality. D* L:
pretends to a strange degree of knowledge by saying Never any right Quaker has
been known to dye with a Lord have mercy upon him in his mouth. Now; although
at that time as well as at other times those words may be very suitable to be
spoken; Prove. 28: 13.
because, at what time soever a sinner repents and confesses, he shall have
mercy: yet in as much as none are sure that the Lord will give a penitent heart
to the impenitent, just at a dying hour; therefore doubtless it is the saf^^t
way for all, as the Light discovers sins (for whatsoever makes manifest, is
Light) to come to a deep sense of them in the time of health, and (...) cry to
the Lord for mercy, for his dear Son's sake, who dyed for them; and so witness
the Lord's mercy, in measure extended to their souls; and not to put it off, as
too too many too much do, till the messenger of death be come to the door:
besides, I believe, D: L: will be hard put to, to find any Precept or President
in all the Scripture of any of the children of God to dye, or dying with those
words in their mouths.

And we do trust to the merits of Christ, and his sufferings without us, as
well as what he effects in us. And what if that we call Light. the Deists call
Reason; since, whatever the Deists say, we have Scripture for what we say and
hold (viz:) In him was life and that life was the light of men: John 1, 4, --
8, 9.
And that it lightneth every man that comes into the world* Which very ^^^ght
John was sent to bear witness of, that all through him might believe.

And that G: F s saying, as in the present tense in a mystical sense That the
Saints attained to the Resurrection of the dead, and had their vile bodies
changed, no ways denies the Resurrection of the Body after Death, any more than
the Apostle (...) as in the Present tense, Ephesians: 2.6
where he says. God has [mark hath] raised us up together and made us sit
together (...) heavenly places i^ Christ Jesus* denies the Resurrection of the
Body after Death; and though he spoke, in the present tense, of their ^itting
together in heavenly places; yet he did not the (...) any that hereafter when
this house or Tabernacle is dissolved; 2 Cor: 5, 1.
but that we should have a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens:
Neither surely will D: L: dare to say that our blessed Lord denied the
Resurrection of the Body after death; though his words are as in the present
tense, when, speaking to the Saddnees about the resurrection (for they denied
it) he tells them. Now that the dead are raised (mark are raised) even Moses
showed at the Bush, Luke 20, 37.
when he called the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Jsaac, and the Go^
of Jacob: For he is not a God of the dead but of the living; for all live unto
him. Here it appears that though God is not a God of the dead, but of the living
yer he was the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob for that they all lived unto
him: and though our Lord brought this even to those who denied the resurrection,
to show that the dead are raised in a spiritual sense; yet he did not thereby
deny the resurrection of the body after death at the last day. No more, do we
find, did G: F: by what he there said

As to his quotation out of the book Truth's Defense, page 8.
I have neither that nor the foregoing book, but am informed he has much
minced and mangled this quotation, whatever he has done by the other; but G:
F's saying that the Ministers of God spoke to the spirits in prison etc: As it
no ways contradicts scripture; neither does it prove that he meant by spirits
in prison any othen than those who were disobedient spirits and: according to
the text cited by him 1 Peter 3 19: but that G: F: after says, Thou art one
that keeps the Light in prison in thee: by the dash D: L: has made it appears
they are not next following those words but possibly many lines after; however
might it not be as proper to say in a spiritual sense that Christ who is the
light of men, is imprisoned in wi^ked men (as it is said, I was in prison, and
ye visited me not) or bound in satan's chai^s: As to say, according to the
Apostle, Heb: 6, 6. -- 11, 8.
that such crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh: As also that he was
crucified in Sodom and Egypt, spiritually so called, and indeed this must be
spiritually meant because, literally speaking, he was crucified neither in
Sodom nor Egypt.

D: L's vile and senseless slighting of miracles, because said to be done by
the power of God, makes nothing against G: F: and, If he can, let him disprove
what G: F: has said in his Journal concerning such miracles that God wrought,
as instrumentally, by him; of which (not in the least to boast, or set up man)
I shall give one instance from page 103; where, speaking of one Richard Myars
that had been long lame of one of his arms, G: F: says, I was moved of the Lord
to say unto him among all the people, prophet Myars, stand upon thy legs (for
he was sitting down) and he stood up and stretched out his arm that had been
lame a long time and said Be it known to all people that this day I am healed;
and he came after to Swarthmore meeting and there declared how the Lord had
healed him. Now though D: L: may call this a vile and senseless miracle; that is
but too much like the hardened Jews who (vilely slighting the miracles wrought
by our Savior himself) said He cast out Devils by Belzebnb ihe Prince of
Devils: though the scriptures declare they were done by the mighty power of God;
neither did it therefore follow that they were done without Christ who is both
the Power and Wisdom of God. 1 Cor: 10, 8.


As for the dispute he tasks of between G: F. G: W. and^: and one T: S: about
the Trinity if ever there was such (...) dispute; methinks D: L: has sh^wn
little discretion in publishing so much of his T: S's folly in arguing that
He Is that may be pointed at must be Persons; for by this way of arguing may not
Horses and He-Go^t^ and: that may be pointed at, Psalms 33, 17. Dan: 8: 4, 6.
be persons as well as men? D: L: says, the name [Person] was warrantably
applied by the ancient ^athers to the Holy Trinity: But we read (...) Do^^
Ber^^^ (...) sent Bishop of Salisbury, in page 104 of the Life of the Earl of
Rochester, speaking of the Trinity, says for want of terms fit to express them
by, we call persons, and are called in scripture the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost: So that it seems the Trinity according to that, (...) Truth and
Innocent, pa. 50.
are not called Persons as a fit name, but for want of a fit name to call them
by. More I could say about what D: L: calls a dispute about the Trinity; but as
he has named no book, nor who this T: S: is; so I can here no more than in
other matters credit his bare say-foes, especially as in this matter: since he
alleges the dispute to be with G: F: etc: in the year 1699; for 'twas nine
years after he was dead, for he died in the year 1690: however though we cannot
subscribe that the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are three distinct and separate
Persons yet we truly own the scriptural Trinity of Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
and that the Father be got the Son, and that the Son is the only begotten of
the Father; and that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: and
that these three are One God blessed for evermore. This has still been our
belief.

As for D: L's taunting about the provision our friends made by subscribing the
Abjuration, Page. 11.
insinuation it to be insincere, is silly and trifling, and tends to the
araigning both the wisdom and sincerity of Kings, Parliaments, Governors and
Assemblies who often in their Laws or Grants after general words of positive
Requirings, Granting or Commanding comes notwithstanding many times after, with
particular provision in order for mitigating or explaining the intent, or the
like instance the King's Grant to our Proprietor and Governor William Penn,
where he Grants him, With the Assent etc: of the Freemen and their Delegates,
free, full and absolute Power to make and Enact any Laws whatsoever for raising
of money for public uses of this Province, or any other end appertaining to
the peace or safety: of the said Province or unto the private utility of
particular persons etc: according to their best discretions. Now
notwithstanding this large Grant to make any Laws whatsoever (as above)
according to their best discretions; yet there comes after, a necessary proviso
(viz:) Provided nevertheless that the said Laws be consonant to reason etc:
Multitudes of Instances might be produced on this head; but this I think is
enough to show the emptiness of D: L's noise in this matter; and D: L: has
only said, but proves not, that out friends there said that they could not
defend the Queen in Person nor Estate. Ibid: pa: 11.
We can and have defended the Queen both in person and Estate in many respects
without waging of war, and thereby destroying the lives of men; according to
the said proviso.

Caleb Pusey thinks he is no ways obliged to tell D: L how we can defend the
Queen, Page 13.
as defend is commonly understood, as he talks of; and yet not do it in person
or Estate; because, first we do not understand that ever our friends said they
could or would, but with the above proviso: next, because they never denied to
defend both in person and Estate in any way consistent with their religious
persuasions. Is there no way to defend but by going or hiring men to fight, or
to learn war? Suppose any of us here should at any time be given to understand
of any seditious conspiracy against the Queen's Government or Sovereignty
(which God forbid, if it be his will) and should not only discover it (as did
honest Mordecai that against the life of King Ahasuerus) but should also lay
hold of and secure the Conspirators in order to be brought to Justice, and
thereby or other ways be Instrumental to prevent such great wickedness, would
not this, in a true sense, be said to defend the Queen and Government? We read
that when Celsus the ancient enemy to the Primitive Christians (as D: L: is now
to us) objected that the Christians refused to assist and help the Emperor in
his wars. Dr: Caves Primit: Christianity pa: 326.
Origin an ancient Father of the Church, answers, Chap: 2. p: 55. Chap: 1.
that they did really assist him and that rather with divine than humane
weapons: And tells him that the more eminent any man is for piety and Religion,
he will be able to afford greater assistance to his Prince than a great many
armed soldie^s that stand ready to fight for him and destroy his enemies.
Lastly it is observable on this hea^^ what was intimated in the relation I gave
in the last Almanac, 1705.
what the Emperor of Rome said concerning the primitive Christians in relation
to fighting, 1 Vol: Book of Mart: pa: 46.
He being in distress in his wars sent for them, Who (said he) did their
endeavor without either Weapon, Ammunition, Armor or Trumpet, as men abhorring
such preparations [mark that] but only satisfied in the trust of their God whom
they carry about with them in their cosciences. Here we may observe, that in
Origen's time the primitive Christians kept so far under the Gospel
dispensation, as not to use weapons of war; and yet according to Origens own
words they did really assist and help their Emperor: and that our refusing to
fight and to learn war, is both according to the primitive Christians example
who declared their weapons of war not to be carnal but spiritual; and also
according to what the holy Prophet said should be in the latter days under
Christ's Kingdom, to wit that they should learn war no more. Isaiah 2: 4.

And though D: L s cruelty and prejudice (the common quality of persecutors)
may subject him so as not to own that the taking away and making havoc of
peoples goods which has already been abundantly done) without the least
pretense of it is being so done for any injury or wrong committed, or for any
abuse either by words or deeds to superiors or any others, either man woman or
child; nor for refusing to pay our shares of Public Taxes or Assessments; but
purely for the sake of their tender consciences and peaceable christian
Testimony: I say though he will not own this to be persecution; yet he may depend
upon it that it will be justly so termed both in this the next and after ages.
And whereas our friends cannot, for conscience sake, learn (...) pay toward
learning of war, D: L: may use his conceited term of passive disobedience if he
please, but let him remember he might by the same rule call any other
sufferings so, where for conscience sake the sufferers have not actually
complied with what has been by the Law of their Country required of them.

And now as to D: L's public and insolent reflections on those three members
of the Queen's Council as such, to wit, S: J. F: D: and G: D: insinuating that
they are guilty of perjury, and that no words will tie them; and of their
equivocating and contradiction beyond a parallel: and his malapert and
impertinent insinuation that they are not fit to be tru^^^ in the Government,
nor the Government safe in it. I say how this may concern the Governor there
to take notice of; as also how well he has kept his oath as a Counselor in
publishing in Print such things from that Board as he has done, I shall not
undertake to determine.

pa: 13. As for his alleging that our Friends went with Arms without the
Command of the Government, what was done was as will be signified by the
following Certificates and under the hands of some who are no Quakers) at the
request or order of Tho: Revel, who I hear is under the Lord Cornbury one of
the Chief Millitary Officers in those parts; the said Certificates are as
follows.

In as much as we whose names are underwritten, are accused for taking up Arms
for to Fight; these are therefore to Certify the truth of the matter to whom
it does or may concern, which is as follows? An Indian King came to Tho.
Bishop, and told him, that the Indians saw some strange men at Coexink which
they supposed to be French men, which was come to destroy them, and desired him
to go to Burlington to inform the people there, and upon that he went thither,
and informed Tho: Revell, and he told him that he thought there was not much in
it, if he thought there was he would go himself; but desired him for to go,
and take some of his neighbors with him and see if there were any thing in it;
and if there was, for to let him know, and if there was not, for to keep at
home, as he told us: and liekwise if he wanted either Arms or Powder and shot,
he might have it. And Tho: answered that he wanted none, for he was not afraid
of them. And the rest of us hearing of a report that ^he Indians had given
forth of a French Army that was at Coexink which is but called a mile from some
of our houses, we met together at the house of William Petty to consider of the
matter: and considering the unlikeliness of it we did conclude there was no
French Army there; and in the inter^m of t^me Thomas Bishop coming from
Burlington, he told us that he had heard by a man that came from York, that was
at Henry Grubb's, that there was some Spanish Indians run away from a Vessel
and had done much harm. Upon this we thought if the Indians saw any body it
might be them; because the Indians said that when they saw them they lay down:
upon this we concluded for to go see if we could find them and take them; and
likewise thought it convenient for them that had Guns for to take them; not
with a design for to hurt either man woman or child, but we thought the sight
of them might fear them; so that we perhaps might take them with the less
danger of harm to our selves: and so we went, some with Guns and some without;
and as we were going we met two of our neighbors, John Hains and Zechariah
Pri^ket who told us that they had been at the Indian Town for to see and hear
if they could the truth of the matter; and they said that they understood by
the Indians discourse that it was two of John Haine's sons that the Indians
saw: and so we returned back and went home.

THOMAS BISHOP. RICHARD EAYRE. JOSEPH ENDICOTE. WILLIAM PETTY Junior JACOB
LAMB.


Whereas there is a report spread about that some called QVAKERS at or about a
branch of Ancocus Creek went armed in a warlike manner to fight the French that
was reported to be at a little distance of them. This is to Certify all whom
it may concern, that we whose names are underwritten, being no Quakers, do
solemnly declare the Truth of the matter in manner following. That we hearing
the report got to the house of W: Petty and hearing they were suppose ^ to be
Run aways; and we being surprised got such things as we had and went to see the
trut^ of it i: but we do believe that none of us had any design nor intent to
kill or hurt any person but only to take up Run-aways: and supposing that such
Arms as we had would make them readily yield to us for one of their Pieces had
no Lock^ and another no Flint. To the truth of this we hereunto subscribe our
hands.

SIMON WOODROVE. JOHN HILLIARD


Whereas there is a report spread about that some called QVAKERS with some
others at or about a branch of Ancocus Creek went armed in a warlike manner to
^^ght with or join with some French that was reported to be 15 or 16 in number,
as the Indian told me and that they were near to our Plantations. This is to
certify all whom it may concern that I being one that was with them though no
Quaker yet shall give a true account of the whole intent and case of our
proceedings in this matter as follows We hearing the aforesaid report, one of
us went to Burlington with speed to Thomas Revell to acquaint him who returned
to us with this answer from him that he would have some of us go and make
discovery of them and find word if there were any thing in it of a truth; and
if not send no word: but the Messenger heard at the Town that there were
Spaniards Indians that were Run away from a Vessel at or near York whereupon we
all concluded that if there were any thing in it of Truth it was these
whereupon we all agreed to go and take them if we could as runaways, and taking
with us such Arms as we had, with this intent that we thought they would be the
more easily taken; for some time before there was three run-aways taken with a
little trouble, only at the sight of one man with a Pistol that had no Lock
(though the Vilains were mightily Armed) this being the Chief reason for our so
doing, Witness my hand.

ALEXANDER BENNIT.

Note, it is reported that one or more of the above subscribers (not Quakers)
have been by a co^t^^^a^ce got into drink, and then procured to give upon Oath
a differing, if not a contrary testimony to what is above delivered, which if
true, it was a very ill contrivance to be sure.

And now how improbable it was that they went out with any design to fight may
be very well supposed by their being so poorly furnished for such a design; one
of their Guns having no Lock, and another no flint, nor did they go forth at
all till they heard a report of these Spanish Indians, who they intended to
take, and supposing they might thereby be the more easily taken, and being
induced so to believe from what had happened before (viz) three well armed
run-aways (which I hear was Negroes) surrendering themselves to one of them
Persons at the sight of a Pistol without a Lock, was the only reason as they
solemnly declare) of their taking with them what they did: However the Meeting
that granted Certificates to some of these men, was wholly unacquainted with
this affair a^ that time now suppose these four or five persons had as D: L:
I^s^^uates gone on purpose to fight etc: and thereby transgresse^ their own
Principles how should this affect the body, who (...) ignorant of it any more
^^an those in the Apostles days, (...) against their known Principles, did
affect the (...) so doing? and your own Principles must needs be very ^ax ones,
i^ they are (...) very often transgressed by diverse of your own Church.

Now, before I come to take notice of his shuffling remarks upon what I
published this present year 1705, at the end of I: T's Almanac, I shall Begin
and set down by number some of his particular falsehoods, and false insinuations
in the first part of his book, and so continue to do as I go along to the end
thereof.

First. False it is where he says, the Quakers were made to believe that
George Fox had the gift of Tongues by inspiration, as the Apostles had at
Pentecost.

2. False it is That G: F's hand was to the Battle-Door to deceive; for there
was two other friends hands to it, who well understood the Languages.

3. A base and false insinuation it is, where in the margin of pa: 4: he or
their Minister, or both, very frothily, and not at all like a Minister of the
Gospel, who should not use lightness of speech, but such as ministers Grace to
the hearers: I say very frothily and abusively, to insinuate (without pretense
of proof) Uncleanness against A: Cock of Road Island, and Mary A: of
Long Island who, we hope, are long since at rest with the Lord of whom see more
anon.

And for C: Holder as he was soon disowned, so if it was our way to take the
like liberty to calumn your Society for the miscarriages of some par^icular
Clergymen among you, we could soon acquaint the world and ^ha^ in a (...)
instance from Road-Island too, of that which might not be very pleasing to you;
but thanks be to God the Lord has taught us otherwise, having made us very
sensible that i^^s both your and our common enemy that goes about like a ^^^ing
lion seeking whom he may devour.

4. False it is that (...) he set up Female Prelates and Courts of Women.

5. False it is that G: F: could not writes date of the year.

6. False it is that he declared himself to be equal with God: And that (...)
this (...) we idolize him and his inventions. A most ^pan^.

7. That the Quakers live and dye hard without any sense of Christ or revealed
Religion. Christ the Author of the Christians faith has revealed himself in
them, by which they are made truly to believe what is in the Scripture revealed
concerning Christ our Lord both outwardly and inwardly; and we ^ust to what he
has done outwardly for us as well as to what h^ by his Holy Spirit effects in
us

8. That the Quakers declared their intentions, that they could not defend the
Queen neither in Person nor Estate.

9 And as idle it is in him where he says, the Magistrates here could not
persuade their Consciences to take the New Oath (as he takes on him to call it)
till they heard that their Brethren in England took it; Pa: 12.
for the Magistrates here knew well enough the Affirmation that our friends in
England took many years before the same was required to be taken by any here:
but by his calling that Affirmation an Oath he sh^ws how high Envy has set him
above the top of the Pinnacle; nay even above the Queen and her Council; for in
the Queen's late Orders from England she plainly distinguishes that which
others take from what the Quakers take, calling expressly the one the Oath, and
the other the Affirmation.

10. False it is that in my answers, I Copy after the London Quakers, and that
I dare venture no further than they have done to my hands. For my Answers are
generally such as I never saw from any London or any other Quaker. The man
seems in what he writes as if he had no more regard to what he says than even
to write what comes uppermost, be it right or wrong, else how could he dare to
publish in print such notorious falsehoods.

But now we are upon the business of Coppying after others, methinks D: L:
above all the writers that ever I knew, might be ashamed of so falsely accusing
another of a thing he is so much guilty of himself, as may be easily made
appear, not only from what I and others have long observed in his Books, as
well as Almanacks; but by these few particular instances following, not only
from this his present Almanac, but also from this present book that is now
under hand, may be seen. First, in his pretending to have found out a great
secret kept under the thumb, that is to fight when we think fit to set up our
claim etc: See how he imitates and acts the Snake in it. It is in his May
Month, for by the Switch I find the Snake cited page 211 thus; So that instead
of their disowning the use of the sword: their true meaning is that none have a
right to it but themselves.

This D: L: thus in effect imitates and says, So that when they pretend to deny
the use of the sword, their meaning is that none have a right to it but
themselves only.

pa: 212. The Snake says this is plain language, they will not yet take up
Arms, not for the present, not till they see their time; but they have entered a
Caveat to secure their right and title to it till they think fit to set up
their claim.

D: L: says this is plain Language, they will not yet take up Arms, not for the
present till they see their own time; but they have entered their Magna Charta
to secure their right and title to it till they think fit to set up their claim
etc: Note, why D: L: has thrust out the Snake's term Caveat and put in the
term Magna Charta I cannot imagine; I have often heard of entering a Caveat, and
of confirming and maintaining Magna Charta: but never before of entering a Magna
Charta he might have let the Snakes term stand for, however he con^^^s of
himself* I take the Snake to be not only both acute and witty but abundantly
wi^er to do evil than himself.

Well but hear him again a little more in this very book now under
consideration page 7 and 8, in his observations on what he casts G: F's
perversions on the 2 Timothy: 17.18 and 1 Peter 3: 29. as above ^he has miserably
pi^^aged George Keith's Observations on the very same texts for ^^em; for w^^r
as G: K says, Note how he ^^^^erts the scripture, both as to words and sense.
See 4 Narrat: pa: 104.

D: L: says, Note how he Perverts the scripture, both as to words and sense.

G: K: says also, He makes the Resurrection that Paul preached Acts 17: 18,
32. and 23: 6. to be Christ himself, perverting our Savior's words (who calls
himself the Resurrection and the life) to a litteral sense, which is obvious to
all intelligent persons contains a figurative sense.

D: L: says, He makes the Resurrection which Paul preached Acts 17: 18, 32.
and 23: 6. to be Christ himself, perverting our Savior's words (who calls
himself the Resurrection and the Life) to a litteral sense, which is plain to
all intelligent persons, contains a figurative sense.

G: K: says, As when God is called in scripture the Saints Hope and confidence
and Salvation (i, e.) the Author and Cause of their Hope, Confidence and
Salvation.

D: L: says, As when God in Scripture is called the Saints Hope, Confidence
and Salvation (i, e.) the Author and Cause of their Hope, Confidence and
Salvation.

G: K: says, the spirits in prison, whereof Peter writes in that place, were
sometimes disobedient in h days of Noah, as his words expressly declare

D: L: says, For the spirits in prison, whereof Peter writes in that place
were sometimes disobedient in the days of Noah, as the following words expressly
declare.

G: K: says, How could Christ in them be disobedient: not only spirits, but
disobedient spirits.

D: L: says, How could Christ in then be disobedient: not only spirits but
disobedient spirits.

G: K: says, This is that Apostle of the Quakers, of whom W: P: says in his
Preface to G: F's Journal, He had an extraordinary Gift in opening the
Scriptures: he would go to the marrow of things. Is not this a rare instance of
(...)?

D: L, says, Are not these rare instances of G: ^'s wonderful and
extraordinary Gift of opening the scriptures: and going to the marrow of things.

Behold Reader how beyond a scruple here are obvious instances of D: L's
parrot-like-prating afrer (not the London Quakers, as he falsely charges me) but
obviously after his brethren, the London Quakers Adversaries, without the least
intimating them to be theirs, possibly that he might have the praise of other
men's abuses toward us.

And note, As we deny not G: K's above mentioned sense upon both those
Scriptures; so I do not find G: F: of a contrary mind: for though he called the
Resurrection that the Apostles preached, Christ Jesus, that is according to what
our Lord himself said in answer to Martha about raising the dead at the last
day, he there told her that he was the Resurrection and the Life. And as the
sense of this is, that he was the Author and Cause of it; so I find it not any
otherwise intended by G: F: etc. See further the Answer above..

11. False it is, that I think it sufficient to refute him, to tell him I have
not seen the Books out of which he brought his Quotations; for, as I never said
so, so I never had such an idle thought; though where I have not such books, I
may justly esteem that sufficient to excuse me for not so trusting to his
Quotations, for reasons before shown, as to think my self obliged to answer
directly to such uncertain and justly suspected charges; though I find but three
such objections neither amongst the abundance of answers there made him.

As to what relates to I: T's Almanac, I leave himself, as the proper person,
to speak to it, if he think good; only I take notice, first of his vain
boasting of the sale of his Almanacks, which at best is but begging the
Question.

14. Next of his false and groundless vaunt (viz:) That the London-Quakers are
baffled in their answers, and confounded to their perpetual shame by the Author
of the Snake in the Grass etc: for the Antedote against that Snake's infection,
and the Switch by which he is so deeply wounded, (the one by George Whitehead,
the other by Joseph Wyeth) shows that that Snake has grievously abused us. One
palpable instance I gave last year concerning a school of our friends at
Warnsworth, ( Snake pa: 148.) proving him a notorious false man, under the
hands of diverse reputable Inhabitants of that town, that are no Quakers, to the
perpetual shame of that Author; but to which D: L: has thought fit to be
silent.

pa: 14. For what I quoted from G: K's Books, he knows, was from what he
delivered as matter of History, which remains the same, though G: K: may change
as much more, and oftener than he has done: besides if I should quote him upon
matter of Doctrine, if it were on fundamentals, he boasting he is still the
same there, it must be good against him, as much as, by their own way of
arguing (viz:) that our ancient friends writings must be good against us;
because we say our Doctrine is the same now as at the beginning. Besides, what
privilege does D: L: conceit he has to cite the Snake's allegations against
us, any more than we have to cite any Quaker or quondam Quaker's Allegations
against them.

12. False it is where he says I have not one word to say about what he calls
our monstrous notion concerning Christ; for I had many words to say, and did
say about it, particularly for that he brought no other authority but the Snake
for what he said (and he gave no page in him neither) I told him we could not
take him to be good Authority against us; because of his so abundantly
perverting our friends writings. and packing up diverse falsehoods against us, of
which I brought the above intimated instance about Warnsworth-school for one.

13. Pa: 15. A most notorious falsehood it is where he say, that when we speak
or write of Christ, we mean not a word of what we say.

He seem^ (...) food of two of his Doctor Lancasters Q^^ries (viz;) First, Do
you believe in Christ without, no^ in heaven? Now though I am satisfied that what
I gave last year as our friends answer to that Doctor was sufficient to prove
to all (but to such ill minds as had rather find us in the wrong than in the
right) that we had the true faith in Christ as without us; yet lest any should
take occasion at our silence herein, I find freedom furher to say, and prove
that if he mean by a Christ without us now in heaven, that Christ is in heaven
without us, as to his outward personal presence and glorified body; and yet not
so limited there, but that by his spiritual appearance he is also in us; it is
our faith as well as theirs: for as he is the true Light which enlightneth
every man that comes into the world; he is within us: and in as much as he
graciously promised to be with his always, even to the end of the world. Mat:
18: 20. This being with them must be in them; and that they had good ground to
take it to be so, is manifest where, after he told them that a little time and
the world should see him no more. At that day, says he, shall ye know that I
am in my Father, and you in me, and I IN you. John 14: 20. Again says he, I in
them, and they IN me: And this of Christ's being within the Apostle afterward
labored much to bring the very Gentiles (at least such before conver^ion) to a
sense of, to whom he said That God would make known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery, which (says he) is Christ IN you, the hope of glory.
Gal: 1: 27. And there being some then which sought a proof of Christ speaking
in him. 2 Cor: 3: 5. It Is no wonder some do the like now by us: But he answered
them and said, Know ye not your own selves that Christ is IN you, except ye be
Reprobates. Now suppose that we should ask any, Do you believe that Christ is
within, as well as without? and should be answered, Nay; would it not plainly
contradict Scripture? So would it be if any should say, Christ is not without
but within only: but then to say, Do you believe in a Christ within? And Do you
believe in a Christ without, as your term is: Might not this give some occasion
to those who are enemies, at large, to the Christian Faith, to suspect that we
believed in two Christ's, who notwithstanding is one Lord Jesus Christ as
without us and within us, and as to the words Humane Nature, if you mean not as
some render the Word (viz:) humane to be from the ground, but he has the true
and proper nature of man, then we believe according to your Question, that
Christ is at this day and forever, truly and really a man in true and proper
humane Nature, and as to his bodily presence without all other men, and that he
will come as such at the last day, to Judge the quick and the dead, and that
this of Christ's being without us, and coming to raise the dead at the last
day, have been believed in, and testified to by our ancient Friends, I could
produce abundance of Instances, out of which at present I shall bring these
following.

First, Edward Borough near 50 years ago, in answer to one Bunyan, who it
seems had writ that the Quakers denied the man Christ without them, and owned
him no otherwise than as he is within: [an ancient mistake, or worse] It seems
it was that because our friends were raised up to direct people (as John did)
to the needful and and Ancient doctrine of the Light of Christ within, that all
through it might believe. John 1: 7. And that as all walked in it they might
have not only fellowship one with another; but also the blood of Christ to
cleanse them from all Sin. 1 John 1: ^. that therefore they denied the man
Christ as he is without. Now to re^tify which mistake and abuse in Bunyan,
Edward Borough answers, May thou not be ashamed to say we own Christ no
other way than as he is within. We own him who was, is, and is to come who is
within us and WITHOUT US. E: B's Works pa: 282. Again, Bunyan having said that
we persuade Souls not to believe that that man that was Crucified and rose
again etc: shall so come again to judgment as he went away etc: Edward Borough
Answers Oh how swiftly thy Tongue runs without fear, for in the Affirmative I
further say, that that Christ Jesus that was Crucified, and rose again, shall
come (as he went away) to judgment, and the dead shall be raised, and every man
shall receive according to their deeds, and he shall sit to judge the Heathen
round about, according to Joel 3. Ibid 283.

Again in pa: 285. says he, there is not many Christ's, but one Christ, which
is not only within but without, not only without but within; But is all, and in
all.

Again, in Testimony for the man Christ Jesus, page 4. near 30 years ago, our
Friends say, that the same man Christ Jesus that suffered, and was put to death
in the flesh, and raised from the dead by the mighty power of God, ascended
into heaven God's dwelling place. Again page 7, The same body that was put to
death, was raised by the power of God, and was a real Body, really seen both
before and after the Resurrection, and at the Ascension; as also we confess the
same Christ not only to be still in being; but also Glorified, and his Body to
be a Glorious. Heavenly and Spiritual Body: So that this man Christ did neither
vanish nor perish in any thing that is essential to him, either as to his
Spirit, Soul or body.

Again, in Malice of the Indep: etc: pa: 19 they [the Quakers] say, though Christ
be God and Man, in a most Glorious Union and Power, yet the manhood is not the
Deity, nor the Deity the manhood, yet inseparable in the man Christ who is Lord
from Heaven.

Again, in Postscript page 23. G: W: says, as hinted before, Christ did rise
in the Body wherein he suffered, and in the same ascended into the Heavens: and
it is so far Circumscribed or Encompassed in the Heavens as it is capable of,
and as is proper to it; and though it be Spiritual and Glorious, yet a body and
therefore not in every place where God is, to be omnipresent is only proper to
God and not to Bodies. I deny to be the Quakers mind, that Christ's Body did
vanish (so as to become Annihilated) at his Ascension, 'twas changed and more
glorified, but not vanished. Real Quaker by G: W: pa: 105.

Again, in the first impression of Robert Barclay's Apology page 88, He says,
We also deny the Error of Eutyches who made the Manhood of Christ to be
swallowed up of the Godhead: therefore as we believe he was true and real man,
so we also believe that he continues so to be glorified in the heavens, in soul
and body, by whom God will judge the world in the great and general day of
Judgment.

Note, these above passages (except Edward Burrough's) with diverse more of the
like tendency, were collected out of our friends ancient works by our quondam
friend William Bradford in a small book called The Christian Faith of the
people called Quakers etc: who truly concludes his Collections thus,

Much more might have been cited out of the writings of our ancient friends;
but this may su^ficet this time to convince our Opposers, that it has been,
and is the firm belief of the people called Quakers, to expect salvation by the
man, Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary, was crucified for our sins
and rose for our justification, ascended into heaven, and ever lives to make
intercession for us. Faithfully collected, and recommended to perusal, By

WILLIAM BRADFORD.

pa: 15. Now, As for Eliz: Fenton's living so spotless since she was a Wife or
Widow, as he speaks of, does not contradict what I was desired to publish which
said nothing of any time since, or before she was Wife or Widow; and whether P:
Fretwell had not grounds for what he said to her, he is best able to determine;
however, had not D: L: begun, as he did, to abuse P: F: I do not see that Mary
W: would have had any occasion to have so much as mentioned her name: And I
went not about to take off P: Fretwell from speaking against Baptism; for I
know not whether he ^^^ke against it or not. And what he calls in me, a
ba^tering scoff against Baptism, I suppose was my producing what I had read of
a Papist in London, who, though they are strong Asserters of Infants Baptism, yet
esteemed it as a miracle to prove it by Scripture.

And D: L: does not charge me as not rightly giving Luther's and Bu^er's words
about Infants Baptism; but perverting their sense, making them speak against
it: Indeed, I must confess if Luther's saying (viz:) If the command (meaning
Christ's command who bid Teach and Baptize. Mat: 28: 19.) be followed, Children
are not to be baptized, be not speaking against Infants Baptism, I shall own my
self mistaken, as soon as I am convinced of it.

Pa: 15. Very false it is where he says, that all this I do under a deceitful
pretense that it is only Infants Baptism that the Quakers deny; for it is a real
truth and not pretense, that only sprinkling Infants we deny to be Baptism; as
also that Infants were never by any divine Precept the subjects of Water
Baptism; but I never argued, in the least, that we owned baptizing the Adult to
be a necessary Gospel Ordinance, by denying sprinkling Infants to be Baptism
etc: but for proof that it is not only Infants Baptism that we deny, he says, We
shoot our poisoned arrows against Baptism it self

Ans: Truly then, seeing their sprinkling Infants is not Baptism it self, but a
show, or something (...) of Baptism: It Is pity that people should have been so
long (...) ^^ved about it, But the One Baptism by which the Saints were by O^e
Spirit baptized into one body, (1 Cor: 12: 13.) is surely Baptism it sef.

But he says, We deny all manner of W^t^r Baptism. We practice none.

Ans: It Is true neither the several manners, nor any manner of Water Baptism do
we practice; for a^ the Christians in the Apostles times though they were no
wholly got off from those outward Ceremonies used under the Law and: as
Circumcision keeping of H^^y Days the diverse Washings or Baptizings with water,
Anointing with (...) the lik^ yet we find the Apostles labored m^^n to bring
them on by degrees to an e^tablishment in that which purely belonged to the
Gospel Dispensation. Let no man judge you (says he) in Meat or in Drink, or in
respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath Days: which are a
shadow of things to come: but the body is of Christ. And if [saith he] ye are
risen with Chrict; seek those things which are above etc: Col: 2: 16. and 3: 1.
And as before, Circumcision was that of the fresh, made with hands; so then
they were the Circumcision, who worshipped God in spirit Philip: 3.3: And whose
Circumcision was made without hands. Col: 2: 11. And as they testified to the
One Spirit, One God, One Lord, One Father and One Body; and so they did to the
One Baptism by which they were baptized into that One body, [as above] Ephesians:
4: 5. And that this was not with water, seems clear, where the Apostle says,
For by One spirit [mark, by One Spirit] are we all baptized into one body. 1
Cor: 12* 13. Now, that there is not a necessity for water baptism besides this,
seems also clear, because, as it is evident from the text, We are to have but
One Lord, One Faith, One God and: so it is as evident that we are to have but
One Baptism; and as evident that this is to be by the Spirit, as above. And
whereas some allege that water and the spirit goes together to make up One
Baptism; we find no ground in the scripture for that, for as some disciples
were baptized with water, which had not so much as heard of, and some who had
not received the Holy Ghost: so also some were baptized with the Holy Ghost
without being baptized with water. Acts 19: 3. 8: 12. and 10: 14. Besides the
texts above mention not a word of water, but say by One Spirit we are all
baptized etc: And we no where read that all the saints were baptized with water.

As to what he says of W: P: out of page 6 of Christian Quaker; and that about
Christ's out^ard person that suffered etc: The first has not only been diverse
times answered; but also largely spoke to in the above book: the other also
has been answered To neither of which do I remember that ever D: ^: (...) any
reply but repeats it again, and again, as if his alone Ipse Dixit or (...) say
foes were sufficient proof against us. Who those very sensible Persons are that
he boasts have forsaken our Society, because those two above doctrines, as he
calls them, are not condemned, as I know not, so I cannot think, (if any such
there are though they may be sensible men, as men, yet if ever they had been
truly of us, from a true and living sense of the Work of God upon their Spirits
and of the sweet Communion of the Saints in Light, which are in measure often
partaken of among us, whatsoever the pretentions of such may be: but that there
must be something of otherwise loosing their inward condition that subjects
them to forsake such their Society with us; and this we have often of late
observed, that since here have been a party that so closely huggs and embraces
such that will but come among them, and run out against the Quakers under
pretense of false doctrine or otherwise; that if any among us for want of
watchfulness, begin to g^ow loose in practice and conversation, and delight
most to be so or for want of due cue do suffer a Pett against some particular
to run so high as to suffer it is effect to be the letting in deep prejudice
against their brethren, and so become both turbulent and ungovernable in the
Church, or to gain some outward end to themselves, or when many of all these
evil qualifications center together as in here and there one, sometimes they do
to, the hurt and danger of their Souls, and to the great grief and exercise of
their brethren, though such are seldom sensible of it; but when they begin to
perceive that the Church, after due and often admonition, find or is like (...)
^^^selves, for the honor of the truth they profess, and peace of the (...),
under a necessity to disown or have disowned such as members of the Body, how
quickly do we then hear that some of these that yet refuse to be ^^claimed,
just as in imitation of G: K:, excuse themselves, as to their being so disowned
and possibly to take a little revenge against their former brethren, think it is
easily done by crying as it were, Alas! Alas! I did not know the Quakers (...)
such doctrine till now, little considering how such things will not stand the
^est at the day of trial, nor how such mean ways are seen through and
disregarded by men of noble tempers, among all persuasions.

pa: 16. As to D: L's silly repeating how he had provoked me to say, if I
durst, that we gave that honor to the Bible, as to our own books, by reading
one Chapter of them in our Meetings etc: What he means by frequently reading
our own books in meetings, as in his Almanac he alleges I know not, unless it
be to impose a falsehood upon his (...) over credulous and bigoted readers; for
how can he but know that it is not our custom to read our own books in our
meetings: no, not so much as Our Written General Testimony against Looseness
and Vanity, is read in our weekly or usual Meetings of worship; and if it were
our custom to read any there, it would doubtless be out of the Bible: but what
if he had as idly provoked me to tell him, if I durst, that in our Meetings we
ever sing David's Psalms in meter, or read their Book of Common Prayer (as well
as the Bible) all which is so manifestly known, that we do not do, that I think
the answer I gave before about the Bible, to wit, in asking where he finds any
Gospel precept is broken by our not so reading them, would be, and is
sufficient, and, so far as I find, more than he cares to answer; for he has
thought fit to wave it, but as idly runs on and says, Note, Caleb Pusey knowing
their own guiltiness in the case, instead of giving me a plain, honest answer,
falls ^oul on the Snake, and then brings Certificates to prove that their
schoolboys read them in their schools.

Ans. First, what Guilt can men lay under for omitting doing that which they
find no necessity for, nor any Incumbent duty upon them to do: however, we can
from our souls praise the Lord, in that we know it is mere labor lost (at least
to us) in these men who have so many years strove to incense the people against
us, as if we did not respect, nor own the scriptures, whilst our own
consciences, assure us that we esteem them the most choice, the most
instructing and the most edifying book in the whole world; and so as that it is
from them, and not from our own books that our pre^^^ers bring frequent
citation in the Meetings; as also that they (...) frequently read in our
families (...) to our mutual comfort and edification.

14. A most horrid falsehood he tells of me, as also in it he abuses his reader,
saying That instead of my giving him a plain, honest answer about reading
Chapters in our Meetings, I fel^ ^oul (...) the Snake in the Gr^ss and then
brings Certificates to prove that our school boys read the scripture, in our
schools, which (says he) is not in our Meetings, as above: Now his own
conscience must needs tell him that what he calls in me falling foul upon the
Snake, did not in the least respect his fo^d but idle question about reading
Chapters in our Meetings; for as it was nine pages after, so the Certificates,
as they were very justly brought, so it was is only to invalidate the bare
Authority of the Snake, by which only D: L: in his 7 and 8 month pages had
alleged the Quakers to be proved guilty of monstrous (...) of Christ, and the
Certificates brought were to prove the Snake to be a very false man, and that
it did not prove him such. I do not find D: L: in the least attempt to prove,
but continuing his mere shifts and quibbles, after his telling that I brought
Certificates to prove that our boys read Chapters in our schools. says he, What
is this to the purpose, every body knows that the Bible is as necessary a book
to teach scholars to read in as another book.

Ans: Yes doubtless every body knows that: but what is this quibble and mere go
by to the purpose, for by the same rule of speaking, every body knows that
peruses both our Almanacks or Prints that I did not produce th^se Certificates
in the least to prove that we read Chapters in our meetings, but to show the
baseness and falsehood of his beloved Snake, who had affi^me^ that in our
Public Schools, particularly that great one at War^s worth the scholars never
read a Chapter out of the Bible, the contrary of which is clearly showed by
those Certificates, being under the hands of ^ix reputable Inhabitants of that
town, no Quakers; as also from the Usher who was a French Protestant: The six
Certify, That some part or portion of the Old or New Testament is daily read in
the said school, beginning at Genesis, and so on till both the Old and New
Testament is read through: The said Usher does solemnly testify, That in the
said school the scriptures are frequently read by the said scholars etc: Now
though the inducements of these men may differ, as to their reasons, for w^iting
as they do, against us; yet to be sure it cannot be true Christian Zeal that
prompts, them on thus to abuse their peace (...) Neighbors to say no more,
from time to time.

page 8. D: L: says I have not (...) quarter part of his Almanac.

Ans: Suppose it were so, by what (...) do^^ (...) think I am obliged to
continue to answer him at all, since he gave not only at first, but continues
to give the occasion to us, by printing and thereby publicly abusing our
friends; and yet of all the faults I have detected him of in his so doing, some
of which are further made out in the above book; as also in this last Almanac
I have detected his abuses and false insinuations against our friends, in at
least fifteen particulars; besides what I have proved out of Scripture, and
cited (...) from Authors against the necessity of outward ordination: their
Festivals, and his whim about the difference betwixt Praying and Preaching, as
also about the Common Prayer. I say, to these nor none of them have he gave the
least reply to; and in what he has given some little hints, how little it may
or ought to be called a reply to mine, let the inquisitive and candid reader
judge.

But again, surely it is very base and unchristian like in them to number A:
Cook and Mary A: the Innocent, with C: H: the Guilty, as before mentioned, and
as I am Credibly informed, A: Cook and Mary A: was such, and ought by the Rules
of Christian Charity to be esteemed such, until they are proved to be
otherwise; besides the said Mary A: was but about five Months at most after she
parted from her Husband before her Child (according to the full course of
Nature) was Born, as by the following Certificates appears.

Whereas, D: L. or J: T. or both of them, in their book called the Great
Mystery of Fox Craft, have falsely insinuated against my dear Sister Mary A: as
guilty of Adultery when she went to Barbados: And I being her Companion in her
said Voyage, and until she was delivered in that Island; and knowing that my
Sister was innocent, I hereby Certify That she left her Husband at New York
about the first of the first Month 1682 (3) and arrived in Barbados in about 7
weeks time: And my said Sister was delivered of her Daughter Mary (who is now
living at Burlington) on the twenty ninth of the fifth Month following, having
gone her full time, whereby it is evident that she is greatly wronged and abused
by these men; and that 8 or 9 years after her decease too; though she was well
known to her neighbors in Long Island and West-Jersey where she lived, that
she was a virtuous, honest woman; and so she died.

LYDIA HORNER

And We whose Names are here underwritten, being Inhabitants in the Island of
Barbados, when the said M: A and her Sister Lydia arrived there; do Certify,
that they arrived about the time aforementioned, and the said Mary was
delivered about the fifth or sixth month 1682, her Child being but about a
Month or six Weeks old, when they took shipping for Pensilvania, in order to
return home to Long Island and Samuel Carpenter being Passenger in the same
Ship, Certifies that they arrived in Pensilvania in the eighth Month following.
And as she was delivered in so short a time after she left her Husband, so we
(...) heard of any reflections upon her on that occasion, in that (...)
although it is now 22 years ago. As witness our H^^^s

GEORGE GRAY. SANUEL CARPENTER.


And we also knew the said (...) m^^y years ^ being then Inhabitants in the
Govern^^ of New York and were often (...) with her, and do Certify that she
went for Barbados, and (...) from thence about the times above certified by
her Sister Lydia and Samuel Carpenter; and therefore there was no cause for
aspersing her: And we can truly say (as many of her neighbors we believe, can
that she was an honest (...) ^^ man, and a true and faithful wife to her
husband, and clear of the base and unworthy charge insinuated against her, as
above mentioned: And we have this testimony that she was a woman that loved
righteousness, and hated wickedness the many years we were acquainted with her.

PATIENCE LLOYD. HENRY WILLIS. MARY WILLIS.


Behold what shameful and unjustifiable courses do these men (...) and
wrongfully bespatter innocent people: it is like they remember the Old Proverb
to wit, Let Us throw (...) enough, and (...) will str^k^ for this like course
have our Opposers thought fit from time to time to take with us. And further,
Note the envious folly of these men, who would make their readers believe that
G; F's Letter dated in 1679 did complain of the matter charged by them on Mary
A: whilst at Barbados, whereas by the date thereof, as themselves have
published it, it was writ three years before she went thither.

Therefore what shall we say, these Backsliders, with some busy wrangling
Priests, are very busy in their contrivance this way and that way, like evil
men of old, who were devising mischief against those who are (...) in the Land;
and since one thing will not do they will think of another; and then publish things
as they please, true or false, and, as they think, may tend to the prejudice of
us, and the way we profess: but alas! this is not the way to propagate the
Gospel in these foreign or any other pa^^s; for the Gospel came in, not only
with peace on earth, and good will toward all men; but also with a Command To
do to all men, as we would have all men do unto us: Nor can these men therefore
be truly esteemed as Zion's Watch men upon the walls, as in page 7 D: L: seems
to intimate themselves to be, for if the Watch men upon the walls of a City
should time after time continue to give false alarms against the true Citizens
under pretense of their being enemies, or a Trumpeter be perpetually giving an
(...) who would th^^ regard what they say or sound either (...) etc^ do these
our Adversaries give time after time (...) con^e^^ing those whose true desire
and labor is, that they may not miss; but obtain and continue to be fellow
Citizens with the saints and household of God, and that they may grow together
an Holy (...) in the Lord; and be built together an habitatton of God through
the spirit. Epes: 2: 19, 21, 22. But such contrivances are no new things. W^
^^^em^er poor Jerusalem of old had many bitter enemies and adve^^^^ some of
which were so restless in their attempts against it, as some are now against
us, that they cried, (...) to the foundation thereof Psalm 107: 7. But as the
Lord stood by (...) they abode in his Counsel etc. so we believe though for (...)
of his peoples faith and patience, he may suffer exercises to (...) them, yet
will he stand by them, and minister true peace to them in all times of trials,
as they stand faithful in their Christian Testimony, (...) in his fea^, walk in
his ways and dwell in true humility before him: And it is our real desire, that
both we and all mankind may so do: and that man may not dwell in Por^ession
only, but truly come to hearken to the voice of the Good Shepherd Christ Jesus.
John 10: 11. for though he died for all and has enlightened all; yet inasmuch as
all have been as lost Sheep (...); astray. Isaiah 53: 6. Therefore all should,
not in words only but in deed and in truth, return to, and follow him, he being
the chief Shepherd and Bishop of the soul. 1 Peter 2: 25.

Some heads of this Book.
1st. Some reasons why we objected against (...): giving Francis Bugg the (...)
of (...) pa: 9 2. An answer particularly to the B^mb's false charges against
the Quake^^, from pa: 14. to ^2 3 O^ our belief in Christ without, as well as
within. The Resurrection. Day of Judgment etc pa^ ^ 33, 24. Our ancient (...)
declared belief (...) Latter Part, pa: 28, 29 30 4 About Baptism Sprinkling
Infants. And the Supper. pa: 35 36, 37. Latter Part pa: 8 9, 10. 5 Treating of
(...) other Differences that are betwixt us and our present opposers. Several
Scriptures and Authors, cited in vindication of our Testimony (...) From pa: 28
to 55. 6 The Testimonies o^ Ancient Christian Authors, to the Light in all men.
The Spirits teaching. And (...) waiting upon our God. From page 55 to 58. 7 The
Opinion of Dr: Edwards and Judge Hales, of the Quakers with a short Observation
t^ereon, as compared with the rambling relation given of us by the Bomb and G:
Keith, page 59, 60. 8 About the Armor of Christians. Ceasing from war etc.
page 36. 54, 55 Latter Part; page 15 16 9 D^vers of D: L's Abuses to the
Quakers more fully manifested than heretofore. From page 61 to 76. 10 The
Latter Part beginning again at page 1, Containing some Re^^^ on a late Pamphlet
signed partly by J. Talbot, and partly by D: L^^^s, called The Great Mystery of
Fox Craft etc. Showing yet more of D. L's abuses to our friends. And G: Fox and
other friends justly vindicated from the idle and ^^othy Aspersions etc: cast
upon them by these men, with something about G: F's spelling; and about the
book called the Battle-Door: As also about some friends signing the
Association, and others going to Fight the French (...).
Pag^ ^. line 8. for great, read great men. Pa: 14. l: 6. f: now, r: how. p^
17. E 2^: f put, ^: bu^ p. 27. l: 13. f. had, r: have. p: 29. l; 2. f: 31. r:
^31. p. 31. l. 22. f. but what, r. but (...) what those anti^nt Martyrs
suffered for, both. pa: 33. l. 5. f. eats life, and Canker, r. eats like a
Canker. p. 36. l. 1. f. no more, ^. which they continue no more. p. 36. l. 32.
after dispensation r. was. p. 27. l. 3^. 5. and 1st of the Priesthood. p. 40.
l. 4. f. not. r. not here. l. 32 f. enduing, r. In dwelling. p. ^1. l. 17. f.
see by, r. see. l. 13. f. it is, r. J. T's. p. 55. l. 34. f. that r. or that no
man is p. 76. f. in Chestnut, r. now in Chestnut.

Latter part p. 3. l. f. ^ waiting, r. watching. p. 4. l. 20. f. which, r.
which it is like. p. 12. l. 23. f. other, r. other. p. 14. l. 19. f.
insinuation, r. insinuating. p. 22. l. 5. f. bu^, ^ but th^^ p. 33. l. 17. f.
particular, r. particulars.


